NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000019
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
NO. CAAP-10-0000019
 
DOUGLAS H. DRAKE, Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
EARL K. GASPAR AND DIANA DANMEYER-GASPAR,
Defendants-Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
and
 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA (DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY,
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE), MAKALEI ESTATES COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION,
DIANE ELLIS, Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellees,
and
 
FRANKLIN PAUL EMBERNANTE, LEILANI PAULINE EMBERNANTE,
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants
 
AND
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000168
 
DOUGLAS H. DRAKE, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
FRANKLIN PAUL EMBERNANTE, individually and as Trustee of the
Franklin Paul Embernante Trust dated February 27, 2006 and
LEILANI PAULINE EMBERNANTE, individually and as Trustee of the
Leilani Pauline Embernante Trust dated February 27, 2006,
Defendants-Appellants
a n d
 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA (DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY,
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE), EARL K. GASPAR, AND DIANA
DANMEYER-GASPAR, MAKALEI ESTATES COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION;
DIANE ELLIS, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-0067K)
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION

(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

This case represents the consolidation of two

separately-brought appeals. In appellate case number CAAP-10­
0000019, Defendants-Appellants Earl K. Gaspar and Diana Danmeyer-
Gaspar ("Gaspars") appealed from the August 17, 2010 Order

Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment ("Order"), filed

in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit ("Circuit Court").
1 In

appellate case number CAAP-10-0000168, Defendants-Appellants

Franklin P. Embernate and Leilani P. Embernate ("Embernates"),

who are also parties in their trustee capacities, see infra,

appealed from the October 20, 2010 Findings of Fact, Conclusions

of Law and Interlocutory Judgment of Foreclosure and Judgment for

Specific Performance on Complaint Filed February 22, 2010

("Judgment"), filed in the Circuit Court.
2

On January 27, 2011, this court, upon motion by

Plaintiff-Appellee Douglas H. Drake ("Drake"), consolidated both

cases under appellate case number CAAP-10-0000019, and directed

the Embernates to designate themselves as cross-appellants and to

file their opening brief as cross-appellants under that case

number. On June 20, 2011, this court dismissed the Gaspars'

appeal from the Order for want of prosecution, while noting that

the Embernates' now designated cross-appeal from the Judgment

remained pending.

On cross-appeal, the Embernates contend that the

Circuit Court erred (1) "in adjudicating [Drake's] right to a

deficiency judgment against [the Embernates, individually] when

the trial court entered [its Judgment]," and (2) "in the

inclusion of [Finding of Fact paragraph 15]." We vacate that

part of the Judgment declaring the Embernates liable for a

deficiency judgment and remand to the Circuit Court for

1/

The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.

2/

The Judgment, in part, implemented the Order. It is of no

significance here that the Gaspars appealed from the Order while the
Embernates appealed from the Judgment. See Haw. R. App. P. 4(a)(2)
(permitting notice of appeal to be filed post-order but pre-judgment and in
such instance deeming the notice to be filed as of the time the judgment
becomes final for purposes of appeal). 
 
2

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.

I. BACKGROUND

A. The Parties' Arrangement

The Embernates, in their capacities as trustees of 
their respective individual trusts ("Embernates-Trustees"), and 
the Gaspars sought to obtain financing to construct a home for the purpose of selling it for a profit. Drake provided the financing via a promissory note in the amount of $500,000 ("Mortgage Note"), backed by a mortgage ("Mortgage") issued by the Embernates-Trustees and the Gaspars ("Mortgagors"), on property located at 72-1147 Ho' opai Way, Kailua-Kona, HI 96740 
(the "Property").
3 The Mortgage Note, signed by the Mortgagors, 
specified that any borrower-trustee personally guaranteed any obligations arising under the note. 
The arrangement did not go as planned. The Property
 
was developed and apparently sale-ready but the Embernates could

not find a buyer. The Mortgagors defaulted on the Mortgage, and
 
Drake sought to foreclose.

B. The Complaint 
 
On February 22, 2010, Drake filed his complaint to

foreclose on the Mortgage ("Complaint") against, among others,

the Gaspars, the Embernates, and the Embernates-Trustees. He

alleged that the Mortgagors had breached the Mortgage and

Mortgage Note, that he was thereby entitled to foreclosure and an

order of sale of the Property, and that he should be awarded all

sums due under the Mortgage. As to the foreclosure, Drake prayed
 
for the following relief:
4

1. That process of this Court issue commanding the
Defendants above named to appear and answer the allegations

3/

Originally, it was Drake in his capacity as Trustee of his
personal trust who loaned the money; he subsequently assigned the mortgage to
himself personally. 
 
4/

Per Drake's definition of Defendant-Mortgagors, references to
"Defendants" that follow are understood to encompass all defendants in the
case while references to "Defendant Mortgagors" encompass only the Mortgagors,
i.e., the Gaspars and Embernates-Trustees, but not the Embernates
individually.

3

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of this complaint and to perform and abide by all such
orders, directions and decrees as may be herein made and
entered.

2. That upon hearing, there be ascertained the total
amount due to Plaintiff at the time of judgment upon the
Note and Mortgage . . . and that this Court determine and
enter its judgment.

3. That there is due and owing to Plaintiff by virtue
of the terms of said Note and Mortgage and all of the proofs
adduced, a certain sum of money in the amount of
$837,387.16, . . . and that said sum of money [plus
interest and other costs and fees] be declared to be a lien
senior to the liens, if any, of the defendants herein
(except [the owners' association and Diane Ellis, a
defendant-lienholder of a senior mortgage]), upon the
Property[.]

. . . .

5. That this Court appoint a Commissioner to [effect
a foreclosure sale].

6. That [proceeds from such sale be properly applied
by the Commissioner]. 
 
. . . .

8. That if the proceeds of the sale shall be
insufficient to pay the aforesaid sums to the Plaintiff and
it shall appear that a deficiency exists, that judgment then
be entered for such deficiency against Defendant Mortgagors,
jointly and severally, and that Plaintiff shall have
execution therefore.

9. That upon the foreclosure sale prayed for herein,
Defendants named herein (other than [the owners'
association] and Diane Ellis) and all persons or entities
claiming by, through, or under said Defendants be forever
barred and foreclosed . . . from any and all right, title
and interest in and to the Property.

10. That Plaintiff have judgment against Defendant
Mortgagors, jointly and severally, in an amount equal to the
principal sum due under the Note, together with interest,
advances, costs and attorney's fees, . . . and that
Plaintiff have execution therefore. 
 
11. That Plaintiffs have such other and further

relief as may be just and to the Court seem proper.

(Emphasis added.)5

C. Motion for Preliminary Injunction 
 
In addition to filing his Complaint, Drake moved for a

preliminary injunction, seeking in part to gain possession of the

Property and enjoin the Gaspars and Embernates from interfering

5/

Drake attached a copy of the Mortgage, but not the Mortgage Note,
as an exhibit to the Complaint.

4

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with it. In their joint filing in opposition, the Gaspars and

Embernates-Trustees alleged that they had already tendered full

payment to Drake. At the hearings on the motion, the legitimacy
 
of the payment instrument—a purported money order drawn on the

United States Treasury—was called into question.
6 The Circuit

Court granted Drake's motion.

D.		Motion for Summary Judgment/Amended Answers

On June 3, 2010, Drake moved for summary judgment. He

contended that the "[Gaspars and Embernates-Trustees] entered

into a construction mortgage securing a promissory note,

personally guaranteed by the Embernates[,]" citing to the

6/

While the issue of the money order is not germane on appeal, it
took center stage in the proceedings below. The Circuit Court's concern,
suggested in the March 17, 2010 Order Granting Motion for Preliminary
Injunction, is revealing:

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

. . . .

2.		Plaintiff has made a showing of the likelihood that he
may prevail on the merits regarding the allegations
against Defendants Gaspar and Embernante [sic] owed
[sic] a debt to him and failed to repay it.

3.		Plaintiff has demonstrated irreparable harm as Defendants
Gaspar and Embernante [sic] have tendered documents
purporting to be payment of that debt, which Plaintiff
believes are "fictitious" documents; and Defendants have
presented to Plaintiff the Internal Revenue Service's form
1099-A indicating that Plaintiff has received such payment
from Defendant.

4.		Plaintiff has argued that the scenario in this case is
substantially similar if not similar [sic] to that in U.S.
v. Anderson, 353 F.3d 490 (6th Cir. 2003) (upholding
conviction for falsely filing tax form indicating money had
been paid to various people in excess of $900,000).

5.		A violation of 26 U.S.C. § 7206(1) Fraud and False

Statements is complete when a taxpayer files a return which
he does not believe to be true and correct as to every
material matter. [citation omitted]

6.		Defendants presented Plaintiff with a 1099-A form prior to
verifying if Plaintiff had taken steps to redeem payment
from the documents presented to him and had truly been paid.

7.		The public interest is served by ensuring that such alleged
conduct of Defendants is taken seriously by the judiciary. 
 
5

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Mortgage Note itself in support. The Mortgage Note stated:7

PERSONAL GUARANTEES

For any borrower that is a trustee under a trust, that
borrower not only obligates the trustee and the trust
assets, but also individually and personally guarantees that
if the trust or trustee do [sic] not pay the obligations
under this Note, that that borrower will be personally
responsible for those obligations.

Additionally, in his notice regarding the motion for summary

judgement ("MSJ"), Drake reiterated his position that he was

entitled to a deficiency judgment against the "Defendant

Mortgagors." In an accompanying declaration, Drake attached a
 
host of documentary exhibits, enumerating and describing each. 
 In that enumeration, Drake described "Exhibit K" as "the deed by

which the Embernates as trustees transferred their interest in

the property to themselves as tenants by the entirety, hence the

reason for naming them individually in this lawsuit." In an

accompanying document entitled "Plaintiff's Statement of

Undisputed Facts for Summary Judgment," Drake posited undisputed

facts, provided the evidentiary basis for each undisputed fact,

and asserted that "[t]he [Mortgage Note] was personally

guaranteed by the Embernates."

The Embernates and Embernates-Trustees eventually

distanced themselves from the Gaspars' money order defense,

disclaiming any knowledge of the details of the purported payment

and admitting that they were unable to verify its validity. They
 
proceeded to file an amended answer to the Complaint ("Amended

Answer"), in which their defense appears to be premised on

Drake's participation in the original venture and his alleged

insistence that the Embernates be placed on title to the

Property. The Embernates and Embernates-Trustees prayed therein
 
that "[Drake] not be allowed a deficiency judgment against [them

individually, and as trustees, and] that the Complaint be

dismissed against them . . . ." 
 
Following a hearing, the Circuit Court granted the MSJ. 
 
7/

The Mortgage Note previously had been entered into the record,
following the Court's Preliminary Injunction Order, as part of Drake's
declaration attesting to his personal assignment of the Mortgage. 
 
6

     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
E. Findings of Fact/Conclusions of Law

Drake submitted his proposed findings of fact and

conclusions of law ("Proposed FOF/COL") to the Circuit Court. In

relevant part, he proposed:

FINDINGS OF FACT

. . . .

15. The [Mortgage Note] was personally guaranteed by
[the Embernates].

. . . . 
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

. . . .

30. If the proceeds of the sale and any rent proceeds
are insufficient to satisfy the amounts owed on Drake's
mortgage and a deficiency exists, a deficiency judgment
shall be entered against defendant Mortgagors and defendants
[Embernates] . . . .

. . . . 
 
THEREFORE IT IS ORDERED, DECREED, AND ADJUDGED:

. . . .

47. That if the proceeds of the sale shall be insufficient
to pay the [moneys due Drake] and it shall appear that a
deficiency exists, that [Drake] have judgment against Defendant
Mortgagors and defendants [Embernates], jointly and severally, in
an amount equal to the principal sum then due under the [Mortgage]
Note, together with [other costs and fees] . . . . 
 
The Embernates and Embernates-Trustees objected to

these Proposed FOF/COL, contending that:

The [Proposed FOF/COL] at ¶ 15, it is attempted [sic]
to address that the [Mortgage Note] was personally
guaranteed by [the Embernates] and while [the Embernates and
Embernates-Trustees as objectors] do not deny the truth of
the statement being said, they do however object to the
inclusion of the statement in the [Proposed FOF/COL], as
[Drake] failed to assert such a "personal guaranteeing"
claim against [the Embernates] in the pleading of his
Complaint . . . and in doing so has waived the assertion of
the claim now and at this time. 
 
The Embernates added to this objection, claiming that Drake

earlier had made clear his reason for naming the Embernates in

the lawsuit:

[Drake] states . . . in his [declaration in support of
the MSJ]:

K. Deed Lot 37 #2: Attached as Exhibit K is the

deed by which the [Embernates-Trustees]
transferred their interest on the property to
themselves as tenants by the entirety, hence the

7

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
reason for naming them individually in this
lawsuit. . . .

And so, [Drake] has clearly pleaded the sole factor and
reason for him naming [the Embernates] in this lawsuit . . . . 
 
The Embernates further contended that:

The [Proposed FOF/COL] at ¶ 30 and ¶ 47, attempts to
assert that if a deficiency exists that a deficiency
judgment be entered against [the Embernates], along with the
Defendant Mortgagors, when in fact [Drake] failed to assert
such a "personal guaranteeing" claim against [the
Embernates] in the pleading of his Complaint . . . and in

doing so waived the assertion of the claim now and at this
time. 
 
The Circuit Court, in its Judgment, while having

incorporated certain other unrelated objections made by the

Embernates, retained paragraphs 15, 30, and 47 of Drake's

Proposed FOF/COL verbatim in its own findings of fact and

conclusions of law ("Circuit Court's FOF/COL"). This appeal
 
followed.

II. STANDARD OF REVIEW

A Circuit Court's post-trial ruling on a motion to 
amend the pleadings is reviewed for an abuse of discretion. See 
Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai' i 92, 104, 
176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). Where, as here, the Circuit Court 
constructively amends the pleadings by entering findings on unpleaded issues, we likewise review for an abuse of discretion. See Galindo v. Stoody Co., 793 F.2d 1502, 1512 & n.8 (9th Cir. 1 9 8 6 ) . 
III. DISCUSSION

The Embernates contend that it was error for the 
Circuit Court to grant Drake relief on a non-pleaded claim. They 
cite only to Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure ("HRCP") Rule 8(a)
8 
8/

HRCP Rule 8(a) states:

Claims for Relief. A pleading which sets forth a claim for
relief, whether an original claim, counterclaim, cross-claim, or
third-party claim, shall contain (1) a short and plain statement
of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief, and
(2) a demand for judgment for the relief the pleader seeks. Relief
in the alternative or of several different types may be demanded.

8

  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(2000) in support of their position that Drake is precluded from

obtaining that relief. Drake, in response, argues that the
 
Embernates' claim is not ripe for appeal and, alternatively, that

the issue of the Embernates' liability for a deficiency judgment

was tried by consent.

As to ripeness, Drake argues that until the Embernates'

potential deficiency judgment becomes an actual deficiency

judgment of a known amount, this court's review is premature. 
 Drake, however, appears to overlook Hawaii Revised Statutes

§ 667-51, which provides, in relevant part:

(a) . . . [T]he following orders entered in a
foreclosure case shall be final and appealable:

(1)		A judgment entered on a decree of foreclosure,
and if the judgment incorporates an order of
sale or an adjudication of a movant's right to a
deficiency judgment, or both, then the order of
sale or the adjudication of liability for the
deficiency judgment also shall be deemed final
and appealable[.] 
 
HAW. REV. STAT. § 667-51 (Supp. 2012). The Embernates have

appealed from the Circuit Court's judgment, which was "entered on

a decree of foreclosure," and that judgment both "incorporated an

order of sale" and "adjudicat[ed] [Drake's] right to a deficiency

judgment." The appeal of the Judgment is therefore authorized by
 
statute, and the issue of the Embernates' liability for a

deficiency judgment is, accordingly, ripe for this court's

review.

As to Drake's failure to pray for a deficiency judgment

against the Embernates, we consider whether the Embernates'

liability for a deficiency judgment was tried by consent. 
 "Pursuant to HRCP Rule 15(b)[(1)], any party may move to amend

its pleadings to conform to the evidence presented at trial,

'when issues not raised by the pleadings are tried by express or

implied consent of the parties.'" Cresencia v. Kim, 10 Haw. App.

461, 477, 878 P.2d 725, 734 (1994) (brackets and footnote

omitted) (quoting Haw. R. Civ. P. 15(b)).
9

Haw. R. Civ. Proc. 8(a).

9/

HRCP Rule 15(b)(1) provides:

For Issues Tried by Consent. When issues not raised by the

9

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, as Drake did not move to amend the pleadings but

instead proposed that he receive relief via his Proposed FOF/COL,

and the Circuit Court granted relief accordingly, we deem the

Circuit Court as having treated the issue of the Embernates'

liability for the deficiency judgment as impliedly tried by

consent. See Prieto v. Paul Revere Life Ins. Co., 354 F.3d 1005,

1012 (9th Cir. 2004) ("[A] district court may amend the pleadings

merely by entering findings on the unpleaded issues." (alteration

in original)).

Regarding implied consent:

As a general rule, 
 
. . . consent will be implied from the failure
to object to the introduction of evidence
relevant to the unpleaded issue. 
 
There are two known exceptions to the general rule.
First, consent will not be implied if a party will be
substantially prejudiced by the proposed amendment. Second,

when the evidence that is claimed to show that

an issue was tried by consent is relevant to an
issue already in the case, as well as to the one
that is the subject matter of the amendment, and
there was no indication at trial that the party
who introduced the evidence was seeking to raise
a new issue, the pleadings will not be deemed
amended under the first portion of Rule 15(b).
The reasoning behind this view is sound since if
evidence is introduced to support basic issues
that already have been pleaded, the opposing
party may not be conscious of its relevance to
issues not raised by the pleadings unless that
fact is made clear.

Kamaka, 117 Hawai' i at 113, 176 P.3d at 112 (citations, brackets, 
pleadings are tried by express or implied consent of the parties,
they shall be treated in all respects as if they had been raised
in the pleadings. Such amendment of the pleadings as may be
necessary to cause them to conform to the evidence and to raise
these issues may be made upon motion of any party at any time,
even after judgment; but failure so to amend does not affect the
result of the trial of these issues.

Haw. R. Civ. P. 15(b)(1).

While it is desirable to move to amend the pleadings where
warranted, see Charles Alan Wright et al., Federal Practice and Procedure §
1493 (3d ed. 1998), such a motion is not required, for "as long as issues are
tried by the express or implied consent of the parties to a lawsuit, the
issues 'shall be treated as if raised in the pleadings.'" Cresencia, 10 Haw.
App. at 478, 878 P.2d at 734 (quoting Hamm v. Merrick, 61 Haw. 470, 474, 605
P.2d 499, 502 (1980)); Wright et al., supra, § 1493 ("Rule 15(b)(2) [the
federal counterpart to HRCP 15(b)(1)] does not require that a conforming
amendment be made and there is no penalty for failing to do so.").

10

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and internal quotation marks omitted). 
 
Significantly, the Embernates did not object to Drake's

assertion in his statement of undisputed facts, submitted in

support of the MSJ, that the Embernates were personally liable

under the terms of the Mortgage Note. That they later objected
 
to inclusion of the assertion as a finding in the Circuit Court's

FOF/COL indicates their recognition of its irrelevance to any of

the specifically pleaded claims. Cf. Reno v. Reno, 884 So. 2d

462, 465 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2004) ("However, 'in order to rely

on questions and answers not objected to during trial as

evidencing the opposing party's implied consent to try unpled

issues, it must be shown that [such] questions and answers are

irrelevant to any pled issues.'" (quoting Bilow v. Benoit, 519

So. 2d 1114, 1116 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1988))). 
 
Moreover, in their Amended Answer, the Embernates

expressly prayed that the Circuit Court not permit a deficiency

judgment against either themselves or their trustee alter egos.

Given these circumstances, in the context of a foreclosure action

where the Embernates-Trustees knew their liability as trustees

was at issue and the Mortgage Note at least appears to bind them

personally, the Circuit Court, absent prejudice, did not abuse

its discretion in effectively amending the pleadings, see Prieto,

354 F.3d at 1012, thereby holding the Embernates personally

liable. 
 
We cannot conclude on this record, however, that there 
was no prejudice. Recognizing that all parties involved appeared pro se and that the purpose of Rule 15(b) is to decide cases on the merits rather than as a contest of pleading skill (or lack thereof), we are constrained to remand to the lower court to consider whether its FOF/COL, having, in effect, constructively amended the pleadings, substantially prejudiced the Embernates. See Schefke v. Reliable Collection Agency, Ltd., 96 Hawai' i 408, 
433, 32 P.3d 52, 77 (2001) (recognizing one of HRCP Rule 15(b)'s purposes as "promot[ing] the objective of deciding cases on their merits rather than in terms of the relative pleading skills of counsel" (quoting Cresencia, 10 Haw. App. at 477, 878 P.2d at 734)); cf. Folk v. Home Mut. Ins. Co., 336 N.W.2d 265, 268 (Minn. 
11

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1983) (determining that a remand to the lower court such that it

might entertain a motion to amend the pleadings would be "more

conducive to justice" where, due to confusion created by the

parties, the appellate court could not find that consent to try

an unpleaded issue had been implied).

IV. CONCLUSION

For the reasons expressed above, and without prejudice

as to their correctness, we vacate paragraphs 15, 30, and 47 in

the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Interlocutory

Judgment of Foreclosure and Judgment for Specific Performance on

Complaint Filed February 22, 2010, filed on October 20, 2010, as

to the Embernates individually, and remand to the Circuit Court

for proceedings consistent with this opinion. We affirm in all

other respects.

DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 12, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Franklin Paul Embernate and 
Leilani Pauline Embernate,Pro Se Defendants-Appellees/Appellants/Cross-Appellants. Chief Judge 
Douglas H. Drake,Pro Se Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
12

