NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000101
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JAMES MUNDON, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 05-1-0206)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant James Mundon (Mundon) appeals from
 
the Judgment, Guilty Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) entered
 
by the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (circuit court) on
 
October 13, 2010. 
Arising out of events that occurred on February 5,
 
2004, Mundon was charged with twenty-eight counts consisting of:
 
twenty-one counts of Sexual Assault in the Third Degree; two
 
counts of Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree; one count
 
of Attempted Sexual Assault in the Third Degree; one count of
 
Kidnapping; one count of Assault in the Third Degree; one count
 
of Attempted Assault in the First Degree; and one count of
 
Attempted Sexual Assault in the First Degree. 
After an initial
 
trial in December 2006, Mundon was convicted of five counts:
 Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree; Kidnapping; Assault
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
in the Third Degree; Attempted Assault in the Second Degree; and
 
Attempted Sexual Assault in the First Degree. Mundon was
 
acquitted in the first trial of the remaining charges.
 
Upon Mundon's appeal after the first trial, the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court reversed Mundon's conviction for Terroristic 
Threatening in the First Degree, vacated his remaining 
convictions, and remanded the case for a new trial. State v. 
Mundon, 121 Hawai' i 339, 219 P.3d 1126 (2009). 
Mundon was retried on the following four charges:
 
Attempted Sexual Assault in the First Degree pursuant to Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 705-500 and HRS § 707-730(1)(a)
 
(Count 1, renumbered from Count 28); Kidnapping pursuant to
 
HRS § 707-720(1)(d) (Count 2, renumbered from Count 24);
 
Attempted Assault in the Second Degree pursuant to HRS § 705-500
 
and HRS § 707-711 (Count 3, renumbered from Count 27); and
 
Assault in the Third Degree pursuant to HRS §707-712(1)(a)
 
(Count 4, renumbered from Count 25).
1
 
In the second trial, Mundon was found guilty of:
 
Attempted Sexual Assault in the First Degree; Kidnapping; and two
 
counts of Assault in the Third Degree. 
On appeal, Mundon contends the circuit court erred by:
 
(1) improperly limiting discovery; (2) improperly permitting
 
evidence of acts for which Mundon was acquitted in the first
 
trial, without also admitting evidence that Mundon was acquitted
 
of those alleged acts; (3) improperly limiting cross examination
 
of the complaining witness (hereafter Complainant);
 
(4) improperly allowing the State to make references to
 
Complainant as "victim" over the objection of the defense; and
 
(5) imposing consecutive twenty year sentences, an award of
 
restitution, and a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment. 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen Watanabe presided. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Mundon's points of error as follows: 
(1) The circuit court did not improperly limit
 
discovery. Mundon contends he was troubled with Complainant's
 
trial testimony using the phrase "outer labia" to describe the
 
area where she was touched by Mundon because in her original
 
report to the police, she said that she was "groped" under her
 
underwear.
 
On March 18, 2010, prior to the second trial, Mundon
 
filed his Request for Discovery Materials Within Possession of
 
Prosecution, seeking:
 
2. Any written documents supplied to government witness
[Complainant] via e-mail, facsimile transmission and U.S.
mail secretly used to study, memorize, rehearse, and prepare
her material trial testimony between Febuary [sic] 2004­Febuary [sic] 2007 by former First Deputy Prosecuting
Attorney Jennifer S. Winn and Victim/Witness Counselor Marla
Torres-Lam as revealed in transcripts.
 
On March 30, 2010, Mundon filed his Second and Final Request for
 
Discovery Material, seeking production of:
 
All case documents as revealed in the written transcripts of
the trial testimony made by material witness [Complainant]
that was secretly e-mailed and faxed between Febuary [sic]
9, 2004 and December 12, 2006 not disclosed to the defendant
pro se prior to trial used for the purpose of studying,
memorizing, rehearsing and preparing. 
In an April 13, 2010 order, the circuit court ordered in part
 
that "[p]redicate questions and related correspondence from the
 
former prosecutor to complainant [] need not be produced as they
 
are the State's attorney work product." Essentially, Mundon
 
suggests that Complainant was coached to use the term "outer
 
labia," and that he has the right to know the extent, if any, to
 
which the State helped to tailor Complainant's testimony.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Mundon's argument fails for several reasons. First, 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 16(b)(1)(i) 
provides: 
Rule 16. Discovery
. . . 
(b)
 Disclosure by the Prosecution.
(1) Disclosure of Matters Within Prosecution's
 
Possession.  The prosecutor shall disclose to the defendant
or the defendant's attorney the following material and
information within the prosecutor's possession or control:
(i) the names and last known addresses of persons
whom the prosecutor intends to call as witnesses in
the presentation of the evidence in chief, together
with any relevant written or recorded statements,
provided that statements recorded by the prosecutor
shall not be subject to disclosure[.]
 
(Emphasis added). Even assuming that some of the material
 
requested by Mundon were "statements" under HRPP Rule
 
2
16(b)(1)(i),  under the plain language of Rule 16(b), such
material would be "statements recorded by the prosecution" that
 
are not subject to disclosure. 
Second, HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(vii) requires a prosecutor 
to disclose to the defense "any material or information which 
tends to negate the guilt of the defendant as to the offense 
charged or would tend to reduce the defendant's punishment 
therefor." 
HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(vii) is not implicated in this 
case because the material sought by Mundon would not tend to negate his guilt. See Dan v. State, 76 Hawai' i 423, 429, 879 P.2d 
528, 534 (1994); Cf. Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963). 
Third, to the extent that Mundon's discovery requests
 
sought information provided to Complainant by the prosecutor's
 office to prepare her trial testimony, such material would be
 
attorney work product, not subject to disclosure. HRPP Rule
 
16(e)(5)(i) provides:
 
2
 See People v. Holtzman, 593 N.W.2d 617, 623-24 (Mich. Ct. App. 1999)
 
(holding that attorney's notes of interview with witness intended to be called
at trial are not a "statement" which must be produced under reciprocal
discovery rule, but rather are protected by the attorney work-product
privilege).
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Rule 16. Discovery
 
.  .  . 
 
(e)
 Regulation of Discovery.
 
.  .  .
 
Matters Not Subject to Disclosure. (5)
(i) Work product. 
Disclosure shall not be required of
legal research or of records, correspondence, report, or
memoranda to the extent that they contain the opinions,
theories or conclusions of a party's attorney or members of
the attorney's legal staff, provided that the foregoing
shall not be construed to prohibit the disclosures required
under section (c)(3) of this rule and Rule 12.1.
 
None of the exceptions provided within the rule are applicable in
 
this case. Moreover, Mundon's reliance on O'Connell v. Cowan,
 
332 S.W.3d 34 (Ky. 2010) is misplaced. O'Connell was a civil
 
lawsuit wherein the plaintiff, a former criminal defendant,
 
alleged that a law enforcement officer had recommended that a
 
criminal charge be filed when there had been no evidence to
 
support it. Id. at 37. The plaintiff sought discovery from the
 
prosecutor who had been involved in the criminal case. In
 resolving the discovery issue, the court analyzed rules of civil
 
procedure, and thus O'Connell is inapposite to the instant case.
 
(2) Mundon argues that the circuit court erroneously
 
admitted evidence of acts for which he had been acquitted in the
 
3
first trial,  and that the court erred in doing so without also
permitting proof of his acquittal of those acts. 
The circuit court held, pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of 
4
Evidence (HRE) Rule 403,  that if there was any prejudice
3 After the first trial, Mundon was acquitted of counts 1-3 and 22
(four counts of Sexual Assault in the Third Degree, based on the acts of
putting his hand on Complainant's genitals); counts 5-9 (five counts of Sexual
Assault in the Third Degree, based on the acts of putting his hand on
Complainant's breast); counts 10-21 (twelve counts of Sexual Assault in the
Third Degree, based on the acts of putting his mouth on her breast); and count
23 (one count of Attempted Sexual Assault in the Third Degree, based on the
act of attempting to put Complainant's hand on his penis).
4
 HRE Rule 403 states that "[a]lthough relevant, evidence may be
excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of
unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of
(continued...)
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
resulting from admitting evidence of the acts for which Mundon 
was acquitted in the first trial, such prejudice did not outweigh 
the probative value of the evidence. A trial court's 
determination of whether relevant evidence is admissible under 
HRE Rule 403 is reviewed for an abuse of discretion. Kaeo v. 
Davis, 68 Haw. 447, 454, 719 P.2d 387, 392 (1986); State v. Duncan, 101 Hawai' i 269, 274, 67 P.3d 768, 773 (2003). 
Mundon argues that the circuit court particularly erred
 
because the charges for Sexual Assault in the Third Degree that
 
related to the acts of putting his hands on Complainant's
 
genitals –- and for which he was acquitted in the first trial -­
"necessarily constituted the 'substantial step' towards digital
 
penetration" necessary for the charge of Attempted Sexual Assault
 
in the First Degree. As noted by the circuit court, however, the
 
acts underlying the charges against Mundon were part of the same
 
criminal episode. That is, similar to Odum v. State, 989 A.2d
 
232, 244-45 (Md. 2010), the acts underlying the acquitted charges
 
were intrinsic to a charge for which Mundon was retried, and it
 
was not error to admit evidence of those acts. In short, the
 
circuit court did not abuse its discretion in determining that
 
evidence of those acts was relevant and not unfairly prejudicial.
 
We further conclude that the circuit court did not
 
abuse its discretion in precluding evidence that Mundon was
 
acquitted in the first trial of the Sexual Assault in the Third
 
Degree charges. Mundon's argument is undermined by the fact
 
that, although he was acquitted of those charges, the jury in the
 
first trial convicted him of Attempted Sexual Assault in the
 
First Degree –- the same charge he was convicted of in the second
 
trial. The circuit court properly sought to preclude all
 
4
 (...continued)
cumulative evidence." 
Mundon does not argue that his acquitted conduct is not
relevant to the charges he faced upon retrial. 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
references to the first trial because such evidence, under an HRE
 
Rule 403 balancing, could result in unfair prejudice, confusion
 
of the issues or misleading the jury.
 
Mundon's reliance on People v. Griffin, 426 P.2d 507
 
(Cal. 1967) and People v. Mullens, 119 Cal. App. 4th 648 (2004)
 
is not persuasive. In both Griffin and Mullens, the trial court
 
admitted evidence of another crime committed by the defendant,
 
similar to the crime being tried, but arising from a completely
 
separate and distinct event or incident.5 In those
 
circumstances, the California appellate courts held it was error
 to exclude evidence that the defendant had been acquitted of the
 
other alleged crime(s). Here, the evidence at issue –- the acts
 
underlying the Sexual Assault in the Third Degree charges –- was
 
not evidence of another separate incident, but were all part of
 
the same incident involving Mundon and Complainant. 
(3) Mundon argues that the circuit court precluded
 
meaningful cross examination of Complainant such that he was not
 
able to fully explore the issue of voluntary release, which if
 
established, could have resulted in Mundon being convicted of
 
kidnapping as a class B felony instead of a class A felony.
6
 
Specifically, when Mundon questioned Complainant on cross-
examination, asking "What was James doing when he agreed to let
 
you go?", the circuit court sustained the State's objection on
 
the basis that the question misstated the testimony. The circuit
 
court did not err in sustaining the State's objection because
 
there was no evidence that Mundon voluntarily "agreed" to let
 
5
 In Griffin, the evidence was allowed because the similarity of the
 
other crime to the crime being tried was relevant to prove the injuries at
issue were not accidental and to prove intent. 426 P.2d at 510. In Mullens,
the evidence of other sexual offenses was admitted pursuant to a statute
allowing certain propensity evidence. 119 Cal. App. 4th at 656-661.
6
 Kidnapping is a class A felony unless "the defendant voluntarily
released the victim, alive and not suffering from serious or substantial
bodily injury, in a safe place prior to trial." HRS § 707-720(3) (1993
Repl.). 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Complainant go. In addition, Mundon was in no way prevented from
 
rephrasing his question or further pursuing the issue of
 
voluntary release. In fact, Mundon was able to and did in fact
 
cross examine Complainant extensively on the issue of voluntary
 
release. 
(4) Mundon argues that it was inappropriate for the
 
prosecutor to make references to Complainant as the "victim."
 
Mundon objected at trial to the prosecutor's use of the term
 
"victim" to identify Complainant. Mundon points to Jackson v.
 
State, 600 A.2d 21, 24-25 (Del. 1991) for the proposition that
 
where there is a factual question of whether there was a victim,
 
as opposed to simply identifying the perpetrator, it is
 
inappropriate for the prosecutor to use the word "victim."
 
We instead look to State v. Nomura, 79 Hawai' i 413, 903 
P.2d 718 (App. 1995) for guidance. In Nomura, this court held 
that it was error for the trial court to refer to a witness as 
the "victim" in certain jury instructions. However, in light of 
other instructions given to the jury, such error was held to be 
harmless error. Id. at 416-18, 903 P.2d at 721-23. 
Here, there were only a few references by the deputy
 
prosecutor to Complainant as the "victim," and although some
 
police officers made sporadic reference to Complainant as the
 
"victim," in the vast majority of the testimony, she was referred
 
to by her name. Additionally, the circuit court's instructions
 
to the jury defused the few references to Complainant as the
 
"victim." The circuit court advised the jury that "[y]ou are the
 
exclusive judges of the facts of this case[,]" and that:
 
You must presume the defendant is innocent of the
charges against him. This presumption remains with the
defendant throughout the trial of the case, unless and until
the prosecution proves the defendant guilty beyond a
reasonable doubt.
 
The presumption of innocence is not a mere slogan but
an essential part of the law that is binding upon you. It
 places upon the prosecution the duty of proving every
material element of the offense charged against the
defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The jury was also instructed that "[s]tatements or remarks made
 
by counsel are not evidence."
 
Therefore, even if we assume arguendo that it was error
 
for the circuit court to allow the few references to Complainant
 as the "victim," we conclude similar to Nomura that it was
 
harmless error. See HRPP Rule 52(a) ("Any error, defect,
 
irregularity or variance which does not affect substantial rights
 shall be disregarded.").
 
(5) Mundon challenges several aspects of his sentence. 
First, regarding the consecutive twenty year sentences due to his
 
convictions for Attempted Sexual Assault in the First Degree and
 
Kidnapping, Mundon contends the circuit court made an improper
 
comparison to another case in its circuit. Mundon takes issue
 
with the circuit court's statement at the sentencing hearing that
 
it "place[d] [Mundon] in the same category as Mr. Vinhaca [ 7
] in
terms of the need for consecutive sentencing." 
We disagree with Mundon that the circuit court erred in
 
comparing his crimes to Vinhaca's crimes. 
Moreover, as Mundon
 
acknowledges, the circuit court evaluated the factors set forth
 
8
in HRS § 706-606 (1993 Repl.)  in imposing the consecutive
7
 Mr. Vinhaca is a defendant in another sexual assault case where the
 
circuit court imposed a consecutive sentence.
8 In imposing a sentence, a court must consider the factors set forth
in HRS § 706-606:
 
§706-606 Factors to be considered in imposing a
sentence. . . 
(1)	 The nature and circumstances of the offense and
 
the history and characteristics of the defendant;
(2) The need for the sentence imposed:
(a) To reflect the seriousness of the offense, to
promote respect for law, and to provide just
punishment for the offense;
(b) To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;
(c) To protect the public from further crimes of
the defendant; and
(d) To provide the defendant with needed
educational or vocational training, medical
care, or other correctional treatment in the
(continued...)
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
sentence. See also HRS § 706-668.5(2) (1993 Repl.). The circuit
 
court considered, among other things, the overall facts of the
 
kidnapping/sexual assault incident; Mundon's history of
 
criminality, including the fact that he committed the subject
 
offenses while still on probation for an assault conviction; that
 
previous rehabilitation efforts have not been effective; that
 
Mundon has not taken responsibility for his failure while on
 
probation; that Mundon preyed on Complainant's vulnerability; and
 
Mundon's attempts to minimize the fact that he merely subjected
 
his wife, as opposed to someone in the community at large, to
 
acts of abuse. 
Second, Mundon argues that restitution for
 
Complainant's backpack was erroneous because inter alia such
 
restitution was not included in his original sentence. The State
 
concedes that restitution for Complainant's backpack, which was
 
not ordered after the first trial, runs afoul of HRS § 706-609
 
(1993 Repl.) and does not oppose the reduction of restitution in
 
this regard. We agree and hold that restitution for
 
Complainant's backpack in the amount of $236.00 violates
 
HRS § 706-609, which prohibits an increased sentence after an
 
appeal:
 
§706-609 Resentence for the same offense or for
offense based on the same conduct not to be more severe than
 
prior sentence.  When a conviction or sentence is set aside
 
on direct or collateral attack, the court shall not impose a
new sentence for the same offense, or for a different
offense based on the same conduct, which is more severe than
the prior sentence.
 
Mundon's sentence with regard to restitution must be reduced in
 
the amount of $236.00. 
8
 (...continued)
 
most effective manner;
(3) The kinds of sentences available; and
(4)	 The need to avoid unwarranted sentence
 
disparities among defendants with similar records
who have been found guilty of similar conduct.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Finally, Mundon contends that the mandatory minimum
 
period of imprisonment imposed by the circuit court after the
 
retrial constitutes a more severe sentence, also in violation of
 
HRS § 706-609. His original sentence did not contain a mandatory
 
minimum, whereas upon re-sentencing, the circuit court imposed a
 
mandatory minimum period of imprisonment of six years and eight
 
months, pursuant to HRS § 706-606.5 (1)(a)(ii) and (2)(e). The
 
issue is whether adding a mandatory minimum makes the more recent
 
sentence "more severe than the prior sentence" pursuant to
 
HRS § 706-609. 
We conclude that it does. Although the mandatory 
minimum sentence may not necessarily affect Mundon's actual 
length of imprisonment, it possibly could. Further, even though 
the most direct impact of the mandatory minimum sentence is the 
timing for when Mundon would be eligible for parole, this case is 
distinct from Keawe v. State, 79 Hawai' i 281, 901 P.2d 481 
(1995). In Keawe, the defendant challenged a second sentence under HRS § 706-609, arguing that it somehow affected his parole 
status. The Hawai' i Supreme Court rejected the argument on the 
grounds that sentencing is the function of the courts, whereas the granting of parole is generally the function of the executive 
branch of government. Id. at 289-90, 901 P.2d at 489-90. There, 
the second sentence, in and of itself, did not contain anything that addressed parole. In this case, to the contrary, the 
mandatory minimum period of imprisonment contained in the second 
sentence was imposed by the circuit court. We thus conclude that 
HRS § 706-609 is applicable. 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the Judgment entered by the
 
Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit on October 13, 2010 is vacated
 to the extent that the sentence: imposed restitution in the
 
amount of $236.00 for Complainant's backpack; and imposed a
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
mandatory minimum period of imprisonment of six years and eight
 
months without the possibility of parole. The judgment is
 
affirmed in all other respects.
 
This case is remanded to the circuit court for further
 
proceedings to resentence Mundon consistent with this Summary
 
Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 27, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Stuart N. Fujioka
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Tracy MurakamiDeputy Prosecuting Attorneyfor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
12
 