FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
    
 
  
 
  
NO. CAAP-24-0000380 
  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
 
---o0o--- 
 
RCA TRADE CENTER, INC., a Hawaii corporation; and 
MP UNIT 21, LLC, a Texas limited liability company, 
Plaintiffs-Appellants, 
v. 
WAYNE MASAO MUN KEONG HU, TARA LEIKO HU, 
Defendants-Appellees, and 
DOES 1–10, Defendants. 
  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CCV-23-0001388) 
  
JUNE 23, 2026 
  
LEONARD, PRESIDING JUDGE, MCCULLEN AND GUIDRY, JJ. 
  
OPINION OF THE COURT BY MCCULLEN, J. 
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants RCA Trade Center, Inc., and MP 
Unit 21, LLC, (collectively, RCA) appeal from the Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit's May 20, 2024 order granting Defendants-Appellees Wayne and Tara Hu's (together, the Hus) motion to 
dismiss brought pursuant to Hawaiʻ i Revised Statutes (HRS) Electronically Filed
Intermediate Court of Appeals
CAAP-24-0000380
23-JUN-2026
03:44 PM
Dkt. 66 OPFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
2 
 Chapter 634G, the Hawaiʻ i Public Expression Protection Act 
(HPEPA), and May 21, 2024 Final Judgment.1 
On appeal, RCA challenges the circuit court's 
(1) finding of good cause for the Hus' untimely filing of their 
HPEPA motion to dismiss, (2) dismissal of its complaint, and 
(3) award of fees and costs.  We affirm. 
We hold that the circuit court did not (1) abuse its 
discretion by finding good cause for the Hus' untimely filing or 
(2) err by dismissing RCA's complaint under HPEPA.  We further 
hold that (3) RCA waived any challenge to the circuit court's 
award of attorney's fees.   
I. BACKGROUND 
A. Factual Background 
In 2016, the Hus acquired a unit within Marconi Point 
Condominiums, an agricultural condominium project (the Project) 
located in Kahuku, Oʻ ahu, Hawaiʻ i.  The Project comprises "two 
(2) lots totaling 96 acres of AG-2 zoned lands" that were 
"'condominiumized' by the developer into 32 units."  "The 
Project aims to develop agricultural condominiums for active 
farming and other agricultural operations" and "is not a 
residential development."  "However, zoning laws allow 'farm 
dwellings' to be constructed within the Project to house 
individuals engaged in the Project's agricultural operations, 
 
1  The Honorable John M. Tonaki presided. 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
3 
 consistent with what is permitted under applicable zoning 
ordinances." 
In 2017, RCA applied for and received multi-building 
permits from the City and County of Honolulu's Department of Planning and Permitting (DPP) to construct eight pre-fabricated 
steel warehouses on their various units within the Project. 
Believing the "Project would remain a quiet 
agricultural condominium project, with few farm dwellings and 
neighbors" at the time they purchased the unit, the Hus became 
concerned about "numerous questionable and possibly unlawful 
activities occurring within the Project" over the next eight 
years. 
These activities — which the Hus believed 
"substantially changed the nature and character of the Project[] and[] . . . impacted the North Shore Community and the interest 
of the public with respect to protecting both agricultural lands 
from non-compliant uses as well as activities that adversely 
affected the environment" — included (1) the "construction of 
eight (8) massive metal warehouses . . . on the AG-2 zoned 
lands[] . . . for the purpose of advertising and leasing spaces . . . to the public for non-agricultural uses"; 
(2) noncompliance with DPP's special management area and 
building permit requirements; (3) "hosting illegal and 
noncompliant uses on AG-2 lands such as 'non-compliant farmers' FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
4 
 markets', 'pop-up markets', weddings, craft fairs, and other 
social gatherings, some of which utilized [RCA's] warehouse 
spaces"; and (4) "allowing people vehicular access to the beach 
areas for 'four-wheeling' in sensitive environmental areas having endangered species." 
As to the eight warehouses, RCA "applied for and 
received a United States Department of Agriculture Rural 
Development Business and Industrial Guaranteed Loan of 
$7,883,000" (the Loan) to "finance the construction of the 
warehouses."  According to RCA, the "program does not provide 
direct funding but only a federal guaranty to secure repayment 
obligations in the event of a borrower's default."  North Avenue 
Capital was RCA's lender under the program. 
Meanwhile, as discussed in more detail below, the 
Hawaiʻi Legislature adopted the Uniform Law Commission's model 
Uniform Public Expression Protection Act (UPEPA) as HPEPA in 
2022.  2022 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 96, § 1 at 215-16. 
Concerned "that the questionable activities put the 
Project in danger of being investigated and cited by various 
federal, state and county governmental agencies," the Hus hired  
Peter J. Lenhart, Esq., to draft a letter to RCA addressing 
these and other issues.      
On August 29, 2023, Lenhart transmitted the "52-page 
letter . . . together with Exhibits '1' through '17'" (the FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
5 
 Letter) to RCA, its counsel, and ten additional governmental 
entities, including DPP, the State of Hawaiʻ i Department of Land 
and Natural Resources, the State of Hawaiʻ i Department of 
Agriculture, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 
On September 1, 2023, North Avenue Capital contacted 
RCA for more information about the Letter, which it received 
from the USDA.  Following the USDA's inquiry into the Letter, 
North Avenue Capital "informed [RCA] that [it] would be putting 
a hold on draws from the loan proceeds, which were needed to pay 
for ongoing construction costs." 
Although RCA attempted to assuage North Avenue 
Capital's concerns, in part by filing the instant lawsuit, North Avenue Capital ultimately "declared [RCA] to be in default of 
[its] obligations under the loan."  "Since December 2023, [RCA has] been able to resolve [North Avenue Capital]'s concern, 
pending USDA consent to the loan modification."
2 
B. Procedural Background 
On October 25, 2023, less than two months after 
receiving the Letter, RCA filed a three-count complaint against 
the Hus, asserting causes of action for Declaratory Relief, 
Tortious Interference, and Injunctive Relief. 
Count I (Declaratory Relief) sought a "declaratory 
ruling that the warehouses may remain on [RCA's] Units, that 
 
2  RCA does not explain how or why the L oan was modified. 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
6 
 [RCA is] not required to remove the warehouse[s] that have 
already been constructed, and that [RCA] may continue with 
construction of the warehouses as intended": 
COUNT I 
DECLARATORY RELIEF 
 
59.  Plaintiffs incorporate by reference each of the 
allegations in all previous paragraphs.  
60.  A controversy exists between Plaintiffs and 
Defendants concerning Plaintiffs' construction of the warehouses. 
 61.  Construction of the warehouses is permitted 
under all applicable laws and the Declaration. 
 62.  A declaratory ruling will serve to terminate the 
uncertainty or controversy giving rise to this proceeding. 
  
63.  Plaintiffs are entitled to a declaratory ruling 
that the warehouses may remain upon Plaintiffs' Units, that Plaintiffs are not required to remove the warehouse [sic] 
that have already been constructed, and that Plaintiffs may 
continue with construction of the warehouses as intended. 
 
Count II (Tortious Interference) alleged the Hus 
"intended to purposefully interfere with the contractual 
relationship among [RCA], [North Avenue Capital], and the 
federal government": 
COUNT II 
TORTIOUS INTERFERENCE 
 
64.  Plaintiffs incorporate by reference each of the 
allegations in all previous paragraphs. 
 
65.  The USDA Loan constitutes a valid and binding 
contract among Plaintiff RCA Trade Center, its lender, and the federal government. 
 66.  Defendants have knowledge of the USDA Loan and 
underlying contractual relationship, in light of the fact 
that they transmitted their [ Letter] to the USDA and 
questioned the use of federal funds for construction of the warehouses (although as explained above, the USDA has not 
actually provided any federal funding, only a guaranty). 
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
7 
 67.  By transmitting their [ Letter] to the USDA and 
other governmental agencies, Defendants intended to 
purposefully interfere with the contractual relationship among Plaintiff RCA Trade Center, its lender, and the 
federal government. 
 
68.  As a direct and proximate result of Defendants' 
interference, Plaintiffs have incurred damages. 
 
69.  The damages incurred by Plaintiffs include 
without limitation, additional costs associated with responding to and mitigating the effects of Defendants' 
untruthful allegations, reassuring Plaintiff RCA Trade Center's lender, and otherwise confirming the propriety of 
Plaintiffs' past and anticipated construction activities, 
both through the declaratory rulings sought in this lawsuit 
and otherwise. 
 
70.  Defendants' actions were made with the intent 
and malice to harm Plaintiffs' contractual and business relationships without legal justification. 
 71.  Under the foregoing circumstances, Plaintiffs 
are entitled to an award of damages in an amount to be 
proven at trial. 
 
Count III (Injunctive Relief) alleged RCA was entitled 
to an injunction preventing the Hus from further interfering 
with its contractual relationships: 
COUNT III 
INJUNCTIVE RELIEF 
 
72.  Plaintiffs incorporate by reference each of the 
allegations in all previous paragraphs. 
 
73.  Plaintiffs are entitled to an injunction 
enjoining Defendants from interfering with Plaintiffs' contractual, business, and other relationships with 
Plaintiff RCA Trade Center's lender and the government. 
 
The Hus were served with RCA's complaint on 
November 30, 2023.  That same day, in a telephone conference 
between Lenhart and RCA's counsel, the parties agreed to extend 
the deadline for responsive filings to January 17, 2024.  
Lenhart had requested an extension in order to secure insurance 
defense counsel from one of the Hus' three insurance carriers.   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
8 
 But Lenhart's efforts were ultimately unsuccessful.  
All three insurance carriers denied the Hus' request for 
indemnification and defense, with the last denial letter 
received on January 20, 2024. 
"Pending resolution of [the Hus'] insurance coverage 
matters," RCA and the Hus nevertheless agreed, in a joint report (conferred on January 11, 2024 and signed and filed on 
January 25, 2024) "to delay Initial Disclosures."
3 
On March 15, 2024, the Hus filed a motion to dismiss 
RCA's complaint pursuant to HPEPA.  RCA opposed the motion as 
untimely, and the circuit court heard arguments on April 24, 
2024. 
At the hearing, as to the timeliness issue, Lenhart 
explained that he interpreted the statement in the joint report to mean "that opposing counsel was agreeing that we were going 
to put everything kind of on hold on this proceeding until we 
knew whether or not" one of the insurance carriers was going to 
defend the Hus against RCA's complaint.  As such, Lenhart 
"treated the receipt of the final insurance denial letter [on 
January 20, 2024,] as the start of a new 'clock' as to the 60-
day period for filing Defendants' Anti-SLAPP Motion."   
The circuit court ultimately found in Lenhart's 
explanation good cause for the late filing, because "there 
 
3  Initial disclosures were to be made on or before February 15, 2024. 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
9 
 seem[ed] to have been some understanding [between RCA and the 
Hus] that everything would be delayed or put off until the 
insurance matter was scheduled."   
As to the substantive issues presented by the motion, 
the circuit court determined (1) the Letter fell within HPEPA's scope, (2) RCA did not state claims for which relief could be 
granted, and (3) DPP was not a party: 
[T]he Court does find that the instant claims by plaintiffs 
fall under Chapter 634G and that the defendants were 
exercising their constitutional First Amendment rights or 
the rights of any citizen to bring complaints regarding the 
permitting and other issues surrounding this property.  And 
that under 634G the claims of the plaintiff should be 
dismissed.    
 The Court is also concerned -- I mean, in addition to 
the finding that it falls under political speech, what the defendants did, the Court is also concerned that the claims 
don't [state] claims to which relief can be granted as 
against the defendants.  
 
The declaratory relief, injunctive relief, some type 
of approval of the structures involved or the developments involved, the Court would need to hear from the building 
department as a party.  The Hus don't have any jurisdiction 
or any power over the granting [of] those permits.   
 
(Formatting altered and emphases added.) 
The circuit court entered its order granting the Hus' 
motion on May 20, 2024.  In addition to finding good cause for 
the untimely filing, the circuit court ruled that the Letter 
fell under HRS Chapter 634G: 
3. Plaintiffs' claims arose in part following 
Defendants' [Letter]  to Plaintiffs, copies of which were 
also sent to various government agencies.  Although the 
[Letter]  was directed to Plaintiffs, because it was also 
transmitted to government agencies, this action constitutes an exercise of Defendants' constitutional right to petition 
the government.  Therefore, the claims asserted in the 
[Letter]  fall under the scope of [Hawaiʻ i] Revised Statutes 
ch. 634G. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
10 
  
The circuit court entered its final judgment on May 21, 2024.  
RCA appealed. 
II. SLAPP and HPEPA 
SLAPP is an acronym for a "Strategic Lawsuit Against 
Public Participation."  Perry v. Perez-Wendt, 129 Hawaiʻ i 95, 99, 
294 P.3d 1081, 1085 (App. 2013).  "The paradigm SLAPP is a suit 
filed by a large developer against environmental activists or a 
neighborhood association intended to chill the defendants' 
continued political or legal opposition to the developers' plans."  Hupp v. Freedom Commc'ns, Inc., 163 Cal. Rptr. 3d 919, 
922 (Cal. Ct. App. 2013).  "While SLAPP suits 'masquerade as ordinary lawsuits' the conceptual features which reveal them as 
SLAPPs are that they are generally meritless suits brought by 
large private interests to deter common citizens from exercising 
their political or legal rights or to punish them for doing so."  
Hernandez v. Zook, 351 A.3d 795, 798 (Pa. Super. Ct. 2026) 
(quoting Unif. Pub. Expression Prot. Act § 1 cmt. (Unif. L. Comm'n 2020)). 
An "anti-SLAPP law is designed to protect persons from 
lawsuits intended to chill their free speech or petitioning activities related to public issues."  City & County of Honolulu 
v. Chevron Corp., 157 Hawaiʻ i 340, 341, 577 P.3d 82, 83 
(App. 2025). FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
11 
 In 2020, UPEPA sought to harmonize the different 
states' varying approaches to combating SLAPP suits "by 
enunciating a clear process through which SLAPPs can be 
challenged and their merits fairly evaluated in an expedited manner."  Unif. Pub. Expression Prot. Act Prefatory Note (Unif. 
L. Comm'n 2020).  UPEPA thus "serves two purposes:  protecting 
individuals' rights to petition and speak freely on issues of 
public interest while, at the same time, protecting the rights 
of people and entities to file meritorious lawsuits for real 
injuries."  Unif. Pub. Expression Prot. Act Prefatory Note 
(Unif. L. Comm'n 2020). 
In 2022, the Hawaiʻ i Legislature repealed HRS 
Chapter 634F, Hawaiʻ i's previous anti-SLAPP statute, and adopted 
UPEPA by enacting HRS Chapter 634G, HPEPA.  2022 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 96, § 1 at 215-16. 
Upon a motion to dismiss based on HPEPA, the court 
must dismiss a cause of action or part of a cause of action if 
(1) the movant proves HPEPA applies; (2) the non-movant fails to 
prove an exception applies; and either (3)(A) the non-movant 
fails to prove a prima facie case as to each element of each 
cause of action or (3)(B) the movant proves the non-movant 
failed to state a cause of action upon which relief can be granted or the movant proves there is no genuine issue of 
material fact: FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
12 
 [§634G-6]  Dismissal of cause of action.   
(a) In ruling on a motion under section 634G- 3(a), the 
court shall dismiss with prejudice a cause of action or 
part of a cause of action if: 
(1) The moving party establishes under section 
634G-2(a) that this chapter applies;  
 
(2) The responding party fails to establish under 
section 634G- 2(b) that this chapter does not 
apply; and 
 
(3) Either: 
 (A) The responding party fails to establish a 
prima facie case as to each essential 
element of the cause of action; or 
 
(B) The moving party establishes that: 
 
(i) The responding party failed to 
state a cause of action upon which 
relief can be granted; or   
(ii) There is no genuine issue as to any material fact and the party is 
entitled to judgment as a matter of 
law on the cause of action or part 
of the cause of action. 
 
HRS § 634G-6(a) (Supp. 2022) (formatting altered and emphases 
added). 
HPEPA is to be "construed liberally to fully 
effectuate its purposes and intent to protect the exercise of the right of freedom of speech and of the press, the right to 
assemble and petition, and the right of association, guaranteed 
by the United States Constitution or [Hawaiʻ i] State 
Constitution."  HRS § 634G-10 (Supp. 2022).  Hawaiʻ i appellate 
courts must also consider the rulings of other states that FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
13 
 enacted UPEPA, "to promote uniformity of the law with respect to 
its subject matter."  HRS § 634G-11 (Supp. 2022).4 
A motion to dismiss under HPEPA must be filed "no 
later than sixty days after a party is served with a complaint, 
crossclaim, counterclaim, third-party claim, or other pleading 
. . . or at a later time on a showing of good cause."  HRS 
§ 634G-3(a) (Supp. 2022).  
III. DISCUSSION 
RCA's points of error on appeal challenge the circuit 
court's (1) finding of good cause for the Hus' untimely filing of their motion to dismiss; (2) dismissal under HPEPA; and 
(3) award of attorney's fees and costs. A. Circuit Court Did Not Abuse Its Discretion When It Found 
Good Cause for the Untimely Filing 
  
First, RCA contends the circuit court "should have 
denied the motion as untimely under" HRS § 634G-3(a), because 
the Hus' "delay in filing the Motion to wait for insurance coverage determinations is not good cause."  (Some formatting 
altered.) 
A motion to dismiss a complaint under HPEPA must be 
filed within sixty days of being served with the complaint "or 
at a later time on a showing of good cause":  
 
4  Hawaiʻ i courts may also refer to the commentary to UPEPA to aid in 
interpreting HPEPA.  Cf. State v. Hopkins, 60 Haw. 540, 543 n.2, 592 P.2d 
810, 812 n.2 (1979) (referring to statutory commentary to "aid in 
understanding the section" but not as an indication "of legislative intent"). 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
14 
 [§634G-3]  Required procedures; motions; 
stays.  (a) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, 
including rules of the court, no later than sixty days 
after a party is served with a complaint, crossclaim, 
counterclaim, third- party claim, or other pleading that 
asserts a cause of action to which this chapter applies, or 
at a later time on a showing of good cause, the party may 
file a special motion to dismiss the cause of action or 
part of the cause of action. 
 
HRS § 634G-3(a) (emphasis added). 
"Good cause depends upon the circumstances of the 
individual case, and a finding of its existence lies largely in 
the discretion of the officer or court to which the decision is 
committed."  Chen v. Mah, 146 Hawaiʻ i 157, 178, 457 P.3d 796, 817 
(2020) (citation modified). 
Here, the Hus were served with RCA's complaint on 
November 30, 2023.  In a declaration to the court, Lenhart 
declared that he called RCA's counsel that same day and 
explained he might not be counsel of record in the proceeding, because he was "in the process of tendering defense of this 
matter" to the Hus' "various insurance carriers."  Lenhart 
further explained that he "wished to avoid submitting 
substantive pleadings that might [have] conflict[ed] with the 
approach of insurance defense counsel" and wished to avoid 
charging the Hus for duplicative work that the insurance 
carriers might have undertaken. 
The parties agreed to extend the deadline to answer 
the complaint to January 17, 2024. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
15 
 All three insurance carriers, however, ultimately 
denied the Hus' request for indemnification and defense, with 
the last denial letter received on January 20, 2024.  Lenhart 
filed the Hus' answer to RCA's complaint on January 17, 2024, and the First Amended Answer on January 31, 2024, to avoid 
default. 
In a joint report, the parties agreed that, "[p]ending 
resolution of [the Hus'] insurance coverage matters, the parties 
have agreed to delay Initial Disclosures" and then set forth 
various deadlines. 
Lenhart argued that he interpreted the statement in 
the joint report to mean "that opposing counsel was agreeing 
that we were going to put everything kind of on hold on this 
proceeding until we knew whether or not" one of the insurance 
carriers was going to defend the Hus against RCA's complaint.  
As such, Lenhart "treated the receipt of the final insurance 
denial letter as the start of a new 'clock' as to the 60-day 
period for filing" the Hus' HPEPA motion to dismiss. 
Lenhart filed the HPEPA motion on March 15, 2024, 
fifty-five days after receiving the last denial letter. 
The circuit court admonished Lenhart for not 
specifically requesting an extension of the sixty-day deadline to file the motion to dismiss, but ultimately found good cause 
for the delay because "there seem[ed] to have been some FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
16 
 understanding that everything would be delayed or put off until 
the insurance matter was scheduled." 
Considering there was some uncertainty as to who would 
represent the Hus, RCA was aware of that uncertainty, the parties agreed to postpone some deadlines based on that 
uncertainty, and the Hus filed their HPEPA motion to dismiss 
within sixty days of the resolution of that uncertainty, we 
cannot say the circuit court abused its discretion in finding 
good cause existed for the untimely filing. 
B. Circuit Court Did Not Err by Dismissing RCA's Complaint 
Under HPEPA 
 
In its second and third points of error, RCA 
challenges the dismissal of its complaint.  RCA asserts that the 
circuit court erred in holding that the Letter fell under the 
scope of HRS Chapter 634G, because the Hus "did not show that the dispute between the parties is a matter of public concern"; 
instead, the Letter "is nothing more than a personal grievance."  RCA further asserts that, even if the Letter fell under HRS 
Chapter 634G, it met its prima facie burden as to all of its 
causes of action. 
We review the circuit court's decision de novo.  
Anderson v. Anderson, No. A25-1075, 2026 WL 1128755, at *4 
(Minn. Ct. App. Apr. 27, 2026) (explaining that it reviews "a district court's decision on a special motion for expedited 
relief [under UPEPA] de novo"); Valve Corp. v. Bucher L. PLLC, FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
17 
 571 P.3d 312, 318 (Wash. Ct. App. 2025) ("We review the denial 
of a UPEPA motion to dismiss de novo."); Andes Roofing, LLC v. 
Rusnak, 726 S.W.3d 13, 17 (Ky. Ct. App. 2025) (reviewing lower 
court's decision under UPEPA de novo); see HRS § 634G-11 ("In 
applying and construing this uniform act, consideration shall be 
given to the need to promote uniformity of the law with respect 
to its subject matter among states that enact it.").  
As stated above, the court must dismiss a cause of 
action or part of a cause of action if (1) the movant proves 
HPEPA applies; (2) the non-movant fails to prove an exception 
applies; and either (3)(A) the non-movant fails to prove a prima 
facie case as to each element of each cause of action or 
(3)(B) the movant proves the non-movant failed to state a cause of action upon which relief can be granted or the movant proves 
there is no genuine issue of material fact.  HRS § 634G-6. 
1. HPEPA Applies 
 
For the first factor, the movant must establish "under 
section 634G-2(a) that this chapter applies[.]"  HRS § 634G-6(a)(1).  Under HRS § 634G-2(a) (Supp. 2022), the movant must 
establish that the non-movant's cause of action was based on communications made in governmental proceedings, communications 
about issues under consideration in governmental proceedings, or 
speech or conduct on a matter of public concern:
 
[§634G-2]  Scope of chapter.  (a) Except as otherwise 
provided in subsection (b), this chapter shall apply to a FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
18 
 cause of action asserted against a person based on the 
person's:  
(1) Communication in a legislative, executive, 
judicial, administrative, or other governmental 
proceeding;  
 
(2) Communication on an issue under consideration 
or review in a legislative, executive, 
judicial, administrative, or other governmental 
proceeding; or 
 
(3) Exercise of the right of freedom of speech or 
of the press, the right to assemble or 
petition, or the right of association, 
guaranteed by the United States Constitution or 
the [Hawaiʻ i] State Constitution, on a matter of 
public concern.  
(Emphasis added.)   
On appeal, RCA argues that the Letter's content was 
not a matter of public concern.  Thus, we focus our analysis on 
whether the Hus' Letter was on a matter of public concern. 
HPEPA, however, does not define "on a matter of public 
concern."  HRS § 634G-2. 
The Hawaiʻ i Supreme Court "generously interprets the 
civil rights bestowed by the Hawaiʻ i Constitution," holding that 
"article I, section 4 provides free speech rights 'at least as expansive as those provided by the United States Constitution.'"  
In re KAHEA, 150 Hawaiʻ i 43, 56, 497 P.3d 58, 71 (2021) (emphasis 
omitted) (quoting State v. Russo, 141 Hawaiʻ i 181, 190, 407 P.3d 
137, 146 (2017)).  The United States Supreme Court has explained 
that "[s]peech deals with matters of public concern when it can 
be fairly considered as relating to any matter of political, social, or other concern to the community, or when it is a FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
19 
 subject of legitimate news interest; that is, a subject of 
general interest and of value and concern to the public."  
Snyder v. Phelps, 562 U.S. 443, 453 (2011) (citation modified). 
At least two state courts interpreting their state's 
version of UPEPA have applied this definition to determine whether speech is a matter of public concern.  See M.G. v. 
Bainbridge Island Sch. Dist. #303, 566 P.3d 132, 145 (Wash. Ct. 
App. 2025); Mackey v. Krause, 575 P.3d 1162, 1173-74 (Utah 
2025).  We likewise apply this definition.  See HRS § 634G-11 
("In applying and construing this uniform act, consideration 
shall be given to the need to promote uniformity of the law with 
respect to its subject matter among states that enact it.").   
The court must "consider the parties' pleadings, the 
motion, any replies and responses to the motion, and any evidence that could be considered in ruling on a motion for 
summary judgment under the applicable" Hawaiʻ i Rules of Civil 
Procedure.  HRS § 634G-5 (Supp. 2022).   
Here, RCA's causes of action were based on the Letter.   
The Letter was sent to RCA and various government agencies.  The 
content of the Letter alleged, among other things, that the 
Project "and the many illegal structures and activities at 
Marconi Point Condominium Project" were affecting "the sensitive 
coastal environment," the impacts of which were initially 
reported on by Environment Hawaiʻ i in November 2022. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
20 
 In particular, the Letter alleged RCA allowed 
"vehicular access to the beach areas for '4-wheeling' in 
sensitive environmental areas having nesting native birds and 
turtles"; dredged "wetlands areas at the Marconi Project (having endemic ('native') birds) and disturb[ed] that wildlife without 
a dredging permit from the Army Corps of Engineers and/or from 
the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service"; and allowed "the construction 
of illegal structures (including construction and occupancy of 
illegal commercial and industrial warehouses) for residential, 
commercial, and industrial uses and purposes at the Marconi 
Point Condominium Project and renting such structures out to the 
public."  (Emphasis omitted.)  Among other laws and ordinances, 
the Letter alleged the aforementioned activity violated federal 
and state environmental laws. 
Given the robust environmental protections enshrined 
in our state constitution, the Hus' speech regarding development 
of agricultural land and degradation of the environment can 
fairly be considered as relating to a matter of value and 
concern to the people of Hawaiʻ i.  Cf. Haw. Const. art. XI, §§ 1, 
3, 9; In re KAHEA, 150 Hawaiʻ i at 54, 497 P.3d at 69 ("KAHEA's 
opposition to development on Mauna Kea falls squarely within the 
heartland of the First Amendment's protections.").  Thus, the 
Letter's content was on a matter of public concern. 
As such, HPEPA applies. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
21 
 2. RCA Failed to Prove Its Causes of Action Fell 
Under an Exception   
 
Because the Hus established that HPEPA applied, the 
burden then shifted to RCA to demonstrate its causes of action 
were exempt from HPEPA under HRS § 634G-2(b) (Supp. 2022).  HRS 
§ 634G-6(a)(2).  Under HRS § 634G-2(b), causes of action brought 
against or by government employees or entities acting in an 
official capacity or against those offering goods or services 
are exempt from HPEPA: 
(b) This chapter shall not apply to a cause of 
action asserted: 
 
(1) Against a governmental unit or an employee or 
agent of a governmental unit acting or 
purporting to act in an official capacity; 
 
(2) By a governmental unit or an employee or agent of a governmental unit acting in an official 
capacity to enforce a law to protect against an 
imminent threat to public health or safety; or  
(3) Against a person primarily engaged in the business of selling or leasing goods or 
services if the cause of action arises out of a 
communication related to the person's sale or lease of the goods or services. 
 
HRS § 634G-2(b). 
Here, RCA's opposition to the Hus' motion to dismiss 
argued only that the Hus did not meet their burden of showing 
HPEPA applied; RCA did not argue that its causes of action were exempt, nor does it make any such argument on appeal.  And the 
record does not demonstrate RCA could make such an argument. 
As such, RCA failed to show its causes of action fell 
under an exemption to HPEPA. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
22 
 3. RCA Failed to Establish a Prima Facie Case as to 
Each Element of Its Three Causes of Action   
 
The third factor is satisfied if either (A) the non-
movant fails to prove a prima facie case as to each element of 
each cause of action or (B) the movant proves the non-movant 
failed to state a cause of action upon which relief can be granted or the movant proves there is no genuine issue of 
material fact.  HRS § 634G-6(a)(3). 
RCA's complaint asserted three causes of action:  
Count I (Declaratory Relief), Count II (Tortious Interference), and Count III (Injunctive Relief). 
a. Count I (Declaratory Relief) 
 
RCA contended it would "likely prevail on the merits 
of Count I because DPP has issued building permits for the 
warehouses." 
To establish a prima facie case for declaratory relief 
under HRS § 632-1 (2016), the complainant must produce evidence demonstrating that a declaratory judgment "will serve to 
terminate the uncertainty or controversy giving rise to the proceeding": 
[A] party has standing to seek declaratory relief in a 
civil case brought pursuant to HRS § 632-1 (1) where 
antagonistic claims exist between the parties (a) that 
indicate imminent and inevitable litigation, or (b) where 
the party seeking declaratory relief has a concrete 
interest in a legal relation, status, right, or privilege 
that is challenged or denied by the other party, who has or 
asserts a concrete interest in the same legal relation, 
status, right or privilege; and (2) a declaratory judgment 
will serve to terminate the uncertainty or controversy 
giving rise to the proceeding.  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
23 
  
Ching v. Case, 145 Hawaiʻ i 148, 173, 449 P.3d 1146, 1171 (2019) 
(emphasis added) (quoting Tax Found. of Hawaiʻ i v. State, 144 
Hawaiʻi 175, 202, 439 P.3d 127, 154 (2019)).  Thus, "the 
dispositive question is whether 'the court is satisfied . . . 
that a declaratory judgment will serve to terminate the 
uncertainty or controversy giving rise to the proceeding,'" 
which is a question of law.  Island Ins. Co. v. Perry, 94 Hawaiʻ i 
498, 502, 17 P.3d 847, 851 (App. 2000).  
In Island Insurance Co., this court held that an 
insured is a necessary and indispensable party where the insurer 
seeks a declaratory judgment to determine its liability to the 
insured.  94 Hawaiʻ i at 502, 17 P.3d at 851.  This court 
explained that, without the insured, the declaratory judgment 
does not bind the insured and the insured could relitigate the matter.  Id.  Thus, the declaratory judgment would not "serve to 
terminate the uncertainty or controversy giving rise to the proceeding."  Id.  This court remanded the case "for the entry 
of an order dismissing this case for lack of jurisdiction to enter a declaratory judgment."  Id. 
In Ohana Control Systems, Inc. v. Hayashi, a 
contractor sought a declaratory judgment that the State of 
Hawaiʻi Department of Education (DOE) was not entitled to recover 
under performance bonds issued by an insurance company.  157 Hawaiʻi 490, 580 P.3d 670, No. CAAP-23-0000443, 2025 WL 3633441, FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
24 
 at *1, *5 (App. Dec. 15, 2025) (mem. op.).  This court held 
that, because the insurance company was not a party to the 
action, the insurance company would not be bound by such a 
declaratory judgment, and thus, the circuit court "lacked jurisdiction to enter a declaratory judgment about DOE's 
entitlement to recover under [the insurance company's] 
performance bonds."  Ohana Control Sys., Inc., 2025 WL 3633441, 
at *5. 
Here, RCA sought "a declaratory ruling that the 
warehouses may remain upon [RCA's] Units, that [RCA is] not required to remove the warehouse [sic] that have already been 
constructed, and that [RCA] may continue with the construction 
of the warehouses as intended."   
In other words, RCA wanted the circuit court to 
confirm that its permits were valid and that it had an affirmative right to build its warehouses. 
But RCA did not join the State or City and County of 
Honolulu through its relative agencies.  
Similar to the declaratory judgments sought in Island 
Insurance Co. and Ohana Control Systems, Inc., any declaratory 
judgment that RCA's permits were valid and construction could 
continue would not have bound the state or city agencies tasked 
with regulating the construction of structures on the Property, 
and the same concerns raised by the Letter related to FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
25 
 construction of the warehouses could be relitigated.  See HRS 
§ 632-1; Island Ins. Co., 94 Hawaiʻ i at 502, 17 P.3d at 851; 
Ohana Control Sys., Inc., 2025 WL 3633441, at *5.  Accordingly, 
RCA failed to show that a declaratory judgment would "serve to 
terminate the uncertainty or controversy giving rise to the 
proceeding."  See Ching, 145 Hawaiʻ i at 173, 449 P.3d at 1171. 
Thus, RCA failed to establish a prima facie case as to 
the second element for obtaining a declaratory judgment. 
b. Count II (Tortious Interference) 
 
Count II (Tortious Interference) of RCA's complaint 
alleged that the Hus' "actions were made with the intent and 
malice to harm [RCA's] contractual and business relationships 
without legal justification." 
"Hawaiʻi recognizes two separate torts:  (1) tortious 
interference with contractual relations and (2) the tort of 
intentional or tortious interference with prospective business 
advantage."  Wadsworth v. KSL Grand Wailea Resort, Inc., 818 
F. Supp. 2d 1240, 1252 (D. Haw. 2010) (first citing Meridian 
Mortg. Inc. v. First Hawaiian Bank, 109 Hawaiʻ i 35, 45, 47-48, 
122 P.3d 1133, 1143, 1145-46 (App. 2005); then citing Robert's 
Hawaii Sch. Bus, Inc. v. Laupahoehoe Transp. Co., 91 Hawaiʻ i 224, 
258-59, 982 P.2d 853, 887-88 (1999)). 
While similar, each tort contains its own distinct 
elements that must be satisfied.  See id.  Because RCA, in its FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
26 
 opposition, focuses on the elements for tortious interference 
with contractual relations, we, too, narrow our analysis to that 
specific tort.  See id. 
A viable prima facie case for tortious interference 
with contractual relations is supported by evidence demonstrating six elements: 
(1) a contract between the plaintiff and a third party; 
(2) the defendant's knowledge of the contract; (3) the 
defendant's intentional inducement of the third party to 
breach the contract; (4) the absence of justification on 
the defendant's part; (5) the subsequent breach of the 
contract by the third party; and (6) damages to the 
plaintiff. 
 
Buscher v. Boning, 114 Hawaiʻ i 202, 215 n.6, 159 P.3d 814, 827 
n.6 (2007) (quoting Kahala Royal Corp. v. Goodsill Anderson 
Quinn & Stifel, 113 Hawaiʻ i 251, 267 n.17, 151 P.3d 732, 748 n.17 
(2007)).  
RCA failed to establish a prima facie case as to the 
fourth element, "absence of justification on the defendant's 
part."  RCA contended the Hus' "conduct was not justified 
because the warehouse construction is fully permitted."  It 
attached, as Exhibit 1 to its opposition, DPP website printouts, 
showing that the construction of the eight warehouses in 
question was permitted. 
But the Hus' Letter also takes issue with the uses to 
which RCA puts the warehouses, not merely the structures themselves.  For example, the Letter points to the 
"advertisement for and leasing of warehouse space to individuals FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
27 
 and entities who are not leasehold or fee owners of the 
Project"; the "false advertisement of the warehouses as being in 
an 'industrial park'"; and the "use of the Project for illegal 
and noncompliant functions[,]" among others.  See id.  Because 
the website printouts of the permits do not address the use of 
the warehouses, the printouts do not establish that the Hus' 
conduct was unjustified. 
Thus, RCA failed to establish a prima facie case as to 
the fourth element of tortious interference with contractual 
relations. 
c. Count III (Injunctive Relief) 
 
A viable prima facie case for injunctive relief 
requires the plaintiff to produce evidence as to the following 
three elements:   
(1) whether the plaintiff has prevailed on the merits; 
(2) whether the balance of irreparable damage favors the 
issuance of a permanent injunction; and (3) whether the 
public interest supports granting such an injunction. 
 
Off. of Hawaiian Affs. v. Hous. & Cmty. Dev. Corp. of Hawaii, 
117 Hawaiʻ i 174, 212, 177 P.3d 884, 922 (2008), rev'd and 
remanded, 556 U.S. 163 (2009), reconsidered, 121 Hawaiʻ i 324, 219 
P.3d 1111 (2009).5 
 
5  The 2008 Supreme Court of Hawaiʻ i case was reversed and remanded on a 
federal question by the United States Supreme Court.  It was subsequently 
reconsidered on state law grounds in the Supreme Court of Hawaiʻ i's 2009 
decision. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
28 
 Here, RCA's opposition did not present any argument as 
to the elements of Count III (Injunctive Relief), but instead 
summarily asserted that, should it prevail on Count II (Tortious 
Interference), it would also "be entitled to injunctive relief under Count III, preventing further interference with [RCA's] 
contractual and business relationships."  Nothing in RCA's 
opposition before the circuit court, or in its opening brief on 
appeal, supports a determination that the "balance of 
irreparable damage favors the issuance of a permanent 
injunction" or that the "public interest supports granting such 
an injunction."  See Off. of Hawaiian Affs., 117 Hawaiʻ i at 212, 
177 P.3d at 922. 
Thus, RCA did not establish a prima facie case as to 
each element for injunctive relief. 
In sum, because the Hus demonstrated that HPEPA 
applied to RCA's causes of action, RCA failed to show its causes 
of action fell under an exemption to HPEPA, and RCA failed to 
prove a prima facie case as to its three causes of action, the 
circuit court did not err in dismissing RCA's complaint.  See 
Reyes v. Kuboyama, 76 Hawaiʻ i 137, 140, 870 P.2d 1281, 1284 
(1994) ("This court may affirm a grant of summary judgment on 
any ground appearing in the record, even if the circuit court 
did not rely on it." (citations omitted)).   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
29 
 C. Challenge to Attorney's Fees and Costs Is Waived 
 
Finally, RCA challenges the award of the Hus' 
attorney's fees and costs based on its assertion that the 
circuit court erred in dismissing its complaint under HPEPA.  RCA otherwise presents no argument in the argument section of 
its opening brief to support this point of error.  Thus, we deem 
this point waived.  See Hawaiʻ i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
Rule 28(b)(7) (requiring an opening brief to include an argument 
section "containing the contentions of the appellant on the 
points presented and the reasons therefor" and stating that 
"[p]oints not argued may be deemed waived").   
IV. CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court's 
May 20, 2024 order granting the Hus' HPEPA motion to dismiss and May 21, 2024 Final Judgment. 
 
On the briefs:  
Michael A. Yoshida, 
Gregory W. Kugle, 
Ross Uehara-Tilton, David H. Abitbol, (Damon Key Leong Kupchak 
Hastert), 
for Plaintiffs-Appellants. 
 
Peter J. Lenhart 
Tori R.K. Maeshiro, for Defendants-Appellees. /s/ Katherine G. Leonard Presiding Judge  
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge  
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge 