NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000465
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MATTHAN PATTIOAY, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 16-1-1676)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Matthan Pattioay (Pattioay ) appeals
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence ( Judgment) entered
on May 17, 2017, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
(Circuit Court).1  After a jury trial, Pattioay was found guilty
of one count of Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree, in
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) § 707-716(1)(e),2 and 
1The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided. 
2HRS § 707-716 (2014) provides in relevant part:
 
§707-716. Terroristic threatening in the first degree.
(1) A person commits the offense of terroristic threatening
in the first degree if the person commits terroristic
threatening:
. . . 
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
was sentenced to five years of incarceration with credit for time
served. 
Pattioay raises a single point of error on appeal,
contending that the Circuit Court erred by failing to instruct
the jury on the knowing and negligent states of mind.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the
relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Pattioay's point of
error as follows:
During the settling of jury instructions below,
Pattioay sought to instruct the jury with a modified version of
Hawai#i Pattern Jury Instructions-Criminal (HAWJIC ) 3.16 that
would have read in pertinent part: "The state of mind with which
a person commits an act such as 'intentionally,' 'knowingly,'
'recklessly,' or 'negligently' may be proved by circumstantial
evidence."  The Circuit Court modified this language, over
Pattioay's objection, and instructed the jury in pertinent part:
"The state of mind with which a person commits an act such as
2(...continued)
(e) With the use of a dangerous instrument or a
simulated firearm.
HRS § 707-715 (2014) defines terroristic threatening in relevant
part: 
 
§707-715. Terroristic threatening, defined. A person
commits the offense of terroristic threatening if the person
threatens, by word or conduct, to cause bodily injury to
another person or serious damage or harm to property,
including the pets or livestock, of another or to commit a
felony:
(1) With the intent to terrorize, or in reckless
disregard of the risk of terrorizing, another
person . . . .
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
'intentionally' or 'recklessly' may be proved by circumstantial
evidence."  Also over Pattioay's objection, the Circuit Court
declined to instruct the jury as to the definitions of
"knowingly" and "negligently." 
On appeal, Pattioay contends that the Circuit Court's
failure to instruct on the knowing and negligent states of mind: 
(1) "precluded the jury from understanding that there are a total
of four states of mind in the criminal law, rather than only
two[;]" (2) reduced the State's burden of proof; and (3)
"precluded the defense from distinguishing between conduct which
was intentional versus knowing versus reckless versus negligent."
When jury instructions or their omission are at issue
on appeal, "the standard of review is whether, when read and
considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially
insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading."  State v.
Klinge, 92 Hawai #i 577, 583, 994 P.2d 509, 515 (2000) (quoting
State v. Ortiz, 91 Hawai# i 181, 190, 981 P.2d 1127, 1136 (1999)). 
Here, the jury was instructed that, inter alia , every
material element of the charged offense must be proven by the
prosecution beyond a reasonable doubt, including that Pattioay
threatened to cause bodily injury to another person with the use
of a dangerous instrument and that he did so "with the intent to
terrorize, or in reckless disregard of the risk of terrorizing,
another person."3  HRS § 707-715(1); see also Klinge , 92 Hawai #i
3The Circuit Court also instructed the jury as to the lesser-
included offense of terroristic threatening in the second degree.  See HRS
§ 707-717.  The state of mind is the same for both the charged and included
offense.  See HRS § 707-715. 
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
at 586-89, 994 P.2d at 518-21 (confirming that the mens rea
component of terroristic threatening requires an intentional or
reckless state of mind).  The jury was instructed on the
statutory definitions of "intentionally" and "recklessly."  See
HRS § 702-206; HAWJIC 6.02 and 6.04. 
Contrary to Pattioay's assertion, we find nothing in
the Circuit Court's instructions, including those outlined above,
suggesting to the jurors that they "did not need to spend any
time considering whether he really had . . . either an
intentional or reckless state of mind[.]"  Nor does Pattioay cite
any case law or other authority indicating that the omission of
instructions defining inapplicable states of mind renders the
instructions "prejudicially insufficient, erroneous,
inconsistent, or misleading" or lessens the State's burden of
proof as to the culpable states of mind, and we find none. 
Indeed, this court has rejected similar arguments before.  See
State v. Tengbergen, No. 29302, 2009 WL 3478003, *2 (App. Oct.
29, 2009) (SDO) (rejecting the defendant's argument that the
trial court erred "in refusing to instruct the jury on the
definition of a reckless state of mind," where the jury was
properly instructed as to the applicable states of mind for
unlawful entry into a motor vehicle - intentionally or
knowingly).
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
For these reasons, we affirm the Circuit Court's May
17, 2017 Judgment.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii, May 8, 2018. #
On the briefs:
Phyllis J. Hironaka,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.Chief Judge
Sonja P. McCullen,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
5