NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000418
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ONE WAILEA DEVELOPMENT, LLC, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
WARREN S. UNEMORI ENGINEERING, INC., Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10,
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, and DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0212)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
The instant appeal arises from professional civil 
engineering services rendered for a proposed residential 
development in Wailea, Hawai 'i on the island of Maui. Plaintiff-
Appellant One Wailea Development, LLC (One Wailea), appeals from 
the following entered in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit1 
(circuit court): 
(1) "Final Judgment in Favor of Defendant Warren S.
 
Unemori Engineering Inc. As to All Claims," entered March 19,
 
2013 (Final Judgment);
 
(2) "Order Granting Defendant Warren S. Unemori
 
Engineering Inc.'s Motion For Award of Attorney's Fees and
 Costs," entered March 22, 2013; and
 
1
 The Honorable Joel E. August presided over the case from its
initial filing on June 15, 2007 until it was reassigned to the Honorable
Joseph E. Cardoza on May 25, 2011.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) "All orders resulting from hearings before The
 
Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza and The Honorable Joel E. August."

 
One Wailea contends the circuit court erred in:
 
(1)
 granting Defendant-Appellee Warren S. Unemori
 
Engineering, Inc.'s (Unemori Engineering) motion for summary
 
judgment (MSJ);
 
(2) denying in part One Wailea's motion for
 
reconsideration;
 
(3) denying One Wailea's motion submitted pursuant to 
Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 60(b); 
(4) denying One Wailea's motion for leave to (a)
 
identify doe defendants and (b) amend its complaint (Motion for
 
Leave to Amend);
 
(5) granting the motion to quash subpoena and/or for
 
protective order (Motion to Quash), filed by Clyde Murashige
 (Murashige), Senior Vice President of Wailea Resort Company, Ltd.
 
(WRC); 
(6) granting the motion to withdraw as counsel for One
 
Wailea by the Law Offices of Phillip R. Brown's (Brown Law
 Offices);
 
(7) denying One Wailea's motion to compel Alexander &
 
Baldwin Wailea, LLC and its related entities (collectively, A&B)
 to (a) produce documents and things pursuant to a subpoena duces
 
tecum, and (b) answer all questions and fully respond to Notice
 of Taking Deposition Upon Written Interrogatories;
 
(8) granting Unemori Engineering's motions in limine to
 
exclude testimony by real estate agent and "Manager" of One
 Wailea, Michael J. Szymanski (Szymanski);
 
(9) denying One Wailea's motion in limine to exclude
 
any evidence presented by Unemori Engineering on the issue of
 liability;
 
(10) failing to preserve for the record a "significant
 
portion" of Szymanski's May 14, 2012 testimony;
 
(11) granting Unemori Engineering's oral motion for a
 
directed verdict made on May 15, 2012;
 
(12) denying One Wailea's oral motion to conform the
 
pleadings to the evidence;
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(13) failing to (a) take judicial notice of the
 
National Society of Professional Engineers (NSPE) Code of Ethics
 
and (b) admit the NSPE Code of Ethics and "related documents"
 
into evidence; and
 
(14) excluding testimony, including that of Title
 
Officer Teri Ferreira (Ferreira), and exhibits pertaining to
 
related litigation.
 
We conclude that One Wailea's appeal is without merit.
I. BACKGROUND
 
By a "Land Sales Contract" dated May 5, 1999, WRC 
agreed to sell, and Szymanski agreed to buy, approximately 23.11 
acres of land in Wailea, Hawai 'i on the island of Maui (Property) 
for $4,900,000 and the "terms, covenants and conditions set forth in [the Land Sales Contract]." 
In June 1999, One Wailea, through Szymanski, submitted
 
an "Application for Special Management Area Permit and Planned
 Development Approval" (SMA&PDA Application) to the County of
 
Maui's Planning Department (Planning Department). The SMA&PDA
 
Application sought the Planning Department's approval of One
 
Wailea's plan to develop the Property into a residential
 community comprised of twenty single-family residential lots. 
The SMA&PDA Application included a "Letter of Authorization" from
 Murashige, informing the Director of the Planning Department that
 WRC, as the fee simple owner of the Property, authorized One
 Wailea to file the application. DKI & Associates (DKI) prepared
 
the SMA&PDA Application for One Wailea.
 
Unemori Engineering was hired to provide DKI with
 
professional services related to the proposed development of the
 
Property between July 1999 and December 2001. By letter dated
 July 21, 1999, Szymanski, who held the title of Manager of One
 Wailea, notified the County of Maui's Department of Public Works
 and Waste Management (Department of Public Works) that Unemori
 
Engineering was authorized to file and process an application for
 
Subdivision Approval (Subdivision Application) on behalf of One
 
Wailea, and questions concerning the Subdivision Application
 
could be addressed to Unemori Engineering.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
By letter dated November 24, 1999, the Planning
 
Department granted One Wailea's SMA&PDA Application subject to
 
sixteen standard and project-specific conditions.
 
By letter dated May 2, 2001, the Department of Public
 
Works approved Unemori Engineering's construction plans for
 subdivision improvements to the Property and informed Unemori
 Engineering that the approval was valid for one year.
 
In an email sent May 30, 2001 to Darren Unemori,
 
Szymanski stated: "Please be sure and send me a copy of any
 correspondence you receive from anyone re: my project, including
 conversations with anyone, including [Murashige], that may be of
 interest or importance to me."
 
By letter dated July 26, 2001, Murashige notified
 
Szymanski that a default had occurred under the terms of the Land
 Sales Contract because Szymanski failed to place the balance of
 the purchase price of the Property "into escrow in time for
 closing . . . ." Murashige notified Szymanski that WRC was
 electing to cancel the Land Sales Contract and thereby terminate
 any rights Szymanski "may have and any duties and obligations of
 [WRC] under the Land Sales Contract[.]"
 
By letter dated October 5, 2001, DKI requested from the
 
Planning Department an extension of the deadline to initiate
 construction on the Property under the Planning Department's
 approval of One Wailea's SMA&PDA Application. By letter dated
 October 18, 2001, the Planning Department responded by requesting
 an updated letter of authorization from WRC confirming that One
 Wailea was authorized to apply for an extension.
 
In January 2003, the Planning Department denied One
 
Wailea's request for an extension on the deadline to initiate
 
2
construction. By letter dated March 11, 2003,  Unemori
Engineering requested from the Department of Public Works
 approval of a one year extension for One Wailea's SMA&PDA
 Application, which was "due to expire on April 28, 2003 unless
 extended." In a fax dated March 17, 2003, Unemori Engineering
 informed Szymanski that it appeared One Wailea was no longer
 
2
 It appears from the May 2, 2001 and March 11, 2003 letters that
the date was extended from April 27, 2002 to April 28, 2003.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
required to request extensions for its SMA&PDA Application
 
"[t]hanks to a favorable interpretation of the subdivision
 ordinance by Corporation Counsel[.]" On March 17, 2003, Unemori
 Engineering received a letter dated March 14, 2003 from the
 Department of Public Works that stated, "in accordance with our
 time extension processing guidelines, no further time extensions
 are required."
 
Through a Limited Warranty Deed dated October 1, 2003,
 
WRC transferred ownership of the Property to Wailea Estates LLC
 (Wailea Estates).
 
On October 20, 2004, the circuit court entered an order
 
in Title Guaranty Escrow Services, Inc's Interpleader Action
 (TGES's Interpleader Action) granting WRC's August 10, 2004
 
motion for summary judgment and denying Szymanski's October 3,
 
2002 motion for partial summary judgment. The circuit court
 entered its final judgment in the TGES's Interpleader Action in
 favor of WRC on April 20, 2005, from which Szymanski appealed. 
Title Guar. Escrow Servs., Inc. v. Szymanski, No. 27254 (App.
 Apr. 27, 2009) (SDO). 
In an agreement dated March 20, 2006, Unemori
 
Engineering agreed to provide professional civil engineering
 services to A&B, which managed Wailea Estates, "for the
 subdivision and development of the [Property]," and A&B agreed to
 pay Unemori Engineering $19,300 for its services as stated in a
 separate proposal.
 
In a May 1, 2006 letter, the Department of Public Works
 
notified Unemori Engineering that it was "unable to process
 [Unemori Engineering's] application for preliminary subdivision
 approval" because the Department of Public Works was also
 processing One Wailea's application for the same property. In a
 June 9, 2006 letter, Paul W. Hallin (Hallin), Senior Vice
 
President of A&B, notified Ms. Lesli Otani (Otani) of the
 
Department of Public Works that Unemori Engineering had received
 
the May 1, 2006 letter and informed Otani that Wailea Estates was
 the owner of the Property and "would like to proceed with the
 subdivision of the [Property]."
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On June 15, 2007, One Wailea filed a complaint in the
 
circuit court against Unemori Engineering and unidentified
 
individuals, corporations, partnerships, and governmental
 entities asserting the five claims for relief: breach of
 contract (Count I), breach of the duty of good faith and fair
 dealing (Count II), breach of fiduciary duty (Count III),
 professional negligence (Count IV), and interference with a
 prospective economic advantage (Count V). One Wailea prayed for
 "general, special, incidental, consequential and punitive
 damages[,]" attorneys' fees and costs, and prejudgment interest.
 Unemori Engineering filed an answer to One Wailea's complaint on
 July 6, 2007.
 
On April 27, 2009, this court affirmed the circuit 
court's final judgment in TGES's Interpleader Action. Title 
Guar. Escrow Servs., SDO at *3. Szymanski filed an application for a writ of certiorari to the Hawai
'i Supreme Court on August 
13, 2009, which was denied on September 17, 2009. Title Guar. 
Escrow Servs., Inc. v. Szymanski, No. 27254, 2009 WL 2974724 (Haw. Sept. 17, 2009). 
On June 26, 2009, Unemori Engineering filed its MSJ on
 
Counts II, III, IV, and V of One Wailea's complaint (Unemori
 
Engineering's First MSJ), arguing that One Wailea was asserting
 
negligence claims and sought "to recover economic losses and
 
therefore are barred by the Economic Loss Doctrine."
 
On August 12, 2009, One Wailea filed a memorandum in
 
opposition to Unemori Engineering's First MSJ, arguing that the
 economic loss doctrine did not apply, and that even if it did,
 One Wailea should prevail on its breach of contract claim.
 
On August 20, 2009, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
Unemori Engineering's First MSJ.
3 On September 29, 2009, the
 
circuit court granted Unemori Engineering's First MSJ as to Count
 II (breach of the duty of good faith and fair dealing), and
 denied the MSJ as to Counts III, IV, and V.
 
On October 14, 2009, Unemori Engineering filed a motion
 
to join Szymanski as a plaintiff and for summary judgment
 
3
 Transcripts for this hearing are not within the record on appeal. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Unemori Engineering's Second MSJ). With regard to One Wailea's
 
breach of contract claim (Count I), Unemori Engineering argued
 
that summary judgment was appropriate because Unemori Engineering
 was "discharged from its contract obligations to Szymanski by
 operation of law" in October 2004 when the circuit court ruled
 against Szymanski and awarded title of the Property to WRC and
 held that "further work by [Unemori Engineering] for Szymanski in
 connection with the subdivision of the property was pointless."
 With regard to One Wailea's other claims, which Unemori
 Engineering referred to as "negligence claims," Unemori
 Engineering argued that summary judgment was appropriate because
 Unemori Engineering's "contract with Szymanski was terminated by
 operation of law" when Szymanski lost his interest in the
 property and therefore "any duty that [Unemori Engineering] had
 to Szymanski was extinguished." One Wailea did not file an
 opposition to the motion.
 
On November 16, 2009, the Brown Law Offices filed a
 
"Motion to Withdraw as Counsel for [One Wailea]" (Motion to
 
Withdraw). At the January 14, 2010 hearing on the motion, the
 
circuit court noted that it received a letter on December 7, 2009
 
from Szymanski informing the court that he planned to oppose the
 motion to withdraw and seeking a continuance. The circuit court
 noted that a continuance issued on December 16, 2009 stated
 "[a]ny person or entity failing to personally appear at [the
 January 14, 2010 hearing] may be deemed to have waived any
 objection to said motion[,]" and that the court had not received
 anything from Szymanski or other representatives of One Wailea.
 The circuit court stated that it would grant the motion because
 One Wailea was not represented at the hearing and the circuit
 court had "not received any calls from anybody opposing the
 motion." The circuit court filed its order granting the Motion
 to Withdraw on January 26, 2010.
 
On March 8, 2010, the circuit court entered into the
 
record a letter it received from George B. Hofmann (Hofmann),
 
Szymanski's counsel in his "Chapter 7" federal bankruptcy case.
 
In the letter, Hofmann requested the circuit court cancel Unemori
 Engineering's Second MSJ before the hearing scheduled for March
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
9, 2010 because the motion violated the automatic stay that
 
applies in bankruptcy cases pursuant to federal law, and because
 Unemori Engineering's counsel had refused to withdraw the motion. 
On March 16, 2010, Unemori Engineering filed their memorandum
 regarding Szymanski's bankruptcy and argued that "[t]he automatic
 bankruptcy stay applies to actions against [Szymanski]" because
 Szymanski was the debtor, not One Wailea.
 
On March 30, 2010, the circuit court held a hearing on 
Unemori Engineering's Second MSJ. The circuit court explained to Szymanski, who appeared at the hearing via telephone, that under Hawai
'i law he could represent himself in the hearing but could 
not represent One Wailea.4 Szymanski "respectfully request[ed] 
if this whole case is not -- this matter is not stayed pending the completion of my bankruptcy, that at a minimum, that it be continued so that [he'd have] additional time to respond[.]" (Emphasis added.) The circuit court made several factual determinations but ultimately found that there were no "disputed issues of material fact with regard to the [MSJ] as to One 
4
 The following exchange took place:
 
MR. SZYMANSKI: For the record, all of the
allegations that [the court] just read and all those facts
are disputed. None of that is actually factual. To this
 day, there is a lis pendens filed against the court
preserving my rights, and at all times [Unemori Engineering]
could have performed. It was not impossible. The contract
 has never been cancelled[.]
 
And there is a -- I don't have any counsel. I
 
haven't had time to get counsel. And I didn't want to file
 anything. [One Wailea] didn't want to file anything opposing
-- that would be contrary to the position that the entire
motion should be stayed.
 
THE COURT: 
Well, Mr. Szymanski, you can't speak

on behalf of [One Wailea] about what [One Wailea] thought or
didn't think. . . .
 
. . . .

 
MR. SZYMANSKI: Okay. There's also the

 
declaration in the record from the previous summary judgment
motion which disputes all the material statements just made. 
THE COURT: 
Yes. Well, your position will be

noted for the record.
 
MR. SZYMANSKI:  Thank you, your Honor.

 
(Emphases added.)

 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wailea" and granted Unemori Engineering's Second MSJ as a matter
 
of law.
 
On May 25, 2010, the circuit court entered an order
 
granting Unemori Engineering's Second MSJ with regard to the
 request for summary judgment against One Wailea and staying the
 motion with regard to its request to join Szymanski. The circuit
 court's order mirrored its reasoning at the March 30, 2010
 hearing.
 
On June 4, 2010, One Wailea, through new counsel, filed
 
a "Motion for Reconsideration of Order Granting [Unemori
 Engineering's Second MSJ]" (Motion for Reconsideration). One
 
Wailea argued that the circuit court's grant of summary judgment
 
in favor of Unemori Engineering was effectively an order of
 default judgment because the court did not allow Szymanski to
 speak for One Wailea and denied Szymanski's request for a
 continuance for One Wailea to obtain new counsel and submit an
 opposition. One Wailea contended the circuit court's ruling
 equated to a denial of due process because One Wailea was given
 only twenty-one days to obtain new counsel (March 9, 2010 to
 March 30, 2010), "made diligent efforts to find new counsel but
 was unable to . . . given the short time frame[,]" and was not
 given an opportunity to explain to the court why it was unable to
 obtain new counsel.
 
As to the substance of Unemori Engineering's Second
 
MSJ, One Wailea argued that Counts I (breach of contract), III
 (breach of fiduciary duty), and IV (professional negligence) "all
 stem from [Unemori Engineering's] unauthorized disclosure of work
 product that belonged to [One Wailea]." One Wailea argued that
 the termination of One Wailea's "contractual rights to purchase
 the land" was irrelevant because "[t]he work product remained and
 the work product was improperly used by A&B for their own profit,
 at the expenses [sic] of [One Wailea]." One Wailea further
 argued that even if Unemori Engineering owed no duty to One
 Wailea after 2004, summary judgment should not have been granted
 on the basis of lack of duty as to Count V of its complaint,
 tortious interference with prospective business advantage,
 because intentional torts do not rely on the existence of a duty. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On June 10, 2010, the circuit court entered Judgment in
 
favor of Unemori Engineering as to all claims in One Wailea's
 
complaint pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b).
 
At the July 15, 2010 hearing on One Wailea's Motion for
 
Reconsideration, the circuit court stated that it would "grant
 the motion for reconsideration to a limited degree," because
 
not all, but many of the arguments raised in the motion for
reconsideration are valid arguments, but with regard to only
one limited area, and that's the issue about the Court's
ruling of summary judgment that would have included the
intentional tort.
 
. . . [T]hat is the only area that is going to be
revived in the motion for reconsideration on summary
judgment. . . .
 
. . . I think there really are some questions about
whether the ending of the contract would have necessarily
meant that there would be no potential intentional tort for
the knowing use of work product to benefit somebody else.
 
On August 10, 2010, the circuit court entered an order
 
granting in part and denying in part One Wailea's Motion for
 
Reconsideration. The circuit court reinstated Count V of One
 Wailea's complaint, interference with a prospective economic
 advantage.
 
On July 28, 2010, Murashige filed a Motion to Quash the
 
subpoena for his deposition. Keith Kiuchi (Kiuchi), counsel for
 
One Wailea, did not oppose the motion at the August 5, 2010
 
hearing. The circuit court explained that it was granting the
 Motion to Quash because it was "convinced based on Dr. Park's
 declaration that [Murashige's] participation [in an oral
 deposition] could present a significant risk to [Murashige's]
 health[.]" The circuit court issued an order granting the motion
 on August 18, 2010.
 
On August 4, 2010, One Wailea filed its Motion for
 
Leave to Amend, seeking to name Wailea Estates, A&B, and Hallin
 as now identified Doe Defendants; alleging facts relating to the
 identified Doe Defendants; pleading certain facts with
 particularity; and adding a claim for unjust enrichment. On
 October 26, 2010, the circuit court denied the motion.
 
On November 16, 2010, Unemori Engineering filed a MSJ
 
as to Count V of One Wailea's complaint (Unemori Engineering's
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Third MSJ). Unemori Engineering argued that summary judgment
 
should be granted because:
 
at the time [Unemori Engineering] contracted with [A&B] to
provide services in connection with the subdivision of the
[Property], [One Wailea] had no valid business relationship,
prospective advantage or expectancy with respect to the
property. . . . [One Wailea] had no reasonable probability
of a future economic benefit with respect to the property
because it could not proceed to subdivide and/or develop the
property since Szymanski no longer had a legal or equitable
interest in the property.
 
On December 13, 2010, One Wailea submitted a memorandum
 
in opposition to Unemori Engineering's Third MSJ.
 
The circuit court denied Unemori Engineering's Third
 
MSJ at the December 21, 2010 hearing and filed its order March
 
18, 2011. The circuit court explained that it was denying the
 motion without prejudice because: 
6. The market value of the preliminary subdivision
approval and the construction plan approval are disputed
issues of material fact. . . .
 
7. Even if [One Wailea] cannot sufficiently prove at
trial that it would have realized the alleged economic
opportunity had there been no interference, [One Wailea]
still might recover by showing that [Unemori Engineering]
was unjustly enriched as a result of the interference.
 
On April 18, 2011, Unemori Engineering filed a MSJ on
 
unjust enrichment (Unemori Engineering's Fourth MSJ). Unemori
 
Engineering argued that "[One Wailea] is not the owner of the
 
plans, specifications and other work prepared by [Unemori
 Engineering] for [One Wailea] and has no standing to bring a
 claim for unjust enrichment[,]" and such a claim "is preempted by
 the federal Copyright Act."
 
On May 25, 2011, One Wailea filed a motion pursuant to
 
HRCP Rule 60(b) to set aside the circuit court's Order Granting
 Unemori Engineering's Second MSJ as to Counts I, III, and IV
 (Motion to Set Aside). In its memorandum in support of its
 
Motion to Set Aside, One Wailea argued that under HRCP Rule
 
60((b)(2), Darren Unemori's February 8, 2011 deposition
 constituted new evidence that Unemori Engineering breached its
 duty to One Wailea by giving information prepared for One Wailea
 to A&B and withdrew One Wailea's Subdivision Application without
 permission, and under HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) based on the
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
extraordinary circumstances of the case's procedural history
 
warranted relief form the order.
 
On June 1, 2011, Unemori Engineering filed its
 
second MSJ on Count V, tortious interference with prospective
 economic advantage (Unemori Engineering's Fifth MSJ).
 
On July 1, 2011, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
Unemori Engineering's Fourth and Fifth MSJ's and One Wailea's
 Motion to Set Aside. At the hearing, the court "conclude[d] that
 given the record in this case, that [sic] the [Motion to Set
 Aside] should be denied[.]"
 
On August 22, 2011, the circuit court reduced its
 
decision to a written order, denying Unemori Engineering's Fourth
 and Fifth MSJs. The circuit court explained that Unemori
 Engineering's Fourth MSJ regarding the unjust enrichment claim
 was "inappropriate at this time as a claim of unjust enrichment
 is not currently part of this case[,]" and that it was denying
 Unemori Engineering's Fifth MSJ on the tortious interference with
 prospective business advantage claim because "[t]here are genuine
 issues of material fact." On the same day, the circuit court
 denied One Wailea's Motion to Set Aside.
 
On February 6, 2012, One Wailea filed a motion to stay
 
trial and motions or, in the alternative for a continuance of
 trial. On March 19, 2012, the circuit court denied the motion to
 stay but granted the motion to continue because of "court
 congestion."
 
On March 7, 2012, One Wailea filed a "Motion to Compel
 
[A&B] to: (A) Produce Documents and Things Pursuant to Subpoena
 Duces Tecum Filed July 16, 2007, and (B) Answer All Questions and
 Fully Respond to Notice of Taking Deposition Upon Written
 Interrogatories Filed July 16, 2007" (Motion to Compel). Unemori
 
Engineering filed a memorandum in opposition to the Motion to
 
Compel on March 6, 2012. At an April 11, 2012 hearing on the
 Motion to Compel, the circuit court orally denied One Wailea's
 motion because "the motion was filed after the discovery cutoff"
 and because "it relates to an issue that is almost five years
 old."
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On April 20, 2012, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
six motions in limine, granting the motions excluding testimony:
 
(1) by Szymanski that One Wailea owned the drawings, plans, maps,
 and other work produced by Unemori Engineering for One Wailea;
 (2) concerning insurance coverage; and (3) by Szymanski regarding
 offers received for the Property, permits and approvals. The
 circuit court denied the motions in limine seeking the exclusion
 of testimony: (1) by Szymanski regarding the value of One Wailea
 and permits and approvals issued to One Wailea; and (2) by
 Szymanski of statements attributed to Warren S. Unemori. The
 circuit court also found "an insufficient factual and legal basis
 to warrant the granting of this motion and to impose sets of
 sanctions on [Unemori Engineering,]" and accordingly, denied the
 motion in limine to exclude any evidence presented by Unemori
 Engineering on the issue of liability.
 
Jury trial commenced on April 23, 2012, and concluded

 
on May 15, 2012. On May 15, 2012, counsel for One Wailea made an
 oral motion to conform the pleadings to the evidence to include a
 claim of unjust enrichment. One Wailea argued that the motion
 was consistent with the circuit court's ruling in December of
 2010. Unemori Engineering objected to the motion on the basis
 that there was no evidence on the record to support a claim of
 unjust enrichment. The circuit court denied the motion.
 
At the close of One Wailea's case in chief on May 15,
 
2012, Unemori Engineering made an oral motion for judgment as a
 matter of law (directed verdict) and for punitive damages. In
 its July 5, 2012 "Order Granting [Unemori Engineering's] Motion
 for Directed Verdict" (Motion for Directed Verdict) and damages
 
based on the claim of tortious interference with a prospective
 
economic advantage, the circuit court explained that it was
 granting the motion because One Wailea "failed to sustain its
 burden of proof . . . ." 
On October 22, 2012, Unemori Engineering filed a motion
 
for attorney's fees and costs, which the circuit court granted on
 March 22, 2013.
 
On March 19, 2013, the circuit court entered its Final
 
Judgment pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b) in favor of Unemori
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Engineering as to all claims made in One Wailea's complaint as
 
well as all of the circuit court's findings, orders, and rulings,
 including an award of attorney's fees and costs. The circuit
 court explained that it granted Unemori Engineering's Motion for
 Directed Verdict because:
 
The court in reviewing the evidence in the light most
favorable to the nonmoving party, [One Wailea], saw issues
with respect to virtually every element of [One Wailea's]
case. In particular, whether there was a purposeful intent
to interfere with the relationship, advantage or expectation
and whether there is legal causation between the alleged act
of interference and with respect to actual damage to [One
Wailea].
 
On March 22, 2013, the circuit court entered its order
 
awarding fees and costs to Unemori Engineering.
 
On April 18, 2013, One Wailea filed its notice of
 
appeal from (1) the Final Judgment; (2) the Order Granting Fees
 
and Costs; and (3) "all orders resulting from hearings before The
 Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza and The Honorable Joel E. August."
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Motion to Withdraw as Counsel
 
"A motion to withdraw as counsel is subject to the 
'approval of the court,' Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 
[(HRPP)] 57, and the court's decision is reviewed for abuse of 
discretion." State v. Plichta, 116 Hawai 'i 200, 214, 172 P.3d 
512, 526 (2007).
B. Motion for Continuance
 
"The circuit court's decision to deny a request for a 
continuance pursuant to HRCP Rule 56(f) shall not be reversed 
absent an abuse of discretion." Assocs. Fin. Servs. of Hawaii, 
Inc. v. Richardson, 99 Hawai 'i 446, 454, 56 P.3d 748, 756 (App. 
2002). "[T]he request must demonstrate how postponement of a ruling on the motion will enable him or her, by discovery or other means, to rebut the movants' showing of absence of a genuine issue of fact." Id. (citation omitted).
C. Summary Judgment
 
On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
 
reviewed de novo.
 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A
 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
 evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light most
favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawai 'i 90, 
96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008) (citation omitted).
D. Motion for Reconsideration
 
[T]he purpose of a motion for reconsideration is to allow
the parties to present new evidence and/or arguments that
could not have been presented during the earlier adjudicated
motion. Reconsideration is not a device to relitigate old
matters or to raise arguments or evidence that could and
should have been brought during the earlier proceeding.
 
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 
100 Hawai 'i 97, 110, 58 P.3d 608, 621 (2002) (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (quoting Sousaris v. Miller, 92 Hawai 'i 505, 513, 
993 P.2d 539, 547 (2000)). An appellate court reviews a "trial court's ruling on a motion for reconsideration . . . under the abuse of discretion standard." Ass'n of Apartment Owners of 
Wailea Elua, 100 Hawai
'i at 110, 58 P.3d at 621. An abuse of 
discretion occurs if the trial court has "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992).
E. Motion to Quash a Subpoena
 
"On review, the action of a trial court in enforcing or 
quashing [a] subpoena will be disturbed only if plainly arbitrary 
and without support in the record." Bank of Hawaii v. Shaw, 83 
Hawai
'i 50, 59, 924 P.2d 544, 553 (App. 1996) (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted).
F. Motion for Leave to Amend Complaint
 
"Orders denying motions for leave to amend a complaint 
are reviewed for an abuse of discretion." Jou v. Dai-Tokyo Royal 
State Ins. Co., 116 Hawai 'i 159, 163, 172 P.3d 471, 475 (2007) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
G.	 HRCP Rule 60(b) Motion to Set Aside
 
"The circuit court's disposition of an HRCP Rule 60(b) 
motion is reviewed for abuse of discretion." Beneficial Hawai 'i, 
Inc. v. Casey, 98 Hawai 'i 159, 164, 45 P.3d 359, 364 (2002).
H.	 Motion to Compel Discovery in a Civil Suit
 
"We review a trial court's ruling limiting the scope of 
discovery under the abuse of discretion standard." Fisher v. 
Grove Farm Co., 123 Hawai 'i 82, 94, 230 P.3d 382, 394 (App. 
2009).
I.	 Motion in Limine
 
The granting or denying of a motion in limine is
reviewed for abuse of discretion. The denial of a motion in
 
limine, in itself, is not reversible error. The harm, if
any, occurs when the evidence is improperly admitted at
trial. Thus, even if the trial court abused its discretion
in denying a party's motion, the real test is not in the
disposition of the motion but the admission of evidence at
trial.
 
State v. Eid, 126 Hawai 'i 430, 440, 272 P.3d 1197, 1207 (2012) 
(quoting Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawai 'i 1, 7, 84 P.3d 509, 515 
(2004)).
J.	 Motion to Conform the Pleadings to the Evidence
 
A motion to conform the pleadings to the evidence under
 
HRCP Rule 15(b) is reviewed for an abuse of discretion. Hamm v.
 
Merrick, 61 Haw. 470, 473, 605 P.2d 499, 502 (1980).
K.	 Motion for Judgment as a Matter of Law (Directed Verdict)
 
The grant or denial of a "motion for judgment as a 
matter of law" under HRCP Rule 50, also known as a "motion for 
JNOV" or "motion for a directed verdict," is reviewed de novo. Kramer v. Ellett, 108 Hawai
'i 426, 430, 121 P.3d 406, 410 
(2005)(citing Nelson v. Univ. of Hawai 'i, 97 Hawai 'i 376, 393, 38 
P.3d 95, 112 (2001)). 
When reviewing a motion for judgment as a matter of law,
"the evidence and the inferences which may be fairly drawn
therefrom must be considered in the light most favorable to
the nonmoving party and [the] motion may be granted only
where there can be but one reasonable conclusion as to the
 proper judgment."
 
Id. (quoting Nelson, 97 Hawai 'i at 393, 38 P.3d at 112).
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 The circuit court did not err in granting the Brown Law
Offices' Motion to Withdraw.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
One Wailea contends the circuit court erred in granting
 
the Brown Law Offices' Motion to Withdraw as One Wailea's counsel
 
because One Wailea did not have "sufficient time to obtain
 replacement counsel and file an opposition" and the circuit court
 should have considered Szymanski's December 7, 2009 letter to the
 circuit court as an opposition to the motion.
 
A motion to withdrawal as counsel may be brought
 
pursuant to HRPP Rule 57, which provides: 
Rule 57. WITHDRAWAL OF COUNSEL .
 
Withdrawal of counsel shall require the approval of
the court and shall be subject to Rule 1.16 of the Hawai' i 
Rules of Professional Conduct [(HRPC)]. . . . Unless
otherwise ordered, withdrawal of counsel shall not becomeeffective until substitute counsel appears or is appointed,the defendant appears pro se or the defendant is deemed tohave waived counsel. 
HRPC Rule 1.16 provides, in relevant part:
 
Rule 1.6. DECLINING OR TERMINATING REPRESENTATION .
 
. . . .
 
(b) Except as stated in paragraph (c), a lawyer may
withdraw from representing a client if:
 
(1) withdrawal can be accomplished without material
adverse effect on the interests of the client;
 
. . . .
 (5) the client fails substantially to fulfill an
obligation to the lawyer regarding the lawyer's services and
has been given reasonable warning that the lawyer will
withdraw unless the obligation is fulfilled;
 
. . . .
 
(c) A lawyer must comply with applicable law
requiring notice to or permission of a tribunal when
terminating a representation.
 
The circuit court granted the Motion to Withdraw
 
because One Wailea did not appear at the January 14, 2010 hearing
 
on the Motion to Withdraw and the circuit court had "not received
 any calls from anybody opposing this motion." Szymanski, the
 sole agent for One Wailea, was notified on December 16, 2009 the
 circuit court was granting his request for a continuance, the
 hearing on the Motion to Withdraw was scheduled for January 14,
 2010, and failure to appear at this hearing may be deemed a
 waiver to any objection to the motion. One Wailea has not cited
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
any evidence in the record of its failed attempts to obtain
 
replacement counsel during its continuance or to support an
 explanation as to why Szymanski failed to seek another
 continuance for One Wailea. Therefore, the circuit court did not
 abuse its discretion in granting the Brown Law Offices' motion to
 withdraw as One Wailea's counsel.
 
Even if the circuit court erred in denying Szymanski's
 
request for a continuance, the error was harmless because One
 Wailea made substantive arguments and presented evidence in
 opposition to Unemori Engineering's Second MSJ in support of its
 Motion for Reconsideration, which the circuit court considered. 
One Wailea was not prejudiced by its lack of counsel and failure
 to oppose Unemori Engineering's Second MSJ.
B.	 The circuit court did not err in granting in part Uemori
Engineering's Second MSJ as to Counts I, III and IV.
 
One Wailea contends the circuit court erred in granting
 
Unemori Engineering's Second MSJ with regard to Counts I (breach
 
of contract), III (breach of fiduciary duty), IV (professional
 negligence), and V (interference with a prospective economic
 advantage).
 
One Wailea's argument with regard to the grant of
 
summary judgment as to Counts I, III, and IV on the basis of the
 admissibility of exhibits attached to a declaration in support of
 the MSJ is without merit because the circuit court based its
 ruling on undisputed facts. As to Count V, One Wailea's argument
 is again without merit because the circuit court revived Count V
 after considering One Wailea's motion for reconsideration. We
 address One Wailea's second and third arguments by evaluating
 whether the circuit court erred in granting summary judgment on
 Count I, III, and IV.
 
1.	 Genuine Issues of Material Fact in Count I (Breach of
Contract)
 
Neither Hawai
'i contract law nor the Restatement 
(Second) of Contracts address "discharge by impossibility." The 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts, however, addresses a relevant doctrine of "Discharge by Supervening Impracticability," which provides: 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Where, after a contract is made, a party's performance is
made impracticable without his fault by the occurrence of an
event the non-occurrence of which was a basic assumption on
which the contract was made, his duty to render that
performance is discharged, unless the language or the
circumstances indicate the contrary.
 
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 261 (1981).
 
Restatement (Second) Contracts § 261 comment "a" to
 
§ 261 explains that "[t]his general principle has traditionally
 
been applied" in three categories: "supervening death or
 incapacity of a person necessary for performance, . . .
 supervening destruction of a specific thing necessary for
 performance, . . . and supervening prohibition or prevention by
 law . . . ." Comment "a" further explains:
 
[T]his Section states a principle broadly applicable to all
types of impracticability and it "deliberately refrains from
any effort at an exhaustive expression of
contingencies" . . . The rule stated in this Section applies
only to discharge a duty to render a performance and does
not affect a claim for breach that has already arisen. The
 effect of events subsequent to a breach on the amount of
damages recoverable is governed by the rules on
remedies . . . .
 
In granting summary judgment in favor of Unemori
 
Engineering with regard to Count I, the circuit court found:
 
On July 26, 2001, because [One Wailea] breached its
contractual obligations by failing to obtain financing for
the purchase [WRC] cancelled the land sales contract and
conveyed the 23 acres to [Wailea Estates].
 
In October 2004, as a result of an interpleader action
involving a dispute as to the legal ownership of [the
Property] the Court ruled in favor of [WRC] with respect to
title to [the Property]. That decision has not been
 overturned by any court.
 
As a result the circuit court held that:
 
no later than October 2004, neither [One Wailea] nor its
principal Szymanski have any legal interest in the property,
and it was not possible for [One Wailea] to proceed with any
development plans, and it would have been futile for
[Unemori Engineering] to act on [One Wailea's] behalf
pursuant to the old contract because development on behalf
of [One Wailea] would have been impossible, and [Unemori
Engineering] was free to contract with any other subsequent
owner to develop the [Property], including the Court's
determined owner [WRC].
 
Unemori Engineering was discharged of its duties under
 
its contract with One Wailea by impossibility or supervening
 
frustration. The circuit court did not err in granting summary
 judgment and denying reconsideration with regard to Count I
 
19

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
because there was no practical way that Unemori Engineering could
 
fulfill its remaining obligations under the contract because
 Szymanski had no right to develop the Property, which was a basic
 assumption of the contract between One Wailea and Unemori
 Engineering. Furthermore, because the Contract does not address
 changed circumstances, One Wailea's competitors, or whether
 Unemori Engineering had the duty to maintain One Wailea's
 subdivision approvals, Unemori Engineering did not breach its
 contract with One Wailea by making an agreement with A&B.
2.	 Genuine Issues of Material Fact in Count III (Breach of
Fiduciary Duty)
 
One Wailea argues that the circuit court erred in 
granting summary judgment in favor of Unemori Engineering because 
there was a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Unemori Engineering owed a fiduciary duty to One Wailea because One Wailea was its client.
5 "Whether a fiduciary duty exists is a 
question of law." Lahaina Fashions, Inc. v. Bank of Hawai 'i, 129 
Hawai'i 250, 265, 297 P.3d 1106, 1121 (App. 2013). In Hawai 'i, a 
fiduciary duty is imposed by statute or special relationship. See, e.g., Hawai
'i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 425-123 (2004 Repl.) 
(providing that a partner owes certain fiduciary duties to the partnership and other partners); Matter of Estate of Dwight, 67 Haw. 139, 145, 681 P.2d 563, 567 (1984) (holding that a trustee owed a fiduciary duty to the beneficiaries of the trust via a special relationship); In re Trask, 46 Haw. 404, 412, 380 P.2d 751, 756 (1963) (holding that an attorney owed a fiduciary duty 
5
 Restatement (Second) of Torts § 874 (1979) ("Violation of
Fiduciary Duty) provides, "[o]ne standing in a fiduciary relation with another
is subject to liability to the other for harm resulting from a breach of duty
imposed by the relation." Comment "a" to § 874 explains, "[a] fiduciary
relation exists between two persons when one of them is under a duty to act
for or to give advice for the benefit of another upon matters within the scope
of the relation." Black's Law Dictionary defines "fiduciary" as:
 
1. Someone who is required to act for the benefit of another
person on all matters within the scope of their
relationship; one who owes to another the duties of good
faith, loyalty, due care, and disclosure <the corporate
officer is a fiduciary to the corporation>. 2. Someone who
must exercise a high standard of care in managing another's
money or property <the beneficiary sued the fiduciary for
investing in speculative securities>.
 
Black's Law Dictionary 743 (10th ed. 2014).
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to his client via a special relationship). One Wailea does not
 
cite to a statute or case imposing fiduciary duty on an engineer
 who is contracted to provide professional services. 
The circuit court did not err in granting summary 
judgment and denying reconsideration with regard to Count III because under Hawai
'i law, Unemori Engineering, as an engineering 
firm contracted for professional services, owed no fiduciary duty to its client, Szymanski or One Wailea.
3.	 Genuine Issues of Material Fact in Count IV
 
(Professional Negligence)
 
One Wailea challenges the circuit court's conclusion
 
that "[s]ince any contractual duty owed by [Unemori Engineering]
 
to [One Wailea] was terminated because of impossibility of
 performance, at the time [Unemori Engineering] contracted with
 [WRC], [Unemori Engineering] owed no duty in tort to [One
 Wailea].
 
"The economic loss rule bars recovery in tort for 
purely economic loss." City Express, Inc. v. Express Partners, 
87 Hawai
'i 466, 469, 959 P.2d 836, 839 (1998). In City Express, 
the economic loss rule was applied to bar tort recovery where the plaintiff alleged that the professional negligence of the defendant, an architectural firm with which it contracted, caused the plaintiff to suffer economic loss in the form of "additional costs, lost rent, the cost of remedying the alleged building defects, and the difference between the value of the building as designed and the value it would have had if it had been properly designed." Id. The City Express court explained: 
The economic loss rule marks the fundamental boundary
between the law of contracts, which is designed to enforce
expectations created by agreement, and the law of torts,
which is designed to protect citizens and their property by
imposing a duty of reasonable care on others. The economic
 loss rule was designed to prevent disproportionate liability
and allow parties to allocate risk by contract.
 
Id. (internal citation omitted) (quoting Berschauer/Phillips
 
Constr. Co. v. Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1, 881 P.2d 986, 989-90
 (Wash. 1994).
 
The City Express court further explained:
 
In the context of construction litigation involving
design professionals, sound policy reasons counsel against
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
22providing open-ended tort recovery to parties who have
negotiated a contractual relationship.
If tort and contract remedies were allowed
to overlap, certainty and predictability in
allocating risk would decrease and impede future
business activity.  The construction industry in
particular would suffer, for it is in this
industry that we see most clearly the importance
of the precise allocation of risk as secured by
contract.  The fees charged by architects,
engineers, contractors, developers, vendors, and
so on are founded on their expected liability
exposure as bargained and provided for in the
contract.
Berschauer/Phillips Constr. Co., 881 P.2d at 992. 
. . . .
Construction projects are characterized by detailed and
comprehensive contracts that form the foundation of the
industry's operations.  Contracting parties are free to
adjust their respective obligations to satisfy their mutual
expectations.
Id. at 470, 959 P.2d at 840 (emphasis, citation and internal
quotation marks omitted) .
City Express is applicable to the instant case.  One
Wailea brought suit alleging that Unemori Engineering's
professional negligence caused One Wailea to suffer economic loss
in the form of lost profits, and the parties admit that they were
in privity of contract.  Therefore, the circuit court did not err
in granting summary judgment and denying reconsideration with
respect to Count IV because One Wailea's professional negligence
claim is barred by the economic loss rule.  City Express , 87
Hawai#i at 469, 959 P.2d at 839.
C.The circuit court did not err in granting Murashige's Motion
to Quash.
One Wailea contends that Murashige "was a key person in
the Land Contract between [Szymanski] and WRC and he was the one
that contacted [Unemori Engineering] in 2006 that lead to this
lawsuit. . . . [I]mportant evidence was forever lost when
[Murashige] died afterwards, without his deposition ever being
taken."  One Wailea contends the circuit court erred in granting
Murashige's Motion to Quash because although Murashige was
allegedly ill, he was not exempted from discovery and his
testimony was not privileged.  One Wailea argues that this error
"deprived [One Wailea] of this key discovery opportunity."  OneNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wailea states that it submitted a memorandum in opposition to the
 
Motion to Quash, but does not provide accurate citations to the
 record, and it appears that such opposition is not within the
 record on appeal.
 
HRCP Rule 26(c) provides:
 
Rule 26. GENERAL PROVISION GOVERNING DISCOVERY.
 
. . . .
 
(c) Protective Orders. Upon motion by a party or by
the person from whom discovery is sought, accompanied by a
certification that the movant has in good faith conferred or
attempted to confer with other affected parties in an effort
to resolve the dispute without court action, and for good
cause shown, the court in which the action is pending or
alternatively, on matters relating to a deposition, the
court in the circuit where the deposition is to be taken may
make any order which justice requires to protect a party or
person from annoyance, embarrassment, oppression, or undue
burden or expense, including one or more of the following:
(1) that the disclosure or discovery not be had; (2) that
the disclosure or discovery may be had only on specified
terms and conditions, including a designation of the time or
place; (3) that the discovery may be had only by a method of
discovery other than that selected by the party seeking
discovery; (4) that certain matters not be inquired into, or
that the scope of the disclosure or discovery be limited to
certain matters; (5) that discovery be conducted with no one
present except persons designated by the court; (6) that a
deposition, after being sealed, be opened only by order of
the court; (7) that a trade secret or other confidential
research, development, or commercial information not be
revealed or be revealed only in a designated way; and (8)
that the parties simultaneously file specified documents or
information enclosed in sealed envelopes to be opened as
directed by the court.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
At the August 5, 2010 hearing on Murashige's Motion to
 
Quash, the circuit court explained that it was granting the
 
motion because it was "convinced based on Dr. Park's declaration
 that [Murashige's] participation [in an oral deposition] could
 present a significant risk to [Murashige's] health[.]" The
 circuit court's decision to grant the Motion to Quash based on
 its conclusion that deposing Murashige could present a
 significant risk to his health was not plainly arbitrary, and
 therefore the circuit did not err. 
D.	 The circuit court did not err in denying One Wailea's Motion
for Leave to Amend.
 
One Wailea contends the circuit court erred in denying
 
One Wailea's Motion for Leave to Amend because the statute of
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
limitations had not yet run on its unjust enrichment claim, so
 
One Wailea should have been permitted to amend its complaint to
 add A&B as a defendant. One Wailea also contends the circuit
 court "could have found a basis for tolling the statute of
 limitations on the tortious interference claim because new
 counsel had just entered."
 
HRCP Rule 15(c) provides, in relevant part:

 
Rule 15. AMENDED AND SUPPLEMENTAL PLEADINGS.
 
. . . .
 
(c) Relation back of amendments. An amendment of a
 
pleading relates back to the date of the original pleading
when
 
(1) relation back is permitted by the law that
provides the statute of limitations applicable to the
action, or
 
(2) the claim or defense asserted in the amended
pleading arose out of the conduct, transaction, or
occurrence set forth or attempted to be set forth in the
original pleading, or
 
(3) the amendment changes the party or the naming of
the party against whom a claim is asserted if the foregoing
provision (2) is satisfied and the party to be brought in by
amendment (A) has received such notice of the institution of
the action that the party will not be prejudiced in
maintaining a defense on the merits, and (B) knew or should
have known that, but for a mistake concerning the identity
of the proper party, the action would have been brought
against the party.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
The statute of limitations for the claim of tortious
 
interference with a prospective economic advantage is two years. 
See HRS § 657-7 (1993).
 
HRCP Rule 17(d)(1) provides, in relevant part:

 
Rule 17. PARTIES PLAINTIFF AND DEFENDANT; CAPACITY.
 
. . . .
 
(d) Unidentified defendant .
 
(1) When it shall be necessary or proper to make a
person a party defendant and the party desiring the
inclusion of the person as a party defendant has been unable
to ascertain the identity of a defendant, the party desiring
the inclusion of the person as a party defendant shall in
accordance with the criteria of Rule 11 of these rules set
 forth in a pleading the person's interest in the action, so
much of the identity as is known (and if unknown, a
fictitious name shall be used), and shall set forth with
specificity all actions already undertaken in a diligent and
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
good-faith effort to ascertain the person's full name and
identity.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
"[A] primary purpose of [HRCP Rule 17(d)] is to 'toll 
the statute of limitations with respect to Doe defendants who 
cannot be identified prior to the running of the statute.'" Tri-
S Corp. v. W. World Ins. Co., 110 Hawai 'i 473, 500, 135 P.3d 82, 
109 (2006) (quoting Wakuya v. Oahu Plumbing & Sheet Metal, Ltd., 65 Haw. 592, 596, 656 P.2d 84, 88 (1982)). In Tri-S Corp. the Hawai
'i Supreme Court concluded that the circuit court erred in 
allowing the plaintiffs to join a defendant under HRCP 17(d) because the plaintiffs knew of the defendant's identity when they filed their complaint and chose not to name the defendant for strategic purposes. Tri-S Corp., 110 Hawai
'i at 499, 135 P.3d at 
108. The supreme court, however, held that the error was
 
harmless because even if the circuit court had properly denied
 the motion for HRCP Rule 17(d) certification, the plaintiffs
 "could still have brought a timely, separate action against [the
 defendant] at that point (which ultimately could, and probably
 would, have later been consolidated with the instant action), or
 they could have properly joined [the defendant] in the instant
 action under HRCP Rule 20(a)." Tri-S Corp., at 501, 135 P.3d at
 
110. 
On June 15, 2007, One Wailea filed its complaint
 
against Unemori Engineering and unidentified individuals,
 corporations, partnerships, and governmental entities. In its
 complaint, One Wailea alleged facts that specifically include
 Wailea Estates and A&B. On November 16, 2009, One Wailea's
 counsel at the time, the Brown Law Offices, filed their Motion to
 Withdraw. On August 4, 2010, with the aid of its current counsel
 One Wailea filed its Motion for Leave to Amend.
 
One Wailea could not join Wailea Estates, A&B, or
 
Hallin under HRCP Rule 15(c) - One Wailea was prohibited from
 joining new defendants under its tort claims pursuant to the two-
year statute of limitations set forth by HRS § 657-7, and One
 Wailea does not claim to have made a mistake with regard to the
 identity of the parties. Additionally it was not appropriate for
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
One Wailea to use HRCP Rule 17(d) to name Wailea Estates, A&B,
 
and Hallin as "Doe Defendants" in its complaint because at that
 time, One Wailea knew of Wailea Estates and A&B and of the
 general role each played in the alleged wrongdoing against One
 Wailea, and likely knew or should have known of Hallin and his
 general role due to his position as Senior Vice President of A&B. 
HRCP Rule 17(d) may not be used to join a defendant by a
 plaintiff who knows the identity of a potential defendant but
 chooses not to name them for strategic purposes. See Tri-S
 Corp., 110 Hawai
'i at 499, 135 P.3d at 108. Therefore, the 
circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying One
 Wailea's Motion for Leave to Amend because the motion was not
 warranted under either HRCP Rule 15(c) or HRCP Rule 17(d).
E.
	 The circuit court did not err in denying One Wailea's HRCP
Rule 60(b) Motion to Set Aside.
 
One Wailea contends the circuit court abused its
 
discretion in denying One Wailea's HRCP Rule 60(b) Motion to Set
 
Aside because "it should have taken into account the gross
 negligence of previous counsel, Mr. Brown, in moving to withdraw
 while a summary judgment motion was pending[.]"
 
HRCP Rule 60(b) provides, in relevant part:
 
Rule 60. RELIEF FROM JUDGMENT OR ORDER.
 
. . . .
 
(b) Mistakes; inadvertence; excusable neglect; newly
discovered evidence; fraud, etc. On motion and upon such
terms as are just, the court may relieve a party or a
party's legal representative from a final judgment, order,
or proceeding for the following reasons: (1) mistake,
inadvertence, surprise, or excusable neglect; (2) newly
discovered evidence which by due diligence could not have
been discovered in time to move for a new trial under Rule
 59(b); (3) fraud (whether heretofore denominated intrinsic
or extrinsic), misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an
adverse party; (4) the judgment is void; (5) the judgment
has been satisfied, released, or discharged, or a prior
judgment upon which it is based has been reversed or
otherwise vacated, or it is no longer equitable that the
judgment should have prospective application; or (6) any
other reason justifying relief from the operation of the
judgment. The motion shall be made within a reasonable
 time, and for reasons (1), (2), and (3) not more than one
year after the judgment, order, or proceeding was entered or
taken.
 
In its memorandum in support of its Motion to Set
 
Aside, One Wailea argued that the circuit court should set aside
 
its May 25, 2010 order pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(2) because
 
26

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Darren Unemori's February 8, 2011 deposition constituted new
 
evidence of the allegation that Unemori Engineering breached its
 duty to One Wailea by giving information prepared for One Wailea
 to A&B and by withdrawing One Wailea's Subdivision Application
 without permission; or pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(6) based on
 the extraordinary circumstances of the case's procedural history. 
At the July 1, 2011 hearing on the motion, Unemori Engineering
 argued that the motion should be denied because One Wailea had
 not presented any evidence that could not have been previously
 presented. The circuit court denied the motion at the hearing
 and on August 22, 2011, issued its order on the same day.
 
The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
denying One Wailea's Motion to Set Aside because One Wailea did
 not present any evidence that it could not have presented
 previously and thus cannot be afforded relief under HRCP Rule
 60(b)(2), and failed to identify any extraordinary circumstances
 that would justify relief under HRCP Rule 60(b)(6).
F.	 The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying
One Wailea's Motion to Compel.
 
One Wailea contends the circuit court abused its
 
discretion in denying One Wailea's "Motion to Compel because the
 
documents sought were relevant to [One Wailea's] claims, and A&B
 had a continuing duty to produce these documents, and didn't."
 One Wailea argues that there was good cause to grant the motion
 to compel because even though the motion was late, "A&B still had
 [a] duty, under HRCP Rule 26(e), to supplement their earlier
 responses on the original production request."
 
"[I]t is well-settled that courts have inherent equity, 
supervisory, and administrative powers as well as inherent power to control the litigation process before them." Enos v. Pac. 
Transfer & Warehouse, Inc., 79 Hawai
'i 452, 457, 903 P.2d 1273, 
1278 (1995) (citation and internal quotation mark omitted). Under HRCP Rule 16(b), "the court shall . . . enter a scheduling order that limits the time . . . (3) to complete discovery. . . . A schedule shall not be modified except upon a showing of good cause and by leave of the court." (Emphasis added.) 
HRCP Rule 26(e) provides:
 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Rule 26. GENERAL PROVISIONS GOVERNING DISCOVERY.
 
. . . .
 
(e) Supplementation of Responses. A party who has
responded to a request for discovery with a response that
was complete when made is under no duty to supplement his or
her response to include information thereafter acquired,
except as follows:
 
(1) A party is under a duty seasonably to supplement
his response with respect to any question directly addressed
to (A) the identity and location of persons having knowledge
of discoverable matters, and (B) the identity of each person
expected to be called as an expert witness at trial, the
subject matter on which he or she is expected to testify,
and the substance of his or her testimony.
 
(2) A party is under a duty seasonably to amend a
prior response to an interrogatory, request for production,
or request for admission if the party learns that (A) the
response is in some material respect incomplete or incorrect
or (B) the response omits information which if disclosed
could lead to the discovery of additional admissible
evidence.
 
(3) A duty to supplement responses may be imposed by
order of the court, agreement of the parties, or at any time
prior to trial through new requests for supplementation of
prior responses.
 
One Wailea filed its Motion to Compel on March 7, 2012,
 
seeking to compel A&B to (1) produce documents and things
 
pursuant to subpoena duces tecum filed July 16, 2007, and (2)
 answer all questions and fully respond to Notice of Taking
 Deposition Upon Written Interrogatories filed July 16, 2007. At
 the April 11, 2012 hearing on the Motion to Compel, the circuit
 court stated that it was denying the motion because it was filed
 after the discovery cutoff date and on the eve of trial, and
 therefore granting the motion would disrupt trial. The circuit
 court did not abuse its discretion in denying One Wailea's Motion
 to Compel because One Wailea did not make a showing of good cause
 for granting the motion and the court's denial was within its
 inherent powers and authority under HRCP Rule 16(b).
G.	 The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in ruling on
the motions in limine.
 
1.	 The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
granting Unemori Engineering's motions in limine to
exclude testimony by Szymanski.
 
One Wailea contends the circuit court abused its
 
discretion in granting Unemori Engineering's motion in limine to
 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exclude testimony by Szymanski that One Wailea owned the work
 
produced by Unemori Engineering for One Wailea because "there was
 no testimony that [Unemori Engineering] had copyrighted its work
 and their work had no copyright symbol." According to One Wailea
 the circuit court's ruling precluded One Wailea from asserting
 that the work produced by Unemori Engineering for One Wailea
 should not have been used for the A&B subdivision application. 
One Wailea also contends the circuit court erred in granting the
 motion in limine to exclude Szymanski's testimony regarding
 offers Szymanski allegedly received for the subdivision approvals
 because such offers were not hearsay.
 
Unemori Engineering provided professional civil
 
engineering services related to One Wailea's proposed residential
 development pursuant to a contract that did not give ownership of
 work product.
 
The work product produced by Unemori Engineering was
 
owned by Unemori Engineering under federal copyright law. See 17
 
U.S.C. § 102(a) (providing that "pictorial, graphic, . . .
 sculptural works[,] . . . and architectural works" enjoy
 copyright protection when "original works of authorship [are]
 fixed in any tangible medium of expression"); 17 U.S.C. § 101
 (defining (1) "architectural works" as "the design of a building
 as embodied in any tangible medium of expression, including a
 building, architectural plans, or drawings" and (2) "pictorial,
 graphic, and sculptural works" to "include two-dimensional and
 three-dimensional works of fine, graphic, and applied art,
 photographs, prints and art reproductions, maps, globes, charts,
 diagrams, models, and technical drawings, including architectural
 plans"). Therefore, the circuit court did not abuse its
 discretion in granting Unemori Engineering's motion in limine to
 exclude Szymanski's testimony as to ownership of the work
 product.
 
a.	 One Wailea waived the issue of whether the circuit
 
court erred in granting Unemori Engineering's
motion in limine to exclude Szymanski's testimony
as to alleged offers received.
 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
One Wailea challenges the circuit court's conclusion
 
that Szymanski's testimony regarding offers he received for
 
subdivision approvals were barred as hearsay.
 
[W]hen the court cannot render an unequivocal pretrial
ruling on the admissibility of the particular evidence
because it must wait until foundational prerequisites are
established at trial or a proper trial record is otherwise
first developed, the court should accordingly "refrain from
rendering a pretrial ruling and defer such ruling for trial.
If the trial court must defer ruling on the motion in
limine, its decision should be expressly communicated to the
parties and placed on the record."
 
Kobashigawa v. Silva, 129 Hawai 'i 313, 325, 300 P.3d 579, 591 
(2013) (internal citations omitted) (quoting Barcai v. Betwee, 98 
Hawai'i 470, 491-92, 50 P.3d 946, 967-68 (2002)). 
At the April 20, 2012 hearing on the motions in limine,
 
the circuit court reminded the parties twice that all of its
 rulings on the motions in limine were preliminary in nature, and
 with respect to the motion in limine to exclude testimony by
 Szymanski of offers allegedly received, the circuit court
 specifically informed the parties that it would reconsider the
 motion if One Wailea wanted to "present a foundation relative to
 this[.]" At no point during trial did One Wailea attempt to lay
 foundation to introduce evidence as to offers allegedly received. 
The circuit court's pretrial ruling was equivocal 
because the circuit court informed the parties that it would reconsider the motion if One Wailea provided foundation. See 
Kobashigawa, 129 Hawai
'i at 325, 300 P.3d at 591. By passing on 
its opportunity to lay foundation for the introduction of such evidence, One Wailea waived this issue for appellate review.
2.	 The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
denying One Wailea's motion in limine to exclude any
evidence presented by Unemori Engineering on the issue
of liability.
 
One Wailea contends the circuit court abused its
 
discretion in denying One Wailea's motion in limine to exclude
 
any evidence presented by Unemori Engineering on the issue of
 liability because the motion was "intended as a discovery
 sanction" for Unemori Engineering's failure to produce "two key
 documents . . . until the eve of trial . . . ."
 
30
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Unemori Engineering responds by arguing that the
 
circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying One
 
Wailea's motion in limine to exclude any evidence presented by
 Unemori Engineering on the issue of liability because One Wailea
 intended the motion to serve as a discovery sanction and
 therefore should have been filed, prior to the discovery cutoff
 date, as a motion to compel discovery pursuant to HRCP Rule
 37(b).
 
HRCP Rule 37(b) provides, in relevant part:
 
Rule 37.	 FAILURE TO MAKE OR COOPERATE IN DISCOVERY;
SANCTIONS.
 
. . . .
 
(b) Failure to Comply With Order.
 . . . .
 (2) SANCTIONS BY COURT IN WHICH ACTION IS
PENDING. If a party . . . fails to obey an order to provide
or permit discovery, . . . the court in which the action is
pending may make such orders in regard to the failure as are
just, and among others the following:
 
. . . .
 
(B) An order . . . prohibiting him or her from
introducing designated matters in evidence[.]
 
The circuit court explained that it was denying One 
Wailea's motion in limine to exclude any evidence presented by 
Unemori Engineering on the issue of liability because there was "an insufficient factual and legal basis to warrant the granting of [the] motion and to impose sets of sanctions on [Unemori Engineering]." The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying One Wailea's motion because One Wailea sought a discovery sanction and therefore should have filed a motion under HRCP Rule 37(b)(2)(B). Even if the circuit court did abuse its discretion in denying One Wailea's motion in limine, One Wailea has failed to establish that the court's denial of the motion prejudiced One Wailea. See Kobashigawa, 129 Hawai
'i at 322, 300 P.3d at 588 
(holding that generally the denial of a motion in limine to exclude is not reversible error because it is an interlocutory order and therefore, "[t]he harm, if any, occurs when the evidence is improperly admitted at trial") (citation and internal quotation mark omitted). 
31
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
H.	 The circuit court abused its discretion in denying One
Wailea's motion to conform the pleadings to the evidence to
include the unpleaded claim of unjust enrichment, but the
error was harmless.
 
One Wailea contends the circuit court abused its
 
discretion in denying One Wailea's motion to conform the
 
pleadings to the evidence because "the parties had impliedly
 tried the unjust enrichment claim."
 
HRCP Rule 15(b)(1) provides, in relevant part:
 
Rule 15. AMENDED AND SUPPLEMENTAL PLEADINGS.
 
. . . .
 
(b) Amendments during and after trial.
 
(1) FOR ISSUES TRIED BY CONSENT. When issues not raised by
the pleadings are tried by express or implied consent of the
parties, they shall be treated in all respects as if they had been
raised in the pleadings. Such amendment of the pleadings as may
be necessary to cause them to conform to the evidence and to raise
these issues may be made upon motion of any party at any time,
even after judgment; but failure so to amend does not affect the
result of the trial of these issues.
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has explained: 
[HRCP] Rule 15(b) is not permissive in terms: it provides
that issues tried by express or implied consent shall be
treated as if raised in pleadings. As a general rule, when
a party seeks to amend the pleadings to include an unpleaded
issue, the critical question is whether that unpleaded issue
was tried by the implied consent of the parties[.] In this
 jurisdiction, consent will be implied from the failure to
object to the introduction of evidence relevant to the
unpleaded issue.
 
Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel , 117 Hawai 'i 92, 113, 
176 P.3d 91, 112 (2008) (internal quotation marks and brackets
 
omitted) (format altered) (quoting Hamm v. Merrick, 61 Haw. 470,
 472-74, 605 P.2d 499, 501-02 (1980)).
 
Even though One Wailea's pleadings did not include a
 
claim of unjust enrichment, and One Wailea's Motion for Leave to
 Amend was denied, Unemori Engineering filed a MSJ on the issue of
 unjust enrichment on April 18, 2011, arguing "that [One Wailea]
 is not the owner of the plans, specifications and other work
 prepared by [Unemori Engineering] for [One Wailea] and has no
 standing to bring a claim for unjust enrichment[,]" and such a
 claim "is preempted by the federal Copyright Act." The circuit
 court abused its discretion in denying One Wailea's motion to
 
32

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conform the pleadings to the evidence because Unemori Engineering 
expressly consented to trying the issue when it filed a MSJ on the claim and made substantive rather than procedural arguments in support of its MSJ. However, this error was harmless because One Wailea did not introduce evidence to establish that it conferred a benefit upon Unemori Engineering that if retained by Unemori Engineering would be unjust. See Durette v. Aloha 
Plastic Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai
'i 490, 504, 100 P.3d 60, 74 
(2004) ("[A] claim for unjust enrichment requires only that a plaintiff prove that he or she conferred a benefit upon the opposing party and that the retention of that benefit would be unjust.") (citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted).
I.	 The circuit court did not err in granting Unemori
Engineering's Motion for Directed Verdict because One Wailea
failed to establish a colorable economic relationship
between One Wailea and a third party.
 
One Wailea contends the circuit court erred in granting
 
Unemori Engineering's Motion for Directed Verdict because it
 
proved the elements of the claim of tortious interference with
 prospective business advantage.
 
[T]he elements of the intentional tort of tortious
interference with prospective business advantage are:
 
(1) the existence of a valid business
relationship or a prospective advantage or
expectancy sufficiently definite, specific, and
capable of acceptance in the sense that there is
a reasonable probability of it maturing into a
future economic benefit to the plaintiff; (2)
knowledge of the relationship, advantage, or
expectancy by the defendant; (3) a purposeful
intent to interfere with the relationship,
advantage, or expectancy; (4) legal causation
between the act of interference and the
 impairment of the relationship, advantage, or
expectancy; and (5) actual damages.
 
Hawaii Med. Ass'n v. Hawaii Med. Servs. Ass'n, Inc., 113 Hawai 'i 
77, 116, 148 P.3d 1179, 1218 (2006) (quoting Robert's Hawaii Sch. 
Bus, Inc. v. Laupahoehoe Transp. Co., Inc., 91 Hawai 'i 224, 258, 
982 P.2d 853, 887 (1999)). 
"The first element requires 'a colorable economic
 
relationship between the plaintiff and a third party with the
 potential to develop into a full contractual relationship. The
 
33
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prospective economic relationship need not take the form of an
 
offer but there must be specific facts proving the possibility offuture association.'" 
Minton v. Quintal , 131 Hawai 'i 167, 191, 
317 P.3d 1, 25 (2013) (quoting Hawaii Med. Ass'n, 113 Hawai 'i at 
116, 148 P.3d at 1218) (emphases omitted).
 
 
At the May 15, 2012 hearing, the circuit court orally
 
granted Unemori Engineering's Motion for Directed Verdict and
 explained:
 
The Court, in considering each of the elements [of the
claim of tortious interference with a prospective economic
advantage] in the light most -- and in viewing the evidence
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, sees
issues with respect to virtually every element, in
particular, whether there was a purposeful intent to
interfere with your relationship, advantage, or your
expectation; whether there's legal causation between the
alleged act of interference and with respect to actual
damages to the Plaintiff.
 
. . . .
 
One Wailea has not established that -- the elements that it
 must establish with respect to this particular claim as it
relates to One Wailea . . . .
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
One Wailea provided no specific facts showing that it 
had a relationship with A&B or any other third party that would 
potentially lead to a contractual relationship for the sale of One Wailea's preliminary subdivision approval or construction plan approval. One Wailea did not establish a colorable economic relationship through Szymanski's speculations and assumptions that A&B, or another third party, would have paid One Wailea to withdraw its application or transfer its entitlements - a colorable economic relationship is established through specific facts showing that a plaintiff and third party had the potential to enter into a contractual relationship. Hawaii Med. Ass'n, 113 
Hawai
'i at 116, 148 P.3d at 1218. The circuit court did not err 
in granting the Motion for Directed Verdict because One Wailea failed to meet its burden of proof with regard to the first element of the claim of tortious interference with a prospective business advantage. 
We decline to address One Wailea's remaining points of
 
error because they are either moot or without merit.
 
34
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The (1) March 19, 2013 "Final Judgment in Favor of
 
Defendant Warren S. Unemori Engineering Inc. as to All Claims,"
 
and (2) March 22, 2013 "Order Granting Defendant Warren S.
 Unemori Engineering Inc.'s Motion for Award of Attorney's Fees
 and Costs," both entered in the Circuit Court of the Second
 Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 20, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Keith M. Kiuchi 
for Plaintiff-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Frank K. Goto, Jr.Jan Kwan (Law Offices of Frank K. Goto,Jr.)for Defendant-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
35
 