NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1  The Honorable Lanson K. Kupau presided. NO. CAAP-16-0000878
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
AARON SOARES, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
HONOLULU DIVISION
(1DCW-16-0001195)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Aaron Soares (Soares) appeals from
the Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment, entered on
October 27, 2016 in the District Court of the First Circuit,
Honolulu Division (District Court).1
Soares was convicted of Assault in the Third Degree, in
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 707-712(1)(a)
(2014).
On appeal, Soares contends there was insufficient
evidence that he intended to cause bodily harm and that the State
failed to adduce sufficient evidence to negate his justification
defense of self-defense.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Soares' points of error as follows:
When the evidence adduced at trial is considered in the
strongest light for the prosecution,  State v. Matavale, 115NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2Hawaii 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 (2007), there was
substantial evidence to support Soares's conviction for Assault
in the Third Degree.  #
HRS ยง 707-712 (1)(a) states:
ยง707-712  Assault in the third degree.  (1)  A person
commits the offense of assault in the third degree if the
person:
     (a) Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causes
bodily injury to another person[.]
"'Bodily injury' means physical pain, illness, or any impairment
of physical condition."  HRS ยง 707-700 (2014).  The Complaining
Witness (CW) testified that while he was surfing, Soares was
going to run him over so he threw his board and dove under a
wave.  When he came out of the water Soares swam toward him. 
Soares came at him aggressively, punched him twice, and kicked
him twice.  Soares' fist and foot made contact with the CW's
nose.  The CW felt pain later that evening from the incident. 
The CW denied that he provoked Soares and did not give Soares
consent to make contact with him or cause bodily injury.
Soares admitted that he "tapped" the CW in the face
twice, which Soares described as less than a punch.  Soares also
stated that he put his foot on CW's chest to separate him from
his board.  Soares claimed that he acted in self defense after
the CW purposely shot his board into him which caused cuts to his
legs from skegs.  Soares denied that he intended to cause injury
to CW but felt threatened when CW intentionally shot the board at
Soares's feet.
The District Court found that Soares was not credible.  
"It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon
issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight
of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." 
State v. Mattiello, 90 Hawai# i 255, 259, 978 P.2d 693, 697 (1999)
(citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted).  
Thus, based on CW's testimony, there was substantial evidence
that Soares caused bodily injury to CW by punching and kicking CW
in the face which caused pain.
We are thus drawn back to the oft-repeated proposition that, 
given the difficulty of proving the requisite state of mind
by direct evidence in criminal cases, "we have consistently
held that . . . proof by circumstantial evidence andNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3reasonable inferences arising from circumstances surrounding
the [defendant's conduct] is sufficient. . . . Thus, the
mind of an alleged offender may be read from his acts,
conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all the
circumstances."
State v. Stocker , 90 Hawaii 85, 90, 976 P.2d 399, 406 (1999) #
(citation and some brackets omitted).  From Soares' conduct and
inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances, there was
substantial evidence that Soares intended to cause bodily injury
to CW by confronting CW after nearly running him over with
Soares's board and then punching and kicking the CW in the face
which caused pain.  
"The prosecution disproves a justification defense
beyond a reasonable doubt when the trial court believes the
prosecution's case and disbelieves the defendant's case."  State
v. Jhun, 83 Hawai# i 472, 483, 927 P.2d 1355, 1366 (1996).  The
District Court did not find Soares credible, thus, it believed
the prosecution's case and disbelieved Soares' self-defense
claim.
Therefore,
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment and Notice of
Entry of Judgment, entered on October 27, 2016 in the District
Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, September 27, 2017.
On the briefs:
Brandon K. Flores,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Justin P. Haspe,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge