NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000212
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
SAGE MILLION, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-0023)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Leonard, Presiding Judge, and Ginoza, J.;
and Reifurth, J., dissenting)
 
Defendant-Appellant Sage Million (
Million) appeals from
 
a December 16, 2010 Amended Judgment of Conviction and Probation
 
Sentence (Amended Judgment), entered by Circuit Court of the
 
1
Third Circuit (Circuit Court).  Following a jury trial, Million
 
was found guilty of: (1) Count 1 - Terroristic Threatening in
 
the First Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§§ 707-715(1) and 707-716(1); (2) Count 4 - Reckless Driving of
 
Vehicle, in violation of HRS § 291-2; and (3) Count 5 - Criminal
 
Property Damage in the Fourth Degree, in violation of HRS § 708­
823. 
On appeal, Million raises two points of error,
 
contending that: 
(1) the Circuit Court erred in concluding that
 
Million knowingly and intelligently waived his constitutional
 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
right to counsel; and (2) the Circuit Court's instruction to the
 
jury on self-defense was plainly erroneous.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Million's points of error as follows:
 
In State v. Dickson, 4 Haw. App. 614, 673 P.2d 1036
 
(1983), this court held that "[t]he trial court is initially
 
charged with the function of assuring that the defendant's waiver
 
of counsel is made knowingly and intelligently and that the
 
record is complete so as to reflect that waiver." Id. at 619,
 
673 P.2d at 1041. "The trial court should first examine the
 particular facts and circumstances relating to the defendant,
 
such as the defendant's age, education, mental capacity,
 
background and experience, and his conduct at the time of the
 
alleged waiver." Id. (citations omitted).
 
"Secondly, in order to fully assure that the defendant
 
is informed of the risks of self-representation, the trial court
 
should make him aware of the nature of the charge, the elements
 
of the offense, the pleas and defenses available, the punishments
 
which may be imposed, and all other facts essential to a broad
 
understanding of the whole matter." Id. at 619, 673 P.2d at 1041
 
(citations omitted).
 
"Finally, the trial court should inform the defendant:
 
of his right to counsel, whether private or appointed; that
 self-representation is detrimental to himself; that he will be
 
required to follow all technical rules and substantive,
 
procedural, and evidentiary law; that the prosecution will be
 
represented by able counsel; that a disruption of the trial could
 
lead to vacation of the right to self-representation; and that if
 
voluntary self-representation occurs, the defendant may not
 
afterward claim that he had inadequate representation." Id. at
 
620, 673 P.2d at 1041-42 (internal citations omitted).
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In this case, although the Circuit Court informed
 
Million that he had a right to representation and apprised him of
 
the nature of the charges and punishments which may be imposed,
 
the court failed to advise Million of the elements of offenses
 
charged, the pleas and defenses available, the hazards of self-
representation, that disruption at trial could lead to vacation
 
of the right to self-representation, and that self-representation
 
may not allow him to claim inadequate representation.
 
As Million points out on appeal, the Circuit Court made
 
an attempt to examine Million about his education and work
 
history, but not until after it examined and inquired about
 
Million's waiver of his right to counsel, and without inquiry
 
into his experience with the criminal justice system. Although
 
such examination is "necessary to allow the trial court to
 
determine the level and depth to which an explanation and inquiry
 
must extend," we reject the proposition that, in every case, this
 
query must precede the balance of the Dickson inquiry. See
 
Dickson, 4 Haw. App. at 619, 673 P.2d at 1041. Yet, in this
 case, the circumstances warranted a more thorough, and perhaps an
 
earlier, examination. 
At the hearing in which Million waived his right to
 
representation, the discussion regarding waiver of the right to
 
counsel essentially began with: 
THE DEFENDANT: . . . I will be proceeding in this
matter pro se, therefore I move this Court for a continuance
of 90 days so I can produce my bill of particulars and bring
forth all admissible evidence for the trial.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Uh, so, Mr. Million, you'll be
representing yourself is what you're saying?
 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, sir, along with ediclesia
(phonetic).
 
THE COURT: Along with what?
 
THE DEFENDANT: Ediclesia (phonetic). I'll be
 
receiving paralegal help from my flurries of motions, and,
uh that is to – I'm in training right now and that is to
proceed immediately. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
This exchange -- which demonstrated an apparent
 
misunderstanding of the nature of a bill of particulars, and
 
included what appears to be unexplained and unexamined gibberish
 
(reference to "ediclesia"), a nonsensical reference to paralegal
 
help from flurries of motions, and a statement about being in
 
some sort of training "right now" – should have alerted the
 
Circuit Court that an especially thorough and careful inquiry
 
might be necessary to establish that any waiver by Million was
 
made knowingly and intelligently.
 
Later in the court's colloquy with Million, after
 
identifying the charges without reading them verbatim or
 
informing Million of the elements of the offenses, the discussion
 
continued:
 
THE COURT: . . . [A]s part of the discussion, I'm
supposed to advise you of what possible defense there might
be, but I don't know of any except for, uh, the State has
the burden of proving the charges beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
THE DEFENDANT: Thank you, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT: So, you know, if they failed to do that
then, uh, the jury would not enter verdicts of guilty in
regard to these courts.
 
THE DEFENDANT: If I may, Your Honor?
 
THE COURT: Yes.
 THE DEFENDANT: Once my – once the additional
witnesses are subpoenaed and my evidence brought forward, I,
uh, I see this being resolved prior to trial and proceeding
immediately with a bill of particulars in the matter.
 
THE COURT: Okay.
 
Two aspects of this part of the discussion are
 
troubling. First, although the Circuit Court could not have
 
known of all of the potential evidence and defenses, based on the
 
charges in the indictment and the "Notice of Defenses" filed by
 
Million's prior counsel, the court could have identified certain
 
available defenses, including self-defense. Second, Million
 
again displayed a misapprehension of the proceedings to come,
 
stating that his evidence would "resolve" the case prior to a
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial and repeating that he was going to proceed with a bill of
 
particulars. The Circuit Court simply said, "Okay" and moved on. 
Although a trial court "is not required to give the defendant a
 
short course in criminal law and procedure", this interchange
 
contra-indicates that Million knew and understood the dangers and
 
disadvantages of self-representation, which were not discussed
 
except for the court's statement of its assumption of Million's
 
knowledge. "I assume that, uh, you are aware that at least in
 
theory a lawyer licensed to practice law in the State of Hawaii
 
would have the knowledge and ability to represent you better than
 
you probably could represent yourself[.]"
 
This court has thoroughly reviewed the record in this
 
case, most particularly, the entirety of the Circuit Court's
 
examination of Million. Based on this review, although not every
 
Dickson factor need be discussed by a trial court in conjunction
 
with a waiver, we conclude that there was not sufficient
 
examination of Million to establish that he made a knowing and
 
intelligent waiver of his right to counsel. Further, upon
 
review, we cannot conclude that this error was harmless beyond a
 
reasonable doubt. See Dickson, 4 Haw. App. at 623, 673 P.2d at
 
1043.
 
In light of the foregoing, we need not reach Million's
 
second point of error.
 
Accordingly, we vacate the Circuit Court's December 16,
 
2010 Amended Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence and 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
remand for further proceedings consistent with this Summary
 
Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 30, 2012 
On the briefs:
 
John M. Tonaki 
Public Defender
 James S. Tabe
 Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
 
Charlene Y. Iboshi 
Prosecuting AttorneyJefferson R. Malate Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
6
 