NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0003065
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KILAKILA 'O HALEAKAL A,
Appellant-Appellant,
v.
 
BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES;
DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES;
WILLIAM AILA, JR., in his official capacity as
Chairperson of the Board of Land and Natural Resources;
and UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI 'I,
Appellees-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-3070)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Reifurth, J. and Circuit Court

Judge Nakasone in place of Nakamura, C.J., Fujise, Leonard 
and Ginoza, JJ. all recused)
 
This secondary agency appeal arose from Appellee­
1
Appellee University of Hawaii's (University)  March 10, 2010
Conservation District Use Application (
CDUA) to build the
 
Advanced Technology Solar Telescope (Solar Telescope) at the
 
summit of Haleakal a on the island of Maui. On May 24, 2010,
 
2
Appellant-Appellant Kilakila 'O Haleakal a (Kilakila)  petitioned
the Board of Land and Natural Resources (
Board) for a contested
 
case hearing for the CDUA. The request was resubmitted on July
 
8, 2010 and December 2, 2010. On December 1, 2010, the Board
 
1
 More specifically, the University Institute for Astronomy
submitted the CDUA.
 
2
 Kilakila is an organization "dedicated to the protection of the
sacredness of the summit of Haleakala ."
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
approved the University's CDUA, issuing Permit MA-3542. See 
Kilakila 'O Haleakal a v. Bd. of Land & Natural Res., 131 Hawai 'i 
193, 196-97, 317 P.3d 27, 30-31 (2013) (Kilakila 1). Shortly 
thereafter, Kilakila challenged Permit MA-3542 in circuit court 
under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 91-14 (2012 Repl.). See 
id. 
On February 11, 2011, while the circuit court appeal of 
Permit MA-3542 was pending, the Board approved Kilakila's request for a contested case hearing on Permit MA-3542. See Kilakila 1, 
131 Hawai
'i at 198, 317 P.3d at 32. As a result, the circuit 
court dismissed the appeal as moot. See id. The Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court held the circuit court had jurisdiction to review Kilakila's challenge under HRS § 91-14 because the Board effectively denied Kilakila's request for a contested case hearing when it approved Permit MA-3542 without rendering a decision on Kilakila's request. See id., 131 Hawai
'i at 203, 317 
P.3d at 37. On December 13, 2013, the supreme court remanded the case to the circuit court to decide Kilakila's request for a stay or reversal of the Board's 2010 Approval. See Kilakila 1, 131 
Hawai
'i at 206, 317 P.3d at 40. 
Meanwhile, on November 9, 2012, following the contested
 
case hearing for CDU Permit MA-3542, the Board again approved the
 University's permit application, issuing Conservation District
 Use Permit MA-11-04. Kilakila's challenge of CDU Permit MA-11-04
 is now before this court.
 
Kilakila appeals from the "Final Judgment" entered
 
August 20, 2013, and the "Order Affirming the Board of Land and
 Natural Resources' Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision
 and Order in DLNR File No. MA-11-04" entered July 11, 2013, both
 
3
entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit
 
court).
 
On appeal, Kilakila contends the circuit court erred

 
when it affirmed the Board's approval of MA-11-04 because: 
3
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presiding.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) the Board's approval did not comply with Hawaii
 
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 13-5-30(c) (1994); 
(2) the Board erred by considering economic factors;
 
(3) the Board erred by weighing the lack of
 
alternatives against the Solar Telescope's adverse impacts, 
(4) the correct entity did not apply for the
 
conservation district use permit (CDUP), 
(5) the Solar Telescope is inconsistent with the June 
8, 2010 Management Plan (Management Plan) prepared by the 
University of Hawai 'i Institute for Astronomy (UIA), 
(7) the Board violated Kilakila's procedural due
 
process rights; and
 
(8) the Board acted pursuant to unauthorized procedure.
I. BACKGROUND
 
In 1961, the State of Hawai 'i (State) transferred 
approximately eighteen acres of land on Haleakal a to the 
University on the condition the land be set aside for the 
Haleakal a High Altitude Observatory Site (Observatory Site). The 
Observatory Site, located within a conservation district, is in a subzone which specifically permits astronomy facilities. See HAR 
§§ 13-5-24(c) (1994) and 13-5-25(a) (1994). The UIA proposed to build the Solar Telescope at the Observatory Site. The Solar Telescope is funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF). 
Along with the CDUA, the University submitted a copy of the Solar 
4
Telescope's Final Environmental Impact Statement (FEIS)  prepared
by the NSF, and a Management Plan.5 The CDUA was initially
 
approved on December 1, 2010 and the Board issued Conservation
 
4
 The FEIS assesses the impacts the Solar Telescope would have at
the Preferred Mees and alternative Reber Circle sites as well as the impact on
the Observatory Site if the Solar Telescope were not built ("No Build"
alternative). The FEIS assesses the impacts of the Solar Telescope
individually and in combination with existing facilities at the site
("cumulative impacts").
 
5
 The Management Plan is a prerequisite for building astronomy
facilities at the Observatory Site. See HAR 13-5-25(c)(4) and 13-5-24
(astronomy facilities may be constructed in a conservation district general
subzone only if the project receives approval of a board permit and management
plan). The Management Plan "includes policies and practices for the long-term
preservation of archeological and cultural resources within the [Observatory
Site]."
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
District Use (CDU) Permit MA-3542. Without staying CDU Permit
 
MA-3542, the Board granted Kilakila's request for a contested
 
hearing on CDU Permit MA-3542. The Board appointed Steven
 Jacobson (Jacobson) as the hearing officer.
 
On June 2, 2011, Kilakila filed a motion to disqualify
 
Deputy Attorney General Linda Chow (Chow) from advising Jacobson
 
or the Board at the hearing. Kilakila contended Chow could not
 
serve as Counsel for the Tribunal without casting suspicion on
 the hearing's integrity because Chow previously represented the
 Board in a related circuit court proceeding involving Kilakila.
6
 
On June 28, 2011, Jacobson denied the motion to
 
disqualify Chow without prejudice to Kilakila moving the Board to
 disqualify Chow after Jacobson filed and served his report to the
 Board. This denial provided that (1) disqualification of Chow
 was within the hearing officer's discretion under HAR § 13-1­
7
32(c) (2009),  (2) Kilakila's objection to Chow may be untimely
and possibly waived, and (3) the motion to disqualify was without
 merit because "unlike the lay members of the Board of Education
 in [White v. Bd. of Educ., 54 Haw. 10, 501 P.2d 358 (1972)]"
 Jacobson had more professional experience and would prepare his
 own findings of fact (FOFs), conclusions of law (COLs), and
 
recommendation based on his own evaluation and the parties'
 
submissions. The contested case hearing on the merits was held
 on July 18-20 and August 26, 2011. Chow acted as Counsel for the
 Tribunal.
 
On March 2, 2012, Kilakila filed a post-hearing motion
 
to disqualify Chow from advising Jacobson and the Board regarding
 the Hearing. Kilakila reiterated the arguments it made in its
 prior motion to disqualify. On March 16, 2012, the Board denied
 the motion on the ground that Chow's appearance as counsel for
 
6
 Chow represented the Board in a related case, Civ. No. 10-1-2510,
contending the Solar Telescope was consistent with HRS Chapter 205 and HRS
Chapter 183C, as a specifically allowed use in the resource subzone of the
conservation district.
 
7
 HAR § 13-1-32(c) provides in relevant part that during a contested
case hearing, the hearing officer has the power to "dispose of other matters
that normally and properly arise in the course of a hearing authorized by law
that are necessary for the orderly and just conduct of a hearing."
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Board in Civ. No. 10-1-2510 did not disqualify her from
 
advising the Board.
 
On March 19, 2012, the Board filed Minute Order No. 14,
 
which provided that the Board had become aware of a March 15,
 2012 email from Jacobson to counsel for the University. In that
 email, Jacobson stated he had been subjected to inappropriate ex
 parte pressure and activity by U.S. Senator Daniel Inouye's
 (Senator Inouye) and the Governor's offices to quickly render a
 
recommendation, which resulted in him initially submitting an
 
incomplete report and recommendation to the Board. The email
 further provided:
 
The seeming consensus of the appropriate ethical
offices with which I have now consulted is that no
 disclosures are required as long as (1) neither [UIA]
nor its counsel had anything to do with what the
Senator's and Governor's offices were doing, (2) the
Board and courts disregard the interim report and
recommendations and consider only the final report and
recommendations (to the extent they consider them at
all), and (3) Kilakila is not prejudiced by being
shortchanged in time to respond to the final report
and recommendations. 
So, my question for you is whether any of you had
anything to do with what the Senator's and Governor's
offices were doing.
 
The Board found Jacobson's email itself was an impermissible ex
 
parte communication under HAR § 13-1-39 (2009).
 
Jacobson filed a response to Minute Order No. 14 on
 
March 20, 2012. Jacobson's response provided:
 
Preparation of My Reports and Recommendations 
In this file, while preparing my report and
recommended decision, considerable ex parte pressure
was placed upon me to simply spit out a recommended
decision quickly, so that the Board would have
 something before it, to approve. That pressure
included requiring me to make daily reports to both
the Health Department and the Board's Chair as to how
soon I contemplated finishing, what else I thought I
needed to do, why I thought I had to do it, etc.
 
The pressure included a "suggestion" that [Chow]
be given a role in completing the decision. 
I was advised that the pressure was generated by
a staffer in [Senator Inouye's] office, and applied
through the Governor's office. I was not asked to
recommend a particular result, although the result
Senator Inouye's office wanted from the Board was
clear. I did not see any evidence that anyone else
(i.e., anyone in State Government), wanted any
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
particular result, and the Board's Chair, in
particular, made clear that all he wanted to know was
when this matter could be put on the Board's calendar.
 
My initial report and recommended decision
herein were filed as a result of "or else" pressure.
The only way the pressure affected my initial report
and recommended decision was that they were
incomplete. I made no substantive changes in light of
comments by [Chow].
 
I then completed my final report and
recommendations. In completing them, the only effect
of the previous pressure upon me (which had been
withdrawn) was that I very carefully went through
everything [UIA] submitted, again, to be sure that I
hadn't missed something that those favoring the [Solar
Telescope] might be hoping that I would miss. 
Again, nothing substantive was changed due to
anything said by [Chow]. The final report and
recommendations are entirely mine.
 
While preparing the final report and
recommendations, I did find, online, a Final
Supplemental Environmental Assessment (FESA) for the
[Solar Telescope], published February 10, 2012, which
no one had bothered to disclose to me. I took the FESA
 into account.
 
My initial report and recommendations had not
included any suggested conditions to granting of the
CDUA. In light of the FESA, and other factors, the
final report included four recommended conditions.
 
After My Reports and Recommendations Were Filed
 
Once my final report and recommendations were
filed, I checked back with counsel because of my
concerns (i) that no one be prejudiced by the unusual
filing of an initial report before my final report
(i.e., that my initial report and recommendations be
ignored, and that [Kilakila] have sufficient
opportunity and time to respond and make objections to
the final report), and (ii) that full disclosure might
be required in any event.
 
Included among those issues was whether the ex
 
parte pressures placed upon me were "communications
bearing upon the substance of a matter" as that term
is used in HRCJC Rule 2.9(b). 
Although the Board's counsel opined that no
disclosures were required, assuming that [UIA's]
counsel had nothing to do with the pressures
generated, that was less than helpful advice as there
was no basis for simply assuming that [UIA's] counsel
were not involved. 
The better conclusion, in my view after further
consultations, was (and is) that full disclosure was
(and is) required unless (i) it is clear that [UIA's]
counsel were not involved, (ii) my initial report and
recommendations are ignored, and (iii) Kilakila has
 
6
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
sufficient opportunity and time to respond and make
objections to the final report and recommendations.
 
The Conflicting Rules re Determining Whether [UIA's]
Counsel Were Involved 
The Board's counsel's opinion, and the
conclusion that full disclosure was required unless
[UIA's] counsel were not involved, raised the
questions of (i) how to determine whether any of
[UIA's] counsel were involved (ii) without making the
very disclosures that might not have been required.
 
 
Here several conflicting rules were involved,
which HAR § 13-1-39, an administrative rule (not a
statute), must be interpreted in light of: 
1. HRCJC Rule 2.2 & Comment I thereto, which
required me "To ensure impartiality and fairness to
all parties."
 
2. HRCJC Rule 2.9(a)(5), which allows
initiating, permitting, or considering an ex parte
communication when expressly authorized by law.
 
3. HRCJC's Terminology section, defining "Law"
as including statutes, rules, ordinances,
constitutional provisions, provisions of the HRCJC,
and decisional law. 
4. The common law of necessity, which is part
of decisional law. See HRS § 1.1 ("The common law of
England, as ascertained by English and American
decisions, is declared to be the common law of the
State of Hawaii in all cases, except as otherwise
expressly provided by the Constitution or laws of the
United States, or by the laws of the State, or fixed
by Hawaiian judicial precedent, or established by
Hawaiian usage").
 
After considering all of the applicable rules,
principles, and advice of others, my conclusion was
that, in these highly unusual circumstances, the law
allowed me to simply ask [UIA's] counsel if they were
involved in any way with the pressures placed upon me.
If they said "yes," then full disclosure would be
required. If they said "no," then the next step would
have been to further consult with counsel as to what
 to do with that "no" - whether to report it as part of
a full disclosure, or something else.
 
At the same time, I would have been continuing
to monitor the proceedings before the Board, to be
sure that my initial decision was not considered, and
that Kilakila was not being shortchanged on time to
respond to my final report and recommendations. 
As things turned out, [UIA] itself chose full
disclosure, and response times have been suspended, so
those concerns have been mooted.
 
The University responded to Minute Order No. 14 by
 
urging the Board to review the record and issue a decision
 
itself, without appointing a new hearing officer. The University
 
7

  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
requested in the alternative that a new hearing officer be
 
required to issue a decision within a reasonable time frame and
 limit additional fact finding to a site visit. Kilakila
 responded in turn by requesting appointment of a new hearing
 officer and disclosure "of any communications tending to show
 that external political pressure was applied to affect the
 outcome of this proceeding[.]"
 
On March 29, 2012, the Board filed Minute Order No. 15
 
concluding:
 
Even assuming the communications from the
non-parties were initiated at the urging of a party in
this case, such communications would be considered
permitted ex parte communications under [HAR]
§ l3-l-37(b)(2) which permits requests for information
with respect to the procedural status of a proceeding.
 
The communication from the Hearing Officer to
[UIA] was an unpermitted ex parte communication in
violation of [HAR] § 13-1-37. 
Despite the assertions by the Hearing Officer
that the pressure that was put on him to issue a
decision did not influence the outcome of his
 decision, the Board finds that the totality of the
circumstances gives rise to a question regarding the
impartiality of the Hearing Officer in arriving at his
recommended decision.
 
Consequently, "to avoid even the appearance of impropriety," the
 
Board discharged Jacobson and struck from the record Jacobson's
 proposed FOFs, COLs, and decision and order.
 
On March 30, 2012, Kilakila filed a "Motion of
 
[Kilakila] for Disclosure of All Communications To and From [the
 Board] Regarding the [Solar Telescope]," in which they sought, in
 part, information about a March 21, 2012 meeting regarding the
 Solar Telescope.
 
On June 4, 2012, the Board issued Minute Order No. 23,
 
providing:

 
The Motion is granted with regard to the meeting
held on March 21, 2012, as referenced in Exhibit A of
the Reply. The following disclosures are made
regarding that meeting: 
a. A meeting occurred on March 21, 2012, at

which Chairperson Aila was in attendance. No party to
the contested case was present during the meeting. 
b. During the meeting the sole topic of
discussion was when the recommended decision in this
 contested case would be issued by the hearing officer,
Steven Jacobson. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
c. There was no discussion of any substantive
issues involved in this contested case hearing. 
Inasmuch as no party was present during the
meeting, there was no ex parte communication with the
hearing officer or any member of the Board. Even if a
party were present, the discussion referred to above
comes within the purview of [HAR] § 13-1-37 [(2009)]
as a permitted communication related to requests for
information with respect to the procedural status of a
proceeding. No further action is required regarding
this communication. 
The Board is the head of the Department of Land
and Natural Resources (DLNR). [HRS] § 26-15 [(2009
Repl.)]. As the head of the DLNR, the Board has many
functions. Its members function in a
 quasi-legislative capacity when engaged in rule
making, as adjudicators when deciding a contested
case, and as trustees and managers when considering
dispositions of public lands. 
When carrying out their duties as Board members,
the members of the Board interact with numerous people
in various situations. Kilakila's Motion does not
 provide a time frame or context for the requested
disclosures and the motion may encompass
communications that occurred long before this matter
was the subject of a contested case. 
Kilakila's Motion also relies heavily on
statements made by the former hearing officer
regarding inquiries made and pressure put upon the
hearing officer to render a decision. As this Board
has already determined, the communication to the
hearing officer came within HAR § 13-1-37 as a
permitted ex parte communication. When the hearing
officer went beyond communication allowed under HAR
§ 13-1-37, the Board acted appropriately by disclosing
the ex parte communication and discharging the hearing
officer. Minute Order No. 15. 
Kilakila's Motion fails to show that any
communications beyond those allowed under HAR
§ 13-1-37, and the previously disclosed communications
between the former hearing officer and others, have
occurred. Kilakila's Motion is based, at most, upon
mere speculation. Kilakila's Motion has also not shown
that the Board has acted in any manner other than as
an impartial adjudicator in this case. In addition,
any prejudice that may have occurred as a result of
communications with the former hearing officer has
been remedied by the Board's discharge and replacement
of the hearing officer. The Board is mindful that no
matters outside the record should be considered when
 making its decision, except as allowed under HRS
chapter 91.
 
For the reasons stated above, Kilakila's Motion
with regard to disclosure of all other communications,
other than what is disclosed above, is hereby denied.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On May 2, 2012, the Board appointed Lane Ishida
 
(Ishida) as hearing officer. Also on May 2, 2012, the Board
 
filed Amended Minute Order No. 19, in which it modified CDU
 
Permit MA-11-04 to prohibit construction during the pendency of
 the contested case proceeding except for the removal of Reber
 
8
Circle and other unused facilities at the Observatory Site.
On June 12, 2012, Kilakila filed a motion to reconsider

 
Minute Order No. 23. Kilakila contended that the "sole topic" of
 
9
the March 21, 2012 meeting  could not have been "when the
recommended decision in [the Solar Telescope] contested case

 
would be issued by the hearing officer, Steven Jacobson[,]"
 because Jacobson had already issued his initial and final
 decisions.
 
On July 13, 2012, the Board granted the motion in part

 
and denied it in part, amending Minute Order No. 23 to read,
 "During the meeting, the sole topic of discussion was when the
 final decision in this contested case would be issued, in light
 of Minute Order No. 14, filed on March 19, 2012."
 
On July 16, 2012, Ishida filed a Report and Proposed
 
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, Decision and Order
 (Proposed Order). On August 13, 2012, Kilakila filed its
 
exceptions to the Proposed Order. Among other things, Kilakila
 
argued that UIA was not authorized to apply for the CDUP.
 
On September 27, 2012, Kilakila filed a second motion
 
to reconsider Minute Order No. 23. Attached to the motion were
 emails that purportedly revealed (1) the University/UIA acted in
 bad faith, (2) that "immense political pressure has been applied
 in this case that is even greater than prior documents had
 revealed[,]" and (3) that Aila had received more ex parte
 communication than had been previously revealed. These emails,
 
8
 Reber Circle is the remnant of a former radio telescope facility
at the Observatory Site. Removal of Reber Circle was proposed as a mitigation
measure.
 
9
 Chairperson William Aila, Jr. (Aila), Attorney General David
Louie, Bruce Coppa, a representative from the Governor's office, and Jennifer
Sabas (Sabas), staff member for Senator Inouye, appear to have attended, or at
the least, planned to attend the meeting.
 
10
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
between (1) Mike Mayberry, a UIA representative, and Sabas, and
 
between (2) Sabas and Aila, appear to indicate communication
 about the possibility of losing funding for the Solar Telescope
 if construction did not begin by a certain date.
 
On November 9, 2012, the Board issued an order denying
 
the second motion to reconsider Minute Order No. 23. The Board
 found Kilakila failed to demonstrate any impermissible ex parte
 communication occurred between Jacobson or any Board members and
 a party in the case.
 
On November 9, 2012, the Board granted the CDUA in its
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision, and Order (Order
 
Granting CDUP). The Board concluded the Solar Telescope
 
satisfied the criteria set forth in HAR § 13-5-30(c) (1994). The
 
Solar Telescope's CDUA was granted subject to 20 conditions.
 
On December 6, 2012, Kilakila appealed to the circuit
 
court from the Order Granting CDUP under HRS § 91-14 and other
 authorities. Kilakila primarily asked the circuit court to stay
 and reverse the Order Granting CDUP. On July 11, 2013, the
 circuit court affirmed the Board's Order Granting CDUP, and on
 August 20, 2013, the court entered its "Final Judgment" in favor
 of the University.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon
its review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal.
The standard of review is one in which [the appellate] court
must determine whether the circuit court was right or wrong
in its decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS
§ 91-14(g) (1993) to the agency's decision.
 
HRS § 91-14, entitled "Judicial review of contested
cases," provides in relevant part: 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may
affirm the decision of the agency or remand the case
with instructions for further proceedings; or it may
reverse or modify the decision and order if the
substantial rights of the petitioners may have been
prejudiced because the administrative findings,
conclusions, decisions, or orders are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutoryprovisions; or 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority orjurisdiction of the agency; or 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or 
11
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(4)	 Affected by other error of law; or
 
(5)	 Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or
 
(6)	 Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized
by abuse of discretion or clearly
unwarranted exercise of discretion.
 
Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are reviewable
under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions regarding
procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of fact
under subsection (5); and an agency's exercise of discretion
under subsection (6).
 
United Pub. Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO, v. Hanneman, 106 
Hawai'i 359, 363, 105 P.3d 236, 240 (2005) (brackets in original 
omitted) (quoting Paul's Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai
'i 412, 416, 91 P.3d 494, 498 (2004)). "Pursuant to HRS 
§ 91-14(g), an agency's conclusions of law are reviewed de novo." United Pub. Workers, 106 Hawai
'i at 363, 105 P.3d at 240 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). "A circuit court's conclusions of law are subject to de novo review." Paul's Elec. Serv., 104 Hawai
'i at 420, 91 P.3d at 502. 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 The Board's approval of the Solar Telescope
complies with HAR § 13-5-30(c).
 
1. HAR §§ 13-5-30(c)(1) & (2)
 
Kilakila contends the Solar Telescope is inconsistent
 
with the purpose of the conservation district and objectives of
 
the general subzone. HAR § 13-5-30(c)(1) and (2) provide that
 the proposed land use must be "consistent with the purpose of the
 conservation district" and "the objectives of the subzone of the
 land on which the use will occur[.]" The Solar Telescope's
 proposed sites are located in the General subzone. "The
 objective of this subzone is to designate open space where
 specific conservation uses may not be defined, but where urban
 use would be premature." HAR § 13-5-14 (1994). HAR § 13,
 Chapter 5 does not define "urban use," but 
Under the Land Use Law, lands are designated as belonging in
one of four land use districts: urban, rural, agricultural,
and conservation. . . . Land in an urban district tolerates
 the highest degree of development and conservation land the
least.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
13Life of the Land v. Land Use Comm'n of State of Hawaii,  63 Haw.
166, 170 n.3, 623 P.2d 431, 437 n.3 (1981). 
In the Order Granting CDUP, COL 28, the Board
concluded:
a.  HAR § 13-5-30(c)(1). The proposed land use
is consistent with the purpose of the conservation
district because the [Solar Telescope] is an allowed
use within the conservation district and it is located
within the [Observatory Site] which already includes
other astronomical facilities.  The use of an already
developed area promotes protection, preservation and
long-term sustainability of the surrounding areas
within the conservation district.
b.  HAR § 13-5-30(c)(2). The [Solar Telescope] is not
an urban use and is consistent with the uses allowed under
Executive Order No. 1987. The proposed land use is a
specific permitted use in the general subzone. The
[Observatory Site] is developed with roads, parking lots and
astronomy facilities.  The proposed [Solar Telescope] will
occupy one of the last two developable sites at the
[Observatory Site], and thus should have a negligible effect
on open space at Haleakal~  and is consistent with the
objectives of the general subzone.
The circuit court found:
3.    Of the five subzones listed in HAR § 13-5-10,
the [Solar Telescope] is located in the General Subzone. 
"The objective of this subzone is to designate open space
where specific conservation uses may not be defined, but
where urban use would be premature."  HAR § 13-5-14. [The
Board] found that the [Solar Telescope] is not an urban use
and is consistent with the objectives of the General
Subzone, particularly because the site is currently
developed with roads, parking lots, and other astronomy
facilities.  The [circuit court] agrees.
Kilakila contends the Solar Telescope is an "urban use" due to
its height, mass, scale, use of hazardous materials, location in
an area known as "Science City," which is already 40% developed,
industrial appearance, and substantial impacts.  Much of
Kilakila's argument on this point concerns whether the Solar
Telescope has a substantial impact on natural resources and is
addressed below in section III, A, 3.
HAR § 13-5-25 expressly allows astronomy facilities to
be built in the resource subzone.  See HAR § 13-5-24, -25.  There
is no limitation in the rule regarding the size, appearance, or
other characteristics a facility may have, as long as the
construction and operation of the facility otherwise complies
with HAR Chapter 13, Section 5.  See id. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2. HAR § 13-5-30(c)(3)
 
HAR § 13-5-30 provides that the proposed land use must
 
comply with "provisions and guidelines contained in [HRS Chapter]
 
205A, entitled 'Coastal Zone Management [(CZM)],' where
 
applicable[.]" HAR § 13-5-30(c)(3). "All agencies shall enforce
 
the objectives and policies of this chapter . . . ." HRS § 205A­5(b) (2011 Repl.). Two such objectives are to protect, preserve,
 and where desirable, (1) "restore those natural and man-made
 historic and prehistoric resources in the coastal zone management
 area that are significant in Hawaiian and American history and
 culture[,]" and (2) "restore or improve the quality of coastal
 scenic and open space resources." HRS §§ 205A-2(b)(2)(A) and
 205A-2(b)(3)(A) (2011 Repl.). Kilakila contends the Solar
 Telescope is inconsistent with HRS § 205A-2(b) because it
 adversely affects the visual and cultural resources of the summit
 of Haleakal
a, including the Observatory Site, which "is a natural
 
prehistoric resource that is significant in Hawaiian history and
 culture." In COL 28(c), the Board concluded:
 
The goals of the [CZM] program are to address issues from an
integrated ecosystem perspective, and as no lands in Hawai' i 
are more than 30 miles from the shore the entire State is considered to be in the Coastal Zone. The objectives andpolicies of the [CZM] program relate to recreationalresources, historic resources, scenic and open spaceresources, coastal ecosystems, economic uses, coastalhazards, managing development, public participation, beachprotection and marine resources. HRS § 205A-2. The 
implementation of mitigation measures . . . is designed toreduce, minimize, eliminate, or compensate for the impactsof the [Solar Telescope] on surrounding areas. In particular, impacts of storm water runoff and effects ongroundwater, which may directly affect the coastal zone,will be reduced to a negligible level. The [SolarTelescope] is consistent with the goals and objectives ofHRS chapter 205A. 
(Emphasis added.) Additionally, as discussed further below in 
section III, A, 3, the Board found the Solar Telescope's visual impact would not be significant and the site's cultural resources would be reasonably protected. Consequently, Kilakila's contention is without merit. See generally Application of 
Hawaiian Elec. Co., Inc., 81 Hawai
'i 459, 465, 918 P.2d 561, 567 
(1996) (courts refrain from determining whether the weight of evidence supports an administrative finding). 
14
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3. HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4)
 
Kilakila contends the circuit court erred because the
 
substantial evidence does not support the conclusion that the
 
Solar Telescope would not have a substantial adverse impact to
 existing natural resources. HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) provides that
 
(c) In evaluating the merits of a proposed land use,
the department or board shall apply the following criteria:
 
. . . .
 
(4)	 The proposed land use will not cause substantial
adverse impact to existing natural resources
within the surrounding area, community, or
region[.]" 
Natural resource "means resources such as plants, aquatic life
 
and wildlife, cultural, historic, recreational, geologic, and
 archeological sites, scenic areas, ecologically significant
 areas, watersheds, and minerals." HAR § 13-5-2 (1994).
 
The FEIS provides that construction and operation of
 
the Solar Telescope would result in major, adverse impacts on
 cultural resources:
 
Construction and operation of the proposed [Solar
Telescope] at either the Preferred Mees or Reber
Circle sites would result in major, adverse, short-
and long-term, direct impacts on the traditional
cultural resources within the [Region of Influence].
No indirect impacts are expected. Mitigation measures
would be implemented; however, those measures would
not reduce the impact intensity: impacts would remain
major, adverse, long-term and direct.
 
The FEIS concluded that under the no-action alternative, "there
 
would continue to be major, adverse, long-term, direct impacts to
 traditional cultural resources." The FEIS likewise concluded the
 cumulative impact to cultural resources of the Solar Telescope at
 the preferred and alternate site would be major, adverse,
 long-term, and direct. The Board found that while the impact on
 cultural resources was major, it was incremental and would exist
 even without construction of the Solar Telescope:
 
168. Several people provided testimony as part
of the [Supplemental] Cultural Assessment that
conducting Native Hawaiian traditional cultural
practices often requires an uninterrupted view of the
summit area to make an emotional and physical
connection to a place of importance.
 
169. The presence of manmade structures on the
summit already creates an interruption of the view.
 
15
  
The FEIS evaluated impacts to visual resources and
 
viewplanes from within Haleakal a National Park and from populated
 
areas of Maui, and determined impact intensity by comparing
 
various existing views with images of views that included
 computer simulated images of the Solar Telescope.
10 Regarding
 
the preferred Mees and alternative Reber Circle sites, the FEIS
 concluded that from within the Haleakal
a National Park, "the
 
prominence of the proposed new structure in views from within two
 miles of the [Solar Telescope] would result in moderate, adverse
 and long-term impacts to visual resources[,]" and "[n]o
 mitigation would adequately reduce this impact." The FEIS
 concluded that beyond Haleakal
a National Park, "in views from
 
throughout Maui . . . the proposed [Solar Telescope] would result
 in a minor, adverse and long-term impact to visual resources[,]"
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The addition of the proposed [Solar Telescope] would
only slightly increase the degradation of the summit
as a traditional cultural property. 
170. The FEIS determined that although the size
and color of the [Solar Telescope] would have a majorimpact on native Hawaiians conducting traditionalcultural practices, which often requires anuninterrupted view of the summit, because of the pastconstruction of man made structures on the summit and the current view, which is already interrupted, theaddition of the [Solar Telescope] would be incrementalin degradation of the summit as a traditional culturalproperty. The addition of the [Solar Telescope] wouldresult in readily detectable, localized effects, withconsequences at the regional level to traditionalcultural practitioners within greater Hawai' i. The 
cumulative effects on traditional cultural resources of past actions combined with the [Solar Telescope]would be major, adverse, long-term and direct. 
171. The FEIS determined that although the
No-Action Alternative would not contribute to changes
in traditional cultural, historic, or archeological
resources within the [Observatory Site], for those who
believe that any man-made development in the summit
area constitutes a form of desecration, those people
would continue to find that the current development
results in major, adverse, long-term, direct effects
to traditional cultural resources.
 
10
 The FEIS provided "[v]iewer sensitivity is assumed to be
relatively high within the [Haleakala  National Park], based on the fact that
viewers in the area are predominantly visitors to the national park with an
expectation of high visual quality in the area."
 
16
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and "[n]o mitigation would adequately reduce this impact."11
 
Regarding the no action alternative, the FEIS concluded visual
 
impacts were negligible, adverse, and long-term. The FEIS
 indicated the Solar Telescope's cumulative impact on visual
 resources and viewplanes, from both the preferred and alternate
 build sites, was major, adverse, and long-term. The Board found:
 
176. From within Haleakala  National Park, the
prominence of the [Solar Telescope] at the Mees site,
in views from within two miles of the [Solar
Telescope] site . . . the proposed [Solar Telescope]
would be visible to the point of co-dominance with
other nearby structures. It would intensify the
already developed appearance in its immediate
surroundings, and would also appear to increase
slightly the amount of horizontal space occupied by
structures in views from within [Haleakala  National
 
Park]. The new structure would not substantially
alter the existing visual character visible in any
view.
 
. . . .
 
178. During the construction phase, however,
crane equipment may be visible from outside [Haleakala
 
National Park].
 
. . . .
 
182. From outside of [Haleakala  National Park],
in views from throughout Maui (including windward,
upcountry, central valley and south Maui locations),
the proposed [Solar Telescope] at the Mees site would
be visible atop distant ridgelines from a number of
viewing locations and indistinguishable in views from
other locations. Because of the distance of these
 views, regardless of whether the [Observatory Site] is
presently visible from these locations, the proposed
[Solar Telescope] would not substantially alter the
visual quality of the views.
 
The FEIS concluded "there would be moderate, adverse,
 
and long-term impacts on visitor use and experience from changes
 
in the quality of recreational activities such as sightseeing,
 hiking, backpacking, photography, and camping associated with
 changes in the viewshed from construction activities at either
 the Preferred Mees site or the alternative Reber Circle site[.]" 
The FEIS concluded further that "[c]hanges in the viewshed during
 the operations phase would result in major, adverse, and
 
11
 The FEIS explained that "[b]ecause of the distance of these views,
regardless of whether the [Observatory Site] is visible at present or not, the
proposed [Solar Telescope] would not substantially alter the visual quality of
the views."
 
17
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
long-term impacts on the visitor use and experience from
 
locations where the proposed [Solar Telescope] would be
 prominently seen[.]" It also concluded that construction noise
 "would have a major, adverse, and short-term impact on visitor
 use and experience[,]" but this impact would be mitigated to
 
th
"negligible, adverse, and long term between April 20  and July
th
15 ; at other times of the year noise impacts would be mitigated
to moderate, adverse and short-term." The FEIS indicated that
 for both the preferred and alternative build sites, cumulative
 impacts to visitor use and experience would continue to be major,
 adverse and long-term. The Board found:
 
190. Impacts on visitor use and experience
would be anticipated if the proposed [Solar Telescope]
were constructed. These impacts would result from
changes in the quality of recreational activities such
as sightseeing, hiking, backpacking, photography, and
camping associated with changes in view from
construction activity at the proposed [Solar
Telescope] site and along the Park Road corridor.
 
191. Impacts on air quality associated with
increased construction vehicle traffic and use would
 be minor, adverse, and short-term. These impacts would
occur over the short-term, would be mitigated to the
greatest possible extent, as set forth herein, and the
impacts on visitor use and experience would diminish
in the long-term.
 
192. Changes in the view would, however,
continue to result in moderate and long- term impacts
on the visitor use and experience from locations where
the proposed [Solar Telescope] would be prominently
seen.
 
Ultimately, the Board concluded the Solar Telescope
 
would not substantially adversely impact existing natural
 
resources because (1) specific measures had been proposed to
 mitigate impacts to cultural resources, view planes, and
 endangered flora and fauna, (2) ten other facilities already
 existed within the Observatory Site, which was specifically
 created for astronomy uses, (3) the "benefits to be derived from
 the [Solar Telescope] include not only the advancement of
 scientific knowledge that would be of significant benefit to the
 world, but it would also create economic benefits[,]" and (4)
 educational opportunities would be created for students and
 native Hawaiian astronomers. 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After Kilakila appealed the Board's Order Granting
 
CDUP, the circuit court concluded:
 
4. There exists substantial evidence that supports
the conclusion that the [Solar Telescope] will not have a
substantial adverse impact to existing natural resources
with the surrounding area and community, consistent with
[the Board's] decision, "when considered together with all
minimization and mitigation commitments . . . [the Solar
Telescope] will not cause substantial impact to existing
natural resources with the surrounding area, community, or
region." 
Although Kilakila cites to the [FEIS] in support of
its arguments to the contrary, the Court agrees with [the
University] that the FEIS is not necessarily a binding
document. An environmental study is an "informational
document" as outlined and explained in HRS § 343-2 and Mauna
Kea Power Co. Inc. v. Board of Land and Natural Resources
 [(Bd.)
, 76 Hawai' i] 259, 874 P.2d 1084 (1994). 
5. [The Board's] decision that the [Solar 
Telescope] does not violate HAR Title 13, chapter 5, was not

erroneous. The [Solar Telescope] would be in close
proximity to other previously developed facilities for
astronomy with the observation site. [The Solar Telescope]]
would be "similar to the existing facilities at
the . . . site and surrounding areas . . . will preserve the
existing physical environmental aspects of the Land." 
Kilakila contends the circuit court was wrong because
 
substantial evidence does not exist to support the Board's
 
conclusion that the Solar Telescope's adverse impact on natural
 resources would be less than substantial. Kilakila contends the
 Board failed to follow HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) because:
 
(1) the FEIS and CDUA show the Solar Telescope's
 
impacts on natural resources -- specifically cultural resources,

 
visual view planes, natural beauty, and quiet -- would be
 substantial; 
(2) the Board "offered no explanation for rejecting all

 
this evidence"; 
(3) mitigation measures "do not reduce the impacts to
 
less than substantial; and 
(4) FOF 169 in the Board's Order Granting CDUP
 
"distorts the evidence" and FOFs 167, 176 and 192 are clearly
 erroneous.
 
Kilakila's arguments regarding the evidence of
 
substantial impacts to natural resources and the Board's failure
 to explain its alleged disregard of the same is unavailing. In
 
19
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
part, Kilakila's argument conflates the FEIS conclusion of a
 
major impact on cultural resources with a substantial impact. 
The FEIS defines a "major" impact on cultural resources as an
 adverse impact where
 
disturbance of a site(s) results in loss of integrity
and impact(s) would alter resource conditions. There
would be a block to, or great affect on, traditional
access, site preservation, or the relationship between
the resource and the affiliated group's body of
practices and beliefs, to the extent that the survival
of a group's practices and/or beliefs would be
jeopardized.
 
The CDUA, however, appears to use the terms interchangeably:
 
Within the FEIS, potential impacts were characterized
with respect to intensities described as major,
moderate, minor, and negligible. The criteria for the
 intensity of impact on each resource, the anticipated
impacts on the natural environment, and mitigations
for those impacts are described in [the FEIS]. Table I
below is a summary of the resources, impacts,
mitigations, and final impacts for the Mees Site
(shown as Table 4-7 in FEIS Vol. I.) Table 2 below
 details the mitigations for those impacts (shown as
Table 4-13 FEIS Vol. I.) 
Both Tables I and 2 below show that the proposed
[Solar Telescope] would have a substantial (major)
adverse impact on cultural resources. Specifically,
the proposed [Solar Telescope] would be seen as
culturally insensitive and disturb traditional
cultural practices conducted within the [ROI, which
includes parts of [Haleakala  National Park]. Noise and
associated construction-related disturbances would
 also have a major, adverse impact on traditional
cultural practices within the ROI. No mitigation would
eliminate these impacts, but numerous mitigation
measures would be employed to reduce such impacts as
much as possible. As shown from the extensive analysis
conducted during the EIS process, no other aspects of
the proposed land use would result in substantial
(major) adverse impacts.
 
(Emphases added.) The CDUA also provided the Solar Telescope
 
"will cause a substantial visual impact on visitors to the summit
 area of [Haleakal
a National Park] and only negligible impacts on
 
populated parts of the greater Maui community." Nevertheless,
 whether an impact on natural resources is substantial and
 requires denial of a CDUP is within the Board's discretion. See
 
HRS § 183C-3 (2011 Repl.); 
see also  HAR §§ 13–5-1 (1994) and 13­
5-30. 
It is not the court's role here to weigh evidence. See

 
Application of Hawaiian Elec. Co., Inc, 81 Hawai 'i at 465, 918 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.2d at 567 ("[C]ourts decline to consider the weight of the 
evidence to ascertain whether it weighs in favor of the administrative findings[.]"). Assuming the FEIS concluded the impact on cultural resources was substantial, the Board is not bound by an applicant's EIS. See Mauna Kea Power Co., Inc. v. 
Bd. of Land & Natural Res. (Bd.), 76 Hawai
'i 259, 265, 874 P.2d 
1084, 1090 (1994) (an EIS is an informational document whose acceptance is separate from the approval of a conservation district use application). Similarly, it appears that the Board is not bound by the conclusions of a conservation district use application (otherwise, applicants could essentially dictate Board action). "But where the record demonstrates considerable conflict or uncertainty in the evidence, the agency must articulate its factual analysis with reasonable clarity, giving some reason for discounting the evidence rejected." In re Water 
Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai
'i 97, 163-64, 9 P.3d 409, 
475-76 (2000) (Wai ahole). To the extent the Board rejected the 
FEIS or CDUP conclusions regarding impacts to natural resources by concluding the Solar Telescope would not cause a substantial adverse impact, the Board's conclusion was consistent with Wai
ahole. 
Regarding impacts to the natural resources in question,
 
the Board explained that it assessed the Solar Telescope within
 the "context of the [Observatory Site,]" as well as mitigation
 measures to be employed and conditions attached to the use
 permit. The Board found the impact on cultural practices was
 incremental because the existence of other astronomy facilities
 already created an obstructed viewplane and as a result, the
 Solar Telescope would "only slightly increase the degradation of
 the summit as a traditional cultural property." This is
 supported by the FEIS conclusion that the intensity of the impact
 on cultural resources would remain the same under the no-action
 alternative. The Board applied a similar reasoning in its
 analysis of visual and noise impacts. The Board also considered
 the several mitigation measures which included educational
 programs for native Hawaiians, minimizing noise from constructing
 
21
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and operating the Solar Telescope at certain times, reserving
 
Solar Telescope usage time for native Hawaiian astronomers,
 evaluating the exterior paint options periodically to make the
 
12
Solar Telescope less noticeable,  and decommissioning and
deconstructing the Solar Telescope within 50 years from the date
 operations begin upon consultation with native Hawaiian
 organizations. Consequently, the record shows the Board
 articulated its factual analysis with reasonable clarity and gave
 some reasons for discounting the alleged rejected evidence.
13
 
Kilakila contends HAR § 13-5-30 "does not state that as
 
long as mitigation measures are employed that substantial impacts
 magically become insubstantial." The Board concluded mitigation
 measures would reduce all impacts to natural resources to
 minimal, except for cultural and visual resources, but further
 concluded these resources would be adequately protected by
 measures taken beyond the mitigation proposed by the FEIS:
 
c. The effect on, or impairment of,
traditional cultural practices by the astronomical
facilities currently located on the [Observatory Site] has,
to a degree, already been mitigated by the construction and
consecration of the east-facing ahu.[ 
14
] Protection of the
native Hawaiian practitioners' exercise of cultural

practices in the [Observatory Site] and near the [Solar
Telescope] may be accomplished through the construction and
consecration of a third ahu in a location to be agreed upon
by [UIA] and Kilakila in consultation with the Cultural
Specialist and the Native Hawaiian Working Group. The
implementation of this measure together with the conditions
contained in the Long Range Development Plan, Management
Plan, Record of Decision and the Programmatic
 
12
 Additionally, the Board concluded "impacts to view planes will be
mitigated through the choice of the location of the [Solar Telescope] within
the [Observatory Site] and the periodic evaluation of exterior paint options
that could make the [Solar Telescope] less noticeable." This would presumably
apply to the Solar Telescope's impact to both visual resources and viewplanes,
and visitor experience and use.
 
13
 Citing Application of Kauai Elec. Div. of Citizens Utilities Co.,
 
60 Haw. 166, 184, 590 P.2d 524, 537 (1978) (Citizens Utilities), Kilakila
contends the Board failed to identify evidence in the record to reach a
conclusion different from the FEIS. This contention presumes the conclusions
differ based on Kilakila's conflation of the terms "major," from the FEIS, and
"substantial," from HAR § 13–5-1. Additionally, Citizens Utilities held the
agency had a duty to provide findings to enable a meaningful review of its
decision, see Citizens Utilities, 60 Haw. at 184, 590 P.2d at 537, which the
Board here fulfilled.
 
14
 In Hawaiian, ahu is defined as a "heap, pile, collection, mound,
mass; alter, shrine, cairn[.]" M.K. Pukui & S.H. Elbert, Hawaiian Dictionary
 at 8 (1986).
 
22
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Agreement . . . will reasonably protect the exercise of
cultural practices in the [Observatory Site] and near the
[Solar Telescope].
 
. . . .
 
32. The protection of the natural resources of the
Haleakala  summit and the area covered by the application for
the [CDUP] can be accomplished through implementation of the
conditions contained in the Long Range Development Plan,
Management Plan, Record of Decision, Programmatic Agreement,
and the Habitat Conservation Plan and accompanying
incidental take permits.
 
Additionally, throughout the Order Granting CDUP, the Board found 
and concluded the Solar Telescope's impact to cultural and visual resources was incremental, and the impact to those resources would exist without the development of the Solar Telescope. We decline to assess whether the weight of evidence supports an administrative finding. See Application of Hawaiian Elec. Co., 
Inc., 81 Hawai
'i at 465, 918 P.2d at 567. 
Kilakila also contends the Board failed to identify
 
evidence that the mitigation measures actually reduced impact
 intensities, citing Makua v. Rumsfeld, 163 F. Supp. 2d 1202, 1218
 (D. Haw. 2001) for the proposition that a "perfunctory
 description or mere listing of mitigation measures, without
 supporting analytical data, is insufficient to support a finding
 of no significant impact." (Citation and internal quotation
 marks omitted.) Rumsfeld is inapposite because it reviewed an
 
agency's determination that an EIS was not required, a
 determination which was based "almost entirely" on mitigation
 measures whose effectiveness was not analyzed.
15 Id. at 1217-18. 
In contrast, here, an EIS was completed and we review the
 agency's grant of a CDUA.
 
Kilakila further contends the Board failed to follow
 
HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4) because FOF 169 in the Board's Order Granting
 CDUP "distorts the evidence" and FOFs 167, 176 and 192 are
 clearly erroneous.
 
Kilakila contends FOF 169 "distorts the evidence"
 
because it contradicts FOF 170 and misquotes the FEIS. FOFs 169
 
15
 In some cases the law allows agencies to not complete an
Environmental Impact Study (EIS) where the agency adopts mitigation measures.
See Rumsfeld at 1217.
 
23
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and 170 are not contradictory. FOF 169 provides the "presence of
 
manmade structures on the summit already creates an interruption
 of the view. The addition of the proposed [Solar Telescope]
 would only slightly increase the degradation of the summit as a
 traditional cultural property." (Emphasis added.) FOF 170
 provides:
 
The FEIS determined that although the size and color
of the [Solar Telescope] would have a major impact on native
Hawaiians conducting traditional cultural practices, which
often requires an uninterrupted view of the summit, because
of the past construction of man[-]made structures on the
summit and the current view, which is already interrupted,
the addition of the [Solar Telescope] would be incremental
in degradation of the summit as a traditional cultural
property.
 
(Emphasis added.) The portion of the FEIS to which the Board
 
cites in FOF 170 provides:
 
Therefore, because of the past construction of man-made
structures on the summit and the current view, which is
already interrupted, the addition of the [Solar Telescope]
would be incremental in the degradation of the summit as a
traditional cultural property.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
In light of the FEIS opinion, FOF 170 appears to mean
 
the adverse impacts on cultural resources at the site were
 
already major, direct, and long-term when the University
 submitted its CDUA, and the addition of the Solar Telescope would
 only increase the existing impact incrementally, resulting in a
 cumulative adverse impact of no greater intensity than what
 already existed. FOF 169 does not distort the evidence because
 under the circumstances, a "slight increase" and "incremental
 addition" are synonymous.
 
Kilakila contends FOF 167 was clearly erroneous because
 
the record was replete with evidence that native Hawaiian usage
 of the summit prior to November 25, 1892 was established as a
 practice, and FOF 167 was contradicted by FOFs 3, 156,
 
16 17
and 165.  FOF 167 states "Kilakila did not provide evidence
 
16
 FOFs 3, 156, and 165 provide:
 
3. [Kilakila] is an organization that is dedicated to
the protection of the sacredness of the summit of Haleakala . 
One of Kilakila's objectives is the protection of
traditional and customary practices as well as natural
 
24
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of any native Hawaiian usage of the summit of Haleakal a or the
 
[Observatory Site] that was established in practice prior to
 
November 25, 1892." FOF 167 relates to COL 29(a), the Board's
 conclusion that Kilakila failed to show that its directors or
 members engaged in traditional and customary activities, i.e.,
 activities protected under Hawai
'i law, according to Pratt.18 The 
resources. The directors of [Kilakila] state that they
engage in traditional and customary practices on Haleakala . 
Among the practices exercised by the directors of [Kilakila]are: ma lama aina [(taking care of the land)], the burying
of piko [(umbilical cord)], offering ho' okupu [(ceremonial
gift-giving as a sign of honor and respect)] (including pule[(prayers, blessings)], oli [(chants)] and materials),connecting with their ancestors and participating inreligious ceremonies. The directors of Kilakila enjoy viewsof and from the summit of Haleakala  and the beauty of the
area. 
(Record references omitted.)
 
156. Comments were received that the summit of
 
Haleakala  was used by native Hawaiians both as a place of
burials of the dead as well as a place for the burying of
piko (umbilical cord). Burial places of the dead at
Haleakala  include Makaopalena, Kealaohia, Puukilea,
Hamohamo, Alalakeiki, and Niuaiaawa.
 
. . . . 
165. Members of Kilakila testified that they go to
Haleakala , especially during significant times such as the
solstices and equinoxes, to welcome the sun. In particular,
[a member of Kilakila] testified that she believed the
cultural practice of going to the summit during these
significant times started prior to 1892, although she could
not say for sure. In addition, [this member] testified that
she goes to the summit, to the parking area of the National
Park Service, to conduct these practices.
 
(Record references omitted.)
 
17
 Hawaiian words as defined in M.K. Pukui & S.H. Elbert, Hawaiian
 
Dictionary (1986). 
18
 COL 29(a) provides:
 
Although Kilakila has not shown that its directors or
members engage in activities that are traditional and
customary, according to Pratt, the Cultural Resources
Assessment and the Supp. Cultural Assessment conducted in
connection with the [Solar Telescope] have established that
traditional cultural practices, such as religious prayer and
ceremonies, the burying of piko [(umbilical cord)], and
connection with akua (gods) and ancestors, have occurred and
continue to occur in the summit area. The practices engaged
in by the directors and members of Kilakila are consistent
with the cultural practices set forth in the cultural
assessments and will be accepted as such.
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Board apparently discredited the evidence presented by Kilakila 
on this point, which was within the Board's discretion to do. See Application of Hawaiian Elec. Co., Inc., 81 Hawai
'i at 465, 
918 P.2d at 567. And considering Kilakila was found to have standing, they have not explained how an error on this matter affects its substantial rights. Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure 
Rule 61 ("The court at every stage of the proceeding must disregard any error or defect in the proceeding which does not affect the substantial rights of the parties."). 
Kilakila contends FOFs 176 and 192 accurately quote the
 
FEIS but "to the extent they may imply that the visual impact is
 not substantial, they create an inaccurate impression." Again,
 contrary to Kilakila's assertions, the FEIS did not conclude the
 impact on visual resources and view planes was substantial, nor
 did the FEIS conclude the visual impact as it relates to visitor
 use and experience was substantial.
 
FOF 176 concerns the impact to visual resources and 
view planes and provides in part: "[The Solar Telescope] would intensify the already developed appearance in its immediate surroundings, and would also appear to increase slightly the amount of horizontal space occupied by structures in views from within the Park. The new structure would not substantially alter the existing visual character visible in any view." This is identical to language in the FEIS. Additionally, the CDUA provided that while the Solar Telescope would intensify the appearance of development from various views, it would be consistent with the scale and character of the existing views of the Observatory Site. As such, FOF 176 is not clearly erroneous. See Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai
'i 43, 51, 85 P.3d 150, 158 (2004) 
(An FOF is clearly "erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding."). 
FOF 192 concerns the impact to visitor experience and
 
provides: "Changes in the view would, however, continue to result
 in moderate and long-term impacts on the visitor use and
 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
experience from locations where the proposed [Solar Telescope] 
would be prominently seen." The evidence regarding whether the Solar Telescope's individual impact to views is major or moderate, as it relates to visitor use and experience, is somewhat conflicting.
19 However, the Board appears to have 
weighted the existing impacts to views heavier than the additional impact caused by the Solar Telescope when it concluded the Solar Telescope's added impact, in context, would be slight. This is consistent with the FEIS, which provided the "existing visual impact of [the Observatory Site] could, however, still be considered to be contrary to visitor expectations for the summit area, with respect to the natural landscape vistas, and, with selection of the No-Action alternative, would continue to have a major, adverse, and long-term, direct impact on the viewshed." As such, FOF 192 is not clearly erroneous. See Bremer, 104 
Hawai
'i at 51, 85 P.3d 158 (An FOF is clearly "erroneous when the 
record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding."); see also Application of Hawaiian Elec. Co., Inc., 81 Hawai
'i at 465, 
918 P.2d at 567 (Courts refrain from determining whether the weight of evidence supports an administrative finding). 
Kilakila also appears to contend FOFs 176 and 192 are
 
clearly erroneous because they rely on an allegedly faulty visual
 impact analysis in the FEIS. The FEIS concluded that for both
 the preferred and alternative build sites, the Solar Telescope's
 impact on visual resource and view planes from within Haleakal
a
 
19
 The FEIS indicated the Solar Telescope's individual impact on
visitor experience would be overall moderate, adverse and long-term and that
"[c]hanges in the viewshed during the operations phase would result in major,
adverse, and long-term impacts on the visitor use and experience from
locations where the proposed [Solar Telescope] would be prominently seen, as
described in Section 4.5-Visual Resources and View Planes." Emphases added.)
Section 4.5 assesses the direct and indirect individual impact to visual
resources and concluded the intensity of impacts from various vantage points
would not exceed moderate.
 
After receiving comments on the FEIS, the [National Science
Foundation (NSF)], in its "Record of Decision," which approved the NSF's
funding of the Solar Telescope, acknowledged that "in consideration of both
the quantitative and qualitative analyses and the comments of the [National
Park Service] and others, NSF agrees that the construction and operation of
the [Solar Telescope] will have major adverse short-term and long-term impacts
to visual resources and view planes within key areas of the Park that will
thus result in major adverse impacts to the visitor experience within the
Park." (Emphasis added.)
 
27
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
National Park would be moderate and that "[n]o mitigation would
 
adequately reduce this impact." However, the FEIS defined
 moderate impacts as those in which mitigation measures "would
 likely be successful." While this inconsistency may cast doubt
 on the FEIS's impact assessment methodology, the Board appears to
 have not limited its analysis to the mitigation measures proposed
 by the FEIS as it concluded the "protection of the natural
 resources of the Haleakal
a summit and the area covered by the
 
application for the [CDUP] can be accomplished through
 implementation of the conditions contained in the Long Range
 Development Plan, Management Plan, Record of Decision,
 Programmatic Agreement, and the Habitat Conservation Plan and
 accompanying incidental take permits." Again, as discussed
 above, the Board is not bound by the EIS and we do not weigh the
 evidence.
20
 
Kilakila contends FOFs 176 and 192 are clearly 
erroneous and cites State v. Diamond Motors, Inc., 50 Haw. 33, 36, 429 P.2d 825, 828 (1967) for the proposition that the Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court held that protecting an industrial district from further encroachment was important, and even though structures already existed at a site, adding one that would rise fifty feet above any other structure would "substantially impair the view." Diamond Motors assessed the constitutionality of an ordinance regulating the size of outdoor signs and is inapposite. Diamond 
Motors, 50 Haw. at 33-35, 429 P.2d at 826-27. Kilkila cites to the supreme court's statement, "We accept beauty as a proper community objective, attainable through the use of the police power." Id. at 36, 429 P.2d at 827. That dicta does not support 
Kilakila's proposition.
4. HAR § 13-5-30(c)(5)
 
HAR § 13-5-30(c)(5) provides that "[t]he proposed land
 
use, including buildings, structures, and facilities, shall be
 
20
 Additionally, Kilakila contends the University inadequately
presented and defended the FEIS impact assessment methodology. This also goes
to the weight of the evidence -- i.e., Kilakila suggests that the Board should
not have credited the FEIS's assessments. Further, Kilakila fails to provide
any authority to support its contention that the University had to explain or
defend the methodology or that any other methodology should have been used.
 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
compatible with the locality and surrounding areas, appropriate
 
to the physical conditions and capabilities of the specific
 parcel or parcels[.]" Kilakila contends there is no evidence the
 Solar Telescope would be compatible with Haleakal
a National Park,
 
"which is only a few hundred yards away." Kilakila contends the
 evidence supports the opposite conclusion and cites (1) the FEIS
 conclusion that the cumulative impact on visitor use and
 experience would be major, adverse, and long-term, (2) the NSF's
 conclusion that the Solar Telescope, if located at the preferred
 Mees site, would have a major, adverse, and long-term impact on
 visual resources for Haleakal
a National Park Visitors, and (3)
 
the National Park Service's (NPS) opinion, from the public
 
comments to the supplemental draft EIS, that 
The statement -- 'The proposed [Solar Telescope] would not
hinder [Haleakala  National Park's] purpose . . . or prevent
the NPS from continuing its conservation work to meet its
guiding mission of preservation' should be deleted. Based
 on analysis the proposed action would not only hinder the
NPS, but would prohibit our ability to conserve the scenery
and other resources leaving them unimpaired for the
enjoyment of future generations.
 
Kilakila's contention is unavailing. An "agency's
 
interpretation of its own rules is generally entitled to
 
deference[,]" unless the interpretation is plainly erroneous or
 inconsistent with the underlying legislative purpose. Kaleikini
 
v. Yoshioka, 128 Hawai
'i 53, 67, 283 P.3d 60, 74 (2012), 
reconsideration denied, 128 Hawai 'i 199, 285 P.3d 1013 (2012). 
Here, the Board appears to have interpreted "locality and
 surrounding areas" as immediate vicinity, i.e., the Observatory
 Site:
 
The [Observatory Site] was specifically set aside for
observatory site purposes under Executive Order No. 1987.
Astronomical and observatory facilities have existed on the
[Observatory Site] since 1951. The [Solar Telescope]
includes the construction of astronomical facilities which
 are compatible with the locality and surrounding areas,
appropriate to the physical conditions and capabilities of
the specific parcel.
 
Additionally, as discussed above, the Board's analysis under HAR
 
§ 15-5-30(c)(4) concluded the Solar Telescope would not cause a
 substantial adverse impact to the existing natural resources
 
29
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
within the surrounding area, community or region.21 
Consequently, the record reflects compliance with HAR § 13-5­
30(c)(5). See generally Application of Hawaiian Elec. Co., Inc., 
81 Hawai 'i at 465, 918 P.2d at 567 (Courts refrain from 
determining whether the weight of evidence supports an administrative finding).
5. HAR § 13-5-30(c)(6)
 
HAR § 13-5-30(c)(6) provides the "existing physical and
 
environmental aspects of the land, such as natural beauty and
 open space characteristics, will be preserved or improved upon,
 whichever is applicable[.]" In COL 28(f), the Board concluded:
 
The [Observatory Site] currently contains various astronomy
facilities, including support buildings, roads, and parking
lots. The [Solar Telescope] will not enhance the natural
beauty or open space characteristics of the [Observatory
Site]. However, because the proposed [Solar Telescope] is
similar to the existing facilities at the [Observatory Site]
and surrounding areas, the [Solar Telescope] will be
consistent with and will preserve the existing physical and
environmental aspects of the land.
 
Kilakila contends the University admitted the Solar 
Telescope did not improve natural beauty or open space 
characteristics and failed to demonstrate that the it preserves them. Kilakila asserts, "Given the negative visual impacts, it is not credible to claim that the [Solar Telescope] preserves natural beauty." This claim is without merit. HAR § 13-5­30(c)(6) concerns "existing physical and environmental aspects of the land" and is not limited to visual impacts. See HAR § 13-5­
30(c)(6). And, we do not weigh the evidence to determine whether it supports an administrative finding. See Application of Hawaiian Elec. Co., Inc., 81 Hawai
'i at 465, 918 P.2d at 567. 
6. HAR § 13-5-30(c)(7)
 
HAR § 13-5-30(c)(7) provides, "Subdivision of land will
 
not be utilized to increase the intensity of land uses in the
 conservation district[.]" Citing to HRS § 46-6(f)(6) (2012
 
21
 The plain language of HAR § 13-5-30(c)(4), prohibiting substantial
adverse impacts to "existing natural resources within the surrounding area,
community, or region[,]" appears broader than the geographic scope of HAR
§ 13-5-30(c)(5), which provides that the proposed land use "shall be
compatible with the locality and surrounding areas, appropriate to the
physical conditions and capabilities of the specific parcel or parcels[.]"
(Emphases added.)
 
30
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Repl.), Kilakila contends that by leasing land at the Observatory
 
Site, the university is subdividing it, and that the Solar
 Telescope will increase the intensity of land use in the
 conservation district. HRS § 46-6(f)(6) defines "subdivision" as
 follows:
 
§46-6 Parks and playgrounds for subdivisions.
. . . .
 
(6)	 "Subdivision" means the division of improved or
unimproved land into two or more lots, parcels,
sites, or other divisions of land and for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale,
lease, rental, transfer of title to, or interest
in, any or all such lots, parcels, sites, or
division of land. The term includes
 resubdivision, and when appropriate to the
context, shall relate to the land subdivided.
The term also includes a building or group of
buildings, other than a hotel, containing or
divided into three or more dwelling units or
lodging units. 
The Board concluded "[t]here is no proposed subdivision of land
 
related to this application." The record supports this
 conclusion.
 
7. HAR § 13-5-30(c)(8)
 
HAR § 13-5-30(c)(8) provides, "The proposed land use
 
will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety,
 and welfare." Kilakila contends "insofar as the [Solar
 Telescope] would adversely affect cultural resources, scenic
 views and Haleakal
a National Park, it is detrimental to public
 
welfare." Kilakila provides no authority for this proposition. 
The Board concluded the adverse impacts from the
 
construction and operation of the Solar Telescope would not be
 materially detrimental to public health, safety and welfare, and
 the telescope would have broad benefits for the public health,
 safety and welfare:
 
Adverse impacts from the construction and operation of
the [Solar Telescope], including impacts to noise, air
quality, water resources, and hazardous materials and solid
waste, will be minimized or mitigated such that these
impacts will not be materially detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare. 
Noise levels are required to be below levels required
by the Department of Health and the construction personnel
will be required to use appropriate safety procedures and
equipment. Little impact is anticipated to air quality or
 
31
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
water resources. The use of best management practices during
construction and the construction of a storm water
 collection system and replacement of an existing cesspool
will mitigate against any pote11tial impacts to water
quality. 
Little impact is anticipated from the solid waste or
hazardous materials related to the [Solar Telescope]. Solid
waste will be handled consistent with current procedures for
the existing facilities which calls for solid waste to be
kept in covered containers until it is removed to a licensed
Maui landfill. Handling and storage of hazardous materials
will be in compliance with the [Solar Telescope] Hazardous
Materials and Hazardous Waste Management
Program . . . . Aspects of the [Solar Telescope] have been
redesigned to reduce or eliminate the need for the use or
storage of hazardous materials. 
The [Solar Telescope] is designed to protect public
health, safety and welfare by providing scientific data that
will assist in learning more about the Sun's effects on our
atmosphere and environment and how the Sun affects
communication, power transmission and presents hazards to
humans in commercial air space.
 
The record reflects compliance with HAR § 13-5-30(c)(8).
B.
	 The Board did not err by considering economic
factors.
 
Kilakila contends the Board improperly considered
 
economic benefits, job creation, and community benefits -­
criteria not included in HAR § 13-5-30(c). This contention is
 without merit. The Board concluded, under its HAR § 13-5­30(c)(4) analysis, that
 
The benefits to be derived from the [Solar Telescope]
include not only the advancement of scientific knowledge
that would be of significant benefit to the world, but it
would also create economic benefits. Jobs and revenue for
 the economy would be created on Maui, both in the
construction of the [Solar Telescope] and in the continued
operation of the [Solar Telescope]. Educational
opportunities would be created for students at the Maui
Community College as well as for native Hawaiian
astronomers.
 
The circuit court found:
 
[The Board] acted consistently with HAR § 13-5-1 which
states, "[t]he purpose of this chapter is to regulate land
use in the Conservation District for the purpose of
conserving, protecting, and preserving the important natural
and cultural resources of the State through appropriate
management and use to promote their long-term sustainability
and the public health, safety, and welfare." [The Board] did
not commit error in considering other benefits.
 
Kilakila contends the Board's decision-making authority
 
is "naturally constrained" by HAR Chapter 13-5 but provides no
 
authority for the proposition that the Board is limited to
 
32

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
considering the HAR § 13-5-30(c) criteria when deciding whether
 
to grant conservation district use permits. As the circuit court
 found, HAR § 13-5 has a broad purpose, and includes promoting the
 public health, safety, and welfare. Additionally, the Solar
 Telescope was subject to environmental review under HRS Chapter
 343. HRS § 343-2 (2010 Repl.) defines an "environmental impact
 statement" as 
an informational document . . . which discloses the
 
environmental effects of a proposed action, effects of a
proposed action on the economic welfare, social welfare, and
cultural practices of the community and State, effects of
the economic activities arising out of the proposed action,
measures proposed to minimize adverse effects, and
alternatives to the action and their environmental effects.
 
(Emphasis added.) And, HAR § 11-200-1 (1996) provides "Chapter
 
343, HRS, establishes a system of environmental review at the
 state and county levels which shall ensure that environmental
 concerns are given appropriate consideration in decision making
 
along with economic and technical considerations. " (Emphasis
 
added.) 
C.
	 The Board did not err erred by weighing the lack
of alternatives against the Solar Telescope's
adverse impacts.
 
Kilakila contends the Board's rules do not allow the
 
Board "to disregard, or minimize the importance of, visual or
 
other impacts simply because there may be no other place, or
 manner, that a particular project can be built." The Order
 Granting CDUP provided:
 
23. The visual or other impacts of a project are site
specific. In the Matter of Conservation District Use 
Application for Hawaiian Electric Company, Inc. to Construct 
a 138-kV Transmission Line at Wa' ahila Ridge, Honolulu, 
Hawai'i, DLNR File No. OA-2801 ("Wa' ahila Ridge Decision") at
65-66, fn. 17 (Ex. B-1.) 
24. BLNR also takes into consideration whether
 
limited alternatives may outweigh the obvious visual or
other impacts. [Id.] at 66, fn. 17 . . . .
 
25. Whether alternative sites for the project
necessarily are limited by their nature, obvious visual or
other impacts may be outweighed. [Id.] . . . .
 
26. Structures and land uses which impact a public
viewplane of a significant natural feature like a pu' u or 
ridge should propose adequate mitigation or make someshowing of the lack of reasonable and practicablealternatives. [Id.] at 64, fn. 13. 
33
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Board concluded "Haleakal a is one of only three possible 
locations for the [Solar Telescope] in the world. Of the three 
possible locations, Haleakal a is the best location. There are no 
alternative sites for the [Solar Telescope] in [Hawai 'i]." In 
response to Kilakila's argument below that the Board erred by considering the lack of alternative sites as a basis for its decision to grant the CDUP, the circuit court concluded: 
7. Kilakila cites the Court to HAR § 13-5-30(c)
asserting that the rules "do not allow the [Board] to
disregard, or minimize the importance of, visual or other
impacts simply because there may be no other place, or
manner, that a particular project can be built." However,
the record reflects that the [Board] did consider other
sites, including locations at the Reber Circle site and the
lower Mees site.
 
(Record references omitted).
 
The circuit court appears to have misconstrued
 
Kilakila's argument on this point. Kilakila contended the Board
 
erred by considering whether a lack of alternative sites weighed
 in favor of granting the CDUP despite the Solar Telescope's
 impact on natural resources; Kilakila did not contend the Board
 failed to consider alternate sites. Nevertheless, Kilakila cites
 to no authority that the criteria set forth in § 13-5-30(c) is
 exhaustive or that the Board was limited to considering only
 § 13-5-30(c)'s criteria, and we find none.
D.	 UIA was authorized to apply for the conservation
district use permit.
 
Kilakila contends "[a]s a body corporate, only the
 
University itself has the legal authority to apply for
 
permits[,]" and that UIA had no authority to apply for a permit
 in its own name. Kilakila also contends HAR § 13-5-31(a)(5)
 (1994) requires the landowner to sign the conservation district
 use application and here, the landowner is the UH, not the UIA.
 Kilakila's contentions are unavailing. 
HAR § 13-5-31(b) provides that for "state and public
 
lands, the [State] or government entity with management control
 over the parcel shall sign as landowner." The Order Granting
 CDUP's FOF 2, unchallenged on appeal, provides:
 
2. The [UIA] was established in 1967 as an Organized
Research Unit at the University of Hawaii at Manoa. [UIA]
 
34
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conducts research and educational programs in most areas of
modern astronomy; it develops and manages observatory
facilities on Haleakala  and Mauna Kea; and it constructs
state-of-the-art astronomical instrumentation.
 
Kilakila provides no authority to support the proposition that
 
the UIA director could not sign for the University as
 "landowner." 
E.	 The Solar Telescope is consistent with the
Management Plan.
 
Kilakila contends the Solar Telescope is inconsistent
 
with the Management Plan because the staging and laydown area for
 
the Solar Telescope is to be located outside the Observatory
 Site, at the adjacent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) site,
 
contrary to the Management Plan's prohibition against parking
 
outside the Observatory Site. This contention is unavailing. 
The Management Plan provides "to protect vital environmental
 resources . . . [p]arking of heavy equipment and storage of
 construction materials outside the immediate confines of [the
 Observatory Site] property is prohibited." (Emphasis added.) The
 Draft Supplemental Environmental Assessment, to which Kilakila
 cites, provides the Solar Telescope staging and laydown area
 would be located on both the Observatory Site and FAA property. 
This assessment also provides that the FAA property to be used
 for parking was previously disturbed, so parking on it would not
 result in adverse effects on biological or archeological
 resources, nor would it increase "environmental impacts as
 compared to the FEIS analysis." The circuit court concluded the
 Management Plan "intended to prohibit parking specifically in
 areas that contain vital environmental resources." Kilakila does
 not contend the purported deviation from the Management Plan
 impacts vital environmental resources nor does the record reflect
 such. 
F.	 The Board's approval of Permit MA-11-04 did not
violate Kilakila's due process rights.
 
Kilakila contends the Board prejudged the contested
 
case hearing. The thrust of Kilakila's contention is that by
 
first approving Permit MA-3542 without holding a contested case
 
35
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hearing, the contested case hearing that resulted in the approval
 
of Permit MA-11-04 was a mere formality, violating Kilakila's due
 process rights.
 
As evidence, Kilakila asserts the Board did not allow 
Kilakila to present its full case before it approved Permit MA­3542 in 2010. However, Kilakila 1 "involve[d] appellate review of the December 1, 2010 decision by [the Board] to grant the conservation district use application . . . filed by [the University]." Kilakila 1, 131 Hawai
'i at 206, 317 P.3d at 40. 
Kilakila's due process argument relating to the Board's voting prior to holding a contested case was addressed by Kilakila 1. Conversely, the instant case involves appellate review of the Board's November 9, 2012 decision granting Permit MA-11-04. Kilakila does not contend it was prohibited from presenting evidence at the contested case hearing subject to review here.
22 
Kilakila also contends the Board's prejudgment is
 
evidenced by authorization of construction before the 2012
 contested case hearing had concluded. This contention is
 unavailing. Kilakila appears to be referring to Minute Order No.
 19, which provided:
 
On April 11, 2012, the Board received notice that
[UIA] intended to commence construction activity on Monday,
May 14, 2012. By a separate letter [UIA] indicated that the
construction activity would include 1) the removal of Reber
Circle and other previously disturbed sites and 2) the
creation of power and communications corridors to Pan-STARRS
and Mees buildings.
 
The Board is concerned that [UIA] intends to initiate
construction activity while the contested case hearing forCDUP MA-3542 is ongoing. Despite this concern, the Boardrecognizes that the removal of Reber Circle and otherpreviously disturbed sites, as described in Exhibit A, haslong been supported by Kilakila's president, Ki' ope Raymond. 
With the concurrence of four members, the Board
approves modification of CDUP MA-3542 to include the
following condition no. 19: 
19.	 No construction shall occur during the pendency
of the contested case proceeding before the
[Board], DLNR File No. MA-11-04, except for the
removal of Reber Circle Site # 50-50-11-5443 and
 
22
 Kilakila's Proposed Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision
and Order confirms this, providing: "All the declarations, testimony and
exhibits submitted by [Kilakila] were received into evidence except that
Exhibit B-5 was redacted to exclude page 4-67." 
36
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
removal of unused facilities at the [Observatory
Site], as required by sections II.G. and II.H.
of the Programmatic Agreement among the [NSF],
the [NPS], the [University], the State Historic
Preservation Officer, and the Advisory Council
on Historic Preservation. Removal of Reber
 Circle shall be in accordance with the
 requirements set forth in the Programmatic
Agreement.
 
Per the Order Granting CDUP's FOFs 282 and 283, the Reber circle
 
site is a remnant of a former telescope facility at the
 Observatory Site, the removal of which was required both by the
 Programmatic Agreement as a mitigation measure for the Solar
 Telescope, and significantly, an Archaeological Recovery Plan
 that was Board approved in 2006. Kilakila has not contested FOFs
 282 or 283 on appeal.
G. The Board's procedure was authorized.
 
Kilakila contends "[n]o law allowed the [Board] to 
conduct a contested case on whether to grant a conservation district use permit when it had already granted the permit." As the concurrence in Kilakila 1 states, the HAR does not explicitly authorize the Board, after holding a contested case hearing, to revoke a permit it granted before holding the hearing. See 
Kilakila 1, 131 Hawai
'i at 213, 317 P.3d at 47. However, as 
discussed above, construction appears to not have commenced under the first permit, Permit MA-3542. And, the Board has broad powers under HRS § 171-6 (2011 Repl.), including the power to "[d]o any and all things necessary to carry out its purposes and exercise the powers granted in [HRS Chapter 171]." HRS § 171­6(20). Consequently, the contested case hearing that ultimately led to approval of the second permit, Permit MA-11-04, was authorized. 
Kilakila also contends the contested case hearing was
 
procedurally flawed because it was "riddled with procedural
 irregularities, including political pressure, ex parte
 communication, the dual role of a deputy attorney general, and
 the arbitrary omission of key findings of the hearing officer."
 Citing Wai
ahole, Kilakila contends political pressure -­
purportedly from Senator Inouye's office pressuring the Haleakal a
 
National Park superintendent to mute objections to the Solar
 
37
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Telescope, and Senator Inouye and Governor Abercrombie's
 
respective offices pressuring Jacobson to recommend approving the
 CDUA -- violated its procedural due process rights. This
 contention is without merit.
 
HAR § 13-1-37 provides:
 
§13-1-37 Ex parte (single party) communications.
 
(a) No party or person petitioning to be a party in a
contested case, nor the party's [sic] or such person's [sic]
to a proceeding before the [Board] nor their employees,
representatives or agents shall make an unauthorized ex
parte communication either oral or written concerning the
contested case to the presiding officer or any member of the
[Board] who will be a participant in the decision-making
process.
 
(b) The following classes of ex parte communications
are permitted:
 
(1)	 Those which relate solely to matters which
a board member is authorized by the
[Board] to dispose of on [sic] ex parte
basis.
 
(2)	 Requests for information with respect to
the procedural status of a proceeding.
 
(3)	 Those which all parties to the proceeding
agree or which the board has formally
ruled may be made on an ex parte basis.
 
The Board discharged Jacobson on March 29, 2012 after
 
he sent an impermissible ex parte communication to counsel for
 
the University regarding alleged pressure placed upon him to
 render a decision. The Board found the totality of the
 circumstances gave rise to a question regarding Jacobson's
 impartiality. The Board struck Jacobson's filings and appointed
 a new hearings officer, Ishida. Kilakila does not contend Ishida
 was subject to any ex parte communication or political pressure. 
Consequently, any impropriety was cured when the Board discharged
 Jacobson and appointed Ishida. See generally Wai
ahole (concern
 
regarding adjudicator impartiality focuses on the relation
 between the communications and the decision-making process). 
Kilakila contends the Board erred by refusing to
 
disqualify Chow as counsel for the tribunal because she had a
 conflict of interest, having represented the Board in circuit
 court proceedings regarding Kilakila's challenge of the first
 permit, Permit MA-3542. Kilakila's citation to White, 54 Haw. at
 
38
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
16, 501 P.2d at 363 is unavailing. White involved a deputy
 
attorney general who represented a party, a superintendent, in an
 
adversarial hearing against a teacher, and then represented the
 tribunal in related hearings before the Board of Education. 
Id
 
at 11-12, 501 P.2d at 360-61. Here, Chow did not represent a
 party and has only represented the Board.
IV. CONCLUSION

 
Accordingly, the "Final Judgment" entered August 20,
2013, and the "Order Affirming the Board of Land and Natural
 Resources' Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision and
 Order in DLNR File No. MA-11-04" entered July 11, 2013, both
 entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit are affirmed.
 

 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, October 17, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
David Kimo Frankel 
Sharla Ann Manley(Native Hawaiian LegalCorporation) forAppellant-Appellant Kilakila 
'O 
Haleakal a. Presiding Judge
Darolyn H. Lendio,University General Counsel,Bruce Y. Matsui (Office of the General Counsel)and Lisa Woods MungerLisa A. Bail Adam K. Robinson (Goodsill Anderson Quinn &Stifel) forAppellee-Appellee University ofHawai
'i. Associate Judge
Acting Associate Judge
William J. Wynhoff
Linda L.W. Chow
 Deputy Attorneys General for
Appellee-Appellee
Board of Land and Natural
 Resources, William Aila, in his
capacity as the Chairperson of
the Board of Land and Natural
 Resources; and Department of
Land and Natural Resources.
 
39

 