NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-14-0000500 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
SPAR MARKETING SERVICES, INC., Appellant-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI# I, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS, EMPLOYMENT SECURITY APPEALS REFEREES' OFFICE,
and LORENE L. KANE, Appellees-Appellees 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0121) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, C.J., and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.) 
In this secondary appeal, Appellant-Appellant Spar 
Marketing Services, Inc. ("Spar"), appeals from the January 28, 
2014 "Decision on Spar Marketing Services, Inc.'s Appeal from the Decision of the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations, Employment Security and Appeals Referee" ("January 28, 2014 Decision") and the related May 6, 2014 Final Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
/ ("Circuit Court") in 
favor of Appellee-Appellee State of Hawai# i, Department of Labor 
and Industrial Relations, Employment Security and Appeals Referee's Office ("DLIR"), regarding Appellee-Appellee Lorene L. Kane's claim for unemployment benefits.
/  21
On appeal, Spar contends that DLIR Decision: 1203565 
and the January 28, 2014 Decision are (1) clearly erroneous in 
1/ The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided. 
2/ The underlying decision of the DLIR to which the January 28, 2014
Decision refers was issued on January 23, 2013 as Decision: 1203565 ("DLIR
Decision: 1203565").  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
view of substantial evidence in the record as a whole; (2) 
affected by errors of law; and (3) "arbitrary, capricious or characterized by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion because they wholly ignore and fail to account for all of the reliable, probative and substantial record evidence . . . ."
3/ 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Spar's points of error as follows and affirm. 
Spar asserts that the Circuit Court clearly erred 
because its decision was "not based upon any reliable, probative 
and substantial evidence in the record, nor do they provide any 
rationale for ignoring all of the evidence supportive of 
independent contractor status." That argument is not reflective of the facts in the record. 
Although Spar's agreement with Kane states that there 
is no employer/employee relationship, Kane was a self-employed contractor, Kane could work for other merchandising companies, and that Spar would not "restrict or supervise the timing, method, manner or means of [Kane's] performance and completion of any [p]roject", further evidence supports the DLIR's determination to the contrary. The DLIR was not clearly erroneous in determining that the evidence showed that Spar exercised general control over Kane's services. For instance, Spar decided Kane's compensation; and required Kane to conform to a specified standard of behavior while on the job, that Kane report the work performed on forms provided by Spar, wear a Spar merchandising badge while on the job, and sign in and out of a vendor log upon arrival and departure from a job site. 
3/ Although Spar asserts three separate points of error in its
opening brief, it addresses all three points of error under the same argument,
and asks this court to review that argument under different standards ofreview. The standard of review of a secondary appeal, however, is neitherclear error nor abuse of discretion. Rather, the standard is whether thecircuit court was right or wrong in its decision, applying the standards setforth in Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") section 91-14(g) to the agency's
decision. Flores v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res. , 143 Hawai #i 114, 120, 424 P.3d
469, 475 (2018). 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Furthermore, each month, Kane received a written plan of action 
from Spar, giving step-by-step instructions for each location that Kane would service. Kane also made monthly conference calls with other Spar merchandisers and Spar's district manager, and upon completing an assignment was expected to report back to Spar via a website where she could post pictures to verify her work. 
The January 28, 2014 Decision affirmed DLIR Decision: 
1203565, and held that: 
there are some factors in considering whether that
relationship was under Chapter 383, one of employment, orexempt as . . . an independent contractor as provided in HRSsection 383-6 that would favor Spar Marketing's contention.However, it appears that the [r]eferee resolved disputedissues of fact in favor of Kane being an employee[,] and therecord supports [that] conclusion on review. Despite someevidence supporting Spar Marketing's position, there issubstantial evidence to support the referee's decisionand[,] further[,] that the decision was not clearlyerroneous. 
Our recent decision in Spar Marketing Servs., Inc. v. State of 
Hawai# i, No. CAAP-13-0001140, 2019 WL 912096 (Haw. Ct. App. 
Feb. 22, 2019) (resolving the same legal issue as addressed in 
this case with regard to a different claimant, but with similar facts) guides our decision here.
/ The Circuit Court did not err 
when it affirmed the DLIR's decision that Kane's services constituted covered employment under HRS chapter 383 relating to unemployment benefits, that there was substantial evidence to support the DLIR's decision, and that it was not clearly 4
4/ Other jurisdictions have also determined that Spar exerts control,
or has the right to control its merchandisers: 
Spar Marketing Serv., Inc. v. Unemployment Ins. Appeal Bd. , CA.
No. K11A-03-003 WLW, 2012 WL 1414097, *3 (Del. Super. Ct. Feb. 28, 2012)
(determining that the Board finding several provisions, like a professionalismrequirement, a requirement to maintain worker's compensation and generalliability insurance, and certain invoicing procedures, to be indicative ofcontrol, and thus substantial evidence that Spar exercised control over
merchandiser); Spar Marketing Serv., Inc. v. Emp't Dep't , 222 P.3d 1140 (Or.
Ct. App. 2009) (affirming without opinion the decision of the administrative
law judge that Spar failed to meet its burden to prove that merchandisers were
not employees); contra Spar Marketing Serv. Inc., v. N.J. Dep't of Labor and
Workforce Dev. , 2013 WL 890071, *3 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. Mar. 12, 2013)
(determining that the first two of three prongs of the statutory test were
satisfied by Spar, but ultimately concluding that Spar failed to prove thatmerchandisers were customarily engaged in an independently established trade,occupation, profession or business, and affirming the agency's determinationthat merchandisers that worked for Spar were employees). 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
erroneous.5/ See Haw. Rev. Stat. ยง 383-6 (1993). 
The Circuit Court applied the correct standard and came 
to the correct conclusion under the circumstances of this case. 
Therefore, the January 28, 2014 Decision and the May 6, 2014 Final Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 13, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
John S. Mackey
(Torkildson, Katz, Moore,Hetherington & Harris)and Thomas J. Vollbrecht, pro hac vice(Fabyanske, Westra, Hart &Thomson, P.A.)for Appellant-Appellant. Chief Judge
Associate JudgeAssociate Judge 
Frances E.H. Lum and 
Li-Ann Yamashiro,Deputy Attorneys General,State of Hawai# i 
for Appellee-AppelleeState of Hawai
#i, Department
of Labor and Industrial Relations, Employment Securityand Appeals Referees' Office 
5/ Consequently, we need not address the second or third exemption
requirements under HRS section 383-6. 
4 