   
     
  
        
      
    
        
          
      
     
      
  NOT  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST'S  HAWAI I  REPORTS  AND   PACIFIC  REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000388 23-JUL-2026 07:56 AM Dkt. 58 SO 
NO.  CAAP-24-0000388 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
CALVIN  ELIZARES,  Petitioner-Appellant,  v. 
STATE  OF  HAWAI I,  Respondent-Appellee  
APPEAL FROM THE
 CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2CPN-23-0000005) 
SUMMARY  DISPOSITION  ORDER  
(By: Nakasone, Chief
 Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant  Calvin  Elizares   (Elizares )  appeals  
from  the  May  7,  2024  Findings  of  Fact,  Conclusions  of  Law  and 
Order  Denying  Petition  to  Vacate,  Set  Aside,  or  Correct  Judgment 
or  to  Release  Petitioner  From  Custody  (Order  Denying  Rule  40 
Petition )  entered  against  him  by  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  Second 
Circuit  (Circuit  Court).  At  the  conclusion  of  a  jury  trial, 
Elizares  was  convicted  of,  inter  alia,  Attempted  Murder  in  the 
First  Degree  (Attempted  Murder). 2 1 
1 The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided. 
2 HRS § 705-500 (1993) states: 
§ 705-500 Criminal attempt. (1) A person is 
guilty of an attempt to commit a crime if the person: 
(a) Intentionally engages in conduct which would 
constitute the crime if the attendant 
circumstances were as the person believes them 
to be; or 
(continued...)          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
      
          
          
          
        
       
        
         
        
     
      
       
       
       
   
          
           
         
      
        
       
          
   
        
        
    
     
        
      
      
         
   
         
       
       
 
      
         
        
  Although not properly identified as such, Elizares 
appears to raise a single point of error on appeal, contending 
that the Circuit Court erred in denying his April 29, 2023 
Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release 
Petitioner From Custody (Rule 40 Petition ) because he received 
ineffective assistance of counsel at trial. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve 
Elizares's assertion of error as follows: 
2(...continued) 
(b) Intentionally engages in conduct which, under 
the circumstances as the person believes them to 
be, constitutes a substantial step in a course 
of conduct intended to culminate in the person's 
commission of the crime. 
(2) When causing a particular result is an element of 
the crime, a person is guilty of an attempt to commit the 
crime if, acting with the state of mind required to 
establish liability with respect to the attendant 
circumstances specified in the definition of the crime, the 
person intentionally engages in conduct which is a 
substantial step in a course of conduct intended or known to 
cause such a result. 
(3) Conduct shall not be considered a substantial 
step under this section unless it is strongly corroborative 
of the defendant's criminal intent. 
HRS § 707-701 (1993) states: 
§  707- 701   Murder  in  the  first  degree.   (1)   A  person 
commits  the  offense  of  murder  in  the  first  degree  if  the 
person  intentionally  or  knowingly  causes  the  death  of: 
(a)
 More than one person in the same or separate 
incident; 
(b) A peace officer, judge, or prosecutor arising 
out of the performance of official duties; 
(c) A person known by the defendant to be a witness 
in a criminal prosecution; 
(d) A person by a hired killer, in which event both 
the person hired and the person responsible for 
hiring the killer shall be punished under this 
section; or 
(e) A person while the defendant was imprisoned. 
(2) Murder in the first degree is a felony for which 
the defendant shall be sentenced to imprisonment as provided 
in section 706-656. 
2          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
       
         
         
          
         
          
            
         
           
      
         
        
          
        
          
           
          
       
         
          
         
         
             
         
          
         
        Elizares argues that his trial counsel was ineffective 
with respect to his defense to the Attempted Murder charge 
because, in closing argument, trial counsel did not argue that 
the State's evidence did not show that Elizares had the requisite 
mens rea for Attempted Murder. Elizares relatedly argues that, 
even though Elizares himself testified he "never even had a gun 
. . ., Defense counsel should have argued that even though this 
[testimony] is true, the State's evidence, even if believed by 
the jury, did not show the requisite intent to kill." 
To establish ineffective assistance of counsel in 
Hawai i, a defendant  must show "1) that there were specific 
errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, 
or diligence" and "2) that such errors or omissions resulted in 
either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially 
meritorious defense." State v. Yuen, 154 Hawai i  434, 444,  555 
P.3d 121, 131 (2024). To satisfy the second prong, the defendant 
need only show a possible, rather than probable, impairment of a 
potentially meritorious defense. Id. However, "Counsel's 
assistance need not be errorless nor will it be judged 
ineffective solely by hindsight." State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 
348, 615 P.2d 101, 104 (1980). "Defense counsel's tactical 
decisions at trial generally will not be questioned by a 
reviewing court." Id. at 352, 615 P.2d at 106; see also State v. 
Adviento , 132 Hawai i 123, 150,  319 P.3d 1131, 1158 (2014) 
(observing that, even where trial court has a duty to instruct 
the jury on a potential defense, defense counsel has discretion 
to determine whether to argue the defense during closing). 
3          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
        
          
       
            
        
              
        
          
            
            
           
         
             
         
        
            
    
        
          
           
         
           
           
         
            
         
     
          As recounted in the unchallenged findings of fact set 
forth in the Order Denying Rule 40 Petition, the two complaining 
witnesses testified, inter alia, that Elizares confronted them 
with a hand gun and a shot gun, accused them of betraying him, 
ordered them restrained, struck the female witness, and directed 
someone to put them in the trunk of a car and take them out to 
the pineapple fields. The female complaining witness testified, 
inter alia, that Elizares pointed the weapons at them, told them 
they were going to die, and this was their last day on earth, 
prior to their being tied up with their mouths taped shut and put 
in the trunk from which they later escaped. The male complaining 
witness testified, inter alia, that Elizares "sort of" told him 
he was going to die that night. After they were able to escape 
from the trunk of the moving vehicle and the complaining 
witnesses ran in different directions, Elizares found the male 
and took him back to the shack where the incident began. They 
did not catch the female. 
Elizares testified at trial that Brian Wong (Wong) was 
the one who was "ballistic" and "crazy" during the incident and 
had been awake smoking crystal meth for days. He testified that 
it was Wong who lifted a pistol, ordered the complaining 
witnesses to be tied and taped, and struck the female. Elizares 
stated that as Wong was about to drive away with the complaining 
witnesses in the trunk, Elizares took his pistol away, emptied 
it, placed it under the passenger, and did not know if Wong was 
going to kill them or just trying to scare them. 
Consistent with Elizares's testimony, trial counsel 
argued that the evidence showed it was Wong who was responsible 
4          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
            
         
        
        
          
       
         
          
         
         
         
            
          
        
      
        
        
          
         
          
      
       
        
         
   for the incident, that he was "a beast," and "the center of drug 
trafficking" in the community. Counsel argued at length that 
neither complaining witness should be believed due to the 
female's recent drug use, other involvement with drugs, the 
male's lies to the police, their motivations to protect Wong, and 
attacked their credibility noting, inter alia, their problematic 
backgrounds. The defense strategy was clearly to attack the 
credibility of the other witnesses and to urge the jury to 
believe Elizares's testimony. As Elizares testified that it was 
Wong, not him, that pulled a gun, scolded the complaining 
witnesses, struck one, ordered them bound and gagged and thrown 
in the trunk to be taken out to the pineapple fields, it was 
clearly a tactical decision not to then argue, even if you 
believe the complaining witnesses instead, the evidence does not 
demonstrate the requisite intent to kill them. 
We conclude that trial counsel was not ineffective for 
not making a contradictory argument that would have undermined 
Elizares's main defense theory as well as his credibility. We 
will not second guess counsel's strategic choice to present a 
single, cohesive argument to the jury. Viewed as a whole, 
counsel's closing argument was consistent with Elizares's 
testimony and the overarching defense presented throughout the 
trial. We cannot conclude that counsel rendered ineffective 
assistance by declining to advance an argument premised on facts 
the defense otherwise denied. 
5
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
   
   For  these  reasons,  the  Circuit  Court's  May  7,  2024 
Order  Denying  Rule  40  Petition  is  affirmed. 
DATED:
 Honolulu, Hawai i, July  23, 2026. 
On  the  briefs: 
Steven  Slavitt, 
for  Petitioner-Appellant 
Gerald  K.  Enriques, 
Deputy  Prosecuting  Attorney, 
County  of  Maui, 
for  Respondent-Appellee /s/  Karen  T.  Nakasone 
Chief  Judge 
/s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Associate  Judge 
/s/  Keith  K.  Hiraoka 
Associate  Judge 
6
 