                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000050
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
COUNTY OF HAWAI 'I, a municipal corporation of the
State of Hawai 'i, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
LORNE R. ITO, LYRA R. KELIIPAAKAUA, RAGS PRIVATE AUTO
CLUB, LLC, DOE AGENCIES 1-10, and DOE DEFENDANTS 1-100,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(NORTH AND SOUTH KONA DIVISION)

(CIVIL NO. 3RC11-1-304K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant County of Hawaii (County) appeals
 
from the Order Dismissing Complaint for Lack of Jurisdiction
 
Pursuant to HRS § 604-5, which was entered on December 29, 2011,
 by the District Court of the Third Circuit, North and South Kona
 Division (District Court)
1
 
On appeal, the County contends that the District Court
 
erred when it dismissed this case, wherein the County sought to
 interplead a dispute concerning who was entitled to ownership
 and/or possession of an automobile, the value of which was within
 the jurisdictional limits of the district courts, as provided in
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo, Jr. presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 604-5 .2 In the County's complaint, in addition to
 
requesting that the defendants "be ordered and commanded to
 
interplead and settle among themselves their rights and claims"
 to the automobile, the County, in essence, sought an order
 broadly immunizing the County from any liability for its actions
 with respect to the seizure and continued possession of the car. 
After carefully reviewing the record and the brief
submitted by the County (no other briefs having been filed), and
 analyzing the law relevant to the arguments, we resolve the
 County's point of error as follows:
 

 
An interpleader is:
 
A suit to determine a right to property held by a
usu[ally] disinterested third party (called a stakeholder)
who is in doubt about the ownership and who therefore
deposits the property with the court to permit interested
parties to litigate ownership.
 
B 'LACKS LAW DICTIONARY 943  th
(10  ed. 2014).
It has been referred to as "a remedial joinder device 
that serves as a useful adjunct to the provision for the
 

2
 HRS § 604-5 (Supp. 2013) provided, in relevant part:
 
HRS § 604-5 Civil jurisdiction.  (a) Except as
otherwise provided, the district courts shall have
jurisdiction in all civil actions where the debt, amount,
damages, or value of the property claimed does not exceed
$25,000, except in civil actions involving summary
possession or ejectment, in which case the district court
shall have jurisdiction over any counterclaim otherwise
properly brought by any defendant in the action if the
counterclaim arises out of and refers to the land or
 premises the possession of which is being sought, regardless
of the value of the debt, amount, damages, or property claim
contained in the counterclaim. Attorney's commissions or
fees, including those stipulated in any note or contract
sued on, interest, and costs, shall not be included in
computing the jurisdictional amount. Subject to subsections
(b) and (c), jurisdiction under this subsection shall be
exclusive when the amount in controversy, so computed, does
not exceed $10,000. The district courts shall also have
original jurisdiction of suits for specific performance when
the fair market value of such specific performance does not
exceed $20,000 and original jurisdiction to issue injunctive
relief in residential landlord-tenant cases under chapter
521.
 
Effective April 17, 2014, the statute was amended to increase the
jurisdictional amount from $25,000 to $40,000. 2014 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 24,
§1.
 
2
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
permissive joinder of parties[.]" W RIGHT, MILLER & KANE FEDERAL
 
PRACTICE & PROCEDURE: CIVIL 3d § 1702 (2001). 
The principle of interpleader is that, where two
persons are engaged in a dispute, and that which is to be
the fruit of the dispute is in the hands of a third party,
who is willing to give it up according to the result of the
dispute, then, that third person is not obliged to be at the
expense and risk of defending an action; but, on giving up
the thing, he is to be relieved, and the Court directs that
the persons between whom the dispute really exists shall
fight it out at their own expense.
 
Id. (citation and ellipses omitted).
 
The interpleader "prevents the stakeholder from being
 
obliged to determine at his peril which claimant has a better
 
claim, and, when the stakeholder has no interest in the
 [property], forces the claimants to contest what essentially is a
 controversy between them without embroiling the stakeholder in
 the litigation over the merits of the respective claims." Id.
 
(citations omitted). Thus, in the first instance, the analysis
 in this case must be to determine whether the District Court has
 jurisdiction over a civil action between various persons claiming
 a right to the subject property, i.e., the automobile. We
 conclude that it does.
 
HRS § 604-5 provides, inter alia, that the district
 
courts have jurisdiction in all civil actions where the value of
 the property claimed does not exceed the jurisdiction. See n.2. 
Here, it appears undisputed that the value of the claimed
 property, i.e., the automobile is within the jurisdictional
 amount. Therefore, the District Court has jurisdiction to enter
 an order and judgment awarding the possession and/or ownership of
 the automobile to one of the claimants joined by the County's
 interpleader. 
However, the District Court's concern regarding its
 
authority to grant the broader relief sought by the County was
 not misplaced. First, we note that, pursuant to HRS § 632-1
 (1993), strictly declaratory relief may not be obtained in any
 district court. In addition, while interpleading funds or
 property may protect a stakeholder from liability for turning
 over such funds or property to a claimant who prevails in the
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interpleader action, the County cites no authority for the
 
proposition that the initiation of an interpleader action also
 immunizes the stakeholder from a proceeding alleging improper
 seizure, conversion, or other wrongful acquisition of the subject
 funds or property; and we find none. Nevertheless, these issues
 pertain to the nature of the relief available to the County,
 rather than the question of whether the District has jurisdiction
 over this interpleader action. See Avco Corp. v. Aero Lodge No.
 
735, Int'l Ass'n of Machiists & Aerospace Workers, 390 U.S. 557,
 561 (1968) ("The nature of the relief available after
 jurisdiction attaches is, of course, different from the question
 whether there is jurisdiction to adjudicate the controversy."). 
Therefore, we conclude that the District Court erred in
 dismissing the case in its entirety.
 
Accordingly, the District Court's December 29, 2011
 
Order Dismissing Complaint for Lack of Jurisdiction Pursuant to
 HRS § 604-5 is vacated, and this case is remanded to the District
 Court for further proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 21, 2014. 
On the brief: 
Kimberly K. Angay
Deputy Corporation Counselfor Plaintiff-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge

 
4
 