 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000724 06-JUN-2025 07:49 AM Dkt. 59 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000724  
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I   
GEORGE H. WRIGHT, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
RICHARD D. GRONNA, as Personal Representative of  
THE ESTATE OF ROBERT MCCORMICK BROWNE,  
Defendant/Cross-claim Defendant-Appellee,  
TRUSTEES OF THE ESTATE OF BERNICE PAUAHI BISHOP  
dba KAMEHAMEHA SCHOOLS, Defendants/Cross-claimants/  
Third-Party Plaintiffs/Cross-claim Defendants-Appellants,  
ST. FRANCIS MEDICAL CENTER, a Hawaii corporation, 
Defendant/Cross-claim Defendant/Cross-claimant-Appellee,  
ST. FRANCIS HEALTHCARE SYSTEM OF HAWAII, a Hawaii corporation, 
Defendant/Third-Party Defendant-Appellee,  
and  
DOES 1-10, JOHN DOES 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, DOE 
PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, and DOE NON-PROFIT ENTITIES 1-10, 
Defendants/Cross-claim Defendants/Third-Party Defendants  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 1CCV-20-0000667)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.)  
This appeal arises out of the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit's  (circuit court)  dismissal of Defendants/Cross-
claimants/Third-Party Plaintiffs/Cross-claim Defendants-1 
1 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.   
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
    
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellants Trustees of the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop, dba 
Kamehameha Schools ' (Kamehameha Schools ) cross-claims and third -
party claims as to Plaintiff -Appellee George H. Wright ( Wright), 
against Defendant/Cross -claim Defendant/Cross -claimant-Appellee 
St. Francis Medical Center , and Defendant/ Third-Party Defendant -
Appellee St. Francis Healthcare System of Hawaii.2 The circuit 
court dismissed the cross -claims and third -party claims after 
certifying a good faith settlement between Wright and St. 
Francis in 1CCV -20-0000667. 
Kamehameha Schools appealed from two orders related to 
certifying the good faith of the settlement : (1) the "Order 
Granting Defendant St. Francis Medical Center's Petition for 
Determination of Good Faith Settlement" (Good Faith Order ), 
filed on November 14, 2022 ; and (2) the "Order Granting 
Defendant/Third -Party Defendant St. Francis Healthcare System of 
Hawaii's Substantive Joinder to Defendant St. Francis Medical 
Center's Petition for Determination of Good Faith Settlement, 
Filed August 3, 2022, Filed on August 12, 2022 [Dkt. 241]" 
(Joinder Order ), filed on October 24, 2022. 
2 St. Francis Medical Center and St. Francis Healthcare System of 
Hawaii are separate entities, and they are represented by separate counsel in 
this litigation. They are referenced individually as St. Francis Medical 
Center and St. Francis Healthcare System , and collectively as St. Francis in 
this Summary Disposition Order. 
2   
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
      
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. BACKGROUND 
In 2020, Wright  filed a Complaint  against  
Defendant/Cross-claim Defendant-Appellee Richard D. Gronna, as 
Personal Representative of the Estate  of Robert McCormick Browne 
(Estate of Dr. Browne ),  Kamehameha Schools,  and St. Francis 
Medical Center,  pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) §  657-
1.8 (2016  & Supp. 2018). Wright  identified Dr. Browne,  formerly 
employed as Chief of Psychiatry at St. Francis  Medical Center, 
as having sexually abused him  when he  was a  student at 
Kamehameha Schools. HRS § 657-1.8 permits certain actions "for recovery of damages based on physical, psychological, or other 
injury or condition suffered by a minor arising from the sexual 
abuse of the minor by any person" that would otherwise be time-
barred.  43
Wright's Complaint and Amended Complaint asserted 
claims of 1) gross professional medical negligence , 2) sexual 
assault and battery, 3) breach of fiduciary duty, 4) gross 
negligence, 5) intentional infliction of emotional distress, 6) 
grossly negligent infliction of emotional distress, and 7) 
grossly negligent or reckless referral, selection, training, 
3 Wright subsequently filed a First Amended Complaint in March 2022 
to include St. Francis Healthcare System as a Defendant , and to allege claims 
of intentional fraudulent transfer, constructive fraudulent transfer, and 
piercing the corporate veil against St. Francis. 
4 Dr. Browne is deceased, and the Estate of Dr. Browne is a nominal 
appellee in this appeal. 
3   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
    
 
  
  
  
  
 
     
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
retention, and/or supervision of Dr. Browne against Kamehameha 
Schools. 
Kamehameha Schools filed cross -claims5 against St. 
Francis Medical Center and the Estate of Dr. Browne, and a 
third-party complaint against St. Francis Healthcare System . 
Wright entered into a settlement agreement with 
St. Francis in July 2022 . In August 2022, St. Francis Medical 
Center filed a Petition for Determination of Good Faith 
Settlement ( Petition ). St. Francis Healthcare System joined 
St. Francis Medical Center's Petition , requesting that the 
circuit court " find and order that the settlement was made and 
entered into in good faith" and dismiss " any and all claims 
against the settling parties by any joint tortfeasors or co -
obligors ." Kamehameha Schools opposed the Petition to the 
extent it sought dismissal of the cross -claims and third -party 
claims against St. Francis. Kamehameha Schools did not obje ct 
to a finding that the settlement was made in good faith. 
The circuit court granted the Petition and St. Francis 
Healthcare Systems ' joinder, entering its Joinder Order in 
October 2022 and its Good Faith Order in November 2022. 
5 Kamehameha Schools filed its initial cross -claims on June 15, 
2020. The cross -claims were subsequently amended on July 31, 2020 to include 
more extensive factual allegations an d allege addition al claims of 
intentional fraudulent transfer, constructive fraudulent transfer, and 
piercing the corporate veil against St. Francis Medical Center. 
4   
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
       
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kamehameha Schools timely appealed both orders, and the appeal 
was docketed as CAAP -22-0000724.6 
II. POINT OF ERROR 
Kamehameha Schools raises a single point of error on 
appeal, contending that the circuit court erred in concluding 
that the good faith settlement bars all of Kamehameha Schools' 
cross-claims and third -party claims under HRS § 663 -15.5 (2016). 
We review the circuit court's conclusions of law de 
novo, under the right/wrong standard. State v. Hoshijo ex rel. 
White, 102 Hawaiʻi 307, 316, 76 P.3d 550, 559 (2003). Upon 
careful review of the record and relevant legal authorities, and 
having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the 
issues raised by the parties, we resolve Kamehameha Schools' 
contention as follows. 
HRS § 663 -15.5, entitled "Release; joint tortfeasors; 
co-obligors; good faith settlement" provides, in pertinent part, 
(d) A determination by the court that a settlement 
was made in good faith shall: 
(1) Bar any other joint tortfeasor . . . from any 
further claims against the settling tortfeasor 
. . . except those based on a written indemnity 
agreement; and 
(2) Result in a dismissal of all cross -claims filed 
against the settling joint tortfeasor . . . 
except those based on a written indemnity 
agreement. 
6 On August 10, 2023, this court filed an Order for Temporary 
Remand, instructing the circuit court to amend the Good Faith Order and 
Joinder Order to reflect "a determination of good faith as to the settlement 
by and between Wright , [St. Francis Medical Center], and [St. Francis 
Healthcare System], " or to explain why that was "not possible or appropriate 
to do so. " On remand, the circuit court entered an Amended Good Faith Order 
and Amended Joinder Order, reflecting that the settlement was made in good 
faith between Wright and both St. Francis entities. 
5   
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
St. Francis Medical Center argues that the "plain 
language of the statute reflects the legislative intent to 
preclude not only contribution claims, but also 'any' other 
claims that might seek recovery against the settling party for 
the plaintiff's harm, wh ether such claims are styled as seeking 
'indemnity,' [']subrogation,' 'contribution,' or anything else." 
The argument is contrary to the language of the statute and the 
legislative history. 
HRS § 663 -15.5 (Supp. 2001) originally provided: 
(d) A determination by the court that a settlement was 
made in good faith shall bar any other joint tortfeasor 
. . . from any further claims against the settling 
tortfeasor . . . for equitable comparative contribution, or 
partial or comparative indemnity, based on comparative 
negligence or comparative fault . 
(Emphasis added.) For purposes of the statute, joint 
tortfeasors are "persons jointly or severally liable in tort for 
the same injury to person or property." HRS § 663-11 (2016). 
The claim bar applied only to claims for joint tortfeasor 
indemnity or contribution. 
The legislature amended the statute in 2003. The 
phrase emphasized above was deleted and the words "except those 
based on a written indemnity agreement" were added. 
Subparagraph (2) was also added. 2003 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 146, 
§ 1 at 344. The claim bar language substitution did not change 
its substance because a written indemnity agreement is not an 
equitable remedy. The House Judiciary Committee reported "this 
6   
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
measure is primarily a housekeeping measure." H. Stand. Comm. 
Rep. No. 712, in 2003 House Journal, at 1378. The Senate 
Judiciary and Hawaiian Affairs Committee similarly reported that 
the "purpose of this measure is to make clarifying and 
housekeeping amendments." S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1205, in 
2003 Senate Journal, at 1538. The Conference Committee reported 
the "purpose of this measure is to make clarifying and 
housekeeping amendments" to "[m]ake technical, nonsubstantive 
amendments for clarity and c onsistency in style and language." 
Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 9, in 2003 House Journal, at 1703, 2003 
Senate Journal, at 949. Thus, the claim bar still applie s only 
to claims for joint tortfeasor indemnity or contribution. 
Contrary to Kamehameha Schools' contention, the 
circuit court did not authorize a "sweeping dismissal" of all 
claims – including those grounded on independent duties owed to 
Kamehameha Schools – against St. Francis. The circuit court's 
Amended Good Faith Order stated, 
IT IS HEREBY, ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that St. 
Francis Medical Center 's Petition for Determination of Good 
Faith Settlement, filed August 3, 2022, is hereby GRANTED 
as follows: 
 . . . . 
2. The cross -claims against St. Francis Medical 
Center are here by [sic] dismissed pursuant to HRS [§] 663-
15.5(d)(2). 
3. St. Francis Medical Center is discharged from all 
liability for contribution to any other joint tortfeasor or 
co-obligor. 
4. Pursuant to HRS § 663 -15.5(d)(1), this Order bars 
any other joint tortfeasor or co -obligor from bringing any 
7   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
further claims against St. Francis Medical Center in 
connection with this litigation, except those based upon a 
written indemnity agreement. 
The circuit court's Amended Joinder Order stated, with regard to 
the third-party complaint against St. Francis Healthcare System, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that: 
 . . . . 
2. Defendant/Third -Party Defendant Healthcare 
System's Substantive Joinder to Defendant St. Francis 
Medical Center’s Petition for Determination of Good Faith 
Settlement, Filed August 3, 2022, filed on August 12, 2022, 
is GRANTED as to all cross -claims and third -party claims 
pursuant to [HRS §] 663-15.5(d)(2). 
As this court recently recognized in Abad v. Griffith , 
Reading all parts of HRS § 663 -15.5 together, we 
conclude the trial court's approval of a good faith 
settlement under HRS § 663 -15.5(d)(2) requires dismissal of 
only those crossclaims against a settling joint tortfeasor 
raised in the capacity of a joint tortfeasor, i.e ., those 
seeking contribution or indemnity (directly or indirectly) 
for the injury (to the complainant) that is the subject of 
the good faith settlement.  
[W]e examine, for this limited purpose, the nature of 
the [appellants'] claims against the [settling joint 
tortfeasors],  i.e., to consider whether they seek 
contribution or indemnity for the original injury to [appellees], as opposed to relief for alleged direct injuries to the [appellants].  
Abad v. Griffith , Nos. CAAP -21-0000120, CAAP -23-0000015, 2024 WL 
5088457, at *5 (Haw. App. Dec. 12, 2024) (SDO). 
In Abad, this court examined the nature of the 
appellants' claims, including the nature of the relief 
requested, and concluded that the appellants made "separate, 
unqualified requests for attorneys' fees and costs that are not 
tied to the [appellants'] liability to the [appellees]."   Id.  
Here, Kamehameha Schools' cross-claims and third-party claims, 
8   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
including its breach of contract and Uyemura v. Wick7 claims, 
arose out of the "original injury" to Wright caused by Dr. 
Browne's abuse, and are "directly or indirectly" in the nature 
of contribution and indemnity claims. 
The circuit court's dismissal "as to all cross -claims 
and third -party claims " is therefore consistent with the 
underlying purpose of HRS § 663-15.5 of protecting settling 
tortfeasors from contribution claims brought by nonsettling 
alleged joint tortfeasors. 
III. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the circuit court's Good 
Faith Order and Joinder Order are  affirmed.  
DATED Honolulu, Hawai ʻi, June 6, 2025. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka  
 Presiding Judge  
Paul Alston and   
Claire Wong Black,  /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
for Defendants/Cross- Associate Judge  
claimants/Third-Party  Plaintiffs/Cross-claim /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  Defendants-Appellants.  Associate Judge   
Andrew J. Lautenbach,  
for Defendant/Cross-claim Defendant/Cross-claimant-
Appellee.  
 
David J. Minkin,  
for Defendant/Third-Party 
Defendant-Appellee.  
7 Uyemura v. Wick , 57 Haw. 102, 551 P.2d 171 (1976). 
9 