NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000045 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
ETHAN G.K. NEVES, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
H
ONOLULU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DTC-18-505607) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Ethan G.K. Neves (
Neves) appeals 
from the Judgment filed December 30, 2019 (Judgment
), in the 
District Court of the First Circuit (District Court)  convicting 
Neves of driving with a revoked, suspended or otherwise 
restricted motor vehicle license pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-62(a)(1), (2) and (c)(1).
   21
1 The Honorable James Kawashima presided. 
2 HRS § 291E-62 (Supp. 2018) provides in part: 
(a) No person whose license and privilege to operate a
vehicle have been revoked, suspended, or otherwise
restricted . . . shall operate or assume actual physicalcontrol of any vehicle: 
(1) In violation of any restrictions placed on theperson's license; 
(continued...) 2(...continued) NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Neves raises four points of error: (1) the 
District Court failed to engage in a sufficient Tachibana 
colloquy with Neves; (2) the Tachibana colloquy error was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt; (3) the District Court improperly admitted into evidence Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai#i's (State) Exhibit 7 - the Notice of Administrative 
Revocation (
NOAR); and (4) there was insufficient evidence to 
establish Neves' guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issued raised by the parties, we affirm. 
Points of error (1) and (2):  During a bench trial, the 
District Court heard from two witnesses, considered seven exhibits, and conducted the following colloquy under Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai# i 226, 237, 900 P.2d 1293, 1304 (1995): 
THE COURT: Okay. You can remain seated, Mr. Neves --
well, actually, no. You do have to rise, Mr. Neves. I have 
to go through the rights to testify again. 
(2) While the person's license or privilege tooperate a vehicle remains suspended or revoked; 
. . . . 
(c) Any person convicted of violating this section shall
be sentenced as follows without possibility of probation orsuspension of sentence: 
(1) For a first offense, or any offense not precededwithin a five-year period by conviction for anoffense under this section . . .: 
(A) A term of imprisonment of not less than
three consecutive days but not more thanthirty days; 
(B) A fine of not less than $250 but not more than $1,000; 
(C) Revocation of license and privilege tooperate a vehicle for an additional year;and 
(D) Loss of the privilege to operate a vehicleequipped with an ignition interlockdevice, if applicable[.] 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
So you understand what your lawyer said, defense
rests? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes. 
THE COURT: And just to be safe, in your words, what
does that mean? 
THE DEFENDANT: That we are done arguing. THE COURT: Okay. It also means that you will not
have the opportunity to testify and tell your side of the
story. You understand that? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes. 
THE COURT: And if you want to tell your side of the
story under oath, you can do it even if your lawyer thinks
you shouldn't. 
You understand? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes. 
THE COURT: It does mean the prosecutor will get to
ask you questions, too, however. 
Do you understand that? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes. THE COURT: But if you want to remain silent, you also
have that right. 
You understand? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes. THE COURT: And if you choose to not testify, no one
can force you to testify. 
You understand? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes. 
THE COURT: And your silence will not be used against
you and cannot be used against you if you choose not to
testify. 
You understand? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes. 
THE COURT: You have any questions for me about these
rights to testify or not testify? 
THE DEFENDANT: I do not. THE COURT: 
Then what is your choice? 
THE DEFENDANT: Not testify. THE COURT: Thank you. You can have a seat. And the court does find defendant's knowingly,
voluntarily, intelligently waiving his right to testify and
exercising his right to remain silent in this matter. 
Proceed to closing. State. 
"In determining whether a waiver of the right to 
testify was voluntarily and intelligently made, this court looks 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to the totality of the facts and circumstances of each particular 
case." State v. Celestine, 142 Hawai# i 165, 171, 415 P.3d 907, 
913 (2018) (citation omitted). 
A Tachibana colloquy requires the following: 
There are two components of a Tachibana colloquy. The first 
is informing the defendant of fundamental principlespertaining to the right to testify and the right not totestify. We stated that this advisement should consist of the following information: 
that he [or she] has a right to testify, that if he[or she] wants to testify that no one can prevent him[or her] from doing so, [and] that if he [or she]testifies the prosecution will be allowed tocross-examine him [or her]. In connection with the privilege against self-incrimination, the defendantshould also be advised that he [or she] has a rightnot to testify and that if he [or she] does nottestify then the jury can be instructed about thatright. 
The second component of the Tachibana colloquy
involves the court engaging in a true "colloquy" with the
defendant. 
This portion of the colloquy consists of a
verbal exchange between the judge and the defendant "inwhich the judge ascertains the defendant's understanding ofthe proceedings and of the defendant's rights." 
Id. at 170, 415 P.3d at 912 (citations and underline omitted). 
First, Neves argues that the Tachibana colloquy was 
defective because it was posed after Neves rested. Timing alone, 
without more, does not constitute reversible error. 
[T]he ideal time to conduct the colloquy is
immediately prior to the close of the defendant's case.
Therefore, whenever possible, the trial court should conductthe colloquy at that time. 
If the trial court is unable to conduct the colloquy
at that time, however, such failure will not necessarilyconstitute reversible error. If a colloquy is thereafterconducted and the defendant's waiver of his or her right totestify appears on the record, such waiver will be deemedvalid unless the defendant can prove otherwise by apreponderance of the evidence. 
Tachibana, 79 Hawai# i at 237, 900 P.2d at 1304 (footnote and 
citation omitted). Neves does not proffer any evidence or allege 
any harm caused by the timing of the Tachibana colloquy. As such, Neves' claimed error with respect to timing of the Tachibana colloquy is without merit. 
4  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Second, Neves argues that the District Court did not 
engage in a true Tachibana colloquy because the District Court 
failed to include background questions such as the ability to understand English, education, mental status, and state of mind. There is no requirement that the District Court ask defendants background questions during a Tachibana colloquy. See Celestine 
142 Hawai# i at 170, 415 P.3d at 912 (containing no background 
question requirement). 
Moreover, the record shows that the 
District Court asked Neves background questions, such as his name, age, and ability to understand English, at the beginning of trial, and Neves intelligently responded to each question during the District Court's colloquies. The District Court engaged in a true colloquy and Neves' argument to the contrary lacks merit. 
Third, Neves argues that the colloquy was defective 
because the District Court "never listed Defendant's rights in terms of the 'right to testify' and the 'right not to testify.'" Neves disregards the substance of the colloquy, particularly where the District Court informed Neves of all Tachibana
 elements 
and engaged in a true colloquy, and that no fewer than six times the District Court asked Neves whether he "understood" aspects of the colloquy and Neves responded intelligently, including stating his choice that he would "not testify." Thus, Neves' point of error with respect to the District Court's wording of the colloquy lacks merit. 
Under the totality of the facts and circumstances, the 
record supports the District Court's finding that Neves' waiver 
of the right to testify was voluntarily and intelligently made. 
Consequently, Neves' second point of error – asserting a 
Tachibana colloquy error was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt – is also without merit. 
Point of error (3): In his third point of error, Neves 
asserts the District Court erred in admitting the NOAR because it was not certified and because it was part of the police report such that it could not "be used to obviate the public records 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hearsay exception." Neves relies on State v. Abrigo, 144 Hawai# i 
491, 445 P.3d 72 (2019), but Abrigo is inapposite to this case.
"Evidentiary rulings are reviewed for abuse of 
discretion, unless application of the rule admits of only one 
correct result, in which case review is under the right/wrong standard." State v. Loa, 83 Hawai# i 335, 348, 926 P.2d 1258, 
1271 (1996) (citation omitted). 
In this case, Neves was charged with driving on 
November 21, 2018, while his license was suspended or revoked due to operation of a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII). Officer James Spiker (Officer Spiker) testified that 
previously, on October 11, 2018, he had completed the NOAR when 
Neves was arrested for OVUII. Officer Spiker testified as to Neves' identity, that Officer Spiker filled in the NOAR with information obtained from Neves while he was detained at the police station, and that Neves signed the form after it was read to him verbatim. Thus, Officer Spiker authenticated the NOAR and it did not need to be certified by the Administrative Driver's License Revocation Office (ADLRO). 
Further, the NOAR form was not part of the police 
report. ADLRO is a component of the Hawai# i Judiciary, acting 
under the authority of the Administrative Director of the Courts and in accordance with HRS Chapter 291E. See HRS § 291E-1;
3 HRS 
ch. 291E, pt. III. A police officer completes the NOAR and it is 
submitted to the ADLRO for administrative review. See §§ 291E-
33(c), 291E-36(a)(6) or (b)(2), 291E-37. As Officer Spiker 
testified, it is a form created by ADLRO, he filled out the NOAR related to Neves, read it to Neves, and sent it to ADLRO. Given the evidence, the District Court did not abuse its discretion by admitting the NOAR for "informational and indentificational purposes." 
3 For purposes of HRS Chapter 291E, "Director" is defined as "the
administrative director of the courts or any other person within the judiciary
appointed by the director to conduct administrative reviews or hearings orcarry out other functions relating to administrative revocation under partIII. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Point of error (4): In his final point of error, Neves 
asserts there was insufficient evidence for a conviction. "The 
test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." State v. Batson, 
73 Haw. 236, 248, 831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992) (citations omitted). 
Contrary to Neves' assertion, the record includes, 
inter alia: testimony of two officers identifying Neves as the individual cited on October 11, 2018, and November 21, 2018; a NOAR completed with information obtained from Neves (Exhibit 7) and a certified ADLRO decision (Exhibit 2) establishing a license revocation period of November 11, 2018, through November 10, 2019; and a certified traffic abstract (Exhibit 1) and a photo of a State identification card (Exhibit 4), which when viewed together with other exhibits and testimony, identify Neves, contain Neves' name and address, and also include matching dates of birth and the last four digits of a social security number. 
Taken together, there was sufficient evidence to 
support the District Court's judgment. See State v. Kam, 134 
Hawai#i 280, 288-89, 339 P.3d 1081, 1089-90 (2014) (citation 
omitted) (holding that "matches" in various exhibits containing defendant's name, address, date of birth, and last four digits of social security number constituted sufficient evidence of a prior OVUII conviction). 
For the reasons discussed above, the Judgment filed on 
December 30, 2019, in the District Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 9, 2022. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge 
7 Samuel P. King, Jr.,For Defendant-Appellant 
Loren J. Thomas,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, for Plaintiff-Appellee 