NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0000059 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
EDDIE A. GARCIA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CRIMINAL NO. 11-1-0288(4))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Eddie A. Garcia (Garcia) appeals
 
from the January 18, 2013 "Judgment, Conviction and Sentence,
 
Notice of Entry," entered in the Family Court of the Second
Circuit1
 (family court). Garcia pled no-contest to Count 1:
 
continuous sexual assault of a minor under the age of fourteen
 years in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 707-733.6
 
(1993); and Count 2: abuse of a family or household member in
 
violation of HRS ยง 709-906 (Supp. 2013).
 
Garcia contends the family court reversibly erred by: 
(1) failing to find that the prosecution breached the 
plea agreement by attempting to influence the Hawai
'i Paroling 
Authority (HPA); 
1
 The Honorable Ricard T. Bissen, Jr. presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(2) denying Garcia's motion to withdraw his no-contest
 
plea in light of prosecutor's breach of their plea agreement; and 
(3) failing to consider Garcia's choice of remedies as
 
a further consequence of erroneously concluding that the
 
prosecution had honored the plea agreement.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Garcia's points of error as follows: 
Our review of Garcia's contention that Plaintiff-
Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) breached the parties' plea 
agreement is guided by State v. Abbott, 79 Hawai 'i 317, 320, 901 
P.2d 1296, 1299 (App. 1995). This court held: 
The touchstone for determining whether a breach of a
plea agreement has occurred, however, is whether the
defendant has reasonable grounds for reliance on his
interpretation of the prosecutor's promise, and whether the
defendant in fact relied to his detriment on that promise.
This determination requires an inquiry into the precise
meaning of the language of the agreement as it was
understood by the defendant and defendant's legitimate
expectations arising therefrom.
 
Furthermore, a plea agreement containing terms that are
ambiguous or reasonably susceptible to different interpretations
is strictly construed in favor of the defendant. Even where the
 state technically complies with every term, a breach of the plea
agreement may be found if the spirit of the agreement is breached.
 
Id. (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
The parties' plea agreement provided that the State 
would "remain silent at the minimum term hearing." Even when 
"strictly construed in favor of [Garcia,]" this phrase indicates 
the State would not communicate its position on Garcia's minimum 
sentence to HPA at the minimum term hearing. Abbott, 79 Hawai 'i 
at 320, 901 P.2d at 1299. 
The family court received the prosecutor's July 23,
 
2012 letter to the Adult Client Services probation officer as
 part of the "Presentence Diagnosis and Report & Confidential
 
Sentencing Recommendations, dated July 27, 2012 (Not Utilized by
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2
the Court)" (Presentence Diagnosis and Report),  but did not
submit it to HPA. 
The family court noted that cases cited by
 
Garcia in support of his motion to dismiss his no-contest plea
 
involved breaches of plea agreements by prosecutors "where they
 
breached with the judge."3 Garcia's counsel correctly agreed
 
with the family court in that "[t]he distinction in this case is
 there could be no breach with the [family c]ourt as the [family
 
c]ourt had already bound itself by the plea agreement."
 
At its hearing on Garcia's motion to withdraw his no-
contest plea, the family court stated Garcia could still receive
 
the benefit of the parties' bargain if the Presentence Diagnosis
 
and Report containing the prosecutor's letter was put under seal
 
and a new probation officer prepared a new Presentence Diagnosis
 
and Report.
 
In its order denying Garcia's motion, the family court
 
found the Presentence Diagnosis and Report had not reached HPA,
 
the State "ha[d] not made an indirect minimum term arguement
 
[sic] to [HPA,]" and therefore, the State "did not breach the
 
plea agreement . . . ." We conclude the family court correctly
 found the State did not breach the plea agreement. 
Garcia's other contentions - that the family court
 
reversibly erred by denying his motion to withdraw his no-contest
 
plea and his choice of remedies - are premised upon Garcia's
 
contention the State breached the parties' plea agreement.
 
Because we conclude the family court correctly determined the
 
State did not breach the parties' plea agreement, we do not reach
 
Garcia's other contentions.
 
2
 With limited exception, courts are required to "order a pre-sentence
correctional diagnosis of the defendant and accord due consideration to a
written report of the diagnosis before imposing sentence where: (a) [t]he
defendant has been convicted of a felony" and "may order a pre-sentence
diagnosis in any other case." HRS ยง 706-601(1)(a) & (2) (1993). 
3
 In his memorandum in support of his motion to withdraw no-contest
plea, Garcia primarily relied on State v. Adams, 76 Hawai' i 408, 879 P.2d 513
(1994). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the January 18, 2013
 
"Judgment, Conviction and Sentence, Notice of Entry," entered in
 
the Family Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 21, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Benjamin E. Lowenthal
(Law Office of Philip H. Lowenthalfor Defendant-Appellant. 
Richard K. Minatoya,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Mauifor Plaintiff-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
4
 