NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000686

IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
HAN KAMAKANI PHUA, Defendant-Appellant

APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT

KA
'U DIVISION

(Case No. 3P810-0184)

SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Han Kamakani Phua (Phua) appeals 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, entered on 
August 29, 2011 in the District Court of the Third Circuit, Ka' u 
Division (District Court).1  
Phua was found guilty of Harassment, in violation of 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 711-1106(1) (Supp. 2012). 
On appeal, Phua contends (1) the presiding judge 
plainly erred by not, sua sponte, recusing himself from the case because he presided over two prior civil cases involving Phua and (2) the District Court erred by finding that Phua knowingly and
 
intelligently waived his right to counsel during sentencing.

Upon careful review of the record and the briefs

submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to

the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we

resolve Phua's points of error as follows:

1

The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo, Jr. presided.

On November 8, 2013, the District Court entered a signed Judgment
of Conviction and Sentence nunc pro tunc to August 29, 2011.

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) The presiding judge did not plainly err by failing

to recuse himself due to bias against Phua. Phua points out that
 
the judge presided over two other civil cases involving Phua in

which he made rulings unfavorable to Phua relating to the

property on which the alleged Harassment occurred in this case. 
 Phua notes that the judge took judicial notice of the two cases

and the rulings he made in those cases which found that Phua had

no claim to the property. Phua claims that "[t]he fact that Mr.
 
Phua appeared pro se before the judge in those matters gave the

judge certain biases toward Mr. Phua." In support of such bias,
 
Phua states there were many inconsistencies in the testimony of

prosecution witnesses "but it was decided by the district court

judge that only Mr. Phua had been lying. The district court

judge obviously made his decision partially based upon the prior

knowledge of Mr. Phua as well as his previous interactions with

Mr. Phua."

Phua concedes that a judge presiding over a prior 
prosecution of the defendant does not, without more, provide a basis for recusal. While Phua claims that is not the case here, he does not describe his prior actions that would cause the judge to have a bias against him. Phua points to nothing else but the judge issuing adverse rulings in two prior civil cases and an adverse ruling in this criminal case as evidence of judicial bias. "Bias cannot be premised on adverse rulings alone." Arquette v. State, 128 Hawai' i 423, 448, 290 P.3d 493, 518 (2012) 
(citing State v. Ross, 89 Hawai' i 371, 378, 974 P.2d 11, 18 
(1998)). The District Court did not plainly err by failing to recuse himself due to bias against Phua. 
(2) The District Court did not plainly err by finding

that Phua waived his right to counsel during sentencing. Phua

claims that the District Court's examination of Phua regarding

his waiver of the right to counsel was inadequate. Phua claims

that the District Court should have examined Phua about his

"education, work history, and experience with the judicial system

before informing Mr Phua of the punishment which may be imposed

and advising Mr. Phua of the risks of self-representation."

2

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Although such examination is 'necessary to allow the 
trial court to determine the level and depth to which an 
explanation and inquiry must extend,' we reject the proposition that, in every case, this query must precede the balance of the Dickson inquiry. See [State v. Dickson, 4 Haw. App. 614, 619, 
673 P.2d 1036, 1041 (1983)]." State v. Million, 128 Hawai' i 477, 
290 P.3d 547, CAAP-10-0000212 2012 WL 5990270 at *2 (App. Nov. 30, 2012) (SDO). Phua articulates no reason why the District Court's inquiry about his education, work history, and experience after warning him of the possible punishment and advising him of the risks of self-representation was prejudicial. 
Phua faults the District Court for asking "Do you

understand that you're entitled to have an attorney represent you

and if you cannot afford one, the Court can appoint one for you?"

to which Phua responded "No, I was not aware of that but --" 
 Phua claims that when the District Court then asked "Do you still

wish to proceed without an attorney?" the District Court "simply

ignored Mr. Phua's lack of knowledge that he may have had a right

to a court-appointed attorney if he could not afford to retain

one." It appears that Phua argues that the District Court should

have then "informed" him that he had a right to have an attorney

and that if he could not afford one, that one would be appointed,

and that the District Court's prior question was somehow

insufficient to advise Phua of such a right. The District Court

informed Phua that he had the right to an attorney, and that if

he could not afford one, one would be appointed, albeit in the

form of a question rather than a statement. Thus, Phua's claim
 
is without merit. 
 
Lastly, Phua claims that "He obviously is unable to

understand the consequences of his actions when he decided to

appear pro se at his sentencing hearing," and "There was nothing

to show that Mr. Phua was familiar with the legal system." 
 However, "[t]he record need not reflect a discussion between the

court and a defendant illuminating every such factor." Dickson,

4 Haw. App. at 620-21, 673 P.2d at 1042. Examination of a

defendant's experience is used "to determine the level and depth

to which [the court's] explanation and inquiry must extend." 
 
3

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dickson, 4 Haw. App. at 619, 673 P.2d at 1041. The record

demonstrates that Phua was adequately informed of the risks of

self-representation, the right to private or appointed counsel,

and that the waiver of the right to counsel was made knowingly

and voluntarily. 
 
Therefore,

IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of Conviction 
and Sentence, entered on August 29, 2011 in the District Court of the Third Circuit, Ka' u Division is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 19, 2013. 
On the briefs:

Cherylann Miyamoto,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge

Associate Judge
Associate Judge

Linda L. Walton,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai
'i, 
for Plaintiff-Appellee.

4

