NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000104
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
BOWEN HUNSAKER HIRAI CONSULTING, INC., Petitioner-Appellee
and Cross-Appellant v. DAVID TURK, HARUMI TURK,
MARJET INC., HAYASHI TRANSPACIFIC, INC. and
HAYASHI TRANSPACIFIC AIRCRAFT, INC., Respondents-Appellants
and DAVID TURK, LLLC, Respondent Cross-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.
 NO. 09-1-0227)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Respondents-Appellants David Turk (Turk), Harumi Turk
 
(Harumi), Marjet, Inc. (Marjet), Hayashi Transpacific, Inc.
 
(Hayashi Transpacific), and Hayashi Transpacific Aircraft, Inc.
 (Hayashi Transpacific Aircraft), (collectively "Appellants"),
 appeal from a Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)
 October 19, 2009 Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 
Petitioner Bowen Hunsaker Hirai Consulting, Inc.'s Petition to
 Compel Mediation and/or Binding Arbitration and a September 28,
 2010 Final Judgment entered (1) in favor of Petitioner Bowen
 Hunsaker Hirai Consulting, Inc., (Bowen), as against Appellants,
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and (2) in favor of Respondent David Turk LLLC (Turk LLLC), as
 
against Bowen.1
 
Appellants raise four points of error, contending that
 
the Circuit Court erred: (1) in granting Bowen's July 10, 2009
 
Petition to Compel Mediation and/or Binding Arbitration against
 all Appellants; (2) in ruling that there were no genuine issue of
 material fact regarding whether Turk had signed the January 10,
 2008 arbitration agreement with Bowen, and/or on behalf of
 Harumi; (3) in ruling that Turk and Harumi were equitably
 estopped from raising their non-execution of Bowen's January 10,
 2008 Arbitration Agreement; and (4) in ruling that Bowen had not
 waived its right to arbitration.
 
Bowen cross-appeals, raising three points of error
 
which assert that: (1) the Circuit Court erred in denying
 Bowen's Petition to Compel Mediation against Turk LLLC based on
 an alleged oral and/or implied agreement; (2) the Circuit Court
 abused its discretion in failing to order mediation pursuant to
 HRCC Rule 12.2; and (3) the Circuit Court erred when it entered
 judgment in favor of Turk LLLC and against Bowen because there
 were genuine issues of material fact in dispute and there was no
 notice, hearing or opportunity to be heard prior to the court's
 entry of judgment.
 
I. DISCUSSION
 
A. Appellants' Points of Error
 (1) Appellants assert various procedural flaws in the
 
Circuit Court proceedings in which Bowen sought to compel
 
1
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
mediation and arbitration; Appellants' arguments in support of
 
its first point of error focus on the issue of mediation. 
First, we reject Appellants' argument that the Circuit
 
Court improperly considered "new" arguments and exhibits set
 forth in Bowen's reply memorandum. Bowen's reply properly
 responded to arguments made in Appellants' memorandum in
 opposition to Bowen's petition seeking to compel mediation and
 arbitration. 
Second, we reject Appellants' argument that the Circuit 
Court lacked the authority to order the parties to mediation. "When a court orders the parties to enter mediation, they have no choice but to obey." Arquette v. State, 128 Hawai' i 423, 445-46, 
290 P.3d 493, 515-16 (2012); see also HRS § 603-21.9(6) (1993) (granting Hawai' i circuit courts with the inherent power and 
authority to control the litigation process before them and "[t]o make and award such judgments, decrees, orders, and mandates . . . and do such other acts and take such other steps as may be necessary to carry into full effect the powers which are or shall be given to them by law or for the promotion of justice in 
2
matters pending before them"). HRCC Rule 12.2 (1997)  provides:
Alternative Dispute Resolution. The court, in its
 
discretion or upon motion by a party, may order the parties
to participate in an alternative dispute resolution process
subject to conditions imposed by the court.
 
2
 HRCC Rule 12.2 was subsequently amended in 2012 to more explicitly
state that the court "sua sponte or upon motion by a party, may in exercise of
its discretion, order the parties to participate in a non-binding Alternative
Dispute Resolution process (ADR or ADR process) subject to terms and
conditions imposed by the court." The amended rule further provides that
mediation is included within the term "Alternative Dispute Resolution."
 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(Emphasis added.) HRCC Rule 12.2 clearly provides that a circuit
 
court may order the parties to participate in an alternative
 dispute resolution process, such as mediation, "in its
 discretion," whether or not a party has filed a motion to compel
 alternative dispute resolution. 
(2) Appellants maintain that Turk and Harumi could not
 
be compelled to participate in binding arbitration because
 genuine issues of material fact existed concerning whether Turk
 and/or Harumi executed Bowen's 2008 Agreement. 
The standard for
 
compelling arbitration is analogous to that of summary judgment. 
Koolau Radiology, Inc. v. Queen's Med. Ctr., 73 Haw. 433, 834
 P.2d 1294 (1992).
 
If the existence of an arbitration agreement is in issue,
the court shall proceed summarily to the judge or jury trial
thereof. The trial court can only decide, as a matter of
law, whether to compel the parties to arbitrate their
dispute if there is no genuine issue of material fact
regarding the existence of a valid agreement to arbitrate.
Therefore, we hold that the standard of review applicable to
the trial court's decision in this case should be that which
 is applicable to a motion for summary judgment.
Accordingly, we review this case de novo, using the same
standard employed by the trial court and based upon the same
evidentiary materials as were before it in determination of
the motion.
 
Id. at 439-40, 834 P.2d at 1298 (citations, internal quotation
 
marks, brackets omitted); HRS § 658A-7(a)(2) (Supp. 2012) ("[T]he
 court shall proceed summarily to decide the issue" of whether an
 agreement to arbitrate exists).
 
It is undisputed that Harumi did not sign the 2008
 
Agreement with Bowen. Instead, Bowen contends that Turk signed
 the arbitration agreement "as an agent" for Harumi, as well as on
 his own behalf.  However, Turk states in his sworn declaration
 
that "[t]he signature on [the 2008 Agreement] document is not
 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
mine. Further, I did not authorize anyone to sign that document
 
on my behalf." Although Bowen contends on appeal that it
 "believes that it was David Turk's signature as demonstrated by
 his signatures on past Agreements," and all of the Appellants'
 various 2008 Agreements were "signed in the same manner," it is
 well-settled that "[w]hether or not the signature was a forgery
 was a question of fact[.]" Iaea v. Iaea, 59 Haw. 648, 649, 586
 
P.2d 1015, 1016 (1978). Accordingly, because a trial court is
 authorized to compel the parties to arbitrate only if there is no
 genuine issue of material fact regarding the existence of a valid
 agreement to arbitrate, the Circuit Court erred in summarily
 ordering Turk and Harumi to arbitrate this dispute absent an
 evidentiary hearing to determine whether Turk signed the 2008
 Agreement (1) on behalf of himself, and (2) on behalf of Harumi.
 
(3) Appellants argue that the Circuit Court erred in
 
applying the doctrine of equitable estoppel to preclude Turk and
 Harumi from avoiding the arbitration provision in the 2008
 Agreement. We disagree. 
In Sher v. Cella, 114 Hawai' i 263, 267, 160 P.3d 1250, 
1254 (App. 2007), this Court examined whether the appellees in that case could bind non-signatory appellants to an arbitration provision under any of the five alternate bases set forth in Thomson-CSF, S.A. v. Am. Arbitration Ass'n, 64 F.3d 773, 776 (2d Cir. 1995), including equitable estoppel. The court's analysis of the applicability of the doctrine of equitable estoppel to such matters is as follows: 
In Thomson–CSF, a federal district court ordered
Thomson–CSF to arbitrate its claims against defendant Evans
 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
& Sutherland Computer Corp. based on language contained in a
'Working Agreement' entered into between Sutherland and
Rediffusion Simulation Limited (a company that had been
purchased by Thomson–CSF). 64 F.3d at 775. The United
 States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit held that the
benefit obtained by Thomson–CSF as a result of the contract
in question (the elimination of Rediffusion from a
particular market sector) was too indirect to form the basis
for estopping the non-signatory from avoiding arbitration.
Id. at 779. In that case, the benefit asserted resulted not
from the contract, but from changed market conditions
occurring as a result of the contract. Id.
 
Like Thomson–CSF, Appellants here received no benefit
as a result of the Acquisition Agreement, but rather they
accepted, after the consummation of the transaction, an
indirect benefit. Although the commission is referred to in
the Acquisition Agreement, the Seller's obligation to pay
that commission was not created by that agreement; rather,
the obligation to pay was created by virtue of the Listing
Contract executed in January 2002 by CBIP and the Seller.
Even if the Acquisition Agreement had not referred to any
commission at all, that commission would still have been due
by virtue of the Listing Contract.
 
On the subject of equitable estoppel, the United
States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit has held that
'a party may be estopped from asserting that the lack of his
signature on a written contract precludes enforcement of the
contract's arbitration clause when [the party] has
consistently maintained that other provisions of the same
contract should be enforced to benefit him.' 
Int'l Paper
Co. v. Schwabedissen Maschinen & Anlagen GMBH, 206 F.3d 411,
418 (4th Cir.2000). Appellants, by accepting the commission
resulting from the sale of the Property, have not embraced
the Acquisition Agreement to the degree necessary to subject
them to its terms, including the arbitration provision
contained therein. Other than Appellants' acceptance of
their sales commission, the record in this case shows no
affirmative embracing of the agreement by Appellants. Had
 Appellants attempted to enforce some provision of the
Acquisition Agreement or receive its benefit in some other
manner, a contrary result may have resulted. Thomson–CSF,
64 F.3d at 779. Therefore, the [appellees] may not rely on a
theory of equitable estoppel solely because Appellants
received their commission on the sale of the Property.
 
Sher, 114 Hawai' i at 268-69, 160 P.3d at 1255-56. 
Here, Bowen entered into an Agreement with Turk and
 
Harumi indicating that Bowen would prepare Turk and Harumi's
 
"2007 Federal and State individual income tax returns," and Turk
 and Harumi would furnish Bowen with the necessary information to
 do so. As Bowen maintains, Turk and Harumi accepted the direct
 benefits of the 2008 Agreement and performed as if the agreement
 
6   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was in effect at all times, until the parties' dispute later
 
arose. Namely, Turk and Harumi submitted the "2007 Tax
 Organizer" to Bowen, signed by both Turk and Harumi, indicating
 that they were submitting "information for the sole purpose of
 preparing [their] tax return(s)" and representing that the
 information provided was "true, correct, and complete to the best
 of [their] knowledge." The record also contains a "Letter of
 Transmittal" addressed to Turk and Harumi, indicating the
 transmittal of their 2007 tax returns, with a handwritten note
 indicating a client "pick up" date of August 19, 2008. Turk
 
further acknowledged that Bowen prepared his 2007 federal and
 
state income tax returns in a letter disputing the fees charged
 by Bowen, and indicating that he planned to file suit against
 Bowen in connection with the work performed pursuant to the 2008
 Agreement, i.e., Bowen's "preparation of my 2007 federal and
 state income tax returns."
 
It appears from the record that Turk and Harumi 
received benefits that directly resulted from the 2008 Agreement, i.e., the preparation of their 2007 income tax returns. Unlike the appellants in Sher, here, there is no assertion that there was any other agreement or basis for Bowen to have provided the services received by Turk and Harumi. Accordingly, Turk and Harumi "may be estopped from asserting that the lack of [their] signature on a written contract precludes enforcement of the contract's arbitration clause when [they] ha[ve] consistently maintained that other provisions of the same contract should be enforced to benefit [them]." Sher, 114 Hawai' i at 269, 160 P.3d 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 1256 (citing Int'l Paper Co. v. Schwabedissen Maschinen &
 
Anlagen GMBH, 206 F.3d 411, 418 (4th Cir. 2000)). By accepting
 the 2007 tax returns prepared pursuant to the 2008 Agreement,
 Turk and Harumi have affirmatively embraced the 2008 Agreement to
 the degree necessary to subject them to its terms, including the
 mediation and/or arbitration provision contained therein. 
Accordingly, Turk and Harumi are estopped from asserting that the
 purported lack of Turk's authentic signature on the 2008
 Agreement precludes enforcement of the Agreement's arbitration
 clause. Therefore, the Circuit Court did not err in holding that
 Turk and Harumi were compelled to participate in mediation and/or
 arbitration.
 
(4) Appellants contend that the Circuit Court erred in
 
compelling mediation and/or arbitration because Bowen "waived its
 right to these remedies" by submitting its claims against
 Appellants to a debt collector. Appellants argue that the
 procedure outlined in the 2008 Agreements is "not consonant with
 initially referring a dispute to a professional debt collector." 
It is well-settled that "[a]n agreement to arbitrate 
may be waived by the actions of a party which are completely inconsistent with any reliance thereon." Ass'n of Owners of 
Kukui Plaza v. Swinerton & Walberg Co., 68 Haw. 98, 110, 705 P.2d 28, 36 (1985) (citation omitted). "Waiver is generally defined as an intentional relinquishment of a known right, a voluntary relinquishment of rights, and the relinquishment or refusal to use a right." Fireman's Fund Ins. Co. v. AIG Hawai' i Ins. Co., 
109 Hawai' i 343, 354, 126 P.3d 386, 397 (2006) (citation and 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
internal quotation marks omitted). A waiver of the right to
 
arbitration pursuant to a valid arbitration agreement "will not
 be lightly inferred." Id. (citation omitted). 
The mediation and/or arbitration clause at issue
 
provides, in relevant part, that:
 
if any difference arises out of this agreement, either of us
shall have the option, prior to the commencement of any
legal proceeding, to submit the matter to mediation by
giving notice to the other party. . . .
 
If agreement cannot be reached by mediation, you agree to
submit the difference to binding arbitration. . . .
 
(Emphasis added.) Accordingly, the only condition that must be
 
satisfied before commencement of mediation is that notice be
 given to the other party "prior to the commencement of any legal
 proceeding." 
At least as early as January 22, 2009, Appellants
 
received communication from the debt collector regarding
 Appellants' past due debt owing to Bowen. In response, Turk sent
 a letter to the debt collector, dated February 24, 2009,
 disputing the amounts owed and informing them of his intent to
 file suit. On March 11, 2009, Bowen sent a letter to Turk
 indicating that Bowen 
retained the Law Firm of Jim On & Beerman to represent us in
connection with the mediation and binding arbitration of
these outstanding debts and your claim of alleged
malfeasance or misfeasance. He will be contacting you soon
regarding the submission of this matter to mediation and
binding arbitration process.
 
Bowen's counsel sent a letter to Turk, dated March 18, 2009,
 
informing Appellants of its intent to submit the matter to
 mediation pursuant to the 2008 Agreement. 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
There is nothing in the 2008 Agreement to suggest that
 
submitting the matter to a debt collector would waive the right
 
to mediation and/or arbitration, and the parties do not cite to
 any authority suggesting that such an action constitutes a "legal
 proceeding." "Waiver of an arbitration right must be
 intentional; thus, implying waiver from a party's actions is
 appropriate only if the facts demonstrate that the party seeking
 to enforce arbitration has intended to waive its arbitration
 right." 4 Am. Jur. 2d Alternative Dispute Resolution § (2007). 
There is no evidence of an intentional waiver. Instead, it
 appears that Bowen timely notified Appellants of its intent to
 rely on the right to submit the matter to mediation and/or
 arbitration. Accordingly, because a waiver cannot be inferred
 
from Bowen's referral of Appellants' accounts to a debt
 
collector, we conclude that Bowen did not waive its right to
 submit this matter to mediation and/or arbitration pursuant to
 the arbitration clause contained in the 2008 Agreement.
 
B. The Cross-Appeal
 (1&2) Bowen's first two points of error on appeal
 
raise the same issue - that the Circuit Court should have ordered
 mediation with Turk LLLC. Although Bowen admitted that there
 was no 2008 agreement with Turk LLC, Bowen sought to compel
 mediation "based upon the course and conduct of prior dealings
 with David Turk as a law corporation, as a law company" and HRCC
 Rule 12.2. Bowen acknowledged that, absent an agreement, it
 could not compel arbitration. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Bowen contends that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion when it failed to compel mediation because "there was 
absolutely no justification for not also ordering the Turk Law Firm to participate in the same mediation," that the court ordered with respect to Appellants. Although public policy strongly favors alternative dispute resolution over litigation, HRCC Rule 12.2 does not mandate that a circuit court grant a party's request to mediate; instead, this decision remains discretionary with the court. "An abuse of discretion occurs when the trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Save Sunset Beach 
Coal. v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 102 Hawai' i 465, 484, 78 P.3d 
1, 20 (2003). 
Because other avenues remain available to Bowen to 
remedy David Turk LLLC's nonpayment for tax services received and to defend against any claims David Turk LLLC may raise against Bowen, it cannot be said that the Circuit Court's refusal to order mediation in this instance "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." 
(3) Finally, we reject Bowen's argument that the
 
Circuit Court improperly entered judgment in favor of Turk LLLC. 
It appears from the record that the Circuit Court revised a
 proposed form of Final Judgment to correctly reflect the court's
 prior order that expressly provided that Bowen's Petition to
 Compel was denied "in favor of Respondent David Turk LLLC[.]" 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's September 28,
 
2010 Final Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 30, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Brian K. Yomono 
for Respondents-Appellants
and Cross-Appellees, and
Respondent Cross-Appellee
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Shelton G.W. Jim On
 
(SJO & Associates, LLLC)
for Petitioner-Appellee
and Cross-Appellant 
12 