NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000789 and CAAP-11-0000896
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
DAIRY ROAD PARTNERS, a Hawai 'i limited partnership,
Appellant- Appellant, v. THE MAUI PLANNING COMMISSION,
an agency of the County of Maui, a political subdivision
of the State of Hawai 'i and A & B PROPERTIES, INC.,
a Hawai 'i corporation, Appellees-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-0455(1))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In these consolidated cases, Dairy Road Partners
 
appeals from the September 29, 2011 Order Granting Appellee A & B
 
Properties, Inc.'s Motion to Dismiss Appeal Filed on July 21,
 2011, or, in the Alternative, for Summary Judgment, Filed on
 September 7, 2011 ("Order Granting Motion to Dismiss") and the
 October 28, 2011 Judgment in favor of Appellee Maui Planning
 Commission and Appellee A & B Properties, Inc. ("Judgment"),
 which were both entered in the Circuit Court of the Second
 Circuit.
1 In Dairy Road Partners' initial appeal to the Circuit
 
Court from the Commission's denial of its petition to intervene
 in A & B's Special Management Area ("SMA") Use Permit
 application, the court concluded that Dairy Road Partners failed
 to establish that it was a "person aggrieved" for purposes of
 standing to bring an appeal under Hawaii Revised Statutes 91­
1/
 The Honorable Rhonda I. L. Loo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
14(a). Therefore, the court held, it did not have subject matter
 
jurisdiction over the appeal.
 
2
On further appeal to this court,  Dairy Road Partners
offers the laconic argument that, because the Commission denied
 its petition to intervene, it is "indisputably a 'person
 aggrieved by a final decision and order in a contested case' and
 is therefore 'entitled to judicial review'" by the Circuit Court
 under HRS chapter 91. Because we review questions of standing
 and jurisdiction de novo, we review the record of our own accord. 
In so doing, we conclude that Dairy Road Partners is a "person
 aggrieved" under HRS § 91-14(a). Therefore, the Circuit Court
 has jurisdiction to consider Dairy Road Partners' appeal. We
 vacate the Judgment and remand to the Circuit Court for further
 consideration of Dairy Road Partners' appeal and A & B's motion
 to dismiss.
 
I. Background

 
On May 3, 2010, A & B applied to the Maui Planning
 
Commission for an SMA Use Permit for its proposed Maui Business
 Park Phase II Subdivision project in Kahului, Maui. The
 Commission informed A & B that it would review the project on
 April 26, 2011, and instructed A & B to notify all owners and
 recorded lessees located within 500 feet of the proposed project
 about the upcoming review.
 
After independently learning of the hearing, Dairy Road
 
Partners filed a Petition to Intervene in the proceedings on
 April 25, 2011. The petition argued that the project presented
 traffic and drainage problems for Dairy Road Partners and others
 in the area. Commission rules, however, required that petitions
 to intervene be filed at least ten days before the scheduled
 hearing. Maui P. Comm. R. § 12-201-40(a). At the hearing, Dairy
 Road Partners agreed that its petition was untimely but argued
 that it had good cause to file late because it did not receive
 
2/
 Contrary to its notice of appeal filed in the Circuit Court where
Dairy Road Partners referenced HRS § 91-14 as the authority upon which it
appealed, the notices filed to this court reference HRS § 91-15 as authority.
Nevertheless, the opening brief argues that its appeal is authorized under HRS
§ 91-14(a). Furthermore, the answering brief discusses the appeal only within
the context of HRS § 91-14. Consequently, we treat the appeal as though Dairy
Road Partners proceeded under HRS § 91-14.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
notice of the hearing as required under the Commission's rules. 
Maui P. Comm. R. § 12-202-13(g). 
A & B responded that Dairy Road Partners did not have
 
good cause for its late filing because A & B had notified HRT
 Realty, LLC, which owned the property on which Dairy Road
 Partners' gasoline service station sits. When asked by the
 Commission whether A & B was contending that Dairy Road Partners
 was outside the 500-foot zone set out in its notification rule, A
 & B's counsel responded: "No, we are fairly conservative when it
 comes to our 500-foot measurements and if there is a question as
 to whether or not that is our personal policy in our office, if
 there is a question, whether it's in or out we are usually more
 conservative."
3 The Commission voted 7–1 to deny the petition. 
Later in the same meeting, the Commission voted 8–0 to approve A
 & B's SMA Use Permit for the proposed project.
 
On May 19, 2011, Dairy Road Partners filed a motion for
 
reconsideration of the denial of the petition with the
 Commission. Once again, Dairy Road Partners' argument focused
 largely on its late filing and, specifically, on its contention
 that its failure to receive notice of the hearing represented
 good cause. The Commission denied the motion. On July 12, 2011,
 the Commission issued Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law,
 Decision and Order Denying Dairy Road Partners' Petition to
 Intervene Filed on April 25, 2011, in which it concluded that
 Dairy Road Partners had failed to meet its burden of showing that
 good cause existed to excuse its failure to timely file its
 petition, as required by Commission Rule § 12-201-40(a). 
Dairy Road Partners thereafter appealed to the Circuit
 
Court and argued that, in its petition, it "claimed [that A &
 B's] proposed subdivision would substantially affect the economic
 and social welfare of the Community and would have substantial
 secondary impacts on public streets and drainage." Dairy Road
 Partners further contended that granting the permit "would have a
 
3/
 A & B and the County appear to have subsequently agreed that Dairy
Road Partners' parcel is located more than 500 feet from the project. Our
 
decision here does not reach that question or preclude either the Circuit
Court or the Commission from relying on any such fact, should it be
established, in any future review of A & B's motion or Dairy Road Partners'
petition.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
detrimental effect on traffic, disrupt the commercial use of the
 
property and cause economic harm[,]" and that it "had concerns
 about drainage since the area is prone to flooding."
 
A & B filed with the Circuit Court a motion to dismiss
 
Dairy Road Partners' appeal, contending that Dairy Road Partners
 did not have standing to appeal and, therefore, the Circuit Court
 lacked subject matter jurisdiction over the matter. In response,
 Dairy Road Partners submitted a declaration of its general
 partner, Glenn Nakamura, which states, in relevant part, that:
 
4. I believe that . . . Dairy Road Partners is
aggrieved by the damages to my personal or property rights.
 
5. That Dairy Road Partners has been at its present
location since 1985. Since 1985 till the early 1990, [Dairy
Road Partners] has been selling approximately
250,000–300,000 gallons of gasoline per month. My customers
were in large part regulars and local residents of the
Kahului, Paia, Haiku, Makawao, Kula and Pukalani.
 
6. Since the development of the Costco and Kmart in
early 1990, traffic has increased significantly on Dairy
Road, Kahului, Maui, Hawaii.
 
7. The congestion on Dairy Road increased due to
the additional cars that were going to Costco and Kmart and
the other developments that have been occurring in the area
surrounding the intersections Hana Highway and Dairy Road
and Dairy Road and Haleakala Highway.
 
8. Each year my business has been affected by the
traffic and [Dairy Road Parthers] is presently selling on
the average 180,000 gallons of gasoline a month. . . .
 
9. The reason for the loss of business, I
believe[,] is that my regular customers and the local
residents tend to avoid the traffic that is on Dairy Road.
 
10. I believe that the claims in the documents filed
 
by Applicant in this case indicate that the potential
impacts [of the proposed project] would be mitigated by
future infrastructure.
 
11. I have concerns because there is no guarantee
that infrastructure development will [occur] in a timely
fashion or that specific mitigation measures during the
construction phase for the development and any access road
will be implemented or implemented in a way that would
prevent congestion on the road and affect the surrounding
roadways such as Dairy Road and Haleakala Highway.
 
12. I have owned this business for 26 years and I
have had first-hand experience of the impacts of traffic as
a result of development.
 
13. This service station was in business at the time
 
when the Maui Market Place was constructed and that had a
 dramatic affect on the traffic in the area and there were
 impacts on the business.
 
14. There also were impacts on my regular customers.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
16. There comes a point [where,] because the
congestion on Dairy Road[] by virtue of the construction[]
and the substandard nature of Dairy Road as it now stands,
. . . regular customer[s,] those who are consistent and come
on a regular basis[,] will stay away because of the
congestion.
 
17. There are from time-to-time people who will come
through to use that lane to access the airport as they are
traveling, but they are not dependable in that they can move
from one station to another without any problems. It is the
 local customers that you have established a relationship
over a period of years to form a base of your business and
if you increase traffic congestion there [is a] decrease in
the number of persons.
 
18. I have also had incidents during heavy rains
where the intersection on Dairy Road, Hana Highway and the
feeder roads immediately adjacent thereto and such as Dairy
Road fronting my property all become flooded.
 
* * *
 
27. Since Dairy Road Partners' business is very
close to the intersection of Haleakala Highway and Dairy
Road[,] it will be impacted by the modification of the
intersection, the building of any access roads and the
closure of any access from Costco which would wind around
behind the airport, by a route that is regularly used [by]
those Costco customers of the potential customers to this
development to go to their homes upcountry Maui and Paia,
Haiku, Makawao and Hana.
 
28. I am not talking about hypothetical injury
because when Dairy Road was first widened to accommodate
. . . the Maui Market Place . . ., there was a significant
impact[] on my business as mentioned above.
 
29. I also experienced significant impacts as a
result of flooding since areas of the intersection of
Haleakala Highway and Dairy Road are lower than others
causing large [flooded] areas in or very close to the
intersection. Also[,] the roadway immediately fronting the
Dairy Road Shell floods depending on the run-off from the
main intersection.
 
30. I also believe that it is evident that any
potential impacts on my business will be directly related to
the proposals offered to the proposed development.
 
31. My goal is to participate in the process and
ensure that there are sufficient mitigation measures to
protect my business and other similarly situated from the
impacts I had already experienced.
 
On September 29, 2011, the Circuit Court issued its
 
Order Granting Motion to Dismiss. In it, the court found that
 
Dairy Road Partners
 
5

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
failed to meet its burden in establishing that it is a
"person aggrieved" because it did not provide sufficient
facts or allegations to demonstrate that it has suffered an
actual or threatened injury or that such injury is traceable
to the Commission's conduct. . . . Therefore, the court
finds that [Dairy Road Partners] is not a "person
aggrieved", [Dairy Road Partners] lacks standing to bring
this appeal, and since [Dairy Road Partners] lacks standing,
this Court does not have subject matter jurisdiction over
this appeal under HRS § 91-14(a). 
This timely appeal follows.
 
II. Standards of Review
 Administrative Agency Decisions - Secondary Appeals
 
Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon its
review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal. In an
 appeal from a circuit court's review of an administrative
decision the appellate court will utilize identical
standards applied by the circuit court. Questions of fact
are reviewed under the "clearly erroneous" standard. In
contrast, an agency's legal conclusions are freely
reviewable. An agency's interpretation of its rules
receives deference unless it is plainly erroneous or
inconsistent with the underlying legislative purpose.
 
Hawaii Teamsters & Allied Workers, Local 996 v. Dep't of Labor & 
Indus. Relations, 110 Hawai 'i 259, 265, 132 P.3d 368, 374 (2006) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 
Jurisdiction
 
"Whether the circuit court has jurisdiction to hear the 
plaintiffs' complaint presents a question of law, reviewable de novo. A plaintiff without standing is not entitled to invoke a court's jurisdiction. Thus, the issue of standing is reviewed de novo on appeal." AlohaCare v. Ito, 126 Hawai
'i 326, 341, 271 
P.3d 621, 636 (2012) (quoting Hawaii Med. Ass'n v. Hawaii Med. Serv. Ass'n, 113 Hawai
'i 77, 90, 148 P.3d 1179, 1192 (2006)) 
(internal quotation marks omitted). The review of whether an appellant has satisfied its burden of establishing standing is confined to the record on appeal. United Pub. Workers, Local 
646, AFSCME, AFL-CIO v. Brown, 80 Hawai
'i 376, 381, 910 P.2d 147, 
152 (App. 1996). III. Discussion
 
Dairy Road Partners' principal argument is that it was
 
"indisputably a 'person aggrieved by a final decision and order
 in a contested case'" because the Commission denied its Petition
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to Intervene.4 Although HRS chapter 91 does not define the term 
"person aggrieved," the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held that the 
phrase is "essentially synonymous with someone who has suffered 
'injury in fact.'" See AlohaCare, 126 Hawai 'i at 342, 271 P.3d 
at 637 (quoting E & J Lounge Operating Co. v. Liquor Comm'n of the City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 118 Hawai
'i 320, 345 n.35, 189 P.3d 
432, 457 n.35 (2008)) (some internal quotation marks omitted). On appeal, then, we consider whether Dairy Road Partners has suffered an "injury in fact" such that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing its appeal for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. 
We determine whether someone seeking to appeal from 
agency action under HRS § 91-14 has suffered an "injury in fact" by considering: "(1) whether the person 'has suffered an actual or threatened injury as a result of the [agency's decision],' (2) whether 'the injury is fairly traceable to the [agency's decision],' and (3) whether 'a favorable decision would likely provide relief for [the person's] injury.'" Id. at 342–43, 271 
P.3d at 637–38 (brackets in original) (emphasis added) (quoting E & J Lounge Operating Co., 118 Hawai
'i at 345 n. 35, 189 P.3d at 
457 n. 35) (some internal quotation marks omitted). An appellant must satisfy all three prongs of the test to establish standing. See Sierra Club v. Hawai
'i Tourism Auth. ex rel. Bd. of 
Directors, 100 Hawai 'i 242, 250, 59 P.3d 877, 885 (2002) ("Since 
the [injury-in-fact] test is stated in the conjunctive, Petitioner must satisfy all three prongs to establish its standing."). Therefore, Dairy Road Partners 
has the burden of proof with respect to the injury-in-fact
test: 
Since [the injury-in-fact elements for standing] are
not mere pleading requirements but rather an
indispensable part of the plaintiff's case, each
element must be supported in the same way as any other
matter on which the plaintiff bears the burden of
proof, i.e., with the manner and degree of evidence
required at the successive stages of the
litigation.... At the pleading stage, general factual
 
allegations of injury resulting from the defendant's
 
conduct may suffice[.]
 
4/
 Dairy Road Partners' further argument that the Maui Planning
Commission Rule § 12-201-46 explicitly permits an appeal under HRS § 91-14
when a petition for intervention is denied necessarily depends on whether an
appeal under HRS § 91-14 is permitted. This brings us back to the analysis
above and the question of whether Dairy Road Partners is a "person aggrieved."
 
7
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 250-51, 59 P.3d at 885-86 (emphasis added) (quoting Lujan
 
v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 561 (1992)).
 
Based on our review of the record, Dairy Road Partners

 
has alleged facts that would establish that it has standing,
 under the injury-in-fact test, as an "aggrieved person" under HRS
 § 91-14. Indeed, Nakamura stated that traffic and construction
 issues related to the proposed A & B development project, unless
 mitigated, threatened to injure Dairy Road Partners' business. 
In support, Nakamura noted that his gasoline sales had declined
 between 30–40% after Costco and Kmart developments were completed
 
5
nearby in early 1990.  Nakamura attributed his reduced sales to
the fact that the service station's regular customers—who are

 
mostly local residents—tended to avoid the traffic on Dairy Road. 
Nakamura argued that those customers would be even further
 affected by A & B's proposed project. Moreover, Nakamura
 contended that A & B itself recognized the likely adverse traffic
 effects associated with the project by offering mitigation
 measures in its traffic study.
 
Nakamura's declaration satisfies the first part of the 
injury-in-fact test. 
 Compare Pele Defense Fund v. Puna 
Geothermal Venture, 77 Hawai 'i 64, 70 n. 14, 881 P.2d 1210, 1216 
n. 14 (1994) (project neighbor demonstrated injury-in-fact distress and discomfort from construction-related diesel exhaust, early morning noise, and increased traffic generally, in addition to health-related fears), with United Pub. Workers, Local 646, 80 Hawai
'i at 381, 910 P.2d at 152 (appellant lacked standing to 
appeal because appellant's assertions were "only of possible injury . . . [and t]he record [was] devoid of any documents, exhibits or testimony to substantiate that [appellant] suffered any concrete injury"); see also Soc'y Hill Towers Owners' Ass'n v. Rendell, 210 F.3d 168, 176 (3d Cir. 2000) (residents alleged
 concrete and particularized injury in the form of increased
 traffic, pollution, and noise).
 
5/
 Dairy Road Partners' concerns were said to not be related to
competition that might accompany the development, recognizing that competition
is "not a[n] SMA issue."
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nakamura's declaration also satisfies the second part 
of the injury-in-fact test because it establishes that the 
threatened injury to Dairy Road Partners is "fairly traceable" to the Commission's decision to disallow Dairy Road Partners intervention in its consideration of the A & B project. Nakamura explicitly stated that "any potential impacts on my business will be directly related to the proposals offered to the proposed development." Dairy Road Partners' alleged injuries could not occur without the development contemplated in the SMA application. See Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp., 115 Hawai
'i 
299, 331, 167 P.3d 292, 324 (2007) (holding that alleged injuries to appellants' marine tourism business from the presence of a commuter ferry were traceable to the state department of transportation's decision to exempt the ferry company from its obligation to prepare an environmental assessment). 
Finally, as to the third part of the test, the Circuit
 
Court concluded, rather summarily, that "a favorable decision by
 this Court would not likely provide relief because, even if
 [Dairy Road Partners'] Petition to Intervene could be heard by
 the Commission, [its] chances of being admitted as a party in the
 Commission's proceedings are remote." While the Commission might
 have declined to allow intervention even if it had determined
 that Dairy Road Partners had good cause for its late-filed
 petition, the order and the related transcript provide us with no
 basis upon which we might discern why the Circuit Court believes
 that to be the case.
 
Furthermore, there is nothing in the record to suggest 
why Dairy Road Partners, if it was allowed to intervene, would not or could not find relief for the injury it alleges. Indeed, intervention itself would at least "likely provide relief" by necessarily focusing the agency's attention further on the intervenor's concerns. See Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp., 115 
Hawai
'i at 331, 167 P.3d at 324 (holding that the "threat of 
increased risk [was] clearly redressable by the preparation of an [environmental assessment], which would allow the threatened injuries raised by Appellants to be addressed and potentially mitigated or avoided."); E. Diamond Head Ass'n v. Zoning Bd. of 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appeals of City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 52 Haw. 518, 521–24, 479
 
P.2d 796, 798–99 (1971) (overturning dismissal of HRS § 91-14
 appeal and remanding for trial, in effect granting intervention
 to "aggrieved persons" unable to intervene at agency proceeding
 below).
 IV. Conclusion
 
Dairy Road Partners has satisfied all three parts of
 
the injury-in-fact test and, therefore, is an "aggrieved person"
 with standing to appeal under HRS § 91-14. As such, we vacate
 the Judgment, filed on October 28, 2011 in the Circuit Court of
 the Second Court, and remand the case to the Circuit Court for
 further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 23, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Frederick W. Rohlfing III
Michael G. Kozak (Case Lombardi & Pettit),for Appellant-Appellant DairyRoad Partners, a Hawai
'i 
limited partnership. Presiding Judge
Associate JudgeAssociate Judge
Gregory J. Garneau,
for Appellee-Appellee A & BProperties, Inc., a Hawai
'i 
corporation. 
Jane E. Lovell
 
Deputy Corporation Counsel,
County of Maui,
for Appellee-Appellee The Maui
Planning Commission.
 
10
 