NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
CAAP-12-0000917
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE INTEREST OF K CHILDREN
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 05-0052)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
The Family Court of the Third Circuit (Family Court)1/
 
terminated the parental rights of Mother-Appellant (Mother) over
 
her children, AK and MK (Children), pursuant to the "Findings of
 Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Motion to Terminate
 Parental Rights" (Order Terminating Parental Rights) filed on
 October 18, 2012. On appeal, Mother argues that the Family Court
 erred in terminating Mother's parental rights. In particular,
 Mother contends that the Family Court: (1) erred in determining
 that Mother could not provide a safe family home; (2) erred in
 determining that the permanent plans were in the best interests
 of Children; (3) violated Mother's due process rights "by
 requiring that she either take potentially dangerous psychotropic
 drugs or permanently lose her Children"; and (4) erred in failing
 to appoint a guardian ad litem for Mother. We affirm.
 
1 The Honorable Lloyd Van De Car presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
BACKGROUND
 
Mother has a long history of mental illness. In May
 
2005, the Department of Human Services (DHS) removed Children
 
from Mother's custody after receiving reports of Mother's
 deteriorating mental condition. Mother was reportedly
 hallucinating, speaking to her mother, who was in Arizona, as if
 she were present in the room, and yelling and screaming at other
 tenants in Mother's apartment complex. A neighbor stated that
 Mother yells, screams, and swears at people outside the apartment
 building several times each day, sometimes continuing for an
 hour. This behavior led to frequent calls to the police and
 caused the landlord to eventually evict Mother.
 
AK told a DHS social worker that Mother yelled and
 
talked to people who were not there, sometimes for hours at a
 time. AK said that Children were worried and scared by Mother's
 behavior and hid in the bedroom closet or under the bed. Mother
 also began speaking with what was described as a "Rastafarian
 accent," which she had developed within the last three years. In
 2005, Mother had a third minor child, JN, who was apparently in
 Mother's care and custody. Mother thought that JN was present in
 her home, even though his whereabouts were unknown and he had not
 been living with her for weeks. In June 2005, Mother agreed to
 temporary foster custody of Children and JN, after JN was
 located.
 
Mother was diagnosed at various times between 2005 and
 
2012 as suffering from psychosis; psychosis and schizophrenia,
 paranoid type; post-traumatic stress disorder, crystal
 methamphetamine induced psychosis (resolving), and paranoid
 personality disorder; psychotic disorder not otherwise specified;
 schizophrenic disorder; psychotic disorder not otherwise
 specified; organic mental disorder secondary to polysubstance
 abuse; and schizophrenia, paranoid type, and alcohol/poly
 substance abuse. Mother also admitted to a history of using
 marijuana, crystal methamphetamine, cocaine, and alcohol.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although not all of the mental health professionals who
 
diagnosed Mother recommended that she take anti-psychotic
 
medication to treat and control her psychotic symptoms, many of
 them did. Mother, however, refused to take any medication to
 address her mental health condition. Between 2005 and 2012,
 Mother's mental health problems remained unresolved, and she
 continued to exhibit, delusional, confrontational, and erratic
 behavior. 
Despite Mother's mental health issues, the DHS made
 
efforts to reunify Mother with Children, including permitting
 visits with Children. Although there were periods during which
 the visits were positive and successful, Mother's erratic and
 confrontational behavior attributable to her mental illness, and
 its effect on Children, resulted in suspensions or restrictions
 on Mother's visitation. Eventually, MK refused to visit with
 Mother, and Children both consented to their respective permanent
 plans, which called for the termination of Mother's parental
 rights.
 
In the meantime, the DHS again referred Mother for a
 
psychiatric evaluation in 2009. Henry H. Yang, M.D. (Dr. Yang),
 who performed the evaluation, noted that Mother had grandiose
 delusions and admitted to auditory hallucinations, and he
 diagnosed Mother as having organic mental disorder secondary to
 polysubstance abuse. Dr. Yang opined that Mother suffered from a
 disabling mental disorder, which rendered her unable to make
 rational decisions necessary to function as a responsible and
 supportive parent. Dr. Yang opined that Mother would benefit
 from anti-psychotic medications such as Risperdal or Geodon to
 relieve her symptoms of psychosis. However, because Dr. Yang did
 not believe that Mother posed an imminent danger to herself or
 others, he noted that "it would be up to [Mother]" to comply with 
recommendations to take such medications. Dr. Yang recommended
 that if Mother sought to regain custody of Children, medication
 management with psychotropic medications should be required. He
 also recommended that Mother be evaluated to see if her mental 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
condition improved in response to the medications, to the point
 
where she could be a responsible parent.
 
In December 2009, the DHS proposed a service plan that
 
explicitly required Mother to engage in medication management
 that would include the provision of psychiatric medications as
 recommended by Dr. Yang. Mother objected to the proposed service
 plan. In support of her objection, Mother presented a February
 2010 letter written by Dr. Albatosov, a psychiatrist with Care
 Hawaii, who had been treating Mother. Dr. Albatrosov stated that
 Mother had been reasonably stable over the past two years without
 taking any anti-psychotic medications and recommended that Mother
 continue close observation and individual therapy without the use
 of psychoactive medications. The Family Court amended the DHS's
 proposed service plan to omit the reference to the psychiatric
 medications as recommended by Dr. Yang, but included a
 requirement that Mother participate in a medication management
 program if recommended. The Family Court approved and ordered
 the service plan, as amended, in April 2010. 
In preparation for a December 2010 review hearing, the
 
Children's guardian ad litem (GAL) contacted Care Hawaii and
 learned that Dr. Albatrosov was no longer there and that his
 duties had been assumed by Nidhi Chabora, an advanced practice
 nurse with prescriptive rights. Nurse Chabora informed the DHS
 that Mother was very paranoid and had delusions of persecution. 
Nurse Chabora stated that without the assistance of medications,
 which Mother was refusing, Mother would present a danger to
 Children if they were reunited with Mother.
 
In August 2011, the DHS requested a hearing date on its 
motion to terminate Mother's parental rights. Mother requested
 the appointment of an independent medical examiner, and the
 Family Court appointed Samuel Paltin, D.O., M.D. In November
 2011, the DHS filed a withdrawal of it motion to terminate
 Mother's parental rights and instead sought a guardianship for
 Children without the termination of Mother's parental rights. 
However, when Mother stated that she would not consent to the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
proposed guardianship, the DHS renewed its motion to terminate
 
Mother's parental rights.
 
Dr. Paltin testified at the hearing on the DHS's motion
 
to terminate parental rights, and the report he prepared of his
 psychiatric evaluation of Mother was admitted in evidence.
 Dr. Patlin's diagnosis of Mother was schizophrenia, paranoid
 type, and alcohol/polysubstance abuse. Dr. Paltin noted that
 Mother's disorder is characterized by delusions and
 hallucinations, difficulty in formulating logical conclusions,
 and the inability to function adequately over a prolonged period. 
It was Dr. Paltin's belief that without the assistance of anti-
psychotic medication, Mother would not be able to function as an 
adequate parent for her teenage children. 
The Family Court terminated Mother's parental rights
 
and approved and ordered the terms set forth in the permanent
 plans dated April 25, 2012. 
DISCUSSION
 
We resolve the arguments raised by Mother on appeal as
 
follows:
 
I.
 
We conclude that the Family Court did not err in
 
terminating Mother's parental rights. The Family Court
 terminated Mother's parental rights pursuant to HRS § 587A-33
 (Supp. 2012), which provides in relevant part:
 
(a) At a termination of parental rights hearing, the
court shall determine whether there exists clear and
 
convincing evidence that:
 
(1)	 A child's parent whose rights are subject to
termination is not presently willing and able to
provide the parent's child with a safe family
home, even with the assistance of a service
plan; 
(2)	 It is not reasonably foreseeable that the
child's parent whose rights are subject to
termination will become willing and able to
provide the child with a safe family home, even
with the assistance of a service plan, within a
reasonable period of time, which shall not
exceed two years from the child's date of entry
into foster care; 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3)	 The proposed permanent plan is in the best
interests of the child. In reaching this
determination, the court shall: 
(A)	 Presume that it is in the best interests
 
of the child to be promptly and
permanently placed with responsible and
competent substitute parents and family in
a safe and secure home; and 
(B)	 Give greater weight to the presumption
that the permanent plan is in the child's
best interest, the younger the child is
upon the child's date of entry into foster
care; and 
(4)	 The child consents to the permanent plan if the
child is at least fourteen years old, unless the
court consults with the child in camera and
 finds that it is in the best interest of the
 child to proceed without the child's consent.
 
A.
 
Mother contends that the Family Court erred in
 
determining that Mother could not provide a safe family home. We
 
disagree. 
As preconditions for the termination of Mother's 
parental rights, the Family Court was required to determine that
 (1) Mother was not presently willing and able to provide Children with a safe family home, and (2) it was not reasonably foreseeable that Mother would become willing and able to provide Children with a safe family home, within a reasonable period of time. HRS § 587A-33(a)(1) and (a)(2). We review the Family Court's determinations pursuant to HRS § 587A-33(a)(1) and (a)(2) as well as the Family Court's factual findings under the clearly erroneous standard of review. In re Doe, 95 Hawai' i 183, 190, 20 
P.3d 616, 623 (2001). 
The Family Court made extensive factual findings
 
concerning Mother's long history of mental illness and the
 negative effect it had on her Children, her behavior, and her
 ability to care for Children. In addition, the Family Court
 found:
 
85. While there is some conflict as to [M]other's
diagnosis, there is general agreement and the court
specifically finds that [M]other is actively psychotic and
delusional. Mother's delusions are paranoid, in the sense
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that she perceives people around her are harming or
threatening to harm her, exposing her to drugs against her
will, or are talking about her. . . ;
 
86. Before they were removed from [M]other's home
[Children] would hide in their closet or under their beds
when [M]other was hallucinating or when she was delusional.
They have been in foster custody for nearly seven and one-
half years;
 
. . . .
 
93. Mother has completed many of the services
set forth in the service plan, but has consistently
denied that her mental health problems have harmed her
children. Mother does not understand the severity of
her mental health problems, and while she has at times
engaged in therapy, she has steadfastly refused to
take medication as part of her treatment. . . ;
 
94. Until it was determined that permanent out of
home placement was in [Children's] best interests, DHS made
reasonable efforts to reunify [M]other and [Children]. In
 addition to mental health treatment, [M]other was offered
parenting classes and DHS provided for visits between
[M]other and [Children]. When [Children] became reluctant
to visit [M]other, DHS arranged for family therapy to
address [Children's] concerns;
 
95. Throughout the history of this case [M]other has
been unable or unwilling to address her mental illness, not
even to the point of sustained unsupervised overnight visits
with [Children], much less provide them a safe family home,
even with the assistance of a service plan;
 
96. The court finds by clear and convincing evidence
that [M]other is not presently willing and able to provide
the children with a safe family home[], even with the
assistance of a service plan;
 
97. The court finds by clear and convincing evidence
that it is not reasonably foreseeable that mother will
become willing and able to provide the children with a safe
family home, even with the assistance of a service plan.
 
The Family Court considered and applied the safe family
 
home factors set forth in HRS § 587A-7 (Supp. 2012) in
 
determining that Mother was not willing and able to provide
 Children with a safe family home. The Family Court concluded:
 
6. Foremost among those factors in this case is
[M]other's unwillingness and/or inability [to] understand
the nature and severity of her mental illness. On account
 of that [M]other has not acknowledged and accepted
responsibility for the harm she has caused [Children]
[factor (8)], she has not demonstrated an understanding of
and involvement in the services set forth in her service
 plan [factor (12)], she has not resolved the identified
safety issues in her home despite seven years of DHS and
court oversight [factor (13)];
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
7. Additionally, there is no protective non-
perpetrator residing in the family home [factor (9)] nor a
support system available to the family [factor (10)] to
insure the safety of [Children] in [M]other’s home;
 
8. The court has also considered DHS' assessment and
 
recommendations, and the fact that [M]other has been unable
to demonstrate over the seven plus years of this action her
ability to provide a safe family home [factor (14)][.]
 
(brackets surrounding factor numbers in original).
 
We conclude that the Family Court's determinations 
that Mother was not presently willing and able, and it was not 
reasonably forseeable that Mother would become willing and able, to provide Children with a safe family home were supported by substantial evidence and were not clearly erroneous. Mother contends that there was no allegation that she would physically harm Children. However, providing a safe family home includes protecting Children against psychological and emotional harm. See HRS § 587A-7(a)(1)(B) (including as a safe family home factor, "[t]he child's developmental, psychological, medical, and dental health status and needs"); In re Doe, 95 Hawai' i at 194, 
20 P.3d at 627 ("[A] safe family home is a family home in which the child's parents or legal custodian can adequately provide for the child's physical and psychological health and welfare and thereby adequately protect the child from harm, be it actual, imminent, or threatened."). There was substantial evidence that Mother's mental condition exposed Children to psychological and emotional harm and rendered her unable to provide them with a safe family home. 
B.
 
Mother argues that the Family Court erred in
 
determining that the permanent plans were in the best interests
 of Children. We disagree.
 
As to MK, the record shows that MK was fifteen years
 
old when the Order Terminating Parental Rights was issued; that
 he had been in a stable placement since his removal from Mother's
 custody, was active and healthy, and had bonded with his foster
 parents; that MK's permanent plan called for him to remain in
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
this placement; and that he did not want to return to his
 
Mother's home. We conclude that the Family Court did not err in
 determining that MK's permanent plan was in the best interests of
 MK.
 
The question is a closer one for AK, who was seventeen
 
years old when the Order Terminating Parental Rights was issued. 
The record shows that AK had a difficult time while in foster
 care. AK was physically abused by a relative of former foster
 parents, and AK became pregnant while living in another foster
 home, and then miscarried. AK was placed in numerous foster
 homes and experienced emotional problems, including those related
 to dealing with the effects of Mother's mental illness and its
 effect on their relationship. AK's permanent plan called for AK
 to be placed in a guardianship.
 
Mother notes the difficulties experienced by AK while
 
in foster care and contends that Mother, rather then the DHS,
 should hold the residual parental rights in the event of
 guardianship. On the other hand, the DHS argues that AK wanted
 Mother's parental rights to be terminated so AK could find
 permanent placement in a home; the Children's GAL felt that
 placement in the DHS's permanent custody was in Children's best
 interests; and that the permanent plan was necessary to end the
 state of limbo and instability in which AK had been living for
 the prior seven years.
 
"Generally, the 'family court possesses wide discretion 
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion.'" In re Doe, 95 
Hawai'i at 189, 20 P.3d at 622 (citation omitted). Under the 
circumstances presented, we cannot say that the Family Court abused its discretion in determining that AK's permanent plan was in the best interests of AK. 
C.
 
Mother argues that the Family Court violated her due
 
process rights "by requiring that she either take potentially
 dangerous psychotropic drugs or permanently lose her Children." 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mother's argument is based on the erroneous premise that the
 
Family Court terminated her parental rights because she refused
 to take psychotropic medications. However, in its conclusions of
 law, the Family Court made clear that this premise was false. 
The Family Court stated:
 
Mother's parental rights are terminated here not
because of her refusal to include medication as part of her
mental health treatment, but because the court has found by
clear and convincing evidence that [M]other is unwilling or
unable to provide the children with a safe family home and
that the permanent plans proposed for [Children] are in
their best interests[.]
 
Mother's parental rights were terminated because she
 
was unable to provide Children with a safe family home. Her
 
inability to provide Children with a safe family home was due to
 her mental illness and the effect it had on her reasoning and
 behavior. The Family Court did not force or compel Mother to
 take psychotropic medication. It was up to Mother to decide how
 to treat her mental illness so that it would not prevent her from
 providing Children with a safe family home. Mother chose to
 address her mental illness without taking psychotropic
 medication. If she had been successful in treating and
 controlling her mental illness in this fashion and became able to
 provide Children with a safe family home, the Family Court would
 not have terminated her parental rights. Unfortunately for
 Mother, the methods she chose to treat her mental illness did not
 render her able to provide a safe family home.
 
Mother does not cite any case holding that a parent's 
due process rights are violated under the circumstances presented
 in this case. Because the Family Court did not force Mother to
 take psychotropic medication, the cases cited by Mother
 concerning the due process requirements where individuals are
 compelled to take such medication against their will, and the
 findings necessary to justify such actions, are inapposite. 
We conclude that the Family Court did not violate Mother's due
 process rights.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
Mother alternatively argues that if the Family Court
 
did not err in terminating her parental rights, then "the Family
 
Court erred in failing to appoint a guardian ad litem for Mother
 in light of her repeated and consistent mental illness
 diagnosis." We disagree.
 
HRS § 587A-16(b)(2)(B) (Supp. 2012) provides in
 
relevant part that the Family Court "may appoint a guardian ad
 litem for an adult party only after a determination, by clear and
 convincing evidence, that: (i) [t]he party is an incapacitated
 person; and (ii) [t]he party's identified needs cannot be met by
 less restrictive means, including the use of appropriate and
 reasonably available assistance." (format altered). The term
 "incapacitated person," in turn, is defined in relevant part to
 mean "a person who, even with appropriate and reasonably
 available assistance, is unable to substantially: (1)
 [c]omprehend the legal significance of the issues or nature of
 the proceedings under this chapter; (2) [c]onsult with counsel;
 and (3) [a]ssist in preparing the person's case or strategy." 
HRS § 587A-4 (Supp. 2012) (format altered).
 
Mother's counsel requested the appointment of a
 
guardian ad litem for Mother. In considering this request, the
 Family Court explained to Mother that a guardian ad litem would
 talk to Mother and examine all the other available information
 and would "then tell the Court what he or she believes is best
 for you." The Family Court also explained that "the guardian ad
 litem's position might be different from yours[.]" Mother stated 
that she understood the Family Court's explanation and asserted
 that she did not want a guardian ad litem. 
In denying the request for appointment of a guardian ad
 
litem for Mother, the Family Court essentially found that Mother
 was not an "incapacitated person." The Family Court expressed
 its belief that Mother understood the proceedings in the
 courtroom and understood "the risks that you assume when you make
 certain decisions." The Family Court further stated that if it
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
was in Mother's position, "I probably make a different decision,"
 
but that was not enough for the court "to take away [Mother's]
 decision-making authority." 
Although Mother's mental illness prevented her from
 
providing Children with a safe family home, that did not
 necessarily mean that Mother was an incapacitated person whose
 needs could not be met by less restrictive means than the
 appointment of a guardian ad litem. Mother was represented by
 counsel in the proceedings to terminate her parental rights, and
 she opposed the termination of her parental rights as well as
 guardianship for her Children. We conclude that the Family Court
 did not abuse its discretion in respecting Mother's decision-
making authority and declining to appoint a guardian ad litem for
 Mother.
 
CONCLUSION 
We affirm the Family Court's Order Terminating Parental 
Rights. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 30, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Rebecca A. Copeland 
(Law Office of Rebecca
A. Copeland, LLC)
for Appellant-Mother
 Chief Judge
Associate JudgeAssociate JudgeKimberly Tsumoto Guidry
First Deputy Solicitor GeneralDepartment of the Attorney Generalfor State of Hawai
'i, Department 
of Human Services 
12
 