NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000919 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
JR, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
IR, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-D NO. 14-1-7523) 
AMENDED SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant I.R. (
Wife) appeals from: (1) the 
Divorce Decree, filed April 7, 2017 (Divorce Decree); (2) the 
Amended Order Re: Trial, filed April 7, 2017 (Amended Trial Order); (3) the Order Re: Defendant's Motion for Reconsideration of Amended Order and Divorce Decree, filed November 27, 2017 
(Order Denying Motion for Reconsideration of Amended Trial 
Order); (4) the Order Re: Plaintiff's Request for Payment of Attorney Fees and Costs, filed November 27, 2017 (Attorneys' Fees Order); and (5) the Order Re: Defendant's Motion for Reconsideration, filed December 6, 2017 (Order Denying Motion for   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Reconsideration of First Trial Order), all entered by the Family 
Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).1 
After an eight-day trial regarding the divorce of 
Plaintiff-Appellee J.R. (Husband) and Wife, the Family Court entered the Divorce Decree and the subsequent Attorneys' Fees 
Order. Wife raises five points of error on appeal arguing that the Family Court erred in: (1) excluding Wife's impeachment evidence, which purportedly countered Husband's portrayal of his pre-marital and marital debt, and erred in finding that Husband accrued $59,246 in credit card debt during the marriage when a substantial amount was pre-marital debt; (2) awarding Husband child support of $1,069 per month when there was no evidence as to Wife's current (2016) earnings; (3) finding, in the First Trial Order and the Amended Trial Order, that Wife had engaged in parental alienation; (4) entering the Divorce Decree, in that the court did not follow the language of the First Trial Order or the Amended Trial Order; and (5) awarding Husband attorneys' fees and costs when, Wife argues, by operation of Hawai# i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 4(a)(3), Husband's motion was 
deemed denied. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Wife's points of error as follows: 
1 The Honorable Gale L.F. Ching presided. 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Wife sought to admit into evidence Exhibits RA2 
through RG, which Wife claims on appeal were for the purposes of 
impeaching Husband's testimony. As relevant to her argument on appeal,
3 among the excluded exhibits was Exhibit RF, which 
includes checks that Husband received for consulting services he performed through his business. It appears that there is no dispute that both parties had access to the excluded exhibits through discovery, but that Wife failed to provide the exhibits to opposing counsel for admission at trial before the Family Court's trial exhibit deadline. Wife argued to the Family Court 
that the excluded exhibits should be admitted because they were intended to be "rebuttal exhibits." The Family Court found that Wife had possession of these exhibits prior to trial and that the failure to exchange trial exhibits prior to the deadline merited their exclusion from trial. 
2 Exhibit RA was separately admitted at trial. 
3 On appeal, Wife only argues that the checks included in Exhibit RF
should have been admitted as impeachment evidence. Wife does not argue that
any of the other documents included in Exhibits RA-RG should have beenadmitted as impeachment evidence. Only arguments made on appeal will beconsidered as contentions not argued are deemed abandoned. See Kakinami v. 
Kakinami
, 127 Hawai #i 126, 144 n.16, 276 P.3d 695, 713 n.16 (2012). 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai# i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 16  states in 
relevant part that "[t]he [family] court in its discretion may 
establish a pre-trial calendar on which actions may be placed for consideration[.]" Moreover, the family courts also "have broad powers to control the litigation process before them, including the presentation of evidence." Weinberg v. Dickson-Weinberg, 123 4
Hawai# i
 68, 75, 229 P.3d 1133, 1140 (2010) (citing Richardson v. 
Sport Shinko (Waikiki Corp.), 76 Hawai# i 494, 507, 880 P.2d 169, 
182 (1994)). In Richardson, the Hawai# i Supreme Court stated: 
Among courts' inherent powers are the powers "to create a
remedy for a wrong even in the absence of specific statutoryremedies[,]" and "to prevent unfair results." The courtsalso have inherent power to curb abuses and promote a fairprocess which extends to the preclusion of evidence and mayinclude dismissal in severe circumstances. It follows that if the trial court has the inherent power to level the"ultimate sanction" of dismissal, it necessarily has thepower to take all reasonable steps short of dismissal,depending on the equities of the case. 
76 Hawai# i at 507, 880 P.2d at 182 (citations omitted). 
4 HFCR Rule 16 states: 
Rule 16. CONFERENCES WITH THE COURT; FORMULATING ISSUES.
In any action, the court may in its discretion direct
the attorneys for the parties to appear before it for a
conference to consider: 
(1) The settlement of the case;(2) The simplification of the issues;(3) The necessity or desirability of amendments to the
pleadings;
(4) The possibility of obtaining admissions of fact
and of documents which will avoid unnecessary proof;
(5) The limitation of the number of expert witnesses;(6) The advisability of a preliminary reference of
issues to a master for findings to be used as evidence;
(7) Such other matters as may aid in the disposition
of the action. 
The court shall make an order which recites the action 
taken at the conference, the amendments allowed to thepleadings, and the agreements made by the parties as to anyof the matters considered, and which limits the issues fortrial to those not disposed of by admissions or agreementsof counsel; and such order when entered controls thesubsequent course of the action, unless modified at thetrial to prevent manifest injustice. The court in its discretion may establish a pre-trial calendar on whichactions may be placed for consideration as above provided. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
First, we conclude that the Family Court did not abuse 
its broad discretion in controlling the presentation of evidence 
at trial when it determined that Wife's failure to exchange certain exhibits prior to the trial exhibit deadline merited the exclusion of those exhibits from trial. See Weinberg, 123 Hawai# i at 75, 229 P.3d at 1140. The Family Court's conclusion 
that Wife had the exhibits in her possession before trial but failed to give them to opposing counsel, supports the Family Court's decision to exclude the exhibits. 
See Richardson, 76 
Hawai# i at 507, 880 P.2d at 182. 
Wife argues that she did not plan to use the evidence 
unless she needed to impeach Husband's testimony and, therefore, as impeachment exhibits they should have been admitted. 
A review 
of the trial transcript and the checks Wife now argues should have been admitted for impeachment purposes does not support Wife's argument. On appeal, Wife argues that the checks were intended to impeach Husband's claim that "he only made his salary from August to December 2015 from [a certain employer]." Wife identifies the testimony she sought to impeach, but that testimony came after Wife sought the admission of Exhibit RF, which was denied. 
Impeachment evidence is evidence used to discredit a 
witness by, for example, catching the witness in a lie. See Black's Law Dictionary 676 (10th ed. 2014) (defining "impeachment evidence" as "[e]vidence used to undermine a witness's credibility"). Testimony that has not been given cannot be 
5    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
impeached. Wife did not attempt to seek admission of the 
excluded exhibits for impeachment after Husband testified regarding his income from his employer for the relevant time period. Wife identifies no other testimony in the transcript that she sought to impeach with the excluded exhibits. Wife's argument that she did not plan to introduce the excluded exhibits unless it was necessary for impeachment purposes is not supported by the record. We conclude the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in excluding the excluded exhibits.
5 
Wife also argues that the Family Court erred in finding 
that Husband accrued $59,246 in credit card debt during the marriage when a substantial amount of that sum was pre-marital debt. 
As proof of his debt at the time of marriage, Husband 
submitted Exhibit 39, which consisted of various documents, including notices and billing statements, showing the amounts due on five credit cards on or around the time of the parties' marriage. Exhibit 39 includes a statement from Citi for January 20 - February 17, 2011 with a Citi credit card balance of 
5 On appeal, Wife claims that Exhibit RF was already admitted into
evidence in the pre-trial hearing for child support. Wife does not provide a
citation to the appellate record to support her assertion but merely refers tothe hearing transcript and the exhibit designation at the pre-trial hearing.  
At trial, Wife did not argue to the Family Court that the exhibit was alreadyadmitted at a pre-trial hearing and the Family Court had no opportunity toconsider Wife's argument. Accordingly, the argument is waived. See State v. Moses, 102 Hawai #i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003) (generally, "if a party
does not raise an argument at trial, that argument will be deemed to have beenwaived on appeal; this rule applies in both criminal and civil cases"). 
6  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
$8,586.35. The parties were married on February 28, 2011. Wife 
argues that her Exhibit RA showed that the balance on the Citi credit card at the date of marriage was approximately $3,000 higher than the amount shown in Exhibit 39, which was adopted by the Family Court. Wife's Exhibit RA showing a balance on the Citi card of $14,130.81 is a statement from February 18 - March 17, 2011.  Taking into account the Citi statement submitted by 
Wife and subtracting the debts and interest incurred on that 
credit card on and after the date of marriage, the resulting credit card balance would be $11,907.45. However, Husband testified that additional charges made earlier in the billing period, just prior to the wedding, including a $2,328.42 expense for a Carnival cruise, were wedding and honeymoon expenses. Subtracting the $2,328.42 cruise charge from the balance on the Citi card on the date of the wedding leaves a balance of $9,579.03.  This is $992.68 more than the $8,586.35 amount 
reflected in Exhibit 39 and accepted by the Family Court. This 
difference appears to be accounted for by Husband's testimony that additional charges made shortly before the date of marriage included various wedding-related expenses. Therefore, we conclude that the Family Court did not clearly err in finding that Exhibit 39 was an accurate accounting of Husband's debt at the time of marriage, as this finding is supported by substantial evidence in the record. 
Insofar as the court can discern Wife's argument, Wife 
also appears to argue that Husband's Exhibit 39 is inconsistent 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with Husband's various Asset & Debt Statements. The statements 
submitted by Husband list each of his creditors, the month and year the debts were incurred, the total balances owed, and the required minimum monthly payments. However, the Asset and Debt Statements do not appear inconsistent with the Family Court's findings regarding the amount of debt Husband had at the time of marriage. The Asset and Debt Statements show Husband's outstanding debts. Although the statements list the dates the debts were incurred, the Family Court reasonably interpreted the statements to mean not that the total debt was incurred on that date but, rather, the statements merely provided the cumulative total to date and, presumably, the date the debt was "incurred" actually means when the credit line was opened. Wife makes no additional discernable argument contesting the Family Court's findings regarding the amount of debt accrued during the parties' marriage. The Family Court's findings with respect to Husband's debt at the time of marriage and the parties' jointly accrued debt are not clearly erroneous. 
(2) Wife argues that the Family Court erred in 
awarding Husband child support of $1,069 per month when there was no evidence as to Wife's current (2016) earnings.  Wife contends that, because the Family Court rejected the evidence she offered with respect to her current income as not credible, the Family Court erred in making a finding regarding her current income to calculate child support. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Family Court made numerous findings regarding 
Wife's claims regarding her income and business expenses between 
2012-2016, finding that Wife's testimony was not credible. Wife challenges none of these findings on appeal. The Family Court entered into evidence, inter alia, Wife's 2015 IRS Form 1099 (2015 Form 1099), which showed that in 2015, the year immediately 
before trial, her income was $112,780.62. It appears that the 
Family Court extrapolated Wife's "current" income from her income earned in 2015 as reflected on her 2015 Form 1099. Accordingly, in its Finding of Fact (FOF) 14, the Family Court found "Wife had 
a gross monthly income of $9,398.39," which was the amount used 
on the Child Support Worksheet to determine the appropriate level of child support. Wife does not challenge FOF 14 on appeal. The Family Court's estimate of Wife's current income, based on the evidence that it found credible regarding her most recent full years' income in 2015, was not clearly erroneous. Although Wife's income may vary year to year based on the nature of her position as an independent realtor associate, Wife held the same job in 2016 as she did in 2015. Wife made no argument as to why she would make substantially less than in 2015, and she provided no other credible evidence showing her "current" income. On this record, the Family Court's finding regarding Wife's income was not clearly erroneous as there is substantial evidence in the record to support it. 
(3) Wife argues that the Family Court erred in finding 
in its First Trial Order and Amended Trial Order that Wife had 
9  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
engaged in parental alienation. Wife challenges the following 
finding, which is included in both the First Trial Order and the Amended Trial Order: 
The Court notes that there is evidence of "Parental 
Alienation" in which both [Husband] and [Wife] havecontributed to with the majority of such appearing to bemore from the [Wife], which has adversely affected theMinor's emotional, psychological and educationaldevelopment. 
The Family Court's finding above is supported by 
substantial evidence. Dr. Reneau Kennedy (Dr. Kennedy), a 
clinical and forensic psychologist, testified extensively 
regarding her observations and expert opinion regarding parental alienation behaviors exhibited by the parties' child (Child). 
The Family Court made numerous factual findings regarding Dr. 
Kennedy's testimony regarding parental alienation behaviors exhibited by the Child, which the Family Court found credible and none of which are specifically challenged by Wife on appeal. Dr. Kennedy stated that it was her opinion that the "[Child] historically and currently exhibits behaviors of alienation regarding his nonpreferred parent, who is father."  Dr. Kennedy 
also testified regarding the harms caused to children who display 
parental alienation behaviors. Dr. Kennedy testified that Wife's failure to include Husband in care plans for the Child contributed to Child's alienation and was not in his best interests. Nicole Cummings, Esq., who was appointed the guardian ad litem (GAL) by stipulation of the parties, expressed the same 
concerns regarding the Child's behaviors that demonstrated 
parental alienation. The GAL testified that the Child's behavior 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with Husband did not match the image portrayed by Wife or 
comments made by Child while he was under Wife's care that indicated the Child was afraid of Husband and did not want to be with him.
 The evidence showed that the Child exhibited evidence 
of "cognitive distortions," and there was testimony that Wife's chosen doctor for the Child reenforced the Child's "alignment" with Wife and his perception that Wife was good and Husband was bad. There was also testimony that Wife made unfounded allegations against Husband and was negative regarding him, which were picked up and repeated by the Child. The Family Court's inference from the evidence, i.e., that the Child's behaviors exhibiting parental alienation from Husband was caused in large part by Wife, is a reasonable inference from the evidence. 
Wife also argues that the Family Court erred in 
awarding sole physical custody to Husband. Wife argues that no witness testified that it would be in the best interests of the Child for sole physical custody to be awarded to Husband and that the finding is not supported by any evidence in the record. 
11  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 571-46 (Supp. 2017)6 provides the 
6 HRS § 571-46 states, in relevant part: 
§ 571-46 Criteria and procedure in awarding custody
and visitation; best interest of the child.  (a) In actions
for divorce, separation, annulment, separate maintenance, or
any other proceeding where there is at issue a dispute as tothe custody of a minor child, the court, during the pendencyof the action, at the final hearing, or any time during theminority of the child, may make an order for the custody ofthe minor child as may seem necessary or proper. In awardingthe custody, the court shall be guided by the followingstandards, considerations, and procedures:
(1) Custody should be awarded to either parent or toboth parents according to the best interests ofthe child, and the court also may considerfrequent, continuing, and meaningful contact ofeach parent with the child unless the courtfinds that a parent is unable to act in the bestinterest of the child; 
. . . . (b) In determining what constitutes the best
interest of the child under this section, the court shallconsider, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Any history of sexual or physical abuse of achild by a parent;
(2) Any history of neglect or emotional abuse of achild by a parent;
(3) The overall quality of the parent-childrelationship;
(4) The history of caregiving or parenting by eachparent prior and subsequent to a marital orother type of separation;
(5) Each parent's cooperation in developing andimplementing a plan to meet the child's ongoingneeds, interests, and schedule; provided thatthis factor shall not be considered in any casewhere the court has determined that familyviolence has been committed by a parent;
(6) The physical health needs of the child;
(7) The emotional needs of the child;
(8) The safety needs of the child;
(9) The educational needs of the child;
(10) The child's need for relationships withsiblings;
(11) Each parent's actions demonstrating that theyallow the child to maintain family connectionsthrough family events and activities; providedthat this factor shall not be considered in anycase where the court has determined that familyviolence has been committed by a parent;
(12) Each parent's actions demonstrating that theyseparate the child's needs from the parent'sneeds;
(13) Any evidence of past or current drug or alcoholabuse by a parent; 
(continued...) 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
criteria and procedure for awarding custody and visitation of 
children in, inter alia, divorce actions. HRS § 571-46(a)(1) states: 
(1) Custody should be awarded to either parent or to
both parents according to the best interests of thechild, and the court also may consider frequent,continuing, and meaningful contact of each parent withthe child unless the court finds that a parent isunable to act in the best interest of the child. 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has instructed that: 
Hawai# i courts have consistently adhered to
the best interests of the child standard as paramount when considering the issue ofcustody. In so doing, the family court isgranted broad discretion to weigh the variousfactors involved, with no single factor beinggiven presumptive paramount weight, indetermining whether the standard has beenmet. 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 41, 50, 137 P.3d 355, 364 (2006). 
Further, "[t]his court is keenly aware that custody, visitation, 
and relocation decisions should be overturned only in the rarest 
6(...continued)
(14) The mental health of each parent;
(15) The areas and levels of conflict present within
the family; and
(16) A parent's prior wilful misuse of the protectionfrom abuse process under chapter 586 to gain atactical advantage in any proceeding involvingthe custody determination of a minor. Such wilful misuse may be considered only if it isestablished by clear and convincing evidence,and if it is further found by clear andconvincing evidence that in the particularfamily circumstance the wilful misuse tends toshow that, in the future, the parent who engagedin the wilful misuse will not be able to cooperate successfully with the other parent intheir shared responsibilities for the child.The court shall articulate findings of factwhenever relying upon this factor as part of itsdetermination of the best interests of the child. For the purposes of this section, whentaken alone, the voluntary dismissal of apetition for protection from abuse shall not betreated as prima facie evidence that a wilfulmisuse of the protection from abuse process hasoccurred. 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of cases, where there has been a 'manifest abuse of discretion.'" 
Doe v. Doe, 120 Hawai# i 149, 179, 202 P.3d 610, 640 (App. 2009) 
(quoting Sabol v. Sabol, 2 Haw. App. 24, 31, 624 P.2d 1378, 1383 (1981)). 
In addition to the findings regarding parental 
alienation discussed above, the Family Court made numerous additional findings relevant to the best interests of the Child in terms of his physical custody, none of which are specifically challenged by Wife on appeal. 
It is well-settled that findings 
of fact not challenged on appeal are binding on the appellate court. See Balogh v. Balogh, 134 Hawai# i 29, 33 n.3, 332 P.3d 
631, 635 n.3 (2014) (unless challenged on appeal, family court's remaining findings of fact are binding on the appellate court); see also Bremer v. Weeks, 104 
Hawai# i 43, 63, 85 P.3d 150, 170 
(2004). The above findings support the Family Court's award of sole physical custody of the Child to Husband. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Family Court did not 
err in its findings regarding parental alienation or in exercising its discretion in reaching its custody decision. 
(4) Wife argues that the Family Court erred in 
entering the Divorce Decree in that the court did not follow the language of the First Trial Order or Amended Trial Order. Wife contends that there is no evidence that she ever had the chance to object to the content of the Divorce Decree and that the Family Court made substantial changes and additions from its prior orders without any explanation or hearing as to why it was doing so. 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
First, Wife provides no authority to support the 
proposition that the Family Court is bound by previous orders or 
that it does not retain the right to modify previous decisions. To the contrary, the general rule is that "so long as a trial court retains jurisdiction, it always has the power to reexamine, modify, vacate, correct and reverse its prior rulings and orders." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps.' Ret. Sys. of Haw., 92 Hawai# i 432, 441, 992 P.2d 127, 136 (2000) (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
Wife cites no authority for 
her proposition that the Family Court must expressly state its reasons for making changes to its trial orders, and we find none. The Family Court, upon the request of Wife, provided detailed findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding its final decisions as represented in the Amended Trial Order and the Divorce Decree. Unless those decisions constitute an abuse of the Family Court's discretion or if a finding of fact is clearly erroneous or a conclusion of law is wrong, the Family Court's decision will not be disturbed on appeal. See Brutsch v. Brutsch, 139 Hawai# i 373, 381, 390 P.3d 1260, 1268 (2017). 
It appears that the only substantive changes from the 
First Trial Order were made by the Family Court in response to Wife's Motion for Reconsideration. In her Motion for Reconsideration, Wife objected that the Family Court had awarded Husband sole physical custody but had set forth a detailed joint physical custody schedule granting both parents essentially equal time with the Child. 
Wife also asked the Family Court to address 
debt equalization. 
15  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In its Amended Trial Order and Divorce Decree, the 
Family Court addressed both of these issues. The Family Court 
affirmed its decision to grant Husband sole physical custody and removed the detailed custody schedule to which Wife had objected. The Family Court did not, however, accept Wife's proposed remedy, joint physical custody. In addition, the Family Court also resolved Wife's request that the court address the debt equalization between the parties. On appeal, Wife argues that it is unknown why the court made the changes it did. However, the Family Court's decision is supported by the detailed FOFs and Conclusions of Law (COLs) requested by Wife. 
Finally, Wife asserts that "[s]ubstantial evidence was 
lacking to support the Family Court's findings." 
Wife provides 
no argument or specificity as to which facts are not supported. Therefore, this contention will be disregarded. See Kakinami, 127 Hawai# i at 144 n.16, 276 P.3d at 713 n.16 (citing In re 
Guardianship of Carlsmith, 113 
Hawai# i 236, 246, 151 P.3d 717, 
727 (2007) (noting that this court may "disregard a particular contention if the appellant makes no discernible argument in support of that position")). 
We conclude that Wife's fourth point of error is 
without merit. 
(5) Wife argues that the Family Court erred in 
awarding Husband attorneys' fees and costs when, by operation of HRAP Rule 4(a)(3), his motion for fees and costs was denied ninety days after the filing of the motion. 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On March 10, 2017, in Husband's written Closing 
Argument, Husband requested attorneys' fees pursuant to HRS 
§ 580-47(a) (2006 & Supp. 2017).  7
7 HRS § 580-47 states, in relevant part, 
HRS 586-47 Support orders; division of property.
(a) Upon granting a divorce, or thereafter if, in
addition to the powers granted in subsections (c) and(d), jurisdiction of those matters is reserved underthe decree by agreement of both parties or by order ofcourt after finding that good cause exists, the courtmay make any further orders as shall appear just andequitable (1) compelling the parties or either of themto provide for the support, maintenance, and educationof the children of the parties; (2) compelling eitherparty to provide for the support and maintenance ofthe other party; (3) finally dividing and distributingthe estate of the parties, real, personal, or mixed,whether community, joint, or separate; and (4)allocating, as between the parties, the responsibilityfor the payment of the debts of the parties whethercommunity, joint, or separate, and the attorney'sfees, costs, and expenses incurred by each party byreason of the divorce. . . . 
(b) An order as to the custody, management, and
division of property and as to the payment of debtsand the attorney's fees, costs and expenses incurredin the divorce shall be final and conclusive as to both parties subject only to appeal as in civil cases.The court shall at all times, including during thependency of any appeal, have the power to grant anyand all orders that may be necessary to protect andprovide for the support and maintenance of the partiesand any children of the parties to secure justice, tocompel either party to advance reasonable amounts forthe expenses of the appeal including attorney's feesto be incurred by the other party, and to amend andrevise such orders from time to time. 
. . . . 
(f) Attorney's fees and costs. The court hearing any motionfor orders either revising an order for the custody,support, maintenance, and education of the children of theparties, or an order for the support and maintenance of oneparty by the other, or a motion for an order to enforce anysuch order or any order made under subsection (a) of thissection, may make such orders requiring either party to payor contribute to the payment of the attorney's fees, costs,and expenses of the other party relating to such motion andhearing as shall appear just and equitable afterconsideration of the respective merits of the parties, therelative abilities of the parties, the economic condition ofeach party at the time of the hearing, the burdens imposedupon either party for the benefit of the children of theparties, the concealment of or failure to disclose income or
(continued...) 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On March 17, 2017, the Family Court in its First Trial 
Order found that Husband was entitled to reasonable attorneys' 
fees and directed Husband to file a detailed declaration as to fees and costs and granted Wife seven days in which to file any objections. Husband submitted his attorneys' fees declaration on March 24, 2017. On appeal, Wife appears to regard this submission as a "motion" for attorneys' fees. Wife filed a motion for reconsideration of the Amended Trial Order on March 29, 2017, in which she asked the court to reconsider its decision regarding, inter alia, the award of attorneys' fees. Wife also filed her objections to the request for attorneys' fees on April 4, 2017. The Amended Trial Order is identical to the First Trial Order with respect to the Family Court's finding that Husband was entitled to reasonable attorneys' fees. On April 7, 2017, the Divorce Decree also provided that Husband was entitled to reasonable attorneys' fees and instructed that the court would issue a separate order regarding the attorneys' fees award. 
On April 17, 2017, Wife filed her second motion for 
reconsideration which again asked the court to reconsider its decision with respect to attorneys' fees. Wife also requested that the Family Court issue FOFs and COLs if her motion was not granted in its entirety. On November 27, 2017, the Family Court entered its Order Awarding Attorneys' Fees, awarding Husband one-third of his requested attorneys' fees, GET, and costs, in the amount of $35,567.19. 
7(...continued)
an asset, or violation of a restraining order issued under
section 580-10(a) or (b), if any, by either party, and allother circumstances of the case. 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 On the same day, the Family Court also entered its 
Order Denying Motion for Reconsideration of Amended Trial Order. 
On December 6, 2017, the Family Court entered its Order Denying Motion for Reconsideration of First Trial Order.   Wife filed a 
notice of appeal on December 27, 2017. On January 5, 2018, Wife filed a request for FOFs and COLs. On February 20, 2018, the Family Court issued its FOFs and COLs. 
Wife argues that Husband's "motion" for fees and costs 
was denied ninety days after the filing of the motion or the subsequently-filed Divorce Decree, by operation of HRAP Rule 4(a)(3). HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) provides, in relevant part: 
(3) TIME TO APPEAL AFFECTED BY POST-JUDGMENT MOTIONS.
If any party files a timely motion for judgment as a matter
of law, to amend findings or make additional findings, for anew trial, to reconsider, alter or amend the judgment ororder, or for attorney’s fees or costs, and court or agencyrules specify the time by which the motion shall be filed,then the time for filing the notice of appeal is extendedfor all parties until 30 days after entry of an orderdisposing of the motion. The presiding court or agency inwhich the motion was filed shall dispose of any suchpost-judgment motion by entering an order upon the recordwithin 90 days after the date the motion was filed. If the court or agency fails to enter an order on the record, then,within 5 days after the 90th day, the clerk of the relevantcourt or agency shall notify the parties that, by operationof this Rule, the post-judgment motion is denied and thatany orders entered thereafter shall be a nullity. The time of appeal shall run from the date of entry of the court oragency’s order disposing of the post-judgment motion, if theorder is entered within the 90 days, or from the filing dateof the clerk’s notice to the parties that the post-judgmentmotion is denied pursuant to the operation of the Rule.
The notice of appeal shall be deemed to appeal
the disposition of all post-judgment motions that aretimely filed after entry of the judgment or order. 
(Emphasis added). 
HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) is plainly intended to provide a 
framework for when, and under what circumstances, the time to 
file an appeal is affected by post-judgment motions, including specifically what kind of post-judgment motions affect the deadline to file an appeal. HRAP Rule 4(a)(3), by its own terms, 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
applies only to motions for which a time limit is established by 
court or agency rule. HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) specifically states that the rule applies to timely motions for attorneys' fees and costs for which "court or agency rules specify the time by which the motion shall be filed[.]" HRS § 580-47(a) allows the Family Court to award attorneys' fees and states: 
Upon granting a divorce, or thereafter if, in addition to
the powers granted in subsections (c) and (d), jurisdictionof those matters is reserved under the decree by agreementof both parties or by order of court after finding that goodcause exists, the court may make any further orders as shallappear just and equitable . . . (4) allocating, as betweenthe parties, the responsibility for the payment of the debtsof the parties whether community, joint, or separate, andthe attorney's fees, costs, and expenses incurred by eachparty by reason of the divorce. . . . 
(Emphasis added). 
No time limit is specified in the statute and the 
language provides that the Family Court has the power to award 
attorneys' fees after the granting of a divorce. The parties have not identified any Family Court rule that provides a time limit regarding the request for attorneys' fees in a divorce action, and the court has found none. See Cox v. Cox, 125 
Hawai# i 19, 29, 250 P.3d 775, 785 (2011) (no time limit for 
Family Court Rule 68 request for attorneys' fees after offer of settlement and request for fees can even be filed after appeal of judgment is completed). Therefore, we conclude that HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) is not applicable and did not divest the Family Court of the power to award attorneys' fees in this case. Furthermore, the Attorneys' Fees Order was entered prior to Wife's filing of her notice of appeal, so the Family Court still retained jurisdiction over the matter when it entered the Attorneys' Fees Order. See Cox, 125 Hawai# i at 29, 250 P.3d at 785 (family court 
20 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is divested of jurisdiction to hear Rule 68 motion for attorneys' 
fees upon filing of notice of appeal). 
For these reasons, we affirm the Family Court's April 
7, 2017 Divorce Decree, April 7, 2017 Amended Trial Order, November 27, 2017 Order Denying Motion for Reconsideration of Amended Trial Order, November 27, 2017 Attorneys' Fees Order, and December 6, 2017 Order Denying Motion for Reconsideration of First Trial Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 25, 2019. 
On the briefs: Earle A. Partington,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
John C. Bryant, Jr.,Lynne M. Youmans,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
21 