NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000298
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaiintiff-Appellee, v.
IAN J. DEMING, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
KANE'OHE DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-15-03980)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ian J. Deming (Deming) appeals from
 
the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment,

 
1
entered on March 3, 2016  and Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or
Order and Plea/Judgment, entered on March 23, 2016 in the District Court of the First Circuit, K
ane'ohe Division (District 
Court).2 
Deming was convicted of Operating a Vehicle Under the
 
Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2016).
 
On appeal, Deming contends the District Court erred by
 
(1) failing to conduct an adequate Tachibana colloquy by omitting
 an advisement about his right to testify, therefore, he did not
 knowingly waive his right to testify and (2) admitting the
 arresting officer's opinion that he failed field sobriety tests
 because there was insufficient foundation for its admission.
 
1
 The Honorable Randal I. Shintani presided.
 
2
 The Honorable Linda K. Luke presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Deming's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Deming contends that the District Court failed to
 
conduct an adequate pre-trial "Tachibana" colloquy by failing to
 state that he had "a right to testify" and that if he did not
 testify by the end of trial the court would briefly question him
 again to ensure that the decision not to testify was his own
 decision, and by failing to conduct an adequate ultimate
 Tachibana colloquy by failing to state that he had "a right to
 testify."
 
Deming claims that his pre-trial Tachibana colloquy was
 
inadequate for failure to warn him that he would again be

 
questioned prior to the end of trial to ensure that it was his
 decision not to testify. Such as advisement is required by State
 v. Lewis, 94 Hawai
'i 292, 297, 12 P.3d 1233, 1238 (2000). 
However, a waiver of the right to testify will be deemed valid unless the defendant can prove otherwise by a preponderance of the evidence. Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai
'i 226, 237, 900 P.2d 
1293, 1304 (1995) (citing State v. Ibuos, 75 Haw. 118, 121, 857 P.2d 576, 578 (1993). The District Court did question Deming again prior to the end of trial to ensure that it was his decision not to testify. Deming points to nothing else, except as noted above, to support his claim that he did not validly waive his right to testify. Deming has not proven by a preponderance of the evidence that his waiver of the right to testify was not knowingly made. 
The District Court's pre-trial and ultimate Tachibana
 
colloquy was not deficient for failing to state the words "right
 to testify." In the advisement prior to the State's first
 witness, the District Court stated that Deming will eventually
 make a decision whether to testify or not, it was his right to
 remain silent, and that if he testified he would be subject to
 cross-examination and his testimony would be considered in
 determining the outcome of the case. During the colloquy prior
 to Deming's decision not to testify, the District Court reminded
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Deming of the pre-trial advisement and stated "that decision,
 
whether to testify or not, is your decision to be made." The
 District Court again stated the consequences of Deming's decision
 to testify or not testify. The District Court is not required to
 use the specific words "right to testify." The advisement given
 to Deming adequately apprised him of his right to testify or not
 testify. 
(2) Deming contends that the District Court improperly
 
considered Officer Brent Sylvester's (Officer Sylvester)
 testimony that he "failed" the field sobriety tests after it had
 precluded such testimony during trial. The District Court
 sustained Deming's objections to Officer Sylvester's testimony
 that Deming failed the walk-and-turn test and the one-leg stand
 test. However, Officer Sylvester testified without objection
 that based on Deming's performance on the walk-and-turn test that
 Deming was impaired, Deming did not complete the walk-and-turn
 and one-leg stand test correctly, and that Deming was impaired
 and could not operate a vehicle safely. Deming also failed to
 object to Officer Sylvester's testimony regarding clues on the
 walk-and-turn and one-leg stand test, how many clues there were
 for each test, how many clues constituted a failure of each test,
 and how many clues he observed when Deming performed the tests.
 
In finding Deming guilty, the District Court noted that 
with respect to the walk-and-turn test "Officer Sylvester expressed the opinion that either he failed or he was impaired," and "Officer Sylvester was of the opinion, based on his training and experience, that Mr. Deming either failed or was impaired," based on Deming's performance on the one-leg stand test. Based upon the context of the District Court's statements, it appears that the District Court was summarizing Officer Sylvester's testimony when it referred to Officer Sylvester's testimony regarding failed field sobriety tests. The District Court properly stated that in Officer Sylvester's opinion Deming was impaired based on his performance on the walk-and-turn and one-leg stand tests. In a bench trial, it is presumed that the trial court will disregard inadmissible evidence. State v. Vliet, 91 
Hawai
'i 288, 298, 983 P.2d 189, 199 (1999). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Aside from Officer Sylvester's excluded opinions, there
 
was sufficient evidence to convict Deming of OVUII. While Deming
 
was operating his vehicle, Officer Sylvester observed Deming
 crossing a solid white line then swerving back into his lane and
 slamming on his brakes without any apparent reason. Officer
 Sylvester noticed a strong odor of an alcoholic beverage from
 Deming's breath and that Deming had glassy, watery, and bloodshot
 eyes and slurred speech. Officer Colson Friel also testified
 that he could smell the strong odor of alcohol from Deming as
 Deming spoke and blew into the screening device and Officer Friel
 also observed Deming's red, watery, and glassy eyes.
 
During Officer Sylvester's administration of the field
 
sobriety tests, Deming lost his balance in the starting position
 on the walk-and-turn test. Deming also stopped for 5 seconds
 after making the turn, which was not part of the instructions,
 then stepped off the line, missed one heel-to-toe, and raised his
 arms. Deming swayed to the front, to the back, and from side to
 side during the entire one-leg stand test, hopped, and raised his
 arms during the test, all contrary to the instructions given to
 Deming. Thus, any error in mentioning Officer Sylvester's
 opinion that Deming failed the tests was harmless. 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of Entry of 
Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, entered on March 3, 2016 and Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, entered on March 23, 2016 in the District Court of the First Circuit, K
ane'ohe Division are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 31, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Marcus B. Sierra,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Loren J. Thomas,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,

City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
4
 