NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0001700
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MONTY V. RIDEOUT, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 13-1-001K, CRIMINAL NOS. 91-054K, 91-095)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Monty V. Rideout (Rideout) appeals
 
from the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying
 
Petitioner's Rule 40 Petition Without A Hearing," entered June
 21, 2013 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
1
 (circuit 
court). Rideout's Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 
40 Petition sought post-conviction relief from his convictions in: (1) CR. No. 91-054K for drug-related offenses committed on March 5, 1991; and (2) CR. No. 91-095 for drug- and firearms-related offenses also committed on March 5, 1991.  
Rideout contends the circuit court erred by: 
(1) failing to assign him counsel pursuant to HRPP Rule
 
40(i);
 
(2) failing to separate his claim for relief for
 
unlawful revocation of his parole under HRPP Rule 40(a)(2)(ii)
 and (iii) from his due process, liberty interest, and double
 jeopardy claims;
 
1
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(3) failing to grant him an evidentiary hearing
 
pursuant to HRPP Rule 40(f);
 
(4) granting Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai 'i's 
(State) untimely April 9, 2013 motion for an extension of time to 
answer; and 
(5) failing to respond to his motions for summary
 
judgment, assistance of counsel, and to expedite proceedings.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
 Rideout's appeal is without merit.
 
First, Rideout contends the circuit court erred by 
failing to assign counsel to represent him at parole violation hearings held in Washington state, where Hawai
'i authorities had 
released him on parole on December 10, 1998. Rideout raised this claim pursuant to HRS § 355D-1 (Supp. 2013), Interstate Corrections Compact, which contains no provision requiring the assignment of counsel. See inter alia HRS § 355D-1. Rideout 
also indicates no evidence or argument supporting a colorable claim that the circuit court erred in failing to "refer the [HRPP Rule 40] petition to the public defender for representation" pursuant to HRPP Rule 40(i). 
Second, contrary to Rideout's contention, HRPP Rule 
40(c)(3) did not require the circuit court to order his due process, liberty interest, and double jeopardy claims "transferred . . . for disposition under the civil rules." Rideout fails to indicate how his due process, liberty interest, and double jeopardy claims are civil complaints that could be disposed of under civil rules. Cf. Hutch v. State, 107 Hawai
'i 
411, 420, 114 P.3d 917, 926 (2005) (concluding the lower court should transfer defendant's civil claims that he was denied access to a Federal Prison Guidebook and medically-necessary shoes for disposition under civil rules). Further, HRPP Rule 40 relief is inapplicable to these claims because Rideout fails to indicate extraordinary circumstances that prevented him from raising these issues during the circuit court proceedings or in 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
an appeal. See HRPP Rule 40(a)(3).
 
Third, Rideout misinterprets HRS § 353-70 (1993)2
 and
Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 23-700-53 (1992)3 as
 
supporting his contention that the circuit court should have held
 
an evidentiary hearing on his HRPP Rule 40 Petition pursuant to
 HRPP Rule 40(f).
4 None of these authorities require the HPA or
 
the circuit court to hold an evidentiary hearing. 
2 HRS § 353-70 governs final discharge for parolees and provides in
pertinent part:
 
§353-70 Final discharge. Whenever, in its opinion, any
paroled prisoner has given such evidence as is deemed reliable and
trustworthy that the paroled prisoner will remain at libertywithout violating the law and that the paroled prisoner's finalrelease is not incompatible with the welfare of society, the[Hawai'i] paroling authority may grant the prisoner a written
discharge from further liability under the prisoner's sentence. 
Any paroled prisoner who has been on parole for at
least five years shall be brought before the paroling
authority for purposes of consideration for final discharge
and complete pardon. In the event the prisoner is not
granted a final discharge and full pardon, the paroled
prisoner shall be brought before the paroling authority for
the aforementioned purposes annually thereafter.
 
(Emphases added.) 
3 HAR § 23-700-53 provides:
 
23-700-53 Discharge after five years of parole. When a
 
parolee has been on parole status for five consecutive years, and
not received a final discharge from sentence, [The Hawaii Paroling
Authority (HPA)] shall consider the parolee for discharge on the
completion of the fifth year and annually thereafter until the
parolee is discharged or serves the parolee's full maximum term.
Pardon recommendation to the Governor shall be a part of the
consideration for final discharge.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
4 HRPP Rule 40(f) provides in relevant part:
 
(f) Hearings. If a petition alleges facts that if
proven would entitle the petitioner to relief, the court
shall grant a hearing which may extend only to the issues
raised in the petition or answer. However, the court may
deny a hearing if the petitioner's claim is patently
frivolous and is without trace of support either in the
record or from other evidence submitted by the petitioner.
The court may also deny a hearing on a specific question of
fact when a full and fair evidentiary hearing upon that
question was held during the course of the proceedings which
led to the judgment or custody which is the subject of the
petition or at any later proceeding.
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fourth, Rideout contends the circuit court erred in
 
granting the State's April 9, 2013 motion for an extension of
 
time to answer. This is also apparently based on a misreading of
 the law. HRPP Rule 40(d) permits the State to file its response
 "within such . . . time as the [circuit] court may allow[.]" The
 State's filing was timely because the circuit court permitted the
 State to respond by May 9, 2013.
5
 
Rideout's fifth contention also misapplies the circuit
 
court rules that appropriately apply to the parties. Hawai 'i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rules 8(d) and 12(a)(2) require
 
responses and replies from parties.6 Neither HRCP Rule 8(d) nor
 
5 HRPP Rule 40(d) provides:
 
(d)
 Response. The State of Hawai' i shall be named as 
the respondent in the petition, and the petitioner shall
serve the petition on the respondent by delivering a filedcopy thereof to the prosecutor. Service may be made by theattorney for the petitioner, or the petitioner in a pro se
case. If it appears that the petitioner is unable to effect
prompt service of a filed copy of the petition or otherpleading under this rule, the court shall direct court staffto effect service on behalf of the petitioner. Within 30 days after the service of the petition or within suchfurther time as the court may allow, the respondent may
answer or otherwise plead, but the court may require theState to answer at any time. Where the petition makes ashowing of entitlement to immediate relief, the court mayshorten the time in which to respond to the petition. Therespondent shall file with its answer any records that arematerial to the questions raised in the petition which arenot included in the petition. 
(Emphasis added.) 
6 HRCP Rule 8 provides in relevant part:
 
Rule 8. GENERAL RULES OF PLEADING.
 
. . . .
 (d) Effect of Failure to Deny. Averments in a
 
pleading to which a responsive pleading is required, other
than those as to the amount of damage, are admitted when not
denied in the responsive pleading. Averments in a pleading
to which no responsive pleading is required or permitted
shall be taken as denied or avoided.
 
HRCP Rule 12 provides in relevant part:
 Rule 12. DEFENSES AND OBJECTIONS - WHEN AND HOW PRESENTED - BY
 
PLEADING OR MOTION - MOTION FOR JUDGMENT ON THE PLEADINGS.
 
(a) When Presented.
 
(continued...)
 
4
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rule 12(a)(2) required the circuit court to respond to Rideout's
 
motions for summary judgment, assistance of counsel, and to
 expedite proceedings.
7
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Petitioner's Rule 40
 Petition Without a Hearing," entered June 21, 2013 in the Circuit
 Court of the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 9, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Monty V. Rideout
Petitioner-Appellant pro se.
 
Chief Judge
Lisa M. Itomura
 Diane K. Taira
 Deputies Attorney General
for Respondent-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
6(...continued)
. . . . 
(2) A party served with a pleading stating a
cross-claim against that party shall serve an answer thereto
within 20 days after being served. The plaintiff shall
serve a reply to a counter-claim in the answer within 20
days after service of the answer or, if a reply is ordered
by the court, within 20 days after service of the order,
unless the order otherwise directs.
 
7
 Rideout does not cite to the record to indicate his motion for
 
assistance of counsel nor has review of the record disclosed such a motion. 
This may indicate his "motion" was part of his HRPP Rule 40 petition. 
5
 