NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0000542
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
BANQUE DE TAHITI, a Tahiti corporation,
Judgment Creditor-Appellant,
v.
 
FILOLA TINA KURTH, Personal Representative of the
Estate of THOMAS CHRISTIAN KURTH, Deceased,
Judgment Debtor-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(S.P. NO. 03-1-0045)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
This action arose from Judgment Creditor-Appellant
 
Banque de Tahiti's (Banque de Tahiti) filing of a French
 
Polynesian judgment in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
 
1
(circuit court),  seeking to enforce that foreign judgment
against Judgment Debtor-Appellee Thomas Christian Kurth (Kurth),
 who is now deceased.
2 Banque de Tahiti appeals from the circuit
 
court's Judgment, entered on March 24, 2014, in favor of Kurth
 
and dismissing Banque de Tahiti's claims to enforce the foreign
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 
2
 On March 3, 2016, we granted Banque de Tahiti's "Motion to Substitute
Parties" to the extent it sought to substitute Filola Tina Kurth, Personal
Representative of the Estate of Thomas Christian Kurth, for Thomas Kurth. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
judgment.
 
In appealing from the Judgment, Banque de Tahiti
 
contends that the circuit court erred by entering: (1) the "Order
 
Granting [Kurth's] Motion to Dismiss Pursuant to [Hawaii Revised
 
3
Statutes (HRS)] § 657-5,"  (Order Granting Motion to Dismiss)
 
entered December 23, 2013; and (2) an "Order Granting [Kurth's]

 
Renewed Motion for Reconsideration of Findings of Fact;
 Conclusions of Law; Order Granting [Banque de Tahiti's] Motion
 for Summary Judgment Filed March 10, 2006 and Denying [Kurth's]
 Motion for Summary Judgment" (Order Granting Reconsideration),
 
entered October 21, 2009, which vacated a previous summary
 
judgment ruling in favor of Banque de Tahiti.
 
For the reasons stated below, we vacate in part, 

affirm in part, and remand for further proceedings.
I. Background
 
This case has a fairly lengthy and involved procedural
 
background. We summarize relevant parts of the record.
 
On September 19, 2003, Banque de Tahiti filed in the
 
circuit court the French Polynesian judgment entered in favor of
 
Banque de Tahiti and against Kurth (Foreign Judgment), asserting
 
that it was being filed pursuant to HRS § 658C-4 (Supp.
 
3 HRS § 657-5 (2016) provides:
 
§657-5 Domestic judgments and decrees.  Unless an
 
extension is granted, every judgment and decree of any court
of the State shall be presumed to be paid and discharged at
the expiration of ten years after the judgment or decree was
rendered. No action shall be commenced after the expiration
of ten years from the date a judgment or decree was rendered
or extended. No extension of a judgment or decree shall be
granted unless the extension is sought within ten years of
the date the original judgment or decree was rendered. A
 court shall not extend any judgment or decree beyond twenty
years from the date of the original judgment or decree. No
 extension shall be granted without notice and the filing of
a non-hearing motion or a hearing motion to extend the life
of the judgment or decree.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2008)(repealed 2009).4 HRS § 658C-4 was part of the now-repealed
 
Uniform Foreign Money-Judgment Recognition Act (UFMJRA). The
 
Foreign Judgment was issued in the Civil Court of First Instance
 
of Papeete, Island of Tahiti (Tahiti court) on June 23, 1999. 
Tahiti is part of French Polynesia. The Foreign Judgment
 
apparently provides, inter alia, that Kurth was ordered to pay
 Banque de Tahiti 90,829,471 French Pacific francs, and also
 declared the execution against property on amounts held by Banque
 de Tahiti on behalf of Kurth regular and valid.
 
On December 8, 2003, Kurth filed in the circuit court a
 
statement opposing enforcement of the Foreign Judgment under HRS
 § 658C-4. In an attached declaration, Kurth declared, inter
 alia, that he received no notice that the underlying French
 Polynesian proceedings involved more than an in rem action for
 attachment to money on deposit with another bank, Banque Paribas,
 thus the Foreign Judgment was not a money judgment enforceable
 under HRS § 658C-4. On January 26, 2004, Kurth filed affirmative
 defenses to enforcement of the Foreign Judgment and
 counterclaims. As an affirmative defense, Kurth asserted, inter
 alia, that the procedures by which the Foreign Judgment was
 obtained were not compatible with due process, therefore
 enforcement should be denied pursuant to the UFMJRA, HRS
 Chapter 658C.
5
 
4 HRS § 658C-4(a) provided: 
[§658C-4] Recognition and enforcement.  (a) Except as
provided in section 658C-5, a foreign judgment meeting the
requirements of section 658C-3 shall be conclusive between
the parties to the extent that it grants or denies recovery
of a sum of money. A copy of any foreign judgment may be
filed in the office of the clerk of an appropriate court of
this State. The foreign judgment shall be enforceable in
the same manner as the judgment of a sister-state that is
entitled to full faith and credit.
5
 HRS Chapter 658C, the UFMJRA, was repealed effective April 30, 2009.
2009 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 34, § 2 at 64. HRS Chapter 658C was replaced by HRS
Chapter 658F, the Uniform Foreign-Country Money Judgments Recognition Act
(UFCMJRA). 2009 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 34, § 1 at 62-64; HRS § 658F-1 (2016).
Because this case was initiated before April 30, 2009, Chapter 658C is
applicable. 2009 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 34, § 3 at 64. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Thereafter, the parties had a number of discovery
 
disputes, and then both Kurth and Banque de Tahiti filed motions
 
for summary judgment on February 16, 2006, and March 10, 2006,
 respectively. Kurth asserted in his motion that the Foreign
 Judgment was unenforceable under the UFMJRA, the Foreign Judgment
 had not been perfected under the law of French Polynesia due to
 inadequate service, and Kurth's obligation had been discharged. 
Banque de Tahiti opposed Kurth's motion for summary judgment and
 instead sought summary judgment in its favor, arguing that the
 Foreign Judgment was enforceable under the UFMJRA. Most of
 Banque de Tahiti's contentions were based on a declaration from
 Frederic Veniere (Veniere), who declared that he was an attorney
 
in both France and French Polynesia, and that he had reviewed the
 
files of the Tahiti court regarding the subject Foreign Judgment. 
The circuit court subsequently entered an order
 
granting Banque de Tahiti's motion for summary judgment and
 denying Kurth's motion for summary judgment (7/20/06 Summary
Judgment Order). On July 31, 2006, Kurth filed a motion for
 
reconsideration which the circuit court denied on November 14,
 
2006.
 
Subsequently, however, Banque de Tahiti and Kurth
 
continued to file various motions and the circuit court
 eventually granted Kurth leave to file a renewed motion for
 reconsideration of the 7/20/06 Summary Judgment Order, which
 Kurth filed on December 12, 2008. In a supplemental memorandum
 in support of his renewed motion for reconsideration, Kurth
 asserted that Veniere was deposed on April 22, 2009, and based on
 Veniere's deposition, the Foreign Judgment was not enforceable
 pursuant to the UFMJRA.
 
On October 21, 2009, the circuit court issued the Order
 
Granting Reconsideration, thereby vacating the 7/20/06 Summary
 Judgment Order. For four years thereafter, not much occurred in
 the case.
 
On October 29, 2013, Kurth filed a motion to dismiss
 
pursuant to HRS § 657-5, arguing that ten years had elapsed since
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Foreign Judgment had been filed with the circuit court on
 
September 19, 2003, that Banque de Tahiti had not renewed the
 judgment, and thus the Foreign Judgment is deemed discharged as a
 matter of law. On December 23, 2013, the circuit court granted
 Kurth's motion to dismiss, issuing the Order Granting Motion to
 Dismiss. On March 24, 2014, the circuit court entered the
 Judgment in favor of Kurth dismissing Banque de Tahiti's claim to
 enforce the Foreign Judgment (and also dismissing Kurth's
 counterclaims).
II. Discussion
 
A. Motion to Dismiss Pursuant to HRS § 657-5
 
In this appeal, Banque de Tahiti contends that the
 
circuit court erred in granting Kurth's motion to dismiss
 
pursuant to HRS § 657-5, which provides that a domestic judgment
 or decree is presumed paid and discharged after ten years from
 the date the judgment or decree was rendered. It is not
 contested that Banque de Tahiti timely initiated the underlying
 proceedings in the circuit court. The issue is whether the ten-
year period under HRS § 657-5 was triggered, such that the
 Foreign Judgment is discharged under HRS § 657-5 and Banque de
 Tahiti is precluded from seeking to enforce it within the state.
 
Banque de Tahiti contends that the ten-year period has 
not yet begun because, under the UFMJRA which was adopted in Hawai
'i in now-repealed HRS Chapter 658C, a Hawai 'i court must 
first officially recognize the Foreign Judgment, especially given Kurth's challenge to the enforceability of the Foreign Judgment. Banque de Tahiti contends that without a Hawai
'i judgment 
recognizing the enforceability of the Foreign Judgment, it lacked a right of action to execute within a reasonable time. Put differently, Banque de Tahiti asserts that due to Kurth's attack on the enforceability of the Foreign Judgment, and the fact that the circuit court has not entered a judgment recognizing the Foreign Judgment, the ten-year clock under HRS § 657-5 has not yet started. 
Kurth, in turn, responds that the circuit court did not
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
err because the ten-year period started when the Foreign Judgment
 
was initially filed with the circuit court in Hawai 'i (on 
September 19, 2003), regardless of Kurth's challenge to its
 enforceability. Kurth contends that the UFMJRA did not require
 an official declaration of recognition by the circuit court
 regarding the Foreign Judgment.
 
"A trial court's ruling on a motion to dismiss is
 
reviewed de novo
." Wong v. Cayetano, 111 Hawai 'i 462, 476, 143 
P.3d 1, 15 (2006) (citation omitted). Moreover, resolving this
 appeal requires us to interpret relevant statutes.
 
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law
reviewable de novo. Capua v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 117 Hawai' i 
439, 443, 184 P.3d 191, 196 (2008) (citing Flor v. Holguin,
94 Hawai' i 70, 76, 9 P.3d 382, 388 (2000)) (brackets,
citations, and ellipses omitted). Statutory construction isguided by the following rules: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain and
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its
plain and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task
of statutory construction is our foremost obligation
to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from
the language contained in the statute itself. Fourth,
when there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used
in a statute, an ambiguity exists. And fifth, in
construing an ambiguous statute, the meaning of the
ambiguous words may be sought by examining the
context, with which the ambiguous words, phrases, and
sentences may be compared, in order to ascertain their
true meaning.
 
Carlisle v. One (1) Boat, 119 Hawai' i 245, 256, 195 P.3d
1177, 1188 (2008) (quoting In re Contested Case Hearing onWater Use Permit Application, 116 Hawai' i 481, 489-90, 174
P.3d 320, 328-29 (2007)) (block quotation format altered). 
Estate of Roxas v. Marcos, 121 Hawai 'i 59, 66, 214 P.3d 598, 605 
(2009)(quotation marks omitted).
 
HRS § 657-5 provides a ten-year window, subject to
 
extension, in which a domestic judgment or decree is enforceable: 
§657-5 Domestic judgments and decrees.  Unless an
 
extension is granted, every judgment and decree of any court
of the State 
shall be presumed to be paid and discharged at
the expiration of ten years after the judgment or decree was
rendered. No action shall be commenced after the expiration
of ten years from the date a judgment or decree was rendered
or extended. No extension of a judgment or decree shall be
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
granted unless the extension is sought within ten years of
the date the original judgment or decree was rendered. A
 court shall not extend any judgment or decree beyond twenty
years from the date of the original judgment or decree. No
 extension shall be granted without notice and the filing of
a non-hearing motion or a hearing motion to extend the life
of the judgment or decree.
 
(Emphasis added.) By its plain language, HRS § 657-5 is 
applicable only to judgments and decrees of a Hawai 'i court. If 
a Hawai 'i judgment is not satisfied within the ten year period, 
"HRS § 657-5 places the burden on the judgment creditor to seek judicial extension of the judgment prior to the expiration of the ten year statutory period; otherwise, the judgment is presumed to be 'paid and discharged' as a matter of law." Int'l Sav. & Loan 
Ass'n v. Wiig, 82 Hawai
'i 197, 199, 921 P.2d 117, 119 (1996). 
Hawaii's version of the UFMJRA (HRS Chapter 658C),
 
which is applicable to this case but now repealed, covered
 recognition of money judgments from foreign governments. Thus,
 we must first consider whether HRS § 657-5 even applies to a
 foreign government judgment. HRS § 658C-4 provided that a
 foreign government judgment could be enforced in the same manner
 as a judgment of a sister-state. In this regard, HRS § 658C-4
 stated:
 
[§658C-4] Recognition and enforcement.  (a) Except as
provided in section 658C-5, a foreign judgment meeting the
requirements of section 658C-3 shall be conclusive between
the parties to the extent that it grants or denies recovery
of a sum of money. A copy of any foreign judgment may be
filed in the office of the clerk of an appropriate court of
this State. The foreign judgment shall be enforceable in
 
the same manner as the judgment of a sister-state that is
entitled to full faith and credit.
 
(Emphasis added.) In turn, Chapter HRS 636C, appears to address 
judgments of a "sister-state," in that it deals with judgments of a court of the United States or courts entitled to full faith and credit in Hawai
'i. See HRS § 636C-2 (2016). Under HRS § 636C-3 
(2016), such "sister-state" judgments may be filed in an appropriate Hawai
'i court and "[a] judgment so filed has the same 
effect and is subject to the same procedures, defenses, and proceedings for reopening, vacating, or staying as a judgment of 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a court of this State . . . and may be enforced or satisfied in
 
like manner." HRS § 636C-3. In sum, therefore, although HRS
 § 657-5 does not expressly apply to a foreign government
 judgment, it appears that via HRS § 658C-4 and HRS § 636C-3, the
 limitations to enforcing a judgment set out in HRS § 657-5 are
 applicable to foreign government judgments addressed under HRS
 Chapter 658C, such as the Foreign Judgment in this case.
 
Having concluded that HRS § 657-5 applies here, we must 
now determine if or when the ten-year window under HRS § 657-5 began to run. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has previously 
considered the issue of when the ten-year period begins in a different context. In Estate of Roxas, the supreme court considered the question of what constitutes the "original judgment" for purposes of when an extension may be filed under HRS § 657-5. 121 Hawai
'i at 61, 214 P.3d at 600. The supreme 
court held that the "original judgment" for purposes of HRS § 657-5 is not necessarily the "first-in-time" judgment, but it is the judgment that creates the rights and responsibilities sought to be extended. Id. at 61, 71, 214 P.3d at 600, 610. "[T]he 
term 'judgment,' as used throughout HRS § 657-5, must refer to a valid and enforceable judgment." Id. at 67, 214 P.3d at 606 
(emphasis added). "[T]he statute of limitations for extending a judgment begins to run at the creation of the judgment that creates the rights and responsibilities that the party is seeking to extend." Id. at 69, 214 P.3d at 608 (emphasis added). 
While Estate of Roxas addressed a different question, 
the notion that there must be enforceable rights in order for the time period under HRS § 657-5 to start is relevant to this case. After all, HRS § 657-5 is a legislatively-created limit for the timely enforcement of rights created by judgments. Thus, the issue in this appeal is which action creates the enforceable right under the UFMJRA? Stated another way, when is the foreign judgment considered recognized and enforceable in Hawai
'i: when 
the judgment creditor filed it with the clerk of the court, or after an official recognition by a court of this state? 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 This raises a question of statutory interpretation. 
We start with pertinent language of the UFMJRA as adopted in
 
Hawai'i. HRS § 658C-4(a) provided, in pertinent part that: 
"Except as provided in section 658C-5, a foreign judgment meeting
 the requirements of section 658C-3 shall be conclusive between
 the parties to the extent that it grants or denies recovery of a
 sum of money." (Emphasis added.) In turn, § 658C-5 (Supp.
 2008)(repealed 2009)
6
 entitled "Grounds for non-recognition,"
provided in subsection (a) that a foreign judgment "shall not be
 conclusive" under several specified bases, and in subsection (b)
 provided that a foreign judgment "need not be recognized" under
 certain specified bases. Additionally, HRS § 658C-6 (Supp.
 
7
2008)(repealed 2009)  provided a list of instances where a
6 HRS § 658C-5 provides in relevant part:
 
[§658C-5] Grounds for non-recognition. (a) A foreign
judgment shall not be conclusive if: 
(1)	 The judgment was rendered under a system that
does not provide impartial tribunals or
procedures compatible with the requirements of
due process of law;
(2)	 The foreign court did not have personal
jurisdiction over the defendant; or
(3)	 The foreign court did not have jurisdiction over
the subject matter.
(b) A foreign judgment need not be recognized if:
(1)	 The defendant in the proceedings in the foreign
court did not receive notice of the proceedings
in sufficient time to enable the defendant to
 defend;
(2)	 The judgment was obtained by fraud;
(3)	 The cause of action on which the judgment is
based is repugnant to the public policy of this
State;
(4)	 The judgment conflicts with another final and
conclusive judgment;
(5)	 The proceedings in the foreign court was contrary to
an agreement between the parties under which the
dispute in question was to be settled otherwise than
by proceedings in that court; or
(6)	 In the case of jurisdiction based only on personal
service, the foreign court was a seriously
inconvenient forum for the trial of the action. 
(Emphasis added.)
7
 HRS § 658C-6 provides in relevant part: 
[§658C-6] Personal jurisdiction.
 (a) The foreign
judgment shall not be refused recognition for lack of personal
(continued...)
 
9
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
foreign judgment would not be denied recognition for lack of
 
personal jurisdiction. Together, HRS §§ 658C-4, 658C-5, and
 658C-6 indicate there should be an opportunity for the parties to
 argue the merits of recognizing a foreign judgment. However,
 Chapter 658C is unclear whether any formal hearing, opportunity
 to be heard, or official statement of recognition was required
 before a foreign judgment was recognized and enforceable.
 
The language of Chapter 658C is ambiguous and thus we
 
look to extrinsic aids. Estate of Roxas,  121 Hawai 'i at 68, 214 
P.3d at 607. In 1962, the National Conference of Commissioners
 on Uniform State Laws (Commissioners) promulgated the UFMJRA, a
 
uniform act, intended to codify rules on the recognition of money
 
judgments rendered in a foreign court. UFMJRA, Prefatory Note
 (Nat'l Conference of Comm'rs on Unif. State Laws 1962). In 1996,
 Hawai
'i adopted the UFMJRA. 1996 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 49 §§ 1-3 
at 69-71. However, the UFMJRA as drafted by the Commissioners
 differs from the version adopted by Hawai
'i in one key way. In 
7(...continued)
jurisdiction if:

(1) 	The defendant was served personally in the
foreign state;
(2) 	The defendant voluntarily appeared in the
proceedings, other than for the purpose of
protecting property seized or threatened with
seizure in the proceedings or of contesting the
jurisdiction of the court over the defendant;
(3) 	The defendant prior to the commencement of the
proceedings had agreed to submit to the
jurisdiction of the foreign court with respect
to the subject matter involved;
(4) 	The defendant was domiciled in the foreign state
when the proceedings were instituted, or, being
a body corporate had its principal place of
business, was incorporated, or had otherwise
acquired corporate status, in the foreign state;
(5) 	The defendant had a business office in the
 foreign state and the proceedings in the
foreign court involved a cause of action
arising out of business done by the
defendant through that office in the
foreign state; or
(6) 	The defendant operated a motor vehicle or
airplane in the foreign state and the
proceedings involved a cause of action arising
out of that operation.
(b) 	The courts of this State may recognize other [bases]
of jurisdiction. 
10
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the UFMJRA as drafted by the Commissioners, the section on
 
"Recognition and Enforcement" stated:
 
SECTION 3. [Recognition and Enforcement.] Except as provided
in section 4, a foreign judgment meeting the requirements of
section 2 is conclusive between the parties to the extent
that it grants or denies recovery of a sum of money. The
 foreign judgment is enforceable in the same manner as the
judgment of a sister state which is entitled to full faith
and credit.
 
UFMJRA § 3. Section 4, in turn, set out criteria where a foreign
 
judgment was not conclusive or need not be recognized. In
 Hawai
'i, the section regarding "Recognition and Enforcement" was 
adopted in HRS § 658C-4(a), which provided in pertinent part:
 
[§658C-4] Recognition and enforcement.  (a) Except as
provided in section 658C-5, a foreign judgment meeting the
requirements of section 658C-3 shall be conclusive between
the parties to the extent that it grants or denies recovery
of a sum of money. A copy of any foreign judgment may be
filed in the office of the clerk of an appropriate court of
this State. The foreign judgment shall be enforceable in
the same manner as the judgment of a sister-state that is
entitled to full faith and credit.
 
(Emphasis added.) Therefore, Hawai 'i added language that the 
judgment creditor could file the judgment with the clerk of the 
appropriate Hawai 'i court. 
The parties dispute the effect of this added language
 
in Hawaii's statute that is different from the uniform law. In
 our view, the effect of the added language to HRS § 658C-4 does
 not necessarily signal an intent to adopt a process different
 from the process intended by the Commissioners who drafted the
 UFMJRA.
 
In 1962, the Commissioners promulgated the UFMJRA and,
 
in 2005, the Commissioners promulgated a revised version entitled
 the Uniform Foreign-Country Money Judgments Recognition Act
 (UFCMJRA). In 2005, the Commissioners stated that the 2005 Act
 
"continues the basic policies and approach of the 1962 Act." 
UFCMJRA Prefatory Note (Nat'l Conference of Comm'rs on Unif.
 State Laws 2005). Given the similar intent behind the 1962 and
 2005 Acts, and because the comments to the 1962 Act provide
 little guidance, we look to the comments and summary provided by
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the Commissioners in 2005.
 
The comments to Sections 4 and 6 of the 2005 UFCMJRA
 
indicate a two-step process  which requires: (1) recognition and
 
then (2) enforcement. The Commissioners summarized this process
 
as follows: 
The first step towards enforcement is recognition of
the foreign country judgment. The recognition occurs
in a state court when an appropriate action is filed
for the purpose. If the judgment meets the statutory
standards, the state court will recognize it. It then
 may be enforced as if it is a judgment of another
state of the United States. Enforcement may then
proceed, which means the judgment creditor may proceed
against the property of the judgment debtor to satisfy
the judgment amount.
 
 
First, it must be shown that the judgment is

conclusive, final and enforceable in the country of
origin. Certain money judgments are excluded, such as
judgments on taxes, fines or criminal-like penalties
and judgments relating to domestic relations.
Domestic relations judgments are enforced under other
statutes, already existing in every state. A
 foreign-country judgment must not be recognized if it
comes from a court system that is not impartial or
that dishonors due process, or there is no personal
jurisdiction over the defendant or over the subject
matter of the litigation. There are a number of
 grounds that may make a U.S. court deny recognition,
i.e., the defendant did not receive notice of the
proceeding or the claim is repugnant to American
public policy. A final, conclusive judgment
enforceable in the country of origin, if it is not
excluded for one of the enumerated reasons, must be
recognized and enforced. The 1962 Act and the 2005
 Act generally operate the same.
 
Foreign-Country Money Judgments Recognition Act Summary (Nat'l
 
Conference of Comm'rs on Unif. State Laws 2005).
 
The Commissioners further stated that:

 
[r]ecognition of a judgment means that the forum court
accepts the determination of legal rights and
obligations made by the rendering court in the foreign
country. See e.g. Restatement (Second) of Conflict of
Laws, Ch. 5, Topic 3, Introductory Note (recognition
of foreign judgment occurs to the extent the forum
court gives the judgment "the same effect with respect
to the parties, the subject matter of the action and
the issues involved that it has in the state where it
 was rendered.") Recognition of a foreign-country
judgment must be distinguished from enforcement of
that judgment. 
UFCMJRA § 4, cmt. 2 (Nat'l Conference of Comm'rs on Unif. State
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Laws 2005)(emphasis added). Moreover, "[b]ecause the forum court
 
cannot enforce the foreign-country judgment until it has
 determined that the judgment will be given effect, recognition is
 a prerequisite to enforcement of the foreign-country judgment." 
UFCMJRA § 4, cmt. 2 (Nat'l Conference of Comm'rs on Unif. State
 Laws 2005) (emphasis added). As such, "[t]he issue of whether a
 foreign-country judgment will be recognized is distinct from both
 the issue of whether the judgment will be enforced, and the issue
 of the extent to which it will be given preclusive effect." 
UFCMJRA § 4, cmt. 2 (Nat'l Conference of Comm'rs on Unif. State
 Laws 2005).
 
In adopting the UFMJRA in 1996, it appears that the 
Hawai
'i Legislature intended a two-step process. When originally 
introduced in Senate Bill No. 2263, section 4 stated: 
§-4 Recognition and enforcement. Except as provided in
section -5, a foreign judgment meeting the
requirements of section -3 is conclusive between the
parties to the extent that it grants or denies
recovery of a sum of money. The foreign judgment is
enforceable in the same manner as the judgment of a
sister state which is entitled to full faith and
 
credit. 
 
S.B. 2263, 18th Leg., Reg. Sess. (1996). The Senate Committee on 
Judiciary commented that the bill "establishes a process for the recognition and collection of money judgments obtained outside of the United States, including safeguards to ensure that judgments obtained in foreign courts that do not meet the basic requirements of fairness and due process are 
not recognized or 
enforced." S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2051, in 1996 Senate Journal, at 995 (emphasis added). Thus, it appears that the Legislature contemplated adoption of the UFMJRA as a way to establish a process for recognition while also ensuring that foreign judgments not comporting with fairness and due process are not recognized or enforced in Hawai
'i. It follows that to 
recognize a foreign judgment, the process involves a determination of whether it comports with, inter alia, fairness and due process. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The bill adopting the UFMJRA was amended in the House
 
to add the following sentence: "A copy of any foreign judgment
 
may be filed in the office of the clerk of an appropriate court
 of this State." S.B. 2263, S.D. 1, H.D. 1, 18th Leg., Reg. Sess.
 (1996). In explaining the amendment, the House Committee on
 Judiciary commented that it "amended the bill by: (1)
 [c]larifying that a copy of the foreign judgment may be filed
 with the clerk of an appropriate court of this State[.]" H.
 Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1553-96, in 1996 House Journal, at 1649. 
In discussion of the bill on the floor, one senator noted that
 the amendments
 
permit the filing of a copy of any foreign judgment in the
office of the clerk in the appropriate court in the state,
and provides the mechanism for the filing and notice
requirements. I believe these amendments make it easier for
 persons dealing in international commerce to track foreign
judgments.
 
1996 Senate Journal, at 472 (statement of Sen. Graulty). It thus 
appears that the Legislature amended the bill to simply enable filing of the foreign judgment, making it easier for parties dealing with foreign judgments. There is no indication the amendment was intended to allow the filing with the court clerk to be a substitute to a judicial determination of recognition. In short, the mere act of filing a foreign judgment with the clerk of the court was not intended to convert the foreign judgment into an enforceable judgment in Hawai
'i. 
As a practical matter, recognition by the court seems
 
necessary to give the debtor an opportunity to raise the grounds
 for non-recognition of the foreign judgment, as was provided
 under HRS § 658C-5. Recognition prior to enforcement is also
 sensible because it may be unclear how a foreign judgment would
 be recognized and interpreted as it relates to converting the
 monetary amount to U.S. currency. See 9 Am. Jur. Proof of Facts
 
3d § 5 (1990).
 
In sum, the Commissioners noted that the 1962 UFMJRA
 
and the 2005 UFCMJRA have the same basic approach, and the
 comments and summary to the 2005 UFCMJRA indicate a two-step
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
process of recognition and then enforcement. In adopting the 
UFMJRA, in HRS Chapter 658C, the Hawai 'i Legislature did not 
intend to make substantive amendments to the uniform law changing the two-step process. Rather, HRS 658C-4 permitted a debtor to raise grounds for non-recognition of the foreign judgment. Under this provision, a court is allowed to recognize the foreign judgment or deny recognition. Following recognition, the creditor may seek enforcement of the foreign judgment. Merely filing the foreign judgment with the clerk of the appropriate court did not convert the judgment into an enforceable judgment in Hawai
'i. 
In this case, Banque de Tahiti was required to seek and
 
obtain a judicial determination recognizing the Foreign Judgment
 before it was enforceable. Without recognition of the Foreign
 Judgment by the court, the second step of enforcement could not
 begin. In other words, under Estate of Roxas, there was no
 "valid and enforceable judgment" to start the ten-year period
 under HRS § 657-5. Banque de Tahiti filed the Foreign Judgment
 in the circuit court and sought and obtained an order of
 examination. Although Banque de Tahiti attempted to enforce the
 Foreign Judgment, Kurth asserted that the Foreign Judgment was
 unenforceable under the UFMJRA, and raised grounds for non­recognition under HRS § 658C-5. The circuit court has not yet
 recognized the Foreign Judgment.
 
Therefore, for the reasons discussed above, the ten
 
year period in HRS § 657-5 has not started to run, because the
 circuit court has not recognized the enforceability of the
 Foreign Judgment. The circuit court thus erred in granting
 Kurth's motion to dismiss pursuant to HRS § 657-5.
B. Renewed Motion for Reconsideration
 
Banque de Tahiti contends that the circuit court erred
 
by granting Kurth's renewed motion for reconsideration of the
 
order granting summary judgment for Banque de Tahiti. The
 circuit court granted leave for Kurth to file the renewed motion
 for reconsideration as a result of Banque de Tahiti's late
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
production of certain documents. Banque de Tahiti does not
 
assign any error to the circuit court's invitation to Kurth to
 file a renewed motion for reconsideration.
 
"The trial court's ruling on a motion for 
reconsideration is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard." Cho v. State, 115 Hawai
'i 373, 381, 168 P.3d 17, 25 
(2007)(quoting Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai
'i 97, 110, 58 P.3d 608, 621 (2002)). 
Banque de Tahiti contends that the circuit court abused
 
its discretion because Kurth's "newly discovered evidence" was
 inapposite in that it actually demonstrated the judgment was a
 money judgment; the burden to prove any of the grounds for non­recognition of the Foreign Judgment was on Kurth, and he failed
 to sustain it; and none of the "newly discovered evidence" could
 not have been discovered through due diligence. However, the
 circuit court granted Kurth's renewed motion based on "newly
 produced evidence" and the existence of genuine issues of
 material fact regarding service of the Foreign Judgment on Kurth
 and whether Kurth or an attorney representing Kurth were present
 at the underlying proceeding in Tahiti. Of Banque de Tahiti's
 arguments, the only one that tangentially addresses this
 conclusion is the assertion that the "newly discovered evidence"
 could have been discovered through due diligence.
 
Banque de Tahiti contends that neither Veniere's
 
deposition nor the newly produced documents should have been
 relied upon by the circuit court because Kurth could have
 discovered them through due diligence. However, on September 12,
 2005, the circuit court granted Kurth's motion to compel
 responses to his request for production of documents, which
 included a request for all documents related to any proceedings
 in the underlying French Polynesian action. In September 2007,
 over two years later, Banque de Tahiti produced some of the
 pleadings in the underlying French Polynesian case; asserted that
 Veniere was not aware that he was supposed to produce copies of
 the pleadings that were available to both parties; it was only in
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
preparing his declaration for Banque de Tahiti's motion for
 
summary judgment on Kurth's counterclaims that Veniere realized
 the oversight; and Banque de Tahiti was now producing the
 pleadings related to the case. In response to this late
 disclosure, it is understandable that the circuit court would
 grant Kurth permission to depose Veniere regarding his review of
 the French Polynesian records.
 
Banque de Tahiti further contends that the "newly
 
produced documents" could have been obtained by Kurth at an
 earlier date as they were part of the record of the French
 Polynesian court, which Kurth had access to as a party to the
 underlying French Polynesian action, thus the court should not
 consider the documents "newly discovered." However, in
 submitting the documents, Banque de Tahiti admitted that the
 documents should have been produced earlier in response to
 Kurth's request, regardless of Kurth's purported access to them. 
Under these circumstances, we cannot say the circuit court abused
 its discretion.
 
Banque de Tahiti filed the Foreign Judgment pursuant to
 
HRS Chapter 658C, which applied to "foreign judgment[s] that
 [are] final, conclusive, and enforceable where rendered." HRS 
§ 658C-3. The parties apparently agree that, under French
 Polynesian law, the Foreign Judgment needed to be perfected
 through notice and service for it to be enforceable in French
 Polynesia. Thus, whether proper service occurred was a material
 fact. Banque de Tahiti asserted that the Foreign Judgment was
 enforceable in French Polynesia because the requirements of
 Article 400 of the Code of Civil Procedure of French Polynesia
 were met. The circuit court appears to have based its initial
 decision, that there was compliance with Article 400, on the
 declaration of Veniere. In that declaration, Veniere declared
 that the procedures followed to serve Kurth with the Foreign
 Judgment satisfied the service requirements of Article 400, and
 it was not required that Kurth be personally served. However, in
 his deposition, Veniere stated that the "Record of Service"
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
probably indicated that the judgment was not served on Kurth, and
 
that Veniere was not aware if efforts were made through the
 Tahiti court pursuant to Article 400 to excuse the lack of
 service. Therefore, it appears that a genuine issue of material
 fact existed as to whether the law of French Polynesia was
 complied with such that the Foreign Judgment was enforceable
 where rendered. The circuit court did not err in granting the
 renewed motion for reconsideration.
 
III. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment entered on
 
March 24, 2014, in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit, is
 
vacated to the extent that Banque de Tahiti's claims under the
 Foreign Judgment were dismissed pursuant to HRS § 657-5.
 
We affirm the circuit court's grant of Kurth's renewed
 
motion for reconsideration, which rescinded the prior grant of
 summary judgment in favor of Banque de Tahiti.
 
This case is remanded to the circuit court for further
 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 31, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Randall Y. Kunn Char,
for Judgment Creditor-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Sidney K. Ayabe,Steven L. Goto,(Ayabe, Chong, Nishimoto, Sia& Nakamura, LLLP)for Judgment Debtor-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
18

 