_________________________ NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0004947
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
PATRICIA NAKAMOTO, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
JAMAE KAWAUCHI, in her individual and official
capacity as County Clerk, DOMINIC YAGONG, in his individual and
official capacity as Chairman, Hawai 'i County Council, County of
Hawai'i, CORPORATE SPECIALIZED INTELLIGENCE AND INVESTIGATIONS
LLC, Defendants-Appellees, and DOE PERSONS 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS
1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS 110, ROE "NON-PROFIT" CORPORATIONS 1-10,
AND ROE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0466)
 
SHYLA M. AYAU, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
JAMAE KAWAUCHI, in her individual and official

capacity as County Clerk, DOMINIC YAGONG, in his individual and
official capacity as Chairman, Hawai 'i County Council, County of
Hawai'i, CORPORATE SPECIALIZED INTELLIGENCE AND INVESTIGATIONS
LLC, Defendants-Appellees, and DOE PERSONS 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS
1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, ROE "NON-PROFIT" CORPORATIONS 1-10,
AND ROE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0467)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Patricia Nakamoto (Nakamoto) and
 
Shyla M. Ayau (Ayau) (collectively Plaintiffs) assert claims
 
against the defendants in this case arising out of, inter alia,
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
an investigation of Plaintiffs' alleged misconduct in their 
employment with the County of Hawai 'i Elections Division, the 
termination of Plaintiffs from their employment (they were later reinstated), public statements made by some of the defendants regarding the investigation and terminations, and the alleged improper release of certain information about the investigation. 
The Plaintiffs filed separate actions, later 
consolidated, against: Defendant-Appellee Jamae Kawauchi (Kawauchi), individually and in her official capacity as County 
Clerk; Defendant-Appellee Dominic Yagong (Yagong), individually 
and in his official capacity as Chairman of the Hawai
'i County 
Council; Defendant-Appellee County of Hawai 'i (County); and 
Defendant-Appellee Corporate Specialized Intelligence and 
Investigations, LLC (CSII).1 
Plaintiffs appeal from a Judgment filed on October 3,
 
2013, in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court),2
 
which was entered in favor of all defendants and against
 Plaintiffs. The Judgment was based on the following five orders:
 (1) "Order Granting Defendant County of Hawai
'i Motion to Dismiss 
Filed October 23, 2012" (Order Dismissing Nakamoto's Complaint
Against County Defendants), filed on December 24, 2012; (2) 
"Order Granting Defendant County of Hawai 'i Motion to Dismiss 
Filed October 23, 2012" (Order Dismissing Ayau's Complaint
Against County Defendants), filed on March 8, 2013; (3) "Order 
Granting Defendants Jamae Kawauchi and Dominic Yagong, in Their 
Individual Capacities,' Motion For Summary Judgment Filed March 22, 2013" (Order Granting Summary Judgment for Kawauchi and
Yagong Individually), filed on June 4, 2013; (4) "Order Granting 
Corporate Specialized Intelligence and Investigations, LLC's 
1 In the circuit court and in this court, the parties have grouped
themselves as follows: Kawauchi and Yagong, in their individual capacities
(referred to herein as Kawauchi and Yagong Individually); the County, Kawauchi
in her official capacity, and Yagong in his official capacity (referred to
herein as County Defendants); and CSII.
2
 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Motion for Summary Judgment (Filed on March 22, 2013)" (Order
 
Granting Summary Judgment for CSII), filed on June 4, 2013; and
 
(5) "Sua Sponte Amended Order Granting Defendants Jamae Kawauchi
 
and Dominic Yagong, in Their Individual Capacities', Motion For
 Summary Judgment Filed March 22, 2013, Filed June 4, 2013" (Sua
 
Sponte Amended Order Granting Summary Judgment for Kawauchi and
Yagong Individually), filed on June 25, 2013.
 
In their opening brief on appeal, the Plaintiffs appear
 
to contend that the circuit court erred when it: (1) dismissed

 
defamation claims against the County Defendants; (2) granted
 
summary judgment for CSII on a negligent investigation claim; and
 (3) dismissed false light claims.
3 In their reply brief, the
 
Plaintiffs also argue that the circuit court erred in granting
 summary judgment for Kawauchi and Yagong Individually on the
 defamation claims.
4
 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm the Judgment
 
in this case.
 
3 Nakamoto and Ayau's opening brief does not comply with Hawai' i Rules 
of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) because their asserted points of
error are set forth as general questions and do not specify: the alleged errorcommitted by the circuit court; where in the record the alleged erroroccurred; and where in the record the alleged error was objected to or themanner in which the alleged error was brought to the attention of the circuitcourt. The points of error also do not reference in any way the circuitcourt's summary judgment ruling in favor of CSII or the orders that dismissedthe false light claim, however, Nakamoto and Ayau apparently challenge theseorders in the argument section of their opening brief. Because we seek to address cases on the merits where possible, we address Nakamoto and Ayau'sarguments to the extent they are discernable and with respect to the specificclaims they address. See Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawai' i 490, 496, 280 P.3d
88, 94 (2012); Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553,
558 (1995). 
Nakamoto and Ayau's opening brief also does not comply with HRAP Rule
28(a) because it exceeds thirty-five (35) pages. This court issued an order
 on March 12, 2014 denying Nakamoto and Ayau's Motion for Leave to Allow
Appellants to File an Overlength Opening Brief, and therefore we do not
consider the opening brief beyond page thirty-five. Counsel for Nakamoto and
 Ayau is cautioned to comply with the HRAP in the future.
4
 As addressed more fully infra, Nakamoto and Ayau's challenge to the
circuit court's summary judgment ruling in favor of Kawauchi and Yagong
Individually are waived. Moreover, even if we consider that ruling, the
circuit court properly granted summary judgment.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. Background
 
On September 5, 2012, Nakamoto filed her Complaint in 
Civil No. 12-1-0466, and Ayau filed her Complaint in Civil No. 
12-1-0467. Nakamoto alleged that she has been employed with the County of Hawai
'i Elections Division for approximately twenty-
five years. Ayau alleged that she had been employed with the County of Hawai
'i Elections Division for approximately seven and 
a half years. Both Nakamoto and Ayau assert that they were terminated from their positions for alleged violations of County policies after CSII conducted an investigation. Both Complaints asserted causes of action against all defendants for: (1) Defamation "Per Se"; (2) Defamation "Per Quod"; (3) False Light; (4) Negligent Investigation; and (5) Negligent Infliction of
 Emotional Distress. 
On October 23, 2012, the County Defendants filed 
separate motions to dismiss Nakamoto's Complaint and Ayau's Complaint, respectively, pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(b)(6). The County Defendants argued, 
inter alia, that the Plaintiffs' claims were preempted by 
Hawaii's Workers' Compensation Law (WCL) under the exclusive 
remedy provision in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 386-5 (2015). 
On November 19, 2012, Nakamoto filed an opposition to
 
the County Defendants' motion to dismiss. Nakamoto argued, inter
 
alia, that the claims in her Complaint were not preempted by the
 WCL and the WCL does not cover post-termination defamation. 
At a hearing on November 26, 2012, the circuit court
 
orally granted the County Defendants' motion to dismiss
 Nakamoto's Complaint "finding that the allegations alleged fall
 within the exclusive province of the workers' compensation
 statute, and therefore action in this Court is improper." 
On December 24, 2012, Ayau filed an opposition to the
 
County Defendants' motion to dismiss. Ayau also argued, inter
 alia, that the claims in her Complaint were not preempted by the
 WCL and the WCL does not cover post-termination defamation. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On December 24, 2012, the circuit court filed the Order
 
Dismissing Nakamoto's Complaint Against County Defendants.
 
On January 25, 2013, the circuit court filed an order
 
consolidating Civil Nos. 12-1-0466 (Nakamoto) and 12-1-0467
 
(Ayau).
 
At a February 15, 2013 hearing, the circuit court
 
orally stated that it would grant the County Defendants' motion
 to dismiss Ayau's Complaint consistent with its ruling as to
 Nakamoto's Complaint, that is, the allegations against the County
 Defendants are barred by the WCL. On March 8, 2013, the circuit
 court filed the Order Dismissing Ayau's Complaint Against County
 Defendants.
 
On March 22, 2013, Kawauchi and Yagong Individually
 
filed a motion for summary judgment. They argued, inter alia,
 that there was no genuine issue of material fact that they acted
 with just cause and did not engage in wilful and wanton conduct,
 and that the claims against them should thus be barred by the
 WCL. Kawauchi and Yagong Individually also argued that the
 Plaintiffs failed to establish any false statements made by
 Kawauchi and/or Yagong.
 
On March 22, 2013, CSII filed a motion for summary
 
judgment arguing, inter alia, that no defamatory statements
 attributable to CSII are alleged in either the Plaintiffs'
 Complaints; and that CSII did not owe a duty to Nakamoto and Ayau
 and, even if it did, there was no breach of duty.
 
On April 19, 2013, the Plaintiffs filed an opposition
 
to Kawauchi and Yagong Individually's motion for summary
 judgment. The Plaintiffs argued that a genuine issue of material
 fact existed as to "[w]hether Kawauchi and Yagong, in their
 individual capacities, acted with malicious, willful and wanton
 intent to harm Nakamoto and/or Ayau" and "[w]hether Kawauchi and
 Yagong acted without just cause and willfully and wantonly
 defamed and intentionally inflicted emotional distress upon
 Nakamoto and Ayau by knowingly making false statements concerning 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the basis for their termination as employees of the County of
 
Hawaii Elections Division."
 
On April 19, 2013, the Plaintiffs also filed an
 
opposition to CSII's motion for summary judgment. Plaintiffs
 argued that there were genuine issues of material fact as to
 whether "CSII conducted its investigation in a negligent and
 reckless manner by misrepresenting the extent of witness's
 statements and/or intentionally ignoring and/or failing to ask,
 obtain or seek out any exculpatory evidence[,]" and as to whether
 "there was a reasonably close causal connection between the
 negligent investigation and the resulting injury to Plaintiffs."
 
On June 4, 2013, the circuit court filed the Order
 
Granting Summary Judgment for CSII. The court held that
 "Plaintiffs failed to present any admissible evidence to
 demonstrate that any defamatory statement was published by CSII
 that was unprivileged and concerned the Plaintiffs[,]" and thus
 dismissed the defamation and false light claims. The circuit
 court also held that "Plaintiffs have failed to produce facts
 supporting the existence of any duty owed by CSII to Plaintiffs
 in connection with CSII's investigation of unauthorized
 activities at the election warehouse[,]" and thus dismissed the
 negligent investigation claims. Given its ruling on the other
 claims, the circuit court also dismissed the negligent infliction
 of emotional distress claim against CSII. 
On June 4, 2013, the circuit court also filed the Order
 
Granting Summary Judgment for Kawauchi and Yagong Individually.
 In this order, the circuit court determined that based upon the
 admissible evidence presented by Kawauchi and Yagong
 Individually, and the lack of evidence presented by Plaintiffs,
 Kawauchi and Yagong negated the "willful and wanton" elements of
 the Plaintiffs' claims and the Plaintiffs failed to provide clear
 and convincing evidence supporting their claims demonstrating
 they would be unable to carry their burden of proof at trial. 
The circuit court also determined that absent evidence of false
 and/or defamatory statements attributable to Kawauchi and/or
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Yagong, the claims for defamation, false light, and infliction of
 
emotional distress must be dismissed.
 
On June 25, 2013, the circuit court filed the Sua
 
Sponte Amended Order Granting Summary Judgement for Kawauchi and
 Yagong Individually. In this order, the circuit court stated it
 was correcting oversights contained in its Order Granting Summary
 Judgment for Kawauchi and Yagong Individually. In the amended
 order, the circuit court held that "[b]ased upon the admissible
 evidence presented, there exists an absence of evidence that
 Defendants Kawauchi and Yagong made false statements about
 [Plaintiffs]. As such, Defendants Kawauchi and Yagong have
 demonstrated that Plaintiffs will be unable to carry their burden
 of proof at trial."
 
On October 3, 2013, the circuit court filed the
 
Judgment in favor of all defendants. On November 1, 2013, the
 Plaintiffs timely filed their Notice of Appeal.
II. Standards of Review
 
A. Motion to Dismiss
 
A trial court's ruling on a motion to dismiss is
reviewed de novo. The court must accept plaintiff's
allegations as true and view them in the light most
favorable to the plaintiff; dismissal is proper only if it
appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff "can prove no set of
facts in support of his or her claim that would entitle him
or her to relief."
 
AFL Hotel & Rest. Workers Health & Welfare Tr. Fund v. Bosque, 
110 Hawai 'i 318, 321, 132 P.3d 1229, 1232 (2006) (citations 
omitted). 
B. Motion for Summary Judgment
 
The grant or denial of summary judgment is reviewed de
 
novo
. Tri-S Corp. v. W. World Ins. Co., 110 Hawai 'i 473, 487, 
135 P.3d 82, 96 (2006) (citation omitted).
 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Id. (citation omitted, block format altered). Further, 
The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue as
to all material facts, which, under applicable principles of
substantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment as a
matter of law. This burden has two components.
 
First, the moving party has the burden of producing support
for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material fact
exists with respect to the essential elements of the claim
or defense which the motion seeks to establish or which the
 motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed facts, it
is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. Only
when the moving party satisfies its initial burden of
production does the burden shift to the nonmoving party to
respond to the motion for summary judgment and demonstrate
specific facts, as opposed to general allegations, that
present a genuine issue worthy of trial.
 
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion. This burden always remains with the moving party
and requires the moving party to convince the court that no
genuine issue of material fact exists and that the moving
party is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law.
 
Thus, where the non-movant bears the burden of proof
at trial, a movant may demonstrate that there is no genuine
issue of material fact by either: (1) presenting evidence
negating an element of the non-movant's claim, or (2)
demonstrating that the non-movant will be unable to carry
his or her burden of proof at trial.
 
Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawai 'i 46, 56-57, 292 P.3d 1276, 1286-87 
(2013) (citation omitted, block format altered).
 
An appellate court "may affirm a grant of summary
 
judgment on any ground appearing in the record, even if the
 
circuit court did not rely on it." Reyes v. Kuboyama, 76 Hawai 'i 
137, 140, 870 P.2d 1281, 1284 (1994) (citation omitted).
III. Discussion
 
A. Defamation and False Light
Claims Against County Defendants
 
The Plaintiffs apparently contend that the circuit
 
court erred in holding that their claims for post-termination
 defamation and false light were barred by the WCL.
5 Plaintiffs
 
5 The Plaintiffs do not directly refer to the orders they seek to
challenge, and therefore we must infer which orders they challenge when
(continued...)
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
primarily focus on their defamation claim, although we note that
 
there is overlap between the two claims.
 
Defamation requires: 
(1) a false and defamatory statement concerning another; (2)
an unprivileged publication to a third party; (3) fault
amounting at least to negligence on the part of the
publisher [actual malice where the plaintiff is a public
figure]; and (4) either actionability of the statement
irrespective of special harm or the existence of special
harm caused by the publication.
 
Gonsalves v. Nissan Motor Corp. in Hawai 'i, 100 Hawai 'i 149, 171, 
58 P.3d 1196, 1218 (2002) (citations omitted). "[T]ruth is an
 
absolute defense to defamation." Id. at 173, 58 P.3d at 1220
 
(internal quotation marks omitted).
 
Under the WCL, a "work injury" is "a personal injury
 
suffered under the conditions specified in section 386-3." HRS
 § 386-1 (2015). HRS § 386-3(a) (2015) provides:
 
§ 386-3 Injuries covered. (a) If an employee suffers
personal injury either by accident arising out of and in the
course of the employment or by disease proximately caused by
or resulting from the nature of the employment, the
employee's employer or the special compensation fund shall
pay compensation to the employee or the employee's
dependents as provided in this chapter.
 
Further, "[a]s a general rule in Hawai 'i, workers' compensation 
is an injured employee's exclusive remedy for an injury arising
 
out of and in the course of employment." Iddings v. Mee Lee, 82
 
Hawai'i 1, 5, 919 P.2d 263, 267 (1996). The WCL exclusive remedy 
provision provides:
 
The rights and remedies herein granted to an employee or the
employee's dependents on account of a work injury suffered
by the employee shall exclude all other liability of the
employer to the employee, the employee's legal
representative, spouse, dependents, next of kin, or anyone
else entitled to recover damages from the employer, at
common law or otherwise, on account of the injury, except
for sexual harassment or sexual assault and infliction of
 emotional distress or invasion of privacy related thereto,
in which case a civil action may also be brought.
 
HRS § 386-5 (2015) (emphasis added).
 
5(...continued)
reviewing the arguments in their appellate briefs.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court in this case determined that the WCL
 
exclusivity provision barred the Plaintiffs' defamation and false
 
light claims against the County Defendants. 
Nakamoto and Ayau first contend the WCL exclusivity 
provision does not bar a defamation claim because it is an intentional tort and therefore not a personal injury defined under HRS § 386-3. However, even assuming defamation is an intentional tort, "the WCL does not provide a general exception to allow intentional tort claims against an employer." Adams v. 
Dole Food Co. Inc., 132 Hawai
'i 478, 484, 323 P.3d 122, 128 (App. 
2014). 
In Yang v. Abercrombie & Fitch Stores, 128 Hawai 'i 173, 
284 P.3d 946 (App. 2012), this court held that an employee's claim for defamation was barred by the WCL exclusivity provision. The employee, Yang, was employed by Abercrombie & Fitch Stores, Inc. (A & F) and alleged she "was suspended and then terminated 
for abusing A & F's discount policy, without any factual or legal 
basis." Id. at 175, 284 P.3d at 948. Yang filed a complaint 
which alleged, inter alia, defamation and/or defamation per se. Id. A & F filed a motion to dismiss asserting the claim was 
barred under the WCL. Id. On appeal from the circuit court's 
denial of the motion, this court stated that the "Hawai
'i Supreme 
Court has demonstrated great reluctance to narrow the scope of the exclusivity provision, recognizing the pros and cons of doing so, but maintaining its deference to the Legislature's domain." Id. at 178, 284 P.3d at 951. This court held: 
The plain language of HRS § 386–5, and the harmonious
reading of the Workers' Compensation Law as a whole,
mandates the conclusion that the workers' compensation
remedies granted to Yang exclude all other liabilities of A
& F to Yang on account of the personal injuries she
allegedly suffered arising out of and in the course of her
employment.
 
Id. at 181, 284 P.3d at 954. This court concluded:
 
(1) the exclusivity provision in HRS § 386–5 bars Yang'ssuit against A & F for alleged injuries suffered because ofher employment, which were caused by the alleged willfulacts of her co-employees acting in the course and scope oftheir employment; (2) [Furukawa v. Honolulu ZoologicalSociety, 85 Hawai' i 7, 936 P.2d 643 (1997)] does not create 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
an exception to the exclusive remedy provision under HRS §
386–5 for all intentional torts; (3) an intentional tort
committed by a co-employee acting in the course and scope of
his or her employment may be considered an "accident," as
defined in the HRS § 386–3, if the intentional act was
directed against the employee because of the employee's
employment; and (4) a co-employee may be considered a "third
person" as used in HRS § 386–3(a).
 
Id. at 183, 284 P.3d at 956.
 
Given Yang, the Plaintiffs' defamation claims are
 
barred by the WCL exclusive remedy provision so long as the
 
alleged defamatory statements were made in the course and scope
 of employment.
 
The Plaintiffs also contend, however, that the
 
defamation claims in this case are not barred by the WCL because
 the alleged defamatory statements were made post-termination.
 
"The essential prerequisite for coverage under Hawaii's
 
Workers' Compensation Law is the existence of an employer-
employee relationship." Chung v. Animal Clinic, Inc. 63 Haw.
 
642, 644, 636 P.2d 721, 723 (1981); see also Evanson v. Univ. of
 Haw., 52 Haw. 595, 598, 483 P.2d 187, 190 (1971) ("Since
 liability is made dependent on a nexus to the job, the essential
 prerequisite for coverage under [workers'] compensation acts is
 the existence of an employer-employee relationship."). Under the
 WCL, "'Employee' means any individual in the employment of
 another person." HRS § 386-1. "'Employer' means any person
 having one or more persons in the person's employment." Id. 
"'Employment' means any service performed by an individual for
 another person under any contract of hire or apprenticeship,
 express or implied, oral or written, whether lawfully or
 unlawfully entered into." Id. 
In this case, because the question is whether the 
circuit court properly decided a motion to dismiss, we must accept as true the allegations in the Complaints filed by the Plaintiffs. See Bosque, 110 Hawai
'i at 321, 132 P.3d at 1232. 
Nakamoto's Complaint alleges that: she "has been employed with the County of Hawaii Elections Division for approximately twenty-five (25) years[;]" through the mail, Kawauchi sent Nakamoto a 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Notice of Termination dated January 5, 2012, that was postmarked
 
on January 10, 2012, and received by Nakamoto on January 11,
 2012; and that Kawauchi instructed Nakamoto not to report for
 work as of January 6, 2012. Nakamoto's Complaint refers to and
 attaches the January 5, 2012 letter, which states: "The County
 Clerk is discharging you from your employment . . . effective
 January 6, 2012 close of business[.]" (Emphasis added.)
 Nakamoto's Complaint further alleges, inter alia, that "[o]n or
 about January 12, 2012, the Hawaii Tribune Herald published an
 article with the title, 'County elections workers fired.'" 
Nakamoto's Complaint also alleges that, on or about June 21,
 2012, Nakamoto accepted a conditional reinstatement of her
 employment subject to a ten (10) day suspension. 
Ayau's Complaint alleges she "was employed with the
 
County of Hawaii Elections Division for approximately seven and a
 half (7½) years[.]" On or about January 5, 2012, Kawauchi signed
 Ayau's Termination Letter but mailed it on January 9, 2012. 
Ayau's Complaint refers to and attaches the January 5, 2012
 letter, which states: "The County Clerk is discharging you from
 your employment . . . effective January 6, 2012 close of
 business[.]" (Emphasis added.) Ayau's Complaint further alleges
 that "[o]n or about January 12, 2012, the Hawaii Tribune Herald
 published an article with the title, 'County elections workers
 fired.'" On or about September 4, 2012, the County agreed to
 reinstate Ayau's employment and transfer her employment status to
 the County of Kauai.
6
 
In both Nakamoto and Ayau's Complaints, their
 
respective causes of action for "defamation per se" do not
 specify the dates that alleged defamatory statements were
 published. The "Facts" sections in both Complaints identify the
 
6
 The Complaints do not contain allegations related to any grievance
process by Nakamoto or Ayau challenging their respective terminations.
Further, the parties do not address whether any grievance process would affect
the analysis as to whether Nakamoto or Ayau were employed when the alleged
defamatory statements were made. We do not address this issue.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawaii Tribune Herald article, published on January 12, 2012, as
 
the earliest publication of alleged statements. With regard to
 the Plaintiffs' respective causes of action for "defamation per
 quod" and "false light," their Complaints state those claims are
 based on allegedly false statements starting from January 5,
 2012, but in identifying the alleged publications, it appears the
 earliest is the Hawaii Tribune Herald article.
 
Based on the allegations in each of the Complaints and
 
viewing those allegations in the light most favorable to the 
Plaintiffs, as required for a motion to dismiss, the Plaintiffs
 were terminated effective January 6, 2012, close of business. To
 the extent the Plaintiffs' claims are based on allegedly false or
 defamatory statements made prior to their termination, the WCL
 exclusivity provision would bar their claims because they were
 still employed.
 
However, to the extent their claims are based on
 
statements made after their termination, including the statements
 published in the Hawaii Tribune Herald on January 12, 2012, their
 claims are not barred by the WCL. That is, for any alleged post-
termination statements, an essential prerequisite for coverage
 under the WCL -- the existence of an employer-employee
 relationship -- did not exist at the time of those claimed false
 or defamatory statements.
 
We agree with Plaintiffs that Anderson v. Hebert, 798
 
N.W.2d 275 (Wis. Ct. App. 2011), is relevant to our
 consideration. There, the Wisconsin Court of Appeals recognized
 that a defamation claim was not barred by a workers' compensation
 exclusive remedy provision where the alleged defamatory
 statements were made after the plaintiff-employee had resigned
 from employment. The court explained:
 
As relevant here, an injury is only covered if, at the time
of the injury: (1) both the employer and employee are
subject to the provisions of the Act; and (2) the employee
is performing service growing out of and incidental to his
or her employment. It is undisputed that the injury to
Anderson—the alleged defamation—did not occur until after
Anderson resigned. Thus, at the time of the injury,
Anderson was not the County's employee and was not subject
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to the provisions of the Act. . . . Anderson's injury
therefore is not covered by the Act. Consequently, the
Act's exclusive remedy provision does not bar his defamation
claim.
 
Id. at 278 (citations omitted). See also Davaris v. Cubaleski,
 
12 Cal. Rptr.2d 330, 335 (Cal. Ct. App. 1993) ("We note,
 
initially, that certain of the allegedly defamatory statements
 made by respondent . . . were made after appellant was terminated
 and can, by no stretch, be deemed to have occurred in the course
 and scope of appellant's employment.").
 
In sum, to the extent the Plaintiffs' Complaints allege
 
that defamatory statements were made after they were terminated
 from employment, the circuit court erred in ruling that their
 defamation and false light claims were barred by the WCL
 exclusivity provision and in granting the County Defendants'
 motions to dismiss these claims.
 
B. Summary Judgment Ruling For
Kawauchi and Yagong Individually
 
As noted earlier, the circuit court resolved the claims 
against Kawauchi and Yagong Individually by granting their motion for summary judgment. In their opening brief on appeal, the Plaintiffs do not challenge the summary judgment ruling as a point of error, only make passing reference to the summary judgment ruling in other parts of their brief, and do not present any substantive argument as to why this summary judgment ruling was in error. It is only in their reply brief that the Plaintiffs present any substantive argument related to the summary judgment ruling for Kawauchi and Yagong Individually. Given this circumstance, Nakamoto and Ayau have waived any challenge to the circuit court's summary judgment ruling in favor of Kawauchi and Yagong Individually. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) and 
(7); Tauese v. Dep't of Labor & Indust. Relations, 113 Hawai
'i 1, 
29, 147 P.3d 785, 813 (2006)(appellant waived issue by failing to provide any discernable argument in the opening brief). 
Even assuming arguendo that the Plaintiffs have
 
properly raised an issue on appeal contesting the circuit court's
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
summary judgment ruling, they only address at most the defamation
 
and false light claims against Kawauchi and Yagong Individually. 
We conclude the circuit court properly granted summary judgment
 on these claims, because Kawauchi and Yagong established there is
 no genuine issue of material fact that the statements challenged
 by Plaintiffs were true.
 
With regard to the Plaintiffs' defamation claims, truth 
is an absolute defense. Gonsalves, 100 Hawai
'i at 171, 58 P.3d 
at 1218. 
Further, with regard to the Plaintiffs' false light
 
claims:
 
The false-light tort is defined in the Restatement (Second)
of Torts as follows:
 One who gives publicity to a matter concerning another that
places the other before the public in a false light is
subject to liability to the other for invasion of his
privacy, if
(a)
 the false light in which the other was placed would be
highly offensive to a reasonable person, and
(b) the actor had knowledge of or acted in reckless
disregard as to the falsity of the publicized matter and the
false light in which the other would be placed.
 

Wilson v. Freitas, 121 Hawai 'i 120, 130, 214 P.3d 1110, 1120 
(App. 2009) (quoting Restatement (Second) of Torts § 652E 
(1977)). Moreover, "[a]lthough false-light and defamation claims are not identical, there is a substantial overlap between the claims. Courts have held that where . . . a false-light claim is based on the same statements as a defamation claim, the false-light claim must be dismissed if the defamation claim is dismissed." Id. (citation omitted). We note that in their 
opposition to Kawauchi and Yagong Individually's summary judgment motion, the Plaintiffs' articulated that their defamation and false light claims were based on the same challenged statements that were published on January 12, 2012, in the Hawaii Tribune Herald. 
The Hawaii Tribune Herald newspaper article, entitled
 
"County elections workers fired," was originally attached to both
 Nakamoto and Kawauchi's Complaints. The article states that
 "Hawaii County has fired four elections workers, including the
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
program administrator, following an investigation into alcohol
 
storage and private business activities allegedly conducted at a
 Hilo elections warehouse." The article quotes Yagong as saying,
 inter alia: "They have received termination notices already";
 "The infractions dealt with 'violations of county policy'"; "I
 don't want to go into details and jeopardize the process"; and
 the "final decision (to terminate the employees) is made by the
 county clerk, but I was involved in the decision-making
 process[.]" The article further states that "Kawauchi confirmed
 four employees have 'separated' from the county, but she couldn't
 divulge why. However she identified the employees as Pat
 Nakamoto, a longtime elections program administrator, Glen
 Shikuma, warehouse manager, Shyla Ayau, and Elton Nakagawa." 
Kawauchi and Yagong attached admissible evidence to
 
their motion for summary judgment showing that the statements in
 question were true. For example, Kawauchi and Yagong each
 submitted extensive declarations in which they attested to, among
 other things, receiving an investigative report by CSII that was
 attached to the declarations and which noted violations of County
 of Hawaii policy, including liquor and safety violations. 
Kawauchi's declaration also states that on January 5, 2012, seven
 days before the newspaper article was published, she sent a
 Notice of Termination to both Nakamoto and Ayau. Yagong's
 declaration states that he received a copy of Nakamoto and Ayau's
 Notices of Termination. The Notices of Termination were attached
 to the declarations. Kawauchi signed both termination letters
 and both letters stated that the County Clerk was discharging
 Nakamoto and Ayau as of January 6, 2012 for the stated reasons,
 which included violation of the County's alcohol-free workplace
 policy. Both letters also indicate that Yagong was copied on the
 letters. Thus, the undisputed evidence and the letters show that
 Nakamoto and Ayau were in fact terminated from employment with
 the County at the time the January 12, 2012 Hawaii Tribune Herald
 article was published, and that violations of County policy were
 involved.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In their opposition to Kawauchi and Yagong's motion for
 
summary judgment, the Plaintiffs did not present any specific
 
argument disputing the truth of the statements in the Hawaii
 Tribune Herald article. On May 6, 2013, at the hearing on the
 motion for summary judgment, in addressing the statements in the
 Hawaii Tribune Herald article, counsel for Nakamoto and Ayau
 argued:
 
All the statements highlighted by [counsel for
Kawauchi and Yagong], we contend, are false. And you only
have to look at Exhibit 4 to our memorandum in opposition,
Mr. Shikuma's declaration, about when those events, in terms
of the sign-making -– when the business, conducting the
business, was done. All those statements are directly
refuted by Mr. Shikuma when he made that declaration.
 
Glen Shikuma's (Shikuma) declaration, attached to the Plaintiffs'
 
opposition memo, does not refute the truth of the statements
 
published in the Hawaii Tribune Herald article about Plaintiffs. 
Rather, Shikuma's declaration addresses, inter alia, his personal
 sign making business. Shikuma's declaration does not address the
 truth or falsity of whether employees had received termination
 notices dealing with violations of County policy or who was
 terminated from the County, which were the subjects of the
 challenged statements in the Hawaii Tribune Herald article.
 
Given the evidence adduced related to Kawauchi and
 
Yagong Individually's motion for summary judgment, the circuit
 court properly granted summary judgment on the defamation and
 false light claims because the challenged statements by Kawauchi
 and Yagong were not false.
C. Summary Judgment Rulings for CSII
 
Although not set out in any point of error, the
 
Plaintiffs argue in their opening brief that CSII's investigation
 was negligent and that CSII generally cast the Plaintiffs in a
 false light.
1. Negligent Investigation Claim Against CSII
 
The parties do not dispute that CSII was hired by the
 
County to conduct an independent investigation into unauthorized
 
activities at the County's Election Warehouse. The circuit court
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ruled that CSII did not owe a duty to the Plaintiffs in
 
connection with the investigation. The Plaintiffs contend on
 appeal that the circuit court erred in granting summary judgment
 for CSII on the negligent investigation claim because CSII owed
 them a duty of reasonable care and conducted an inadequate
 investigation. In particular, the Plaintiffs claim that "CSII
 failed or ignored to interview or properly interview critical
 witnesses," and violated best practices in conducting the
 investigation. The Plaintiffs further contend that "[i]t was
 highly foreseeable that if the investigation unjustly implicated
 the Plaintiffs, they would be fired and their reputations
 damaged."
 
CSII responds that summary judgment was properly
 
granted in its favor because, inter alia, the Plaintiffs did not
 establish that CSII owed the Plaintiffs a duty that would support
 a negligence claim.
 
A negligent investigation claim is construed as a 
common law negligence claim. Tseu ex rel. Hobbs v. Jeyte, 88 
Hawai
'i 85, 91, 962 P.2d 344, 350 (1998). 
[T]he elements of a cause of action founded on negligence
are:
 1. A duty or obligation, recognized by the law, requiring
the defendant to conform to a certain standard of conduct,
for the protection of others against unreasonable risks;
2. A failure on the defendant's part to conform to the
standard required: a breach of the duty;
3. A reasonably close causal connection between the conduct
and the resulting injury and[;]
4. Actual loss or damage resulting to the interests of
another.
 
Id. (emphasis added) (citation omitted). Thus, "a negligence 
action lies only where there is a duty owed by the defendant to the plaintiff." Birmingham v. Fodor's Travel Publ'ns, Inc., 73 
Haw. 359, 366, 833 P.2d 70, 74 (1992) (citation omitted); McKenzie v. Haw. Permenente Med. Grp., Inc., 98 Hawai
'i 296, 298, 
47 P.3d 1209, 1211 (2002) ("A prerequisite to any negligence action is the existence of a duty owed by the defendant to the plaintiff that requires the defendant to conform to a certain 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
standard of conduct for the protection of the plaintiff against
 
unreasonable risks."). 
The existence of a duty, that is, whether such a relation
exists between the parties that the community will impose a
legal obligation upon one for the benefit of the other-or,
more simply, whether the interest of a plaintiff who has
suffered invasion is entitled to legal protection at the
expense of a defendant-is entirely a question of law.
 
Birmingham, 73 Haw. at 366, 833 P.2d at 74 (citation omitted).
 
"The question of whether one owes a duty to another
 
must be decided on a case-by-case basis." Blair v. Ing , 95
 
Hawai'i 247, 260, 21 P.3d 452, 465 (2001) (citation omitted). 
Factors relevant in determining whether to impose a duty include:
 
whether a special relationship exists ..., the
foreseeability of harm to the injured party, the degree of
certainty that the injured party suffered injury, the
closeness of the connection between the defendants' conduct
 and the injury suffered, the moral blame attached to the
defendants, the policy of preventing harm, the extent of the
burden to the defendants and consequences to the community
of imposing a duty to exercise care with resulting liability
for breach, and the availability, cost, and prevalence of
insurance for the risk involved.
 
Id. (block format altered) (quoting Lee v. Corregedore, 83
 
Hawai'i 154, 164, 925 P.2d 324, 334, 336 (1996)). 
The Plaintiffs point to the Restatement (Second) of
Torts § 302A (1965), comments c and d, to support their
 
contention that CSII was negligent. Restatement (Second) of
 Torts § 302A provides:
 

 
An act or omission may be negligent if the actor realizes or
should realize that it involves an unreasonable risk of harm
 to another through the negligent or reckless conduct of the
other or a third person.
 
(Emphasis added.)7
 
7 Section 302A is "a special application of the rule stated in
§ 302(b)." Restatement (Second) of Torts § 302A, cmt a. In turn, Section 302 provides: 
A negligent act or omission may be one which involves anunreasonable risk of harm to another through either
(a) the continuous operation of a force started or
continued by the act or omission, or
(b) the foreseeable action of the other, a third
person, an animal, or a force of nature. 
(continued...) 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Comment c to Restatement (Second) of Torts § 302A
 
provides:
 
As stated in § 290, the actor is required to know the common
qualities and habits of human beings, in so far as they are
a matter of common knowledge in the community. The actor may
have special knowledge of the qualities and habits of a
particular individual, over and above the minimum he is
required to know, or he may have special warning that the
individual is or is about to be negligent or reckless in the
particular case. Even without such special knowledge, the
actor is required to know that there is a certain amount of
negligence in the world, and that some human beings will
fail on occasion to behave as a reasonable man would behave.
 Where the possibility of such negligence involves an
unreasonable risk of harm, either to the person who is to be
negligent or to another, the actor, as a reasonable man, is
required to take it into account and to govern his conduct
accordingly.
 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 302A, cmt c.
 
In turn, Comment d to Restatement (Second) of Torts
 
§ 302A provides:
 
As stated in § 291, negligence is determined by weighing the
magnitude of the risk involved against the utility of the
actor's conduct. If the probability of the negligent conduct
of another is relatively slight, or if the harm to be
expected from it is relatively slight, and the utility of
the actor's conduct is relatively great in proportion, the
actor may be entitled to ignore the risk, and proceed on the
assumption that others will act in a reasonable manner. On
the other hand, if the actor knows or should realize that
there is a serious chance of grave harm to valuable
interests of others, and the utility of his own conduct is
less than the risk, he is required to take precautions
against the negligence of others which a reasonable man
would take under like circumstances.
 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 302A, cmt d.
 
7(...continued)
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 302 (1965). Comment 
b to Section 302 notes
 
that: "A special application of Clause (b) of this Section, involving the risk
of harm through the negligent or reckless conduct of others, is stated in
§ 302A." (Emphasis added.)
 
Given that Section 302A is a special application of Section 302, it
appears doubtful that Plaintiffs' reliance on Section 302A creates a legalduty for establishing a negligence claim. In McKenzie, the Hawai' i Supreme
Court stated, "Restatement (Second) § 302 by itself does not create or
establish a legal duty; it merely describes a type of negligent act." 98
Hawai'i at 300, 47 P.3d at 1213. The supreme court further stated that "the
fact that [the defendant's] negligent conduct falls under the rubric ofRestatement § 302 does not establish per se that he owes a duty to the
[plaintiffs]; it only describes the manner in which he may be negligent if 
[the defendant] owed a duty to the [plaintiffs]." Id. at 301, 47 P.3d at 
1214. 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
By relying on Section 302A, the Plaintiffs apparently 
suggest that CSII realized or should have realized that its 
investigation involved an unreasonable risk of harm to the Plaintiffs "through the negligent or reckless conduct of . . . a third person," i.e, Kawauchi and/or Yagong. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 302A; See also Touchette v. Ganal, 82 Hawai
'i 
293, 303-04, 922 P.2d 347, 357-58 (1996)(discussing that wife of a man who killed and injured others might have an actionable duty to those killed or injured based on Restatement (Second) of Torts §§ 302, 302A and/or 302B, where she was alleged to have had an extra-marital affair, taunted and humiliated her husband with respect to the affair, causing husband to suffer severe and extreme emotional and mental distress and depression); McKenzie, 98 Hawai
'i at 301 n.5, 47 P.3d at 1214 n.5. 
In this case, the undisputed evidence is that CSII was
 
retained by the County in connection with information that
 unauthorized activities were being conducted at the County
 Election Warehouse. CSII was one of two investigation companies
 listed on the County Procurement List. There is no evidence in
 the record to suggest that CSII realized or should have realized
 that its investigation involved an unreasonable risk of harm to
 the Plaintiffs "through the negligent or reckless conduct" of
 Kawauchi, Yagong, or any other third party. The declarations in
 the record by Kevin Antony (Antony), a member of CSII who
 
conducted the investigation, and Kawauchi and Yagong, detail the
 
actions taken related to the investigation and reflect a
 legitimate concern involving the use of the County Election
 Warehouse. Moreover, the declarations of Kawauchi and Yagong
 expressly state that they never held any personal animosity
 toward Nakamoto or Ayau, that they never intended to inflict any
 unreasonable harm upon Nakamoto or Ayau, and that they made it
 clear to Antony that they required a fair and impartial
 investigation.
 
The Plaintiffs did not submit any evidence to suggest
 
that CSII realized or should have realized that its investigation
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
posed an unreasonable risk of harm to Plaintiffs through the
 
negligent or reckless conduct of Kawauchi, Yagong, or any other
 third party.
 
We therefore conclude that, given the undisputed
 
material circumstances in this case, the Plaintiffs' reliance on
 Restatement (Second) of Torts § 302A, comments c and d, is
 misplaced. These provisions do not establish that CSII owed a
 legal duty to the Plaintiffs.
 
The Plaintiffs also point to the Restatement (Second)
 
of Torts § 500 (1965) to support their contention that CSII was
 negligent. Section 500, entitled "Reckless Disregard of Safety
 Defined," provides:
 
The actor's conduct is in reckless disregard of the safety
of another if he does an act or intentionally fails to do an
act which it is his duty to the other to do, knowing or
having reason to know of facts which would lead a reasonable
man to realize, not only that his conduct creates an
unreasonable risk of physical harm to another, but also that
such risk is substantially greater than that which is
necessary to make his conduct negligent. 
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 500 (emphasis added). 
Section 500 merely provides a definition for the
 
reckless disregard of the safety of others. Further, Section 500
 
applies when a duty already exits. Thus, this section does not
 provide support for establishing that CSII owed a duty to the
 Plaintiffs as an investigator retained by the County to conduct
 an independent investigation.
 
The Plaintiffs also contend that Baldwin v. Blue
 
Cross/Blue Shield of Alabama, 480 F.3d 1287 (11th Cir. 2007)
 supports their contention that CSII is liable for negligently
 conducting its investigation. However, Baldwin is
 distinguishable. In Baldwin, the Court of Appeals of the
 Eleventh Circuit analyzed whether pursuant to two United States
 Supreme Court cases, Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775
 (1998) and Burlington Industries, Inc. v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742
 (1998), the employer "exercised reasonable care to . . . correct
 promptly any sexually harassing behavior," once the plaintiff,
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Baldwin, complained. Baldwin, 480 F.3d at 1303. Baldwin
 
challenged the reasonableness of the investigation of her
 
discrimination claim. Id. at 1304. Baldwin does not involve
 
whether a retained investigation company owed an actionable duty
 to the potential subjects of the investigation, and thus we
 conclude it is inapposite to the instant case.
 
Based on the above, we conclude that CSII did not owe a
 
legal duty to the Plaintiffs that would support their claim for
 negligence against CSII. Given the undisputed record, as
 discussed above, we decline to extend a duty as a matter of law
 in this case. See Ishmael v. Andrew, 137 P.3d 1271, 1274-75
 
(Okla. Civ. App. 2006) (stating that the plaintiff, a former
 employee, failed to present authority supporting a ruling that
 defendant, an attorney hired by the employer to investigate an
 incident at the workplace, owed a duty to the former employee).
 
Therefore, the circuit court properly granted CSII's
 
motion for summary judgment on the negligent investigation claim.
2. False Light Claim Against CSII
 
In the Order Granting CSII's Motion for Summary
 
Judgment, the circuit court concluded that the Plaintiffs "failed
 to present any admissible evidence to demonstrate that any
 defamatory statement[s] [were] published by CSII" and because the
 Plaintiffs' defamation claims were dismissed the false light
 claim was also dismissed.
 
The Hawaii Tribune Herald article published on January
 
12, 2012, in which the alleged defamation and false light
 occurred, does not contain any statements from CSII. Further, in
 their opposition to CSII's motion for summary judgment, Nakamoto
 and Ayau only made conclusory arguments about the false light
 claim, but did not adduce any evidence creating a genuine issue
 of material fact as to whether CSII gave publicity to any matter
 concerning Nakamoto and/or Ayau where CSII had knowledge or acted
 in reckless disregard to the falsity of the publicized matter.
 
The circuit court properly granted summary judgment for
 
CSII on the false light claim.
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D. Law of the Case
 
Based on the above, the circuit court erred only in its
 
ruling that the Plaintiffs' claims for defamation and false light
 
against the County Defendants were barred entirely by the WCL
 exclusivity provision. Rather, to the extent that the Complaints
 alleged defamatory and false light statements occurred after the
 Plaintiffs' were terminated, the WCL exclusivity provision does
 not apply to bar those claims.
 
However, with respect to the defamation and false light
 
claims, we have upheld the summary judgment ruling in favor of
 Kawauchi and Yagong Individually. That is, we have determined
 that Plaintiffs waived their challenge to the summary judgment
 ruling in favor of Kawauchi and Yagong Individually, and even
 considering the merits of that ruling, summary judgment was
 proper.
 
Given these circumstances, we conclude that the "law of 
the case" doctrine applies, such that Plaintiffs are foreclosed from re-litigating the defamation and false light claims against the County Defendants (i.e. Kawauchi and Yagong, in their official capacities, and the County of Hawai
'i). The allegations 
against Kawauchi and Yagong for the defamation and false light claims are identical, regardless of their individual or official capacities. That is, Plaintiffs do not assert any different allegations or facts related to Kawauchi and Yagong based on their status as individuals or in their official capacities. Moreover, the claims against the County are based only on the doctrine of respondeat superior, or in other words, the "doctrine holding an employer or principal liable for the employee's or agent's wrongful acts committed within the scope of the employment or agency." Respondeat superior, Black's Law 
Dictionary (10th ed. 2014). 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has explained "law of the 
case" doctrine as follows: 
The "law of the case" doctrine holds that "a determination
 
of a question of law made by an appellate court in the
course of an action becomes the law of the case and may not
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
be disputed by a reopening of the question at a later stage
of litigation." Tabieros v. Clark Equip. Co., 85 Hawai‘i
336, 352 n.8, 944 P.2d 1279, 1295 n.8 (1997). Thus, as the
United States Supreme Court held, the "law of the case"
doctrine "merely expresses the practice of courts generally
to refuse to reopen what has been decided." [Christianson v.
 Colt Indust. Operating Corp., 486 U.S. 800, 802, 108 S.Ct.
2166 (1988)].
 
Hussey v. Say, 139 Hawai 'i 181, 186, 384 P.3d 1282, 1287 (2016) 
(format altered). 
In Ditto v. McCurdy, the supreme court affirmatively 
relied on a case which described the law of the case doctrine as 
"a form of issue preclusion within the same case." 98 Hawai 'i 
123, 128 n.6, 44 P.3d 274, 279 n.6 (2002)(citing Overseas Shipholding Grp., Inc. v. Skinner, 767 F. Supp. 287, 296 (D.D.C 1991)). Moreover, the court in Ditto stated: 
"the law of the case concept applies to single proceedings,
and operates to foreclose re-examination of decided issueseither on remand or on a subsequent appeal but does notencompass issues presented for decision but left unanswered
by the appellate court." [Weinberg v. Mauch, 78 Hawai' i 40,
47, 890 P.2d 277, 284 (1995)] (citing Pegues v. Morehouse Par. Sch. Bd., 706 F.2d 735, 736 (5th Cir.1983)) (internal
quotation marks, brackets, and ellipses omitted). 
98 Hawai 'i at 128, 44 P.3d at 279 (emphasis added). 
Here, the Plaintiffs have already litigated their
 
defamation and false light claims against Kawauchi and Yagong in
 
their individual capacities. The law of the case doctrine
 precludes further litigation of these claims against the County
 Defendants because: the Plaintiffs assert identical allegations
 against Kawauchi and Yagong for defamation and false light,
 whether in their individual or official capacities; the claims
 against the County are only for respondeat superior liability
 related to Kawauchi and Yagong's alleged conduct; and we have
 determined in this appeal that the circuit court properly granted
 summary judgment to Kawauchi and Yagong Individually on these
 claims.
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the Judgment filed on October
 
3, 2013 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 14, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Ted H.S. Hong,
for Patricia Nakamoto and Shyla M. Ayau.
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
April Luria,

Jodie D. Roeca, 
(Roeca Luria Hiraoka LLP)
for Corporate Specialized
Intelligence and Investigations, LLC.
 
Thomas L.H. Yeh,
Michael w. Moore,
(Law Offices of Yeh & Moore, LLLC)
Of Counsel: 
Jill D. Raznov,
for Jamae Kawauchi and Dominic Yagong,
In Their Individual Capacities.
 
26
 