NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001376
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF MN
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-J No. 97012)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Minor-Appellant M.N. (MN) appeals from a "Decree Re:
 
Modification and Change of Law Violations Decree," filed on
 
December 4, 2014, and an "Order Denying Minor's Motion for New
 Trial and/or Reconsideration," filed on December 16, 2014, both
 in the Family Court of the Second Circuit (family court).
1
 The
 
family court adjudicated MN a law violator with respect to three
 separate counts of Sexual Assault in the Third Degree in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-732 (2014).
2
  
1
 The Honorable Lloyd A. Poelman, presided. 
2
 HRS § 707-732 provides in part: 
§707-732 Sexual assault in the third degree. (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the
third degree if:
. . . 
(b)	 The person knowingly subjects to
sexual contact another person who is
less than fourteen years old or
causes such a person to have sexual
contact with the person[.] 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, MN contends that (1) the charging document
 
failed to name a complainant; and (2) there was insufficient
 
evidence to support his adjudication on the three counts of
 Sexual Assault in the Third Degree. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant legal authorities, we resolve MN's points of
 error as follows and we affirm.
 
I. Brief Background
 
On March 28, 2013, Petitioner-Appellee State of Hawai 'i 
(the State) filed a petition for the family court to adjudicate 
MN as a law violator for committing four separate counts of 
Sexual Assault in the Third Degree in violation of HRS § 707­732.
3 The charges stemmed from allegations that MN had subjected
 
minor Complaining Witness (CW) to sexual contact while both were
 
attending school. Following trial, on June 9, 2014, the family
 
court entered a decree adjudicating MN as a law violator under
 
HRS § 571-11(1) (Supp. 2016)4
 with respect to the three counts of
Sexual Assault in the Third Degree. MN filed a motion for
 reconsideration, which the family court denied. On December 4,
 2014, the family court entered an amended decree sentencing MN,
 
3 On June 19, 2014, the family court entered an order dismissing Count
IV with prejudice.
4 HRS § 571-11 provides in part: 
§571-11 Jurisdiction; children. Except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, the court shall have
exclusive original jurisdiction in proceedings:
(1)	 Concerning any person who is alleged
to have committed an act prior to
achieving eighteen years of age that
would constitute a violation or
 attempted violation of any federal,
state, or local law or county
ordinance. Regardless of where the
violation occurred, jurisdiction may
be taken by the court of the circuit
where the person resides, is living,
or is found, or in which the offense
is alleged to have occurred[.] 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
inter alia, to probation for a period of twenty-four (24) months
 
under several restrictions. On June 1, 2015, the family court
 adopted the "State's Proposed Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
 Law, and Order Denying Defendant's Motion for New Trial." 
The facts of this case are disputed. The incident
 
occurred on or around November 21, 2012, at school. MN and CW
 were classmates. The school's principal Gary Davidson (Davidson)
 
testified that towards the end of the lunch period, a classmate
 
of CW reported that CW was in a bathroom crying. CW was brought
 to an office and Davidson asked the school clerk, Mandy Takata
 (Takata) to speak to CW. Takata testified that CW was hysterical
 
and crying. Takata handed CW a paper to write down what she
 
wanted to say. After about five minutes alone with CW, Takata
 handed Davidson a note. The note was short but, according to
 Davidson, there were a "sequence of words" to the effect that MN
 touched CW on her breasts, buttocks, and vagina. The note
 prompted Davidson to contact a school resource officer, Officer
 Michael McCutcheon (Officer McCutcheon), and Davidson gave him
 
the note. Officer McCutcheon paraphrased the information on the
 
note into his police report and also testified that he placed the
 note in one of the pockets of his uniform and inadvertently
 washed it.
5 According to Officer McCutcheon, Davidson relayed to
 
him that CW allowed MN to hug her in a certain teacher's [Ms.
 U's] classroom, and during the hug, MN touched CW's breasts,
 buttocks, and vagina on the surface of CW's clothing.
 
CW testified to the following during trial. She was
 
outside Ms. U's classroom during the lunch hour, near a tree, and
 MN asked for a hug and she hugged him. MN asked for another hug
 at which point he also touched CW on her "breasts, [her] butt,
 and [her] vagina." CW also testified that MN "started humping"
 and "pushing against [her]." Thereafter, CW pushed MN away and
 walked away.
 
MN also testified. According to MN, while he was
 
walking outside, he heard a loud noise, he turned around, and
 
5
 There was a stipulation that the note had been inadvertently lost. 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"while [he] was walking [his] left arm was swinging" and CW came
 
"on the side of [MN]" and his "hand accidently hit [his] leg and
 it bounced off and it accidently bumped [CW]." He further
 testified that he apologized, gave her a "side hug" and continued
 walking to class. MN denied that he was by the side of Ms. U's
 classroom with CW and denied hugging CW there. He also denied
 CW's allegations that he hugged her twice and denied that he
 touched her buttocks, breasts, and vagina.
II. Sufficiency of the Charge
 
On appeal, MN contends for the first time that the
 
charges against him were defective because they failed to name
 
the CW. In each of the three relevant charges, it states in
 
pertinent part that "[MN] did knowingly subject a person less
 than fourteen (14) years old and not married to him, to sexual
 contact, or cause said person to have sexual contact with him[.]"
 
A charging document must sufficiently allege all of the 
essential elements of the offense charged. State v. Hitchcock, 
123 Hawai
'i 369, 376-79, 235 P.3d 365, 372-75 (2010). As such, 
"the sufficiency of the charging instrument is measured, inter alia, by whether it contains the elements of the offense intended to be charged, and sufficiently apprises the defendant of what he or she must be prepared to meet." Id. at 376, 235 P.3d at 372 
(citations omitted). As is the case here, when the sufficiency of a charge is challenged for the first time on appeal, the Motta-Wells post-conviction liberal construction approach applies. State v. Tominiko, 126 Hawai
'i 68, 76, 266 P.3d 1122, 
1130 (2011). This standard "means we will not reverse a conviction based upon a defective indictment unless the defendant can show prejudice or that the indictment cannot within reason be construed to charge a crime." Id. (citation omitted). In 
determining whether an offense has been sufficiently plead, "we now interpret a charge as a whole, employing practical considerations and common sense." State v. Sprattling, 99 Hawai
'i 
312, 319, 55 P.3d 276, 283 (2002) (citation omitted). "Moreover, in construing the validity of [a charge], we are not restricted to an examination solely of the charge, but will interpret it in 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
light of all of the information provided to the accused." Id. at
 
319, 55 P.3d at 283 (citations omitted).
 
MN contends that the charging document failed to put MN
 
on notice because it did not name CW, and that even if MN
 
actually knew who the CW was it did not satisfy the requirement
 that he be put on notice and informed of the nature of the
 charge. 
HRS § 707-732(1)(b) provides that a person commits 
Sexual Assault in the Third Degree if "[t]he person knowingly subjects to sexual contact another person who is less than fourteen years old or causes such a person to have sexual contact with the person[.]" Further, at the time of this case, sexual contact was defined as "any touching . . . of the sexual or other intimate parts of a person not married to the actor, or of the sexual or other intimate parts of the actor by the person, whether directly or through the clothing or other material intended to cover the sexual or other intimate parts." HRS § 707-700 (Supp. 2013). The actual charges against MN were similarly worded and track the statutory language of HRS § 707­732 and HRS § 707-700. See State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai
'i 390, 
406, 56 P.3d 692, 708 (2002) (noting that generally, "a charge drawn from the language of the statute proscribing the offense is not fatally defective") (citation omitted). 
Moreover, as MN apparently acknowledges, he knew the
 
identity of the CW. Importantly, he does not provide any
 specific argument about how he was prejudiced by the omission of
 CW's name in the charging document. The record confirms that MN
 was aware of the identity of CW. As the State notes, police
 reports with the CW's name and related information were provided
 to MN. Moreover, MN filed pretrial discovery motions related to
 CW, and also filed subpoenas seeking production of school records
 and police investigations regarding CW. Thus, the record
 reflects that MN had actual knowledge of the CW and the
 allegations made against him. He thus was not prejudiced by the
 lack of CW's name appearing in the charge. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Given that MN raises his challenge to the charge for
 
the first time on appeal, and in applying the Motta-Wells post-
conviction liberal construction standard, MN's adjudication will
 not be reversed absent MN showing that he was prejudiced or the
 charges cannot within reason be construed to charge an offense. 
MN fails to make such a showing.
III. Sufficiency of the Evidence
A. Findings of Fact (FOF) Nos. 3 and 4
 
MN contends that the family court clearly erred in its
 
FOFs Nos. 3 and 4 because the note written by CW was helpful and
 material to MN's case and would have shown that CW is not
 credible and her testimony was inconsistent. The circuit court's
 FOFs Nos. 3 and 4 state: 
3. None of the note, or the destroyed evidence, was
exculpatory or helpful to [MN's] case, and there was
no showing of bad faith by Officer McCutcheon and the
police department in destroying the evidence. 
4. The note would not have created a reasonable doubt
 
about [MN's] guilt that would not otherwise have
existed, and the note was not material to guilt or
punishment of [MN]. 
FOFs are reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard. 
Schiller v. Schiller, 120 Hawai 'i 283, 288, 205 P.3d 548, 553 
(App. 2009). MN appears to argue that the note would have 
clarified where the incident took place, arguing that the "note would have shown that [CW] wrote the alleged incident occurred in Ms. [U's] classroom which was inconsistent with where [CW] testified it happened[.]" 
However, the note purportedly stated that the incident
 
occurred in Ms. U's classroom. Officer McCutcheon testified that
 he read the note, incorporated it into his report, and that it
 said the incident took place inside Ms. U's classroom. CW
 testified at trial that the incident took place outside of Ms.
 U's classroom. At an evidentiary hearing, MN requested that he
 be allowed to impeach CW through Officer McCutcheon's testimony
 as it relates to the destroyed note. MN's request was granted
 and during the trial MN challenged CW's credibility, by way of
 impeaching her with Officer McCutcheon's testimony. Thus,
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
despite the unavailability of the note, MN was not prejudiced or
 
harmed because he was still able to challenge CW's credibility
 based on Officer McCutcheon's testimony that the note said the
 incident happened in Ms. U's classroom. Given the testimony of
 Officer McCutcheon, MN was able to adequately challenge CW's
 inconsistent statements about where the incident occurred. 
B. Findings of Fact Nos. 23 and 27 and Credibility
 
MN contends that the family court erred in finding CW
 
credible and that the evidence presented at trial was not
 substantial to support the circuit court's adjudication that he
 committed the three offenses. MN challenges the family court's
 FOFs Nos. 23 and 27, which state: 
23. The court finds the testimony of [CW] credible in
relation to the important elements in the case. 
. . . . 
27. The State met its burden of proof, beyond a
reasonable doubt, with respect to each and every
element in Counts One through Three of the Petition in
FC-J No. 97012, each charging the MN with Sexual
Assault in the Third Degree. There was sufficient
evidence presented by the State to support the MN's
convictions for Sexual Assault in the Third Degree in
all three counts of the Petition. 
In considering evidence adduced at trial and its review on 
appeal, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has 
long held that evidence adduced in the trial court
must be considered in the strongest light for the
prosecution when the appellate court passes on the
legal sufficiency of such evidence to support a
conviction . . . The test on appeal is not whether
guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact. 
State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai 'i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 
(2007). "'Substantial evidence' as to every material element of 
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable [a person] of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Id. (citation and brackets 
omitted). "[V]erdicts based on conflicting evidence will not be set aside where there is substantial evidence to support the 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[trier of fact's] findings." State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai 'i 87, 
100-101, 997 P.2d 13, 26-27 (2000) (citation omitted). 
MN argues that CW's testimony was not credible and 
thus, the evidence cannot constitute "substantial evidence" to 
support the circuit court's adjudication. The supreme court has recognized that "[w]itnesses may be inaccurate, contradictory, and even untruthful in some portions of their testimony, and yet be entirely credible in other portions of their testimony." State v. Jhun, 83 Hawai
'i 472, 482, 927 P.2d 1355, 1366 (1996). 
Further, an "appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the [trier of fact]." Jenkins, 93 
Hawai
'i at 101, 997 P.2d at 27. 
Here, the family court noted that there are various
 
inconsistencies in the testimony, such as what day of the week it
 was, in which order CW's body parts were touched by MN, and how
 long the hugs lasted. The family court considered CW's behavior
 surrounding the incident, noting that she was "hysterical" and
 determined that CW was credible despite her inconsistent
 testimony. Even if CW presented inconsistent testimony, other
 portions of her testimony may still be credible. Given her
 demeanor following the incident and the corroborating testimony
 provided by Davidson and Takata, there was sufficient evidence
 for the family court to determine that CW was credible,
 especially as it relates to the elements of the crime charged. 
The family court expressly noted that inconsistent testimony
 "doesn't defeat a case in establishing the burden of proof beyond
 a reasonable doubt[.]" Because it is in the province of the
 family court to weigh the evidence and determine credibility, we
 do not disturb the family court's conclusion. 
Having determined that CW's testimony was credible, the
 
family court found that the State proved beyond a reasonable
 doubt three counts of Sexual Assault in the Third Degree. Based
 on our review of the record, and given the credibility
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
determination made by the trial court, we conclude there is
 
sufficient evidence in the record to support the circuit court's
 conclusions as to the three offenses adjudicated in this case. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Decree Re:
 
Modification and Change of Law Violations Decree," filed on
 December 4, 2014, and "Order Denying Minor's Motion for New Trial
 and/or Reconsideration," entered on December 16, 2014, in the
 Family Court of the Second Circuit, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 29, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Setsuko Regina Gormley,
for Minor-Appellant. 
Peter A. Hanano,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
9
 