FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI
'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
STANLEY S.L. KONG, Defendant-Appellant
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000393
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-0683(2))
 
JANUARY 31, 2013
 
FUJISE, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J. 
Defendant-Appellant Stanley S.L. Kong (Kong
) appeals 
from an April 11, 2011 Circuit Court of the Second Circuit 
(Circuit Court) Judgment of Conviction and Sentence for promoting 
a dangerous drug in the second degree and prohibited acts related 
to drug paraphernalia.1 On November 19, 2009, Plaintiff-Appellee 
State of Hawai' i (State) charged Kong and co-defendant Sunny 
Stevens (Stevens) with: (1) Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the 
Second Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
1
 The Honorable Shackley F. Raffetto presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2
§ 712-1242 (Supp. 2011) (Count One),  and (2) Prohibited Acts
Related to Drug Paraphernalia in violation of HRS § 329-43.5
 
3
(2010) (Count Two).  Kong petitioned for admission into the Maui
 
Drug Court (MDC), and on April 14, 2010, the Circuit Court
 
admitted Kong into the MDC program. However, Kong self-
terminated from the program on February 3, 2011, subjecting
 
himself to a stipulated-facts trial. On April 11, 2011, the
 
Circuit Court entered a judgment of conviction against Kong for
 
Counts One and Two and sentenced him to imprisonment for
 
consecutive terms of ten years for Count One and five years for
 
Count Two, for a total of fifteen years. 
On appeal, Kong maintains that the judgment of
 
conviction must be vacated and Kong should be allowed to reenter
 
the MDC program, or in the alternative, Kong should be
 
resentenced to a concurrent term or the matter should be remanded
 
for resentencing because the Circuit Court: (1) erred by
 
imposing consecutive terms of imprisonment without adequately
 
articulating its justification; (2) violated Kong's due process
 
2
 HRS § 712-1242 provides, in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of promoting a dangerous drug in
the second degree if the person knowingly:
(b) Possesses one or more preparations, compounds, mixtures,
or substances of an aggregate weight of:
(i) One-eighth ounce or more, containing
methamphetamine, heroin, morphine, or cocaine or any
of their respective salts, isomers, and salts of
isomers[.]
(2) Promoting a dangerous drug in the second degree is a class B
felony.
 
3
 HRS § 329-43.5 provides, in relevant part:
 
(a) It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with
intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal,
inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body
a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. Any person
who violates this section is guilty of a class C felony and upon
conviction may be imprisoned pursuant to section 706-660 and, if
appropriate as provided in section 706-641, fined pursuant to
section 706-640.
 
2
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rights by basing its sentence on crimes Kong did not commit; and
 
(3) erred by terminating Kong from the MDC program without
 
ensuring that he understood the rights he was about to relinquish
 
and its consequences. For the reasons stated below, we affirm.
 
I. BACKGROUND FACTS
 
A. Alleged Offenses and Charges Against Kong
 
On November 19, 2009, the State filed a joint Felony
 
Information against Kong in Criminal No. 09-1-0683(2) and Kong's
 girlfriend, Stevens, in Criminal No. 09-1-0682(2), alleging that
 
each person had committed two offenses on February 27, 2009: (1)
 
promoting a dangerous drug in the second degree; and (2)
 
prohibited acts related to drug paraphernalia.
 
The charges stemmed from a search of Kong's and
 
Stevens's residence, where police found "one [] large clear
 
plastic bag containing fifteen [] packets with purported crystal
 
methamphetamine [ 4
] and numerous empty packets, and a glass
pipe[.]" After being advised of his constitutional rights and
 
agreeing to give a statement, Kong admitted that "he has been
 
using crystal methamphetamine off and on since 1995." Kong
 
further stated that he has been selling crystal methamphetamine
 
from his residence for the past three months. Kong's dealer
 
occasionally drops off a "load, often concealed in the inseam of
 
a jacket," and Kong is later informed about who will come and
 
pick it up. Kong "further added that he does not know what type
 
of drug the 'load' is but assumes it is about an ounce of 'Ice'
 
at a time. Kong added that he also purchases prepackaged packets
 
of 'Ice' from [his supplier] to sell. He related that he usually
 
buys an '8 ball' (3.54 grams) worth of 'Ice' at a time to sell." 
B. Kong's Admission to the MDC Program
 
On April 14, 2010, Kong petitioned for admission to the
 
MDC. 
The Circuit Court explained that the purpose of the April
 
4
 Tests on all fifteen packets resulted in a positive indication of
the presence of methamphetamine.
 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
14, 2010 hearing was to make sure that Kong understood the legal
 
rights that he would give up and the commitment required to enter
 
the MDC program. The Circuit Court also explained that if Kong
 
broke any of the rules of the MDC program then he could be
 
terminated from the program. After explaining the consequences
 
of successful completion of the MDC program and those if he was
 
terminated from the program, the Circuit Court found that Kong
 
voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently waived his rights as
 
indicated in the petition for admission to the MDC program, and
 
it admitted Kong into the program. 
Kong attended status hearings from April 26, 2010 to
 
November 8, 2010. At the October 25, 2010 status hearing, Kong
 
admitted that he had relapsed and used drugs. The Circuit Court
 
ordered Kong to perform 200 hours of community service and to
 
develop a preventative action plan. At the November 8, 2010
 
status hearing, the Circuit Court informed Kong that it was
 
giving him another chance to stay in the MDC program. However,
 
Kong failed to appear for his next status hearing on November 15,
 
2010, and the Circuit Court issued a bench warrant with no bail
 
set. On January 6, 2011, Kong was in custody, and a status
 
hearing was set for January 26, 2011. 
C. Kong's Termination from MDC Program
 At the January 26, 2011 status hearing, Kong indicated
 
that he wanted to self-terminate from the MDC program and have
 bail set. The MDC also recommended Kong's termination from the
 
program. The Circuit Court explained to Kong that he has a right
 
to have a termination hearing, with counsel present to represent
 
him, to determine if termination is appropriate. It also
 
explained to Kong the consequences of termination:
 
And, now, at a termination hearing, if you are terminated,
. . . your case would proceed to what's called a stipulated
facts trial, in other words, where the facts are agreed on.
So if you get past the point of termination, for example, if
you self-terminate, for example, or if it's determined that
you should be terminated, then the stipulated facts trial is
basically a very short trial. Because essentially what you
 
4
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
will have done already is admitted to all of the parts of
the charge. So that's presented and the trial doesn't even
last a minute and you are found guilty as charged.
 
After Kong indicated that he understood the
 
consequences of self-termination, the Circuit Court further
 
explained that if he self-terminates, he moves "onto a stipulated
 
facts trial where it's almost virtually certain . . . that you
 
will be found guilty as charged." Kong again indicated that he
 
understood these consequences. 
Kong then stated "for the record" that "[u]p until this
 
point the Public Defender's Office was, to my understanding, was
 
never allowed to represent me in any felony cases because of
 
conflict of interest in the past. They represented people who
 
testified against me." The Deputy Public Defender stated that
 
she discussed with Kong what appeared to be a prior conflict with
 
the Office of Public Defender (OPD) arising when Kong was a
 
juvenile on Oahu, but that the OPD database did not indicate a
 
conflict. She understood that Kong still wanted to proceed with
 
self-termination, but possibly with a new attorney. The Circuit
 
Court set a hearing on February 3, 2011 for a motion to withdraw
 
counsel and one on March 7, 2011 for a termination hearing. 
On February 3, 2011, Kong informed the court, through
 
counsel and directly, that he wanted to proceed with self-
termination from the MDC program. After Kong expressed his
 
desire to self-terminate from the MDC program, the Circuit Court
 
found that Kong voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently
 
terminated from the program and it proceeded with a stipulated-
facts trial. Upon Kong's request, the Circuit Court set bail at
 
100,000 dollars.
 
D. Guilty Verdict and Sentencing
 At the February 3, 2011 stipulated-facts trial, the
 
State offered into evidence the Felony Information and the
 Petition for Admission to Drug Court and Waiver of Rights, which
 
were admitted into evidence without objection. The Circuit Court
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
took judicial notice of Kong's identification, the Circuit
 
Court's jurisdiction, the records on file in the case, and that
 
Kong was represented by counsel throughout the proceedings. The
 
State then rested its case, and the defense did not present any
 
evidence. The Circuit Court found Kong guilty as charged of both
 
Counts One and Two, and it ordered a pre-sentence investigation
 
(PSI) report and set sentencing for April 7, 2011. 
At the sentencing hearing on April 7, 2011, defense
 
counsel indicated that the defendant had received the PSI report
 
and that "[t]here are no changes at this time." She asked the
 
Circuit Court to give Kong probation with long-term drug
 
treatment. However, the Circuit Court continued sentencing to
 
April 11, 2011, because there was confusion over whether the
 
charge in Count One had been reduced to Promoting a Dangerous
 
Drug in the Third Degree. 
At the further sentencing hearing on April 11, 2011,
 
defense counsel stated for the record that "Kong does not want to
 
stipulate to the contents of the [PSI] report in this case[,]" to
 
which the Circuit Court responded, "That's fine." The State
 
clarified that the proper charge in Count One was Promoting a
 
Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree. 
Regarding sentencing, Kong again requested probation,
 
or in the alternative, concurrent terms of imprisonment and a
 
recommendation to the Cash Box program to continue his drug
 
treatment. The State requested imprisonment because Kong "has
 
previously served five and ten year prison terms, and his parole
 
was revoked repeatedly in '93, '99, 2001, 2002. He was given a
 
chance as a high risk candidate for drug court, and he just
 
skipped out. So he's not probation eligible[.]" 
The Circuit Court sentenced Kong to imprisonment for
 
consecutive terms of ten years for Count One and five years for
 
Count Two, with credit for time served. The court stated:
 
Taking into consideration all of the factors set forth in
Hawaii Revised Statutes Section 706-606, including the
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
extensive record of the defendant, which includes six
burglary convictions, which really represents -- I'm sorry.
Yeah, six burglary convictions, ten felonies, which
represents a lot of harm in our community.
 
The Court is going to impose the following sentence in this
matter. The defendant will be committed to the care and
 custody of the Director of the Department of Public Safety
for a period of ten years on Count 1, five years on Count 2.
 
. . . .
 In view of his extensive criminality, the Court is going to
make these counts run consecutive for a total of fifteen
 years, mittimus forthwith, full credit for time served.
 
I will order that he be given an opportunity to participate
in the Cash Box drug treatment program at the earliest
convenience of the Department of Public Safety.
 
On May 10, 2011, Kong filed a notice of appeal from the
 
April 11, 2011 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR ON APPEAL
 
Kong raises three points of error on appeal, contending
 
that the Circuit Court: (1) erred by imposing consecutive terms
 
of imprisonment without adequately articulating its
 
justification; (2) violated Kong's due process rights by basing
 
its sentence on crimes Kong did not commit; and (3) erred by
 
terminating Kong from the MDC program without conducting a proper
 
on-the-record colloquy advising Kong of the rights he was about
 
to relinquish. 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
We review sentencing decisions under the abuse of
 
discretion standard.
 
A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in
imposing a sentence. The applicable standard of review for
sentencing or resentencing matters is whether the court
committed plain and manifest abuse of discretion in its
decision. Factors which indicate a plain and manifest abuse
of discretion are arbitrary or capricious action by the
judge and a rigid refusal to consider the defendant's
contentions. And, generally, to constitute an abuse it must
appear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason
or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
substantial detriment of a party litigant.
 
7
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Kahapea, 111 Hawai' i 267, 278, 141 P.3d 440, 451 (2006) 
(citations, brackets, and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
"This court answers questions of constitutional law by
 
exercising its own independent . . . judgment based on the facts
 
of the case. 
Thus, this court reviews questions of
 
constitutional law under the right/wrong standard." Kahapea, 111
 
Hawai
'i at 278, 141 P.3d at 451 (citations, brackets, and 
internal quotation marks omitted).
 
Regarding Kong's assertion of plain error:
 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 52(b) states that
plain errors or defects affecting substantial rights may be
noticed although they were not brought to the attention ofthe court. Therefore, an appellate court may recognizeplain error when the error committed affects substantialrights of the defendant. 
The appellate court will apply the plain error standard of
review to correct errors which seriously affect the
fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial
proceedings, to serve the ends of justice, and to prevent
the denial of fundamental rights.
 
This court's power to deal with plain error is one to be
exercised sparingly and with caution because the plain error
rule represents a departure from a presupposition of the
adversary system -- that a party must look to his or her
counsel for protection and bear the cost of counsel's
mistakes.
 
State v. Mars, 116 Hawai' i 125, 132, 170 P.3d 861, 868 (App. 
2007) (citations, internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
IV.	 DISCUSSION
 
A.	 The Circuit Court Did Not Abuse its Discretion by
Sentencing Kong to Consecutive Terms of Imprisonment
 
If multiple terms of imprisonment are imposed on a
 
defendant, a sentencing court has the discretion to order the
 
terms to run concurrently or consecutively pursuant to HRS § 706­
668.5.5 HRS § 706-668.5(1). ("If multiple terms of imprisonment
 
5
 HRS § 706-668.5 governs the sentencing of a defendant convicted of
multiple offenses and is "a general statute in the sense that it pertains
generally to all offenses and without regard to the type of offender
involved." State v. Hussein, 122 Hawai' i 495, 502, 229 P.3d 313, 320 (2010)
(citation omitted). 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
are imposed on a defendant . . . the terms may run concurrently
 
or consecutively."). "The court, in determining whether the
 
terms imposed are to be ordered to run concurrently or
 
consecutively, shall consider the factors set forth in section
 
706-606."6 HRS § 706-668.5(2). 
"Absent clear evidence to the contrary, it is presumed 
that a sentencing court will have considered all factors before 
imposing concurrent or consecutive terms of imprisonment under 
HRS § 706-606[]." State v. Hussein, 122 Hawai' i 495, 503, 229 
P.3d 313, 321 (2010) (citations omitted). Nevertheless, "circuit courts must state on the record at the time of sentencing the 
reasons for imposing a consecutive sentence" rather than a 
concurrent one. Hussein, 122 Hawai' i at 510, 229 P.3d at 328. 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court explained: 
Such a requirement serves dual purposes. First, reasons
identify the facts or circumstances within the range of
statutory factors that a court considers important in
determining that a consecutive sentence is appropriate. An
 express statement, which evinces not merely consideration of
the factors, but recites the specific circumstances that led
the court to impose sentences consecutively in a particular
case, provides a meaningful rationale to the defendant, the
victim, and the public.
 
Second, reasons provide the conclusions drawn by the court
from consideration of all the facts that pertain to the
 
6
 HRS § 706-606 provides:
 
The court, in determining the particular sentence to be imposed,
shall consider:
 (1) The nature and circumstances of the offense and the history
and characteristics of the defendant;
(2) The need for the sentence imposed:
(a) To reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote
respect for law, and to provide just punishment for the
offense;
(b) To afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct;
(c) To protect the public from further crimes of the
defendant; and
(d) To provide the defendant with needed educational or
vocational training, medical care, or other correctional
treatment in the most effective manner;
(3) The kinds of sentences available; and
(4) The need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities among
defendants with similar records who have been found guilty of
similar conduct.
 
9
   
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
statutory factors. It is vital, for example, for the
defendant to be specifically informed that the court has
concluded that he or she is dangerous to the safety of the
public, or poses an unacceptable risk of re-offending, or
that rehabilitation appears unlikely due to his or her lack
of motivation and a failure to demonstrate any interest in
treatment, or that the multiplicity of offenses and victims
and the impact upon the victims' lives warrant imposition of
a consecutive term. Hence, reasons confirm for the
defendant, the victim, the public, and the appellate court,
that the decision to impose consecutive sentences was
deliberate, rational, and fair.
 
Hussein, 122 Hawai' i at 509-10, 299 P.3d at 327-28. 
Here, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion by
 
sentencing Kong to consecutive terms of imprisonment pursuant to
 
HRS § 706-668.5 because it considered the factors set forth in
 
HRS § 706-606. The Circuit Court explained its reasoning before
 
imposing its sentence, stating, "Taking into consideration all of
 
the factors set forth in [HRS] Section 706-606, including the
 
extensive record of the defendant, which includes six burglary
 
convictions . . . ten felonies, [ 7
] which represents a lot of harm
in our community." The Circuit Court further stated, "In view of
 
[Kong's] extensive criminality, the Court is going to make these
 
counts run consecutive for a total of fifteen years[.]" 
Kong's "extensive record" and the fact that he caused 
"a lot of harm in our community" are specific circumstances that 
led the Circuit Court to conclude that a consecutive sentence was 
appropriate in this case. 
Given these circumstances, the Circuit 
Court likely concluded that Kong was "dangerous to the safety of 
the public, or poses an unacceptable risk of re-offending[.]" 
Hussein, 122 Hawai' i at 509, 229 P.3d at 327. In fact, Kong had 
re-offended, admitting that he had used drugs while participating 
in the MDC program. Kong had been given a second chance when he 
was allowed to continue in the MDC program after relapsing. Yet, 
7
 As addressed in Section V.B. below, Kong failed to challenge the
validity of two convictions in Cr. No. 92-0138(3) listed in his PSI report,
thereby waiving his argument that the Circuit Court should not have considered
these convictions.
 
10
  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kong decided to self-terminate from the program, suggesting that 
"rehabilitation appears unlikely due to his [] lack of motivation 
and a failure to demonstrate any interest in treatment[.]" 
Hussein, 122 Hawai' i at 509, 229 P.3d at 327. These specific 
circumstances support the conclusion that the Circuit Court's 
"decision to impose consecutive sentences was deliberate, 
rational, and fair." Hussein, 122 Hawai' i at 510, 229 P.3d at 
328. 
In light of the foregoing, we cannot conclude that the
 
Circuit Court abused its discretion by sentencing Kong to
 
consecutive terms of imprisonment.
 
B. The Circuit Court Properly Considered Kong's PSI Report
 In State v. Sinagoga, 81 Hawai' i 421, 918 P.2d 228 
(App. 1996), this Court "set forth a five-step procedure for
 trial courts to follow in cases where ordinary sentencing
 
procedures are applicable and there is a possibility that the
 
court may use the defendant's prior conviction(s) as a basis for
 
the imposition or enhancement of a prison sentence." State v.
 
Heggland, 118 Hawai' i 425, 432 n.4, 193 P.3d 341, 348 n.4 (2008) 
(citing Sinagoga, 81 Hawai' i at 447, 918 P.2d at 254) (internal 
quotations marks omitted). The five-step procedure set forth in
 Sinagoga is as follows:
 
Step one, the court shall furnish to the defendant or
defendant's counsel and to the prosecuting attorney a copy
of the presentence report, HRS § 706-604, and any other
report of defendant's prior criminal conviction(s). Step
two, if the defendant contends that one or more of the
reported prior criminal convictions was . . . uncounseled .
. . and/or . . . not against the defendant, the defendant
shall, prior to the sentencing, respond with a good faith
challenge on the record stating, as to each challenged
conviction, the basis or bases for the challenge. Step
three, prior to imposing the sentence, the court shall
inform the defendant that (a) each reported criminal
conviction that is not validly challenged by the defendant
is defendant's prior, counseled, validly entered, criminal
conviction, and (b) a challenge to any reported prior
criminal conviction not made by defendant before sentence is
imposed may not thereafter, absent good cause, be raised to
attack the court's sentence. Step four, with respect to
each reported prior criminal conviction that the defendant
challenges, the HRE [(Hawaii Rules of Evidence)] shall
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
apply, and the court shall expressly decide before the
sentencing whether the State satisfied its burden of proving
to the reasonable satisfaction of the court that the
 opposite of the defendant's challenge is true. Step five,
if the court is aware of the defendant's prior uncounseled
or otherwise invalid criminal conviction(s), it shall not
impose or enhance a prison sentence prior to expressly
stating on the record that it did not consider it or them as
a basis for the imposition or enhancement of a prison
sentence.
 
Heggland, 118 Hawai' i at 432 n.4, 193 P.3d at 348 n.4 (citing 
Sinagoga, 81 Hawai' i at 447, 918 P.2d at 254) (emphasis added). 
"Unless conceded by the defendant, the state is
 
required to show, by evidence satisfactory to the court, the fact
 
of the defendant's prior conviction, as well as the fact of his
 
representation by counsel, or the waiver thereof, at the time of
 
his prior conviction." State v. Afong, 61 Haw. 281, 282, 602
 
P.2d 927, 929 (1979) (citations omitted) (emphasis added). To
 determine whether a prior conviction "was conceded by the
 
defendant," this Court held in Sinagoga that in ordinary
 
sentencing situations, which includes sentencing under HRS § 706­
668.5, after the sentencing judge learns of a defendant's prior
 
conviction(s) pursuant to a PSI report or otherwise, "each
 
conviction listed may be used against defendant except those as
 
to which the defendant timely responds with a good faith
 
challenge on the record that the prior criminal conviction was
 
(1) uncounseled, (2) otherwise invalidly entered and/or (3) not 
against the defendant." Heggland, 118 Hawai' i at 439-40, 193 
P.3d at 355-56 (citations omitted). 
Here, Kong argues that the Circuit Court violated his
 
due process rights by basing its sentence on two convictions in
 Cr. No. 92-0138(3) that were included in the PSI report but had
 
been dismissed in 1995. Kong submits that he did not "concede"
 
his prior convictions in Cr. No. 92-0138(3) because Sinagoga does
 
not apply here. We disagree, finding that the Circuit Court
 
properly relied on Kong's PSI report. See State v. Kamae, 56
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Haw. 628, 637, 548 P.2d 632, 638 (1976) ("In an ordinary term
 
sentencing proceeding, a sentencing judge customarily relies upon
 
information furnished to him in a presentence diagnosis and
 
report.").
 
We conclude that Sinagoga applies because this is a 
case where "ordinary sentencing procedures are applicable and 
there is a possibility that the court may use [Kong's] prior 
conviction(s) as a basis for the imposition or enhancement of a 
prison sentence." Heggland, 118 Hawai' i 425, 432 n.4, 193 P.3d 
341, 348 n.4 (citing Sinagoga, 81 Hawai' i at 447, 918 P.2d at 
254). Finding that the five-step procedure applies here, we 
further conclude that step one has been taken, but regarding step 
two, Kong did not raise a good faith challenge to the validity of 
his convictions in Cr. No. 92-0138(3). At the April 7, 2011 
sentencing hearing, Kong's counsel stated, "We have received the 
[PSI] report. There are no changes at this time." At the April 
11, 2011 sentencing hearing, his counsel merely stated, "Kong 
does not want to stipulate to the contents of the [PSI] report in 
this case." Kong did not at any time challenge his prior 
convictions in Cr. No. 92-0138(3) apparent in the PSI report. 
Kong did not avail himself of the opportunity to 
controvert the PSI report's listing of the convictions in Cr. No. 
92-0138(3) as valid prior convictions. See HRS § 706-604(2) 
("The court shall furnish to the defendant or the defendant's counsel and to the prosecuting attorney a copy of the report of 
any pre-sentence diagnosis . . . and afford fair opportunity, if 
the defendant or the prosecuting attorney so requests, to 
controvert or supplement them."). Kong thus conceded his prior 
convictions in Cr. No. 92-0138(3) because "each conviction listed 
may be used against defendant except those as to which the 
defendant timely responds with a good faith challenge on the 
record that the prior criminal conviction was . . . not against 
the defendant." Heggland, 118 Hawai' i at 439-40, 193 P.3d at 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
355-56 (citations omitted).
 
Kong had more than enough time before sentencing to 
review the PSI report and bring any errors to the Circuit Court's 
attention, so that the failure to object resulted in a concession 
of its accuracy. Heggland, 118 Hawai' i at 445-46, 193 P.3d at 
361-62 (citing inter alia People v. Matthews, 362 Ill. App. 3d 
953, 968, 842 N.E.2d 150, 161-62 (2005) (holding that the 
defendant conceded the accuracy of his prior convictions in his 
PSI report by failing to object to the report)). There would be 
no purpose in giving the parties copies of the PSI report prior 
to sentencing if we were to permit them later to raise objections 
to the report for the first time on appeal. Matthews, 362 Ill. 
App. 3d at 967, 842 N.E.2d at 161 (citation omitted). 
For the first time on appeal, Kong argues that his 
sentence should be vacated because the Circuit Court should not have considered his two prior convictions in Cr. No. 92-0138(3) 
because they had been dismissed about fifteen years earlier. 
Kong had an opportunity to object to the validity of these prior 
convictions as contained in his PSI report, but he failed to do 
so. Therefore, Kong waived this argument and these convictions 
referenced in his PSI report could be deemed as admitted. See 
Heggland, 118 Hawai' i at 445-46, 193 P.3d at 361-62 (citing inter 
alia United States v. Fagans, 406 F.3d 138, 142 (2d Cir. 2005) 
(holding that the defendant's prior conviction referenced in his 
presentence report could be taken as admitted because he had made 
no objection to the facts in his report)). 
There was no basis for the court to question the
 
validity of Kong's prior convictions in Cr. No. 92-0138(3). The
 
Circuit Court was required to "accord due consideration to a
 
written report of the diagnosis [the PSI report] before imposing
 
sentence[,]" HRS § 706-601, and we find that it properly did so.
 
We also note that these circumstances do not rise to
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
15the level of plain error, which should be "exercised sparingly
and with caution because the plain error rule represents a
departure from a presupposition of the adversary system -- that a
party must look to his or her counsel for protection and bear the
cost of counsel's mistakes."  Mars, 116 Hawai #i at 132, 170 P.3d
at 868 (citations omitted).  The State correctly notes that the
record indicates that the Circuit Court based its sentence on
Kong's extensive criminal record in general and not specifically
on the convictions in Cr. No. 92-0138(3).  The PSI report, which
the Circuit Court considered in imposing its sentence, included
all of Kong's prior charges and convictions and not just those in
Cr. No. 92-0138(3).
In light of the foregoing, the Circuit Court did not
err by relying on Kong's PSI report in imposing its sentence.
C.The Circuit Court Did Not Improperly Terminate Kong
from the MDC Program
Pursuant to the guarantees of procedural due process
under the fourteenth amendment of the United States Constitution
and article I, section 5 of the Hawai# i Constitution, a defendant
is entitled to a hearing so that he can adduce evidence in
support of his defense, contest the validity of adverse evidence,
and cross-examine adverse witnesses before a court terminates his
participation in a drug court program.  Cf. Ringor v. State, 88
Hawai#i 229, 240, 965 P.2d 162, 173 (App. 1998); State v. Eline,
70 Haw. 597, 603-04, 778 P.2d 716, 720 (1989).  Here, however,
Kong voluntarily self-terminated from the MDC program, but now
claims that he "did not waive his right to a termination
hearing."  We disagree.
"A waiver is the knowing, intelligent, and voluntary
relinquishment of a known right."  State v. Friedman, 93 Hawai# i
63, 68, 996 P.2d 268, 273 (2000) (citation omitted).  As a
general principle, the trial court must first engage "in a
personal on-the-record colloquy with the defendant" to ensureFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
16that the defendant's fundamental rights are voluntarily and
knowingly waived.  State v. Murray,  116 Hawai #i 3, 12, 169 P.3d
955, 964 (2007).  "To determine whether a waiver was voluntary
and intelligently undertaken, this court will look to the
totality of facts and circumstances of each particular case." 
Friedman,  93 Hawai #i at 68-69, 996 P.2d at 273-74 (citations
omitted).  
Kong's waiver was "voluntary and intelligently
undertaken" under "the totality of facts and circumstances[.]" 
Friedman, 93 Hawai# i at 68-69, 996 P.2d at 273-74 (citations
omitted).  Kong was advised at three different hearings about the
legal rights he would give up and the consequences of self-
termination from the MDC program.  
At the April 14, 2010 hearing for Kong's petition for
admission into the MDC program, the Circuit Court warned that
Kong would "give up a lot of important legal rights to come into
the program," and further stated that "the whole purpose of
today's hearing is really just to make sure you [Kong] understand
how much you give up when you come into the program."  The
Circuit Court explained that if Kong was terminated from the MDC
program, then "the Court finds you guilty, and you are set for
sentencing.  That's it."  After the Circuit Court explained the
consequences of termination, Kong still wanted to participate in
the program and had no questions.
At the January 26, 2011 status hearing, after Kong
indicated that he wanted to self-terminate from the MDC program,
the Circuit Court explained and emphasized to Kong that he has a
right to have a termination hearing.  After Kong indicated that
he understood his right to a termination hearing, the Circuit
Court went on to explain what would happen if Kong was terminated
from the program.  Kong again indicated three more times that he
understood the consequences of a decision to self-terminate.  
At the February 3, 2011 termination hearing, Kong's 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel stated that "[a]lthough [Kong] did benefit from the
 
program and he would like to continue, he understands and would
 
like to self-terminate in order to speed up the process." Kong
 
confirmed that what his counsel stated was accurate, that he
 
wanted to self-terminate from the program, that his mind was
 
clear about his decision to self-terminate, and that he was not
 
taking any medicine or drugs. The record suggests that Kong's
 
strategy was to self-terminate to expedite sentencing because he
 
was hoping for another chance at probation. 
In addition to being orally advised at three hearings
 
about the consequences of termination from the MDC program, Kong
 
signed the MDC program admission agreement, acknowledging that he
 
understood what would happen upon termination from the program. 
Kong does not dispute that his entry into the program was
 
knowing, intelligent, and voluntary. 
The Circuit Court repeatedly warned Kong about the
 
consequences of termination from the MDC program, Kong repeatedly
 
indicated that he understood these consequences, and Kong's
 
decision to self-terminate was direct and unequivocal. The on­
the-record colloquy between the Circuit Court and Kong
 
affirmatively shows that Kong decided to proceed with self-
termination understanding its consequences. Under the totality
 
of the circumstances, Kong voluntarily and intelligently self-
terminated from the MDC program, waiving his right to a
 
termination hearing.
 
In light of the foregoing, we reject Kong's claim that
 
the Circuit Court erred by terminating him from the MDC program
 
without first ensuring that he understood the rights he was about
 
to relinquish and its consequences.
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's April 11, 2011
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence is affirmed.
 
On the briefs:
 
Samuel G. MacRoberts
 
(Law Office of Philip H.
Lowenthal)
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Renee Ishikawa Delizo
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Maui
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
18
 