NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000535 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
GREEN ALOHA LTD., a Hawaii Corporation,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
WINSTON WELBORN; Defendant-Appellee,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE
CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CC171000160) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Nakasone, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Green Aloha Ltd. appeals from the 
Final Judgment  in favor of Defendant-Appellee Winston 
Welborn 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on June 8, 
2018. For the reasons explained below, we affirm the Judgment. 1
The Wasabi Lawsuit 
This case arose from another lawsuit, Wasabi Design, 
Inc. v. Britt, Civ. No. 16-1-0019, Fifth Circuit, Hawai# i (Wasabi 
Lawsuit)
.  Welborn was a plaintiff in the Wasabi Lawsuit. That 
lawsuit was filed on February 5, 2016. The complaint made the 
following allegations: Welborn and Justin Britt were the 
1 The Honorable James H. Ashford presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
shareholders of Wasabi Design, Inc.; in August 2015, Wasabi 
received money from the settlement of another lawsuit it had 
filed; and Britt took more than his share of the settlement funds. The complaint alleged conversion, fraud, unjust enrichment, breach of fiduciary duty, unlawful distribution, declaratory judgment, and receivership and dissolution of Wasabi. 
The Wasabi Lawsuit complaint was amended on 
February 26, 2016. Green Aloha was added as a defendant. The amended complaint alleged that: Britt formed Green Aloha in 2015 to apply for a Hawai# i medical marijuana dispensary license; 
applicants were required to meet certain financial requirements; Britt took more than his share of Wasabi's settlement and used the funds to meet the financial requirements of Green Aloha's license application. The amended complaint sought a constructive trust over Green Aloha's assets. 
By order entered on July 29, 2016, the Fifth Circuit 
Court dismissed Wasabi's and Welborn's claim for unjust enrichment. 
On August 2, 2016, Wasabi and Welborn filed a second 
amended complaint. The second amended complaint made additional factual allegations and added a count for breach of contract against Britt. 
By order entered on March 15, 2017, the Fifth Circuit 
Court dismissed Wasabi's and Welborn's remaining claims against Green Aloha. 
By separate order, also entered on March 15, 2017, 
the Fifth Circuit Court denied Green Aloha's motion for attorney's fees and costs without prejudice. The Wasabi Lawsuit remains pending before the Fifth Circuit Court.
2 
2 We take judicial notice, pursuant to Rule 201 of the Hawai #i Rules 
of Evidence, that as of December 6, 2021, the last document filed in the
Wasabi Lawsuit was a stipulation to continue the hearing on a motion forappointment of counsel/receiver for Wasabi Design, Inc. until moved on, filedon November 4, 2019. 
The remaining claims appear to be Wasabi's and Welborn's
claims against Britt for breach of contract, unlawful distribution, andreceivership and dissolution. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This Lawsuit 
Green Aloha filed this lawsuit against Welborn on 
January 27, 2017, in First Circuit Court. Green Aloha's 
complaint alleged two counts: (1) abuse of process; and (2) malicious prosecution. 
Welborn responded to Green Aloha's complaint by filing 
a motion to dismiss. The motion was heard on June 20, 2017. By order entered on July 5, 2017, the circuit court dismissed the malicious prosecution claim but denied the motion as to the abuse of process claim.
3 The July 5, 2017 order is not at issue in 
this appeal. 
Welborn answered Green Aloha's complaint. On 
February 12, 2018, Welborn filed a motion for judgment on the pleadings or, in the alternative, for summary judgment on Green Aloha's remaining claim. The motion was heard on April 25, 2018. The circuit court requested supplemental briefing. The hearing was continued on May 18, 2018. On June 8, 2018, the circuit court entered an order denying judgment on the pleadings, but granting summary judgment. The Judgment was entered on the same day. This appeal followed. 
Green Aloha's single point of error contends that the 
circuit erred by granting summary judgment for Welborn on Green Aloha's claim for abuse of process. We review a grant of summary judgment de novo using the same standard applied by the trial court. Nozawa v. Operating Engineers Local Union No. 3, 142 
Hawai#i 331, 338, 418 P.3d 1187, 1194 (2018). Summary judgment 
is appropriate if the evidence presented shows that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. Id. at 342, 418 
P.3d at 1198. A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. Id. 
3 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura entered the order. 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[T]here are two essential elements in a claim for 
abuse of process: (1) an ulterior purpose and (2) a wilful act in
the use of the process which is not proper in the regular conduct  
of the proceeding." Young v. Allstate Ins. Co., 119 Hawai# i 403, 
412, 198 P.3d 666, 675 (2008) (cleaned up). The term "process" broadly encompasses "the entire range of procedures incident to litigation." Id. (citation omitted). The second element is 
material to this appeal because even if Green Aloha can show thatWelborn utilized process for an improper ulterior purpose, Green Aloha must still show "a 'willful act' distinct from the use of  
process per se." Id. at 416, 198 P.3d at 679 (emphasis added). 
Green Aloha contends that a letter from Welborn to 
Britt dated January 19, 2016 (18 days before the Wasabi Lawsuitwas filed) satisfied the "wilful act" element. The letter stated:  
Dear Justin, 
I wanted to include this personal note with the final
settlement offer from my attorney, Katherine Caswell. 
The settlement offer comes with good intentions. It's an 
opportunity for closure — for my own benefit, and for yours.A few trusted friends (especially Andy Evans) urged me topursue this route as a last resort. I know that you aregoing through a lot right now. I care about you more thanyou think. Consider the emotional and financial costs of a lawsuit. Think about your family, your time, your newbusiness venture, and your money. 
I know why you took the money. You're willing to take big
risks in pursuit of your new business venture. If you wouldhave asked, I probably would have helped. 
My offer contains options for fair resolution — one in which
you pay less, and another where you get more time to pay. 
You have 7 days to accept. If you do not accept, then I
will file a lawsuit, we'll go to court, spend a lot moremoney, and I will get fully compensated for money due to me,to Wasabi, plus penalties, damages and fees. It may also
put your dispensary application in jeopardy . 
Think seriously about this Justin. This is a chance to move on. 
Sincerely, Winston 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Emphasis added.) Green Aloha argues: 
Defendant Welborn's January 19, 2016 correspondence
was a threat — you, Britt, don't settle and I will take
action against [Green Aloha]. And that is precisely what[Welborn] did. And the threat alone, e.g., threating to sue[Green Aloha] in order to derail its dispensary license inthe unrelated proceeding (having nothing to do with theWasabi lawsuit) is sufficient to meet the second prong ofYoung. 
Green Aloha's argument is without merit for a number of reasons.
First, Welborn's letter to Britt was not "process," 
even under the broad definition of Young, 119 Hawai# i at 412, 198 
P.3d at 675 (defining "process" as "the entire range of 
procedures incident to litigation") (emphasis omitted). 
The 
letter was sent 18 days before
 the Wasabi Lawsuit was filed. At 
most, Welborn's letter could be evidence of ulterior motive: that Welborn filed the Wasabi Lawsuit to put Green Aloha's marijuana dispensary license application in jeopardy. But that would satisfy only the first element (ulterior purpose) of a claim for abuse of process. This was acknowledged by Green Aloha's counsel during the May 18, 2018 hearing: 
THE COURT: So how can an action that is taken before 
process exists be an abuse of that nonexistent process? 
[COUNSEL]: Well, I mean, I don't think you can look
at the timeframe just in a vacuum. 
He's telegraphing you
don't settle this with me, then I'm going to put your
medical marijuana license in jeopardy. The fact of him sending a letter obviously, Your Honor, that's right, that's
not process . But that goes to his intent. 
. . . . 
. . . Of course the letter because it's not process,
it's not an abuse of process. 
THE COURT: Well, it's not abuse of process. 
[COUNSEL]: 
Yeah, and it's not a process at all, it's
a letter. Letters aren't process . 
(Emphasis added.)
Second, as noted by the federal court for the District 
of Hawai# i: 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Young does not address what would constitute a wilful
act sufficient to support an abuse of process claim, and the
court could find no other Hawaii cases addressing thecircumstances under which a plaintiff has sufficientlyalleged a wilful act. Prosser and Keeton, upon which Youngrelied, however, describes that 
[t]he improper purpose usually takes the form ofcoercion to obtain a collateral advantage, notproperly involved in the proceeding itself, such asthe surrender of property or the payment of money, bythe use of the process as a threat or a club. There is, in other words, a form of extortion, and it iswhat is done in the course of negotiation, rather thanthe issuance or any formal use of the process itself,which constitutes the tort. 
Prosser and Keeton, at 898. 
Ancier v. Egan, Civil No. 14-00294, 2014 WL 6872977 at *6 (D.Haw. 
Dec. 4, 2014). But see Young, 119 Hawai# i at 414, 198 P.3d at 
677 ("Offers to settle the claims at issue in a case are proper, if not encouraged, in the regular conduct of proceedings. 
A 
contrary rule would have a devastating effect on the settlement process, because parties would be wary of making settlement offers if such offers could provide the essential ingredient to subject them to a second lawsuit for abuse of process.") (cleaned up). In this case the settlement offer at issue — Welborn's January 19, 2016 letter to Britt — was sent 18 days before the Wasabi Lawsuit was filed (against Britt, not against Green Aloha). Welborn's offer did not condition settlement of Wasabi's claim against Britt upon Green Aloha withdrawing its marijuana dispensary license application.
Third, Green Aloha cites its interrogatory answers and 
argues: 
[T]he May 3, 2016 letter and attachments . . . from David
Tongg, HK Medicinal's attorney to Virginia Pressler of theDOH supports the allegations. Basically, HK Medicinal triedto use the Wasabi complaint with the frivolous claimsagainst Green Aloha as a way to get the dispensary licenserevoked so that HK Medicinal would get the license. 
The May 3, 2016 letter is not in the record. There is no 
evidence that Welborn — who admittedly was an investor in HK Medicinal LLC, a company competing with Green Aloha to secure the 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
single marijuana dispensary license available for the island of 
Kaua#i — had any involvement in writing HK Medicinal's letter or 
sending it to the Department of Health. Nor is there any evidence Welborn actually used the Wasabi Lawsuit to jeopardize Green Aloha's license application. 
Welborn sustained his burden of production under 
Rule 56 of the Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure by filing a 
declaration denying any involvement with the alleged use of the Wasabi Lawsuit to jeopardize Green Aloha's medical marijuana dispensary license application. See Nozawa, 142 Hawai# i at 342, 
418 P.3d at 1198 (noting that "[t]he burden is on the moving party to establish that summary judgment is proper"). 
The record 
contains no evidence of any wilful act by Welborn distinct from prosecuting the Wasabi Lawsuit that may have jeopardized Green Aloha's dispensary application, or was otherwise "antithetical to the legitimate conduct of" the Wasabi Lawsuit. See Young, 119 
Hawai#i at 416, 198 P.3d at 679. 
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment entered by the 
circuit court on June 8, 2018, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 9, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge Richard E. Wilson, for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
A. Bernard Bays, Michael C. Carroll,Brian M. Mullin, for Defendant-Appellee. 
7 