
 


 

 

 

  

 




 


 



 
 


 

 

 

 

 




 


 



 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000372
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
 

v.
 
 
 
MAYUMI HIOKI, Defendant-Appellant
 
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
 
 
(Honolulu Division)

(CASE NO. 1P112-00969)
 
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
 
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Mayumi Hioki (Hioki) was charged
 
with the non-criminal offense of selling tobacco to a minor, in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 709-908(1) (1993).1
 
After a bench trial, the District Court of the First Circuit
 
1At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 709-908(1)
provided: "It shall be unlawful to sell or furnish tobacco in any
shape or form, including chewing tobacco and snuff, to a minor
under eighteen years of age."
 
The penalty for a first-time offender like Hioki was a $500
fine. See HRS § 709-908(4) (Supp. 2011). Because the authorized
 
penalty for the charged offense was a fine, and did not include
imprisonment, the charged offense constituted a violation, and
not a crime, under HRS § 701-107(5) (1993).
  
 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 


 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2
(District Court),  found that Hioki had committed the charged
 
offense, and it sentenced her to the mandatory $500 fine. 
The
 
District Court filed its Judgment on April 20, 2012.
 
On appeal, Hioki contends that there was insufficient

 
evidence to support the District Court's finding that she had
 committed the charged offense. We disagree and affirm the
 District Court's Judgment.
 
I.
 
J.C., a fifteen-year-old high school student,
 
volunteered to participate in the Cruising Against Tobacco Sales
 program. As part of this program, volunteers worked with the
 police and field researches to identify stores that would sell
 tobacco to minors.
 
On January 7, 2012, J.C. went to the Kahala Boutique
 
located in the Kahala Hotel. J.C. entered the store with
 Honolulu Police Department Officer Tiare Sarinean (Officer
 Sarinean), who was in plain clothes. J.C. and Officer Sarinean
 acted as if they did not know each other. Hioki was behind the
 counter. J.C. asked Hioki for a "Kool Milds soft pack." Hioki
 did not have the requested "Kool Milds" cigarettes, but offered
 J.C. two other packs of cigarettes, which Hioki obtained from
 behind the counter. J.C. pointed to the green pack as the one
 she wanted. Hioki sold J.C. this pack of cigarettes without
 
asking J.C. her age or for identification. J.C. left the store
 
and gave the cigarettes to the police.
 
After Hioki sold the cigarettes to J.C., Officer
 
Sarinean approached Hioki. Officer Sarinean identified herself
 as a police officer and informed Hioki that she had sold tobacco
 to a minor. Hioki responded by attempting to chase after J.C. to
 retrieve the cigarettes. Officer Sarinean testified that she
 recovered the cigarettes, which were a pack of "Kool [F]ilter
 [K]ings in a box[.]" 
II.
 
2The Honorable Lenore Lee presided.
 
2
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 709-908(1) makes it unlawful to sell "tobacco in 
any shape or form" to a minor under eighteen years old. Hioki argues that the evidence was insufficient because she claims that Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) failed to prove that 
the cigarettes she sold to J.C. contained tobacco. We disagree. 
In reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence, we view 
the evidence in the light most favorable to the State. State v. 
Ildefonso, 72 Haw. 573, 576, 827 P.2d 648, 651 (1992). "The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." State v. Hoe, 122 Hawai
'i 347, 
349, 226 P.3d 517, 519 (App. 2010) (block quote format altered; citation omitted). "Matters of credibility and the weight of the evidence and the inferences to be drawn are for the fact finder." State v. Romano, 114 Hawai
'i 1, 8, 155 P.3d 1102, 1109 (2007). 
"[A]ppellate courts will give due deference to the right of the trier of fact to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw reasonable inferences from the evidence adduced." State v. 
Agard, 113 Hawai
'i 321, 324, 151 P.3d 802, 805 (2007) (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted). Accordingly, we may affirm the trial court's finding that a defendant committed the charged offense even though we may have weighed the evidence and drawn reasonable inferences differently if we had been the trier of fact. 
Here, the evidence showed that J.C. purchased
 
cigarettes from Hioki that were sold commercially and were
 identified as "Kool [F]ilter [K]ings," a familiar brand of
 cigarettes. From this evidence, the District Court could
 reasonably infer that the cigarettes were commercially produced
 and that as commercially produced cigarettes, they contained
 tobacco. See State v. Stackhouse, No. 2002-P-0057, 2003 WL
 
1904075, at *3 (Ohio Ct. App. Apr. 18, 2003) (holding that a
 chemical analysis was not necessary to prove that unopened pack
 of commercially produced Marlboro Light cigarettes sold to a
 minor and introduced in evidence contained tobacco). The
 
3
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 






 
 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 






 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasonableness of these inferences is supported by federal
 regulations which prohibit cigarette manufacturers from selling
 any item "other than cigarettes or smokeless tobacco or roll­
your-own paper" that bears the brand name or any other indicia of
 product identification similar to, or identifiable with, those
 used for any brand of cigarettes. 21 C.F.R. § 1140.34(a).
3
 
Hioki's attempt to chase after J.C. and retrieve the
 
cigarettes after being informed by Officer Sarinean of the
 violation could rationally be viewed as a tacit admission that
 Hioki knew the pack of Kool Filter Kings contained tobacco and
 therefore was illegal to sell to a minor. In addition, during
 the testimony of the State's witnesses, the Kool Filter Kings
 that Hioki sold to J.C. were referred to as "cigarettes" without
 objection, and the common understanding of the term "cigarette"
 as used in a retail store transaction, as well as its definition
 under HRS Chapter 245, is that of a product containing tobacco. 
See Dictionary.com, http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/
 cigarette?s=t (last accessed Oct. 27, 2014) (defining "cigarette"
 as "a cylindrical roll of finely cut tobacco cured for smoking,
 considerably smaller than most cigars and usually wrapped in thin
 white paper"); HRS § 245-1 (2001) (defining "cigarette" as "any
 roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco . . . the
 wrapper or cover of which is made of paper or any other substance
 or material except tobacco").
 
Hioki contends that the State needed to call an expert
 
witness in order to prove that the cigarettes she sold to J.C.
 contained tobacco. We disagree. See Stackhouse, 2003 WL
 
1904075, at *3 (holding that a chemical analysis was not
 necessary to prove that unopened pack of commercially produced
 
3For purposes of these federal regulations, the term
"cigarette" is defined in such a way that it must contain
tobacco, in that to fall within the definition of a "cigarette,"
the product must be "a tobacco product[.]" 21 C.F.R. §
1140.3(a). 
4
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Marlboro Light cigarettes contained tobacco).
 
When the evidence is viewed in the light most favorable
 
to the State, and giving due deference to the District Court's
 authority to weigh the evidence and to draw reasonable inferences
 from the evidence, we conclude that there was sufficient evidence
 to support the District Court's finding that Hioki had committed
 the charged offense.
 
III. 
We affirm the District Court's Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, October 29, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Stephen T. Hioki
Attorney for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Sonja P. McCullenDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5

 