NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000906
(Consolidated with No. CAAP-18-0000907)
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
CAAP-18-0000906
In the Interest of HK and KK
and
CAAP-18-0000907
In the Matter of the Guardianship of HK and KK
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CASE NOS. FC-S No. 16-00210 and FC-G No. 18-1-6064)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise, and Hiraoka, JJ.)
EK (Father) was defaulted for not appearing at a joint
hearing in two family court cases.  He appeals from orders
denying his motions to set aside the defaults, entered by the
Family Court of the First Circuit ( Family Court)  on November 7,
2018.  For the reasons explained below, we affirm both orders.1
FC-S No. 16-00210/CAAP-18-0000906
Father and AT ( Mother) have two children, HK and KK
(collectively, the Children ).  On October 13, 2016, Petitioner-
Appellee State of Hawai# i Department of Human Services ( DHS)
filed a petition to place HK (then age 14) and KK (then age 13)
1The Honorable Paul T. Murakami signed both orders.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
in temporary foster custody pursuant to the Hawai#i Child
Protective Act, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) Chapter 587A.  The
case was docketed by the Family Court as FC-S No. 16-00210 (the
Child Protective Act Case ).
Father appeared at the October 17, 2016 return.  The
Family Court2 ordered that the Children remain in temporary
foster custody and continued the hearing to October 20, 2016. 
The Family Court also appointed counsel to represent Father.
Father appeared with counsel at the October 20, 2016
hearing.  The Family Court  ordered that the Children remain in
temporary foster custody and set a contested case hearing for
November 1, 2016.  The Family Court also appointed a guardian ad
litem (GAL ) for the Children.3
Father appeared with counsel at the November 1, 2016
hearing.  The Family Court  ordered that the Children remain in
temporary foster custody, set the date for the Children's entry
into foster care at November 1, 2016, approved a family service
plan, and set various report deadlines.  The parties were ordered
to appear at a periodic review hearing set for February 6, 2017.4
Father appeared with counsel at the February 6, 2017
hearing.  The Family Court  found that Father "has made some
progress toward resolving the problems that necessitated place-
ment" of the Children in foster care.  The parties were ordered
to appear at a periodic review and permanency hearing set for
April 5, 2017.5
Father appeared with counsel at the April 5, 2017
hearing.  The Family Court  set report deadlines and ordered the
parties to appear at a periodic review and permanency hearing set
for June 1, 2017.6
2The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided.
3The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided.
4The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided.
5The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided.
6The Honorable Frances Q.F. Wong presided.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Father did not appear at the June 1, 2017 hearing. 
Father's counsel did not know why Father failed to appear.  The
Family Court  entered Father's default and set a further periodic
review and permanency hearing for November 16, 2017.  On
September 1, 2017, the Family Court  entered an order discharging
Father's counsel because Father had been defaulted and legal
representation was no longer required.87
Father did not appear at the November 16, 2017 hearing. 
The Family Court9 found that Father has not made progress toward
resolving the problems that necessitated foster care placement,
set reporting deadlines, and set a further periodic review and
permanency hearing for February 8, 2018.
On February 8, 2018, the Family Court  entered an
order re-appointing counsel for Father.  Father appeared with
counsel at the February 8, 2018 hearing, and orally moved to have
his default set aside.  The Family Court  granted the motion and
set aside the default.  Father's counsel stated that Father
agreed with the legal guardianship by the resource caregivers, SK
and RK.  The Family Court set a further periodic review and
permanency hearing for May 31, 2018.1110
FC-G No. 18-1-6064/CAAP-18-0000907
On April 5, 2018, DHS filed a petition for appointment
of the resource caregivers, SK and RK, as co-guardians of the
Children.  The case was docketed by the Family Court as FC-G
No. 18-1-6064 (the Guardianship Case ).  A hearing was set for
May 31, 2018, together with the hearing scheduled for the Child
Protective Act Case.
7The Honorable Paul T. Murakami presided.
8The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio signed the order.
9The Honorable Linda S. Martell presided.
10The Honorable Paul T. Murakami signed the order.
11The Honorable Paul T. Murakami presided.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Concurrent Proceedings
Father appeared with counsel at the May 31, 2018
concurrent hearing in the Child Protective Act Case and the
Guardianship Case, and addressed the Family Court:12
[Father]: So when my -- my kids got -- the whole
reason this whole situation happened is me and my family had
a blow-out.  They wanted me out of my house, they wanted to
keep my kids there.  I took my kids with me.  The only place
I had to go was, you know, not a good place, so my kids got
removed from -- they made a complaint to the school, they
got removed.
Department of Human Services said to provide a safe
family home, in which I did.  I had a written affidavit by
Rachel-Joy Nisperos, she's a real estate broker and she has
her own business, that I could stay with her.  Department of
Human Services child -- child support -- child welfare
services said no.  They changed their records, put a whole
bunch of stipulations on me.  I blew up in court.  They
said, eh, you know what, you're not gonna see your kids for
a year.  I didn't see my kids for a year.  Department says
that, hey, your kids don't want to see you, they're afraid
of you.  Last hearing they said, oh, yeah, your kids -- your
kids were afraid there was gonna -- you was gonna yell at
them, that's why you didn't see them for a whole year.
So I -- I feel that, eh, no matter what I do, I'm not
gonna get my kids back, and they got it in a way to where
I'm gonna have to owe child support till they're 18.  I
already get everything deducted off of my -- my -- my
paychecks.  I get garnished for -- for other kids that --
that I don't -- one is in Maui, I have another one in
Kaneohe, and I got this other kid in -- so I -- I'm -- I'm
like, you know what, I'm kinda overwhelmed 'cause I -- for
this past -- this whole time I've been working, staying
employable, staying stable in a house, staying clean and
sober, and -- and building up my credit so I can have a life
for myself, and it's really frustrating to work and have
them take all -- garnish all my money and to take my -- my
tax returns.
THE COURT:  Okay.
[Father]:  So that's -- that's the point where I'm at. 
'Cause, you know, I -- I honestly think that, you know what,
I -- I can do -- I can jump through all the hoops and do
everything that CPS wants to do with me, but you know what,
the courts made decision, the department did -- made the
decision of what's gonna happen with my kids, and I just
feel that it's unfair for them to put them in guardianship
and garnish all my checks.  If [SK] wants the kids, then
adopt the kids.
THE COURT: Okay.
[Father]:  If [SK] wants them so bad, you know.
12The Honorable Paul T. Murakami presided.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
THE COURT:  Okay.  No, now I understand the position. 
Got it.  But then that kind of intersects with [Mother's
counsel] and his client.  I don't know if mother's willing
to go [Termination of Parental Rights] and an adoption.
[Father]:  Well, if -- if -- if she -- if she agrees
to the adoption, then she'll be -- she won't be obligated to
child support either if she decides to work later in the
future.
. . . .
So I'm pretty sure that she would agree to adopt--
adoption --
THE COURT:  Okay.
[Father]:  -- versus guardianship, where we would owe
child support.
The Family Court granted DHS's motion to continue the concurrent
hearings.  The parties were ordered to appear at a hearing set
for August 6, 2018, in both the Child Protective Act Case and the
Guardianship Case.
Father appeared with counsel at the August 6, 2018
hearing.  Father's counsel stated:
Well, as father had informed the Court at the last
hearing on May 31st, he preferred the termination of his
rights and adoption over legal guardianship.  He still has
that position, Your Honor.
The GAL stated:
The resource caregivers are not in a position to
adopt, but they are supportive of the long-term care of the
children, and they're doing very well.
The Family Court  stated:13
I can only rule on what's brought before me.  Right
now I've got a -- I've got a guardianship you folks aren't
moving forward on, and this is still a foster custody case. 
I'm going to set it for review in three months.  Figure out
what you folks want to do.
. . . .
Will this case benefit from a further Ohana Conference
or mediation or something (inaudible)?  'Cause there seems
to be a lack of understanding as to what rights,
responsibilities, and obligations are in this case.
13The Honorable Paul T. Murakami presided.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
. . . .
The -- the point I'm trying to make is that rights,
responsibilities, obligations, and duties goes to everyone
in the room, because as was appropriately pointed out, if
you folks move for a [Termination of Parental Rights] and
the resource caregivers aren't inclined to -- for adoption,
in fact they may even turn the kids out at that point,
you're cutting off your nose to spite your face.  You really
should think about what your next moves are, all of you.
The Family Court referred the Child Protective Act Case and the
Guardianship Case to the O#ahu Child Welfare Mediation Program,
set reporting deadlines, and ordered the parties to appear at a
further hearing on October 22, 2018.
Father did not appear at the October 22, 2018 hearing. 
Father's counsel asked that Father be excused.  Counsel
explained:
Your Honor, I called my client at 12:30 this after-
noon, he answered.  It appeared that he had forgotten about
this court hearing.  He was at a doctor's appointment.  He
did participate by telephone during the mediation that was
requested, so he was -- he did speak to the mediator, Your
Honor.
. . . .
THE COURT:  He was supposed to be here.  He was
ordered to be here.  I'm going to default him.
The Family Court14 denied counsel's oral request that Father be
allowed to participate by telephone, granted the guardianship
petition and appointed SK and RK as co-guardians of the Children
in the Guardianship Case, revoked the temporary foster custody
and terminated jurisdiction in the Child Protective Act case, and
discharged Father's counsel effective thirty days from the
hearing.
On November 7, 2018, Father's counsel submitted motions
to set aside Father's default in both the Child Protective Act
Case and the Guardianship Case.  The motions were supported by a
declaration of counsel stating:
That on October 22, 2018 father did not appear at the
courthouse for the mediation set for 12:30 p.m.  Father was
14The Honorable Paul T. Murakami presided.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
available by telephone and twice spoke to the mediator with
declarant listening on the speaker phone.  Father did not
appear at the courthouse because he had forgotten the court
date and was at psychologist Dr. Alisa Antonio's office in
the downtown area for an evaluation for employment purposes. 
After the appointment with Dr. Antonio father was scheduled
for a urinalysis test also for employment purposes and also
in the downtown area[.]
The Family Court stamped "DENIED WITHOUT HEARING" and filed both
motions.  Father appealed in both cases.  We consolidated the
cases for appeal.
Standards of Review
[T]he family court possesses wide discretion in making its
decisions and those decision [sic] will not be set aside
unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion.  Thus, we
will not disturb the family court's decisions on appeal
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of
reason.
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006)
(citation omitted).  A ruling on a motion to set aside a default
is reviewed for abuse of discretion.  Gonsalves v. Nissan Motor
Corp. in Haw., 100 Hawai#i 149, 158, 58 P.3d 1196, 1205 (2002).
The family court's findings of fact are reviewed under
the "clearly erroneous" standard.  Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 137
P.3d at 360.  A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when the
record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or
despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, we are
nonetheless left with a definite and firm conviction that a
mistake has been made.  Id.  "Substantial evidence" is credible
evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion. 
Id. 
The Family Court Did Not Abuse its Discretion in
Refusing to Set Aside Father's Second Default
A party seeking to set aside a default must show
(1) that the nondefaulting party will not be prejudiced by the
reopening, (2) that the defaulting party has a meritorious
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
defense, and (3) that the default was not the result of
inexcusable neglect or a wilful act.  BDM, Inc. v. Sageco, Inc.,
57 Haw. 73, 76, 549 P.2d 1147, 1150 (1976).  The required
findings are cumulative, not alternative.  See Citicorp Mortg.,
Inc. v. Bartolome, 94 Hawai# i 422, 439, 16 P.3d 827, 844 (App.
2000) ("[I]f a movant fails to meet any one prong of the test, a
trial court does not abuse its discretion in refusing to set
aside a default judgment.").
The Family Court made the following findings of fact:
72.[Father] was physically present at the August 6,
2018 concurrent proceedings in both cases, and was ordered
to appear and to be physically present at the October 22,
2018 concurrent proceedings in both cases.  He had notice of
the October 22, 2018 concurrent proceedings in both cases,
the court order to be physically present and the
consequences if he failed to be physically present at the
October 22, 2016 concurrent proceedings in both cases.
73.[Father] failed to obey the court's August 6,
2018 order to be physically present at the October 22, 2018
concurrent hearing in both cases.
74.[Father] was not authorized to participate in
the October 22, 2018 concurrent proceedings in both cases by
way of telephone.
75.According to [Father], by way of the Declaration
of Counsel in support of his Motion to Set-Aside Default,
dated October 31, 2018, [Father] "had forgotten about the
court date."  According to [Father]'s counsel's declaration
(which was not based on information and belief), [Father]
also had an appointment with a psychologist at the same
time.  [Father]'s reason for his failure to be physically
present at the October 22, 2018 concurrent proceedings is
the result of inexcusable neglect or a willful act.
76.Due to the length of time that the Children have
been in foster care since their November 1, 2016 Date of
Entry into Foster Care, it would not be in the Children's
best interests to delay the proceedings in both cases; such
a delay if the default against [Father] were set aside in
both cases.  As a result, the Children would be prejudiced
if the court were to set aside the defaults against [Father]
in both cases.
These findings are supported by substantial evidence in the
record and are not clearly erroneous.  Father wanted the Children
to be adopted rather than placed in a guardianship because he did
not want to continue paying child support.  The Children were
doing very well with the temporary foster caregivers SK and RK,
and SK and RK were willing to become co-guardians, but they were
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
not in a position to adopt the Children.  The Children would be
prejudiced if the co-guardianship was vacated.
Father did not demonstrate that he had a meritorious
defense.
Father had been defaulted in the Child Protective Act
Case once before, so he knew the consequences of failing to
appear at a hearing.  To establish excusable neglect, Father had
to show that his failure to appear for the Family Court hearing
was not due to his "own carelessness, inattention, or willful
disregard of the court's process, but because of some unexpected
or unavailable hindrance or accident or because of reliance on
the care and vigilance of [his] counsel or on a promise made by
the adverse party."  Excusable Neglect, Black's Law Dictionary
(11th ed. 2019).  Father simply "forgetting" about the
October 22, 2018 hearing constituted inexcusable neglect.  For
all of these reasons, the Family Court did not abuse its
discretion in denying Father's motions to set aside his defaults
under the circumstances of this case.  The Family Court's
November 7, 2018 denials of Father's motions to set aside his
defaults in the Child Protective Act Case and the Guardianship
Case are affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 15, 2019.
On the briefs:
Herbert Y. Hamada,
for Father-Appellant. Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
9Patrick A. Pascual,
Julio C. Herrera,
Erin L.S. Yamashiro,
Erin K. Torres,
Deputy Attorneys General,
for Petitioner-Appellee.