NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000083
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
OCWEN LOAN SERVICING, LLC, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
STEVEN J. CHELMINIAK; TERESA M. CHELMINIAK,
Defendants-Appellants
and
MORTGAGE ELECTRONIC REGISTRATION SYSTEMS, INC., 
SOLELY AS NOMINEE FOR COUNTRYWIDE BANK, FSB,
NOW KNOWN AS BANK OF AMERICA, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION;
THE ADMINISTRATOR OF THE SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50;
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50, Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0230)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Acting Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
Defendants-Appellants Steven J. Chelminiak and Teresa 
M. Chelminiak (the Chelminiaks ) appeal from the "Findings of
Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion
for Summary Judgment for Foreclosure Against All Defendants and
for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure" (Order Granting
Foreclosure) and Judgment both entered on January 19, 2017, in NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Ocwen Loan Servicing, LLC ( Ocwen), in
the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit ( circuit court).1 
On appeal, the Chelminiaks contend that the circuit
court erred (1) in granting summary judgment in favor of Ocwen
because Ocwen failed to prove its entitlement to enforce the note
and (2) by concluding that Ocwen was entitled to judgment as a
matter of law despite the evidence the Chelminiaks presented on
their affirmative defense of unclean hands.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve the
Chelminiaks' points of error as follows, and we vacate and
remand.
In Bank of America, N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, the Hawai #i 
Supreme Court held in a judicial foreclosure action that in order
to establish a right to foreclose, the foreclosing plaintiff must
establish standing, or entitlement to enforce the subject note,
at the time the action was commenced.  139 Hawai# i 361, 367-70, 
390 P.3d 1248, 1254-57 (2017).  The holding in Reyes-Toledo is
dispositive in this case.
The supreme court stated that a foreclosing plaintiff
must typically "prove the existence of an agreement, the terms of
the agreement, a default by the mortgagor under the terms of the
agreement, and giving of the cancellation notice."  Id. at 367,
390 P.3d at 1254 (citing Bank of Honolulu, N.A. v. Anderson , 3
Haw. App. 545, 551, 654 P.2d 1370, 1375 (1982)).  Furthermore,
"[a] foreclosing plaintiff must also prove its entitlement to
enforce the note and mortgage."  Id. (citations omitted).  The
supreme court then expressed that "[a] foreclosing plaintiff's
burden to prove entitlement to enforce the note overlaps with the
requirements of standing in foreclosure actions as 'standing is
concerned with whether the parties have the right to bring
suit.'"  Id.  (brackets omitted) (quoting Mottl v. Miyahira, 95
Hawai#i 381, 388, 23 P.3d 716, 723 (2001)).  The supreme court
1  The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided. 
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
further stated that "[a]s standing relates to the invocation of
the court's jurisdiction, it is not surprising that standing must
be present at the commencement of the case."  Id. at 368, 390
P.3d at 1255 (citation omitted).  In concluding that the
foreclosing bank failed to satisfy its burden as the movant for
summary judgment, the supreme court reasoned: "[a]lthough Bank of
America produced evidence that it possessed the blank-indorsed
Note at the time it sought summary judgment, a material question
of fact exists as to whether Bank of America possessed the Note,
or was otherwise a holder, at the time it brought the foreclosure
action."  Id. at 370, 390 P.3d at 1257.
In the instant case, OneWest Bank, FSB ( OneWest) filed
the Complaint for Foreclosure ( Complaint ) on March 27, 2013.
Ocwen was subsequently substituted for OneWest.2  Further, like
the foreclosing bank in Reyes-Toledo, Ocwen was granted a decree
of foreclosure via a summary judgment ruling.  In support of its
summary judgment motion, Ocwen attached, inter alia , the
following to establish its standing to foreclose: (1) a
"Declaration in Support of Plaintiff's Motion for Summary
Judgment" executed on January 11, 2016, by Morgan Battle Ames
(Ames) to which the Fixed/Adjustable Rate Note (Note ) and allonge
are attached as Exhibit 1; and (2) an "HRS § 667-17 Affirmation"
2  On December 12, 2014, OneWest filed a motion to substitute Ocwen as
plaintiff.  OneWest's counsel, Peter Stone ( Stone), attested that "[w]hen the
complaint was filed, [OneWest] qualified as the Note holder with standing to
prosecute the action as the Note was endorsed in blank, thereby converting the
Note to a bearer instrument, and because [OneWest] was in rightful possession
of the endorsed Note."  Stone further attested that Ocwen "is the current
holder of the Note and entitled to enforce the Note. [Ocwen] has standing to
prosecute this action."  On October 12, 2015, the circuit court granted
OneWest's motion and Ocwen was substituted for OneWest as plaintiff.
Stone's declaration does not provide admissible evidence to establish
that OneWest held the blank endorsed note at the time the Complaint was filed. 
Rule 56(e) of the Hawai #i Rules of Civil Procedure provides that "[s]upporting
and opposing affidavits shall be made on personal knowledge, shall set forth
such facts as would be admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively
that the affiant is competent to testify to the matters stated therein." 
Stone's declaration fails to meet these requirements.  Stone's declaration
also is not in compliance with the requirements for an attorney affirmation
under HRS § 667-17 (2016).
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
executed by Keoni Souza ( Souza), counsel for Ocwen in this case.3
Ames's declaration attests, in relevant part, that "[Ocwen] is in
possession of an original promissory note dated 11/19/2007 in the
principal amount of $539,000.00 executed by [Steven J.
Chelminiak] in favor of American Lending Group, Inc." and that
the "Note is endorsed in blank."  The Note is endorsed by
American Lending Group, Inc. payable to IndyMac Bank, F.S.B., and
endorsed by IndyMac Bank, F.S.B in blank payable to bearer on an
allonge to the Note.  The Note was not attached to the Complaint. 
Souza's attorney affirmation states that "I affirm that, to the
best of my knowledge, information and believe [sic], the Summons,
and Complaint and other papers filed or submitted to the Court in
this matter contain no false statement of fact or law and that
Plaintiff has legal standing to bring this foreclosure action."4 
Thus, although Ocwen produced evidence that it possessed the Note
at the time it sought summary judgment, it failed to establish
that OneWest possessed the blank-endorsed Note at the time
OneWest filed the foreclosure Complaint.  Like in 
Reyes-Toledo,
the evidence fails to demonstrate that OneWest was entitled to
enforce the Note at the time this action was commenced.  139
Hawai#i at 370-71, 390 P.3d at 1257-58.
Further, there is no additional evidence to show that
OneWest was entitled to enforce the Note when the Complaint was
filed.  The Complaint simply states that "[OneWest] is the holder
of the Note and record assignee of the Mortgage."  The Note and
allonge are not attached to the Complaint and there is no
verification or other evidence submitted verifying that OneWest
held the blank endorsed Note at the time the Complaint was filed. 
3  Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 667-17 (Supp. 2013) was adopted in
2012 (effective June 28, 2012) and amended in 2014 (effective April 23, 2014). 
The 2014 amendment to HRS § 667-17 further required that the "affirmation
shall be filed with the court at the time that the action is commenced[.]" 
2014 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 37, § 1 at 87.  Because OneWest filed its Complaint
after June 28, 2012, but before April 23, 2014, OneWest, and subsequently
Ocwen, was not required to file its attorney affirmation with the Complaint.  
4  Souza's attorney affirmation identifies Ocwen, not OneWest, as the
Plaintiff, and is based on information Souza obtained from a representative of
Ocwen, not OneWest.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Viewing the facts and inferences in the light most
favorable to the Chelminiaks, there is a genuine issue of
material fact as to whether OneWest had standing at the time this
foreclosure action was commenced.  Therefore, under Reyes-Toledo,
the circuit court erred in granting the motion for summary
judgment. 
Given the above, we need not address the Chelminiaks'
remaining points of error on appeal.5  
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Findings of
Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion
for Summary Judgment for Foreclosure Against All Defendants and
for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure" and the Judgment both
entered on January 19, 2017, in the Circuit Court of the Third
Circuit, are vacated.  This case is remanded to the circuit court
for further proceedings.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 29, 2018.
On the briefs:
Richard T. Forrester,
for Defendants-Appellants. Acting Chief Judge
J. Blaine Rogers,
Lori King Stibb,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
5  Ocwen notes on appeal that if Reyes-Toledo is applicable, that
remand to the circuit court may be warranted.  However, Ocwen requests that in
light of the supreme court's decision in Deutsche Bank Nat'l Trust Co. v.
Kozma, that we clarify that the Chelminiaks are not the prevailing party and
deny an award of costs under Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule
39. 140 Hawai #i 494, 498-99, 403 P.3d 271, 275-76 (2017).  Like the mortgagor
in 
Kozma, the Chelminiaks are not the "prevailing party" entitled to
attorney's fees pursuant to HRS § 607-14 because this court's order puts the
Chelminiaks' "back in the place [they] started" with regard to the foreclosure
action without addressing a "disputed main issue."  Id.  As for an award of
costs under HRAP Rule 39, we will address that issue if and when such a
request is made. 
5