NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001347
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STACY S.K. HIGA and JANICE M.N. HIGA,
Plaintiffs/Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
v.
COUNTY OF HAWAI #I, LINCOLN ASHIDA,
as the Corporation Counsel for the County of Hawai #i,
Defendants/Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
and
JOHN DOES 1-100, JANE DOES 1-100,
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-100, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-100,
DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-100, and DOE ENTITIES 1-100,
Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0293)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Fujise, Acting C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees Stacy S.K. Higa
(Higa) and Janice M.N. Higa (collectively, the  Higas) appeal from
the Judgment entered on November 24, 2014, and challenge the
"Order Granting Defendants County of Hawai #i and Lincoln Ashida,
as the Corporation Counsel for the County of Hawai #i's Motion for
Summary Judgment" entered on May 15, 2014 (Order Granting Summary
Judgment), both filed in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
(circuit court).1 
On appeal, the Higas contend that the circuit court
erred when it granted summary judgment for Defendants-
Appellees/Cross-Appellants County of Hawai #i (County ) and Lincoln
1 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Ashida, as the Corporation Counsel for the County of Hawai# i
(Ashida),2 (collectively, the County Defendants), because there
were genuine issues of material fact precluding summary judgment. 
County Defendants filed a cross-appeal and challenge
the circuit court's "Order Denying [County Defendants'] Motion
for Award of Attorneys' Fees and Costs" ( Order Denying Fees),
filed on October 20, 2014.  County Defendants contend that the
circuit court abused its discretion when it held that the claims
in the Higas' verified complaint sounded in tort rather than
assumpsit, and therefore ruled that the County Defendants were
not entitled to attorneys' fees pursuant to Hawaii Revised
Statutes ( HRS) ยง 607-14 (2016). 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm.
I.The Higas' Appeal
In reviewing the Higas' challenges to the circuit
court's Order Granting Summary Judgment, we apply the following
standard of review:
[An appellate] court reviews a trial court's grant of
summary judgment de novo.  Oahu Transit Servs., Inc. v.#
Northfield Ins. Co., 107 Hawai #i 231, 234, 112 P.3d 717, 720
(2005).  The standard for granting a motion for summary
judgment is well settled:
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law.   A fact is material if
proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties.  The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party.  In other
words, [the appellate court] must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the
light most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
Price v. AIG Hawai i Ins. Co. # , 107 Hawai #i 106, 110, 111 P.3d
1, 5 (2005) (original brackets and citation omitted).
Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel , 117 Hawai# i 92, 104,
176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008).
2  Ashida is named in his official capacity as the Corporation Counsel
for the County of Hawai #i during the relevant period of this case.  The Higas'
verified complaint refers, at times, to Ashida and his subordinates
collectively as "Corporation Counsel."  Our references to "Corporation
Counsel" herein refer to the County of Hawai #i Office of the Corporation
Counsel.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
This case stems from an underlying proceeding before
the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ( EEOC) in which
Melissa Chang ( Chang), a former Legislative Assistant for the
Hawai#i County Council, brought a charge of discrimination
against the County based on certain alleged conduct by, among
others, Higa while he was Chair of the Hawai #i County Council. 
Chang also alleged improper conduct by another County Council
member and the County Clerk ( EEOC case ).  Corporation Counsel
represented the County in the EEOC case.  After an initial ruling
adverse to the County, the EEOC case was settled.
The Higas subsequently brought this action against the
County and Ashida.  Count I of the Higas' verified complaint
asserts a cause of action for "negligence/legal malpractice"
alleging, inter alia , that: an attorney-client relationship
existed between Higa and Corporation Counsel with regard to the
EEOC case; Corporation Counsel owed a duty of care and skill to
Higa; Corporation Counsel negligently breached their duty by
failing to advise Higa about potential conflicts, obtain a waiver
of potential conflicts, or advise Higa of his right to obtain
independent counsel (collectively, Conflict Issues ); and Higa's
reputation was damaged because he was unable to intervene at the
EEOC hearing with his own counsel and defend himself.  
Count II in the verified complaint asserts a cause of
action for breach of contract asserting, inter alia , that: the
Hawai#i County Charter mandated that Corporation Counsel provide
counsel for County Council members sued in their employment
capacity; Corporation Counsel was obligated to exercise the
knowledge, skill, and ability ordinarily possessed by members of
the legal profession; Corporation Counsel was required to advise
Higa about the Conflict Issues in the EEOC case; and as a result
of the failure to notify Higa of the Conflict Issues he suffered
injury to his reputation and other damages.3 
Count III in the verified complaint asserts a cause of
action for breach of fiduciary duty/conflict of interest
3  During the litigation of this case, Higa claimed, inter alia , that
his chances for being elected Mayor were affected by the EEOC case being made
public.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
alleging, inter alia , that: Corporation Counsel "acted in a
fiduciary relationship to Higa as his attorney[,]" which included
an attendant duty of loyalty to ensure there were no conflicts of
interest; Corporation Counsel failed to advise Higa of any
conflicts of interest, allow Higa to waive any conflict, or seek
to withdraw from representing Higa; and as a result the Higas
suffered damages.
Although couched as three different causes of action,
Counts I through III are each grounded in the allegations that
Corporation Counsel breached duties or obligations owed to Higa
due to an attorney-client relationship.  This is reinforced by
the Higas' own presentation of the issues in their appellate
briefing, which addresses their causes of action under Counts I
through III in similar fashion, i.e. , that an attorney-client
relationship existed between Higa and Corporation Counsel, that
Higa should have been allowed to intervene in the EEOC litigation
due to conflicts with the County or other County Council members,
and that the Higas suffered damages because Corporation Counsel
failed to properly represent Higa in the EEOC case. 
In short, we view Counts I through III as each
asserting a legal malpractice claim and will address them
together as such for purposes of reviewing the summary judgment
ruling.  The Higas' derivative claim set forth in Count IV is
addressed separately.
A.Legal Malpractice
As established by the Hawai# i Supreme Court in Thomas
v. Kidani,
The elements of an action for legal malpractice are: (1) the
parties had an attorney-client relationship, (2) the
defendant committed a negligent act or omission constituting
breach of that duty, (3) there is a causal connection
between the breach and the plaintiff's injury, and (4) the
plaintiff suffered actual loss or damages.
126 Hawai #i 125, 129, 267 P.3d 1230, 1234 (2011) (citations
omitted).  The supreme court further expressed that "[t]he
causation element of legal malpractice is often thought of as
requiring a plaintiff to litigate a 'trial within a trial.'"  Id.  
(citation omitted).  That is, to prove causation, a plaintiff in
a legal malpractice action must show "both the attorney's
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
negligence and also what the outcome of the mishandled litigation
would have been if it had been properly tried."  Id. (citation
omitted).  In Thomas, the supreme court held that the legal
malpractice plaintiff had the burden to prove that her prior
attorney had failed to present a certain legal theory when he had
represented her, and  that plaintiff would have prevailed in the
prior case if the attorney had presented the legal theory.  Id.
In this case, therefore, the Higas have the burden of
proof at trial under the standards for establishing legal
malpractice set forth in Thomas.  For purposes of reviewing the
circuit court's summary judgment ruling in this case, we also
consider the following:
where the non-movant bears the burden of proof at trial, a
movant may demonstrate that there is no genuine issue of
material fact by either: (1) presenting evidence negating an
element of the non-movant's claim, or (2) demonstrating that
the non-movant will be unable to carry his or her burden of
proof at trial.
Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawai #i 46, 57, 292 P.3d 1276, 1287 (2013)
(emphasis added).
Given the record in this case, and based on our de novo
review, we conclude that the first circumstance described in
Ralston applies here.  That is, the County Defendants
demonstrated there is no genuine issue of material fact by
presenting evidence with their summary judgment motion negating
an element -- the causation element -- of non-movant Higa's legal
malpractice claim.  In turn, once the burden shifted to Higa, he
failed to present any counter evidence showing that there were
genuine issues of material fact for trial on the causation
element.
One of the exhibits attached to the County Defendants'
summary judgment motion is the deposition testimony of Higa in
which he testified, inter alia , about the bases for his claims. 
Higa testified that he had wanted to intervene in the EEOC case,
stating in relevant part:
Hey, I was trying to intervene to correct -- or what I
consider wrong, okay.  That's what I'm getting -- that's
what this lawsuit is about, that I think your guys or
whoever it was screwed up, never gave us a chance to go
through the process and do this thing correctly.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Although Higa was a witness in the EEOC case and, among other
things, was prepared for his testimony in that matter by
Corporation Counsel attorneys, he was never named as a party. 
When asked what difference it would have made if he was a party,
Higa testified that he would have brought in experts "in this
field of litigation[.]"  However, he could not provide any
explanation as to how the outcome in the EEOC case would have
been better for him.  When asked if he knew "whether those
experts would have made a difference in the ruling rendered" in
the EEOC case, Higa responded: "Again, I don't know. 
Speculating.  I can't -- I can't guess.  All I know -- all I know
is I never had the opportunity to defend my position or my
reputation, all that stuff.  Again, it was clearly targeted
toward me."
Additionally, at the April 9, 2014 hearing on the
County Defendants' motion for summary judgment, the Higas'
attorney told the circuit court several times that the Higas
could not show that the outcome of the EEOC litigation would have
been different if not for the County Defendants' acts and that
they do not know if Higa would have won the Mayor's race.  During
the course of the hearing, the Higas' counsel stated: 
We can't say that the decision before the EEOC judge would
be any different, and we can't -- nobody can.  If I could do
that I'd be in Vegas.
. . . .
We are not saying that he would have won the election.  We
are not saying necessarily that the EEO [sic] decision would
have come out differently.  We don't know.
. . . .
So what we're saying is basically we don't know about what
they're saying.  Okay.
"Would we have won?"
"I don't know."
"Would you have won the mayoral race?"
"I don't know."
In short, based on the evidence and the admissions before the
circuit court, we conclude the circuit court properly determined
that the County Defendants had negated the causation element of
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Higa's legal malpractice claims.4
Similar to Thomas, therefore, we conclude that summary
judgment was warranted on the legal malpractice claims.5
B.Loss of Consortium
In light of our conclusion regarding the Higas' claims
in Count I-III, we need not address the Higas' derivative loss of
consortium claim in Count IV.  Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co. , 82
Hawai#i 226, 241, 921 P.2d 146, 161 (1996) (holding that loss of
consortium is a derivative action, and that such claims are
barred when the victim's initial claim of injury cannot be
maintained) (citing Towse v. State , 64 Haw. 624, 637, 647 P.2d
696, 705 (1982)).
II.County Defendants' Cross-Appeal
In their cross-appeal, the County Defendants argue that
the circuit court erred in denying their request for attorneys'
fees under HRS ยง 607-14.  We review the circuit court's ruling on
the request for attorneys' fees for abuse of discretion.  Hart v.
Ticor Title Ins. Co., 126 Hawai #i 448, 455, 272 P.3d 1215, 1222
(2012).
The Hawai #i Supreme Court has held that assumpsit is "a
common law form of action which allows for the recovery of
damages for non-performance of a contract , either express or
implied, written or verbal, as well as quasi contractual
4  We note that the Higas generally argue that Chang's discrimination
charge was time barred, but they provide no particulars to counter the
evidence and admissions that Higa cannot show causation, i.e., that there
would have been a different outcome in the EEOC case if not for the alleged
negligent acts/omissions of Corporation Counsel.  We further note that,
although the Higas focus on Chang's assertion in her charge that the last
incident involving Higa occurred on December 15, 2005, the charge as a whole
encompasses allegations of discriminatory conduct by County employees up to
early July 2006.  Thus, the evidence in the record shows that Chang's charge
dated November 6, 2006, which was submitted to the Hawaii Civil Rights
Commission and dual filed with the EEOC, was timely.
As to Higa's contention that Ashida made derogatory public statements
after the EEOC decision, and that Higa was not allowed to access files, Higa's
alleged harm was the effect on the Mayor's race.  Again, however, Higa
admitted that he could not show any causation with regard to the Mayor's race. 
Further, the Higas do not allege any defamation claim.
5  Although the Higas raised an HRCP Rule 56(f) argument in the circuit
court, they do not challenge the circuit court's ruling in that regard in this
appeal.
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
obligations."  Blair v. Ing, 96 Hawai# i 327, 332, 31 P.3d 184,
189 (2001) (emphasis added) (quoting TSA Int'l Ltd. v. Shimizu
Corp., 92 Hawai #i 243, 264, 990 P.2d 713, 734 (1999)).  In
deciding whether to award fees under HRS ยง 607-14, the court must
determine the nature of the lawsuit where both assumpsit and
non-assumpsit claims are asserted in an action.  Id.
The Blair court analyzed whether a claim is in the
nature of assumpsit using the following framework:
In ascertaining the nature of the proceeding on appeal, this
court has looked to the essential character of the
underlying action in the trial court.  The character of the
action should be determined from the facts and issues raised
in the complaint, the nature of the entire grievance, and
the relief sought.  Where there is doubt as to whether an
action is in assumpsit or in tort, there is a presumption
that the suit is in assumpsit.
Id. (internal brackets, citations, and quotation marks omitted).
We first note that Higa's claim of an attorney-client
relationship with Corporation Counsel is based on the Corporation
Counsel's obligations under the Hawai# i County Charter, and is
not based on an alleged contract.  Second, based on our review of
the Higas' verified complaint, we agree with the circuit court
that it sounds in tort rather than contract.  Indeed, even though
Count II is labeled as asserting a breach of contract, given the
actual allegations in that count, we have treated it as a
professional negligence/legal malpractice cause of action.
In sum, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion
in denying the County Defendants' motion for attorneys' fees.
III.Conclusion
Based on the above, we affirm the following entered by
the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit:
(1) the "Order Granting Defendants County of Hawai #i
and Lincoln Ashida, as the Corporation Counsel for the County of
Hawai#i's Motion for Summary Judgment," filed on May 15, 2014;
(2) the "Order Denying Defendants County of Hawai #i and
Lincoln Ashida's, as the Corporation Counsel for the County of
Hawai#i, Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees and Costs," filed on
October 20, 2014; and
(3) the Judgment filed on November 24, 2014.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 9, 2018.
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On the briefs:
William A. Harrison, 
Craig M. Sadamoto, 
for Plaintiffs/Appellants/
Cross-Appellees.Acting Chief Judge
Sidney K. Ayabe,
Calvin E. Young,
Monica K.S. Choi,
for Defendants/Appellees/
Cross-Appellants.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
9