 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAIʻI  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000006 10-SEP-2024 08:12 AM Dkt. 73 SO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000006 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
STATE OF HAWAIʻI, Plaintiff-Appellee, v. 
JOSHUA MASUDA-MERCADO, Defendant-Appellant. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3CPC-20-0000731)  
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Joshua 
Masuda-Mercado, appeals 
from the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit's1 December 16, 2022 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence. Following a jury trial, 
Masuda-Mercado was convicted of (1) Attempted Sexual Assault in 
the First Degree, in violation of Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§§ 705-500(1)(b) and 707-730(1)(b) (2014), for a July 2, 2019 
incident (Count 1), and (2) Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor 
1 The Honorable Wendy M. DeWeese presided.   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under the Age of Fourteen Years, in violation of HRS § 707-733.6 
(2014), for the period between November 1, 2014 through 
August 31, 2018 (Count 2).  2
2 In relevant part, Masuda- Mercado's conviction was under the following 
sections of the Hawaiʻ i Revised Statutes: 
§705-500  Criminal attempt. (1) A person is guilty 
of an attempt to commit a crime if the person: 
(a) Intentionally engages in conduct which would 
constitute the crime if the attendant 
circumstances were as the person believes them 
to be; or 
(b) Intentionally engages in conduct which, under the circumstances as the person believes them 
to be, constitutes a substantial step in a 
course of conduct intended to culminate in the 
person's commission of the crime. 
(2) When causing a particular result is an element 
of the crime, a person is guilty of an attempt to commit 
the crime if, acting with the state of mind required to 
establish liability with respect to the attendant 
circumstances specified in the definition of the crime, the person intentionally engages in conduct which is a 
substantial step in a course of conduct intended or known 
to cause such a result. 
(3) Conduct shall not be considered a substantial 
step under this section unless it is strongly corroborative of the defendant's criminal intent. 
§707-730  Sexual assault in the first degree.   (1) A 
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the first 
degree if:  
    . . . . 
(b) The person knowingly engages in sexual penetration with another person who is less 
than fourteen years old[.] 
§707-733.6  Continuous sexual assault of a minor 
under the age of fourteen years.   (1) A person commits the 
offense of continuous sexual assault of a minor under the age of fourteen if the person:  
(continued . . .) 
2   
 
 
 
   On appeal, Masuda-Mercado challenges the jury 
instructions as to Count 1 and Count 2, and the 
constitutionality of HRS § 707-733.6. While this appeal was 
pending, the Hawai‘ i Supreme Court deemed HRS § 707-733.6 
constitutional. 
The jury instructions given in this case, 
however, were erroneous.  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we 
resolve this appeal as discussed below, and vacate and remand. 
(1
) As to Count 1, Masuda-Mercado contends the 
instructions were erroneous because "the jury was not instructed that a conviction could only be based on an attempt to (a) . . . 
lick or (b) digitally penetrate [complainant's] genitals."
3 
(. . . continued)  
(a)  Either resides in the same home with a minor 
under the age of fourteen years or has 
recurring access to the minor; and  
(b)  Engages in three or more acts of sexual penetration or sexual contact with the minor 
over a period of time, while the minor is under 
the age of fourteen years.  
(2)  To convict under this section, the trier of 
fact, if a jury, need unanimously agree only that the 
requisite number of acts have occurred; the jury need not 
agree on which acts constitute the requisite number.  
3 Masuda-Mercado also argues the instructions on Count 1 failed to name 
the complainant, confusingly set forth the State's burden of proof, and 
(continued . . .) 
3   
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Masuda-Mercado argues the instructions did not accurately 
reflect the acts alleged in the Second Amended Bill of 
Particulars while the definitions improperly "included 
additional prohibited acts." 
"[O]nce a bill of particulars is filed, the State is 
limited to proving the particulars specified in the bill." 
State v. Valenzona
, 92 Hawaiʻi 449, 452, 992 P.2d 718, 721 
(App. 1999) (emphasis added). 
"[O]n appeal, the standard of review is whether, when 
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are 
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or 
misleading." State v. Nichols
, 111 Hawaiʻi 327, 334, 141 P.3d 
974, 981 (2006) (citation omitted). To vacate a conviction 
there must be "a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the defendant's conviction, i.e., that the 
erroneous jury instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt." 
Id.
 at 337, 119 P.3d at 984. 
The Bill of Particulars provided the specific acts the 
State intended to prove at trial, 
(. . . continued) 
incorrectly used statutory definitions. Masuda- Mercado makes similar 
arguments challenging the instruction on the included offense of Attempted 
Sexual Assault in the Third Degree. However, we decline to address these 
arguments in light of our decision. 
4   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As to Count 1: The State contends on or about 
July 2, 2019, in the County of Hawai‘ i, the Defendant 
knowingly engaged in sexual penetration of [the 
complainant], a minor born in the year of 2006 who was less 
than 14 years- old, and said penetration consisted of:  
cunnilingus, to wit, the Defendant used his tongue and/or 
mouth to lick [complainant's] genitals; and/or Defendant 
digitally penetrated [complainant's] genitals. 
(Some emphasis omitted and added.) The Bill of Particulars also 
stated, "[t]he State contends the Defendant engaged in acts of 
sexual penetration and/or sexual contact with the complainant 
. . . , a minor born in the year 2006" and "[f]or purposes of 
the Indictment, the following definitions apply[.]" The 
definitions for "sexual contact" and "sexual penetration" under 
HRS § 707-700 (2014) were then provided. 
Upon cursory examination, the inclusion of the 
definitions for "sexual penetration" and "sexual contact" in the Bill of Particulars appears to provide Masuda-Mercado notice of 
the statute's prohibited acts so he could prepare an appropriate 
defense. See State v. Balanza
, 93 Hawaiʻi 279, 286, 1 P.3d 281, 
288 (2000) (stating the purpose of a bill of particulars "is to 
help the defendant prepare for trial and to prevent surprise"). 
During the course of trial, however, the circuit court 
granted Masuda-Mercado's Motion for a Judgment of Acquittal as 
to Sexual Assault in the First Degree because "viewing the 
evidence in the light most favorable to the State the evidence 
is insufficient to support a prime [(sic)] facie case of Sex Assault in the First Degree." 
The circuit court then instructed 
5   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the jury on the included offense of Attempted Sexual Assault in 
the First Degree. See State v. Behrendt, 124 Hawaiʻ i 90, 110, 
237 P.3d 1156, 1176 (2010) (holding when a rational basis based 
on the evidence exists, a court may instruct a jury on a lesser 
included offense). 
As part of the attempt instruction, the court 
instructed that "[a] person commits the offense of Sexual 
Assault in the First Degree if he knowingly engages in sexual 
penetration with a minor who is less than fourteen years old." 
The instruction defined sexual penetration as including deviate 
sexual intercourse: 
"Sexual penetration" means: 
(1) Vaginal intercourse, deviate sexual intercourse, or 
any intrusion of any part of a person's body or of any 
object into the genital opening of another person's body; 
it occurs upon any penetration, however slight, but emission is not required. "Genital opening" includes the 
anterior surface of the vulva or labia majora; or 
(2) 
Cunnilingus, whether or not actual penetration has 
occurred. 
(Some formatting altered and emphasis added.)  
But the instruction did not include the definition for 
deviate sexual intercourse, which means "sexual gratification 
between a person and an animal or a corpse[.]" HRS § 707-700. 
The instruction also did not include the acts specified in the 
Bill of Particulars. 
6   
 
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Including deviate sexual intercourse in the definition 
of sexual penetration, yet not defining it, is problematic 
because it is a term with a specific statutory definition. 
Although the State presented no evidence of deviate sexual 
intercourse as statutorily defined, there is a reasonable 
possibility the jury may have interpreted Masuda-Mercado's 
alleged sexual interactions with complainant as deviating from 
the norms of society. See State v. Uyesugi, 100 Hawaiʻi 442, 
452, 60 P.3d 843, 853 (2002) (noting that when a circuit court 
does not define a term, jurors are "left to define the word 
according to its ordinary usage"). 
When considering the modification of the charge, the 
breadth of testimony related to sexual acts occurring prior to Count 1's timeframe, the lack of specificity in the culminated 
offense, and the definitions provided, there was a reasonable 
possibility that omitting the Bill of Particulars Count 1 acts 
from the instructions while including a broadened definition of 
sexual penetration (i.e., deviate sexual intercourse) may have 
contributed to Masuda-Mercado's Count 1 conviction. See
Nichols
, 111 Hawaiʻi at 334, 141 P.3d at 981. 
7   
 
 
 
   (2) As to Count 2, Masuda-Mercado similarly contends 
that the instructions failed to include the conduct identified 
in the Bill of Particulars, and combined with the definitions of 
"sexual penetration" and "sexual contact," increased the 
possible prohibited acts.  4
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In the Bill of Particulars, the specified sexual acts 
were as follows: 
As to Count 2: The State contends that between 
November 1, 2014 and August 31, 2018, in the County of 
Hawai‘i, the Defendant, engaged in continuing course of 
conduct in which he intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly 
committed three or more acts of sexual penetration  and/or 
sexual contact  with [the complainant], a minor born in the 
year 2006 and who was less than 14 years- old, to wit by: 
cunnilingus, i.e., using his tongue and/or mouth to lick 
and/or touch [complainant's] genitals; and/or touched 
and/or penetrated [the complainant's] genitals  with his 
penis and/or hand and/or object. The State further 
contends the Defendant had recurring access to [the 
complainant] during this time period.  
(Some emphases added.) 
As with Count 1, the instruction to the jury did not 
include the Bill of Particular Count 2 acts. And the 
4 Masuda-Mercado also asserts that the two "items" in the instruction 
should have been elements. Count 2 enumerates three elements followed by: 
The State must also prove beyond a reasonable doubt: 
4. That the Defendant acted intentionally or knowingly 
with respect to elements 1 and 2 above; and 
5. That this occurred on or between November 1, 2014 through August 31, 2018, in the County and State of 
Hawai‘i. The exact date is not required. 
There was no fatal flaw in the labeling here. 
8   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
instruction included the definitions for sexual penetration 
quoted above and the following definition for sexual contact: 
"Sexual contact" means any touching, other than acts of 
"sexual penetration", of the sexual or other intimate parts 
of a person not married to the actor, or of the sexual or 
other intimate parts of the actor by the person, whether 
directly or through the clothing or other material intended 
to cover the sexual or other intimate parts. 
(Emphasis added.) 
When comparing the acts identified in the Bill of 
Particulars Count 2 and the definition of "sexual contact" in 
the instruction, the Bill of Particulars Count 2 limited sexual 
contact to the touching of complainant's genitals whereas the 
jury was instructed more expansively that "sexual contact" meant 
any touching of sexual or other intimate parts. 
Where some of the testimony referred to "privates" as 
opposed to "genitals," there was a reasonable possibility that 
omitting the specific acts in the Bill of Particulars Count 2 from the instruction while including the expansive definition of 
sexual contact may have contributed to Masuda-Mercado's Count 2 
conviction. 
(3) Lastly, Masuda-Mercado argues that HRS § 707-
733.6 is unconstitutional. 
Following briefing in this case, the Hawaiʻi Supreme 
Court decided 
State v. Tran
, upholding HRS § 707-733.6's 
unanimity requirements as constitutional. 154 Hawaiʻi 211, 218
-
24, 549 P.3d 296, 303-09 (2024). 
9   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the circuit 
court's December 16, 2022 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, 
and remand this case for a new trial. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, September 10, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
 Acting Chief Judge 
Phyllis J. Hironaka,  
Deputy Public Defender, /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
for Defendant-Appellant. Associate Judge 
  
Charles E. Murray III, /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, Associate Judge 
County of Hawai‘ i, 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
10 