NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1The Honorable Edward H. Kubo, Jr. presided.NO. CAAP-15-0000354
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
WALTER BROWN, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 13-1-1006)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Fujise and Leonard, JJ. 
with Nakamura, C.J. dissenting)
Defendant-Appellant Walter Brown (Brown) appeals from
the March 25, 2015 Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
Court).1  Brown was convicted of Assault in the Second Degree, a
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-711(1)(a) and/or
(b) (2014).  He appeals his conviction on the grounds that his
right to confrontation was violated when the trial court refused
to allow cross-examination of the victim about her pending
misdemeanor assault charge and probation status in order to show
bias, interest or motive.  
I.
A.
According to complaining witness (CW), she arrived with
her sister (Sister) (collectively, Sisters) and their children at
the McDonald's Restaurant on Beretania Street in the afternoon of
February 20, 2013 to meet their mother (Mother) for lunch.
However, upon arriving at McDonald's, CW did not see Mother'sNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2CW saw Brown's Wife in the restaurant, but denied that either she
or Sister punched Wife on her nose.  CW acknowledged that she did not like
Wife, but that "Doesn't mean I hate her or would hurt her."
3Sister denied that CW "broke free" from Brown and punched Wife on
the nose.
2car.  Sister needed to use the restroom and CW wanted to check
inside for Mother to help with the children, so CW parked the car
and the Sisters both entered the restaurant.
As soon as the Sisters stepped into McDonald's, they
encountered their father, Brown, whom CW said she had not seen in
years.  He walked toward them with an "upset face" and CW did not
know what to think.  Without warning or provocation, Brown
grabbed both of them by their necks and pushed them back out of
the restaurant.  As she was being pushed backward, CW fell,
grabbing on to Brown's shirt, and felt Brown step on her head. CW
got back up and tried to get Brown off Sister.  Brown let Sister
go and went after CW.  As Sister tried to draw Brown away from
CW, Brown grabbed Sister and slammed her to the ground.  Again,
CW tried to get Brown away from Sister by pushing him, then
punching him.  CW heard Brown say, "Leave my wife alone," but she
said nothing in response and did not know what he was talking
about.  CW asked, "What did we do wrong to you?" and Brown
responded, "Being born."
CW ran, then stopped to turn and see what was going on,
when she "got punched from the back up" and thought she lost a
tooth.  Brown kicked her, and after Sister screamed at him to
stop, he ran after Sister and slammed her to the ground again,
and was "banging her head on the ground."  CW saw "some anonymous
person" pick Brown up and both landed in the bushes; at about
this time the police arrived.  During this episode, Brown's wife
(Wife) stood at the entrance to the restaurant.  CW denied being
involved in any altercation with Wife.2
Sister's version of the fight was largely the same as
CW's.  She testified that as she and CW entered the restaurant,
Brown grabbed them and "flew us to the ground."3  Sister tried to
stop Brown from hitting CW by hitting Brown on his back; when
Brown turned on her, CW hit Brown on his back and ran away,NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4The security guard also heard a very angry pregnant woman exit the
restaurant and tell the bystander, "Mind your fuckin' business."  He did not
see any injuries on this pregnant woman.
5The manager testified that he did not see "the two girls" who were
later hit, in the restaurant at any point.  He admitted that he did not know
if the woman who was hit had earlier hit the man who hit her or the pregnant
lady.
3drawing Brown towards CW.  Brown punched CW on the left side of
her jaw, and Wife yelled to Brown to "hit," "get" and "kill"
them.  Sister testified that Brown "slammed" her on the ground
three times and that a man from the restaurant area pulled Brown
off her.
A security guard from the building next to McDonald's 
testified that he saw a man and woman arguing at the # Ewa end of
the McDonald's parking lot, and as they got closer to each other,
the man hit the woman on the left side of her jaw with his right
hand and it made a "really loud pop sound."  He saw the woman's
knees buckle "like she was trying to catch herself" and the man
hit her on the other side with his left hand, then used an
uppercut with his right hand to her thigh/buttocks.  He did not
see the woman attack the man in any way.  Later, he saw the woman
crying and holding her jaw, which was open with a lot of blood
coming out of it.
The security guard heard another woman, who appeared to
be the first woman's friend, yelling at the man "from far away,"
"You can't just hit her like that and walk away."  The man
approached the friend, who had "put up her hands in defense,"
grabbed her hands to get them out of the way, and then they were
on the ground with the man pinning her down.  As soon as it
looked like he was about to punch her, a bystander pushed the man
off the woman and into the bushes.  The man immediately got up
and took up a fighting stance in front of the bystander, then
tried to tackle the bystander, who was able to avoid the maneuver
and push the man off.4  Before the men could fight, the police
arrived.
The McDonald's manager testified that there was a big
commotion inside the restaurant5 and he followed everyone running
outside so he could see what was going on.  He saw "a man []NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4attacking a girl, hitting her," so he ran back inside to call
911.  When he came back outside, he saw the man and girl
standing, and the man was punching her.  The girl was trying to
protect herself and yelling "stop, stop, stop."  The fight seemed
to subside until a pregnant lady started instigating or verbally
abusing the young girl.  The girl was responding, and then the
man went after her again, started hitting her, then grabbed her
by her neck and punched her in the chin.  Another girl came out
of a vehicle, yelling for him to stop, and the man chased her,
grabbed her, and hit her.  The man stopped hitting the girl when
a bystander pushed the man into the bushes.
Wife testified in Brown's behalf.  According to Wife,
just prior to the incident, Mother came up to her at the
restaurant, pointed her finger less than a foot from Wife's face
and said, "If I ever catch you talking to that bitch Sandy, I'll
fuck you up."  As Brown returned to his family's table, he told
Mother to "get out of here" and "Don't threaten my family."
Mother responded, "F-U, you faggot.  I'm going to call my husband
to come kick your ass."  With that, Mother left the restaurant,
and they could see her sitting in her vehicle with the door open,
dialing on her phone, then driving out of the parking lot.
Brown and Wife decided to leave and packed up their
food.  Brown was first at the door, holding their food and drink
in his hands when he saw the Sisters.  Brown raised his arms to
hold back the Sisters because they were swinging, punching, and
scratching him.  According to Wife, CW fell two or three times
during the attack, but kept getting up.  At one point, CW got
past Brown, who was trying to keep CW back, came up to Wife as
Wife stood in the doorway, punched Wife on the nose, and told
her, "You're lucky you're pregnant."  Wife called to Brown,
"Babe, she hit me."  After this punch, CW fell and hit her head
on one of the tables.  Wife denied that Brown choked, slammed, or
stomped either sister and denied that Brown punched CW on the
jaw.
Brown testified he was with Wife and their three
children in the McDonald's restaurant.  Wife was pregnant with
twins, which was a high risk pregnancy due to Wife's previousNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5miscarriages.  Brown also testified to Mother's confrontation
with Wife and that he saw Mother leave the restaurant, apparently
use her phone, and drive away.
Brown testified that as he got close to the door, he
saw the Sisters and extended his arms out to block them.  One of
the Sisters asked, "What are you doing?" They were "angry,"
"looking past" him, and one of them yelled "Fuck you, bitch" to
Wife.  Brown pushed the Sisters out the door and CW fell to the
ground, hitting a table near the door on the way down.  CW got
back up and past him; he heard Wife say "Babe, [CW] hit me," but
he did not see what CW had done to Wife.  As Brown tried to stop
the Sisters from going after Wife, CW fell numerous times, and
that the Sisters were trying to get past him by punching,
scratching, and pulling his shirt.  Brown said CW wanted to fight
and came towards him swinging, punching him in the nose.  Brown
warned CW that "[I]f you're going to hit someone . . . you got to
expect that someone is going to hit you back, and it's going to
feel like this."  As CW came at him again, Brown blocked her with
an open hand.  Brown testified that CW "fell forward.  She fell
sidewards" and hit her head on one of the tables outside.  Brown
denied ever punching CW, choking or grabbing CW or Sister by
their necks, slamming them to the ground, or stomping on anyone's
head.  Brown maintained that the stranger pushed him into the
hedge and wanted to fight with him for no reason.
CW was taken to Queen's Medical Center and treated for
a broken left jaw.  On July 12, 2013, Brown was charged with one
count of Assault in the Second Degree, a violation of HRS § 707-
711(1)(a) and/or (b) (2014) for the injuries to CW and one count
of Assault in the Third Degree, a violation of HRS § 707-
712(1)(a) (2014) for the injuries to Sister.
B.
On December 12, 2014, Brown submitted a notice of
intent to introduce evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts by
CW.  Relevant to this appeal were the following items:
a. On February 18, 2013, [CW], while a passenger in
a vehicle, lifted herself higher out the
passenger window holding onto the vehicle's
luggage rack and threw a Pepsi can at a crowd
gathered in the driveway of Ms. Tina Jardine forNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6a birthday party.  [CW] also yelled "Fuck You
Bithces. [sic]  Come on now you Fucka's."  [CW]
was charged with Harassment under HRS § 711-1106
(See HPD Report No. 13-062663).
. . . .
c. On October 28, 2010, [CW] went to [Mother's]
residence and punched and kicked the secured
front screen door and yelled at [Mother] through
the screen door she was going to kill [Mother]. 
[CW's] five year old daughter was present with
her.  Prior to arriv[ing] at [Mother's]
residence, [CW] texted [Mother] calling her
names like psychotic and one of her text
messages said she was going to kill [Mother]. 
[Mother] feared [CW] was going to harm her.  HPD
Officer Mike Tanaka observed the threatening
text message.  [Mother] is [CW's] mother.  [CW]
was charged with Terroristic Threatening in the
Second Degree under HRS § 707-717 (See HPD
Report No. 10-386460).
d.  On April 4, 2011, [CW pled] no contest to the
amended charge of Harassment, HRS § 711-
1106(l)(b), under Case ID 1P1100010788 and
associated with HPD Report No. 10-386460.  [CW]
was sentenced to six (6) months probation and a
$50 suspended fine.
. . . . 
f.  On February 20, 2013, [CW] was arrested and
charged with Assault in the Third Degree against
[Wife] under HPD Report No. 13-064724 and Case
ID IDCW-13-0005867 for conduct arising out of
the same incident in the [present] case.
g. On February 20, 2013, [CW] was arrested and
charged with Assault in the Third Degree against
[Brown,] under HPD Report No. 13-064722 and Case
ID 1DCW-13-0005867 for conduct arising out of
the same incident in the [present] case.
. . . .
j.  On December 12, 2013, [CW] was arrested for and
charged with Abuse of Family or Household
Members under HRS § 709-906 against her eight-
year old daughter, [Z.B.].  [Z.B.] told her
school counselor [CW] had struck her in the face
with an open hand causing pain.  [Z.B.] had a
purplish bruise on the right side of her face.
(See HPD Report No. 13-452477).
k. On March 4, 2014, [CW] pled guilty to the
amended charge of Assault in the Third Degree
under FC-CR No. 13-1-2324 associated with HPD
Report No. 13-452477.  [CW] was sentenced to one
(1) year of probation and ordered to complete a
domestic violence intervention program and
complete parenting classes.
l.  [CW] is currently under Misdemeanor probation
supervision.
(Emphasis in original).NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7At the December 29, 2014 hearing, the Circuit Court
ruled that if Brown could confirm that CW was convicted of the
harassment described in paragraph "a", he would allow it as
evidence of the first aggressor.  The Circuit Court also granted
paragraphs "c" and "d" as evidence of the first aggressor.  The
Circuit Court denied paragraphs "f" and "g" after the following
exchange:
THE COURT: . . . [T]hat complainant was arrested
for assault third against [Wife] --
. . . .
THE COURT:  -- and the next one which is
arrested for conduct arising out of the same incident,
that's this case; right?
[STATE]:  Yes.
THE COURT:  Okay.  So that is irrelevant since
it's the -- this case --
. . . .
THE COURT:  -- and you're going to be bringing
in the entire facts and circumstances of the res
gestae.
[DEFENSE]:  Yes, your Honor.  The reason why I
believe it is relevant is in the sense that what the
jury sees is they see that my client is accused of the
crime that's arising from the same incident, but she
was arrested -- [CW] was arrested and charged with
crimes related to the very same incident.  I believe
it's important for the jury to see that as well
because that also goes to first-aggressor violent
behavior that's associated.  The police arrested both
of them, essentially.
THE COURT:  But it's – the jury is to determine
the guilt or innocence of the defendant based on his
conduct, and the arrest of other people is irrelevant
to whether or not the State can make its burden of
proof as to the material elements as to the defendant. 
And so I think that interjecting the fact that the
complaining witnesses were arrested confuses the jury
and misleads them in an unfair way.  And so I feel
that this court will exercise its discretion, and with
regard to both arrests, I will deny[.]
The Circuit Court denied evidence of another assault in
the third degree conviction, stating:
THE COURT: . . . In this particular case, what
we are discussing -- should be evidence of recent
vintage.  The arrest and charging and conviction which
is almost eight years old is old enough where this
court believes it will be where the prejudice far
outweighs the probative value.
In any event . . . this Court has already ruledNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8that two fresh instances of aggressive conduct . . .
made by the complaining witness is admissible.  That
is enough to put the issue before the jury and to show
the jury any 404(b) conduct which they should consider
in this particular case.
The Circuit Court granted paragraphs "j" and "k," but
denied paragraph "i":
THE COURT: . . . [H]ad this instant case not
involved a family fight, . . .  I would be prone to
strike that evidence.  However, this being an issue
involving an intent by a family member to engage in
conduct causing bodily injury to another family
member, this takes on more relevance than prejudice to
such an extent that the prejudice is not far
outweighed by the probative value.  So this Court will
grant the evidence coming in.
And, finally, that evidence that the complaining
witness is currently under misdemeanor and probation
supervision this court will deny.  I think that has no
probative value whatsoever.
The Circuit Court then informed defense counsel that
out of the three instances just ruled admissible, Brown would
only be allowed to bring in two:
THE COURT: . . . [W]hen we're looking at the overall
picture, three is more prejudicial than probative.  Two is
okay to give . . . the jury the picture of aggression, and
so I will allow you to bring in two out of the three[.]
At trial, Brown asked the Circuit Court to reconsider
its decision to prohibit evidence of CW's arrest for assaulting
Brown and Wife:
[DEFENSE]: . . . Defense just wants to be clear
that I believe that it's pertinent to our defense that
the defense be allowed to get into the fact that she
was also one charged, and that she -- the police were
also on their way to arrest her because of the reports
filed by [Brown and Wife]. 
. . . .
. . . [I]f we were to use the defense of mutual
affray, your Honor, it's a stronger defense if you
were to show that she too was charged by the police,
your Honor, and she too was arrested, your Honor.  And
so we believe that by not allowing us to go into that
. . . restricts the defenses that we may be able to
assert in this case.
. . . .
THE COURT: . . . This trial deals with the guilt
or innocence of [Brown].  The jury will be advised
that they are to consider this evidence as to him and
no one else.  To bring in any outside information of
another being arrested raises a presumption of guilt
of that other person which is not being tried in thisNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9case at this time.  That's for another court to
decide.  What is sufficient is the guilt or innocence
of the defendant based on the evidence and this
indictment and two counts, and so this Court will deny
the defense's request to bring in evidence of anyone
else's arrest because that's neither here nor there,
nor is it the purview of the jury to decide the guilt
or innocence of anyone else. 
 
You want to proceed on your 404(b).  Your 404(b)
which we discussed, the two out of the three is
granted on your end.
Brown renewed his argument regarding evidence of
assault charges against CW stemming from this incident.  This
time, Brown argued that the information was relevant to CW's
bias, interest, and motive.
[DEFENSE]:  . . . [CW] is charged with two
assaults, the assault against [Brown] and the assault
against [Wife], and it's my understanding that the
State nolle prosequied the case against [Brown].
I think, again, that bringing in the fact that
she was charged is paramount to the fact that now she
has bias, motives -- she had bias, motives, and
interests prior to the nolle prosequiing of the case. 
But I believe now she has even more so because now she
doesn't have to face being charged against [Brown], so
she frees up in her testimony to be inconsistent, not
have to worry about any repercussions of that in her
case in which she is the defendant.  So I do believe
now, your Honor, that even more so this goes to bias,
motive, and interest. 
[STATE]:  Your Honor, I don't know why the case
was nolle prosequied, but the fact that she was
charged is not relevant to this case.  If we're gonna
get into the fact that she was charged, then are we
going to get into the fact that it was nolle
prosequied?   Because -- 
THE COURT:  I've already made my ruling on that,
and the ruling still stands.  As far as we're
concerned, we're here on one case against one person,
and I'm not going to have mini trials within a trial. 
So I've made my ruling, and the Court will deny the
reconsideration.
On cross-examination, CW was questioned about and
admitted the prior charge for the incident involving her
daughter.  CW was also cross-examined about a post she wrote on
Mother's Facebook page on April 1, 2013, and admitted that she
made the following statement regarding Wife and the February 20,
2013 incident:  "bahahahaha fuckin' silly girl gave birth.  Now
let's see who will laugh.  Talk shit, get hit.  I ain't
scade. . . . Let's do it again, me and you round two.  Oh, wait,NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6The Circuit Court granted Brown's motion for judgment of acquittal
as to Count II (Sister) at the end of State's case-in-chief, for lack of
evidence that Brown's alleged actions caused her physical pain.
10round one wasn't finished."  Lastly, CW was cross-examined about
the 2010 terroristic threatening charge stemming from the
incident at Mother's residence.  CW denied saying she was going
to kill her mother but admitted to pleading to an amended charge
of harassment for that incident.
On January 5, 2015, the jury returned a verdict of
guilty on Count I, Assault in the Second Degree.6
During the hearing on Brown's motion for a new trial,
Brown renewed the issue of CW's probation.
[DEFENSE]: . . . [W]e would ask the Court to consider
a new trial in this case and . . . the basis for that . . .
would be . . . the fact that [CW], her charges, her -- the
fact that she was on probation, the jury's precluded from
hearing that.  Again, we believe that that would be
something that . . . would've been essential to the jury to
hear with regarding whether or not she was truly a victim .
. . as the complaining witness in the case against [Brown].
. . . .
[STATE]: . . . [W]hether or not she was on probation
at the time of the incident is clearly irrelevant and has no
probative value[.]
. . . . 
THE COURT: . . . [T]he call of the question still
remains as to whether or not there was sufficient evidence
that the jury's verdict stands under the reasoning of the
evidence. 
. . . [T]he crucial evidence that I believe the
State's case rested on were third party witnesses and their
observations as to what happened. . . . [B]ecause these
third party witnesses had no dog in the fight, whereas
everyone else had their own interest at heart,
understandably, under any form of cross-examination, it
would've brought out bias, interest or motive.
. . . .
. . . I think that the only possible way the verdict
would've been changed would've been that security guard from
the next building, the lack of his testimony, and maybe the
lack of the testimony from the McDonald's manager.  Their
observations were very compelling in overcoming any self-
defense or defense of others defenses.
Brown's motion for a new trial was denied, and the
Circuit Court entered the Judgment of Conviction and Probation
Sentence on March 25, 2015.  Brown was sentenced to probation forNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
11four years with,  a special term of seven days of
imprisonment with credit for time served.  This appeal followed. inter alia ,
II.
Brown raises one point of error on appeal:
1. The trial court's refusal to allow [Brown] to
cross-examine [CW] regarding the dismissal of her pending
district court case for assaulting [Brown] based on the same
incident as the instant case, and her pending district court
trial for assaulting [Wife], which was also based on the
same incident as the instant case, and the fact that she was
on probation for an unrelated offense, violated [Brown's]
right to confrontation as guaranteed by the sixth and
fourteenth amendments to the United States Constitution and
article I, section 14 of the Hawai# i State Constitution. 
The afore-mentioned evidence was admissible to show bias,
interest, and motive.  In addition, the error in excluding
the evidence was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt
because except for the testimonies of [Brown] and [Wife],
there was no other evidence with which to impeach [CW's]
testimony which suggested that her fractured jaw was not
caused by falling and striking her head on a table, but
rather was the result of being punched in the jaw or stomped
on the head by [Brown]. 
. . . .
Without being allowed to question [CW] regarding her pending
assault charges against [Brown] and [Wife], as well as the
fact that she was on probation, the defense was unable to
expose [CW's] bias and motive for fabricating the charge
against [Brown].
We begin with the notion that
"[b]ias, interest, or motive is always relevant under
[Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE)] Rule 609.1."  [State v.]
Estrada, 69 Haw. 204, 220, 738 P.2d 812, 823 (1987)
(emphasis added). The degree to which evidence might tend to
show possible bias, interest, or motive is not the
determining factor with respect to admissibility of evidence
under HRE Rule 609.1. Rather, the relevant inquiry is
whether such evidence has "any tendency to support an
inference of the witness’ disposition or tendency,
consciously or unconsciously, to slant testimony, one way of
the other, from the straight and true."  Addison M. Bowman,
Hawai#i Rules of Evidence Manual
 (HRE Manual) § 609.1–[1][C]
(2010-11 ed.) (emphasis added). Once evidence has been shown
to be relevant to possible motive, interest, or bias, "it is
error not to allow cross-examination to reveal possible
bias."  Estrada, 69 Haw. at 220, 738 P.2d at 823.
State v. Levell, 128 Hawai #i 34, 40, 282 P.3d 576, 582 (2012)
(emphasis in original).
However, the trial court's discretion in exercising control
and excluding evidence of a witness's bias or motive to
testify falsely becomes operative only after the
constitutionally required threshold level of inquiry has
been afforded the defendant.  The Sixth Amendment is
satisfied where sufficient information is elicited to allow
the jury to gauge adequately a witness'[s] credibility and
to assess his [or her] motives or possible bias.  When theNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
12trial court excludes evidence tending to impeach a witness,
it has not abused its discretion as long as the jury has in
its possession sufficient information to appraise the biases
and motivations of the witness.
State v. Balisbisana , 83 Hawai #i 109, 114, 924 P.2d 1215, 1220
(1996) (citations and quotation marks omitted, emphasis added). 
In addition,
The denial of a defendant's constitutionally protected
opportunity to impeach a witness for bias, motive or
interest is subject to harmless error analysis.  A
defendant's conviction will not be overturned if a court
commits an error that is harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
However, an error is not harmless if there is reasonable
possibility that the error might have contributed to the
conviction.  In reviewing whether an error was harmless,
this court examines the entire record.  A host of factors
may be considered, including the importance of the
witness'[s] testimony in the prosecution's case, whether the
testimony was cumulative, the presence or absence of
evidence corroborating or contradicting the testimony of the
witness on material points, the extent of cross-examination
otherwise permitted, and, of course, the overall strength of
the prosecution's case.
Levell, 128 Hawai #i at 41-42, 282 P.3d at 583-84 (citations, some
brackets, and internal quotation marks omitted).  
Brown argues that the dismissal of the pending
misdemeanor charge of assault against CW involving him was
relevant to show that CW might consciously or unconsciously shade
her testimony in favor of the State because the State dismissed
this charge.  Moreover, Brown contends that the evidence was
relevant to show that she had an interest in ensuring the State
obtained a conviction of Brown in order to motivate the State to
dismiss her pending misdemeanor charge for assaulting Wife.  
Finally, Brown argues the evidence was relevant to show that CW
had a motive to lie about assaulting Brown and Wife, because any
admission that CW assaulted Brown or Wife could be used against
her in the pending assault-of-Wife trial or could be used to
revoke her misdemeanor probation for an unrelated conviction for
assault and could result in possible imprisonment.
Brown concedes that the trial court allowed extensive
cross-examination to show that CW may have been the first
aggressor but argues that the excluded evidence of bias,
interest, and motive could have caused the jury to doubt CW's
credibility and strengthened Brown's defense that he did not
cause CW to suffer a broken jaw.  We disagree.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7Brown argues that the Circuit Court "did not allow any cross-
examination to show that [CW] might not have been credible about whether the
fractured [sic] may have been caused by [Brown] stomping on her head or
whether, in her haste [sic] attack [Brown and/or Wife], she may have fractured
her jaw when she fell and hit her head on a table."  Brown provides no
citations to the record for this assertion.
13There was sufficient information presented at trial
from which the jury could have assessed CW's credibility.  First,
because CW was one of the persons allegedly assaulted in this
case, the jury would have understood CW had a motive to provide
testimony supporting the allegation and possibly embellishing the
same.  Second, CW admitted that she disliked Brown due to their
family history and admitted that she had placed a post taunting
Wife on Mother's Facebook page after the incident.  Third, as her
sister was also allegedly assaulted, the jury would also
understand CW had a motive to support Sister in her testimony. 
Fourth, the jury also heard about CW's past convictions for
harassment and assault involving family members.  Finally, as
Brown concedes, cross-examination was otherwise extensive.7  The
jury had ample information from which to assess CW's credibility.
Even if we were to assume the exclusion of this
evidence was improper, on the unique facts of this case, any
error was harmless.  
There is no doubt that CW's testimony was important to
the prosecution's case and that there was no other evidence that
CW had also been charged for this incident or that she was under
probation for a previous offense at the time of trial.  
However, besides CW, the prosecution presented three
percipient witnesses, two of whom were disinterested bystanders. 
All testified to Brown punching CW's head with force; one
bystander testified he heard a loud popping sound at the time. 
All three also testified that they did not see CW touching Brown
before he hit her.  Thus, as to the material points, there was
ample testimony corroborative of CW's version of the events.
The Circuit Court allowed extensive cross-examination
of CW, on subjects including who was the first aggressor, CW's
previous convictions for harassment and assault against family
members, and her relationship with Brown. 
Finally, the State's evidence against Brown was strong. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
14Although both Wife and Brown testified that CW hit her head on a
table in the restaurant, testimony regarding CW's bleeding from
her mouth and inability to speak as well as strong blows to her
jaw established the injury occurred after CW was out of the
restaurant.  The testimony of three witnesses other than CW to
the assault against her as well as the physician establishing the
extent of her injuries amounted to a very strong, if not
overwhelming, case.
Based on our examination of the entire record, we
conclude that the exclusion of the evidence of the pending
charges against CW and her probation status could not have
contributed to Brown's conviction and therefore was harmless
beyond a reasonable doubt.
III.
We affirm the March 25, 2015 Judgment of Conviction and
Probation Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the First
Circuit.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawaii, June 30, 2017. #
On the briefs:
William H. Jameson, Jr.,
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant.
Sonja P. McCullen,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge