   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0004352
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DANIEL WOMACK, Defendant-Appellee,
v.
 
EXODUS BAIL BOND,
Real-Party-In-Interest-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-0878)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Real-Party-In-Interest-Appellant Exodus Bail Bond
 
(Exodus) appeals from an "Order Denying Motion to Set-Aside Bail
 
Forfeiture" (Order Denying Set Aside) filed on October 9, 2013 in
 the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).
1
 
On appeal, Exodus contends the circuit court erred when
 
it: (1) did not find "good cause" to set aside the bail
 forfeiture judgment because there was nearly a four year delay
 between Defendant-Appellee Daniel Womack's (Womack) failure to
 appear for trial call and the written notice given to Exodus of
 bail forfeiture; (2) refused to issue a subpoena to the military
 to release Womack's records; and (3) denied Exodus's request to
 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
enlarge the search period for a second time to locate Womack.2
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as relevant
 statutory and case law, we resolve Exodus's points of error as
 follows.
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) charged 
Womack with: two counts of Assault in the Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-711(1)(d) (2014); two counts of Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree, in violation HRS § 707-716(1)(e) (Supp. 2012); and Criminal Property Damage in the Third Degree, in violation of HRS § 708-822(1)(b) (2014). The court set bail for $15,000 and Exodus issued bail. 
On August 6, 2009, Womack failed to appear for trial
 
call, after which the circuit court issued a bench warrant for
 his arrest and orally granted the State's request for bail
 forfeiture. 
On April 30, 2013, nearly four years after Womack
 
failed to appear for trial call, the circuit court filed a
 "Judgment and Order of Forfeiture of Bail Bond" (Bail Forfeiture
 Judgment). On May 28, 2013, Exodus received written notice from
 the State of the Bail Forfeiture Judgment and timely filed its
 "Motion to Set-Aside Bail Forfeiture" (Motion to Set Aside) on
 June 20, 2013. Thereafter, on October 9, 2013, the circuit court
 issued its Order Denying Set Aside. 
2
 Exodus's Opening Brief does not comply with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28 in several ways, which alone raises the potential for
dismissal of the appeal and/or waiver of issues sought to be raised.Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995).
For example, the statement of the case does not include references to therecord and two out of three points in the argument section of the brief do notinclude citations to authority. HRAP Rule 28(b)(3), (7). However, because weseek to address cases on the merits where possible, we address Exodus'sarguments to the extent they are discernable. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i at 230,
909 P.2d at 558. Exodus's counsel is again cautioned to comply with HRAP Rule28, and future non-compliance may result in sanctions. State v. Miles, 135 
Hawai'i 525, 526n.2, 354 P.3d 178, 179n.2 (App. 2015). 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Exodus's Motion to Set Aside Bail Forfeiture
 
(a) "Good cause"
 
Exodus contends that the circuit court erred when it
 
did not find "good cause" to set aside the bail forfeiture,
 arguing that the nearly four-year delay between Womack's failure
 to appear and the written notice given to Exodus constituted good
 cause.
 
3
Under HRS § 804-51 (2014),  once a surety has notice of
a bail forfeiture judgment, the surety has thirty days after
 notice to move to set aside the judgment for good cause. See
 
State v. Diaz
, 128 Hawai 'i 215, 223, 286 P.3d 824, 832 (2012). 
"[G]ood cause why execution should not issue upon the judgment of
 forfeiture may be satisfied by the defendant, prior to the
 expiration of the thirty-day search period: (1) providing a
 satisfactory reason for his or her failure to appear when
 
3 HRS § 804-51 provides:
 
§ 804-51 Procedure. Whenever the court, in any
criminal cause, forfeits any bond or recognizance given in a
criminal cause, the court shall immediately enter up
judgment in favor of the State and against the principal or
principals and surety or sureties on the bond, jointly and
severally, for the full amount of the penalty thereof, and
shall cause execution to issue thereon immediately after the
expiration of thirty days from the date that notice is given
via personal service or certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the surety or sureties on the bond, of the
entry of the judgment in favor of the State, unless before
the expiration of thirty days from the date that notice is
given to the surety or sureties on the bond of the entry of
the judgment in favor of the State, a motion or application
of the principal or principals, surety or sureties, or any
of them, showing good cause why execution should not issue
upon the judgment, is filed with the court. If the motion or
application, after a hearing held thereon, is sustained, the
court shall vacate the judgment of forfeiture and, if the
principal surrenders or is surrendered pursuant to section
804-14 or section 804-41, return the bond or recognizance to
the principal or surety, whoever shall have given it, less
the amount of any cost, as established at the hearing,
incurred by the State as a result of the nonappearance of
the principal or other event on the basis of which the court
forfeited the bond or recognizance. If the motion or
application, after a hearing held thereon, is overruled,
execution shall forthwith issue and shall not be stayed
unless the order overruling the motion or application is
appealed from as in the case of a final judgment.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
required; or (2) surrendering or being surrendered." State v. 
Camara, 81 Hawai 'i 324, 330, 916 P.2d 1225, 1231 (1996) 
(quotation marks omitted). A satisfactory reason for failure to 
appear may be "uncontrollable circumstances [that] prevented appearance pursuant to the stipulations in the bond, or that the default of the principal was excusable." Id. at 330, 916 P.2d at 
1231 (citation, quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
In this case, Exodus did not locate Womack during the
 
search period. Exodus did not provide a satisfactory reason for
 why Womack failed to appear for trial call, and Womack was not
 surrendered. Thus, under relevant case law, Exodus did not
 satisfy the criteria for showing good cause to set aside the Bail
 Forfeiture Judgment.
(b) Prejudicial effect
 
Although Exodus argues that the delayed notification of 
bail forfeiture should constitute good cause, the delay is more properly addressed in terms of whether Exodus was prejudiced. In State v. Ranger Ins. Co. ex rel James Lindblad, Inc., 83 Hawai
'i 118, 925 P.2d 288 (1996), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
analyzed whether a delay of nearly three months between the circuit court's oral granting of the prosecution's motion for forfeiture of bail and the entry of a bail forfeiture judgment constituted reversible error. Id. at 121-22 925 P.2d at 291-92. 
The supreme court stated that pursuant to HRS §§ 804-1, -7.4(2), -17, and -51 (1993): 
upon a defendant's unexcused failure to appear for a court
proceeding, (1) the defendant's default shall be entered,
(2) the default shall be evidence of the breach of an
appearance bond, and (3) if the defendant's bail bond is
 
forfeited, the court shall immediately enter a forfeiture
judgment in favor of the State and against the defendant and
his or her surety.
 
Id. at 122, 925 P.2d at 292 (internal quotation marks and
 
brackets omitted). The supreme court concluded that "[h]aving
 orally granted the prosecution's motion for bail forfeiture, the
 circuit court should, sua sponte, 'immediately' have entered a
 forfeiture judgment." Id. (emphasis added). Despite the fact
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that the forfeiture judgment was not entered immediately in
 
Ranger, the supreme court held that the surety was not prejudiced
 by the delay. Id. 
The supreme court concluded that because the surety had
 
actual notice of the defendant's failure to appear, the surety
 likely benefitted from the delay in entering the forfeiture
 judgment rather than being prejudiced by it. Id. Therefore, the
 
supreme court held "that the circuit court's 'delayed' entry of
 forfeiture judgment resulted in no prejudice to the [s]urety and
 did not render the judgment void or otherwise unlawful." Id.
 
In this case, the record is unclear and the circuit
 
court did not make any findings as to whether Exodus had actual
 notice of Womack's failure to appear for trial call on August 6,
 2009, prior to the Bail Forfeiture Judgment being entered on
 April 30, 2013 and the written notice on May 28, 2013. The
 circuit court minutes indicate that at the trial call, Kevin
 O'Grady, Womack's attorney, stated that he "did not know where
 [Womack] was and he contacted [Exodus] and they also were not in
 contact with [Womack]." This indicates that Exodus may have had
 notice that Womack was missing and would not appear as required. 
However, the transcript from the trial call is not in the record,
 and the court minutes are not a substitute for the transcript
 because they "are merely prepared for the court's own use." 
State v. English, 68 Haw. 46, 52, 705 P.2d 12, 16 (1985)
 (citation, quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
In light of Ranger, if Exodus had actual notice of
 
Womack's failure to appear at the trial call in or around the
 same time period, Exodus was not prejudiced by the delay in
 entering the Bail Forfeiture Judgment. The record is not clear
 as to whether Exodus did in fact have such actual notice. 
Therefore, we conclude under Ranger that the case should be
 remanded for the circuit court to determine whether Exodus had
 actual notice of Womack's non-appearance in or around the time
 period of the trial call, and whether Exodus was prejudiced by
 the delayed entry of the Bail Forfeiture Judgment.
 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(2) Subpoena to the Military
 
Exodus contends that the circuit court erred when it
 
did not issue a subpoena to the military to release Womack's
 
records to assist Exodus in determining Womack's whereabouts. In
 the first hearing on Exodus's Motion to Set Aside on June 25,
 2013, the circuit court denied Exodus's request for a subpoena on
 the basis that Exodus needed to first do its due diligence in
 contacting the military before the court would step in. At the
 second hearing held on September 24, 2013, Exodus could not
 provide any further information as to what efforts it had made to
 contact the military and obtain Womack's records.
 
Based on this record, we conclude that the circuit
 
court did not abuse its discretion in denying Exodus's request to
 subpoena Womack's military records.
(3) Extension of search period
 
Exodus contends that the circuit court erred when it 
denied Exodus's request to enlarge the search period.
4 Based on 
Camara, Exodus was required to show good cause within the thirty-
day search period. 81 Hawai 'i at 330, 916 P.2d at 1231. 
Therefore, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion when it denied Exodus's request to extend the time to locate Womack even further beyond the thirty-day search period. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order Denying Motion to
 
Set-Aside Bail Forfeiture," filed on October 9, 2013 in the
 Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed to the extent that
 Exodus did not show "good cause" to set aside bail forfeiture. 
However, this case is remanded to the circuit court for further
 proceedings regarding whether Exodus was prejudiced by the 
4
 The circuit court had already continued the hearing on Exodus's Motion
to Set Aside, allowing Exodus additional time to search for Womack. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
delayed entry of the Bail Forfeiture Judgment, consistent with
 
this decision.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 27, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Anthony T. Fujii,
for Real-Party-In­Interest-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7
 