FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
---o0o---
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
vs.
MARCIA D. WILSON, Defendant-Appellant.
NO. CAAP-15-0000682
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 2DTA-14-00949)
JANUARY 26, 2018
NAKAMURA, C.J., and FUJISE and CHAN, JJ.
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) charged
Defendant-Appellant Marcia D. Wilson (Wilson) with: (1) Operating
a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII), in
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 291E-61(a)(1)
(2007) and 291E-61(b) (Supp. 2014);1 and (2) Refusal to Submit to
1HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) provides:
(continued...)FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
a Breath, Blood, or Urine Test (Refusal to Submit to Testing), in
violation of HRS § 291E-68 (Supp. 2014).2  After a bench trial,
Wilson was found guilty as charged.
Wilson's conviction for Refusal to Submit to Testing
was based on her refusal to submit to a breath or blood test to
determine alcohol concentration after being arrested for OVUII. 
This appeal presents the question of whether Wilson could be
prosecuted for Refusal to Submit to Testing in light of the
Hawai#i Supreme Court's decision in State v. Won, 137 Hawai# i 330,
372 P.3d 1065 (2015).  In Won, the supreme court overturned Won's
OVUII conviction, which was based on a breath test that showed
his breath alcohol concentration exceeded the legal limit,
holding that Won's consent to the breath test was coerced by the
criminal sanctions that could be imposed if he refused to
consent.  Won, 137 Hawai #i at 348-49, 372 P.3d at 1083-84.  As
explained below, based on the supreme court's analysis in Won, we
conclude that Wilson could not be prosecuted for Refusal to
Submit to Testing.  We therefore reverse that conviction.
1(...continued)
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the
person operates or assumes actual physical control of a
vehicle:
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an
amount sufficient to impair the person's
normal mental faculties or ability to care
for the person and guard against casualty[.]
HRS § 291E-61(b) establishes the penalties for committing the
offense of OVUII and provides for enhanced penalties for repeat
OVUII offenders.
2At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 291E-68 provided,
in relevant part: "[R]efusal to submit to a breath, blood, or
urine test as required by part II is a petty misdemeanor."  HRS §
291E-68 was subsequently repealed effective April 26, 2016, which
was after the date of the charged offense in this case.  2016
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 17, § 2 at 21.
2FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Wilson also challenges her OVUII conviction.  Wilson
contends that her OVUII conviction should be vacated because the
trial court erred in accepting her stipulation that the arresting
officer was qualified to administer field sobriety tests.  Wilson
contends that her stipulation was invalid because the trial court
failed to engage in a colloquy with her to ensure that she
personally approved of the stipulation.  We conclude that
Wilson's colloquy argument is without merit and affirm her OVUII
conviction.
BACKGROUND
Wilson was driving a white Volkswagon convertible when
Maui Police Department (MPD) Officer Jun Hattori signaled for her
to pull over.  Wilson's car moved to the shoulder of the road,
then climbed the curb and came to a stop with both passenger
tires on the curb.  In speaking with Wilson, Officer Hattori
observed that her eyes were red, her speech was slurred and
mumbled, and there was an odor of liquor coming from her person
and her car.  Officer Hattori asked Wilson if she would be
willing to participate in field sobriety tests, and Wilson agreed
to participate.   Wilson performed poorly on the tests, and she
was arrested for OVUII. 
At the police station, Officer Hattori, using a
standard MPD "implied consent" form (MPD Form 332), advised
Wilson that pursuant to HRS Chapter 291E:
1. Any person who operates a vehicle upon a public way,
street, road or highway . . . shall be deemed to have
given consent to a test or tests for the purpose of
determining alcohol concentration . . . of the
person's breath [or] blood . . . ."
2. You may refuse to submit to a breath or blood test, or
both, for the purpose of determining alcohol
concentration . . . ."
Wilson told Officer Hattori that she was "not taking any
tests[,]" and she signed the MPD Form 332 after checking the box
signifying that she "refuse[d] to take a breath and/or blood
3FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
test" for alcohol concentration.
Officer Hattori then used the standard MPD "refusal to
take test(s)" form (MPD Form 332a), to advise Wilson, among other
things, of the administrative and criminal sanctions she may be
subject to if she persisted in refusing to submit to testing. 
With respect to criminal sanctions, Wilson was informed that:
If you refuse to submit to a breath [or] blood . . . test,
as requested, you may be subject to up to thirty days
imprisonment and/or a fine of up to $1,000, and/or the
sanctions of HRS 291E-65, if applicable.
Although Wilson initially indicated she would take a breath test
using a breathalyzer machine, she changed her mind and refused to
submit to testing.  Wilson checked and initialed the box on the
MPD Form 332a that signified that she refused to take a breath or
blood test for alcohol concentration, and she signed the form. 
At trial, the State introduced both MPD Form 332 and MPD Form
332a.  
After considering the evidence presented, the District
Court of the Second Circuit (District Court)3 found Wilson guilty
as charged of OVUII and Refusal to Submit to Testing.  The
District Court entered its Judgment on August 27, 2015, and this
appeal followed.
DISCUSSION
I.
The Hawai #i Supreme Court's decision in Won was issued
after the trial in this case.  Wilson argues that in light of
Won, evidence of her refusal to submit to testing was obtained in
violation of her right to be free from unreasonable searches, and
the District Court erred in admitting such evidence.  She thus
argues that her conviction for Refusal to Submit to Testing must
3The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided.
4FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
be reversed.4
As explained below, we conclude that the supreme
court's analysis in Won requires the reversal of Wilson's Refusal
to Submit to Testing conviction.  To understand the application
of Won to this case and the development of the law, it is helpful
to review the history of legislative enactments and judicial
decisions in this area.
A.
In 1967, the Hawai# i Legislature enacted an implied
consent statute to reduce deaths, injuries, and damages arising
out of highway traffic accidents.  See 1967 Haw. Sess. Laws Act
214, at § 1.  While the statutory scheme has evolved over time,
its underlying premise has remained the same, that a person who
operates a motor vehicle on the State's public roads "shall be
deemed" to have given consent to testing for evidence of
impairment.  See  HRS § 286-151 (1968); HRS § 291E-11(a) (2007). 
The original statute authorized testing of a driver's breath or
blood to determine the alcoholic content of the driver's blood. 
HRS § 286-151 (1986).  Subsequent amendments to the statutory
scheme expanded the scope of testing to breath, blood, or urine
to determine the alcohol concentration or drug content of the
driver's breath, blood, or urine, as applicable.  HRS § 291E-
11(a) (2007).  A driver whose alcohol concentration in breath or
blood exceeds the legal limit is subject to criminal liability
for OVUII without the State having to prove at trial that the
4We note that the State concedes error on this point of
error.  However, we are obligated to resolve the case on the
merits, notwithstanding the State's concession of error.  See
State v. Hoang, 93 Hawai #i 333, 336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 (2000). 
Moreover, even if we had the option of basing our decision solely
on the State's concession of error, see State v. Tokunaga, CAAP-
16-0000875, 2017 WL 6033023, at *2 (Hawai# i App. Dec. 6, 2007)
(Nakamura, C.J., concurring), we would exercise our discretion to
address the issue on the merits.   
5FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
driver was actually impaired.  See HRS § 291E-61(a)(3) (2007).5
Prior to 2011, a person who refused to submit to
testing, as required by the implied consent statutory scheme, was
subject only to civil administrative sanctions, including the
revocation of his or her driver's license and referral for
substance abuse assessment and treatment.  See HRS §§ 291E-41, 
291E-65 (2007).  However, effective January 1, 2011, the
Legislature enacted HRS § 291E–68, which imposed criminal
sanctions for the refusal to submit to a breath, blood, or urine
test.  2010 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 166, §§ 2, 26, at 398, 415.  The
version of HRS § 291E–68 applicable to Wilson's case stated:
"Except as provided in section 291E–65, refusal to submit to a
breath, blood, or urine test as required by part II is a petty
misdemeanor."6
B.
In Won, the supreme court considered the impact that
the criminal sanctions under HRS § 291E-68 for refusal to submit
to testing had on the validity of a defendant's consent to submit
to a breath test under the statutory scheme.  Won was arrested
for OVUII.  Won , 137 Hawai #i at 334, 372 P.3d at 1069.  At the
5HRS § 291E-61(a)(3) provides: 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the
person operates or assumes actual physical control of a
vehicle:
. . .
(3) With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two
hundred ten liters of breath[.] 
6HRS § 291E–65 (Supp. 2014) pertains to sanctions for
persons under the age of twenty-one who are arrested for
operating a vehicle after consuming a measurable amount of
alcohol and who refuse to submit to testing.  HRS § 291E-65 did
not apply to Wilson who was over twenty-one at the time of her
arrest.  Part II of HRS Chapter 291E establishes the requirements
and procedures for implied consent testing.  
6FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
police station, an officer read an "implied consent" form to Won. 
Id.  The form advised Won that he could refuse to submit to a
breath or blood test to determine his alcohol concentration, but
that if he refused, he "shall be subject to up to thirty days
imprisonment and/or fine up to $1,000 or the sanctions of
291E–65, if applicable."  Id. at 335, 372 P.3d at 1070.  Won
indicated his agreement to take a breath test by initialing the
form next to the statement "AGREED TO TAKE A BREATH TEST AND
REFUSED THE BLOOD TEST," and he signed the form.  Id.  Won took a
breath test, and the test results showed that he had a breath
alcohol content of 0.17 grams of alcohol per two hundred ten
liters of breath, far above the legal limit of 0.08.  Id.  Won
was charged with and convicted of OVUII, in violation of HRS 
§§ 291E-61(a)(3) and (b)(1), as a first offense.  Id. 
The supreme court addressed the question of whether
Won's consent to the breath test was valid where he was informed
by the police of his right to refuse consent, but was also told
that if he exercised that right, his refusal to consent would be
a crime for which he could be imprisoned for up to thirty days. 
Id. at 333, 372 P.3d at 1068.  The supreme court reasoned that a
breath test was a search subject to constitutional constraints,
including the warrant requirement generally applicable to
searches.  Id. at 338-39, 372 P.3d at 1073-74.  The court
recognized, however, that the warrant requirement was subject to
exceptions.  Id.  at 339, 372 P.3d at 1074.  After concluding that
certain established exceptions to the warrant requirement, such
as exigent circumstances and search incident to arrest, did not
apply in Won's case, the court focused its attention on the
consent exception to the warrant requirement.  Id. at 339-40, 339
n.23, 372 P.3d at 1074-75, 1075 n.23.  
The court held that because Won had been informed that
his refusal to submit to testing would subject him to criminal
penalties, Won's consent to the breath test had been coerced by
the threat of criminal sanctions and was therefore invalid.  Id.
7FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
at 348-49, 372 P.3d 1083-84.  In this regard, the court concluded
that if Won had only been advised that his refusal to submit to
testing would subject him to statutory civil administrative
penalties, Won's consent would have been valid.  Id. at 349 n.34,
372 P.3d at 1084 n.34.7  Thus, in the court's analysis, it was
the threat of being subjected to criminal sanctions imposed by
HRS § 291E-68, which the police communicated to Won in obtaining
his consent to the breath test, that rendered his consent
7The court stated: 
It bears repeating here that this opinion does not
concern the civil administrative penalties attendant to
a driver's refusal of [alcohol concentration] testing. 
See HRS § 291E–41(d) (Supp. 2010); see generally HRS
Chapter 291E, Part III.  Those types of sanctions are
not affected in any way by our decision.  Because we
conclude only that the threat of being subjected to
criminal sanctions inherently coerces a suspected OVUII
offender into giving consent, if a police officer does
not inform the offender of the criminal sanctions
because they were omitted from the notice given by the
officer, see HRS § 291E–15 ([Supp. 2010]); supra note
28, then proving OVUII through evidence of a
defendant's [breath or] blood alcohol content, see  HRS 
§ 291E–61(a)(3)–(4), will remain a viable option for
purposes of prosecution.
Won, 137 Hawai #i at 349 n.34, 372 P.3d at 1084 n.34.  The court
read HRS 
§ 291E-15 as giving the police the option of only advising an
arrested driver of the civil administrative sanctions under HRS §
291E-41, and not the criminal penalties under HRS § 291E-68.  Id.
at 345 n.28, 372 P.3d at 1080 n.28.  The court noted that "the
legislative history of HRS § 291E–15 indicates that police are
obliged to inform an arrestee only of the sanctions that may be
sought to be imposed."  Id.  In other words, the police could
obtain a valid consent to testing from an arrested driver by
omitting the warning that refusal to consent would subject the
driver to criminal penalties.  This omission, however, would also
preclude the State from prosecuting an arrested driver for
Refusal to Submit to Testing because as a prerequisite for such
prosecution, the statutory scheme required the police to advise
the driver of the criminal sanctions under HRS § 291E-68, and
then ask the driver if he or she still refused to submit to
testing.  HRS § 291E-15 (Supp. 2010).
8FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
invalid.  The court concluded that because Won's consent was
invalid, and no other exception to the warrant requirement was
applicable, Won's breath test constituted an unconstitutional
warrantless search; therefore, Won's breath test results were
subject to suppression and inadmissible as evidence.  Id. at 355,
372 P.3d at 1090.
C.
Unlike Won, Wilson did not consent to a breath test,
but rather refused to submit to testing.  Thus, this case is
factually distinguishable from Won.  However, we conclude that
the analysis used by the majority in Won to arrive at its
determination that Won's consent was invalid controls our
decision in this case.
In particular, the Won majority observed that in the
absence of a warrant or an exception (besides consent) to the
warrant requirement, the choice presented to Won by the implied
consent form, which required him to surrender either his
constitutional right to refuse to be searched or his
constitutional right to not be arrested for constitutionally
authorized conduct, rendered his consent to search involuntary. 
The majority opined:
In situations in which police have not obtained a
warrant and no other exception to the warrant requirement is
present, the choice presented by the [i]mplied [c]onsent
[f]orm forces a defendant to elect between fundamental
rights guaranteed by the Hawai #i Constitution.  On the one
hand, the person may exercise the constitutional right to
refuse to be searched, thus relinquishing the constitutional
right to not be arrested for conduct that is authorized by
the constitution.
Alternatively, the person may "choose" to be searched
in order to prevent being arrested for the refusal crime,
thus forfeiting the constitutional right to not be subject
to a search absent a warrant or an exception to the warrant
requirement.
That is, with respect to both alternatives, a person
must surrender one constitutional right for preservation of
another.  However, the government may not condition a right
guaranteed in our constitution on the waiver of an
equivalent constitutional protection.  "It is intolerable
that one constitutional right should have to be surrendered
9FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
in order to assert another."  
It is manifestly coercive to present a person with a
"choice" that requires surrender of the constitutional right
to refuse a search in order to preserve the right to not be
arrested for conduct in compliance with the constitution. 
It is equally coercive to "allow" the person to preserve the
fundamental right to refuse a search by requiring the person
to relinquish the right to not be arrested for conduct that
does not violate the constitution.
Id. at 347-48; 372 P.3d at 1082-83 (citations, footnote,
emphasis, and brackets omitted).
Integral to the majority's analysis is that absent a
warrant or an exception to the warrant requirement, an arrested
driver has a constitutional right to refuse to consent to be
searched, i.e. submit to a breath test.  Therefore, where the
police lack a search warrant or an exception to the warrant
requirement, imposing criminal penalties on an arrested driver,
pursuant to HRS § 291E-68, for refusing to submit to testing
would impermissibly impose criminal sanctions on the driver for
engaging in conduct that is constitutionally protected.  Stated
another way, where there is no warrant or exception to the
warrant requirement, an arrested driver has a constitutionally
protected right to be free from governmental searches, and such
driver cannot be subject to criminal penalties for exercising
that right by refusing to consent to a breath-test search. 
Here, the police did not have a warrant to search
Wilson, and based on Won, there was no exception to the warrant
requirement that would permit the police to compel Wilson to
submit to testing.  In accordance with the majority's analysis in
Won, the State could not subject Wilson to criminal punishment
for exercising her constitutional right to refuse to submit to
testing.
D.
In the aftermath of the supreme court's decision in
Won, the Legislature repealed HRS § 291E-68 effective April 26,
2016.  2016 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 17, § 2 at 21.  Accordingly,
under the current statutory scheme, refusal to submit to testing
10FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
is no longer a crime subject to criminal penalties.  Instead, an
arrested driver's refusal to submit to testing only subjects the
driver to civil administrative penalties.  As the supreme court
concluded in Won, advising an arrested driver that his or her
refusal to consent to testing would result in the imposition of
civil administrative penalties would not invalidate the driver's
subsequent consent to testing.  Won , 137 Hawai #i at 349 n.34, 372
P.3d at 1084 n.34.
E.
After the Hawai #i Supreme Court's decision in Won and
the Legislature's repeal of HRS § 291E-68, the United States
Supreme Court considered three consolidated cases involving
implied consent statutes which, like Hawai# i's statutory scheme
in effect at the time of Won and this case, imposed criminal
penalties on an arrested driver who refused to consent to
testing.  Birchfield v. North Dakota, 136 S.Ct. 2160 (2016).  The
three consolidated cases involved: (1) a driver prosecuted for
refusing to submit to a breath test; (1) a driver prosecuted for
refusing to submit to a blood test; and (3) a driver who
consented to a blood test after being warned of criminal
sanctions for test refusal and whose license was administratively
suspended based on the blood test results.  Id. at 2170-72.
The Supreme Court began its analysis by noting that the
decision in the three cases turned on whether a warrantless
search for breath or blood comports with the Fourth Amendment
under the circumstances presented: 
[S]uccess for all three [driver-]petitioners depends on the
proposition that the criminal law ordinarily may not compel
a motorist to submit to the taking of a blood sample or to a
breath test unless a warrant authorizing such testing is
issued by a magistrate.  If, on the other hand, such
warrantless searches comport with the Fourth Amendment, it
follows that a State may criminalize the refusal to comply
with a demand to submit to the required testing, just as a
State may make it a crime for a person to obstruct the
execution of a valid search warrant.  See, e.g., Conn. Gen.
Stat. § 54–33d (2009); Fla. Stat. § 933.15 (2015); N.J.
11FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Stat. Ann. § 33:1–63 (West 1994); 18 U.S.C. § 1501; cf.
Bumper v. North Carolina, 391 U.S. 543, 550, 88 S.Ct. 1788,
20 L.Ed.2d 797 (1968) ("When a law enforcement officer
claims authority to search a home under a warrant, he
announces in effect that the occupant has no right to resist
the search").  And by the same token, if such warrantless
searches are constitutional, there is no obstacle under
federal law to the admission of the results that they yield
in either a criminal prosecution or a civil or
administrative proceeding.  We therefore begin by
considering whether the searches demanded in these cases
were consistent with the Fourth Amendment.
Id. at 2171-73 (emphasis added).
The Supreme Court distinguished between warrantless
breath tests and warrantless blood tests.  The Court held that a 
warrantless breath test constituted a valid search incident to
arrest for drunk driving and thus was permissible under the
Fourth Amendment.  Id. at 2184.  In support of this holding, the
Court concluded that the "impact of breath tests on privacy is
slight,"8 and the need for blood alcohol concentration (BAC)
testing through breath tests is great.9  Id.  The Court, however,
8The Court concluded that "breath tests do not implicate
significant privacy concerns" because: (1) the required physical
intrusion "is almost negligible"; (2) the information revealed by
breath tests is limited to the amount of alcohol in the subject's
breath; and (3) participation in a breath test is not likely to
cause any great enhancement in the embarrassment inherent in any
arrest.  Id. at 2176-77 (internal quotation marks, citation, and
brackets omitted).
9The Court observed that "[a]lcohol consumption is a leading
cause of traffic fatalities and injuries" and noted that its
cases have "long recognized the 'carnage' and 'slaughter' caused
by drunk drivers."  Id. at 1278.  The Court also noted the burden
on the police and the courts that would be imposed by requiring a
search warrant for every breath test: "If a search warrant were
required for every search incident to arrest that does not
involve exigent circumstances, the courts would be swamped.  And
even if we arbitrarily singled out BAC tests incident to arrest
for this special treatment . . . the impact on the courts would
be considerable.  The number of arrests every year for driving
under the influence is enormous -- more than 1.1 million in
2014."  Id.  at 2180.  
12FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
came to a different conclusion with respect to blood tests,
holding that a warrant was required for a blood test and that a
blood test could not be administered under the "search incident
to arrest" exception to the warrant requirement.  Id.  In support
of this holding, the Court noted that blood tests are
significantly more intrusive than breath tests, and that "the
availability of the less invasive alternative" of breath tests to
measure BAC diminished the need for warrantless blood tests.  Id.
Based on this analysis, the Supreme Court held that
Bernard, the driver who refused to submit to a warrantless breath
test, could be criminally prosecuted for his refusal.  Id. at
2186.  The Court reasoned that the warrantless breath test "was a
permissible search incident to Bernard's arrest for drunk
driving, an arrest whose legality Bernard has not contested. 
Accordingly, the Fourth Amendment did not require officers to
obtain a warrant prior to demanding the test, and Bernard had no
right to refuse it."  Id.   (emphasis omitted). 
The Court reversed the conviction of the driver
prosecuted for refusing to consent to a blood test.  Id.   With
respect to the driver on whom administrative sanctions were
imposed after he consented to a blood test, the Court remanded
the case for consideration of whether the driver's consent was
voluntary, since the state court's ruling that the consent was
voluntary was based on the erroneous assumption that the state
could permissibly compel both blood and breath tests.  Id.  
F.
Under the United States Supreme Court's reasoning and
analysis in Birchfield, Wilson could properly be prosecuted for
Refusal to Submit to Testing.  Under the Birchfield  analysis,
because a warrantless breath test is permissible as a search
incident to arrest, Wilson could have been compelled to submit to
a breath test, and she had no right, constitutional or otherwise,
13FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to be free from a breath-test search or to refuse to consent to a
breath test.  Because Wilson had no right to refuse to consent to
a breath test, her refusal to submit to a breath test, after
being given the option of a breath or blood test, could
legitimately have subjected her to criminal penalties.  
The question thus becomes whether the United States
Supreme Court's decision in Birchfield would cause the Hawai #i
Supreme Court to change its analysis in Won.  Birchfield was
decided based on the Fourth Amendment to the United States
Constitution, while Won was based on the Hawai #i Supreme Court's
interpretation of Article I, Section 7 of the Hawai #i
Constitution.  Unlike the United States Supreme Court, the
Hawai#i Supreme Court concluded that the "search incident to
arrest" exception to the warrant requirement did not apply to
Won's breath test.  The Hawai #i Supreme Court stated:
The search incident to arrest exception is also inapplicable
as it is "limited in scope to a search of the arrestee's
person and the area within his immediate control from which
he could obtain a weapon or destroy evidence."  State v.
Paahana, 66 Haw. 499, 506, 666 P.2d 592, 597 (1983)
(internal quotation mark omitted).  "The exception for
searches incident to a lawful arrest 'implies the exigent
circumstances of imminent danger to the arresting officer or
others and of imminent concealment or destruction of
evidence or the fruits of the crime from the circumstances
of a lawful arrest.'"  Id. (quoting State v. Clark, 65 Haw.
488, 496, 654 P.2d 355, 361 (1982)).  As noted, McNeely held
that the natural metabolization of alcohol does not qualify
as a per se exigency, and the record indicates no other
exigency that necessitated the breath test.
Won, 137 Hawai #i at 339 n.23, 372 P.3d at 1074 n.23 (brackets
omitted).
If the Hawai# i Supreme Court adopted the Birchfield
analysis in interpreting Article I, Section 7 of the Hawai# i
Constitution, it would require overturning Won  because Won was
premised on the assumption that the State could not lawfully
compel Won to submit to a breath test.  If the police were
authorized to administer a breath test to Won as a valid search
incident to arrest, imposing criminal penalties on Won's refusal
14FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to submit to testing would not be coercive because Won would have
no right to refuse to consent to a breath test.  
The Hawaii Supreme Court's analysis in Won of the
"search incident to arrest" exception to the warrant requirement
differs from that of the United States Supreme Court in
Birchfield , and the Hawai #i Supreme Court is free to give broader
protection under the Hawai #i Constitution than given by the
United States Constitution.  State v. Viglielmo , 105 Hawai# i 197,
211, 95 P.3d 952, 966 (2004).  Without additional guidance from
the Hawai #i Supreme Court, we cannot say that Birchfield  would
alter the Hawai #i Supreme Court's analysis in Won.  Based on the
analysis in Won , the State could not prosecute Wilson for Refusal
to Submit to Testing.  We therefore reverse Wilson's Refusal to
Submit to Testing conviction.#
II.
Wilson challenges her OVUII conviction on the ground
that the District Court committed plain error in accepting her
stipulation that Officer Hattori was qualified to administer
field sobriety tests.  Wilson claims that the District Court
could not accept this stipulation because it failed to engage in
a colloquy with her to ensure that she personally approved of the
stipulation.  We reject Wilson's colloquy argument.
A.
 Prior to calling Officer Hattori as its first witness,
the State advised the District Court that the parties had reached
a stipulation that Officer Hattori was qualified to administer
field sobriety tests and placed the content of the stipulation on
the record:
[Prosecutor]:  . . . [A]fter discussing this case with
the Public Defender, at this time I believe we're going to
stipulate to Officer Hattori's training, that he followed
the standards and guidelines and requirements of the
[National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)]
Manual.  It was supervised by a NHTSA Certified Instructor. 
 
Officer Hattori's qualified and certified to conduct
15FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the standard -- standardized field sobriety tests and that
he received specialized training in administering and
grading all of the standard field sobriety tests. 
Wilson's counsel did not dispute the prosecutor's representation
and the District Court accepted the stipulation to Officer
Hattori's qualifications.
B.
As part of the trial process and strategy, parties
routinely stipulate to matters relating to a witness's
qualifications or competency, foundation for testimony, and the
admissibility of exhibits.  Such stipulations serve to make the
trial process more efficient by avoiding time-consuming and
needless presentation of evidence on matters that are undisputed
or for which objection is viewed as unnecessary or unwarranted. 
To require the trial judge to engage in a colloquy with a
criminal defendant on every stipulation presented in a case, and
to give the defendant veto power over every stipulation agreed to
by his or her counsel, would burden the trial process and
interfere with the role of defense counsel to exercise
appropriate judgment in trial tactics and procedure.  
In State v. El'Ayache , 62 Haw. 646, 618 P.2d 1142
(1980), the Hawai #i Supreme Court recognized these concerns and
rejected the defendant's claim that the trial court erred in
admitting stipulations regarding witness testimony without first
determining whether the defendant had knowingly and voluntarily
waived her constitutional right to confront and cross-examine the
witnesses.  In support of its holding, the supreme court
reasoned:
The right to confront and to cross-examine is not absolute
and may, in appropriate cases, bow to accommodate other
legitimate interests in the criminal trial process.
Indubitably, one of the legitimate interests in the
criminal trial process is the right of defense counsel to
make an appropriate judgment on the trial tactics and
procedure to be employed in defense of his client based upon
his knowledge of the facts and law of the case; another is
16FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the expeditious manner in which the criminal trial is
conducted.  The decision whether to call a witness or not in
a criminal trial is normally a matter within the judgment of
counsel and, accordingly, will rarely be second-guessed by
judicial hindsight.
El'Ayache , 62 Haw. at 649, 618 P.2d at 1144 (citations omitted).  
Wilson cites State v. Murray , 116 Hawai# i 3, 169 P.3d
955 (2007), in arguing that the District Court erred in failing
to engage her in a colloquy regarding the stipulation to Officer
Hattori's qualifications.  Wilson's reliance on Murray  is
misplaced.  In Murray, the supreme court imposed a colloquy
requirement where the defendant stipulated to an essential
element of the charged offense.  Murray, 116 Hawai #i at 10-14,
169 P.3d at 962-66.  Murray did not hold that the trial court
must engage the defendant in a colloquy for every single
stipulation agreed to by the parties.  Id.  
Here, the stipulation that Officer Hattori was
qualified to administer field sobriety tests did not constitute a
stipulation to an essential element of the OVUII offense. 
Rather, it was the type of stipulation routinely entered into by
parties in criminal cases to avoid the unnecessary consumption of
time.  Wilson makes no showing that absent the stipulation, the
State would have been unable to establish Officer Hattori's
qualifications to administer field sobriety tests.  Officer
Hattori testified and was subject to cross-examination by Wilson.
We conclude that the District Court was not required to engage in
a colloquy with Wilson before accepting the stipulation regarding
Officer Hattori's qualifications.  Thus, Wilson is not entitled
to overturn her OVUII conviction based on her colloquy claim.
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the District Court's
Judgment with respect to Wilson's OVUII conviction and reverse
the Judgment with respect to Wilson's conviction for Refusal to
Submit to Testing.
17FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On the briefs:
James Manjiro Yuda
James S. Tabe
Deputy Public Defenders
for Defendant-Appellant
Richard K. Minatoya
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Maui
for Plaintiff-Appellee
18