  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000562
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
FC-S NO. 14-00245

 
In
 the Interest of KB
 
AND
 
FC-S NO. 15-00004
 
In
 the Interest of SY
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 14-00245 & FC-S NO. 15-00004)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Appellant Mother (Mother) appeals from the Orders
 
Concerning Child Protective Act, filed on July 22, 2015 in the
 
1
Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court),  which awarded
foster custody of her children, K.B. and S.Y. (collectively the 
children), to Appellee State of Hawai 'i, Department of Human 
Services (DHS). 
On appeal, Mother contends the Family Court erred by

 
finding that (1) her children's physical or psychological health
 or welfare was harmed or subject to threatened harm by her acts
 or omissions and (2) foster custody was necessary because she was
 not willing and able to provide a safe family home for the
 children, even with the assistance of a service plan. Mother
 argues that there was no clear and convincing evidence that she
 caused injury to her step-child, K.D., and also that a videotaped
 
1
 The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interview of K.B. and J.D. (K.D.'s full sister) should have been
 
submitted as the best evidence of what they said about the
 incident.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Mother's points of error as follows and affirm.
 
DHS petitioned the Family Court to invoke the court's
 
jurisdiction and to award foster custody of K.B. and S.Y. to DHS
 based on an incident on December 13, 2014, in which their sibling
 
2
K.D., then three and a half years old, suffered life-threatening
head injuries. 
Mother contends that the injuries to K.D. were
 
the result of K.D. falling from a couch. DHS contends that
 K.D.'s injuries were caused by Mother. At the time of the
 incident, Mother was at home with K.D., K.B. and J.D. Mother was
 pregnant with S.Y. at the time.
 
The Family Court found, 
inter alia, that there was
 
clear and convincing evidence that active efforts have been made
 to provide remedial services and rehabilitative programs designed
 to prevent the breakup of the Indian family and that these
 efforts have proved unsuccessful, that the continued custody of
 K.B. and S.Y. by the parent or Indian custodian is likely to
 result in serious emotional or physical damage to K.B. and S.Y.,
3
 
2
   At the time of the December 13, 2014 incident, Mother was married to
P.D. K.B. is Mother's child from a previous relationship. J.D. and K.D. are
 
P.D.'s children from a previous relationship. S.Y. is the son of Mother and
 P.D. Thus, K.D. is a step-sibling to K.B. and half-sibling to S.Y. 
3
 The Family Court applied, and no party contests the applicability of,
the standard under 25 U.S.C. § 1912(e) for foster custody placement because
K.B. and S.Y. are each an Indian Child as defined in 25 U.S.C. § 1903(4)(a).
25 U.S.C. § 1912(e) states:
 
(e)
 Foster care placement orders; evidence; determination of
damage to child
 
No foster care placement may be ordered in such proceeding
in the absence of a determination, supported by clear and
convincing evidence, including testimony of qualified expert
witnesses, that the continued custody of the child by the
parent or Indian custodian is likely to result in serious
emotional or physical damage to the child.
 
Further, 25 U.S.C. § 1912(d) states:
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
a finding which is supported by the testimony of qualified expert
 
witnesses, that having K.B. and S.Y. continue in the family home
 would be contrary to the immediate welfare of the children, that
 K.B. and S.Y. "are children whose physical or psychological
 health or welfare is subject to imminent harm, has been harmed,
 or is subject to threatened harm by the acts or omissions" of
 Mother, that Mother was not presently willing and able to provide
 a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan,
 and that continued custody by Mother was likely to result in
 serious emotional or physical damage to the children.
 
In addressing a petition for foster custody, HRS
 
§ 587A-28(e) (Supp. 2015) provides in pertinent part:
 
§587A-28 Return hearing
 
. . . .
 
(e) If the court finds that the child's physical or
psychological health or welfare has been harmed or is
subject to threatened harm by the acts or omissions of the
child's family, the court:
(1)	 Shall enter a finding that the court has jurisdiction
pursuant to section 587A-5;
(2)	 Shall enter a finding regarding whether, before the
child was placed in foster care, the department made
reasonable efforts to prevent or eliminate the need to
remove the child from the child's family home;
(3)	 Shall enter orders:
 (A)	 That the child be placed in foster custody if
the court finds that the child's remaining in
the family home is contrary to the welfare of
the child and the child's parents are not
willing and able to provide a safe family home
for the child, even with the assistance of a
service plan; or
(B)	 That the child be placed in family supervision
if the court finds that the child's parents are
willing and able to provide the child with a
safe family home with the assistance of a
service plan[.]
 
Drs. Sarah Rogers and Catherine Heinzen Jim both
 
testified that a CT scan of K.D.'s brain showed a subdural
 
(d) Remedial services and rehabilitative programs;
preventive measures
 
Any party seeking to effect a foster care placement of, or
termination of parental rights to, an Indian child under
State law shall satisfy the court that active efforts have
been made to provide remedial services and rehabilitative
programs designed to prevent the breakup of the Indian
family and that these efforts have proved unsuccessful. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hemotoma which they characterized as critical or life
 
threatening. Dr. Jim stated that Mother told her that K.D. was
 injured from falling from a couch. Although Dr. Jim did not
 offer an opinion about how the injury occurred, she testified
 that she often sees children about the same age as K.D. with
 complaints of falling from a couch but none of them had injuries
 similar to K.D. and that the injuries were not consistent with
 similar falls in her experience. 
Dr. Kayal Natarajan testified that K.D.'s fractured
 
skull with bleeding on the brain was not consistent with a small
 child falling off a couch because only 1 in 2 million falls would
 result in such injury to a child like K.D. Dr. Natarajan stated
 that K.D.'s injury requires force such as being involved in a
 motor vehicle crash or riding a skateboard downhill without a
 helmet. In her opinion, K.D.'s injuries were inflicted and
 nonaccidental due to child abuse. 
Dr. Brenda Wong, a clinical psychologist, testified
 
that there is no protective person in the family home because
 there was no one identified as the perpatrator of harm to K.D.
 Dr. Wong also stated that there is also a suspicion that one of
 the parents could have injured K.D., therefore, the other
 children were at risk of harm. Mother was the only adult present
 at the time of the incident and K.D.'s Father (P.D.) was ruled
 out as the perpetrator of harm because he was not present when
 K.D. was injured. Dr. Wong concluded that it was not safe to
 return the children to the family home until the risk factors in
 the home are identified. 
David Hoke (Hoke), a DHS social worker, testified that
 
the children are subject to threatened harm because Mother's
 explanation of K.D.'s injuries are not accurate. Hoke further
 testified regarding his observation of the separate interviews of
 K.B. (seven years old at the time) and J.D. (six years old at the
 time) at the Children's Justice Center. Hoke testified that K.B.
 and J.D. stated that they heard K.D. cry briefly but they stayed
 in the room where they were, and then after that they saw Mother
 take K.D. into the bathroom and close the door. According to
 Hoke, K.B. and J.D. reported they heard the shower being turned
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on, that when K.D. entered the bathroom she was wearing Hello
 
Kitty pajamas but that before going to the hospital K.D. was
 changed into a white shirt and pink pants, and that they saw the
 wet Hello Kitty pajamas in the house. Hoke further testified
 that Mother did not participate in all services recommended under
 a service plan, and based on all of the information provided to
 DHS, DHS's assessment is that Mother and P.D. are not willing and
 able to provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a
 service plan. 
The Family Court found all of the testimony by DHS's 
expert witnesses to be credible. "It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Fisher v. Fisher, 111 
Hawai
'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) (citation omitted). 
There was substantial evidence to support the Family
 
Court's finding that Mother was the perpetrator of the injuries
 suffered by K.D. on December 13, 2014. Mother was the only adult
 present at the time K.D. sustained the injuries. K.D.'s injuries
 were consistent with intentional, nonaccidental infliction, and
 Mother's explanations were not consistent with the injuries
 sustained. 
The evidence that Mother was the perpetrator of the
 
injuries suffered by K.D. also shows that the Family Court did
 not err in determining by clear and convincing evidence that the
 continued custody of K.B. and S.Y. by Mother was likely to result
 in serious emotional or physical damage to K.B. and S.Y. and that
 K.B. and S.Y. were subject to threatened harm by the acts or
 omissions of Mother. Mother was offered remedial services and
 rehabilitative programs to address the family home safety
 concerns but failed to complete the offered services and
 programs. Thus, DHS made active and reasonable efforts to
 prevent the breakup of the Indian family and prevent or eliminate
 the need to remove the children from the family home. Based on
 the evidence in this case, the Family Court did not err in
 determining that the requirements for foster care placement
 pursuant to 25 U.S.C. § 1912(d) and (e) and HRS § 587A-28(e) had
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
been satisfied.
 
With regard to Mother's contention that the Family
 
Court should have required DHS to produce a videotaped recording
 
of K.B.'s and J.D.'s interviews at the Children's Justice Center
 as the best evidence of their statements, Mother did not object
 to the introduction of Hoke's testimony regarding what the
 children stated. At the conclusion of Hoke's testimony on June
 18, 2015, Mother's counsel inquired whether the Family Court
 wanted to see a recorded interview of the children, because it
 was the best evidence of the children's statements, instead of
 relying upon witness testimony about what the children said. The
 Family Court responded that it was counsel's decision whether to
 offer such evidence for the court's consideration. The recorded
 interview was not submitted into evidence and there was no
 objection. Therefore, the point of error is without merit.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Orders Concerning Child
 
Protective Act, filed on July 22, 2015 in the Family Court of the
 First Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 22, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Herbert Y. Hamada,
for Appellant Mother. Chief Judge 
Patrick A. Pascual,Mary Anne Magnier,Jay K. Goss,Howard H. Shiroma,Deputy Attorneys General,Department of the Attorney General,for Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6

 