NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000547 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
JACOB PAUL DECLOUET, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-17-04047) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Jacob Paul DeClouet (DeClouet) 
appeals from a Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and 
Plea/Judgment, entered on June 13, 2018, by the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (d
istrict court).  The 
district court convicted DeClouet of one count of Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 291E-61(a)(1).
  21
1 The Honorable Sherri-Ann L. Iha presided at trial. The Honorable 
William M. Domingo entered the Judgment. 
2 HRS ยง 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2018) provides: 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair the person's normalmental faculties or ability to care for theperson and guard against casualty[.] NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, DeClouet argues the district court wrongly 
convicted him based on (1) a clearly erroneous finding that his 
performance on the Standardized Field Sobriety Test (SFST) showed 
he was intoxicated, and (2) insufficient evidence. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve DeClouet's points of error as follows and affirm.
(1) The district court did not err in determining that
evidence of DeClouet's SFST performance supported
the conviction. 
In its ruling, the district court stated, inter alia, 
that it found Officer Richard Townsend (Officer Townsend) 
"credible in his testimony that there was a strong odor of 
alcohol as well as the performance on the field sobriety test." DeClouet argues that because the district court also found credible his testimony that he thought Officer Jared Spiker (Officer Spiker) had earlier demanded money from him,
3 and given 
DeClouet's testimony that he was nervous and having a hard time concentrating, his performance on the SFST was not necessarily attributable to intoxication and the district court erred in relying on his SFST performance. We disagree. 
At trial, Officer Townsend testified that he 
administered the SFST to DeClouet. While the officer gave DeClouet the Horizontal Gaze Nystagmus (HGN) test instructions, 
DeClouet swayed about an inch from side to side. 
While Officer Townsend was demonstrating how to perform 
the Walk-and-Turn test, DeClouet was unable to keep his balance. 
Contrary to Officer Townsend's instructions, which DeClouet said he understood, DeClouet began the test before the officer told him to do so and with the wrong foot; on the first nine steps, DeClouet stepped off the line several times, once lost his 
3 DeClouet testified that Officer Spiker had demanded $500 from him.
In addressing this testimony, the district court stated "[t]he Court does not
feel that Officer Spiker is shaking anybody down[,]" but also stated that "thedefendant did believe those things and did interpret it that way." 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
balance and had to stop for two or three seconds to steady 
himself, did not count his steps; and after the first nine steps, DeClouet turned right instead of left and turned by shuffling both feet. 
On the second set of nine steps on the Walk-and-Turn 
test, contrary to Officer Townsend's instructions, DeClouet stepped off-line several times and twice lost his balance and had to take two or three seconds to steady himself. 
On the One-Leg Stand test, contrary to Officer 
Townsend's instructions, DeClouet started the test before Officer Townsend told him to do so, and put his foot down five times, swayed while leaning to the right, and hopped on his planted foot. 
In light of the evidence indicating that DeClouet had 
consumed alcohol and the evidence of DeClouet's driving behavior, discussed 
infra, it was within the district court's discretion to 
assess the evidence and to determine that DeClouet's actions 
during the SFST were also evidence of intoxication supporting conviction. See State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai# i 131, 139, 913 P.2d 
57, 65 (1996) ("An appellate court will not pass upon the trial judge's decisions with respect to the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence, because this is the province of the trial judge." (Citations omitted)); State v. Kam, 134 
Hawai# i 
280, 287, 339 P.3d 1081, 1088 (App. 2014), as corrected (Jan. 20, 2015) ("[A]ppellate courts will give due deference to the right of the trier of fact to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw reasonable inferences from the evidence adduced." (citation omitted)).
(2) There is sufficient evidence to support the
conviction. 
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the 
prosecution and deferring to the district court's right to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw reasonable inferences from the evidence adduced, as we must, we hold that the evidence was sufficient to support DeClouet's conviction. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
See Kam, 134 Hawai# i at 287, 339 P.3d at 1088; see, e.g., State 
v. Vliet, 91 Hawai# i
 288, 293, 983 P.2d 189, 194 (1999); State v. 
Nishi, 9 Haw. App. 516, 524-25, 852 P.2d 476, 481 (1993); State v. Boyd, No. CAAP-15-0000528, 2016 WL 3369242, at *2 (Hawai# i 
App. June 15, 2016) (SDO); State v. Kahana, No. CAAP-17-0000359, 2018 WL 2316511, at *2 (Hawai# i App. May 22, 2018) (SDO). 
In addition to Officer Townsend's testimony regarding 
DeClouet's SFST performance, the following evidence was adduced. 
Officer Spiker testified that on October 24, 2017, at 
about 2:40 a.m., he was stopped at a red light when he noticed a vehicle make an illegal left turn onto Pi# ikoi Street. While 
following the vehicle, the officer saw its driver's-side tires drift about a foot over the skip-dash white lane markings, three to four times. 
Officer Spiker initiated a traffic stop by flashing his 
blue strobe lights. However, the vehicle continued driving about a block, passing safe places to stop. 
The vehicle then turned 
onto a street and parked on a driveway in such a way as to completely block the road and driveway. 
Officer Spiker approached the vehicle and saw a man 
(later identified as DeClouet) behind the wheel. While speaking with DeClouet, the officer detected a strong odor of an alcoholic-type beverage coming from DeClouet's breath and saw DeClouet's eyes were red, bloodshot, and watery. DeClouet told Officer Spiker, "I'm 28 years old; I know better than to drink and drive." However, according to his birth date, he was 32 years old. 
Officer Townsend testified that when he arrived on the 
scene, he noticed from three to four feet away that DeClouet's eyes were red and watery, his face was bright red, and he emitted a strong odor of an alcoholic-type beverage. While conducting the HGN test, the officer noted DeClouet still exhibited these indicia of intoxication. 
Officer Townsend noticed DeClouet's speech was slurred.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of 
Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, entered on June 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
13, 2018, by the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu 
Division, is affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 30, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Sarah M. Nishioka,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Sonja P. McCullen,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5 