  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-21-0000316 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN THE INTEREST OF J.H. 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-S NO. 18-00251) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and McCullen, JJ.) 
Appellant Father (Father) and Cross-Appellant Mother 
(Mother) appeal from the Order Terminating Parental Rights filed 
on April 28, 2021, in the Family Court of the First Circuit 
(Family Court).1 Father's and Mother's parental rights to their 
child (J.H.) were terminated. 
On appeal, Father challenges Findings of Fact (FOFs) 9, 
29, 38, 46, 49, 69, 135, 141, 151-54, 164-65, and 177. Father 
contends that Petitioner-Appellee the State of Hawai# i, 
Department of Human Services (
DHS), failed to provide him with a 
reasonable opportunity to reunify by denying any form of visitation with J.H., the Family Court violated his due process rights by denying his request to delay the termination of 
1/ The Honorable Andrew T. Park presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parental rights proceeding until after his trial on alleged 
sexual abuse of his minor step-daughter (SA) was concluded, and 
his due process rights were violated when his court appointed 
attorney was discharged for a period of time during the proceeding. 
On cross appeal, Mother challenges FOFs 149 and 164 and 
Conclusions of Law (COLS) 16 and 17.  Mother contends that there 
was not clear and convincing evidence that she was not presently 
willing and able to provide a safe family home or that it was reasonably foreseeable she would become willing and able to provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable period of time not to exceed two years from the date J.H. entered foster care, DHS failed to provide a reasonable effort to provide a service plan when it failed to re-refer her for a psychological evaluation, and the Family Court violated her due process right by denying her motion for a continuance due to her hospitalization. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Father's and Mother's points of error as follows: 
"DHS is under an obligation to provide a reasonable 
opportunity to parents through a service plan to reunify the family." In re Doe
, 100 Hawai# i 335, 343, 60 P.3d 285, 293 
(2002) (interpreting Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 587, 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the predecessor to HRS Chapter 587A). The Family Service Plan 
stated that Father would not be permitted to have visitation with J.H. until it was deemed appropriate and approved by Father's sex offender treatment therapist and in consultation with the 
Guardian Ad Litem (GAL). Father does not contest that he refused 
to participate in any of the services in the Family Service Plan, 
including sex offender treatment. Thus, Father did not have a sex offender treatment therapist approve visitation. At no time did Father challenge the Family Service Plan. "[A] claim for additional services and accommodations must be timely made." Id. 
at 344, 60 P.3d at 294. Father did not raise the issue of lack of visitation until trial. Under these circumstances, we cannot conclude that Father's contentions regarding visitation have merit. See id.
Father further contends that the Family Court violated 
his due process rights by denying his request to delay the termination of parental rights proceeding until after his trial on alleged sexual abuse of his minor step-daughter was concluded. The United States Constitution "does not ordinarily require a stay of civil proceedings pending the outcome of criminal proceedings." SEC & Exch. Comm'n v. Dresser Indus., Inc., 628 
F.2d 1368, 1375 (D.C. Cir. 1980) (citing Baxter v. Palmigiano, 425 U.S. 308 (1976)). Father cites no authority to the contrary and on appeal, Father provides no specific reason or argument why the termination of parental rights proceeding should have been 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stayed until his criminal trial was concluded. Therefore, we 
cannot conclude that this argument has merit. 
Finally, Father contends that his due process rights 
were violated when his court-appointed attorney was discharged after he was defaulted for failing to appear at the hearing where DHS was awarded foster custody of J.H. 
In In re T.M.
, 131 Hawai# i 419, 436, 319 P.3d 338, 355 
(2014), the Hawai# i Supreme Court held: "We direct that upon the 
filing date of this opinion, trial courts must appoint counsel for indigent parents upon the granting of a petition to DHS for temporary foster custody of their children." 
In 
In re L.I.
, 149 Hawai# i 118, 122, 482 P.3d 1079, 
1083 (2021), the supreme court clarified "that 
In re T.M. 
mandated that family courts appoint counsel for indigent parents when DHS files a petition asserting custody over a child." The supreme court further held: 
The failure to timely appoint counsel is structural
error which, under State v. Loher
, requires vacatur without
the necessity of proving harmful error. 140 Hawai #i 205,
222, 398 P.3d 794, 811 (2017). The family court's failure
to appoint Mother counsel when DHS filed its petition forfamily supervision was structural error and cannot be deemedharmless. 
Id. at 123, 482 P.3d at 1084 (footnote omitted). Accordingly, 
the supreme court vacated the judge in that case and remanded "for further proceedings consistent with this opinion and considering the best interests of the children." Id. 
The supreme reiterated and explained its prior ruling 
as follows: 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In In re T.M., the petitioner appealed from an order
granting temporary foster custody of her children to DHS
because she was not appointed counsel until nineteen monthsafter DHS filed its petition for temporary foster custody.131 Hawai #i at 421, 319 P.3d at 340. This court held that 
the family court's failure to appoint counsel constituted anabuse of discretion. Id. The In re T.M. court explained
that, had the petitioner been appointed counsel sooner, shemay have been able to comply with the terms of the familyplan and provide her child with a safe family home, thuspotentially avoiding the subsequent termination of herparental rights. Id. at 433, 319 P.3d at 352. The In re 
T.M. court concluded by holding that "parents have aconstitutional right to counsel under article I, section 5in parental termination proceedings and that from and afterthe filing date of this opinion, courts must appoint counselfor indigent parents once DHS files a petition to assertfoster custody over a child." Id. at 421, 319 P.3d at 340. 
The In re T.M. court repeatedly explained that counsel
must be appointed once DHS files a petition to assert fostercustody. See id. at 435, 319 P.3d at 354 ("Thus, as soon as
DHS files a petition asserting custody over a child,parents' rights are 'substantially affected.' At that point, an attorney is essential to protect an indigentparent's liberty interest in the care, custody and control
of his or her children."); 
id. ("Mandating the appointment
of counsel for indigent parents once DHS moves for custodywould remove the vagaries of a case-by-case approach."). 
Id. at 121-22, 482 P.3d at 1082-83 (some emphasis added; 
footnotes omitted). 
In a recent case, this court similarly observed: 
In In re L.I., the Hawai #i Supreme Court held that
family courts must appoint counsel for indigent parents even
earlier (where applicable), when DHS files a petition forfamily supervision, because their parental rights are
already substantially affected at that point. 149 Hawai #i 
at 122, 482 P.3d at 1083 (citation omitted). The court 
further held that the failure to do so was structural e
rror,
requiring vacatur without the necessity of proving harmful
error . Id. at 122-23, 482 P.3d at 1083-84. Citing In re
T.M., the court noted that "an attorney is essential to
protect an indigent parent's liberty interest in the care,custody and control of his or her children." Id. at 122,
482 P.3d at 1083 (citation and internal quotation marks
omitted). The gravamen of this decision, as well as its
predecessors, is that such an attorney is essential
throughout proceedings that could result in the terminationof parental rights, and we so hold. Representation is soessential that failure to provide counsel to indigentparents facing possible termination of their parental rightsis structural error that cannot be deemed harmless error . 
See id. at 122-23, 482 P.3d at 1083-84 (citation omitted). 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In the Interest of J.M., 150 Hawai# i 125, 142, 497 P.3d 140, 157 
(App. 2021) (emphasis added).  
Although we noted various ways that the father in In re 
J.M.
 may have benefitted from continuous representation, we 
recognized that those potential benefits and consequences related 
only to whether the discontinued representation was harmful. Id.
Our holding nevertheless stated: 
However, based on the Hawai #i Supreme Court's
decisions concerning the due process afforded to parents
facing possible termination of their parental rights,
particularly in In re L.I., we hold that the Family Court's
discharge of Father's attorney during the pendency of these
proceedings, prior to the Family Court's decision on DHS'sMotion to Terminate Parental Rights, violated Father's dueprocess rights and was structural error . Accordingly, with
respect to Father, the Order Terminating Parental Rightsmust be vacated without the necessity of proving harmfulerror . 
Id. at 143, 497 P.3d at 158 (citation omitted; emphasis added). 
In this case, Father was appointed counsel when he 
first appeared for the initial hearing on the Petition for 
Temporary Foster Custody. However, on August 14, 2019, Father's counsel was discharged when Father (and Mother) failed to appear for the evidentiary hearing on the Petition for Temporary Foster Custody; Mother's counsel was similarly discharged. The petition was granted, but no further service plan could be ordered due to the parents' lack of appearance. When the Family Court discharged counsel for Father and Mother, the court stated that if parents contacted the attorneys again, the attorneys could file ex parte motions to rescind the order of discharge. No ex parte motion was ever filed. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On January 14, 2020, DHS filed a Motion to Terminate 
Parental Rights and served it on the parents' former counsel; 
there is no indication that Father or Mother were served. On 
January 21, 2020, the Family Court held a hearing on, inter alia, the Motion to Terminate Parental Rights. Father's former 
attorney appeared for Father and a "stand-in" lawyer appeared for Mother's former attorney; both parents were present. Stand-in counsel stated that he was not aware of the motion to terminate and Mother had not had a chance to review it. The parents requested a trial on the Motion to Terminate Parental Rights, which was set for April 2, 2020 (but was later rescheduled). 
The record does not reflect that any court hearings 
were held during the five-month period between the August 14, 2019 hearing at which both parents' attorneys were discharged, and the January 21, 2020 hearing. 
Nevertheless, the cases discussed above make clear that 
Father was not required to demonstrate that the discharge of his attorney was harmful, because he was indigent and the termination of his attorney during the pending of these proceedings violated his due process rights and was structural error. In supplemental briefing on this issue, DHS makes cogent arguments that the facts of this case are different than the facts in In re J.M., and that here, Father's ability to make legal arguments was not severely impacted by the lack of legal representation for 159 days. However, the fundamental due process rights and mandate at issue 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
here are not subject to "the vagaries of a case-by-case 
approach." See In re L.I., 149 Hawai# i at 122, 482 P.3d at 1083. 
Mother's attorney was similarly discharged, warranting our recognition of plain error. Accordingly, the Order Terminating Parental Rights must be vacated as to both parents and we need not address the other issues raised by Mother. 
For these reasons, the Family Court's April 28, 2021 
Order Terminating Parental Rights is vacated in its entirety, and this case is remanded for further proceedings.
2 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 31, 2022. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Herbert Y. Hamada, Chief Judge
for Father-Appellant. 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Tae Chin Kim, Associate Judge
for Cross-Appellant/Mother. 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Abigail S. Dunn Apana, 
Julio C. Herrera,Patrick A. Pascual,Regina Anne M. Shimada,Deputy Attorneys General,for Petitioner-Appellee
The Department of Human Services. Associate Judge
Michelle K. Moorhead,(Legal Aid Society of 
Hawai# i)
Guardian Ad Litem. 
2/ As noted in In re J.M., this ruling does not constitute the
beginning of a new "two-year period" to address the issues that led to J.H.'s
removal from the parents' care and DHS's request to terminate their parentalrights. 150 Hawaii at 143 n.10, 497 P.3d at 158 n.10. However, a new hearingmust be held concerning the best interests of J.H., consistent with this
Summary Disposition Order and, inter alia,  the authorities cited herein. See, 
e.g., In re LI
, 149 Hawai #i at 123, 482 P.3d at 1084. 
8 