NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001173
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JASON LAIRD, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
HO'OLA LAHUI HAWAI 'I dba KAUA 'I COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTER,
DAVID PETERS, Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-5, JANE DOES 1-5, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-5,
DOE LLCS 1-5, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-5, DOE NON-PROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS 1-5, and DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-5, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0271)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Jason Laird (Laird) appeals from
 
the Final Judgment entered on September 11, 2014 in the Circuit
 
Court of the Fifth Circuit1
 (circuit court).
 
On appeal, Laird contends the circuit court erred in:
 
(1) awarding attorneys' fees and costs for the first motion to
 
compel discovery; (2) granting the motions to compel Laird to
 appear at depositions; (3) awarding attorneys' fees for the
 second motion to compel discovery; (4) granting the ex parte
 motion to shorten time for the hearing on the motion for
 sanctions; (5) imposing the sanction of dismissal with prejudice;
 and (6) awarding attorneys' fees for the motion for sanctions.
 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. Attorneys' Fees Awards
1. Attorneys' Fees for First Motion to Compel
 
Laird argues the award for attorneys' fees should have
 
been less than the $6,633.22 awarded by the circuit court,
 
because the preparation for the first motion to compel should
 have been completed by a paralegal, rather than an attorney.
 
Laird cites Schefke v. Reliable Collection Agency, 
Ltd., 96 Hawai
'i 408, 32 P.3d 52 (2001) to support his argument. 
Schefke holds, "if reasonable compensation requires it, a prevailing party must be compensated for paralegal costs." Id. 
at 458, 32 P.3d at 102. Schefke has no bearing on whether a 
motion to compel, or a comparable motion, should be drafted by a paralegal, nor does it hold that attorneys should use paralegals whenever possible to maximize cost savings. 
Laird also argues that the preparation of a billing 
statement is a clerical task and should have been omitted from the award. "Courts should reduce an award of attorneys' fees for . . . performance of clerical functions." Schefke, 96 
Hawai
'i at 458, 32 P.3d at 102. The charge Laird contests as 
clerical work is described as "Discussion with [counsel] re preparation of declaration re time spent on motion to compel; review invoices for October and November 2013 and draft [counsel's] declaration and exhibits to the declaration." Although Laird construes this description to be "preparation of a billing statement," we cannot conclude that the circuit court has exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice in awarding fees for a paralegal's preparation of a declaration in support of a motion to compel discovery. Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992).
2. Attorneys' Fees for Second Motion to Compel
 
Laird argues the award for attorneys' fees on the
 
second motion to compel discovery "were similarly excessive as
 argued above with respect to the first motion." As Laird points
 to no additional authority requiring paralegals to prepare
 motions to compel, we cannot hold that the circuit court abused
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
its discretion in awarding attorneys' fees on the second motion
 
to compel.
 
Laird's only additional argument is that counsel for 
Defendant-Appellees Ho 'ola Lahui Hawai 'i dba Kaua 'i Community 
Health Center and David Peters (together, KCHC) "never did submit 
an itemized billing statement." However, the declaration of 
Pamela M. Harms, counsel for KCHC, states the basis, including hours and rates, for which KCHC requested attorneys' fees for the second motion to compel.
3. Attorneys' Fees for Motion to Dismiss
 
Laird argues "with respect to the third motion, the
 
[circuit] court automatically approved the request for excessive
 attorneys' fees without any review as to reasonableness. Once
 again the attorneys' fees were approved without an itemized
 billing. This was an abuse of discretion and error." Laird
 makes no argument as to why the fee award on the motion to
 dismiss was not reasonable. Laird does not cite to any authority
 requiring KCHC to provide an itemized billing statement. Without
 more, this court cannot find that the circuit court has exceeded
 the bounds of reason or disregarded principles of law or practice
 in awarding attorneys' fees on KCHC's motion to dismiss. Amfac,
 
74 Haw. at 114, 839 P.2d at 26.
 
B. Motion to Compel
 
Laird argues the circuit court "should not have ordered
 
LAIRD to participate in a deposition when his legal
 
representation was not clear." Laird suggests, 
Instead of granting the motion, the [circuit] court
should have continued the hearing and ordered LAIRD to
appear, in person, at the continued hearing at which
the [circuit court] should have informed LAIRD that he
had a certain amount of time to settle the issue of
 his legal representation and that if he did not do so
and thereafter comply with all court rules and orders,
his case would be dismissed with prejudice; and that,
if he chose to continue pro se he would be held to the
same standard of conduct as any attorney admitted to
practice before the [circuit court].
 
Laird admits that he was "being deliberately contumacious in
 
failing to communicate with his counsel, and in flagrantly
 ignoring court rules and orders." This is the type of behavior
 
3
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 37 seeks to 
deter and punish by allowing a court to compel discovery. HRCP 
Rule 37(d) states, "If a party . . . fails . . . to appear before the officer who is to take the deposition, after being served with a proper notice . . . the court in which the action is pending on motion may make such orders in regard to the failure as are just[.]"  Laird failed to appear at his scheduled 
deposition on numerous occasions. His assertion that his 
relationship with his counsel was tenuous does not render the 
granting of a motion to compel discovery based on his failure to appear at the deposition unjust. As such, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in granting KCHC's motions to compel discovery. Save Sunset Beach Coal. v. City and Cty. of Honolulu, 
102 Hawai
'i 465, 483, 78 P.3d 1, 19 (2003).
C. Motion to Shorten Time
 
Laird argues the circuit court erred in granting the ex
 
parte motion to shorten time because the circuit court should
 have instead continued the trial date. Laird provides no
 authority to support this argument. 
Laird also argues that the motion to shorten time was
 
served in violation of Rules of the Circuit Courts (RCCH) Rule
 
7.2(f), which states in part, 
(f) Ex parte motions. A motion entitled to be
 
heard ex parte shall
 
. . . . 
(2) be supported by an affidavit or declaration
stating the reason(s) for filing the motion ex parte,
the efforts made to notify parties, and, if the motion
is to shorten time or advance a hearing pursuant to
subsection (g)(5) of this rule, the efforts made to
obtain a stipulation or response from the other
parties in the case or the reason(s) why no attempt
was made;
 
. . . .
 
(4) be served on the date that the motion was
 
presented to the court.
 
KCHC's motion to shorten time was supported by a declaration from
 
Corianne W. Lau (Lau), an attorney for KCHC. In Lau's
 
declaration, there is no mention of any "efforts made to obtain a
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stipulation or response from the other parties in the case or the
 
reason(s) why no attempt was made." RCCH Rule 7.2(f)(2). In
 addition, the motion was delivered to Laird's counsel by mail.
 
Although the motion to shorten time was made in
 
contravention of RCCH Rule 7.2(f), the circuit court's error was 

 
harmless. See HRCP Rule 61 ("The court at every stage of the
 
proceeding must disregard any error or defect in the proceeding

 
which does not affect the substantial rights of the parties.").
 D. Imposition of Sanctions
 
Laird argues the circuit court erred by dismissing his
 
case with prejudice, because: 

LAIRD should have been asked when he would be
 
available for his deposition, and told that his
failure to appear on that date would result in
dismissal of his case with prejudice. He also should
 have been ordered to pay the prior monetary sanctions
or show cause why he was unable to do so and told that
his failure to do so would result in dismissal of his
 case.
 
The circuit court granted the motion for sanctions on
 
August 21, 2014. At the hearing on the motion, the circuit
 
court, addressing Laird's counsel Charles H. Brower (Brower),
 
stated:
 
You know, Mr. Brower, it's one thing for your
client to not be respectful or to disregard opposing--the
opposing party's attempts at discovery, and this court
felt that it dealt fairly with that by issuing sanctions
and not dismissing the case.
 
I think the pattern has been made quite clear;
that Dr. Laird not only has a lack of respect for the
opposing part, which he is suing, I think it's been
made very clear that Dr. Laird has a flagrant
disregard of this Court's orders. 
This Court has ordered that he pay sanctions not
once but twice. That was considered by this court to
be a lesser--much lesser severity than a dismissal of
a case. Dr. Laird has not made any payments as
previously ordered by the Court.
 
The prior Court order also addressed him to be
cooperative in the depositions.
 
I just find if very egregious, Dr. Laird–-and I
don't buy for a minute the excuse that you were so
physically disabled that you were not able to pick up
a phone and make a call. And as I said, these are
Court orders.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Court has spent enough time addressing the
failure of Dr. Laird to attend his depositions and to
be cooperative in a case that he has filed against
[KCHC]. All things considered, this Court is granting
the motion by [KCHC]. This case is dismissed with
 prejudice.
 
HRCP Rule 37(b)(2)(C) permits a court to dismiss an
 
action where a party fails to obey a discovery order, and HRCP
 
Rule 37(d) permits a court to dismiss an action where a party
 fails to appear before the officer who is scheduled to take the
 party's deposition. See Webb v. Harvey, 103 Hawai
'i 63, 67-68, 
79 P.3d 681, 685-86 (App. 2003) (affirming dismissal as a
 discovery sanction where a party failed to attend a pretrial
 conference).
 
[
I]n reviewing whether a circuit court's dismissal of
a claim as a discovery sanction constitutes an abuse
of discretion, [appellate courts] consider the
following five factors: (1) the public's interest in
the expeditious resolution of litigation; (2) the
court's need to manage its docket; (3) the risk of
prejudice to the party moving for sanctions; (4) the
public policy favoring disposition of cases on their
merits; and (5) the availability of less drastic
sanctions.
 
Aloha Unlimited, Inc. v. Coughlin, 79 Hawai 'i 527, 533, 904 P.2d 
541, 547 (App. 1995) (internal quotation marks and brackets 
omitted) (quoting W.H. Shipman, Ltd. v. Hawaiian Holiday Macadamia Nut Co., 8 Haw. App. 354, 362, 802 P.2d 1203, 1207 (1990). In Aloha Unlimited, we affirmed a trial court's dismissal of a counterclaim where a party had failed to comply with discovery requests, applying the five factors listed above. 
The first two factors are related, and here, weigh in 
favor of the sanction. See Aloha Unlimited, 79 Hawai
'i at 533, 
904 P.2d at 547. Trial was scheduled for the weeks of October 13 and 20, 2014. The discovery cutoff was on August 29, 2014. Laird failed to appear to be deposed on four separate occasions, March 25, 2014, April 17, 2014, July 1, 2014, and July 10, 2014 (four scheduled depositions). Like the sanctioned party in Aloha 
Unlimited, Laird "consistently ignored the various orders 
requiring [him] to comply with [the opposing party's] discovery requests. Further motions urging them to comply would be useless and only clog up the court's docket." Aloha Unlimited, 79 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i at 533, 904 P.2d at 547. Laird, on appeal, suggests that 
the "looming trial deadlines could easily have been dealt with by 
simply continuing the trial date." This solution, however, is incompatible with the first two factors favoring expediency and efficiency. 
The third factor asks whether the sanctioned party's 
actions have "impaired [the other party's decision] to go to trial or threaten to interfere with the rightful decision of the case." Aloha Unlimited, 79 Hawai
'i at 533, 904 P.2d at 547 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Malone v. United States Postal Serv., 833 F.2d 128, 131 (9th Cir. 1987), cert denied sub nom. Malone v. Frank, 488 U.S. 819 (1988)). In Aloha Unlimited, this court held that the sanctioned party's "repeated failure to follow court orders requiring it to comply with [the opposing party's] discovery requests . . . deprived [the opposing party] of information it needs to proceed to trial and constitutes a sizeable threat to the 'rightful decision of the case.'" Aloha Unlimited, 79 Hawai
'i at 533, 904 P.2d at 547. 
Similarly, Laird's repeated failure to appear at scheduled depositions and to comply with the circuit court's orders prevented KCHC from obtaining information it needed to prepare for trial. 
In considering the fourth factor, we look at whether 
the sanctioned party "wrongfully failed to provide discovery or if the failure was due to delay or contumacious conduct." Aloha 
Unlimited, 79 Hawai
'i at 534, 904 P.2d at 548. In Aloha 
Unlimited, the sanctioned party "was properly notified of the date of the deposition and appeared twenty-four hours late. There is nothing in the record to suggest that [the sanctioned party's] failure to timely appear was due to inadvertence, negligence, or error." Aloha Unlimited, 79 Hawai
'i at 534, 904 
P.2d at 548. Here, Laird failed to appear to the four scheduled depositions, including two after the circuit court's June 5, 2014 order compelling him to appear for an oral deposition. Laird does not argue that he was not notified about the scheduled depositions. Laird's only argument to the circuit court was that 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his medical condition had prevented him from appearing. However,
 
as the circuit court pointed out, Laird does not explain how his
 medical condition prevented him from contacting his counsel to
 inform him that he would be unable to appear at his deposition.
 Notably, Laird admits on appeal that his conduct was
 unacceptable, stating, "it should have been apparent to the
 [circuit court] that LAIRD was being deliberately contumacious in
 failing to communicate with his counsel, and in flagrantly
 ignoring court rules and orders." As we did in Aloha Unlimited,
 we hold that the record shows Laird willfully violated the
 discovery rules, supporting the sanction of dismissal. 
The fifth factor "concerns the consideration of less 
drastic available sanctions than a dismissal." Aloha Unlimited, 
79 Hawai
'i at 535, 904 P.2d at 549 (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (quoting W.H. Shipman, 8 Haw. App. At 364, 802 P.2d at 1208. In Aloha Unlimited, we held, 
[T]his is one of those exceptional cases where [a
discussion of the possibility of dismissal with the
party to be sanctioned] is not necessary. With regard
to the first order, [the sanctioned party's] failure
to timely attend a scheduled deposition was not an
isolated act but was indicative of its behavior during
the discovery process. Prior to [the motion to
dismiss, the sanctioned party had] already
demonstrated its contentious attitude towards
 discovery by repeatedly forcing [the opposing party]
to obtain orders compelling it to comply with
discovery.
 
Aloha Unlimited, 79 Hawai 'i at 535, 904 P.2d at 549. Similarly, 
Laird failed to engage meaningfully in the discovery process, 
resulting in two orders by the circuit court, the April 4, 2014 order to compel discovery, and the June 5, 2014 order compelling Laird to appear for oral deposition. While Laird argues on appeal that the circuit court's failure to warn Laird about the possibility of dismissal was an abuse of discretion, we hold that like Aloha Unlimited, this is the type of case in which the sanctioned party's conduct was egregious enough to render the warning of dismissal unnecessary. 
All five factors outlined in Aloha Unlimited support
 
the sanction of dismissal of Laird's case. Therefore, we
 conclude the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
dismissing Laird's case as a discovery sanction. Aloha
 
Unlimited
, 79 Hawai 'i at 535-36, 904 P.2d at 549-50. 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Final Judgment entered on 
September 11, 2014 in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit is 
affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, October 29, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Charles H. Brower
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
 
Presiding Judge

Corianne W. Lau
 Terry E. Thomason
Jessica Y.K. Wong
(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)
for Defendants-Appellees. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge

 
9
 