NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000416
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
ALDEN JAMES ARQUETTE,
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, STEVEN H. LEVINS, MICHAEL J.S. MORIYAMA,
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-25, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0118)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise, and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Alden James Arquette 
(Arquette) appeals from the Amended Final Judgment entered 
April 19, 2011 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1 
(circuit court). Judgment was entered in favor of Defendant­Appellee/Cross-Appellant State of Hawai' i (the State), Stephen H. 
Levins (Levins), and Michael J.S. Moriyama (Moriyama) (collectively, Defendants) pursuant to the (1) March 29, 2010 
order granting Defendants' motion for summary judgment as to all 
claims arising from the initiation of its action against Arquette 
and the (2) June 30, 2010 order granting Defendants' motion for 
1
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided, except as otherwise
indicated.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
summary judgment as to all claims arising from the maintenance of
 
the action against Arquette. Judgment was also entered pursuant
 
to the August 23, 2010 "Order Granting [Arquette's] Motion for
 
Review and/or To Set Aside Taxation of Costs" (Order re Taxation
 
of Costs), in which the court denied some of the costs sought by
 
Defendants.
 
Defendants cross-appeal from the Judgment's entry of
 
the Order re Taxation of Costs.
 
On appeal, Arquette contends the circuit court erred
 
when it determined that
 
(1) Defendants had sufficient evidence to establish
 
probable cause to initiate prosecution against Arquette when
 
there was a genuine issue of material fact as to that issue;
 
(2) Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 487-1 (2008 Repl.)
 
did not create a private right of action for a claim of
 
negligence against the State Department of Commerce and Consumer
 
Affairs (DCCA) Office of Consumer Protection (OCP); and
 
(3) Hawai' i limits the tort of malicious prosecution to 
the initiation, but not the maintenance, of a cause of action 
against an individual. 
In its cross-appeal, Defendants contend the circuit
 
court erred in denying several of Defendants' costs taxed by the
 
Clerk in favor of Defendants as the prevailing party. Defendants
 
assert the circuit court erred because the court failed to
 
provide any reasoning for its ruling and Arquette had provided no
 
evidence upon which the court could base its ruling.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve
 
Arquette's and Defendants' points of error as follows:
 
(1) The circuit court did not err when it determined
 
Defendants had sufficient evidence to establish probable cause to
 
initiate prosecution against Arquette. "Probable cause does not
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
depend on the actual state of the facts but upon the honest and 
reasonable belief of the party commencing the action." Brodie v. 
Hawai'i Auto. Retail Gasoline Dealers Ass'n, Inc., 2 Haw. App. 
316, 318-319, 631 P.2d 600, 602-603 (1981), rev'd on other 
grounds by Brodie v. Hawai' i Auto. Retail Gasoline Dealers Ass'n, 
Inc., 65 Haw. 598, 655 P.2d 863 (1982). As evidenced in his affidavit, OCP attorney Moriyama reasonably believed he had 
probable cause to initiate the complaint against Arquette and 
others: 
10. [In or around November 2001], the various investigations
[by OCP, Insurance Division, and SEB] indicated that Dan Fox
(Fox) and other persons were selling large deferred
annuities to elderly Hawaii consumers using the purported
estate planning services of attorney Rodwin Wong (Wong) as a
ruse to bait consumers and obtain specific information, such
as institution names and account numbers, about the
consumers' finances. The financial information obtained
 from consumers was used by [Fox] and others to identify and
quantify specific assets of the consumers which were
liquidated to purchase annuities. Information showed that
 the annuities had long deferral periods meaning that
consumers would not receive the annuitized payouts before
the deferral period expired and the annuities matured and
that consumers might have to pay significant early
withdrawal penalties if they needed cash before the early
withdrawal penalty period expired. As a result, if a
consumer was eighty (80) years old, and his or her annuity
had a twenty (20)-year deferral period, the annuity would
not mature until the consumer was one hundred (100) years
old. Information obtained through the various investigations
indicated that hundreds (100s) of Hawaii consumers,
including elderly consumers, may have been victimized.
 
11. . . . OCP actively investigated this scheme involving
Arquette for two and one-half (2½) years before litigation
was commenced with the approval of [Moriyama's] supervisors.
 . . . . 
24. Prior to filing the lawsuit, [Wong] personally told
[Moriyama] during an interview that the fees purportedly
collected for his estate planning services went directly to
[Fox] and [Fox] then paid [Wong] a portion of those
fees. . . . [Wong] said that the "paralegals" operated under
the direction of [Fox]. OCP's investigation revealed that
[Fox], Arquette and others acted on the pretext of being
"paralegals" offering estate planning advice under the
supervision of a licensed attorney, [Wong].
 
Also supporting Moriyama's reasonable belief was the
 
evidence that Arquette's business cards identified Arquette as a
 
paralegal for Wong but listed the address and phone number of
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fox's insurance sales company. Documents purporting to be from
 
Wong's law office also listed Fox's address and phone number. 
Moriyama reasonably believed he had probable cause to file the
 
OCP complaint.
 
(2) The circuit court did not err when it determined
 
HRS § 487-1 did not create a private right of action for a claim
 
of negligence against the State. HRS § 487-1 charges OCP with
 
the responsibility to pursue "a strong and effective consumer
 
protection program to protect the interests of both the consumer
 
public and the legitimate business person." The OCP represents
 
and protects the State, its counties, and the general public. 
HRS § 487-5 (1993). Among its duties, the OCP Director shall
 
"[i]nvestigate reported or suspected violations of laws enacted
 
and rules adopted for the purpose of consumer protection and
 
shall enforce such laws and rules by bringing civil actions or
 
proceedings[.]" HRS § 487-5(6). 
In determining whether a statute provides for a private 
cause of action, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has applied the 
following criteria: 
First, is the plaintiff "one of the class for whose
especial benefit the statute was enacted"—that is, does the
statute create a right in favor of the plaintiff? Second,
is there any indication of legislative intent, explicit or
implicit, either to create such a remedy or to deny one?
Third, is it consistent with the underlying purposes of the
legislative scheme to imply such a remedy for the plaintiff?
 
Cnty. of Hawai' i v. Ala Loop Homeowners, 123 Hawai' i 391, 407, 235 
P.3d 1103, 1119 (2010) (ellipses and brackets omitted) (quoting 
Pono v. Molokai Ranch, Ltd., 119 Hawai' i 164, 185, 194 P.3d 1126, 
1147 (App. 2008)). The determinative factor is whether the legislature intended a private right of action. Whitey's Boat 
Cruises, Inc. v. Napali–Kauai Boat Charters, Inc., 110 Hawai' i 
302, 313 n. 20, 132 P.3d 1213, 1224 n. 20 (2006). Arquette fails 
to cite any legislative history supporting his contention that 
HRS § 487-1 established a private right of action, and we find 
none. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) The circuit court did not err when it determined 
Hawai'i does not recognize a tort of maintaining, not just 
initiating, a malicious prosecution case. Arquette contends 
Defendants were guilty of malicious prosecution for maintaining 
the case against him after further investigation allegedly 
revealed Defendants lacked probable cause. As discussed, 
Defendants did not lack probable cause to initiate and pursue its 
claims against Arquette. Furthermore, Young v. Allstate Ins. 
Co., 119 Hawai' i 403, 198 P.3d 666 (2008) clearly indicates that 
malicious prosecution is limited to the initiation of an action against a defendant. Id. at 416-18, 198 P.3d at 679-81 (stating 
that the tort of malicious prosecution "remedies harms resulting 
from the initiation of a lawsuit") (emphasis in original). The 
circuit court correctly declined to expand the tort of malicious 
prosecution beyond the initiation of an action to the maintenance 
of an action. 
(4) The circuit court erred in denying several of
 
Defendants' costs taxed by the Clerk in favor of Defendants as
 
the prevailing party when (1) the court did not state any reason
 
for denying the costs and (2) Arquette did not provide any
 
evidence upon which the court could base its ruling.
 
"The award of a taxable cost is within the discretion 
of the circuit court and will not be disturbed absent a clear 
abuse of discretion." Pulawa v. GTE Hawaiian Tel, 112 Hawai' i 3, 
10-11, 143 P.3d 1205, 1212-13 (2006). Hawai' i Rules of Civil 
Procedure Rule 54(d)(1) provides that costs other than attorney's 
fees "shall be allowed as of course to the prevailing party 
unless the court otherwise directs[.]" The presumption is that 
costs will be awarded to the prevailing party. Wong v. Takeuchi, 
88 Hawai' i 46, 52, 961 P.2d 611, 617 (1998). It is the losing 
party's burden to show that such an award would be inequitable. 
Id. If the court denies costs, it must give an adequate reason 
for doing so, "unless the circumstances justifying denial of costs are plain from the record." Id. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HRS § 607-9 (1993) provides a partial, though not
 
inclusive, list of costs that may be allowed in taxation of costs
 
to the prevailing party:
 
All actual disbursements, including but not limited
to, intrastate travel expenses for witnesses and counsel,
expenses for deposition transcript originals and copies, and
other incidental expenses, including copying costs,
intrastate long distance telephone charges, and postage,
sworn to by an attorney or a party, and deemed reasonable by
the court, may be allowed in taxation of costs. In
 determining whether and what costs should be taxed, the
court may consider the equities of the situation.
 
Defendants submitted its notice of taxation of costs
 
for mediation, deposition transcripts, records depositions, and
 
transcript of proceedings of the March 2, 2010 motion for summary
 
judgment. The circuit court, referring to its discretion to
 
"look at the equities of the situation," granted Arquette's
 
request to disallow the mediation fee, the records depositions,
 
and Arquette's deposition.
 
Arquette failed to make any showing that the award of
 
costs to Defendants would be inequitable. He claimed he had
 
incurred substantial damages but failed to provide any evidence
 
to support the claim.
 
Arquette cites to Geldert v. State, 3 Haw. App. 259,
 
649 P.2d 1165 (1982) to support the proposition that because
 
Defendants "did not use, rely upon, or otherwise present" certain
 
record depositions and deposition transcripts as evidence, the
 
circuit court correctly disallowed the costs.
 
However, as stated in Geldert, 
[The appellate court is] inexorably led to the conclusion
that the cost of depositions is taxable when deemed
reasonable, and the trial court has the discretion of
determining what is reasonable.
 
However, we disagree with plaintiffs who equate
reasonableness with actual use during trial. We believe that
the reasonableness test should be whether the depositions
were "necessarily obtained for use in the case."
 
Geldert, 3 Haw. App. at 268, 649 P.2d at 1172. 
Although the circuit court has the discretion to
 
determine what is reasonable, it must support its denial of costs
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with an adequate reason. Wong, 88 Hawai' i at 52, 961 P.2d at 
617. At the hearing on the motion regarding taxation of costs,
 
the circuit court stated that "there is some discretion in
 
awarding costs," but failed to provide any reasoning for its
 
denial of several costs incurred by Defendants.
 
The circuit court abused its discretion when it reduced 
the amount of taxable costs without adequate explanation or a 
readily discernible rationale in the record. See Wong, 88 
Hawai'i at 52, 961 P.2d at 617. 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Amended Final Judgment 
entered April 19, 2011 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed as it pertains to the circuit court's orders of 
March 29, 2010 and June 30, 2010 granting summary judgment to the 
State of Hawai' i, Stephen H. Levins, and Michael J.S. Moriyama. 
The August 23, 2010 "Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Review and/or To Set Aside Taxation of Costs" is vacated and remanded 
for recalculation of Defendants' taxation of costs. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 12, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Eric A. Seitz 
Della A. Belatti Ronald N.W. Kim for Plaitniff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee. 
Presiding Judge 
Dennis K. Ferm Caron M. InagakiDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7
 