NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000652 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
FRANCISCO R. YOUNG, Claimant-Appellant-Appellant, v. 
EMPLOYMENT SECURITY APPEALS REFEREE OFFICE, 
Agency-Appellee-Appellee; 
MAUI COUNTY PARKS AND RECREATION, 
Employer-Appellee-Appellee. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2CCV-20-0000012) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Hiraoka and McCullen, JJ.) 
Claimant-Appellant-Appellant Francisco R. Young 
appeals from the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit's:1 
(1) August 12, 2020 findings of fact, conclusions of law, and 
decision and order denying his appeal; (2) September 22, 2020 
Order denying his motion for reconsideration; and 
(3) September 28, 2020 final judgment in favor of Agency-
1 The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided.  Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-20-0000652 28-OCT-2024 08:03 AM Dkt. 87 SO NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2 Appellee-Appellee State of Hawai‘ i Department of Labor and 
Industrial Relations Employment Security Appeals Referees' 
Office (ESARO) and Employer-Appellee-Appellee County of Maui Department of Parks and Recreation. 
Young worked for the County as a carpenter-cabinet 
maker from June 2017.  Young was subject to a December 23, 2008 
Supplemental Agreement between the County and his union.  
The Supplemental Agreement governed alcohol and 
substance testing, which was "intended to help keep the 
workplace free from the hazards resulting from the use of 
alcohol and controlled substances."  The definition of 
controlled substances included amphetamines.  Regarding controlled substances, the Supplemental Agreement provided that 
the "[e]mployee shall not . . . [r]efuse to submit to a required 
controlled substance test."  Under the Supplemental Agreement, 
an employee who refuses to submit to a controlled substance test 
"shall be discharged unless the Employee agrees to sign 
Exhibit 63A.09c., Controlled Substance Last Chance Agreement, 
whereby the Employee agrees to resign from employment in the event of a positive controlled substance test or second refusal 
to be tested within three (3) years of the first refusal to 
test."  (Emphasis added.) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3 Young's work hours were from 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., 
and at about 7:15 a.m. on November 15, 2018, Young's supervisor 
informed him "that he was selected for a random drug test" at 
8:00 a.m.  Young then informed his supervisor that he needed to 
take his daughter to the doctor.  The supervisor said Young 
could take the test before picking up his daughter, but Young 
chose to leave without submitting to the test.  
The next day, the County informed Young that he would 
be discharged unless he signed the Last Chance Agreement.   Young chose to sign the Last Chance Agreement. 
About six months later, in May 2019, Young was again 
selected for a random drug test.  Young's test came back as 
positive for amphetamines and methamphetamines.  Young requested 
testing of the split sample, which also came back positive for 
amphetamines and methamphetamines.  Following the results of the 
split sample, the County informed Young it accepted his 
resignation pursuant to the Last Chance Agreement. 
According to Young's testimony, his union filed a 
step 1 grievance and a step 2 grievance, which were denied. Young further testified the union did not want to go to 
arbitration as "they claimed that they [sic] didn't have any 
merit." NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4 Young also applied for unemployment insurance 
benefits.  According to a summary of the fact-finding interview, 
Young informed the Unemployment Insurance Division that he 
"tested positive for drugs" and he was "forced to resign as to 
the terms and conditions of the last chance agreement[.]"  
Young's request for unemployment insurance benefits 
was denied because he "quit in lieu of termination effective 
6/20/19 as per violating the company's last chance agreement put in place on 11/16/[1]8." The Unemployment Insurance Division 
concluded Young was "discharged for misconduct connected with 
work." 
Young appealed to the ESARO, which affirmed the 
Unemployment Insurance Division's decision.  Young then appealed 
to the circuit court, which affirmed the ESARO's decision.  
Young filed a timely notice of appeal to this court. 
On appeal, Young contends the circuit court erred in:  
(1) "failing to examine procedural challenges raised"; (2) "concluding [he] was properly discharged for misconduct"; 
(3) "deferring to a non-existent finding"; and (4) "affirming 
the ESARO's improper burden shifting." (Formatting altered.) 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve the 
points of error as discussed below, and affirm. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5 (1) Young's first, third, and fourth points of error 
are related to his positive drug test results.  In his first 
point of error, Young argues he was denied an opportunity to 
discuss the test result with the medical review officer and 
provide information on the medications he was taking.  In his 
third point of error, Young argues the circuit court erred in 
affirming a non-existent finding that the medical review officer 
properly interviewed him after his positive drug test result. And in his fourth point of error, Young argues the ESARO 
improperly shifted the burden by finding he "provided no 
legitimate medical explanation for his positive test results[.]" 
In these arguments, Young appears to challenge his 
resignation. But for signing the Last Chance Agreement, Young 
would have been terminated after his refusal to test.  And by 
signing the Last Chance Agreement, Young agreed "that a 
resignation from employment deprives the Employee of the right 
to grieve . . . or challenge the resignation." 
As Young himself testified, the union nevertheless 
unsuccessfully pursued step 1 and step 2 grievances.  Young also testified that the union stopped short of going to arbitration 
based on lack of merit. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
6 In sum, any challenge to his resignation was addressed 
by the Last Chance Agreement and should have been raised in the 
union grievances.  Thus, we need not further address these 
arguments. 
(2) Next, Young's second point of error contends the 
circuit court erred in "concluding [he] was properly discharged 
for misconduct."  (Formatting altered.)  He argues that the 
hearing officer improperly relied on Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes 
(
HRS) § 383-30(2) and "entered its decision without addressing 
paragraphs 9 and 10" of the Last Chance Agreement.  Young 
further argues that the County breached the no-fault and 
confidentiality clauses of paragraphs 9 and 10 when it presented reasons for his discharge. 
The County points out that Young raised this issue for 
the first time on appeal and this court should not consider this 
issue.  Even if we were to consider this issue, Young fails to 
show error. 
Under HRS § 383-30(2) (2015), an individual is 
disqualified from receiving unemployment insurance benefits if 
the discharge or suspension was based on misconduct.  See Hawai‘ i 
Administrative Rules § 12-5-51(e)(7) (providing that misconduct 
includes "Employee's unauthorized use of intoxicants on the 
job").  Paragraph 9 of the Last Chance Agreement provided that the "Employee's resignation from employment . . . shall be NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
7 reported in the Employee's personnel file as a resignation 
without fault" and Paragraph 10 provided that the Last Chance 
Agreement "shall be confidential[.]" 
Here, the Unemployment Insurance Division concluded 
Young was discharged for misconduct based on his positive drug 
test and denied his request for benefits.  This decision was 
supported by Young's own statements.  On October 2, 2019, 
shortly after he filed a claim for benefits, Young provided a statement to the Unemployment Insurance Division that he "tested 
positive for drugs" and he was "forced to resign as to the terms 
and conditions of the last chance agreement that was in place 
from November 2018[.]" 
The record further shows the County made its statement 
two days later, on October 4, 2019, and provided the information 
the Unemployment Insurance Division requested.  In other words, 
the record shows it was Young who placed his positive drug test 
and the Last Chance Agreement before the Unemployment Insurance Division, disregarding paragraphs 9 and 10 of the Last Chance 
Agreement. 
In sum, Young fails to show the ESARO's decision was 
in violation of constitutional or statutory provisions, in 
excess of its jurisdiction, made upon unlawful procedure, NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
8 clearly erroneous, arbitrary or capricious, or an abuse of 
discretion. 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court's 
September 28, 2020 final judgment. 
DATED:  Honolulu,  Hawai‘i, October 28, 2024. 
On the briefs: Ryan D. Hurley, 
Bianca K. Isaki, for Claimant-Appellant-
Appellant. 
Amy Chan, 
Deputy Attorney General, 
for Agency-Appellee-Appellee, 
Director of Labor and Industrial Relations. 
Caleb P. Rowe, 
Richelle K. Kawasaki, Deputies Corporation Counsel, 
for Employer-Appellee-
Appellee, County of Maui, Department of Parks and Recreation. /s/ Katherine G. Leonard Acting Chief Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
Associate Judge 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge 