NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000682
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
DENA RAMIREZ, Petitioner-Appellee, v.
SERGIO RAMIREZ, Respondent-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CR./CIVIL/S.P.P. NO. )
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
Respondent-Appellant Sergio Ramirez (Sergio) appeals
pro se from the Order for Protection in favor of Petitioner-
Appellee Dena Ramirez (Dena) entered on July 26, 2018 ( Order for
Protection ), by the Family Court of the Third Circuit ( Family
Court).  Sergio's opening brief fails to comply with Hawai#i
Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule 28(b)(3), (4), (5), and
(7), and Sergio did not request transcripts of the subject Family
Court proceedings.  Nevertheless, it is the policy of this court
to permit pro se litigants the opportunity to have their cases
heard on the merits, where possible.  See, e.g., Hawaiian Props.,1
1The Honorable Charles H. Hite presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Ltd. v. Tauala, 125 Hawai#i 176, 181 n.6, 254 P.3d 487, 492 n.6
(App. 2011) (citation omitted).
Sergio fails to identify points of error on appeal, but
it appears that he contends that the Family Court erred when it: 
(1) failed to provide him with an interpreter; (2)  failed to
grant him an extension of time related to a temporary restraining
order (TRO ); (3) denied him a continuance of a hearing date to
retain proper counsel, in effect denying him counsel; (4) limited
the amount of time he had to present his case, thus denying him
due process; (5) granted the Order for Protection solely based on
the testimony of Dena and one of the parties' children; and (6)
ordered a five year period of protection.  
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Sergio's contentions as follows:
(1)Sergio argues that the Family Court denied him due
process because the court never offered him a Spanish language
interpreter.  As noted above, no transcripts of proceedings are
available.  However, the Family Court's minutes of the July 26,
2018 evidentiary hearing on Dena's Petition for an Order of
Protection include the following:
CT: Inquired if Resp. needs an interpreter.
RESP: Spanish is first language but is okay.
Thus, it appears that the Family Court did in fact
inquire concerning whether Sergio needed an interpreter and he
declined.  It further appears from the minutes that Sergio
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
responded to the court's inquiry about legal representation, that
he cross-examined witnesses, made closing arguments, inquired
about whether he could appeal the Family Court's decision, and
inquired about bills that had been paid by the parties'
restaurant.  There is nothing in the record on appeal to support
Sergio's contention that he did not understand and could not
adequately defend himself in the Family Court proceedings due to
a lack of an interpreter.  On the record in this case, we cannot
conclude that the Family Court abused its discretion in failing
to appoint an interpreter.
(2 & 3) Although it is somewhat unclear, it appears
that Sergio contends that the Family Court abused its discretion
by failing to grant him an extension of time related to a TRO,
and perhaps at another time, so that he could retain counsel. 
There are no motions or other written requests for continuances,
no transcripts available for the hearings before the Family
Court, and no minutes indicating a denied request for
continuance.  
It appears from the record that on May 22, 2018, Sergio
was served with a notice of a TRO, a TRO, the Petition for Order
of Protection, and an Amended Notice of Hearing for a hearing to
be held on June 20, 2018.  Minutes of the June 20, 2018 hearing
indicate that Sergio was advised of his right to get an attorney
and the matter was continued to July 11, 2018, to permit Sergio
to consult with an attorney.   Minutes of the July 11, 20182
2The Honorable Darien W.L. Ching Nagata presided.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
hearing indicate that the Family Court  inquired as to whether
Sergio got an attorney, Sergio responded that he had no money and
"wants to go forward," and the court advised Sergio "of his
options."  After the court recessed for over two hours for the
parties to try to work out an agreement, the matter came back on
for hearing, Sergio denied the allegations of the Petition and
the court set the case for evidentiary hearing on July 26, 2018,
and further evidentiary hearing on August 2, 2018.3
  Minutes of
the July 26, 2018 evidentiary hearing indicate that the Family
Court inquired if Sergio was going to get an attorney and he
responded that he tried to, but was unable to get one, and he
"can do it myself."  There is no indication that Sergio requested
a continuance.  On the record in this case, we cannot conclude
that the Family Court abused its discretion in failing to order
any further continuances.4
(4)Sergio contends that the Family Court denied him
due process by limiting the amount of time he had to present his
case.  Sergio does not identify any testimony or other evidence
that he was precluded from presenting.  There is no indication in
the record to support Sergio's assertion that he was denied an
opportunity to present his case.  Accordingly, we conclude that
this argument has no merit.
(5)Sergio appears to contend that the testimony of
Dena and the parties' son constituted insufficient evidence to
3The Honorable Darien W.L. Ching Nagata presided.
4Although the court scheduled two days for the evidentiary hearing,
it appears from the record that the hearing was completed by 10:53 a.m., on
July 26, 2018.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
support the Order for Protection.  The testimony of a single
witness, if found by the trier of fact to have been credible,
will suffice to support a trial court's findings of fact.  See,
e.g., In re Doe, 95 Hawai#i 183, 196-97, 20 P.3d 616, 629-30
(2001) (citations omitted).  Absent a transcript of the
evidentiary hearing, this court has no basis to determine that
the Family Court's findings of fact were clearly erroneous and,
therefore, the Family Court's findings and conclusions will not
be disturbed.  See, e.g., Hawaiian Trust Co. v. Cowan, 4 Haw.
App. 166, 172, 663 P.2d 634, 638 (1983).
(6)Sergio contends that the Family Court erred in
issuing the Order for Protection for a period of five years, "per
statute."  Sergio does not identify which statute supports his
argument.  The Order for Protection was issued pursuant to HRS
ยง 586-5.5 (2018), which permits such an order to be issued for a
"fixed reasonable period as the court deems appropriate."  This
argument is without merit.
For these reasons, the Family Court's July 26, 2018
Order for Protection is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 8, 2019.
On the briefs:
Sergio Ramirez,
Respondent-Appellant, Pro Se .Chief Judge
Melody Parker,
for Petitioner-Appellee. Associate Judge
Associate Judge
5