  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-10-0000123
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KAWA SALAS, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-443)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Kawa Salas (Salas) appeals from the
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered on October 28, 2010
 
by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (circuit court)1
 
convicting him of one count of Robbery in the Second Degree in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-841(1)(b) (Supp.
 
2012).
2
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided. By order of the circuit court,
Salas's sentence has been stayed pending this appeal.
 
2
 HRS § 708-841(1)(b) states, in relevant part:
 
§708-841 Robbery in the second degree. (1) A person commits the
offense of robbery in the second degree if, in the course of committing
theft or non-consensual taking of a motor vehicle: 
. . .
 (b)	 The person threatens the imminent use of force against the
person of anyone who is present with intent to compel
acquiescence to the taking of or escaping with the
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Salas challenges his conviction by raising
 
the following points of error: (1) the circuit court erred in
 
denying his Motion to Suppress the Pre-Identification of
 
Defendants (Motion to Suppress); (2) the circuit court's findings
 
of facts (FOFs) 13, 16, 17, 18, 19, 31, 33 and conclusion of law
 
(COL) 1 in denying the Motion to Suppress were erroneous because
 
they identified Salas as one of the criminals before he was
 
convicted; (3) the circuit court abused its discretion in denying
 
Salas's Motion to Dismiss Indictment (Motion to Dismiss
 
Indictment); (4) the circuit court plainly erred in failing to
 
instruct the jury on the defense of abandonment and renunciation;
 
and (5) Salas was rendered ineffective assistance of counsel. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
3
resolve Salas's points of error as follows :
(1) In his first point of error, Salas contends that
 
the circuit court erred in denying his Motion to Suppress4
 
because the court's findings of fact (FOFs) were "insufficient to
 
satisfy the [t]otality of the [c]ircumstances factors required by
 
Neil v. Biggers, 409 U.[S]. 188, 197, [ ] (1972) because [the
 
FOFs] did not address the initial on-scene identification by the
 
property[.]
 
3
 We note that the opening brief fails to comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28. In violation of HRAP Rule 28(b)(4),
Salas's asserted points of error fail to state where in the record allegederrors were objected to or the manner in which the alleged errors were broughtto the attention of the circuit court. Because of this court's preference toaddress cases on the merits if possible, we will consider Salas's points of
error to the extent they can be discerned. However, Salas's counsel, Joy A.
San Buenaventura, is put on notice and cautioned that future non-compliance
with HRAP Rule 28 may result in sanctions.
4
 In reviewing the circuit court's denial of Salas's motion to
suppress, we consider both the evidence presented at the hearing on the motion
and at trial. State v. Vinuya, 96 Hawai' i 472, 481, 32 P.3d 116, 125 (App.
2001). 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
[complaining witnesses], instead it ambiguously supported its
 
denial by referring to the [complaining witnesses'] subsequent
 
on-scene identification and more subsequent photo line-up
 
identifications as being reliable and non-suggestive."5
 
Salas appears to argue that, because there was
 
testimony as to two possible points at which he was identified at
 
the scene, one when he was handcuffed and sitting next to co­
defendant John Iopa (Iopa) and another when Salas was walked out
 
of the area, the circuit court erred by not specifically
 
addressing each on-scene identification separately. Salas does
 
not contest, however, the circuit court's findings that Salas was
 
identified by the complaining witnesses independent of any
 
procedure orchestrated by the police. This point of error thus
 
lacks merit.
 
Questions regarding the suggestiveness and reliability 
of a pre-trial identification are questions of law reviewed de 
novo on appeal. State v. Okumura, 78 Hawai' i 383, 391, 894 P.2d 
80, 88 (1995), abrogated on other grounds by State v. Cabagbag, 
127 Hawai' i 302, 277 P.3d 1027 (2012). 
When the defendant challenges admissibility of eyewitness
identification on the grounds of impermissibly suggestive
pre-trial identification procedure, he or she has the burden
of proof, and the court, trial or appellate, is faced with
two questions: (1) whether the procedure was impermissibly
or unnecessarily suggestive; and (2) if so, whether, upon
viewing the totality of the circumstances, such as
opportunity to view at the time of the crime, the degree of
attention, and the elapsed time, the witness's
identification is deemed sufficiently reliable so that it is
worthy of presentation to and consideration by the jury.
 
5
 In the argument section of his opening brief, Salas also argues that
the circuit court erred in failing to suppress the pre-trial identification of
him because he was improperly arrested at the scene without a warrant. Salas
 did not raise this argument before the circuit court and therefore it was
waived. State v. Hoglund, 71 Haw. 147, 150, 785 P.2d 1311, 1313 (1990)
("Generally, the failure to properly raise an issue at the trial level
precludes a party from raising that issue on appeal."); State v. Kalani,
3 Haw. App. 334, 649 P.2d 1188 (1982) (holding that the legality of the
defendant's arrest would not be considered on appeal because the issue was not
properly raised in the trial court).
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Araki, 82 Hawai' i 474, 484, 923 P.2d 891, 901 (1996) 
(quoting Okumura, 78 Hawai' i at 391, 894 P.2d at 88). However, 
answering these questions involves determinations of fact by
the court. Appellate review of factual determinations made
by the trial court deciding pretrial motions in a criminal
case is governed by the "clearly erroneous" standard. A
 finding of fact is clearly erroneous when (1) the record
lacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2)
despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, the
appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm
conviction that a mistake has been made.
 
Okumura, 78 Hawai' i at 392, 894 P.2d at 89 (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
After multiple hearings on the Motion to Suppress, the
 
circuit court made detailed FOFs regarding the incident at the
 
campsite, the complaining witnesses' interaction with police
 
after the incident, and the circumstances when three of the
 
complaining witnesses –- Scott Desa (Desa), Lucas Mead (L. Mead),
 
and Benjamin Mead (B. Mead) -- returned to the campsite and
 
identified Iopa and Salas as having been involved in earlier
 
confronting and accosting the complaining witnesses. The circuit
 
court's findings expressly state that Desa, L. Mead, and B. Mead
 
went back to the campsite to pack up and collect their
 
belongings, and that their focus was on making sure that they had
 
all of their camping gear. The circuit court further found that,
 
upon hearing Iopa speaking and recognizing Iopa and Salas, Desa,
 
L. Mead, and B. Mead approached police "of their own initiative"
 
and identified Iopa and Salas as being the individuals who had
 
confronted the complaining witnesses earlier. Moreover, in FOF
 
38, the circuit court found:
 
38.	 The on scene identification of Defendant Salas and
 
Defendant Iopa was made independent of any officiated
identification procedure. Desa, L. Mead and B. Mead
returned to the scene to collect and catalogue their
possessions and not for the purposes of taking part in
a police orchestrated identification procedure. There
 was no coercion on the part of the police, or any
effort to influence or to direct the identification of
 the Defendants by the victims. Desa, L. Mead and
B. Mead each made individual identifications based on
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
their respective perceptions and independent
recollection of events. There is no evidence of
 collusions among the victims to identify Defendant
Iopa and Defendant Salas as participants in the
confrontation. There was no discussion between
 victims to confirm and/or corroborate the
identification.
 
Salas does not challenge FOF 38 or any of the circuit court's 
FOFs indicating that the complaining witnesses initiated the 
identification of Salas. Unchallenged findings of fact are 
binding on this court. State v. Rapozo, 123 Hawai' i 329, 334 
n.4, 235 P.3d 325, 330 n.4 (2010). 
Furthermore, an out-of-court identification should only 
be suppressed where the identification procedure was impermissibly suggestive and "gave rise to a very substantial 
likelihood of irreparable misrepresentation." State v. Malani, 
59 Haw. 167, 170, 578 P.2d 236, 238 (1978) (block quote format altered; citations omitted); see also Neil v. Biggers, 409 U.S. 
188, 198 (1972). Otherwise, "the weight of the identification 
testimony and the credibility of the witnesses [are] for the jury 
to determine." Araki, 82 Hawai' i at 486, 923 P.2d at 903 
(quoting State v. Masaniai, 63 Haw. 354, 365, 628 P.2d 1018, 1026 (1981)). Based on our review of the record, although the 
testimony by the complaining witnesses and police officers as to 
the on-scene identification of Salas varies somewhat, substantial 
evidence exists to support the determination that the 
identification of Salas was not the result of suggestive 
procedures or actions employed by the police. 
Therefore, the circuit court did not err in concluding
 
that the on-scene identification of Salas was not suggestive. As
 
such, and contrary to Salas's assertion, the circuit court was
 
not required to reach the question of the reliability of the
 
5
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
identifications under the totality of the circumstances. See
 
State v. Mitake, 64 Haw. 217, 221, 638 P.2d 324, 327 (1981).6
 
(2) In his second point of error, Salas challenges the
 
following findings of fact and conclusions of law on the grounds
 
that they are clearly erroneous because: they identify Iopa and
 
Salas as the criminals involved in the incident before they were
 
convicted; the victims did not identify Iopa and Salas on-scene
 
by name; and the court erroneously found that L. Mead, a victim,
 
identified Salas on-scene.
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
. . .
 
13.	 Desa then opened his tent and looked out to the
direction of the noise and saw the males coming
towards his tent and Desa saw lights shining in his
direction. Headlights from at least one vehicle were
shining directly in the victims' direction. Desa, who
sat at the front of his tent for the duration of the
 confrontation, was afforded an unobstructed view of
the Defendants Salas and Iopa, both of whom were
illuminated by the headlights during the verbal
confrontation with the Defendants and others, which
lasted approximately 15 minutes.
 
. . .
 
16.	 A second male standing in front of Desa's tent, later
identified as Defendant Salas, was not as vocal, but
was aggressively posturing himself as if he wanted to
fight. Defendant Salas was making blowing sounds from
his mouth. Defendant Salas was 2-3 feet away from
Desa. L. Mead described Defendant Salas as "shadow
 boxing" and making grunting noises like "woof". B.
 Mead described Defendant Salas as wearing lighter
 
6
 Nonetheless, and contrary to Salas's assertion, the circuit court
did consider and address the reliability of the on-scene identifications. In
 this regard, the circuit court made detailed findings as to the complaining
witnesses' ability to see Iopa and Salas up close while Iopa and Salas were
threatening the complaining witnesses by their tents, the elapsed time of the
confrontation, the attention of the complaining witnesses toward Iopa and
Salas during the confrontation, and the time period before the on-scene
identifications of Iopa and Salas. The circuit court then concluded that
"[e]ven if the on-scene identification was a 'show up' and if it was
impermissibly suggestive, it was nonetheless reliable under the totality of
the circumstances." From our own review of the testimony and the record, we
agree that the on-scene identification of Salas was reliable under the
totality of the circumstances.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
shorts and having wiry and poofy hair and getting
within a couple of feet of him.
 
17.	 Desa had his attention focused on Defendants Salas and
 Iopa. 
18.	 About 7 feet behind Defendants Salas and Iopa were
other males, one with a baseball bat or wooden object
resembling a baseball bat.
 
19.	 The confrontation between the victims and Defendant
 Salas and Iopa lasted approximately 15 minutes.
 
. . .
 
31.	 After hearing Defendant Iopa, who was speaking almost
continuously after the police arrived, and upon
recognizing Defendants Iopa and Salas, Desa, L. Mead
and B. Mead approached police and identified Defendant
Iopa as the vocal male, and Defendant Salas as the
shadow boxer who was in front of the victims' tents
 during the earlier confrontation. 
. . .
 
33.	 At the camp area, Desa, L. Mead, and B. Mead also
identified Defendant Salas who was at the time located
 next to Defendant Iopa, and was only wearing a light
colored surf shorts, without a shirt, and had longer
hair, as the male bouncing around taking fighting
stances and breathing blowing sounds who confronted
them in front of Desa's tent earlier.
 
. . .
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
1.	 The on-scene identification of Defendant Iopa and
Defendant Salas on September 1, 2008 was made
spontaneously by Desa, B. Mead, and L. Mead, and not
as a result of any officiated identification. There
 was no "show up".
 
The FOFs are not clearly erroneous and COL 1 is not in error. 
Use of the defendants' names merely are a means to indicate that
 
these individuals were identified by the complaining witnesses,
 
not to suggest that the victims actually identified the
 
defendants by their names. Further, although L. Mead testified
 
that he identified only Iopa at the scene, the record reflects
 
that other witnesses testified that L. Mead did indeed identify
 
Salas on-scene. Based on the testimony presented, the circuit
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
court, as fact-finder, was within its discretion to assess the 
credibility of witnesses, weigh the evidence, and accept or 
reject any witness's testimony in whole or in part. See State v. 
Eastman, 81 Hawai' i 131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 (1996). Therefore, 
these findings were not clearly erroneous for identifying Salas 
by name. 
(3) Salas contends that the circuit court abused its 
discretion in denying his Motion to Dismiss Indictment because 
the prosecution failed to present clearly exculpatory evidence to 
the grand jury.7 "A circuit court's ruling on a motion to 
dismiss an indictment is reviewed for an abuse of discretion." State v. Akau, 118 Hawai' i 44, 51, 185 P.3d 229, 236 (2008) 
(citation and brackets omitted); see also State v. Wong, 97 Hawai'i 512, 517, 40 P.3d 914, 919 (2002). 
With regard to claims of prosecutorial misconduct at a 
grand jury proceeding, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has stated that 
[a] grand jury proceeding is not adversary in nature. An
 
application of this principle is found in the rule that an
indictment may not be attacked on the ground of the
incompetency of the evidence considered by the grand jury,
where prosecutorial misconduct is not involved. The
 function of a grand jury to protect against unwarranted
prosecution does not entail a duty to weigh the
prosecution's case against that of the defense, or even to
 
7
 With regard to Salas' Motion to Dismiss, the trial court concluded in
relevant part that:
 
7.	 There was no prosecutorial misconduct at the Grand
Jury proceedings.
 
8.	 The prosecutor did not fail to present clearly
exculpatory evidence at the Grand Jury that would
warrant dismissal. Evidence that Damien Bentosino
 identified Kameron Wilbourn and Kameron Wilbourne
 [sic] and Raylan Torres-Acia as being responsible
parties is not clearly exculpatory in light of the
live testimony of the victims at the Grand Jury
positively identifying Defendant Salas and Defendant
Iopa as participants in the confrontation with the
victims in front of Desa's tent on August 31,
2008/September 1, 2008.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
determine that the prosecution's case is supported by
competent evidence. 
On the other hand, an indictment that is the result of
 
prosecutorial misconduct or other circumstances which
 
prevent the exercise of fairness and impartiality by the
 grand jury may be successfully attacked.
 
State v. Chong, 86 Hawai' i 282, 288-89, 949 P.2d 122, 128-29 
(1997) (internal citations omitted). The Hawai' i Supreme Court 
has 
rejected an approach to claims of prosecutorial misconduct
that would require the prosecutor to put before the grand
jury any and all evidence that might tend to exculpate the
defendant, or that would merely tend to negate guilt, and
has concluded a court should dismiss an indictment only when
the prosecutor failed to present evidence that clearly would
have negated guilt or presented evidence that would
undermine the authority of the grand jury to act at all.
 
Wong, 97 Hawai' i at 526, 40 P.3d at 928 (internal citations, 
quotation marks, and brackets omitted; emphasis added). The 
focus of the court's inquiry is "the prejudicial character of the 
prosecutor's conduct[,]" and must not involve passing upon the 
credibility of grand jury witnesses nor upon the competency or 
adequacy of the evidence adduced. Chong, 86 Hawai' i at 289 n.3, 
949 P.2d at 129 n.3 (citation omitted); see also State v. 
Griffin, 126 Hawai' i 40, 52, 266 P.3d 448, 460 (App. 2011). 
In this case, Salas fails to meet his burden of proving 
prosecutorial misconduct. See Griffin, 126 Hawai' i at 53, 266 
P.3d at 461. The evidence Salas argues should have been presented included an allegedly contrary description by Desa of 
his assailant's hair, that the photo line-ups did not include 
photos of others who confessed to being involved, and that the 
confrontation ended when someone said to "leave them alone" and 
Iopa shook hands with Desa and B. Mead. This evidence would not 
"clearly negate" Salas's guilt. First, there was evidence 
presented to the grand jury identifying Salas as one of the 
assailants. Second, given the charge of accomplice liability 
against Salas, evidence that males other than Salas and Iopa were 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
involved in the incident would not clearly negate Salas's guilt. 
Third, evidence that Iopa shook hands with Desa and B. Mead also
 
would not clearly negate Salas's guilt. Therefore, the circuit
 
court did not abuse its discretion in concluding that
 
prosecutorial misconduct did not occur and thus in denying the
 
Motion to Dismiss Indictment.
 
(3) Salas's next point of error is that the circuit
 
court erred in failing to instruct the jury on the defense of
 
renunciation and abandonment pursuant to HRS § 705-530(1) (1993
 
Repl.) and HRS § 702-224 (1993 Repl.). While before the circuit
 
court, Salas did not proffer such jury instructions or object to
 
the jury instructions in this regard.
 
"With respect to jury instructions, it is the duty of 
the trial court to ensure that the jury is properly instructed." 
State v. Kikuta, 125 Hawai' i 78, 90, 253 P.3d 639, 651 (2011). 
There is "a presumption that unobjected-to jury instructions are correct[.]" State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai' i 327, 337 n.6, 141 P.3d 
974, 984 n.6 (2006). "[I]f the appellant overcomes the presumption that the instructions were correctly stated, the rule 
is that such erroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and 
are a ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears from 
the record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial." Id. 
(citation, internal quotation mark, and emphasis omitted). 
Salas was charged with Robbery in the First Degree and
 
accomplice liability. The circuit court instructed the jury on
 the offense of Robbery in the First Degree, and the lesser-
included offenses of Robbery in the Second Degree, Attempted
 
Theft in the Fourth Degree, and Theft in the Fourth Degree. 
Salas argues that the circuit court erred in failing to instruct
 
the jury on renunciation and abandonment pursuant to HRS § 705­
530(1) and HRS § 702-224.
 
10
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HRS § 705-530(1) states, in relevant part:
 
§705-530. Renunciation of attempt, solicitation, or
conspiracy; affirmative defense. (1) In a prosecution for
criminal attempt, it is an affirmative defense that the
defendant, under circumstances manifesting a voluntary and
complete renunciation of the defendant's criminal intent,
gave timely warning to law-enforcement authorities or
otherwise made a reasonable effort to prevent the conduct or
result which is the object of the attempt.
 
(Emphasis added.) As the statute indicates, this defense is
 
specifically tied to prosecutions for criminal attempt. The
 
commentary to HRS § 705-530(1) notes that renunciation is an
 
8
affirmative defense to inchoate crimes,  and that "[r]enunciation
in all three inchoate situations requires that the defendant
 
either give timely warning to the police, or make a reasonable
 
effort 
to prevent the culmination of the crime." HRS § 705­
530(1) cmt. (1993 Repl.) (emphasis added).
 
Here, Salas was convicted of Robbery in the Second
 
Degree in violation of HRS § 708-841(1)(b), which is a completed
 offense "if, in the course of committing theft or non-consensual
 
taking of a motor vehicle: . . . (b) The person threatens the
 
imminent use of force against the person of anyone who is present
 
with intent to compel acquiescence to the taking of or escaping
 
with the property[.]" Moreover,
 
[a]n act shall be deemed "in the course of committing a
theft or non-consensual taking of a motor vehicle" if it
occurs in an attempt to commit theft or non-consensual
taking of a motor vehicle, in the commission of theft or
non-consensual taking of a motor vehicle, or in the flight
after the attempt or commission.
 
HRS § 708-842 (Supp. 2012). Hence, in this case, once Salas was
 
"in the course of committing a theft" and threatened the imminent
 
use of force against the complaining witnesses with intent to
 
8
 "Inchoate" is defined in Black's Law Dictionary as "[p]artially
completed or imperfectly formed; just begun." Black's Law Dictionary 830 (9th
ed. 2009). "The common law has given birth to three general offences which
are usually termed 'inchoate' or 'preliminary' crimes - attempt, conspiracy,
and incitement." Id.
 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
compel acquiescence to the taking of property, the culmination of 
Robbery in the Second Degree had occurred. Regardless of any 
evidence that he thereafter voluntarily left the scene without 
taking any property, renunciation under HRS § 705-530(1) is not 
applicable because the crime was already completed. Moreover, 
although the jury was instructed on Attempted Theft in the Fourth 
Degree, the jury convicted Salas on Robbery in the Second Degree 
and thus the circuit court did not plainly err by not giving a 
renunciation instruction related to the Attempted Theft in the 
Fourth Degree offense. See State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai' i 405, 415­
16, 16 P.3d 246, 256-57 (2001). 
With regard to Salas's argument under HRS § 702-224,
 
that statute states, in relevant part:
 
Unless otherwise provided by this Code or by the law
defining the offense, a person is not an accomplice in an
offense committed by another person if:
 . . . 
(3) He terminates his complicity prior to the commission of
the offense and:
 
(a)	 Wholly deprives his complicity of effectiveness
in the commission of the offense; or
 
(b)	 Gives timely warning to the law enforcement
authorities or otherwise makes reasonable effort
 to prevent the commission of the offense.
 
(Emphasis added.) As discussed above, the commission of the
 
crime was completed by the time Salas left without taking any
 
property. Thus a jury instruction pursuant to HRS § 702-224 was
 
not warranted.
 
(4) In his final point of error, Salas asserts that his
 
trial counsel was ineffective for the following reasons:
 
(a) counsel should have moved for suppression of the pre-trial
 
identification of Salas as a fruit of the poisonous tree under
 
Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471 (1963), because his
 
warrantless arrest lacked probable cause; (b) counsel failed to
 
question a trial witness, Christine Wilbourne; (c) counsel failed
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to present to the jury a DVD interview by Officer James Gusman
 
(Officer Gusman) of Rylan Torres-Acia or Rylan Torres-Acia's
 
confession; and (d) counsel failed to proffer a jury instruction
 
on the defense of renunciation and abandonment. 
Upon our review of the record, we conclude that Salas
 
did not meet his burden of demonstrating (1) that there were
 
specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill,
 
judgment, or diligence; and that (2) such errors or omissions
 
resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a
 
potentially meritorious defense. See State v. Antone, 62 Haw.
 
346, 348-49, 615 P.2d 101, 104 (1980) (citations omitted).
 
With regard to Salas's argument that his counsel should 
have moved for suppression of the pre-trial identification because the police did not have sufficient probable cause to 
effect his warrantless arrest, Salas does not explain how 
asserting he was improperly arrested would have necessarily 
resulted in suppression of his pre-trial identification. He 
states obliquely in his reply brief that upon his initial arrest 
he was woken up and hand-cuffed next to Iopa, and we thus infer 
his argument to be that by being hand-cuffed next to Iopa without 
probable cause, he was improperly identified by the complaining 
witnesses. The record is not sufficiently developed to determine 
if there was probable cause for Salas's arrest and whether the 
pre-trial identification of Salas was the fruit of an unlawful 
arrest. On the existing record, Salas fails to establish 
ineffective assistance of counsel in this regard. However, 
because Salas did not obtain new counsel until after the circuit 
court had denied his motion for judgment of acquittal and/or for 
new trial, we deny his ineffective assistance of counsel claim on 
this basis without prejudice to a petition pursuant to Hawai' i 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Next, we also reject Salas's arguments that trial 
counsel was ineffective for: failing to question trial witness 
Christine Wilbourne; for failing to present a DVD interview by 
Officer Gusman of Rylan Torres-Acia; and for failing to present 
Rylan Torres-Acia's confession. As to each of these claims, 
Salas contends that evidence vindicating him would have been 
adduced if his trial counsel had pursued these areas. However, 
Salas's assertions of what the evidence would have been are not 
supported by any affidavits or sworn statements. "Ineffective 
assistance of counsel claims based on the failure to obtain 
witnesses must be supported by affidavits or sworn statements 
describing the testimony of the proffered witnesses." State v. 
Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998). See also 
State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai' i 462, 481, 946 P.2d 32, 51 (1997); 
State v. Aplaca, 74 Hawai' i 54, 68–69, 837 P.2d 1298, 1306 
(1992). Moreover, "matters presumably within the judgment of 
counsel, like trial strategy, will rarely be second-guessed by 
judicial hindsight." Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 39, 960 P.2d at 1247 
(1998) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). The 
extent to which trial counsel chooses to question a witness, if 
at all, or to introduce certain evidence, is generally a tactical 
decision, which should not be questioned in hindsight. See State 
v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 441, 864 P.2d 583, 593 (1993) (finding that although eliciting certain testimony may have strengthened 
the defendant's case, this error did not rise to the level of 
ineffective assistance of counsel); Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 39-40, 
960 P.2d at 1247-48. Again, however, because new counsel did not have an opportunity to develop the record as to these issues, we 
deny Salas's ineffective assistance of counsel claim on these 
grounds without prejudice to an HRPP Rule 40 petition. 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Finally, trial counsel was not ineffective for failing
 
to offer jury instructions on the defense of renunciation and
 
abandonment pursuant to HRS § 705-530(1) and HRS § 702-224. As
 
discussed above, these defenses are inapplicable given the
 
circumstances of this case.
 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence, filed on October 28, 2010 in the Circuit Court of
 the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 4, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Joy A. San Buenaventura
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Darien W.L.C. NagataDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai' i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
15
 