NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0005109
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
SAMUELA HAFOKAMEE, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MELEANA SAAFI, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 12-1-0440)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Meleana Saafi (Wife) appeals from
 
the First Amended Judgment and Decree Granting Divorce (Amended
 
Divorce Decree), filed on November 1, 2013 in the Family Court of
 the Second Circuit (family court). Wife also appeals from the
 "Order on Defendant's Motion for Reconsideration or a New Trial,"
 filed on November 1, 2013.
1
 
Wife contends the family court: (1) entered Findings of
 
Fact (FOFs) that were clearly erroneous; (2) entered Conclusions
 of Law (COLs) that were wrong; (3) abused its discretion when it
 awarded the marital residence to Plaintiff-Appellee Samuela
 Hafokamee (Husband); and (4) abused its discretion when it denied
 "Defendant's Motion for Reconsideration for New Trial Or in the
 
1
 The Honorable Barclay E. MacDonald entered the Amended Divorce Decree
and the "Order on Defendant's Motion for Reconsideration or a New Trial,"
however, the Honorable Michelle L. Drewyer presided over the divorce trial
held on May 10, 2013 and the hearing for "Defendant's Motion for
Reconsideration for New Trial or in the Alternative to Set Aside Judgment"
held on October 28, 2013.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Alternative to Set Aside Judgment" (motion for reconsideration).
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Wife's
 points of error as follows and affirm.
 
The issues on appeal all revolve around a house that 
Husband and Wife purchased sometime in 2000, located in Lahaina, Maui, Hawai
'i (marital residence). Although both parties are on 
title, only Husband's name is on the mortgage for the marital residence. The total debt still owed for the house is approximately $580,000. The mortgage payment is $2,815.99. The parties do not dispute that the value of the house is less than the amount of the mortgage and that there are significant arrears owed on the property such that it is in danger of foreclosure. On appeal, Wife challenges the family court's award of the house to Husband. Wife would like to remain in the marital residence, and have the opportunity to save it from foreclosure, because she can easily maneuver her wheel chair and comfortably get around in the marital residence. 
1. Protective Order
 
Wife contends the family court's FOF 16 is clearly
 
erroneous because the finding is not supported by any facts at
 
trial or in the record and it is not relevant to the issues in
 the case.
 
FOF 16 states: "[Wife] did not seek to modify or
 
dismiss the Protective Order at any time." 
On December 14, 2011, the family court filed an Order
 
for Protection (Protective Order) finding that Wife placed
 Husband in fear of harm constituting family violence under Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-2 (2006). The Protective Order
 stated that Wife could not enter the marital residence for a
 period of one year.
 
It does not appear that there is evidence in the record
 
whether Wife challenged the Protective Order. However, in Wright
 v. Wright, 1 Haw. App. 581, 623 P.2d 97 (1981), this court stated
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that "[e]rroneous findings of fact that are unnecessary to
 
support the decision and judgment of the trial court are not
 grounds for reversal. Id. at 584, 623 P.2d at 100 (citation
 
omitted). Further, this court concluded that because the
 specific finding at issue in Wright was "of marginal relevance
 only and is clearly not necessary to support the family court's
 decision[,]" the "Appellant was not so prejudiced by its
 inclusion as to require reversal." Id.
 
In this case, the family court's finding that Wife did
 
not seek to modify the Protective Order was not necessary to
 support the Amended Divorce Decree. The family court awarded the
 house to Husband because it believed that Husband and his family
 were in a better position to bring the mortgage current and avoid
 foreclosure, stating in COL 10: "[Husband's] family members are
 more financially stable and most likely to be able to preserve
 the home for [Husband]." Thus, the award of the marital
 residence to Husband was not related to the Protective Order and
 instead related to which party would be in a better position to
 keep the marital residence and prevent foreclosure on the
 property. Therefore, although FOF 16 appears to be clearly
 erroneous, Wife was not prejudiced by its inclusion so as to
 require reversal.
 
Similarly, Wife contends that COL 4 is wrong because it
 
is irrelevant. COL 4 states: "[Wife] was absented from the
 property because of her own abusive actions, leading to the entry
 of a Protective Order against her."
 
Wife does not challenge the family court's findings
 
that (1) Husband filed for a Temporary Restraining Order against
 Wife, alleging that she threatened Husband with a knife; (2) the
 court granted Husband a Protective Order against Wife for one (1)
 year; and (3) the Protective Order prevented Wife from entering
 the residence.
 
Thus, even if COL 4 was not directly relevant to the
 
award of the marital residence, it did not prejudice Wife because
 it is not wrong. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. Mortgage Payments
 
Wife contends that FOFs 20 and 24 are clearly erroneous
 
because there is no credible evidence to support the findings. 
FOFs 20 and 24 are included in a series of findings
 
related to the Savou family and their rental history in the
 
marital residence and how it affected Husband's ability to pay
 the mortgage on the marital residence. Laumana Savou testified
 that Wife is her aunt. With regard to the Savous, the court
 found:
 
18. After Ana Saafi and her family moved out, Laumana
Savou and her family moved into the residence.
19. Laumana Savou and her family said that they could
pay One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per month in rent.
20. However, they paid One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00) only two (2) times and did not pay any other
rent for the property.
21. The lack of rental income caused [Husband] to
fall behind in the monthly mortgage payments.
22. In August, 2012, the parties and their families
met with the Bishop of their church to discuss the situation
related to the house.
 
23. At the meeting, [Husband] made a comment that
they should just "let the house go" because it was causing
so much strife within the family.
24. [Husband] did not give the Savou family permission
to live in the residence rent free.
 
25. The Savou family was asked to move in by [Wife's]
daughter.
26. Laumana Savou and her family remained in the
residence without paying any more rent until December, at
which time the Protective Order expired and [Wife] moved
back into the residence.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
Wife contends that the findings support a "negative
 
implication that the Savous, who are related to [Wife], were
 
somehow responsible for the mortgage going into foreclosure and
 thus [Wife] was responsible by relation." Wife also contends
 that Laumana Savou's testimony at trial, that Laumana Savou
 attended the family meeting with the Bishop of the church and at
 that meeting it was agreed that the Savous no longer needed to
 pay rent because Husband was going to let the house go into
 foreclosure, was the more credible evidence.
 
Essentially Wife is challenging the credibility of the
 
testimony that the family court relied upon to make its findings. 
On the one hand, Laumana Savou testified that she was told not to
 continue paying rent. On the other hand, Husband testified that
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
he did not give the Savous permission to live at the marital
 
residence rent free.
 
"It is well-settled that an appellate court will not
 
pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and
 the weight of evidence; this is the province of the trier of
 fact." Fisher
, 111 Hawai 'i at 47, 137 P.3d at 361 (citation 
omitted). Determining witness credibility was the province of
 the family court. Therefore, we will not disturb the family
 court's FOFs 20 and 24.
 
3. Award of the marital residence
 
Wife contends the family court abused its discretion
when it awarded the marital residence to Husband. Wife also
 
challenges FOFs 39, 41, 43, 44, 48, 53, and 61 as clearly
 erroneous and COL 9, 10, and 11 as wrong, all regarding the
 family court's findings associated with each party's ability to
 pay the mortgage on the marital residence and keep it from going
 into foreclosure and ultimately awarding the property to Husband. 

 
The family court found: 
36. Tausinga Hafoka is [Husband's] nephew.
37. Tausinga Hafoka owns a successful masonry business
called Tau Masonry.
38. Tausinga Hafoka resides in a home that he owns on
Kaanapali Golf Course.
39. Tausinga Hafoka is able and willing to help
[Husband] bring the mortgage current. He would pay one-half
of the current mortgage arrears.
40. Tausinga Hafoka has helped [Husband] financially
by paying his legal fees.
41. Tausinga Hafoka has not paid the mortgage arrears
to date because he was uncertain of who would be awarded the
 property in the final divorce.
42. Malini Lauvaka [sic] is [Husband's] niece and duly
appointed attorney—in—fact pursuant to a Power of Attorney
executed by [Husband].
43. Malini Lauvaka [sic] and her husband own a
successful tiki carving business called All Island Tikis.
The business has gross revenues of over One Hundred Sixty
Thousand Dollars ($160,000.00) annually.
44. Malini Lauvaka [sic] is able and willing to help
[Husband] bring the existing mortgage current by paying
one-half of the mortgage arrears.
45. Malini Lauvaka [sic] has spoken to [Husband's]
2
 
bank regarding a refinance but has not taken any other steps
with respect to refinancing the mortgage because of the
 
2
 The family court in FOF 45 found that Malini Lavaka had spoken to
"Wife's" bank. However, because Husband is the only one on the mortgage and
Malini Lavaka is Husband's niece, it appears that the family court meant
Malini Lavaka has spoken to Husband's bank rather than Wife's bank.
 
5
 NOT F OR P UBLICATIO N  IN WEST' S HAW AI#I REP ORTS  AND PACIF IC REP ORTER
6uncertainty over who would be awarded the residence.
46. Malini Lauvaka [sic] was in touch with the bank
most recently one (1) month ago, and two (2) months prior to
that.
47. Koli Hafoka is [Husband's] nephew. He resides in
Wailuku with his parents.
48. If [Husband] is awarded the marital residence,
Koli Hafoka and his family would move into the residence and
pay rent in the amount of Two Thousand Eight Hundred Dollars
($2,800.00) per month, which is the amount of the monthly
mortgage.
49. [Wife] also has family members who are willing to
try to save the property.
50. [Wife] would try to save the property by
attempting to obtain a loan modification.
51. [Wife] would need to be added to the mortgage loan
in order to be able to even apply for a loan modification.
52. [Wife] would apply for a loan modification with
the assistance of family members, including her daughter
Melaia Tuakoi.
53. There is no guarantee that [Wife] and her family 
members would prevail in their attempt to modify the loan.
54. Melaia Tuakoi resides a[t] [the marital
residence].
55. She has lived there since approximately May 6,
2013.
56. Immediately prior to moving into [the marital
residence] Melaia Tuakoi and her family were evicted from
their previous residence for non-payment of rent.
57. In 2010, Melaia Tuakoi assisted the parties in
getting the house out of foreclosure.
58. Melaia Tuakoi is self-employed and makes
approximately Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000.00) each
year. Her husband makes an additional Two Thousand Four
Hundred ($2,400.00) each month.
59. If [Wife] is awarded the real property, Melaia
Tuakoi and her cousin Laumana Savou as well as Ilaisanne
Tuakoi would help make the monthly payments on the mortgage.
60. Laumana Savou did not contribute to the mortgage
when she lived in the property previously.
61. No one from [Wife's] family has contributed to the
mortgage or attempted to assist the parties in bringing it 
current.
(Emphasis added.)
Wife's challenges to the above FOFs, again, concentrate
mainly on the credibility of testimony and the weight of the
evidence to support the findings.  It was within the province of
the family court to assess the credibility of the witnesses and
to weigh the evidence presented by both Husband and Wife as to
their ability to bring the mortgage current and continue to make
the mortgage payments.  Both parties acknowledge that they do not
have the means on their own to keep the house and would have to
rely on family.
Husband's nephew, Tausinga Hafoka, testified that he
would be willing to pay $20,000 or $30,000 of the currentNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
mortgage arrears. Husband's niece, Malini Lavaka, also testified
 
that she was willing to pay half of the mortgage arrears. In
 addition, Husband's nephew, Koliniasi Hafoka, testified that he
 and his family would move into the marital residence, if Husband
 was awarded the house, and pay the full amount of the mortgage.
 
Wife's daughter, Melaia Tuakoi (Tuakoi), testified that
 
Wife's name is not currently on the mortgage note. Tuakoi
 testified that she would assist Wife in doing a modification on
 the loan to save it from foreclosure, if Wife could put her name
 on the loan. Tukoi also testified that if the house was awarded
 to Wife, she would help make mortgage payments. Laumana Savou,
 Wife's niece, testified that she would help pay the mortgage.
 Finally, Wife's granddaughter, Ilaisanne Tuakoi, testified that
 if Wife was awarded the marital residence, she would live in the
 house and pay rent.
 
Based on our review of the record, FOFs 39, 41, 43, 44,
 
48, 53, 61 are not clearly erroneous.
 
Wife further contends that credible evidence does not
 
support COLs 9 and 10. COLs 9 and 10 conclude: "9. [Husband's]
 family members are more likely to be able to bring the existing
 mortgage current without needing to rely on a mortgage
 modification. 10. [Husband's] family members are more
 financially stable and most likely to be able to preserve the
 home for [Husband]."
 
As stated above, both parties presented evidence of the
 
steps they would take to keep the marital residence out of
 foreclosure and to pay the monthly mortgage. Husband, who is
 currently on the mortgage, has family who testified that they are
 likely able to bring the mortgage out of arrears and also pay the
 monthly mortgage payments. 
Wife's family acknowledged that the first step would
 
entail putting Wife on the mortgage before Wife could do anything
 to prevent foreclosure. In addition, Wife's family did not
 testify they had the means to bring the mortgage up to date but
 would instead try to modify the loan. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Wife also contends that COL 11 was wrong because the
 
family court did not consider the factors set forth in HRS § 580­
3
47 (2006)  in making its conclusion.  COL 11 provides: "[a]s
 
there is no equity in the property, it is fair and equitable to
 
award the real property to [Husband] with no equalization payment
 to [Wife]."
 
Wife misinterprets this conclusion when she contends
 
the fact that the house does not have equity is not a proper
 basis for awarding the marital residence to Husband and not to
 Wife. In COL 11, the family court was not using the lack of
 equity as the basis for awarding the marital residence to
 Husband. Rather, the family court was concluding that because
 the marital residence does not have equity, it is fair that
 Husband does not have to pay an equalization amount to Wife based
 on being awarded the marital residence.
 
The family court's COLs 9, 10, and 11 were not wrong.
 Therefore, in considering the case as a whole, the
 
family court did not abuse its discretion when it awarded the
 marital residence to Husband. 
4. Motion for reconsideration or for new trial
 
Wife contends that the family court abused its
discretion when it denied Wife's motion to reconsider or for new
 

 
3
 HRS § 580-47 provides in pertinent part:
 
§580-47 Support orders; division of property.  (a)
Upon granting a divorce, or thereafter if, in addition to
the powers granted in subsections (c) and (d), jurisdiction
of those matters is reserved under the decree by agreement
of both parties or by order of court after finding that good
cause exists, the court may make any further orders as shall
appear just and equitable (1) compelling the parties or
either of them to provide for the support, maintenance, and
education of the children of the parties; (2) compelling
either party to provide for the support and maintenance of
the other party; (3) finally dividing and distributing the
estate of the parties, real, personal, or mixed, whether
community, joint, or separate; and (4) allocating, as
between the parties, the responsibility for the payment of
the debts of the parties whether community, joint, or
separate, and the attorney's fees, costs, and expenses
incurred by each party by reason of the divorce. In making
these further orders, the court shall take into
consideration: the respective merits of the parties, the
relative abilities of the parties, the condition in which
each party will be left by the divorce[.]
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
trial, because Wife presented new information to the court that,
 
after being awarded the marital residence, Husband and his family
 had failed to make the payments to bring the mortgage current. 
A motion for reconsideration and a motion for a new
trial are reviewed for an abuse of discretion. Doe v. Doe,  98
 
Hawai'i 144, 150, 44 P.3d 1085, 1091 (2002). 

 
Wife brought her motion for reconsideration pursuant to
 
4
Hawai'i Family Court Rules (HFCR) 59(a), 59(e),  and 60(b).  In 
her motion to reconsider, Wife contended that "[b]ecause the
 mortgage on the property is still delinquent, this court should
 reconsider its Judgment and should give [Wife] and her family the
 opportunity to save the property from foreclosure."
 
HFCR Rule 59(a) provides:

 
(a) Grounds. A new trial may be granted to all or any
of the parties and on all or part of the issues for good
cause shown. On a motion for a new trial, the court may open
the judgment if one has been entered, take additional
testimony, amend findings of fact and conclusions of law, or
make new findings and conclusions, and direct the entry of a
new judgment.
 
Further, this court clarified that under Hawai 'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 59(a), which has substantially similar
 
language to that of HFCR Rule 59(a), 
[a] new trial based on newly discovered evidence can
be granted provided the evidence meets the following
requirements: (1) it must be previously undiscovered even
though due diligence was exercised; (2) it must be
admissible and credible; (3) it must be of such a material
and controlling nature as will probably change the outcome
and not merely cumulative or tending only to impeach or
contradict a witness.
 
Matsumoto v. Asamura, 5 Haw. App. 628, 630, 706 P.2d 1311, 1313
 
(1985) (emphasis added).
 
HFCR Rule 59(e) provides:
 
(e) Motion to Reconsider, alter or amend a judgment or
 
order. Except as otherwise provided by HRS section 571-54
regarding motions for reconsideration in proceedings based
upon HRS sections 571-11(1), (2), or (6), a motion to
reconsider, alter or amend a judgment or order is not
required but may be filed no later than 10 days after entry
of the judgment or order and shall be a non-hearing motion,
except that the court in its discretion may set any matter
 
4
 The family court filed a "Judgment and Decree Granting Divorce" on
October 10, 2013. Wife filed her motion for reconsideration on October 21,
2013, which was a timely filing under HFCR Rule 59(e).
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
for hearing. Responsive pleadings to a motion for
reconsideration shall be filed no later than 10 days after
service of the motion to reconsider, alter or amend the
judgment or order.
 
"The purpose of a motion for reconsideration is to allow the 
parties to present new evidence and/or arguments that could not have been presented during the earlier adjudicated motion." Tagupa v. Tagupa, 108 Hawai
'i 459, 465, 121 P.3d 924, 930 (App. 
2005). 
At the hearing on the motion for reconsideration or for
 
new trial, Wife argued that the new information warranting
 reconsideration or a new trial was that Husband and his family
 had not brought the mortgage current in the three months since
 the July 9, 2013, Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
 Order, and also that one of Husband's family members told Wife
 that they were not going to pay the mortgage. Wife thus asserted
 that: (1) Husband and his family misrepresented to the family
 court their ability to prevent foreclosure on the marital
 residence or (2) they never had the intention to prevent
 foreclosure. 
Although Wife presented new information, Husband
 
contested Wife's claim that he had not taken steps to prevent
 foreclosure on the marital residence. Importantly, Husband
 asserted, and Wife did not deny, that Wife and her family were
 still living in the house and Husband was in the process of
 obtaining an eviction order. Further, Husband had witnesses
 present the day of the hearing on the motion for reconsideration
 who he represented were willing to testify consistently with what
 they testified to at the divorce trial. Husband asserted family
 members had been in touch with the bank to determine what was
 necessary to prevent the bank from foreclosing on the house.
 
Based on the record in this case, the family court did
 
not abuse its discretion in denying a new trial. The new
 evidence Wife presented was not of such a material and
 controlling nature as would likely change the outcome of this
 case, and instead merely tended to impeach or contradict
 Husband's witnesses that they would help to bring the mortgage
 current and help make the payments in the future. Moreover, Wife
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
admitted she was still residing in the marital residence, and did
 
not dispute that Husband was actively working to evict Wife from
 the marital residence. At the May 10, 2013 divorce trial, some
 of Husband's family members testified that they had not acted on
 preventing foreclosure of the marital residence because they were
 uncertain that Husband would be awarded the marital residence. 
Given that Wife was still living at the marital residence,
 uncertainty remained about having access to the house and the
 ability to rent at least part of it to help pay the mortgage.
 
For similar reasons as stated above, the family court
 
did not abuse its discretion in denying Wife's motion for
 reconsideration.
 Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "First Amended Judgment
 
and Decree Granting Divorce" and the "Order on Defendant's Motion
 for Reconsideration or a New Trial," filed on November 1, 2013,
 in the Family Court of the Second Circuit, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 26, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Elizabeth C. Melehan,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Anne K. Leete,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
11
 