  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000890 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
GF, Appellant-Appellant,
v.
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES, STATE OF HAWAI 'I,
Appellee-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-0485-02)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Ginoza and Chan JJ.)
 
In this secondary appeal from an administrative agency
 
decision, Appellant-Appellant G.F. (GF) seeks review of a
 
Judgment entered on June 4, 2014, by the Circuit Court of the
 
1
First Circuit (circuit court),  in favor of Appellee-Appellee
Department of Human Services, State of Hawai 'i (DHS) and against 
GF. The circuit court's Judgment affirmed an administrative 
hearing decision which confirmed caregiver neglect as specified in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 346-222 (2015) and Hawaii 
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 17-1421-2 (2009). 
On appeal, GF contends that the circuit court erred in

 
not reversing the agency decision because: (1) the hearing
 
officer violated GF's due process rights by deciding an issue not
 raised by DHS; (2) the hearing officer made many factual
 mistakes; and (3) the agency record is defective due to omissions
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
in the administrative hearing transcript.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant legal authorities, we affirm in part and
 reverse in part.
 
DHS initiated an investigation prompted by an Adult
 
Abuse and Neglect Case Report (Abuse Report) on March 28, 2011,
 
which alleged neglect of a ninety-six (96) year old male (Father)
 
by GF, based on his status as a vulnerable adult with a history
 
2
of "CVA"  and dementia, and the presence of five decubitus ulcers
upon admittance to the hospital. Father had been brought to the
 emergency room at a hospital (Hospital) on March 24, 2011, was
 
admitted and subsequently passed away in April 2011. The Abuse
 
Report indicates several concerns regarding caregiver neglect: 
[FATHER] HAS 5 DECUBITUS ULCERS - 3 ON HIS BACK (STAGE
2), 1 ON COCCYX (STAGE 3-4; 10 CM), 1 ON LATERAL HIP
(UNSTAGEABLE)
. . . . 
[FATHER] IS BEDBOUND, UNABLE TO GET UP ON HIS OWN
. . . .
 [GF] HAS NOT TAKEN [FATHER] FOR MEDICAL APPTS SINCE
JULY 2009 (WHEN HE HAD A STROKE & WAS PLACED AT HALE
NANI FOR 2 MONTHS, THEN A CAREHOME FOR A MONTH; BUT HE
WANTED TO RETURN HOME)
 
After an investigation, on August 9, 2011, DHS issued a
 
Notice of Disposition of the Adult Protective Services
 
Investigation, confirming "Caregiver Neglect" of Father. In a
 request dated August 13, 2011, GF requested an administrative
 hearing. On March 7, 2013, a hearing was held before a Hearing
 Officer from DHS's Administrative Appeals Office. On March 28,
 2013, the Hearing Officer issued a Notice of Administrative
 Hearing Decision (Administrative Hearing Decision), which
 
pursuant to stipulation of the parties was re-issued on February
 
20, 2014. Based on his findings of fact and conclusions of law,
 the Hearing Officer determined that DHS correctly confirmed
 caregiver neglect by GF. GF appealed the Hearing Officer
 
2
 Based on the record, it appears "CVA" refers to a stroke that Father
had suffered several years before.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
decision to the circuit court, and the circuit court entered the
 
Judgment in favor of DHS.
 
HRS § 346-222 defines "caregiver neglect."3 In a
 
secondary appeal, questions of fact are reviewed under the
 clearly erroneous standard whereas administrative conclusions of
 law are reviewed under the de novo standard. AlohaCare v. Ito,
 
126 Hawai
'i 326, 341, 271 P.3d 621, 636 (2012).   "An agency's 
findings, if supported by reliable, probative and substantial
 evidence, will be upheld." In re Hawai
'i Elec. Light Co., 60 Haw. 
625, 630, 594 P.2d 612, 617 (1979)(citations omitted). 
 
Furthermore, 
[i]t is well established that courts decline to
consider the weight of the evidence to ascertain
whether it weighs in favor of the administrative
findings, or to review the agency's findings of fact
by passing upon the credibility of witnesses or
conflicts in testimony, especially the findings of an
expert agency dealing with a specialized field. 
Moi v. Dep't of Pub. Safety, 118 Hawai 'i 239, 242, 188 P.3d 753, 
756 (App. 2008)(citations omitted).
 
3
 HRS § 346-222 provides: 
"Caregiver neglect" means the failure of a caregiver
to exercise that degree of care for a vulnerable adult
that a reasonable person with the responsibility of a
caregiver would exercise within the scope of the
caregiver's assumed, legal or contractual duties,
including but not limited to the failure to:
(1) 	Assist with personal hygiene;
 
(2) 	Protect the vulnerable adult from abandonment;
(3) 	Provide, in a timely manner, necessary food,
shelter, or clothing;
(4) 	Provide, in a timely manner, necessary health
care, access to health care, prescribed
medication, psychological care, physical care,
or supervision;
(5) 	Protect the vulnerable adult from dangerous,
harmful, or detrimental drugs, as defined in
section 712-1240; provided that this paragraph
shall not apply to drugs that are provided to
the vulnerable adult pursuant to the direction
or prescription of a practitioner, as defined in
section 712-1240;
(6) 	Protect the vulnerable adult from health and
 safety hazards; or
(7) 	Protect the vulnerable adult from abuse by third
parties.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Finding Not Raised by DHS. GF contends her due
 
process rights were violated because the Hearing Officer made a
 
finding of caregiver neglect that was not raised by DHS, and that
 this shows improper bias by the Hearing Officer against her. GF
 points to statements in the Administrative Hearing Decision that
 GF acted contrary to hospital personnel orders that Father should
 only be fed at hospital-determined intervals due to possible
 aspiration, and that her failure to follow the recommended
 intervals "would also amount, at a minimum, to a finding of
 caregiver neglect." 
The discussion about the feeding issue follows a
 
summary of the Hearing Officer's rulings on the main issues
 (i.e., failure to properly assist in Father's hygiene and failure
 to timely seek medical attention for Father), and are not
 necessary in deciding the main issues. Although DHS referenced
 the feeding issue in a document entitled Internal Communication
 
4
Form (ICF) dated October 14, 2011,  the ICF does not appear to
assert a finding of caregiver neglect on this basis. Thus,
 
because the challenged statements about the feeding issue can be
 construed as a finding of caregiver neglect, it should be struck
 from the Administrative Hearing Decision.
 
Nonetheless, based on our review of the record as a

 
whole, we do not view the statement about the feeding issue as
 indicating the Hearing Officer was biased or in any other way
 affecting the validity of the pertinent rulings by the Hearing
 Officer.
 
(2) Alleged Factual Mistakes by the Hearing Officer. 
GF challenges various conclusions, findings or statements in the
 Administrative Hearing Decision, asserting they are not supported
 by the record and/or are incorrect. GF first contests the
 Hearing Officer's determination that she
 
failed to adequately treat and/or failed to inquire from a
medical professional or notify a medical professional of her
[Father's] debucitis (bed sore) as it continued to grow and
 
4 The ICF was provided to GF prior to the administrative hearing, and in
a letter to GF dated February 19, 2013, the Appeals Administrator advised that
the ICF and exhibits provided to GF "indicate the issues that will be raised
at the hearing and the facts alleged by [DHS]."
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
worsen over a two (2) week period which ultimately led to
the deterioration of her father's medical condition and
 sepsis.
 
GF claims that this determination is not true because she treated
 
the one sore she was aware of, and it was the bed sores she did
 not know about that contributed to her Father's demise. While
 the record reflects that GF did attempt to treat the one sore
 that she knew about, it is also uncontested that this sore grew
 and got worse, and she did not immediately seek medical
 assistance. Further, although GF argues that there is
 conflicting evidence as to when the other bed sores developed,
 there is sufficient evidence in the record to support the finding
 that they developed over the two week period prior to Father's
 hospitalization when he was bedridden and his backside was not
 observed or cleaned.
 
Dr. #6 from the Hospital provided a letter addressing
 
Father's condition indicating, inter alia, details about the bed
 sores, that "[a]ll the wounds were severely tender to
 palpatation[]" and "[b]lood analysis indicated infection." The
 letter from Dr. #6 also stated that: 
Pressure ulcers of this nature tend to develop when a person
does not move from one position after a period of time.
This results in lack of blood flow to the area of pressure
and breakdown of skin integrity. Time to formation of ulcer
 is also dependent on level of nutrition.
 
The Hearing Officer determined that "the record supports [DHS's]
 
position that [GF's] failure to take [Father] to the hospital in
 a timely manner resulted in additional bed sores that were
 infected and got to the point that [Father] suffered from
 sepsis[.]" GF challenges the Hearing Officer's assessment of the
 testimony and evidence, and in essence asks this court to re­weigh the evidence and reassess the credibility of witnesses
 presented at the administrative hearing. However, based on the
 record, we conclude there is reliable and probative evidence to
 support the Hearing Officer's finding in this regard and the
 finding is not clearly erroneous.
 
GF also asserts that the Hearing Officer erred in
 
finding that GF failed to assist Father with proper hygiene. It
 is undisputed that, during the period that Father became
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
bedridden from March 9, 2011 to his hospitalization on March 24,
 
2011, GF did not observe or clean Father's backside. Based on
 the objective standard required under HRS § 346-222, the Hearing
 Officer did not err in determining she failed to assist Father
 with proper hygiene. 
GF also raises an issue about whether Father could
 
communicate or not, asserting that although a DHS employee
 testified she was unable to communicate with Father when he was
 in the Hosptital, other evidence indicates that he was
 communicating both before and after he became bedridden on March
 9, 2011. GF thus contends that if Father had bed sores
 developing or any pain in his back between March 9 and March 24,
 2011, he would have told her and she would have acted. Although
 there is some evidence of Father's minimal ability to communicate
 in the Hospital, this does not establish with any certainty when
 his bed sores developed. The record, including the severity of
 the bed sores and the letter from Dr. #6, is sufficient to show
 that the bed sores developed during the period after March 9,
 2011, when Father was bedridden and his backside was not observed
 or cleaned.
 
GF also takes issue with the Hearing Officer's "focus"
 
on the fact that she had not taken Father to see a medical
 professional since sometime in 2009. However, it is uncontested
 that GF took Father to a doctor after his release from Hale Nani
 in 2009, but thereafter did not take him to see a medical
 professional until he was taken to the hospital on March 24,
 2011. We see no error in the Hearing Officer noting this as part
 of the background in this case. It was not a basis on which the
 Hearing Officer concluded there was caregiver neglect.
 
GF's other arguments regarding the Hearing Officer's
 
findings or determinations are also unavailing. In general, we
 note the record indicates that GF dedicated significant effort
 and time in the care of her Father, and this is admirable. 
However, we also note that caregiver neglect under HRS § 346-222
 is not determined on a subjective basis, but rather an objective
 basis: "the failure of a caregiver to exercise that degree of
 care for a vulnerable adult that a reasonable person with the
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
responsibility of a caregiver would exercise within the scope of
 
the caregiver's assumed, legal or contractual duties[.]" HRS
 § 346-222. In regards to what occurred from March 9, 2011 until
 Father was taken to the hospital on March 24, 2011, there is
 sufficient evidence to support the Hearing Officer's
 determinations in this case based on a failure to assist with
 personal hygiene and to provide timely medical care.
(3) Administrative Hearing Transcript. GF contends
 
that the circuit court should be reversed because the transcript
 of the administrative hearing is incomplete. There are portions
 of the transcription of the administrative hearing which indicate
 that a word or words were "inaudible." However, the transcript
 is largely intact and this court can sufficiently review the
 administrative hearing. Thus, this contention is without merit.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment
 
entered on June 4, 2014, in the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit, is reversed to the extent that the "Amended
 Administrative Hearing Decision," issued on February 20, 2014,
 contains a determination of caregiver neglect based on GF's
 feeding of Father. In all other respects, the circuit court's 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 20, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Edward C. Kemper,
for Appellant-Appellant. 
Heidi M. Rian,
Candace J. Park,Deputy Attorneys General,for Appellee-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
7
 