NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0002043
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
TRACY SOUZA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 12-1-1028)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Tracy Souza appeals from the
 
June 18, 2013 Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence
 
entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit ("Circuit
 Court").
1/ Souza was charged via Felony Information with one
 
count of Place to Keep Unloaded Firearms Other Than Pistols and
 Revolvers in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") section
 134-24 (2011) and one count of Ownership or Possession Prohibited
 of Any Firearm or Ammunition by a Person Convicted of Certain
 Crimes in violation of HRS section 134-7(b) and (h) (2011). 
Souza was convicted by a jury and sentenced by the Circuit Court
 to five years probation, with thirty days in jail for both
 charges.
 
On appeal, Souza contends that the Circuit Court erred
 
in (1) denying his oral motion to dismiss based on a faulty
 charging document; (2) erroneously instructing the jury; (3)
 refusing to accept Souza's admission that he had previously been
 convicted of a felony offense unless he agreed to the form of 
1/
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
stipulation drafted by the State; and (4) improperly conducting
 
its colloquy with Souza about the proposed stipulation. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Souza's points of error as follows and affirm.
 
(1) Souza argues that the trial court erred in denying 
his motion to dismiss for a faulty Felony Information. Souza's motion at trial was based on the State's failure to allege that he did not have a license to carry a firearm, but his argument on appeal challenges the Felony Information for failing to allege that he was not transporting the firearm legally. Because Souza raises new grounds on appeal, we apply the "Motta/Wells post-conviction liberal construction standard," rather than the de novo standard of review. See State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai
'i 383, 
399-400, 219 P.3d 1170, 1186-87 (2009) (referring to the rule of construction adopted in State v. Wells, 78 Hawai
'i 373, 894 P.2d 
70 (1995) and State v. Motta, 66 Haw. 89, 657 P.2d 1019 (1983)). Under the liberal construction standard, a charge is presumed sufficient unless the appellant can show that he was either prejudiced, or a charge could not be reasonably inferred from the language of the charging document. Id. (quoting State v. Merino, 
81 Hawai
'i 198, 212, 915 P.2d 672, 686 (1996)). 
Souza relies upon Wheeler for the proposition that the 
State's failure to plead an attendant circumstance, the negation of legal transport in this case, is fatal. However, Wheeler is distinguishable as to that issue by the fact that the Wheeler defendant's objection on appeal was raised first at trial, and because the issue there involved the definition of a word that was not intuitive or common. 121 Hawai
'i at 399, 219 P.3d at 
1186. Thus, the de novo review under Wheeler does not apply, and Souza is mistaken to premise his argument on showing error, rather than showing prejudice. Souza tangentially asserts prejudice by citing to State v. Elliot, 77 Hawai
'i 309, 884 P.2d 
372 (1994), for the proposition that failing to allege all essential elements of the charge is reversible error. In Elliot, the defendant was accused of resisting arrest, assault against a 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
police officer, and disorderly conduct. 77 Hawai 'i at 310, 884 
P.2d at 373. Although multiple victims were involved, the 
charging document failed to specify the acts that pertained to each victim, such that the defendant could not reasonably know what conduct the charge was based on prior to trial, and thus denied defendant his right to due process. Id. at 312-13, 884 P.2d at 3765-76. 
Conversely, in this case, there is only one act which
 
could substantiate count one, specifically that Souza maintained
 control over a firearm which was not a pistol or revolver in a
 place other than his residence, business, or place of sojourn. 
While the Felony Information does not allege that Souza was not
 transporting,
 
[n]o indictment for any offense created or defined by statute
shall be deemed objectionable for the reason that it fails to
negative any exception, excuse, or proviso contained in the
statute creating or defining the offense. The fact that the
charge is made shall be considered as an allegation that no
legal excuse for the doing of the act existed in a particular
case.
 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 806-29 (1993). Further, multiple witnesses 
testified prior to Souza's motion challenging the Felony Information that at the time of his arrest, Souza was at a location not on the list of approved destinations for the transportation of firearms. See State v. Israel, 78 Hawai
'i 66, 
70, 890 P.2d 303, 307 (1995) (noting that examination is not limited to the charge but includes "all of the information supplied to [the defendant] by the State to the point where the court passes upon the contention that [the charge was insufficient]" (quoting State v. Treat, 67 Haw. 119, 120, 680 P.2d 250, 251 (1984))). Accordingly, Souza failed to meet his burden of showing prejudice or an inability to understand what he had been charged with based on the Felony Information and the proceedings up to the point of the challenge. Therefore, his first point of error is without merit. 
(2) Souza argues that the Circuit Court erred in 
accepting the truncated version of Hawai
'i Pattern Jury 
Instructions - Criminal ("HAWJIC") no. 15.03A. Specifically, the version accepted by the court and read to the jury excised a portion of the pattern instruction regarding the State's burden 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
of proving beyond a reasonable doubt that Souza was not
 
transporting a firearm between authorized locations. Souza
 asserts that this is impermissible burden-shifting, and asks us
 to vacate based on plain instructional error. 
The standard for appellate review of alleged 
instructional error is "whether, when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." State v. Mainaaupo, 117 
Hawai
'i 235, 247, 178 P.3d 1, 13 (2008) (quoting State v. Van 
Dyke, 101 Hawai 'i 377, 383, 69 P.3d 88, 94 (2003)). If 
instructional error is demonstrated, we will vacate, irrespective of whether timely objection was made, "if there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the defendant's conviction, i.e., that the erroneous jury instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." State v. Nichols, 111 
Hawai
'i 327, 337, 141 P.3d 974, 984 (2006). 
In this case, the challenged instruction was part of a
 
series of instructions. The Circuit Court instructed the jury
 that "[a] person is not guilty of an offense unless the State
 proves beyond a reasonable doubt that the person acted with the
 required states of mind, as these instructions specify, with
 respect to each element of the offense" and that "[t]he burden of
 proof is on the prosecution with reference to every element of a
 crime charged[.]" The Circuit Court provided the jury with the
 following instruction concerning the Place to Keep charge:
 
In Count I, the Defendant, Tracy Souza, is charged with
 
the offense of Place to Keep Unloaded Firearms other than
Pistols and Revolvers.
 
A person commits the offense of Place to Keep Unloaded
Firearms other than Pistols and Revolvers if he intentionally
or knowingly carries or possesses an unloaded firearm other
than a pistol or revolver in a place other than his place of
business, residence, or sojourn, without a license to carry.
That at that time, Defendant believed, knew, or recklessly
disregarded the substantial and unjustifiable risks, that the
object was an unloaded firearm other than a pistol or revolver
and that he did not have a license to carry.
There are six material elements of the offense of Place
 
to Keep Unloaded Firearms other than Pistols and Revolver,
each of which the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable
doubt.
 
These six elements are:
 
1. 	 That, [on] or about July 11, 2012, in the  City
 
and County of Honolulu, the Defendant
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
intentionally or knowingly carried or possessed
the object in question; and
 
2.	 That the object in question was  an unloaded
 
firearm other than a pistol or revolver; and
 
3.	 That at the time he carried or possessed the
object in question, the Defendant believed, knew,
or recklessly disregarded the substantial and
unjustifiable risk, that the object was an
 unloaded firearm other than a pistol or revolver;
and
 
4.	 That, the Defendant intentionally, knowingly, or
recklessly failed to confine the firearm which
 was not a pistol or revolver to his place of
business, residence, or sojourn; and
 
5.	 That, at that time, the Defendant did not have a
license to carry; and
 
6.	 That, at that time, the Defendant believed, knew
or recklessly disregarded the substantial and
unjustifiable risk that he did not have a license
to carry.
 
"License to carry" means a license to carry a firearm
other than a pistol or revolver therefore issued by the chief
of police of the City and County of Honolulu.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The challenged instruction, relating solely to the
 
enclosed container/transport exception to the charge, followed
 
the pattern instruction, stating that: 
It is lawful to carry an unloaded firearm or ammunition
in an enclosed container from the place of purchase to the
purchaser's place of business, residence, or sojourn, or
between these places  upon change of place of business,
residence, or sojourn, or between these places and a place of
repair, a target range, a licensed dealer's place of business,
an organized, scheduled firearms show or exhibit, a place of
formal hunter or firearm use training or instruction, or a
police station.
 
However, the following final sentence of the pattern instruction
 
was not included in the instruction that the Circuit Court
 provided to the jury:
 
It is the burden of the prosecution to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that the Defendant was not carrying the
unloaded firearm or the ammunition in an enclosed container or
 that the Defendant was  not carrying the unloaded firearm or
ammunition between [specify authorized locations].
 
HAWJIC 15.03A. Deviation from a pattern instruction, however,
 
"does not automatically result in incomplete and confusing jury
 instructions." State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai
'i 325, 335, 966 P.2d 
637, 647 (1998).
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
The excised portion of the instruction is simply the
 
contrapositive of the previous statement, which was included in
 
the instruction. It is simply logical in light of the
 instruction that the State has the burden of proof with regard to
 every element of the charge that if a subsequent instruction says
 that it is legal for a defendant to carry a firearm within an
 enclosed container between various authorized locations, it is
 the State's duty, in order to prove the underlying charge, to
 disprove that a firearm was being transported in an enclosed
 container between authorized locations. 
Furthermore, the State presented evidence that Souza
 
was stationary with a firearm in an enclosed container at a non-
authorized location. The defense did not provide any
 
contradictory evidence. Instead, Souza's defense was that the
 firearm belonged to another member of his party. None of the
 transportation, enclosed container, or authorized location
 components were raised as issues in the case at trial. Because
 there was no evidence that Souza was transporting the weapon at
 the time, the jury could not consider the defense. See Haw. Rev.
 
Stat. § 707-115(1) & (2). 
The portion of the pattern instruction regarding the
 
State's burden to disprove the components was not relevant. 
Thus, there was no instructional error and, to the extent that
 there was, it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Therefore,
 Souza's second point of error is without merit.
 
(3) Souza's third and fourth points of error relate to 
the stipulation that was entered in the record and read to the jury regarding Souza's prior conviction. Souza's first argument regarding the stipulation is that he was forced to choose, in violation of State v. Murray, 116 Hawai
'i 3, 169 P.3d 955 (2007), 
between accepting the State's version of the stipulation, which he argues included irrelevant information, or not being allowed to stipulate to the prior conviction. 
In Murray, defense counsel stipulated to his client's 
prior abuse convictions in a felony abuse case, in which the prior convictions were an element of the offense. 116 Hawai
'i at 
5-6, 169 P.3d at 957-58. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that the 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
stipulation was invalid as a waiver of a fundamental right
 
without an accompanying colloquy or personal waiver. Id. at
 
10–12, 169 P.3d at 962–64. It further held that a "defendant
 should be allowed to stipulate to the fact of [any] prior
 convictions[,]" and that the trial court must thereafter issue a
 limiting instruction to the jury. Id. at 20, 169 P.3d at 972. 
A straightforward application of Murray is made
 
difficult in this case by the fact that Souza and the State
 offered their own versions of a proposed stipulation. Souza's
 proposed stipulation is not in the record, and the only
 stipulation that appears is the version offered by the State,
 which reads, in part, as follows: 
1.	 As of July 11, 2012, the Defendant, Tracy Souza, had
been convicted of a felony offense in the State of
Hawaii. 
2.	 As of July 11, 2012, the Defendant, Tracy Souza, knew
that he had been convicted of a felony offense in the
State of Hawaii. 
3.	 The Defendant, Tracy Souza, has not been pardoned for
such felony offense. 
4.	 As a result of this conviction, the Defendant, Tracy
Souza, is prohibited from owning or possessing any
firearms or ammunition. 
5.	 As a result of this conviction, the Defendant, Tracy
Souza, knew that he was prohibited from owning or
possessing any firearms or ammunition.
 
Souza's hesitation to accept the State's proposed
 
stipulated facts focused on numbers four and five. The State
 
argued that they were obliged to prove both the element as well
 as the requisite state of mind for each element, which required
 inclusion of numbers four and five, as they established that
 Souza knew about the restriction on his possession of firearms. 
Consequently, if the stipulation did not include numbers four and
 five, the State contended that it would call Souza's probation
 officer to introduce the evidence that it believed was necessary
 to establish the requisite state of mind, including that Souza
 was aware that he was prohibited from owning or possessing
 firearms. 
The State explained at trial that it believed that the
 
court was obliged to accept Souza's stipulation under Murray if
 Souza insisted on his own version, and that it wanted to be clear
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Souza was not being coerced into agreeing to the State's
 
proposed stipulation:
 
[Deputy Prosecuting Attorney]: . . . I just want to make
it clear this isn't a situation where I want -- I don't want
 
this to be characterized as the defendant feels like he's
 forced to stipulate to what I've proposed; because if that's
the case, I will withdraw any proposed stipulation. Because
 
I believe he does have  the right under State v. Murray to
 
stipulate to keep the name and nature out; but it's my opinion
that I still need to introduce evidence as to his state of
 mind. So I do -- I would intend to call the probation
officer, not to discuss the name and nature of the prior
offenses but just to establish that he did go over the terms
and conditions of that probation and they did include the fact
that he was prohibited from owning or possessing the firearm.
So if the defendant wants to, on his own accord, agree to my
stipulation, that's fine; but I don't want it to be a scenario
where it's characterized as though - -  he felt like he was
 
forced to accept my stipulation.
 
At trial, Souza contended that his knowledge that he
 
was prohibited from owning or possessing firearms was not an
 
element to the charge and was therefore irrelevant. The Circuit
 Court disagreed, but explained that it was entirely Souza's
 choice whether to agree to the State's proposed stipulation and
 that:
 
[I]f he decides that he -- the stipulation as proposed is
unacceptable to him, the Court is certainly not going to do
anything to try to persuade him or convince him that, you
know, he should do that. That's entirely up to him. And so
 -- but if, however, he chooses, after thinking about it and
talking to you about it, making a decision, and upon voir dire
by the Court that that's what he wants to do, then the
stipulation will stand as it is."
2/
 
(Footnote added.) Before advising his client, Souza's counsel
 
asked if the Circuit Court was ruling that Souza's state of mind
 with regard to whether he knew he was prohibited from owning or
 possessing firearms or ammunition was relevant, and the Circuit
 Court replied: "Yes." 
Following a break in the proceedings and discussion
 
2/
 Souza, in his opening brief, asserts that the Circuit Court acted
otherwise. He contends that:
 
Ultimately, the trial court made it clear that it would accept
Souza's stipulation to the prior conviction element only if
Souza "agree[d] to enter the stipulation as proposed by the
State." Id. at 19. In other words, Souza's admission would
be accepted only if he allowed the stipulation to "stand as it
is." Id. at 19.
 
It is not apparent how Souza's characterization of the Circuit Court's
comments has any basis in the totality of the discussion reflected in the
transcript.
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
between Souza and his counsel, and outside the presence of the
 
jury, the Circuit Court reconvened and Souza informed the Circuit
 Court that he would agree to the State's proposed stipulation
 "although we had originally not wanted to do that." The Circuit
 Court conducted a colloquy with Souza which is the subject of
 Souza's fourth point of error, and then accepted the stipulation
 as presented and as approved by counsel. 
The transcript of proceedings contradicts Souza's
 
contention that he was forced into a Hobson's choice between
 accepting the State's proposed stipulation or being allowed no
 stipulation at all. While the parties and the Circuit Court did
 not explicitly discuss whether the court would accept Souza's
 stipulation, they did discuss that in the event that Souza's
 stipulation was entered, whether the State would be allowed to
 call Souza's probation officer to establish that Souza knew that
 he was not allowed to possess firearms. Accordingly, the Circuit
 Court complied with Murray, and Souza's third point of error is
 without merit.
 
(4) In his fourth point of error, Souza argues that the
 
colloquy regarding the stipulation was inadequate, relying on
 Murray's importation of the colloquy requirement from Tachibana
 v. State, 79 Hawai
'i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995) and State v. 
Ibuos, 75 Haw. 118, 857 P.2d 576 (1993). Souza further relies upon State v. Gomez-Lobato, 130 Hawai
'i 465, 312 P.3d 897 (2013) 
for the proposition that a series of yes/no questions is insufficient for a colloquy waiving substantial rights. 
Murray
 established that a defendant waiving a 
fundamental right must do so through a colloquy in which the court determines if the defendant understands the right he is waiving, and that his waiver was knowing and voluntary. 116 Hawai
'i at 19-20, 169 P.3d at 971-72. Gomez-Lobato involved a 
non-English speaker waiving his right to a jury using a form written in English and after a colloquy conducted in English. The court stated in rejecting the colloquy that "the validity of the waiver of a right to a jury trial is reviewed under the totality of the circumstances surrounding the case, taking into account the defendant's background, experience, and conduct." 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
130 Hawai 'i at 470, 312 P.3d at 902 (emphasis omitted) (quoting 
State v. Friedman, 93 Hawai 'i 63, 70, 996 P.2d 268, 275 (2000)). 
Gomez-Lobato is distinguishable from the instant case
 
on the central fact that the defendant was demonstrably not
 
proficient in English. In such a case, a colloquy conducted in
 English and composed solely of yes/no questions, and a waiver
 form written in English, were not sufficient to establish that
 the defendant understood his rights and made a knowing and
 voluntary waiver of them. Indeed, the supreme court held that
 "where a language barrier indicates that a defendant's written
 waiver executed outside the presence of the judge 'might be less
 than knowing and intelligent,' the court should take additional
 steps to ensure the defendant understands the right that he or
 she is waiving." Id. at 472, 312 P.3d at 904 (citation omitted).
 
Here, there is no evidence that English was not Souza's
 
first and only language. See State v. Onza, No. CAAP-13-0000025,
 
2014 WL 660225, at *6 (Haw. App. Feb. 20, 2014) (affirming
 defendant's waiver of a jury trial and distinguishing the case
 from Gomez-Lobato because defendant "demonstrated a sufficient
 understanding of English," and "engaged in dialogue with the
 circuit court and his counsel, indicating language was not a
 barrier between [himself] and the circuit court[.]"). In the
 challenged colloquy, the Circuit Court first confirmed that Souza
 had reviewed the State's proposed stipulation, and that he had a
 chance to discuss the stipulation with his attorney. The Circuit
 Court then confirmed that Souza understood that agreeing to the
 stipulation would mean that the State did not need to present
 evidence relating to the prior conviction; that Souza had a
 constitutional right to have every element proven; that agreeing
 to the stipulation would mean that each of the five facts
 included in the stipulation would be considered proven; and that
 stipulating to those facts was what Souza wanted to do. The
 Circuit Court then confirmed that Souza had no questions about
 the stipulation or his rights. 
Moving forward, the Circuit Court confirmed that Souza
 
was thinking clearly; and had not had any alcohol, drugs, or
 medication that were interfering with his ability to make
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
decisions. The Circuit Court then again confirmed that Souza had
 
no questions before accepting the stipulation as being made
 knowingly and voluntarily. 
When the Circuit Court asked Souza a series of yes/no
 
questions, and confirmed twice that he had no questions regarding
 the waiver, Souza's background, experience, and conduct indicated
 that he understood what he was doing. There was no indication on
 the record that Souza was not an English speaker or that he had
 any difficulty with the English language. The Circuit Court gave
 Souza ample opportunity to ask questions about or clarify the
 proposed stipulation. Additionally, Souza signed the stipulation
 which stated the specific facts that he was stipulating to, and
 included language that he was waiving a constitutional right.
 While the colloquy was conducted in the form of yes/no questions,
 there is overwhelming evidence on the record that Souza's waiver
 was knowing and voluntary. Therefore, the Circuit Court was
 correct in accepting Souza's agreement to the stipulation and in
 concluding that his waiver was knowing and voluntary, and the
 fourth point of error is without merit.
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's
 
June 18, 2013 Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 28, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Craig W. Jerome,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
James M. Anderson,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
11
 