 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-12-0000703
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KARL ROBERT BRUTSCH,
Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
v.
 
CELIA KAY BRUTSCH,
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 09-1-2906)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
In this divorce case, Defendant-Appellant/Cross-
Appellee Celia Kay Brutsch (Wife) appeals from: (1) the "Decree
 
Granting Absolute Divorce and Awarding Child Custody" (Divorce
 Decree); and (2) the "Order Denying Defendant's Motion for
 Reconsideration and/or Further Hearing and/or Amendment of Trial
 Decision . . ." (Order Denying Wife's Motion for
 Reconsideration). Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant Karl
 Robert Brutsch (Husband) cross-appeals from: (1) the Divorce
 Decree; (2) the "Order Awarding Attorney's Fees and Costs" (Order
 Awarding Attorney's Fees to Wife); (3) "Order Re: Plaintiff's
 Motion for Reconsideration and for Rule 68 Attorney's Fees Filed 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
February 16, 2012" (Order Denying Husband's First Motion for
 
Reconsideration); and (4) "Order Denying Plaintiff's Motion for
 Reconsideration of Decision Announced March 14, 2012, Filed March
 21, 2012" (Order Denying Husband's Second Motion for
 Reconsideration). The Family Court of the First Circuit (Family
 
1
Court) entered the Divorce Decree, the Order Awarding Attorney's
Fees to Wife, and the Order Denying Husband's First Motion for

 
Reconsideration on April 2, 2012; the Order Denying Wife's Motion
 for Reconsideration and the Order Denying Husband's Second Motion
 for Reconsideration on July 12, 2012; and its Findings of Fact
 and Conclusions of Law on October 8, 2012. 
On appeal, Wife contends that the Family Court erred 
in: (1) awarding Wife and Husband joint physical and legal custody of the parties' two children and continuing the alternating-week custody schedule imposed by the Family Court pending the divorce trial; and (2) its rulings regarding child support, educational and medical expenses, and reimbursement for pre-decree expenses. 
On cross-appeal, Husband contends that the 
Family Court erred in: (1) refusing to award Husband Category 3 credit for gifts and inheritance received from his father during the marriage; (2) denying Husband's request for attorney's fees pursuant to Hawai
'i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 68; and (3) 
awarding Wife attorney's fees and costs. 
As explained below, we affirm in part, vacate in part,
 
and remand for further proceedings.
 
I.
 
We resolve the issues raised in Wife's appeal as
 
follows:
 
A.
 
We conclude that the Family Court did not abuse its
 
discretion in its custody award. Husband filed for divorce in
 September 2009. In November 2009, the Family Court issued an
 
1The Honorable Paul T. Murakami presided over the
proceedings relevant to this appeal. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
order awarding the parties temporary joint physical and legal
 
custody of their two minor children (Son and Daughter) on an
 alternating-week basis. This custody arrangement remained in
 effect for two years while trial was pending. 
During the two-day trial, the Family Court heard
 
conflicting testimony regarding what custody arrangement would be
 in the best interests of the children. See Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 571-46 (Supp. 2011). After considering the
 evidence, the Family Court awarded the parties joint physical and
 legal custody of the children and continued the alternating-week
 time-sharing schedule that existed prior to trial.
 
Contrary to Wife's contention, we conclude that the
 
Family Court made sufficient findings in its oral ruling to
 explain its custody decision.
2 The Family Court stated that it
 
had heard and considered extensive testimony from Wife, Husband,
 and the custody evaluator; that the parties have different
 approaches to raising the children that has led to conflict, but
 that the "good news" is that the children are "coping," are
 "successful in school," and "appear to be doing well"; that the
 Family Court had "concerns on both sides"; and that although
 joint custody presents difficulties, the Family Court believed a
 change in the existing custody arrangement would be worse for the
 children and that the children would be estranged from Husband
 even further, if sole custody were awarded to Wife. The Family
 Court also observed that one of the greatest sources of stress
 for the children was the divorce proceedings and that this source
 of stress would end with the completion of the divorce
 proceedings. The Family Court's findings were sufficient to
 explain and support its custody award.
 
The Family Court possesses wide discretion in making
 
decisions regarding custody, and "those decisions will not be set
 
2We note that Son turned 18 while this appeal was pending,
and therefore, Wife's challenge to the Family Court's custody
award is moot as to Son. See Jacoby v. Jacoby, 134 Hawai 'i 431,
454, 341 P.3d 1241, 1254 (2014). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion." Fisher v. 
Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) (block quote 
format and citation omitted). Although the Family Court declined 
to follow the recommendation of the custody evaluator, it was up to the Family Court to determine the weight and credibility of the evidence, id., and the custody evaluator's recommendation was not binding on the Family Court. Husband presented evidence that he was a concerned and actively involved parent. We cannot say that the Family Court abused its broad discretion in awarding the parties joint physical and legal custody of the children on an alternating-week basis. 
B.
 
Wife contends that the Family Court erred in its
 
rulings regarding child support, educational and medical
 expenses, and reimbursement for pre-decree expenses. 
With respect to child support, we agree with Wife that
 
the Family Court erred in failing to include $1,666 per month in
 rental income received by Husband when determining his monthly
 gross income for purposes of computing his child support
 obligations. The Child Support Guidelines (Guidelines) define
 "gross income" as including "income from all sources that are
 regular and consistent[.]" The evidence showed that Husband had
 been receiving an average of $1,666 per month in rental income
 from a business he owned with his brother for ten years. This
 rental income was clearly "regular and consistent," and the
 Family Court erred in failing to include it in Husband's monthly
 gross income in computing his child support obligations under the
 Guidelines.
 
While the divorce was pending, Husband was terminated
 
from his job, received severance pay for a year, and then
 obtained a new job. At the time of trial, Husband was receiving
 both his severance pay from his former job as well as income from
 his new job. However, by the time the Divorce Decree was
 entered, the severance pay had ended and Husband was only
 receiving the income from his new job. Wife contends that the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Family Court erred in failing to combine Husband's severance pay
 
with the income from his new job in determining Husband's gross
 income for child support purposes for the few months in which he
 was receiving both. We disagree. By the time the Divorce Decree
 was filed, Husband was no longer receiving severance pay and
 therefore the Family Court did not err in excluding the severance
 pay in computing his child support going forward from the date of
 the Divorce Decree. Wife did not seek to modify the Family
 Court's pre-decree child support order based on Husband's receipt
 of both severance pay and income from his new job, and thus there
 is no basis to modify Husband's pre-decree child support
 obligations.
 
In the Divorce Decree, the Family Court ordered the
 
parties to pay the children's private school expenses and
 medical/dental expenses in proportion to the percentages of their
 incomes under the Guidelines, which it determined was 56%
 (Husband) and 44% (Wife). As we have previously concluded, the
 Family Court erred in computing Husband's monthly gross income
 because it failed to include Husband's rental income. We
 therefore vacate the Family Court's determination of the parties'
 income percentages in Paragraphs 6(a) and 8 of the Divorce Decree
 and remand for recalculation of the income percentages.
 
We reject Wife's claim that the Family Court erred in
 
declining to address the children's higher education expenses or
 extra-curricular expenses. At the time of the Divorce Decree,
 the children had not graduated from high school. We conclude
 that the Family Court did not abuse its discretion by declining
 to rule on the division of higher education expenses and instead
 leaving the payment of such expenses to the agreement of the
 parties or later determination by the Family Court. As to extra­curricular expenses, contrary to Wife's assertion, the Family
 Court addressed these expenses by ordering that they be divided
 evenly between the parties for agreed-upon activities and paid
 solely by the parent who enrolled the child for activities not
 agreed-upon.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pursuant to pre-decree orders, the Family Court ordered
 
the parties to contribute to the payment of marital expenses in
 
the proportion of 59% Husband and 41% Wife, and it reserved all
 claims for reimbursement for trial. At trial, both parties
 presented evidence of pre-decree marital expenses they had paid. 
The Family Court, however, declined to rule on Wife's claim for
 reimbursement because it found that the "testimony on both sides
 . . . was basically unsubstantiable. Someone says they paid it. 
Someone says, no, you didn't. I'm not going to fight over it. 
Court declines to order. [Wife's claim for reimbursement] is
 denied." We agree with Wife that the Family Court erred in
 declining to rule on her claim for reimbursement. The Family
 Court's pre-decree orders entitled Wife to obtain reimbursement
 of marital expenses to the extent that she paid more than her 41%
 share. The conflict in testimony did not entitle the Family
 Court to decline to rule on Wife's reimbursement claim. On
 remand, the Family Court shall decide Wife's claim for
 reimbursement.
 
II.
 
We resolve the issues raised in Husband's cross-appeal
 
as follows:
 
A.
 
Husband contends that the Family Court erred in
 
refusing to award him Category 3 credit for gifts and inheritance
 received from his father during the marriage. Husband presented
 evidence that he received gifts and inheritance of money from his
 father during the marriage, including copies of checks and
 deposits.
3 Wife acknowledged that Husband received gifts and
 
inheritance from his father, but contended that the total amount
 was unknown. The Family Court denied Husband any Category 3
 credit for gifts and inheritance, reasoning as follows: "The
 
3Husband presented evidence that he used this gift and
inheritance money during the marriage to make a downpayment on a
residence, purchase a boat, and make home improvements.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
court finds that while it may be accurate to state that [Husband]
 
did receive monies, the record is bereft of any competent or
 credibility [sic] evidence that those monies were actually
 contributed to the marriage." In other words, although the
 Family Court found that Husband had received gifts and
 inheritance during the marriage, it denied Husband any Category 3
 credit because it concluded that Husband had failed to present
 sufficient evidence to trace the funds into purchases that
 "actually contributed to the marriage."
 
We conclude that the Family Court erred in denying 
Husband any Category 3 credit. The net market value (NMV) in Categories 1 and 3 "are the parties' 'capital contributions,' and pursuant to general partnership law, they are returned to each spouse." Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 Hawai
'i 126, 138, 276 P.3d 
695, 707 (2012) (citation omitted). Category 3 is: 
The date-of-acquisition NMV, plus or minus, of property
separately acquired by gift or inheritance during the
marriage but excluding the NMV attributable to property that
is subsequently legally gifted by the owner to the other
spouse, to both spouses, or to a third party.
 
Id. at 137, 276 P.3d at 706 (citation omitted). Gifts and
 
inheritances received during the marriage become marital
 partnership property unless they are (1) expressly classified by
 the donee/heir-spouse-owner as separate property and (2)
 maintained, after acquisition, by itself or sources independent
 of both spouses and funded by sources other than martial
 partnership income or property. Id. at 138-39, 127 P.3d at 707­
08. 
Husband was not required to trace the money he received
 
in gifts and inheritances into specific purchases that
 contributed to the marriage in order to be entitled to a Category
 3 credit. See id. at 137-38, 276 P.3d at 706-07. Therefore, the
 
Family Court erred in denying Husband any Category 3 credit on
 this basis. Because of its ruling, the Family Court did not make
 any determination of the amount of gifts and inheritances Husband
 received during the marriage. On remand, the Family Court shall
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
determine the amount of gifts and inheritances received by
 
Husband that fall within Category 3 and award Husband a Category
 3 credit for such amount. 
B.
 
Husband argues that the Family Court erred in denying
 
his request for attorney's fees pursuant to HFCR Rule 68 (2006).
4
 
In particular, Husband claims that he was entitled to attorney's
 fees on the issue of child custody because the Family Court's
 decision on this issue was patently not more favorable to Wife
 than Husband's settlement offer.
 
The Family Court denied Husband's request because it
 
found that "[HFCR] Rule 68 is predicated on the entire decree
 being patently more favorable or unfavorable depending on the
 offer"; "the [HFCR] Rule 68 offer that was presented was not a
 complete offer"; and the Divorce Decree dealt with financial
 
4At the time relevant to this case, HFCR Rule 68 provided:
 
At any time more than 20 days before any contested
hearing held pursuant to HRS sections 571-11 to 14
(excluding law violations, criminal matters, and child
protection matters) is scheduled to begin, any party
may serve upon the adverse party an offer to allow a
judgment to be entered to the effect specified in the
offer. Such offer may be made as to all or some of the
issues, such as custody and visitation. Such offer
 shall not be filed with the court, unless it is
accepted. If within 10 days after service of the offer
the adverse party serves written notice that the offer
is accepted, any party may then file the offer and
notice of acceptance together with proof of service
thereof and thereupon the court shall treat those
issues as uncontested. An offer not accepted shall be
deemed withdrawn and evidence thereof is not
 admissible, except in a proceeding to determine costs
and attorney's fees. If the judgment in its entirety
finally obtained by the offeree is patently not more
favorable than the offer, the offeree must pay the
costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred
after the making of the offer, unless the court shall
specifically determine that such would be inequitable
in accordance with the provisions of HRS section 580–47
or other applicable statutes, as amended.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
issues in addition to child custody and on balance "is not 
patently more favorable to one or the other." In Owens v. Owens, 104 Hawai
'i 292, 310, 88 P.3d 664, 682 (App. 2004), this court 
held that in applying HFCR Rule 68, the Family Court was required to determine "issue by issue" "whether the final judgment resolving a disputed issue is 'not patently more favorable' than the HFCR Rule 68 offer of judgment as to that issue." Based on Owens, we conclude that the Family Court erred in failing to separately determine the custody issue under HFCR Rule 68. On remand, the Family Court shall determine whether its final judgment on child custody is patently not more favorable to Wife than Husband's HFCR Rule 68 offer on the custody issue. 
Husband also contends that if the Family Court grants
 
him the Category 3 credit he requests, he would also be entitled
 to attorney's fees under HFCR Rule 68 on the financial issues. 
Because we are remanding the case for determination of Husband's
 Category 3 credit, the Family Court should consider Husband's
 HFCR Rule 68 request on the financial issues on remand. 
Under HFCR Rule 68, even if the judgment entered is
 
patently not more favorable to the offeree than the offer, the
 Family Court may still decline to award attorney's fees and costs
 if it "specifically determine[s] that such [an award] would be
 inequitable in accordance with the provisions of HRS section
 580–47 or other applicable statutes, as amended." Therefore, if
 the Family Court determines that the judgment entered by the
 Family Court was patently not more favorable to Wife than
 Husband's offer, it should consider whether the award of fees
 would be inequitable. 
C.
 
Husband argues that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion in awarding Wife $21,984.46 in attorney's fees. We
 disagree. The record reveals that the Family Court awarded these
 attorney's fees to Wife because they were incurred by Wife in
 response to Husband's failure to comply with pre-trial orders. 
We conclude that the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
awarding attorney's fees to Wife on this basis. See HRS § 580­
47(f) (2006 & Supp. 2011). 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we: (1) affirm in part and
 
vacate in part the Divorce Decree; (2) vacate the Family Court's
 
denial of Husband's request for HFCR Rule 68 attorney's fees; (3)
 affirm the Order Awarding Attorney's Fees to Wife; and (4) remand
 the case for further proceedings consistent with this Summary
 Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 12, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Peter Van Name Esser 
and P.Gregory Frey(Coates & Frey)for Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Chief Judge 
Associate Judge 
Samuel P. King, Jr.
for Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant 
Associate Judge 
10

 