   
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000708
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
GARY A. DRAIZEN, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P.
 NO. 11-1-0051; CR. NO. 94-2348)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Gary A. Draizen (Draizen) appeals
 
from the "Order Denying Hearing and Dismissing Petition for Post-
Conviction Relief (Rule 40 HRPP)," filed on July 24, 2012 (Order
 
Denying Post-Conviction Relief), in the Circuit Court of the
 
First Circuit (Circuit Court).1
 
On September 29, 1998, this court, in Appellate No.
 
20344 (Cr. No. 94-2348), affirmed the November 25, 1996 Judgment
 
of the First Circuit Court convicting and sentencing Draizen for
 the offense of Murder in the Second Degree. On September 10,
 1997, Draizen's minimum term was set at 50 years by the Hawaii
 Paroling Authority (HPA).
 
On June 4, 2009, Draizen's request for a new minimum 
sentencing hearing, pursuant to Coulter v. State, 116 Hawai
'i 
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
181, 172 P.3d 493 (2007), was granted. Draizen was appointed
 
legal counsel for the new minimum sentencing hearing.
 
On June 28, 2010, after a hearing, the HPA again set
 
Draizen's minimum sentence at 50 years and specified the Level of
 Punishment as Level III, citing the significant factors of Nature
 of Offense and Degree of Loss/Injury to Victim.
 
On August 31, 2011, Draizen filed a Petition to Vacate,
 
Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from
 Custody (Petition). Draizen claimed that: his minimum sentence
 
was increased after receiving a new minimum sentencing hearing,
 
in violation of his due process rights,; HPA acted arbitrarily
 when classifying him because it failed to distinguish how his
 crime differed from others similarly situated; his minimum
 sentence was an extraordinary departure from the HPA Guidelines
 without explanation; HPA imposed a higher degree of penal
 liability than authorized by statute; he was denied effective
 assistance of counsel at his initial minimum sentencing hearing
 in 1997; HPA increased his minimum term due to actual
 vindictiveness; HPA is subject to Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530
 U.S. 466 (2000); HPA failed to sufficiently specify its rationale
 for determining his level of punishment; he was denied the right
 to present mitigating factors when HPA failed to apprise him of
 the initial Level of Punishment starting point; HPA used the
 wrong level of punishment for its starting point when setting the
 minimum sentence; HPA automatically assessed all offenses
 involving loss of life to be "callous and/or cruel;" and the
 factors cited by HPA do not warrant a Level III classification.
 
On July 24, 2012, the Circuit Court issued the Order
 
Denying Post-Conviction Relief. Draizen timely filed a notice of
 appeal. On appeal, Draizen raises the same contentions as stated
 
in his Petition.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Draizen's points of error as follows:
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Draizen failed to support his claim that he received
 
ineffective assistance of counsel during his minimum term
 
sentencing hearing in 1997 with any evidence in the record. "A
 verbatim stenographic or mechanical record of the hearing shall
 be made and preserved in transcribed or untranscribed form." HRS
 § 706-669(6) (2014). No transcript of the hearing of Draizen's
 1997 minimum term sentencing appears in the record on appeal. 
Thus, there is no trace of evidence in the record to support his
 claims. In addition, even if Draizen received ineffective
 assistance of counsel at his first hearing, Draizen received a
 second minimum term sentencing hearing which provided an
 opportunity to correct any earlier deficiency. 
The minimum sentence imposed, both in 1997 and 2009,
 
was 50 years. Thus, Draizen's claim that his minimum sentence
 was increased due to vindictiveness is without merit.
 
Hawaii Administrative Rule 23-700-22(k) states: "The
 
Authority shall prepare and provide the Department of Public
 Safety, the inmate and the inmate's attorney with a written
 statement of its decision and order." Draizen cites no authority
 to support his claim that he and his counsel must be present when
 the HPA issues its written minimum sentence decision and order
 and we find none.
 
Apprendi does not apply to parole determinations. See
 
Hawks v. Kane, 450 Fed. Appx. 565, 567 (9th Cir. 2011); Rose v.
 Swarthout, No. 2:11-cv-00327, 2012 WL 2959909 at *7-8 (E.D. Ca.
 Jul. 19, 2012). 
The HPA Guidelines do not specify an initial starting
 
point such as Level I or II. The HPA Guidelines state: "In
 reaching a decision on a minimum term, the criteria to be taken
 into consideration are discussed in Part IV." All relevant
 criteria are evaluated and a level of punishment is determined;
 HPA's determination is not based upon an initial starting point
 which allows for the level to increase or decrease based upon the
 criteria.
 The HPA Guidelines for a defendant sentenced to Life
 
with Parole and at Level III specifies a minimum sentence of 20­
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
50 years. Therefore, HPA did not deviate from its Guidelines
 
when it imposed a minimum term of 50 years. The HPA Guidelines
 provide for Levels of Punishment I, II, and III, with minimums
 ranging from 5-10 years, 10-20 years, and 20-50 years,
 respectively, for a defendant who is sentenced to a maximum term
 of Life with Parole. 
Draizen provides no evidence that all offenses
 
involving loss of life, such as Murder, Manslaughter, and
 Negligent Homicide are automatically classified by the HPA as
 "callous and/or cruel" under Nature of Offense 1(a). Only Nature
 of Offense 1(a) factor for Level III mentions that "The offense
 was against a person(s) and the offender displayed a callous
 and/or cruel disregard for the safety and welfare of others[.]" 
Draizen's claim that HPA automatically assesses all offenses
 involving the loss of life to be "callous and/or cruel" is
 without merit. 
When imposing a minimum sentence, the HPA does not
 
determine a defendant's degree of penal responsibility. The HPA
 Guidelines are "to provide a degree of uniformity and consistency
 in the setting of minimum terms while providing the community-at­large, public policy makers and planners, the criminal justice
 system, and victims and offenders with information as to the
 criteria used in establishing minimum terms of imprisonment."
 
In its 2009 Notice and Order of Fixing Minimum Term(s)
 
of Imprisonment, the HPA identified two significant factors in
 determining that Draizen's Level of Punishment was Level III,
 Nature of Offense and Degree of Loss/Injury to Person or
 Property, in compliance with Coulter v. State, 116 Hawaii 181,
 172 P.3d 493 (2007). Where the record is sufficient to permit
 our meaningful review of the HPA's decision, the HPA is not
 required to specify the evidence used to determine which
 significant factors applied to his case. See Nichols v. State,
 No. CAAP–12–0000043, 2014 WL 7334909 (Haw. App. Dec. 24, 2014).
 
Draizen's claim that he does not meet the criteria for
 
Level III based upon the significant factors of Nature of Offense
 and Degree of Loss/Injury to Victim is without merit. The record
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
indicates that the victim was stabbed 28 times, had multiple
 
incisions and stab wounds, including an incision of the larynx
 and right internal jugular vein, incision of right sternomastoid
 muscle and thyroid gland, penetration of the pericardium and
 heart, penetration of the lungs, bilateral hemothorax,
 hemoperitoneum, penetration of the liver, right kidney, spleen,
 pancreas, diaphram, and mesentery of the intestines, and incision
 of the right psoas muscle with right retroperitoneal hemorrhage.
 
In addition, the victim had defensive wounds to the left forearm
 
and right hand. Draizen admitted to his friend that he had used
 a butcher knife to stab the victim to death because she decided
 to return to her previous boyfriend. A neighbor also believed
 she faintly heard the victim screaming hysterically and call out
 Draizen's name. In sum, the record indicates a high degree of
 suffering as the victim was killed.
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's July 24, 2012
 
Order Denying Post-Conviction Relief is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 24, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Gary A. Draizen 
Petitioner-Appellant
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Richard W. Stacey

Diane K. Taira 
Deputy Attorneys General
for Respondent-Appellee
 
5
 