NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000697
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
LOUIS ROBERT SANTIAGO, as Trustee of the Louis Robert Santiago
Revocable Living Trust dated November 17, 1999, as amended,
and YONG HWAN SANTIAGO, as Trustee of the Yong Shimabukuro
Revocable Living Trust dated July 25, 1996, as amended,
Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
v.
 
RUTH TANAKA, Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; and DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0094)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees Louis Robert
 
Santiago (Louis), as Trustee of the Louis Robert Santiago
 
Revocable Living Trust, and Yong Hwan Santiago (Yong), as Trustee
 of the Yong Shimabukuro Revocable Living Trust (collectively, the
 Santiagos), appeal from a "Judgment", filed June 28, 2011, in the
 
1
Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit  (circuit court).  This case
 involved competing claims that seller, Defendant-Appellee/Cross-
Appellant Ruth Tanaka (Tanaka), failed to disclose material terms
 of a land sale contract, and buyers, the Santiagos, defaulted on
 the terms of their partially seller-financed purchase. The
 circuit court entered judgment in favor of Tanaka, ordered a Writ
 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Ejectment against the Santiagos, awarded Tanaka attorneys'
 
fees and costs, and dismissed all other claims, counterclaims,
 cross-claims and third-party claims. 
In their appeal, the Santiagos challenge the circuit
 
court's "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order", filed
 June 8, 2011 (Circuit Court's FOF/COL); the "Writ of Ejectment",
 filed June 28, 2011; the "Order Denying [the Santiagos'] Motion
 to Reconsider, Alter, and/or Amend the [Circuit Court's FOF/COL]
 and Judgment Thereon", filed August 4, 2011 (Order Denying Motion
 to Reconsider); and the "Order Granting in Part and Denying in
 Part [Tanaka's] Motion for Fees and Costs", filed August 22, 2011
 (Order re Fees and Costs).
 
On appeal, the Santiagos contend the circuit court
 
erroneously (1) entered judgment in favor of Tanaka and denied
 their motion to reconsider, and (2) awarded Tanaka attorneys'
 fees and costs.
 
Tanaka cross-appeals from the Judgment, and challenges
 
the Circuit Court's FOF/COL and the Order re Fees and Costs. 
Tanaka asserts the circuit court erred by declining to award
 (1) a deficiency judgment, (2) damages, and (3) additional
 attorneys' fees and costs.
 
For the reasons stated below, we affirm.
 
I. Background
A. Purchase Contract and Foreclosure
 
This appeal stems from the Santiagos' partially seller-
financed purchase of the Nawiliwili Tavern on Kaua
'i (Tavern) 
from Tanaka in 2006. 
Over a decade earlier, in 1995, Tanaka entered into an
 
agreement with neighbor James Jasper Enterprises, Ltd., (Jasper)
 to connect the Tavern to Jasper's existing private sewage system.
 The agreement, entitled "Agreement for Maintenance and Operation
 of Wastewater System and Connection to Wastewater System Located
 at Nawiliwili, Kauai, Hawaii" (Wastewater Agreement), provided
 the following pertinent terms:
 
5. Tanaka agrees to pay Jasper monthly maintenance
charges in the amount of One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00)
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
per month . . . . Jasper reserves the right to adjust the
deposit annually in a sum not exceeding twenty percent (20%)
of the amount paid in the year immediately preceding.
 
. . . .
 
7. Tanaka agrees to pay Jasper the sum of One Hundred
Fifty Dollars ($150.00) as a bi-monthly cleanout charge for
the Jasper [pump station]. . . . Jasper reserves the right
to adjust the deposit annually in a sum not exceeding twenty
percent (20%) of the amount paid in the year immediately
preceding.
 
In 2005, after seven years as a tenant, Louis Santiago
 
submitted an offer to Tanaka's property manager, Wayne Richardson
 
(Richardson), to purchase in fee simple the land upon which the
 Tavern sits entitled "Deposit Receipt Offer and Acceptance
 (DROA)". The parties exchanged a series of counteroffers, all
 based on the original DROA. In Tanaka's January 19, 2006
 counteroffer, Tanaka offered to accept monthly payments as
 payment of the principal purchase price. In her breakdown of the
 monthly payments, Tanaka identified "Sewer Fee & Assessments" in
 the amount of $150.
2 Louis did not accept the counteroffer.
 
Around March 27, 2006, Tanaka made a counteroffer that
 
Louis accepted. Of the agreed upon $1,300,000 purchase price,
 $500,000 was seller financed. The contract included a Purchase
 Money Mortgage. 
On or about April 8, 2006, Tanaka provided to Louis's 
real estate agent, Glenn Takase (Takase) of Coldwell Banker Day-Lum Properties, a "Seller's Real Property Disclosure Statement" with eleven attachments. Amongst the attachments, Tanaka provided the Wastewater Agreement and a series of letters from the County of Kaua
'i noting that the Tavern was connected to 
Jasper's pump station. Louis initialed the Disclosure Statement and acknowledged review and acceptance. 
Tanaka and the Santiagos executed a Promissory Note
 
(Note) and "Mortgage, Security Agreement and Financing Statement"
 (Mortgage) both dated August 10, 2006. The Mortgage was recorded
 on the same day. The Note reserved to Tanaka the power to
 
2
 Tanaka repeated this information in a February 7, 2006 counteroffer
that Louis again did not accept. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
accelerate collection of the entire principal sum and accrued
 
interest should the Santiagos default. The Mortgage additionally
 provided that upon default, Tanaka could foreclose "by court
 proceeding . . . , or, as now or then provided by law, by
 advertisement and sale of the mortgaged property or any part or
 parts thereof at public auction . . . ." 
In October 2006, Jasper sent Jay Geffert (Geffert), the
 
manager of the Tavern, a letter apparently in response to
 Geffert's request for an explanation of invoices that had been
 forwarded to the Tavern. The letter provided that the current
 monthly maintenance charge for the Tavern's use of Jasper's sewer
 lines was $1,114.54 per month, the bi-monthly clean out charge
 was also $1,114.54 (both allegedly escalated the maximum 20% each
 year since execution of the Wastewater Agreement), and demanded
 payment of an outstanding balance of $5,804.85 from the operators
 of the Tavern.
 
In response, Geffert acknowledged that he knew of the
 
original terms of the Wastewater Agreement but denied notice of
 the current escalated maintenance and clean out charges.
 
3
Subsequently, Louis  filed a complaint against Jasper and Tanaka
in the circuit court (Civ. No. 07-1-0141). The circuit court
 dismissed the case without prejudice on December 20, 2007, to
 allow the parties to engage in good-faith mediation. 
In a hand-written letter dated March 10, 2008, Louis
 
announced that he would halt payment to Tanaka on his Note due to
 litigation, unilaterally declaring that he would place his
 monthly payments into a bank account throughout the course of
 litigation. Louis's monthly payment was due on March 10. In a
 letter dated March 11, 2008, the day after payment was due,
 Tanaka, through counsel, gave notice of default and intention to
 foreclose on the property pursuant to the Note, the Mortgage, and
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 667. In the letter, Tanaka
 informed the Santiagos that "the entire principal sum and accrued
 
3
 Yong was not named as a party.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
interest, plus attorneys' fees and costs, are hereby declared
 
immediately due and payable." 
On November 21, 2008, Tanaka recorded a "Mortgagee's
 
Affidavit of Foreclosure Sale Under Power of Sale" in the Bureau
 of Conveyances. The affidavit provides that at a public auction
 on October 24, 2008, Tanaka submitted the highest bid in the
 amount of $365,000. 
B. Procedural History
 
On August 5, 2008, the Santiagos filed a First Amended
 
Verified Complaint against Tanaka and asserted seven (7) claims.
4
 
In turn, Tanaka filed an answer and asserted eleven (11)
 counterclaims.
5
 
By the time of trial, of the Santiagos' seven claims,
 
only their claim for Non-Disclosures and the portion of the
 Negligent Misrepresentation claim regarding sewer fees remained
 undecided. After a bench trial, the circuit court issued its
 FOF/COL and ordered judgment entered in favor of Tanaka on the
 Santiagos' remaining claims and the first four of Tanaka's
 counterclaims. Judgment was entered in accordance with the
 FOF/COL. On June 28, 2011, the circuit court entered a Writ of
 Ejectment against the Santiagos. Subsequently, in the Order re
 Fees and Costs, the circuit court awarded Tanaka attorneys' fees
 and costs in the amount of $152,246.61.
 
II. Discussion
 
A. The Santiagos' Appeal
1. Judgment in Favor of Tanaka Regarding the
Santiagos' Claims
 
The Santiagos contend that the circuit court
 
erroneously entered judgment in favor of Tanaka on the Santiagos'
 
4
 The seven claims were: Breach of Agreement; Breach of Good Faith and
Fair Dealing; Negligent Misrepresentation; Non-Disclosures; Violation of
Plaintiff's Due Process; Breach of Duty of Good Faith Mediation; and Violation
of HRS § 667-42 (Supp. 2010).
5
 The eleven counterclaims were: Breach of Note; Breach of Mortgage;
Breach of Covenant of Good Faith and Fair Dealing; Ejectment; Judicial
Foreclosure; Failure to Mediate in Good Faith; Breach of Confidentiality;
Violation of Order; Waste; Impairment of Security; and Rescission.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
claims for Non-Disclosures and Negligent Misrepresentation
 
because Tanaka clearly failed to disclose material facts.
 
In their opening brief, the Santiagos fail to identify 
in their points of error section the circuit court's FOFs or COLs that they challenge, as is required by Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4)(C). Thus, the Santiagos have failed to properly challenge the circuit court's FOF/COL. To the extent any FOF or COL is not challenged on appeal, it is binding on this court. Wong v. Cayetano, 111 Hawai
'i 462, 479, 143 P.3d 
1, 18 (2006); Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai
'i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002). However, because we try 
to address parties' arguments on the merits where possible, we will address the Santiagos' arguments to the extent discernible. Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawai
'i 490, 496, 280 P.3d 88, 94 (2012). 
"A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is freely reviewable for its correctness. A COL that is supported by the trial court's FOFs and that reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be overturned." Amfac, Inc. v. 
Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 119, 839 P.2d 10, 28-29 (1992) (internal citations omitted). 
In regards to the Santiagos' arguments on appeal, the
 
relevant portions of the circuit court's rulings appear to be
 that
 
A. [The Santiagos], and not [Tanaka], must bear the
burden of proof at trial. [The Santiagos] must prove non­
disclosure. Given the disclosure documents, [the Santiagos]
failed to prove non-disclosure. Accordingly, [Tanaka] is
entitled to prevail.
 
. . . .
 
K. . . . Once [Tanaka] disclosed the private sewer
system (and provided a copy of the sewer agreement), she
discharged her disclosure obligations. Then the
 responsibility shifted to the buyers, who are charged with
reviewing the disclosures and addressing any wastewater
issues.
 
L. [The Santiagos] had all the information necessary to
make further inquiry. The Wastewater Agreement sets forth
the "monthly maintenance charges" (¶ 5) and the "bi-monthly
cleanout charge" (¶ 7) and makes clear that such Jasper
charges are separate from "sewer bills as may be required by
the County" (¶ 6). . . .
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
M. The Wastewater Agreement provides for annual
escalation (up to 20%) of both the monthly maintenance
charges and the bi-monthly cleanout charge. . . .
 
. . . .
 
X. [Tanaka] provided timely and appropriate disclosures
of all material facts (and she confirmed receipt of same). 
The Santiagos argue that the circuit court's rulings
 
are incorrect under Restatement (Second) of Torts § 551 (1977)6
 
because Tanaka has failed to disclose material facts, thus the
 
circuit court erred in concluding that Tanaka provided sufficient
 disclosure.
7 Section 551 has been adopted in Hawai 'i. See 
Pancakes of Hawaii, Inc. v. Pomare Props. Corp., 85 Hawai 'i 300, 
318, 944 P.2d 97, 115 (App. 1997); Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v.
 E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co., 116 Hawai
'i 277, 284 n.3, 172 P.3d 
1021, 1028 n.3 (2007). However, the Santiagos fail to show that
 the circuit court erred.
 
The Santiagos assert that Tanaka had a duty to disclose
 
the current escalated amounts due to Jasper, or, in the
 
6 Restatement (Second) of Torts § 551 provides:
 
(1) One who fails to disclose to another a fact that he
knows may justifiably induce the other to act or refrain
from acting in a business transaction is subject to the same
liability to the other as though he had represented the
nonexistence of the matter that he has failed to disclose,
if, but only if, he is under a duty to the other to exercise
reasonable care to disclose the matter in question.
 
(2) One party to a business transaction is under a duty to
exercise reasonable care to disclose to the other before the
 transaction is consummated,
 
(a) matters known to him that the other is entitled to
know because of a fiduciary or other similar relation
of trust and confidence between them; and
 
(b) matters known to him that he knows to be necessary
to prevent his partial or ambiguous statement of the
facts from being misleading[.]
7
 The Santiagos also argue that Tanaka has committed Negligent
Misrepresentation under Restatement (Second) of Torts § 552 (1977). However,the Santiagos make no argument explaining how the Restatement standard hasbeen violated beyond their general argument regarding failure to disclose.See Laeroc Waikiki Parkside, LLC v. K.S.K. (Oahu) Ltd. P'ship, 115 Hawai' i 
201, 228-29, 166 P.3d 961, 988-89 (2007) (noting that appellant made noattempt to apply the Restatement standard and thus failed to demonstrate agenuine issue of material fact existed). For instance, the Santiagos make noargument regarding the extent of Tanaka's intent to influence the Santiagos. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
alternative, disclose to the Santiagos that they would be
 
required to pay Jasper's fees, negotiate different terms, or
 construct their own sewer system. Further, the Santiagos contend
 that Tanaka had a duty to correct her representation in a
 counteroffer that the monthly sewer fees were only $150 so as to
 prevent misleading the Santiagos.
 
In addition to the Santiagos' uncontested receipt of
 
the Wastewater Agreement, the Santiagos do not dispute that the
 Disclosure Statement expressly provided notice that the Tavern
 was connected to a private sewer system owned by Jasper. The
 terms of the Wastewater Agreement, signed in 1995, provide that
 the monthly maintenance charge and bi-monthly clean out charge
 were subject to 20% increases each year at the discretion of
 Jasper.
8 The Santiagos do not dispute the circuit court's FOF
 
no. 9 that their own real estate broker, Takase, advised the
 Santiagos in writing to check on the private sewer system. In
 spite of this, the Santiagos failed to inquire further.
 
In light of Tanaka's disclosures, the circuit court
 
properly concluded that the Santiagos should have exercised due
 diligence. The Santiagos failed to investigate the sewer system. 
Per the DROA, the Santiagos had a 30-day time period in which to
 investigate the property and rescind the agreement to purchase
 the property. The DROA also provided that upon Tanaka's
 disclosure, the Santiagos had five (5) days to examine the
 
8 The Santiagos express briefly in their opening brief their contention
that the language of the Wastewater Agreement only provides that the "deposit"
may be increased 20% annually and does not expressly provide that the monthlymaintenance charge and bi-monthly clean out charge may be so increased. The Santiagos argue that "deposit" refers to a $300 one-time payment from Tanakato Jasper required under a different clause of the Wastewater Agreement. The circuit court rejected this interpretation of the contract in COL no. M: "TheWasterwater Agreement provides for annual escalation (up to 20%) of both themonthly maintenance charges and the bi-monthly cleanout charge." The Santiagos offer no substantive argument regarding the circuit court's contractinterpretation that would afford meaningful review of this COL or the contractlanguage. Thus, the Santiagos have failed to carry their burden as appellantson appeal. Exotics Hawaii-Kona, 116 Hawai' i at 309 n.21, 172 P.3d at 1053
n.21. The Santiagos also do not explain why the contractual language, even if
referring nominally to a "deposit", would not have at least put the Santiagos
on inquiry notice of potential escalation of the charges when reference to
Jasper's authority to increase the "deposit" is included in each of the
separate and distinct charge clauses.
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
statement and rescind the DROA. The Santiagos did not exercise
 
their rights under the contract to rescind the transaction. The
 Santiagos do not offer a substantive argument against COL no. E:
 "To the extent that the buyers' [sic] failed to exercise their
 right of inspection, there is no liability on the part of the
 seller, especially in the context of an experienced businessman
 purchasing commercial real estate." 
The circuit court's unchallenged FOFs, including FOFs 
6-9 and 12-14, established that the Santiagos were put on notice of the monthly payments made to Jasper and that Jasper reserved the right to raise payments 20% annually. In addition to the clear documentary evidence, the circuit court found that "the witness testimony did not establish Plaintiff's claim."
9 
"[Appellate courts have] long observed that it is within the province of the trier of fact to weigh the evidence and to assess the credibility of the witnesses, and this court will refrain from interfering in those determinations." LeMay v. Leander, 92 
Hawai
'i 614, 626, 994 P.2d 546, 558 (2000). 
The Santiagos' remaining argument based on section 511
 
is that Tanaka had a duty to correct a previous representation
 made in Tanaka's rejected January 19, 2006 counteroffer that the
 monthly sewer fees were $150.
10 Section 551 only requires a
 
party to correct a prior representation when the party knows
 clarification is necessary to prevent the representation from
 being misleading. The Santiagos make no argument regarding
 Tanaka's knowledge. Even assuming the Santiagos did make such an
 argument, there is no evidence suggesting that Tanaka knew
 clarification was necessary. The $150 figure was stated in a
 
9
 The circuit court concluded that "Plaintiff Mr. Santiago was not
credible, and the testimony of Mr. Geffert and Mr. Jasper was not helpful to
Plaintiffs. The testimony of Mr. Tanaka, Mr. Takase and Mr. Richardson was
credible and favorable to Defendant."
10 The Santiagos also contend that Tanaka was required to correct the
alleged misrepresentation in the Disclosure Statement that she had no
knowledge of an unrecorded interest in the property. Yet, the Santiagos offer
no substantive argument against the circuit court's FOF no. 10 or COL no. N,
which both provide that the Wastewater Agreement is not an interest in real
property.
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
rejected counteroffer that formed no part of the final deal. 
Tanaka fully disclosed her agreement with Jasper and Louis
 acknowledged receipt and review of the disclosed document. The
 Wastewater Agreement provided actual notice that the Jasper
 charges were separate from the County fees. The Santiagos asked
 no follow up questions prior to closing the sale. There is no
 evidence Tanaka knew her prior statement was misleading. 
In light of the entirety of Tanaka's disclosures, the
 
Santiagos have not demonstrated the circuit court erroneously
 ruled in favor of Tanaka on the Santiagos' claims.
2. Judgment Regarding Tanaka's Counterclaims
 
The Santiagos contend the circuit court erroneously
 
entered judgment in favor of Tanaka on Tanaka's counterclaims
 
because the Mortgage did not contain a power of sale clause and
 the Santiagos cured the alleged default. The Santiagos also
 contend the court erred because its decision allowed Tanaka to
 have title to the property and keep all money paid by the
 Santiagos.
11 In response, Tanaka inter alia asserts that the
 
Santiagos' appeal of her counterclaims is moot because she has
 sold the property to a third party. Thus, before addressing the
 Santiagos' specific contentions, we must review whether the
 appeal is moot. 
a. Mootness
 
In response to the Santiagos' appeal related to the
 
foreclosure and ejectment, Tanaka argues that the appeal is moot
 because the property has been sold to a third party
12 thus this
 
court cannot grant effective relief. For the reasons below, we
 agree that the Santiagos' appeal related to title and possession
 of the property is moot.
 
11 The Santiagos also contend that the circuit court should not have
found in favor of Tanaka on her counterclaims because they were premised on an
invalid and unenforceable contract. However, as covered above, the Santiagos
have not demonstrated the circuit court erred in ruling in favor of Tanaka
regarding the Santiagos' contract claims, thus this related argument is
without merit. 
12 The Santiagos do not dispute Tanaka's assertion that the buyer was a
bona fide purchaser. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"[M]ootness is an issue of subject matter 
jurisdiction." Hamilton ex rel. Letham v. Lethem, 119 Hawai 'i 1, 
4, 193 P.3d 839, 842 (2008). "[T]he issue of subject matter 
jurisdiction can be properly raised at any time." Garner v. 
State, 122 Hawai 'i 150, 168 n. 15, 223 P.3d 215, 233 n. 15 (App. 
2009). "The duty of this court, as of every other judicial tribunal, is to decide actual controversies by a judgment which can be carried into effect[.] . . . Courts will not consume time deciding abstract propositions of law or moot cases, and have no jurisdiction to do so." Wong v. Bd. of Regents, Univ. of Hawaii, 
62 Haw. 391, 394-95, 616 P.2d 201, 204 (1980). Thus, when events have rendered it impossible for a court to grant an effective remedy, the court will not render judgment on the issue. See 
Lathrop v. Sakatani, 111 Hawai
'i 307, 312-13, 141 P.3d 480, 485­
86 (2006). 
Tanaka argues that under Lathrop and Hawai 'i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 62, this court cannot grant effective relief because title has passed to a third party and the Santiagos should have obtained an injunction or stay pending appeal to prevent mootness arising from the subsequent sale. 
The Santiagos argue that their appeal is not moot
 
because the Santiagos sought a stay pending appeal and because
 the Santiagos appeal from a trial on the merits regarding
 Tanaka's right to conduct the non-judicial foreclosure. The
 Santiagos argue that even if the issues of title and possession
 are moot, issues of the amount of money retained by and awarded
 to Tanaka are not moot. 
In Lathrop, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court reasoned that 
"the sale of the property prevents the appellate court from granting any effective relief" because, even if the court erred in expunging a lis pendens, the plaintiffs could not record another lis pendens because no party still held title to the property. 111 Hawai
'i at 313, 141 P.3d at 486; IndyMac Bank v. 
Miguel, 117 Hawai 'i 506, 521-22, 184 P.3d 821, 836-37 (App. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2008). While Lathrop involved a lis pendens, mootness depended
 
on the court's ability to craft an effective remedy. 
The Lathrop court placed the burden on the appellant to 
preserve the justiciability of issues for appeal. 111 Hawai 'i at 
313, 141 P.3d at 486 ("[I]t is appellant's burden to seek a stay if post-appeal transactions could render the appeal moot." (Citation and internal quotation marks omitted)). "[T]he sale of property generally precludes effective relief. Nevertheless, a party may escape the doctrine of mootness by taking appropriate action such as seeking a stay . . . ." Thorn v. Walker, 912 A.2d 
1192, 1195-96 (D.C. Cir. 2006) (citing Lathrop) (internal citation omitted). The Santiagos filed a motion for stay pending appeal. However, the circuit court denied the motion as moot because the Santiagos had already vacated the premises. The Santiagos did not properly seek an injunction, and they failed to tender a supersedeas bond or file a motion to set a supersedeas bond as required to obtain a stay or injunction pursuant to HRCP Rule 62(c), (d). The Santiagos do not assert the circuit court erred in denying their motion for a stay. Also, the Santiagos did not file a motion with this court for a stay or injunction pending appeal. Lastly, after the circuit court expunged the Santiagos' Notice of Pendency of Action, the Santiagos did not file a motion for stay of the expungement. The closed sale in this case cannot be undone. See City Bank v. Saje Ventures II, 7 
Haw. App. 130, 133-34, 748 P.2d 812, 814-15 (1988). 
Consequently, this court cannot grant effective relief
 
in terms of title or possession of the property.
13 Thus, the
 
appeal as to title or possession of the property is moot. 
However, Tanaka's sale of the property to the third party does
 
13 The Santiagos assert that an exception to the mootness doctrine
applies. The Santiagos single out that review of non-judicial foreclosures in
which the court does not grant a stay will always evade review. The Santiagosoffer no further argument on the subject. Even assuming the Santiagos offereda substantive argument, the "capable of repetition, yet evading review"exception does not apply. See Lathrop, 111 Hawai' i at 315, 141 P.3d at 488
("[B]ecause [the party] did not avail themselves of the mechanisms that wouldhave preserved the issue for review, we are compelled to hold that the issueis moot and the exceptions to the mootness doctrine do not apply."). 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
not preclude us from crafting effective relief, if warranted,
 
regarding the Santiagos' contention that the circuit court
 improperly awarded to Tanaka both the property and all amounts
 paid by the Santiagos. We thus review the Santiagos' arguments
 in this regard to the extent they have been preserved for appeal.
b. Tanaka's Retention of Payments By the Santiagos
 
The Santiagos argue that the circuit court erred by
 
allowing Tanaka to take possession and title to the property and
 retain the amounts paid by the Santiagos on the purchase price,
 in effect amounting to an alleged inequitable windfall for
 Tanaka.
 
Pursuant to HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(iii), the Santiagos
 
provide citations to the record in their opening brief to
 indicate where they allegedly brought the asserted error to the
 attention of the circuit court. Based on our review of the
 record cited by the Santiagos, they did not raise this
 forfeiture/windfall argument until their post-trial motion for
 reconsideration.
14 We therefore review the Santiagos' arguments
 
as a challenge to the circuit court's denial of their motion for
 reconsideration. 
[T]he purpose of a motion for reconsideration is to allow
the parties to present new evidence and/or arguments that
could not have been presented during the earlier adjudicated
motion. Reconsideration is not a device to relitigate old
matters or to raise arguments or evidence that could and
should have been brought during the earlier proceeding.
 
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 
Ltd., 100 Hawai 'i 97, 110, 58 P.3d 608, 621 (2002) (quoting 
Sousaris v. Miller, 92 Hawai 'i 505, 513, 993 P.2d 539, 547 
(2000)) (block format altered) (internal quotation marks omitted). The appellate courts review a "trial court's ruling on a motion for reconsideration . . . under the abuse of discretion standard." Id. An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court 
14 Prior to their motion for reconsideration, the Santiagos' arguments
centered on prevailing on their claims, which, in their opinion, would
preclude Tanaka's non-judicial foreclosure. The only unjust enrichment
argument the Santiagos made prior to the motion for reconsideration pertained
to Tanaka's counterclaim for property damage, and that if the court awarded
her damages on top of title to the property, she would be unjustly enriched.
The circuit court did not award damages in this case. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
has "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules
 
or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of
 a party litigant." Amfac, Inc., 74 Haw. at 114, 839 P.2d at 26.
 
It appears that the circuit court denied the motion for
 
reconsideration because the Santiagos essentially attempted to
 relitigate their contention that the purchase contract should be
 rescinded and that they were entitled to either recovery of the
 money they paid to purchase the property or retention of title. 
In their motion for reconsideration, the Santiagos essentially
 contended that they could not make their forfeiture/windfall
 argument during trial because they did not know that Tanaka would
 receive title to the property as well as retain the amounts paid
 by the Santiagos, and that such result constituted a manifest
 error of law. This argument is without merit. Throughout the
 case, Tanaka asserted that she had properly foreclosed against
 the Santiagos and in her counterclaim she inter alia sought
 ejectment of the Santiagos, alleged breach of the note and the
 mortgage, alleged entitlement to a variety of amounts owed by the
 Santiagos under the note and mortgage (including principal,
 interest, late charges, advances, costs, expenses and attorneys'
 fees), and also sought compensatory damages. At trial, the
 Santiagos' simply chose to focus on prevailing on their claims as
 their defense to Tanaka's counterclaims. The Santiagos could
 have raised their forfeiture/windfall argument during trial and
 failed to do so.
 
Even if the merits of the Santiagos' argument are
 
considered, the Santiagos have not shown they are entitled to
 relief. In regards to payments they made after foreclosure, the
 Santiagos continued occupancy of the property until the issuance
 of the Writ of Ejectment in this case. This covered a period of
 almost three years. Thus, were a court to order return of all
 money paid to Tanaka, the Santiagos would have operated a
 business for years on property held in title by Tanaka for free. 
Further, the Santiagos do not cite to any evidence that
 demonstrates the value of the property at the time of default or
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
foreclosure, or make arguments on appeal that Tanaka paid an
 
improper price at auction, so as to provide support for an
 assertion that Tanaka reaped a windfall. 
The Santiagos have not demonstrated the circuit court
 
abused its discretion in denying their motion for
 reconsideration.
 
3. Attorneys' Fees and Costs Awarded to Tanaka
 
The Santiagos contend that the circuit court 
erroneously awarded Tanaka $152,246.61 in attorneys' fees and 
costs, and any award should have been offset by the Santiagos' forfeiture of the purchase price paid to Tanaka. The Santiagos fail to provide any substantive argument in their opening brief containing the reasons for their argument with citations to authorities and the parts of the record relied upon as required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) and thus the point is waived.
15 City & 
Cnty. of Honolulu v. Hsiung, 109 Hawai 'i 159, 180, 124 P.3d 434, 
455 (2005) ("Because the [Appellant's] opening brief fails to include an argument on their claim that the circuit court erred[,] . . . these points of error are deemed waived.").
B. Tanaka's Cross-Appeal
 
On cross-appeal, Tanaka contends the circuit court
 
erred in declining to award (1) a deficiency judgment,
 (2) damages, and (3) the requested attorneys' fees and costs.
1. Deficiency Judgment and Damages
 
Tanaka contends that she submitted admissible evidence
 
that established her entitlement to a deficiency in the amount of
 
$79,441.55 and damages in the amount of "over $100,000."
 
Tanaka appears to contend that because the court
 
16
concluded certain testimony was credible,  and the Santiagos
15 Arguments raised for the first time in reply briefing are waived.
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Newtown Meadows ex rel. its Bd. of Directors v.
Venture 15, Inc., 115 Hawai' i 232, 281 n.39, 167 P.3d 225, 274 n.39 (2007). 
16 Tanaka also notes that defendant's exhibit 12, which was not
received into evidence, was admissible evidence and supports a deficiency
judgment in this case. Tanaka fails to present a substantive argument as to
how the circuit court erred in excluding exhibit 12. This argument is waived.
HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
17  The awarded $152,246.61 consists of $136,001.29 of the initially
requested $268,477.71, and $16,245.32 accrued due to post-judgment motions. 
18  An additional $25,000 was deducted from Tanaka's requests due to
Tanaka's offer of a discount.  We note that Tanaka's break down of requested
fees does not equal $268,477.71: Prior Litigation ($32,627.07), Instant Case
($161,001.29), and Foreclosure ($95,349.35).  No party assigns any error to
this.
16presented no evidence to the contrary, the court erred in not
awarding the deficiency judgment and damages.  Tanaka cites no
legal authority in support of her arguments, let alone any
authority that requires the circuit court to rule in one party's
favor in this instance.  Tanaka fails to comply with the
requirements of HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) to provide legal authority in
support of her arguments, see Blair v. Ing , 95 Hawai #i 247, 253,
21 P.3d 452, 458 (2001) (noting that because the appellants
failed to cite any legal authority or provide any supporting
argument, the argument was waived), and thus Tanaka fails to
demonstrate reversible error.  See also Malani v. Clapp , 56 Haw.
507, 517, 542 P.2d 1265, 1271 (1975) ("[T]he burden of proving
damages is always upon the plaintiff[.]").   
2. Attorneys' Fees and Costs
Tanaka contends that the circuit court erred by failing
to award the requested attorneys' fees and costs.  The circuit
court's ruling on a motion for attorneys' fees and costs is
reviewed for abuse of discretion.  Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the
Emps. Ret. Sys. of the State of Hawai# i, 106 Hawai# i 416, 431, 106
P.3d 339, 354 (2005).
The circuit court awarded attorneys' fees and costs in
the amount of $152,246.6117 pursuant to HRS § 607-14 (Supp.
2013), the Note, and the Mortgage.  In doing so, the circuit
court rejected the portions of the requested $268,477.71 that
Tanaka self-identified as accrued during prior litigation
($32,627.07) and while pursuing the non-judicial foreclosure
($95,349.35).18  
Tanaka argues that under HRS § 607-14 and HRCP Rule
54(d)(1), a court must award reasonable attorneys' fees and costs
to the prevailing party.  Tanaka contends that the court erred inNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
denying her motion for fees and costs stemming from the prior
 
litigation and the non-judicial foreclosure because the Santiagos
 chose to litigate these issues and the Santiagos did not
 challenge the reasonableness of the requested amounts. 
In respect to fees and costs from the prior litigation,
 
in Civ. No. 07-1-0141, the circuit court granted Tanaka's motion
 to dismiss and explicitly stated that "[e]ach party shall bear
 its own attorneys' fees and costs." Notwithstanding Tanaka's
 arguments,
19 the language of the circuit court's order of
 
dismissal is clear. 
In regards to the fees and costs stemming from the non­
judicial foreclosure, the court denied Tanaka's requested amount
 because the fees and costs were incurred as a result of the
 Santiagos' default, not the Santiagos' litigation against Tanaka.
 Without citing any legal authority, Tanaka argues that because
 parts of the instant case involved the Santiagos' effort to
 challenge the foreclosure, attorneys' fees and costs from the
 non-judicial foreclosure are reasonable. We disagree as there is
 no legal basis to support this contention. Further, as to
 reasonableness of the amount awarded, the circuit court requested
 a breakdown from Tanaka as to the fees that were incurred "for
 the . . . process of a non-judicial foreclosure." Tanaka self-
identified $95,349.35 as related to the foreclosure. Tanaka
 separately identified the fees and costs accrued in the instant
 case. The circuit court relied on the amounts provided by Tanaka
 and thus she cannot complain in that regard.
 
Tanaka has not demonstrated the circuit court abused
 
its discretion.
 
III. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the "Judgment",
 
filed June 28, 2011; "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and
 
Order", filed June 8, 2011; the "Writ of Ejectment", filed
 
19 Tanaka argues that, because the claims in the prior litigation and
the instant case are functionally identical, all previous work is directly
useful to the instant case, and it would be inequitable to penalize Tanaka for
the parties' failure to successfully mediate. 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
June 28, 2011; the "Order Denying Plaintiffs' Motion to
 
Reconsider, Alter, and/or Amend the Court's Findings of Fact,
 Conclusions of Law and Order, and Judgment Thereon", filed
 August 4, 2011; and the "Order Granting in Part and Denying in
 Part Defendant/Counter-Plaintiff Ruth Tanaka's Motion for Fees
 and Costs", filed August 22, 2011, in the Circuit Court of the
 Fifth Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 28, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Gary Victor Dubin
Frederick J. Arensmeyer Lila C.A. King
for Plaintiffs-Appellants/
Cross-Appellees
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Robert Goldberg
Angela Anderson
(Hale & Goldberg, LLP)
for Defendant-Appellee/ Cross-Appellant
 
18
 