NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0002407
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
QUEEN EMMA LAND COMPANY, a Hawai 'i non-profit corporation,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
AMAZONIA FOREST CORP., a Hawai 'i corporation dba
GO NUTS HAWAII, and AUGUSTO C. OLIVEIRA,
Defendants-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL CASE NO. 1RC13-1-1676)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Amazonia Forest Corporation, a 
Hawai'i corporation, dba Go Nuts Hawaii (Amazonia) and Augusto C. 
Oliveira (Oliveira) (together, Appellants), appeal from the 
1) July 25, 2013 Judgment and Notice of Entry of

1
Judgment or Order  (Judgment); 
2) June 28, 2013 Order Denying Defendants Amazonia

 
Forest Corp. and Augusto C. Oliveira's Motion to (1) Set Aside
 
Default Judgment; and (2) For Leave to File Answer and
2
; and
 Counterclaim, Filed on May 22, 2013 
3
3) April 3, 2013 Judgment for Possession  all entered
in the District Court of the First Circuit (district court).
 
1
 The Honorable Gerald H. Kibe presided.
 
2
 The Honorable Hilary Benson Gangnes presided.
 
3
 The Honorable Michael K. Tanigawa presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Appellants contend the district court erred
 
by: 
(1) ordering default against them on April 1, 2013 and
 
April 3, 2013; 
(2) denying their motion to set aside default and for
 
leave to file counterclaims; and
 
(3) failing to set a trial and/or hearing on the issue
 
of damages and instead issuing the Judgment against them.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
 
Appellants' appeal lacks merit.
 
Appellants contend the district court abused its 
discretion by entering default against them because Appellants 
were unable to attend the April 1, 2013 hearing and had limited 
knowledge of the complaint filed by Plaintiff-Appellee Queen Emma 
Land Company (Queen Emma) at the time default was entered. 
Appellants identify the general policy that "defaults and default 
judgments are not favored and that any doubt should be resolved 
in favor of the party seeking relief [from default], so that, in 
the interests of justice, there can be a full trial on the 
merits." Rearden Family Trust v. Wisenbaker, 101 Hawai 'i 237, 
254, 65 P.3d 1029, 1046 (2003) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Entry of default and default judgment are authorized
 
under District Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP) Rule 55(a),
 
which provides:
Rule 55. DEFAULT.
 
(a) Entry . When a party against whom a judgment for
affirmative relief is sought has failed to plead or
otherwise defend as provided by these rules, and the fact is
made to appear by affidavit or otherwise, the clerk shall
enter that party's default.
 
The district court entered default against Appellants
 
after they failed to appear at the April 1, 2013 hearing.
 
Oliveira's spouse and Amazonia's co-owner Katia Oliveira (Katia),
 
testified that Appellants were aware of Queen Emma's complaint
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and the proceedings. Even considering a policy disfavoring
 
default, the district court's entry of default did not constitute
 
an abuse of its discretion under these facts. 
Appellants contend the district court erred by denying
 
their motion to set aside default. Under DCRCP Rule 55(c):
Rule 55. DEFAULT
 
. . . .
 
(c) Setting Aside Default . For good cause shown the
court may set aside an entry of default and, if a judgment
by default has been entered, may likewise set it aside in
accordance with Rule 60(b).
 
When a motion to set aside either an entry of default
or a judgment by default is denied, the court in denying the
motion may award to the non-defaulting party those
reasonable attorney's fees incurred to defend the motion.
 
Generally, courts grant a motion to set aside entry of
 
default upon finding: "(1) that the nondefaulting party will not
 
be prejudiced by the reopening, (2) that the defaulting party has
 
a meritorious defense, and (3) that the default was not the
 
result of inexcusable neglect or a wilful act." BDM, Inc. v.
 
Sageco, Inc., 57 Haw. 73, 76, 549 P.2d 1147, 1150 (1976). 
The district court denied Appellants' May 22, 2013 
motion to set aside default without making any specific finding regarding prejudice to Queen Emma. The district court rejected 
Appellants' arguments that a meritorious defense had been stated 
on the record and that their absence from Hawai
'i and lack of 
knowledge of Queen Emma's complaint constituted "excusable neglect." 
Appellants contend they provided a meritorious defense 
against Queen Emma's allegations that Appellants failed to pay 
rent for March 2013, provide sales reports, obtain insurance, or 
provide a State of Hawai
'i Department of Land and Natural 
Resources (DLNR) issued registration certification (a requirement of the parties' lease agreement). At a hearing held June 10, 
2013, Appellants argued to the district court that they had: 
submitted proof of the required insurance to Queen Emma; been 
hindered in their ability to obtain DLNR registration for their 
business due to Queen Emma's failure to cooperate in their 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
application; and provided required sales reports.
 
However, Appellants did not submit written evidence of
 
insurance coverage, DLNR registration, or sales reports and
 
rather "attached declarations basically attesting to the fact [of
 
their insurance;]" and did not have the documents at the hearing
 
because Oliveira runs many business and his busy schedule made it
 
difficult to find all necessary documentation. Queen Emma's
 
counsel acknowledged to the district court that Appellants paid
 
their March 2013 rent after the filing of the amended complaint. 
The record does not reflect the existence of a meritorious
 
defense.
 
Appellants contend the district court erred by finding 
they had engaged in inexcusable neglect because the record 
established Appellants had been "out of the country and it took 
some time to secure counsel[.]" Appellants cite no authority for 
their contention that absence from the jurisdiction, or delay 
afforded to secure counsel, would constitute excusable neglect. 
See Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7) (requiring 
appellants to provide arguments "with citations to the authorities, statutes, and parts of the record relied on."). 
"Generally, the failure to answer a complaint or to
 
obtain a court order extending the time to answer is inexcusable
 
neglect." Pogia v. Ramos, 10 Haw. App. 411, 417, 876 P.2d 1342,
 
1346 (1994). The district court could reasonably have found that
 evidence of prior notices that Queen Emma would assert its rights
 
under the lease and the termination of their lease on February
 
28, 2013 rendered inexcusable Appellants' neglect of responding
 
to complaints regarding their obligations to pay rent, provide
 
proof of insurance, or vacate the subject property prior to
 
Appellants' departure to Brazil on March 3, 2013.
 
Appellants contend the district court abused its
 
discretion by entering default judgment without providing
 
Appellants an opportunity to go forward with a trial on the
 
merits of their claims and then again on the issue of damages. 
Appellants provide no authority to support this contention and
 
DCRCP Rule 55(b) specifically authorized the district court to
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
enter default judgment, inclusive of a monetary award:
Rule 55.  DEFAULT.
 
. . . .
 
(b) Judgment.  Judgment by default may be entered as
follows:
 
(1) BY THE CLERK. When the plaintiff's claim against a
defendant is for a sum certain or for a sum which can by
computation be made certain, the clerk upon request of the
plaintiff and upon a verified complaint, subsequent verification,
or affidavit of the amount due shall enter judgment for that
amount and costs against the defendant, if the defendant has been
defaulted for failure to appear and if the defendant is not an
infant or incompetent person.
 
. . . .
 
(2) BY THE COURT. In all other cases the party entitled to a
judgment by default shall apply to the court therefor. If, in
order to enable the court to enter judgment or to carry it into
effect, it is necessary to take an account or to determine the
amount of damages or to establish the truth of any averment by
evidence or to make an investigation of any other matter, the
court may conduct such hearings as it deems necessary and proper.
 
District court rules plainly provide that default
 
judgment may be entered for a "sum certain" where a defendant has
 
defaulted. Id. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the
 
1) 
July 25, 2013 Judgment and Notice of Entry of
 
Judgment or Order; 
2) June 28, 2013 Order Denying Defendants Amazonia
Forest Corp. and Augusto C. Oliveira's Motion to (1) Set Aside
 Default Judgment; and (2) For Leave to File Answer and
 
Counterclaim, Filed on May 22, 2013; and
 

 
3) April 3, 2013 Judgment for Possession all entered in
 
the District Court of the First Circuit are affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, August 19, 2014. 
On the briefs: Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Anthony "T.J." Quan

for Defendants/Appellants.
 
John B. Shimizu
 
Robert G. Campbell
(Van Buren Campbell & Shimizu)
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
5
 