NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
CAAP-17-0000827 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN THE MATTER OF HAWAII FIRE FIGHTERS ASSOCIATION,
IAFF, LOCAL 1463, AFL-CIO Complainant-Appellant-Appellant,
and 
RICK BLANGIARDI, MAYOR, CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU;
LIONEL CAMARA, JR., ACTING FIRE CHIEF,
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU;
HONOLULU FIRE DEPARTMENT, CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU;
a
nd CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU,
Respondents-Appellees-Appellees,
and 
HAWAII LABOR RELATIONS BOARD; KERRY KOMATSUBARA;
SESNITA A.D. MOEPONO; and J N. MUSTO (2016-001),
Agency-Appellees-Appellees 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 16-1-1390-07) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Complainant-Appellant-Appellant Hawaii Fire Fighters
Association, IAFF, Local 1463, AFL-CIO (HFFA or the Union) 
appeals from the November 7, 2017 Final Judgment (Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court),1 in favor of Respondents-Appellees-Appellees Rick 
Blangiardi, Mayor,2 City and County of Honolulu; Lionel Camara, 
Jr., Acting Fire Chief,3 City and County of Honolulu; Honolulu 
Fire Department, City and County of Honolulu (HFD); and City and 
County of Honolulu (collectively, the City), and Agency-Appellee-Appellee Hawaii Labor Relations Board (HLRB or the Board), 
including Kerry Komatsubara, Sesnita A.D. Moepono, and J.N. Musto 
(collectively, the Agency).  HFFA also challenges the Circuit 
Court's October 19, 2017 Order Affirming [HLRB's] Findings of 
Fact [(FOFs)], Conclusions of Law [(COLs)], and Decision and 
Order Dated June 21, 2016 (Order Affirming HLRB), and November 7, 
2017 Notice of Entry of Final Judgment. 
This appeal arises out of a Prohibited Practice 
Complaint (Complaint) filed by HFFA with the Board, which alleged that HFD failed to properly consult and/or negotiate with HFFA 
regarding implementation of a Rapid Intervention Team (RIT) fire 
fighter training program, in violation of various provisions of 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 89, as well as the parties' 
collective bargaining agreement (CBA).  Upon conclusion of 
multiple evidentiary hearings on the Complaint, the Board issued 
1 The Honorable Keith K. Hiraoka presided. 
2 Pursuant to Rule 25(d) of the Hawai #i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP ), Mayor Rick Blangiardi is substituted for former Mayor Kirk Caldwell. 
3 Pursuant to HRCP Rule 25(d), Acting Fire Chief Lionel Camara, Jr.
is substituted for former Fire Chief Manuel Neves ( Chief Neves ). 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
its FOFs, COLs, and Decision and Order (Decision 482), finding no 
prohibited practice by HFD and dismissing the Complaint in its 
entirety. 
HFFA appealed to the Circuit Court, which affirmed 
Decision 482.  HFFA timely filed a notice of appeal to this court on November 13, 2017, contending that the Circuit Court erred in affirming Decision 482.  
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues and arguments raised by the parties, we affirm. I. BACKGROUND A. Underlying Facts On February 4, 1972, HFFA was certified as the 
exclusive representative for State of Hawai# i fire fighters, 
bargaining unit 11 (BU 11), consisting of supervisory and non
-
supervisory employees at Hawaii's fire departments.4  The 
Certification Order provided that the City and County of Honolulu, along with the counties of Hawai# i, Kaua# i, and Maui, 
was required to "bargain collectively with [HFFA] and enter into a written agreement with [HFFA] with respect to wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment which are subject to negotiations under the [Hawai
#i Public Employment Relations 
4 Pursuant to the Certification of Exclusive Bargaining
Representative and Order to Negotiate ( Certification Order ), BU 11 does not 
include:  "Administrative and Service Bureau Captain, Service Officer, Fire
Suppression Operations Commander, Chief, Deputy Chiefs, Hawaii BattalionChiefs, Fire Division Commander No. F-149, and all others."  
3  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Act]."  The CBA at issue in this case was in effect from July 1, 
2011, to June 30, 2017. 
On August 5, 2014, HFD issued a Special Notice,5 SN-14-
201, instructing all uniformed personnel to complete mandatory 
online International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF) Fire 
Ground Survival (FGS) training and informing them of three days 
of FGS field training to be conducted that November by HFD 
instructors.  A follow-up Special Notice, SN-14-213, issued the next day, invited fire fighters to sign up for "Train-the-Trainer" training to become instructors for the planned field course.  Following consultation discussions between HFD and HFFA, the FGS field training course began in approximately February 2015. 
In April of 2015, HFD started planning an RIT training 
program
6 to build on the FGS training.  On October 16, 2015, HFD 
5 A Special Notice is "a written notice that disseminates or
distributes information" to HFD personnel.  Chief Neves testified that it is 
standard practice for Special Notices to be sent to the Union and estimatedthat approximately 300 or 400 Special Notices are issued by HFD each year. 
6 RIT training is a National Fire Protection Association ( NFPA )
standard designed to promote the "safety of all fire suppression personnel"and "provide a constant, sustainable rapid intervention capability at the
emergency scene."  HFD does not adopt NFPA standards per se  but uses them as 
best practice guidelines.  Chief Neves testified that some form of RIT 
training had been part of HFD policy for approximately 10 to 15 years, butthat the training program which began in 2015 was the first course implementedby HFD specifically to prepare fire fighters to be part of RITs, in accordancewith NFPA standards. 
Per the subsection entitled "RIT" of HFD's "Policy & Procedures
Manual, Chapter 4-Fire Operations, Article 3-Emergency Response, Section 2-Safety": 
RIT.  The [Incident Commander] shall provide personnel
for the rescue of members operating at emergency incidents
(continued...) 
4 (...continued)  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
issued a Special Notice, SN-15-179, inviting fire fighters to be 
trained as instructors for the planned RIT training.  The Special Notice specifically provided that "[a]ppropriate compensation for off-duty attendance is authorized."  On November 20, 2015, HFD issued a Special Notice, SN-15-201, indicating the 33 fire fighters who were selected to become RIT trainers and providing that they were to attend a five-day "Train-the-Trainer Training" from December 7 to 11, 2015.  All of the selected fire fighters 
were part of BU 11. 
Both Chief Neves and Assistant Chief Socrates Bratakos 
(AC Bratakos) testified before the Board that HFD communicated 
its intent to conduct RIT training to Union representatives at a 
January 4, 2016 meeting, and that the parties discussed creating a working group for the program.   Chief Neves testified further 
that while HFD did not believe the RIT training required consultation, it was HFD's desire to "open" the planning process and involve HFFA "from the get-go."  On January 7, 2016, HFD sent 
HFFA President Robert Lee (President Lee) a letter regarding RIT 
7
if the need arises.  A RIT shall consist of at least four 
members and be available to rescue downed, trapped, lost, ordisorientated fire fighters during emergency operations. . . 
A RIT shall be established at every confirmed building
fire and for any other incident where an extreme life safetyhazard exists for responding fire fighters. 
7 Chief Neves testified that the January 4, 2016 meeting was part of
a series of monthly meetings with HFFA, which began in October, 2015. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
training, announcing HFD's desire to form a working group and 
requesting HFFA designate its representatives for the group. 
By letter dated January 11, 2016 (January 11 Letter), 
HFFA requested the following information regarding the RIT working group: 
1. What is meant by 'Working Groups?'; 
2. What are these group's [sic] charge?; 
3. What are the policy, guidelines, and criteria, if any,
provided to the groups to develop recommendations?; 
4. What authority does these groups [sic] have inselecting other BU11 members in the process; and 
5. What remuneration, if any, is given to BU11 memberswho participate in these groups. 
By letter dated January 15, 2016 (January 15 Letter), 
HFFA responded to HFD's request to form a working group, stating 
HFFA's position that a working group was "premature in light of additional information needed in order to thoroughly discuss all aspects of the [RIT] Training working group."  The January 15 Letter also requested consultation on the RIT training program and its curriculum, and stated that HFFA would contact HFD to schedule a consultation meeting after receipt of the requested information.  
On January 20, 2016, HFD responded to the January 11 
Letter, providing answers to each of the questions posed therein. On January 27, 2016, HFD responded to the January 15 Letter:  (1) incorporating by reference the answers provided in its preceding response; (2) indicating that HFD would produce the requested materials on the RIT curriculum in advance of the monthly 
6  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HFD/HFFA meeting on February 8, 2016; and (3) noting that due to 
the "time sensitive nature" of the RIT program, HFD would like to schedule a consultation meeting for the week beginning February 16, 2016.  On February 3, 2016, HFD emailed HFFA a draft curriculum, schedule, and instructor list for the RIT program. 
On February 4, 2016, HFFA sent HFD an acknowledgment 
(February 4 Letter) of HFD's January 20 and January 27 letters, 
entitled "[HFD] Working Groups."  Therein, HFFA demanded 
immediate "consultation on the purpose and function of HFD Working Groups," and submitted a series of questions regarding the working group and RIT program which were to be answered in a requested "proposal" from HFD, to be produced by the following day.  The February 4 Letter did not contain any mention of the materials HFD provided the previous day. 
AC Bratakos testified, and the Board found, that on 
February 11, 2016, HFD discussed the RIT program with HFFA and conducted a "walkthrough" of the facility where the training was to take place, at which time no objections were raised.
8 
On February 24, 2016, HFD responded to the February 4 
Letter, providing answers to each of the questions posed by HFFA, incorporating by reference the RIT curriculum, schedule, and instructor list emailed to HFFA on February 3rd, and attaching an Emergency Action Plan for the training.  HFD also reiterated its 
8 President Lee and at least one other HFFA board member were in 
attendance. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
invitation for HFFA to participate in the working group and 
assist with development of the training program.  HFD stated that it would "request a consultation meeting with [HFFA] when the RIT Working Group discovers issues that significantly affect wages, benefits, or working conditions."  Chief Neves testified, and the Board found, that while a working group was formed by HFD, HFFA did not participate.   The Board found: 
9
At [that] point, HFD determined that it could not wait
for HFFA to participate in the formulation of the RIT
Program protocols (there were issues with the lapse offunding by June 30, 2016, and more importantly, startingtraining was crucial for the safety of the OPS personnel),and HFD started to implement the RIT Program. 
On March 1, 2016, HFD issued a Special Notice, SN-16-
044, to all fire fighters providing for mandatory participation 
in the RIT course for all Fire Operations (OPS) personnel,
"scheduled for off-duty attendance" beginning April 2016, with 
"appropriate compensation authorized."  The Special Notice further stated: 10 
[HFD] RIT instructors will conduct this training,
which encompasses self-survival procedures, panic
management, communications, low/reduced profile rescues,disentanglement maneuvers, upper floor rescue techniques,and RIT operations.  Training shall be attended on two consecutive days.  Students who successfully completed the[IAFF] FGS course that was offered in 2015 and also completethis RIT course will receive an FDTN [(Fire Department 
9 At the time of HFD's February 24, 2016 letter to HFFA, the working
group consisted of AC Bratakos and the Battalion Chiefs and Fire Captains fromFire Operations and the Training and Research Bureau who were responsible forthe training. 
10 OPS personnel includes all fire fighters that work in HFD's fire 
stations, i.e. , HFD's fire suppression forces.  RIT training was made 
voluntary for bureau personnel, i.e. , those not engaged in fire suppression 
activities. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Training Network)11] Certificate of Completion. 
A schedule for the RIT training was attached to Special Notice 
SN-16-044. 
At the behest of HFFA, Captain Thomas Reppuhn (Captain 
Reppuhn), an HFFA board member and representative on the joint 
HFD-HFFA safety committee,  visited the training facility where 
RIT training was to take place to evaluate safety aspects during 
a "test run" of the program on March 11, 2016.  That same day, 
Captain Reppuhn advised Assistant Chief Scott Lawton (AC Lawton), 
by email, that he had serious concerns regarding the potential 
for bodily injury to fire fighters participating in the training and demanded an emergency meeting of the safety committee.   AC 
Lawton replied later that day to schedule the meeting and solicit further information regarding Captain Reppuhn's concerns so that HFD could address them "immediately." 1312
On March 15, 2016, the safety committee convened to 
discuss the RIT training program.  At the meeting, Captain Reppuhn stated that based on his observations of the March 11 test run, it was HFFA's position that the training should be suspended pending "consultation with HFFA" and a "thorough safety 
11 FDTN is an organization which provided the RIT curriculum
implemented by both Maui Fire Department and Federal Fire Fighters stationed
in Hawai #i prior to adoption by HFD. 
12 Captain Reppuhn was joined at the training facility by fellow HFFA
Board Member Bill Thornock. 
13 Captain Reppuhn testified that he did not notify anyone at the
training facility of his safety concerns. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
review of [the] program."  AC Lawton testified, and the Board 
found, that both he and Battalion Chief Ryan Young (BC Young) 
asked Captain Reppuhn to share specifics on his concerns 
regarding the RIT program and that Captain Reppuhn refused to do so.  HFD did not resolve to suspend the program but agreed to schedule a walkthrough of the program for March 28, 2016. 
After the emergency meeting, Captain Reppuhn emailed a 
list of his safety concerns to President Lee, along with a summary of the meeting.  Captain Reppuhn recommended HFFA contact 
Hawaii Occupational Safety and Health (HIOSH) to do an 
inspection.  In recapping the safety meeting, Captain Reppuhn 
commended BC Young for his "immediate intervention" regarding RIT safety protocols, stating BC Young (1) "identified numerous concerns," (2) gave "recommendations to HFD to make corrections," and (3) had already addressed several of the issues identified at the March 11 test run. 
On March 21, 2016, HFFA filed a "Formal Complaint 
Related to the Safety and Health of Hawaii Fire Fighters" with 
HIOSH (HIOSH Complaint).  The gravamen of the HIOSH Complaint was 
that "[t]he RIT program as it is currently being implemented, 
threatens physical harm and creates an environment whereby 
imminent danger exists that can reasonably cause serious physical harm and/or death."  HFFA requested that HIOSH conduct a site 
inspection and review of the RIT program in the presence of its 
representatives and asked HIOSH to require full disclosure from 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HFD regarding the training to be reviewed by HIOSH to "insure no 
additional safety hazards exists [sic]."  Appended to the HIOSH Complaint was a "Labor Agreement Grievance Form," apparently filed March 15, 2016, alleging violations of several sections of the CBA and demanding consultation, negotiation, and suspension of the RIT training.  After exchanges between HIOSH, HFD, and the Union regarding the HIOSH Complaint, HIOSH found HFD's internal investigation and corrective actions to be "satisfactory" and closed the HIOSH Complaint on April 20, 2016. 
On March 22, 2016, while the HIOSH Complaint was still 
pending, the Union sent HFD a letter demanding HFD cease implementation of the RIT training and make the training voluntary, pending negotiation with the Union as to whether the training may be mandatory.  The following day, Captain Reppuhn sent HFD a similar letter in his capacity as a Union representative on the safety committee. 
On March 28, 2016, HFD held a two-hour walkthrough of 
the RIT training facility with Captain Joseph Condlin (Captain 
Condlin), who led the training, for the safety committee, with 
President Lee and other representatives of HFD and HFFA in 
attendance.  Captain Reppuhn testified that the walkthrough consisted of demonstrations of several training elements and was followed by a meeting wherein the parties discussed their respective positions.  On April 1, 2016, HFFA wrote to Chief Neves, reiterating its demand for consultation.  On April 12, 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2016, the safety committee met to follow-up on the March 28 
walkthrough, among other issues; however, Captain Reppuhn testified that HFFA acquiesced to HFD's position that there was"no reason to discuss [RIT]" given that the HIOSH Complaint waspending.   
B. Board Proceedings On March 30, 2016, HFFA filed the prohibited practice 
Complaint at issue in this appeal, challenging HFD's adoption andimplementation of the RIT training program.  The Complaint alleged that HFD's intentional and willful failure and/or refusalto consult or negotiate with HFFA regarding the RIT program (1) violated various provisions of the BU 11 CBA pertaining to "Recognition,"  (2) violated the duty to bargain in good faith 
14 
 
14 The Complaint alleged violations of "Section 1(A), (B) and/or (C)
of the [CBA]."  Section 1 of the CBA states, in relevant part: 
A. Recognition.
The Employer recognizes the Union as the certified
exclusive bargaining representative of all fire fighters,
including supervisory personnel, of the State and itspolitical subdivisions whose principal duties are to preventand respond to fires, attend to search and rescue, HAZMATand medical emergencies, except for officers and Employeeswho are excluded or may be excluded from the bargaining unitby law and the Hawaii Labor Relations Board.
. . . . 
B.
 Consultation. 
All matters affecting Employee relations, including
those that are, or may be, the subject of a regulationpromulgated by the Employer or any Personnel Director, aresubject to consultation with the Union.  The Employer shallconsult with the Union prior to effecting changes in anymajor policy affecting Employee relations. 
C. Mutual Consent. 
No changes in wages, hours or other conditions of
employment contained herein may be made except by mutual
consent. 
12  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
over changes in wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of 
employment under HRS § 89-9(a) (Supp. 2015) and the duty to consult under HRS § 89-9(c) (2012),
15 (3) constituted "bad 
faith," and (4) constituted prohibited labor practices under HRS § 89-13(a)(1), (5), (7), and (8) (2012).
16 
15 HRS § 89-9 provides, in relevant part: 
HRS § 89-9  Scope of negotiations; consultation.   (a)
The employer and the exclusive representative shall meet at
reasonable times, . . . and shall negotiate in good faithwith respect to wages, hours, the amounts of contributionsby the State and respective counties to the Hawaii employer-union health benefits trust fund to the extent allowed in subsection (e), and other terms and conditions of employmentwhich are subject to collective bargaining and which are tobe embodied in a written agreement as specified in section89-10, but such obligation does not compel either party toagree to a proposal or make a concession. 
. . . . 
(c)  
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all
matters affecting employee relations, including those thatare, or may be, the subject of a rule adopted by theemployer or any director, shall be subject to consultationwith the exclusive representatives of the employeesconcerned.  The employer shall make every reasonable effortto consult with exclusive representatives and consider theirinput, along with the input of other affected parties, priorto effecting changes in any major policy affecting employeerelations. 
16 HRS § 89-13 (2012) provides, in relevant part: 
HRS § 89-13  Prohibited practices; evidence of bad 
faith.   (a) It shall be a prohibited practice for a public
employer or its designated representative wilfully to: 
(1) Interfere, restrain, or coerce any employee inthe exercise of any right guaranteed under thischapter; 
. . . . 
(5) Refuse to bargain collectively in good faith with theexclusive representative as required in section 89-9; 
. . . . 
(7) Refuse or fail to comply with any provision of thischapter; [or] 
(continued...) 
13 (...continued) NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On April 11, 2016, HFD filed an Answer to the 
Complaint, denying all legal conclusions set forth therein, 
asserting a variety of defenses,17 and requesting dismissal of 
the Complaint as well as attorneys' fees and costs. 
On April 15, 2016, HFFA filed a Motion for 
Interlocutory Relief seeking to enjoin, restrain, and prohibit HFD from "further unilateral modification and violation of the [CBA], and further violations of [HRS Chapter 89], pending the issuance of a final determination on the instant [Complaint]." 
Attached thereto, HFFA submitted, inter alia, Declarations of Thomas Reppuhn and Irene L.A. Pu# uohau, along with exhibits 
depicting alleged safety issues regarding the RIT program.  HFD 
opposed the motion. 
The Board held evidentiary hearings on May 11-12, 16, 
and 18-19, 2016.  Six witnesses were called and examined by both parties and HLRB:  Chief Neves; AC Lawton; AC Bratakos; Captain Reppuhn; President Lee; and Captain Condlin. 
On June 21, 2016, the Board entered Decision 482, 
finding for HFD and dismissing HFFA's Complaint.  The Board 
(8) Violate the terms of a collective bargaining
agreement[.] 
17 HFD's Answer asserted the following defenses:  (1) the Complaint
failed to state a claim upon which relief can be granted; (2) HLRB lackedsubject matter jurisdiction to hear the Complaint; (3) HFFA was precluded fromrelief by the equitable doctrines of waiver, acquiescence, election,untimeliness, estoppel, unclean hands and laches; (4) HFFA was precluded fromrelief based on its failure to exhaust mandatory and available contractualremedies; and (5) HFFA failed to establish a violation of HRS Chapter 89and/or the CBA.  
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
framed the question presented as follows:  "Did [HFD] commit a 
'prohibited practice' by adopting and implementing a program to train fire fighters to rescue trapped or disoriented fire fighters without negotiating or consulting with the [HFFA]?"  The Board concluded that HFD's adoption of the training program did not constitute a prohibited practice.  
Decision 482 contained extensive FOFs regarding, inter 
alia, the CBA, the nature and necessity of RIT training, HFD's 
attempts to engage the Union in a working group to develop and 
implement the training, the Union's safety concerns regarding the training, and the corresponding HIOSH Complaint and HFD's corrective actions.  
Based on its FOFs, the Board found and concluded: 
(a)  The RIT Program is not specialized training, but
instead is standard training for OPS personnel.  The RIT 
Program is subject to the consultation requirement, and notthe negotiation or mutual consent requirement.  First, theCBA provides in CBA Section 48.B that HFD may requiretraining as long as the fire fighters are compensated forworking their days off.  There is no requirement for mutual consent or negotiation.  Second, and more important, HFFAtreated the RIT Program as a subject of consultation and notnegotiation.  Finally, and most importantly, HFFA failed inits burden of showing, factually and legally, that the RITProgram was subject to the negotiation requirement. 
(b)  On January 7, 2016, HFD invited HFFA "to form a
working group for the [RIT Program]."  As outlined above,HFFA did not accept HFD's invitation to discuss the RITProgram at its inception.  Subsequently, HFD did, in fact,request consultation in its January 27, 2016 letter to HFFA. However, rather than engaging in consultation over theimplementation of the RIT Program, HFFA changed tactics andrequested consultation on the issue of working groups. Thus, although HFD attempted to engage HFFA in discussionsover the RIT Program in January 2016, HFFA did not consultand engaged in efforts to stop implementation of the RITProgram.  
Moreover, the Board finds that HFD's repeated efforts
to have HFFA participate in the RIT Program working group,
even though not called "consultation," amounted to a request 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 to engage in meaningful discussions or dialog regarding
implementation of the RIT Program .  In substance, if not
form, HFD asked HFFA to be involved in the formulation of
the procedures and protocols for the implementation of theRIT Program.  For reasons not clear to the Board, HFFA
refused to participate.  Therefore, in substance, HFD did,
in good faith, initiate the consultation process .  HFFA, by
engaging in efforts to question the legitimacy of the
working group concept, was undermining the very purpose ofthe consultation requirement -- to have the partiesmeaningfully discuss issues to avoid disputes.  For the Board to rule otherwise and to accept the position taken byHFFA (i.e., the use of a working group did not amount toconsultation) would undermine the utility of theconsultation process by "elevating form over substance," andthe Board refuses to do so. 
(c)  HFD did not violate its obligation to consult 
with HFFA.  Consultation does not require the agreement of 
the parties.  As stated by the Board in In the matter of 
HGEA, AFSCME, Local 152, AFL-CIO, Complainant, and Linda 
Lingle, et al., Respondents, Decision 468 (June 13, 2007) at
p. 9 (adopting the position taken in, and quoting from,
Hawaii Nurses Association, 2 HPERB 218 (1979)): 
"Matters of consultation do not require a resolution
of differences.  'All that is required is that theemployer inform the exclusive representative of thenew or modified policy and that a dialogue as to themerits and disadvantages of the new or proposed policyor policy change take place.'  Cites omitted." 
The Board, then confirmed its adoption of the test
articulated in Decision No. 394, Hawaii Government Employees 
Association, AFSCME, Local 152, AFL-CIO , VI HLRB 1 (1978). 
Decision No. 394 requires management to comply with the
following factors: 
"(1) [N]otice to the union, (2) on proposed personnelpractices and policies of a major, substantial andcritical nature, other than those requiringnegotiations, (3) in reasonable completeness anddetail, (4) requesting the opinion, advice or input ofthe Union thereto, (5) listening to, comparing viewsand deliberating together thereon (i.e., 'meaningfuldialog'), and (6) without requirement of either sideto concede or agreement on any differences orconflicts arising or resulting from suchconsultation." 
Here, HFD, in fact, complied with the Decision 394
factors because : 
(1)  HFFA was notified (orally and in writing) in
January 2016 that, as part of its new training program, HFD
was contemplating the adoption of the RIT Program to betterequip OPS personnel to engage in fire fighter rescue.  This was early in the process.  In addition, HFD proposed theformation and use of the RIT working group to fosterdiscussions over the RIT Program.  While the RIT working 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 group was not intended to supplant consultation, it was the
start -- it was an opportunity to identify those issueswhich required either consultation or negotiation and thenbegin the appropriate process. 
Furthermore, on March 11, 2016, when Captain Reppuhn
advised AC Lawton that he had serious safety concernsregarding the RIT Program, HFFA did not disclose thoseconcerns to HFD, HFFA did not discuss those concerns withHFD, and was, as of March 15, 2016, already preparing tofile the HIOSH complaint.  If any party did not engage inconsultation, it would have been HFFA. 
(2)  While not subject to the negotiation requirement,
the RIT Program involved proposed training which was "major,substantial and critical" to the safety of OPS personnel. 
(3)  Since the RIT Program was in its infancy, HFD
provided as much material as it could to HFFA.  In addition,HFFA and its members were well aware of the RIT Programbecause of the initiation of the "train-the-trainer" programinitiated and completed in October or December 2015.  Thus, in its response to various inquiries from HFFA and byinitiating the "train-the-trainer" program, HFD providedHFFA with available information with reasonable detail and completeness. 
(4)  By proposing the RIT working group, HFD was
"requesting the opinion, advice or input of" HFFA.  Again, in substance, HFD was inviting HFFA to participatemeaningfully in the process of finalizing the implementationof the RIT Program. 
(5)  There was no "meaningful dialog" because HFFA,
rather than engaging in discussions, sought to delay orotherwise prevent the initiation of discussions. 
(6)  Finally, HFD never stated that the RIT working
group required that either side needed to agree.  HFD understood that consultation meant exactly that, i.e.,seeking the input from HFFA on a crucially important safetyprogram. 
Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that HFD
fulfilled its obligation to consult with HFFA over the RITProgram implementation. 
(d)  HFFA failed to provide any factual basis for a
finding that HFD violated the CBA .  Other than point to
[President] Lee's testimony that there may be: 
"potential violations of Section 1. Recognition,
consult, negotiate; Section 4. Management Rights,Respondents abuse their management rights; Section 6.Prior Rights, Benefits and Perquisites, becauseaccording to the Special Notice, the training canimpact where you are assigned; Section 12. Promotions, because failing to attend or participatein the full two days of the training could impact apromotion, or future promotional opportunity; Section 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
14. Duties, because the RIT training changes the
duties of a firefighter; Section 20. Hours of Work,because Respondents are compelling employees to comein or work on their scheduled days off; Section 21.Overtime, clearly may be impacted; Section 30. Meals,because the Special Notice requires employees to bringin their own lunch; when it should be provided by theEmployer; Section 39. Safety and Health, because ofthe misinterpretation by Scott Lawton; Section 43.Equipment, could be impacted based on the employeesbeing provided the proper safety equipment during theRIT training; Section 14. Employer Required Training,because Respondents are misinterpreting what anemployer-required training is.  (Italics added.)" 
There are no facts to support a showing that there was 
an actual violation of the CBA by HFD.  Further, as
addressed above in detail, although the RIT Program was
mandatory, it was not "pass/fail" (as was the Maui training)and was participatory only.  The RIT Program was part of OPSpersonnel regular training and was not a new minimumrequirement.  Finally, all of the issues raised by[President] Lee could have been discussed in detail in theworking group suggested by HFD in January 7, 2016.  Thus,
the Board finds that there is simply no violation of the
CBA. 
(e)  There are no facts showing that HFD acted
wilfully, which is a required element to prove a prohibited
practice pursuant to HRS Chapter 89.  Although there wasmuch evidence regarding the circumstances surrounding theimplementation of the RIT Program, there was no evidence toshow that HFD consciously, knowingly, and deliberatelyintended to violate the provisions of HRS Chapter 89 or theCBA.  In fact, the whole intent of adopting and implementingthe RIT Program was to adequately train OPS personnel inrapid intervention team techniques, procedures and equipmentto save lives and prevent serious injuries -- to help HFFA'smembers when they become trapped or disoriented whilefighting a fire.  This was prompted by, among other things,Chief Neves losing a fire fighter, national efforts toimprove fire fighter safety, the implementation of rapidintervention team training by Maui and Hawaii Counties(without, apparently, objection by HFFA) and the Hawaiibased Federal Fire Fighters and the need to train firefighters in an operation required by HFD Policy -- rapidintervention teams.  In other words, OPS personnel need tobe properly and continuously trained because worker safetyin an inherently dangerous profession is a constant concern. Thus, to make its rapid intervention teams effective inemergency situations was HFD's motivation for training allOPS personnel and HFD's motivation to adopt and implementthe RIT Program, and HFFA provided no evidence to thecontrary. 
(f)  With respect to HFFA's request for injunctive
relief, the Board finds that: 
(1)  The Board, based on the foregoing, finds and
holds that HFFA does not prevail on the merits.  Thus, since 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HFFA cannot prevail on the merits, it is not entitled to
injunctive relief, whether preliminary or permanent. 
(2)  Further, there has been no showing of irreparable 
harm.  There are no worker safety issues extant with respectto the HFD's Charles H. Thurston Fire Training Center wherethe RIT training is conducted.  There is no showing that theOPS personnel, who must meet certain minimum fitness andtraining requirements separate and apart from the RITProgram, would be subject to any unreasonable risk of harm. 
(3)  Finally, it is clear that the public interest
overwhelmingly tips in favor of HFD.  The purpose of the RITProgram is to train HFD's OPS personnel (the personnelactually fighting fires and who are the most at risk) inrescue techniques and preparation to rescue their fellowfire fighters.  The purpose of the RIT Program is not to setdifferent or additional minimum qualifications but toprepare HFD's personnel to save fire fighters who get intotrouble, i.e., to prevent or minimize the risk of line-of-duty deaths and serious injuries.  
HFFA was given the opportunity to comment upon and
actually be involved in developing protocols for theimplementation of the RIT Program through the RIT workinggroup.  HFFA failed to cooperate and collaborate with HFD.It cannot now be heard to complain. 
(Emphasis added; footnotes omitted; format altered). 
The Board entered, inter alia, the following COLs: 
(a)  The adoption and implementation of the RIT
Program, and the mandatory training required to implementthe RIT Program, are not topics subject to mandatorybargaining.  This is because: 
(1)  The CBA does not require negotiation over
employer required training so long as overtime is paid whentraining occurs on employees' days off.  HFFA could not identify any provision which required negotiations overrequired training. 
(2)  Pursuant to HRS § 89-9(d), by requiring OPS
personnel to attend required training sessions (with thepayment of overtime), HFD was exercising its managementrights.  HFD retained the right to direct its employees,maintain efficiency and productivity, and determine themeans, methods and personnel by which its operations were tobe conducted.  Clearly, the adoption of the RIT Program andits implementation through the mandatory RIT Programtraining for OPS personnel was the exercise of a managementright (i.e., directing HFD's OPS personnel to attendtraining, maintaining the efficiency of its personnel inrescue operation and determining how rescue operations wereto be conducted and how its personnel were to be trained inrescue techniques). 
(b)  The adoption and implementation of the RIT
Program was, however, subject to the "consultation" 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
requirement.  As outlined in detail above, HFD did not
violate its obligation to consult with HFFA.  In fact, theBoard found that HFD attempted, early on, to engage(through, for example, the proposed RIT working group) HFFAin meaningful dialog or discussions regarding the RITProgram.  However, HFFA was not willing to participate,listen and have meaningful dialog with HFD over the RITProgram. 
(c)  Based on the foregoing, the Board concludes that
HFD, in implementing the RIT Program did not violate itsobligations under the CBA or HRS Chapter 89.  There was simply no showing of any violation by HFD. 
(d)  Further, there was no showing the HFD acted
wilfully. . . . 
(Footnotes omitted; format altered). 
Having determined that HFFA failed to establish by a 
preponderance of the evidence that HFD committed a prohibited 
practice, the Board concluded that HFFA was not entitled to any of the requested relief and dismissed the Complaint in its entirety.  With respect to the RIT training program, the Board ordered the parties to "engage in meet and confer" via the working group, and that future disputes regarding the RIT program were to be handled via the grievance process set forth in the CBA. 
On July 12, 2016, approximately three weeks after entry 
of Decision 482, HFFA filed a motion for reconsideration pursuant to HRCP Rule 59(e), arguing that the Board misconstrued and 
misapplied HRS § 89-9(a) and (d) (2012 and Supp. 2015) (Motion 
for Reconsideration
).  On July 22, 2016, the Board summarily 
20   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
denied the Motion for Reconsideration as untimely under HRCP Rule 
59(e).18 
C. Appeal to the Circuit Court 
HFFA appealed from Decision 482 to the Circuit Court, 
claiming that the substantial rights of BU 11 employees were prejudiced by the decision and seeking reversal and modification on the grounds that the decision was made: 
(1) in violation of constitutional and statutory provisions,
(2) in excess of statutory authority or jurisdiction of theagency, (3) made upon unlawful procedure, (4) affected byother error of law, (5) clearly erroneous in view of thereliable, probative and substantive evidence on the wholerecord, and/or (6) arbitrary, capricious, and characterizedby abuse of discretion and a clearly unwarranted exercise ofdiscretion. 
After briefing was complete, the Circuit Court heard 
oral argument on September 21, 2017.  At the close of oral 
argument, the Circuit Court concluded that there was substantial evidence in the record to support the FOFs and COLs contained in Decision 482.  The court affirmed Decision 482 and entered the Order Affirming Decision, denying and dismissing HFFA's appeal with prejudice.  On November 7, 2017, the court entered Final Judgment in favor of the City and the Agency.  
On November 13, 2017, HFFA filed its notice of appeal 
to this court. II. POINTS OF ERROR 
HFFA raises four points of error on appeal, contending 
that the Circuit Court was wrong when it:  (1) affirmed the 
18 HFFA does not challenge this ruling. 
21 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Board's findings and conclusions that the training of fire 
fighters affecting their safety, health, and other terms of employment were not mandatory subjects of bargaining; (2) affirmed Decision 482 despite the City's unilateral changes to existing terms of employment which constitute a refusal to bargain in good faith under HRS § 89-9(a); (3) disregarded the Union's contention that the Board erred as a matter of law over the City's circumvention of the Union as the exclusive bargaining agent of fire fighters; and (4) affirmed Decision No. 482 based on the management rights clause in HRS § 89-9(d)(7), contrary to the Constitution and legislative amendments. III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
Our review of a circuit court decision on an appeal 
from an administrative agency determination is a secondary appeal; we must determine whether the circuit court was right or wrong in its decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS § 91-14(g) (2012 and Supp. 2019) to the agency's decision. Flores v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 143 Hawai# i 114, 120, 424 P.3d 
469, 475 (2018). 
HRS § 91-14 provides in relevant part: 
(g)  Upon review of the record, the court may affirm
the decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may reverse ormodify the decision and order if the substantial rights ofthe petitioners may have been prejudiced because theadministrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or ordersare: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutoryprovisions; or 
22 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or 
(4) Affected by other error of law; or 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,probative, and substantial evidence on the wholerecord; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized byabuse of discretion or clearly unwarrantedexercise of discretion. 
"Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are 
reviewable under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions 
regarding procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of fact under subsection (5); and an agency's exercise of discretion under subsection (6)."  Flores, 143 Hawai# i at 121, 424 P.3d at 
476 (citations omitted).  The Hawai# i Supreme Court has stated: 
An agency's conclusions of law are reviewed de novo,
while an agency's factual findings are reviewed for clear
error.  A conclusion of law that presents mixed questions offact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneousstandard because the conclusion is dependent upon the factsand circumstances of the particular case. 
As a general matter, a finding of fact or a mixed
determination of law and fact is clearly erroneous when (1)the record lacks substantial evidence to support the findingor determination, or (2) despite substantial evidence tosupport the finding or determination, the appellate court isleft with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.  Substantial evidence is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enablea person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion. 
Del Monte Fresh Produce (Haw.), Inc. v. Int'l Longshore & 
Warehouse Union, Local 142, 128 Hawai# i 289, 302, 287 P.3d 190, 
203 (2012) (Del Monte II) (citation omitted). 
Additionally, our review is tempered by the "principle 
that the agency's decision carries a presumption of validity and appellant has the heavy burden of making a convincing showing 
23 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the decision is invalid because it is unjust and 
unreasonable in its consequences."  Konno v. Cty. of Haw., 85 Hawai# i 61, 77, 937 P.2d 397, 413 (1997) (citation omitted). 
"Where both mixed questions of fact and law are presented, deference will be given to the agency's expertise and experience in the particular field and the court should not substitute its own judgment for that of the agency."  Dole Hawaii Div.-Castle & Cooke, Inc. v. Ramil, 71 Haw. 419, 424, 794 P.2d 1115, 1118 (1990) (citation omitted). 
"Statutory interpretation is a question of law 
reviewable de novo."  Del Monte Fresh Produce (Haw.), Inc. v. 
Int'l Longshore & Warehouse Union, Local 142, 112 Hawai# i 489, 
499, 146 P.3d 1066, 1076 (2006) (Del Monte I) (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted).  Statutory construction is 
grounded in the following principles: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain andunambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plainand obvious meaning.  Third, implicit in the task ofstatutory construction is our foremost obligation toascertain and give effect to the intention of thelegislature, which is to be obtained primarily from thelanguage contained in the statute itself.  Fourth, whenthere is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctivenessor uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, anambiguity exists. 
When there is ambiguity in a statute, the meaning of
the ambiguous words may be sought by examining the context,with which the ambiguous words, phrases, and sentences maybe compared, in order to ascertain their true meaning. Moreover, the courts may resort to extrinsic aids indetermining legislative intent, such as legislative history,or the reason and spirit of the law. 
24 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  State v. Abihai, 146 Hawai# i 398, 406, 463 P.3d 1055, 1063 (2020) 
(citation omitted). 
In addition, it is a "'well established rule of 
statutory construction that, where an administrative agency is 
charged with the responsibility of carrying out the mandate of a statute which contains words of broad and indefinite meaning, courts accord persuasive weight to administrative construction and follow the same, unless the construction is palpably erroneous.'"  Del Monte I, 112 Hawai# i at 501 n.17, 146 P.3d at 
1078 n.17 (citation omitted). IV. DISCUSSION 
The pivotal issue here concerns whether HFD had a duty 
to bargain with HFFA prior to implementation of the RIT training program.  HFFA contends that the Board was incorrect to conclude that the adoption and implementation of the RIT training program 
were not topics subject to mandatory bargaining. HFFA also 
contends that the Board erred in concluding that HFD was 
exercising its protected management rights in implementing the program.  Accordingly, HFFA maintains that the Circuit Court was wrong to affirm the Board's denial and dismissal of HFFA's Complaint. 
Conversely, HFD submits that the Circuit Court's Order 
Affirming HLRB must be affirmed because: 
(1) the HLRB did not commit clear error when it found that
Employer did not have a duty to negotiate over RIT training,(2) the Board's application of the management rightsdoctrine under [HRS] § 89-9(d) was not clearly erroneous, 
25 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) the Board properly found that Employer satisfied its
duty to consult, (4) HFFA failed to claim before the Boardthat Employer committed a prohibited practice when itsolicited, trained, and used BU 11 members as trainers forRIT training without prior negotiation or consultation, (5)HFFA failed to prove that any violation of [HRS] Ch. 89 waswillful, (6) the Union's appeal is moot, and (7) none ofHFFA's other arguments have legal or factual merit. 
A. Mootness 
At the outset, we consider HFD's argument that the 
instant appeal must be dismissed as moot given that the RIT training is completed, leaving no "live" case and controversy for this court to decide.  "It is axiomatic that mootness is an issue of subject matter jurisdiction."  In re Thomas H. Gentry Revocable Tr., 138 Hawai# i 158, 168, 378 P.3d 874, 884 (2016) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
A case is moot where the question to be determined is
abstract and does not rest on existing facts or rights.Thus, the mootness doctrine is properly invoked where"events . . . have so affected the relations between the parties that the two conditions for justiciability relevanton appeal—adverse interest and effective remedy—have beencompromised." 
In re Thomas, 73 Haw. 223, 226, 832 P.2d 253, 254 (1992) 
(citation omitted). 
The supreme court has held that an agency's 
"[u]nchallenged findings are binding on appeal."  Poe v. HLRB, 97 Hawai# i 528, 536, 40 P.3d 930, 938 (2002).  Here, HLRB found that 
"the initial training held pursuant to the RIT Program would be followed by 'refresher' sessions."  HLRB also found that the RIT training was part of a larger scheme of ongoing training. Considering that neither party challenges these findings -- which are supported by HFD testimony during evidentiary hearings before 
26 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 the Board -- and that HFFA sought injunctive and declaratory 
relief to prevent both the completed training as well as future 
planned trainings, we conclude that relations between the parties 
have not been so affected as to eliminate the requisite adverse 
interest and effective remedy necessary for justiciability of HFFA's claims.  See In re Thomas, 73 Haw. at 225-26, 832 P.2d at 254; see also State v. Nakanelua, 134 Hawai# i 489, 502, 345 P.3d 
155, 168 (2015).  Thus, we conclude that the case is not moot. 
B. Duty to Negotiate HFFA argues that the Circuit Court erred in affirming 
Decision 482 because the Board erred in concluding that HFD did not have a duty to negotiate over its implementation of the RIT program.  Specifically, HFFA contends that "RIT training vitally affected multiple terms and condition of employment of fire fighters and therefore constituted mandatory subjects of collective bargaining under [HRS § 89-9(a)]."  In addition, HFFA maintains that "the Board used the wrong standard to determine what subject matters required bargaining by looking solely to the [CBA] and [HRS § 89-9(d)] to determine the scope of bargaining." HFFA's arguments are unpersuasive. 
The Complaint alleged, inter alia, violations of HRS 
§ 89-13(a)(1), (5), (7) and (8).  In pertinent part, HRS § 89-13(a)(1) prohibits wilful interference with the right to collective bargaining under HRS Chapter 89.  HRS § 89-13(a)(5) makes it a prohibited labor practice for a public employer to 
27 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[r]efuse to bargain collectively in good faith with the 
exclusive representative as required in section 89-9."  HRS § 89-13(a)(7) constitutes a general prohibition on wilful refusal or failure to comply with the provisions of Chapter 89, while HRS § 89-13(a)(8) proscribes wilful violation of the terms of a CBA. 
Concerning the duty to negotiate, HRS § 89-9(a) 
requires public employers to 
negotiate in good faith with respect to wages, hours, the
amounts of contributions by the State and respectivecounties to the Hawaii employer-union health benefits trustfund to the extent allowed in subsection (e), and otherterms and conditions of employment which are subject tocollective bargaining and which are to be embodied in awritten agreement as specified in section 89-10[.] 
HRS § 89-9(c) states: 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all
matters affecting employee relations, including those thatare, or may be, the subject of a rule adopted by theemployer or any director, shall be subject to consultationwith the exclusive representatives of the employeesconcerned.  The employer shall make every reasonable effortto consult with exclusive representatives and consider theirinput, along with the input of other affected parties, priorto effecting changes in any major policy affecting employeerelations. 
HRS § 89-9(d),19 however, provides certain "management 
rights," which are intended to avoid interference through 
collective bargaining with certain employer's functions.  See, e.g., State of Haw. Org. of Police Officers ex rel. Rodrigues v. Cty. of Kaua# i, 135 Hawai# i 456, 466, 353 P.3d 998, 1008 (2015). 
The management rights doctrine establishes that mandatory 
19 We note that subsequent to the filing of the Complaint, HRS
§ 89-9(d) was amended to more specifically state that an employer may not
invoke its management rights to preclude negotiations over "the implementationof management decisions that affect terms and conditions of employment thatare subject to collective bargaining."  2018 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 10, Section § 1 at 37-38.  
28 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
collective bargaining may not "interfere with the rights and 
obligations of the employer to," inter alia: 
(1)  Direct employees; 
(2)  Determine qualifications, standards for work, and the
nature and contents of examinations; 
(3)  Hire, promote, transfer, assign, and retain employees
in positions; 
. . . . 
(6)  
Maintain efficiency and productivity, including
maximizing the use of advanced technology, in governmentoperations; [and] 
(7)  Determine methods, means, and personnel by which the
employer's operations are to be conducted[.] 
HRS § 89-9(d)(1)-(3) and (6)-(7). 
Notwithstanding these management rights, it is well-
settled that an employer may not make a change to wages, hours, 
or other terms and conditions of employment without first sitting down at the negotiating table.  See, e.g., Univ. of Haw. Prof'l Assembly v. Tomasu, 79 Hawai# i 154, 159-61, 900 P.2d 161, 166-68 
(1995).  In any case, the charging party -- in this case HFFA --has the burdens of proof and persuasion, both by a preponderance of the evidence, to establish the alleged violation of HRS § 89-
9.  See HRS § 91-10(5) (2012); Hawai# i Administrative Rules (HAR) 
§ 12-42-8(g)(16). 
Our supreme court has explained: 
[HRS §§] 89–9(a), (c) and (d) must be considered in
relationship to each other in determining the scope of
bargaining.  For if Section 89–9(a) were considereddisjunctively, on the one hand, all matters affecting theterms and conditions of employment would be referred to thebargaining table, regardless of employer rights.  On the other hand, Section 89–9(d), viewed in isolation, wouldpreclude nearly every matter affecting terms and conditionsof employment from the scope of bargaining. . . . 
29 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bearing in mind that the Legislature intended Chapter
89 to be a positive piece of legislation establishing
guidelines for joint-decision making . . . we are of the
opinion that all matters affecting wages, hours and working 
conditions are negotiable and bargainable, subject only to 
the limitations set forth in Section 89–9(d) . 
United Pub. Workers, Local 646 v. Hanneman, 106 Hawai# i 359, 364, 
105 P.3d 236, 241 (2005) (quoting Tomasu, 79 Hawai# i at 161, 900 
P.2d at 168).  In that connection, the United States Supreme 
Court has held that the essential inquiry in determining the scope of mandatory collective bargaining -- ordinarily limited to "issues that settle an aspect of the relationship between the employer and employees" -- is whether an employer's action "vitally affects the 'terms and conditions' of [the bargaining unit's] employment."  Allied Chem. & Alkali Workers of America, Local Union No. 1 v. Pittsburgh Plate Glass Co., Chem. Div., 404 U.S. 157, 178-79 (1971).  
While the first thing to be considered in interpreting 
whether a term or condition of employment has been changed is the plain language of the CBA, "past interpretations and applications, and past practices, as part of the common law of the shop, may be considered."  See Gealon v. Keala, 60 Haw. 513, 
521, 591 P.2d 621, 626 (1979) (citing, inter alia, United Steelworkers of America v. Warrior & Gulf Nav. Co., 363 U.S. 574, 
578-79 (1960) ("The [CBA] states the rights and duties of the parties.  It is more than a contract; it is a generalized code to govern a myriad of cases which the draftsmen cannot wholly anticipate.")). 
30  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, the Board determined that the RIT training 
program was a "standard training" within the terms and conditions 
of the BU 11 CBA and that, to the extent that the program may have an impact on hours, HFD was exercising its management rights under HRS § 89-9(d)(1), (6), and (7).  Relying on Section 48-B of the CBA, which expressly contemplates "Employer-Required Training" and states that "time spent by Employees who are required by the Employer to attend training sessions on their days off shall be considered as time worked," the Board found that "HFD may require training as long as the fire fighters are compensated for working their days off.  There is no requirement for mutual consent or negotiation."  The Board thus concluded that HFD complied with its obligations under HRS Chapter 89 and the CBA in implementing the RIT training program.
20 
On appeal to this court, HFFA does not challenge the 
Board's interpretation of Section 48-B or any of the Board's FOFs, but rather invokes the unilateral change doctrine to argue that HFD "made multiple changes to [other] existing terms and conditions of employment without first giving notice and conferring in good faith with HFFA."  In particular, HFFA claims that the RIT program effected four unilateral changes to terms 
20 Although the Board concluded that the training was not subject to
mandatory bargaining, it found that HFD had a duty to consult with HFFA under
Section 1.B of the CBA, which tracks HRS § 89-9(c) and mandates consultationover "all matters affecting employee relations."  The Board determined that HFFA treated the RIT training program as within the consultation requirement,not the negotiation requirement, and that "HFD did, in fact, initiate andfulfill its duty to consult." 
31 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and conditions of fire fighters' employment:  (1) requiring fire 
fighters to complete training consisting of "hazardous work assignments and 'search and rescue squad' type duties" without providing hazardous duty pay; (2) requiring fire fighters to attend training on their days off without first notifying and negotiating with HFFA; (3) requiring fire fighters to bring a meal to the training; and (4) requiring fire fighters to perform instructional duties without providing additional pay.  For the reasons that follow, we conclude that this argument is without merit. 
Where, like here, there is a valid CBA in operation 
under HRS Chapter 89, an exclusive representative asserting a violation of an employer's duty to negotiate terms and conditions of employment must establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the employer's actions in fact changed said terms and/or exceeded the bounds of what the parties negotiated.  See Tomasu, 79 Hawai# i at 159, 900 P.2d at 166; see also HRS § 91-10(5); 
Malahoff v. Saito, 111 Hawai# i 168, 189-91, 140 P.3d 401, 422-24 
(2006) (legislative act delaying payment of wages did not invoke "core subject of collective bargaining"). 
Upon conclusion of five days of hearings and submission 
of pre- and post-hearing briefs, along with myriad pleadings, declarations, exhibits, notices, and orders, the Board entered the following pertinent "Factual Conclusions" regarding the nature of the RIT program:  (1) "The RIT program is not 
32 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 specialized training, but instead is standard training for OPS 
personnel;" (2) "[t]he purpose of the RIT Program is not to set different or additional minimum qualifications but to prepare HFD's personnel to save fire fighters who get into trouble;" (3) such training did not exceed the bounds of the CBA; (4) HFFA treated the training as a subject of consultation, not negotiation; (5) "HFFA failed to provide any factual basis for a finding that HFD violated the CBA;" (6) there was no showing of continuing worker safety issues or unreasonable risk of harm; and (7) "there was no evidence to show that HFD consciously, knowingly, and deliberately intended to violate the provisions of 
HRS Chapter 89 or the CBA." 
The issue of whether the RIT program constituted such a 
material change in the terms and conditions of BU 11 fire 
fighters' employment as to give rise to a duty to bargain reflects a mixed question of fact and law, requiring application of legal standards to the factual conduct of the parties.  See Del Monte I, 112 Hawai# i at 500, 146 P.3d at 1077 ("[w]hether a 
party failed to bargain in good faith is a mixed question of fact and law, as it consists of the application of the legal standard 
. . . to the factual conduct of the parties" (citing, 
inter alia, 
Price v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals, 77 Hawai# i 168, 172, 883 P.2d 
629, 633 (1994) (defining mixed questions of law and fact as 
conclusions of law that are "dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case"))); 
see also Del Monte II, 
33 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
128 Hawai# i at 302, 287 P.3d at 203 ("a mixed determination of 
law and fact is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks 
substantial evidence to support the finding or determination, or (2) despite substantial evidence to support the finding or determination, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made").  Thus, the Circuit Court applied the correct standard of review in determining whether the challenged findings were supported by substantial evidence and we apply the same standard here. 
1. Safety and Hazard Pay 
HFFA contends first that "the training exercises 
involved hazardous work assignments and 'search and rescue squad' type duties" which (1) affected fire fighters' health and safety, and (2) necessitated a pay increase per Section 44-D of the CBA, governing pay for Hazardous Duty.
21  This argument falls flat. 
While there is no dispute that worker safety is a term 
and/or condition of employment, as the Board's unchallenged FOF 3(a) states:  "[f]ighting fires is an inherently dangerous activity, and fire fighters must be properly trained in their jobs to minimize, as much as possible, loss of life or serious 
21 Section 44-D provides, in relevant part: 
Employees assigned to units that are designated for search
and rescue responses which require them to be trained and/orcertified beyond that which is required for other members oftheir class (and such is not recognized in the pricing oftheir class), shall be paid a hazardous assignmentdifferential of 8.126% of the Employee's regular salary inaddition to base pay and applicable differentials andpremiums. 
34 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
injury."  As such, the Board further found in FOF 3(b), and HFFA 
does not contest, that fire fighter training is a "continuous effort" for HFD and a "crucial function to reduce line-of-duty deaths and injuries."  HFFA also raises no argument against the Board's determinations that RIT training was "crucial . . . for safety purposes" and that "any time a company is dispatched to a fire, there is a potential that a fire fighter could be designated as part of a [RIT] . . .  Thus, the necessity [is] to train all [OPS] personnel in [RIT] techniques."
22  To be sure, 
the fact that the training was mandatory for all OPS personnel, 
as opposed to designated search and rescue personnel trained 
beyond the standard for others of their class, supports the 
Board's finding that it was not specialized, and cuts against
HFFA's assertion that the Hazardous Pay provision of the CBA applied.
 23 
Although the Board found that the RIT training program 
was HFD's first training course specifically geared to RITs, it 
determined that the training effectively implemented an existing 
HFD policy stating that "[an] RIT shall be established at every 
confirmed building fire and for any other incident where an 
extreme life safety hazard exists for responding fire fighters." As Chief Neves testified, RITs had been a part of HFD policy for 
22 HFFA's safety committee representative, Captain Reppuhn,
testified: "RIT training is an excellent idea" and addressed a "real situation
on the fireground that [fire fighters] need to be able to handle." 
23 HFFA President Lee testified on direct examination that hazardous 
pay was "[p]robably not" a concern for RIT training.  
35 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 at least 10 to 15 years, thus its adoption predated the CBA in 
effect at the time of this particular training program's implementation. 
The Board concluded, and HFFA does not contest, that 
the training's intensity reflects the serious and occasionally dangerous nature of fire fighting generally, as well as the need to prepare fire fighters for those situations. 
Furthermore, the Board found, and HFFA does not 
challenge, that fire fighters could elect to observe the physical portions of the training and that these "observers" would still receive a certificate of completion.  The Board determined that although some injuries were recorded, HFD satisfactorily addressed the concerns raised in the HIOSH Complaint, the closure of which HFFA did not appeal, and that there were no reports of 
serious injury. The Board thus concluded that there were "no 
worker safety issues extant" at the facility where RIT training 
took place and there was no showing that OPS personnel would be subject to any unreasonable risk of harm.  
In light of the substantial evidence in the record 
supporting the Board's findings regarding the nature of fire fighter safety and training generally, and specifically as concerning the RIT program, we conclude that the Board did not clearly err in determining that HFFA failed to establish that OPS personnel were subject to any unreasonable risk of harm which 
36 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
affected the terms and conditions of their employment and which 
would have necessitated bargaining and/or hazard pay. 
2. Hours 
HFFA next contends that RIT training violated the Hours 
of Work provision of the CBA by requiring fire fighters to attend training on their off days.
24  This argument is without merit.  
As noted above, Section 48-B of the CBA, "Employer-
Required Training," expressly contemplates that HFD may require training on employees days off and states that "time spent by Employees who are required by the Employer to attend training sessions on their days off shall be considered as time worked."  In addition, Section 21-A of CBA, concerning overtime work, provides:  "Overtime work will occur when an Employee performs service at the direction of or as scheduled by proper authority (including while attending training sessions required by the employer)," and includes work "1. in excess of the normal scheduled work hours on a day or shift; [and] 2. on the Employee's scheduled day or shift off and there has been no permanent change in the Employee's work schedule."  Here, there is no evidence that the RIT training program constitutes a permanent change in schedule, or that HFD does not have authority 
24 Section 20 of the CBA, concerning Hours of Work, states: 
In the event the fire chief (employer) desires to
change a work schedule, the fire chief (employer) shall
notify the union (30) days prior to the tentativeimplementation date of the anticipated change in order toafford the union an opportunity to negotiate with theemployer with reference to said change. 
37 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to direct fire fighters to work overtime as contemplated in 
Section 21-A. 
To the contrary, the Board found and the record 
supports that HFD followed an established method in implementing the RIT program.  Like the FGS training which preceded it, RIT training was mandatory, requiring a "certificate of completion," and included a rigorous field training course which involved overtime scheduling and permitted fire fighters a choice of three 2-day periods, spread over several months, on which to complete the training.  HFFA did not complain or demand negotiation regarding the FGS training and on appeal does not challenge the Board's finding that HFD followed the FGS model in implementing RIT training. 
HFFA thus has not met its "heavy burden of making a 
convincing showing that the decision is invalid because it is unjust and unreasonable in its consequences."  Konno, 85 Hawai# i 
at 77, 937 P.2d at 413.  Therefore, we conclude that the Board did not clearly err in determining that the practice of requiring fire fighters to complete training on days off did not affect their hours, and therefore, that practice was not subject to mandatory bargaining under HRS § 89-9(a), especially in light of the fact that off-duty training is expressly allowed in the CBA. 
3. Meals 
HFFA argues that under CBA Section 30-A, employees 
working beyond their normal shift are entitled to "a meal after 
38 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
two hours."  In pertinent part, Section 30-A provides:  "When 
required to work beyond the normal work shift with less than one work shift prior notice, an Employee shall be entitled to a meal after the first two (2) hours and an additional meal at the end of each five (5) hours of continuous work thereafter."  Special Notice SN-16-044 was issued on March 1, 2016, and informed fire fighters that they were to schedule their training session by March 21, 2016, with mandatory training to begin April 4, 2016.   HFFA produced no evidence that two weeks' notice did not meet the "one work shift" condition for requiring BU 11 employees to bring a meal for training scheduled during off days.  This argument is without merit. 
4. Trainer Wages 
Finally, HFFA contends that the 33 RIT trainers "did 
not receive additional pay or compensation for their added duties."  The issue of trainer wages was not raised before the Board, hence the issue is waived.  See HRS § 89-14 (2012) (providing that the Board has exclusive original jurisdiction over any controversy concerning prohibited practices); HAR § 12-42-42(a) & (f) (prohibited practice complaint must be filed within 90 days of the alleged violation; only one complaint shall issue arising from a single controversy);
25 see also  Hawai# i  Rules 
of Appellate Procedure (H
RAP) Rule 28(b)(4)(iii) (appellant shall 
25 Although a complaint may be amended in the discretion of the Board
prior to the issuance of a final order thereon, pursuant to HAR § 12-42-43,
the Complaint herein was not amended to allege trainer wages. 
39  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
state "where in the record the alleged error was objected to or 
the manner in which the alleged error was brought to the attention of the court or agency" or the point will be disregarded); Waikiki Resort Hotel, Inc. v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 63 Haw. 222, 250, 624 P.2d 1353, 1372 (1981) ("the general rule that an appellate court will consider only such questions as were raised and reserved in the lower court applies on review by courts of administrative determinations so as to preclude from consideration questions or issues which were not raised in administrative proceedings."). 
C. Circumvention and Direct Dealing Lastly, the Union contends that the Circuit Court was 
wrong to affirm Decision 482 because HFD violated HRS § 89-13(a)(1) and (7)
26 by circumventing HFFA as the exclusive 
bargaining representative of fire fighters and engaging in direct dealing with employees.  HFFA argues on appeal that the solicitation of fire fighters to serve as instructors for the RIT training program and to participate in the RIT working group interfered, restrained, and/or coerced employees in their exercise of the right to collective bargaining. 
26 HRS § 89-13(a)(1) makes it a prohibited practice to wilfully
"[i]nterfere, restrain, or coerce any employee in the exercise of any right
guaranteed under [HRS Chapter 89]" and HRS § 89-13(a)(7) generally prohibitswilful refusal or failure to comply with Chapter 89. 
40 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
First, HFFA's argument that the solicitation of fire 
fighters to serve as instructors for the RIT program constituted 
circumvention and/or direct dealing was not raised in the Complaint filed with the Board.
27  Instead, the Complaint alleged 
that the City failed to properly consult and/or negotiate with the Union when it issued Special Notice SN-16-044, which gave notice of the RIT training program, and that the implementation of the mandatory RIT training without proper consultation constituted prohibited practices.  There were no allegations before the Board of circumvention or direct dealing concerning the solicitation of instructors.  Thus, this argument was waived. See HRS § 89-14; HAR §§ 12-42-42 & 12-42-43; see also HRAP Rule 28(b)(4); Waikiki Resort Hotel, Inc., 63 Haw. at 250, 624 P.2d at 1372 (1981). 
Similarly, HFFA did not allege in the Complaint that 
HFD engaged in unlawful circumvention of the Union or direct 
dealing with employees when it asked the Union, in the first instance at a monthly meeting between HFD and HFFA, to participate in a working group to look at, inter alia, the curriculum, schedule, equipment, and safety measures for the RIT 
training program.  Indeed, there was no allegation of 
27 As the City pointed out in its answering briefs in both the
primary appeal and this secondary appeal, this issue was raised by HFFA for
the first time on appeal to the Circuit Court.  HFFA does not point to wherein the record any allegation of direct dealing or circumvention of the Unionwas made.  We reject HFFA's assertion that the allegations in the Complaint,none of which assert direct dealing or circumvention of the Union, adequatelyprovided notice to the City or raised such issues for determination by theHLRB. 
41 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circumvention of the Union or direct dealing with employees as to 
the RIT working group.  While HFFA later pointed to HFD's request that the Union participate in the RIT working group, it did so in support of its argument that HFD failed to properly negotiate and/or consult with the Union concerning the RIT training program.  Thus, we conclude that the argument that HFD circumvented the Union and/or engaged in direct dealings with employees was not raised before the Board and this argument is waived. V. CONCLUSION 
For these reasons, we conclude that the Circuit Court 
was not wrong to affirm Decision 482.  The Circuit Court's November 7, 2017 Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, August 31, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
Chief Judge 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Associate Judge 
42 Herbert R. Takahashi, Rebecca L. Covert,(Takahashi and Covert), for Complainant-Appellant- Appellant. 
Amanda Furman, 
Ernest H. Nomura,Gabriele V. Provenza,Deputies Corporation Counsel,City and County of Honolulu,for Respondents-Appellees- Appellees. 