 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI  RE PORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000349 15-MAR-2024 07:57 AM Dkt. 54 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000349 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE TAX APPEAL OF 
HAWAIIAN AIRLINES, INC., Plaintiff-Appellant, v. 
DEPARTMENT OF TAXATION, Defendant-Appellee. 
APPEAL FROM THE TAX APPEAL COURT 
(CASE NO. 1CTX-21-0000493) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant Hawaiian Airlines, Inc. (Hawaiian) 
appeals from the Tax Appeal Court's  May 16, 2022 "Final Judgment 
Re: Order Granting Defendant Department of Taxation, State of 
Hawaii's Motion to Dismiss or, in the Alternative, Cross Motion 
for Summary Judgment Filed on December 10, 2021." 1
On appeal, Hawaiian argues the Tax Appeal Court erred 
in determining it had no jurisdiction over this case. 
1 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve the 
appeal as discussed below, and affirm. 
Hawaiian purchased supply parts from Boeing for 
Hawaiian's fleet of Boeing aircraft, and agreed to pay certain taxes related to those purchases. At Hawaiian's request, Boeing 
sought a tax exemption for these sales under Hawai‘ i Revised 
Statutes ( 
HRS) § 237-24.9 (2017).2 
Defendant-Appellee State of Hawai‘i Department of 
Taxation (Tax Department) audited Boeing, with one issue being 
whether Boeing's sales of parts to Hawaiian were exempt under HRS § 237-24.9. In an email to Boeing, Tax Department stated 
its position was the exemption was for "services provided to a 
customer not on sales of parts alone to its customers." 
(Emphasis omitted.) 
On June 8, 2021, Boeing billed Hawaiian for these 
taxes. 
The following day, June 9, 2021, Hawaiian submitted its 
2 HRS chapter 237 is the General Excise Tax l aw, which levies 
annual "privilege taxes against persons on account of their business 
and other activities in the State measured by the application of rates 
against values of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross 
income[.]" HRS § 237- 13 (Supp. 2018). 
However, "[t]his chapter shall not apply to amounts received from 
the servicing and maintenance of aircraft or from the construction of 
an aircraft service and maintenance facility in the State." HRS § 237-
24.9(a). 
2   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
      
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
banking/routing information to Tax Department to pay Boeing's 
tax noting it was paying "under protest."  (Formatting altered.) 3
On June 10, 2021, Hawaiian filed a complaint for 
declaratory judgment in the Tax Appeal Court, asserting the "Tax 
Appeal Court has jurisdiction over this action for recovery of 
taxes paid under protest pursuant to [HRS] § 40-35 [(2009)] and Rule 1.1 of the Rules of the Tax Appeal Court."
  4
Over a month later, on July 26, 2021, Tax Department 
issued a "Notice of Final Assessment of General Excise and/or 
Use Tax" (Notice of Final Assessment) to Boeing. The notice 
instructed Boeing to submit payment immediately if it agreed 
3   Hawaiian maintained it had "the right, under [HRS § 232- 1 (2017)] to 
any appeal rights Boeing may have to challenge the tax imposed."   HRS § 232- 1 
provides:  
Whenever any person is under a contractual obligation to 
pay a tax assessed against another, the person shall have 
the same rights of appeal to the board of review, the tax appeal court, and the intermediate appellate court, subject 
to chapter 602, in the person's own name, as if the tax 
were assessed against the person. The person against whom 
the tax is assessed shall also have a right to appear and 
be heard on any such application or appeal. 
4 HRS § 40- 35 provides in pertinent part: 
(a) Any disputed portion of moneys representing a 
claim in favor of the State may be paid under protest to a 
public accountant of the department, board, bureau, 
commission, or other agency of the State with which the claimant has the dispute. . . . 
(b) Action to recover moneys paid under protest or 
proceedings to adjust the claim may be commenced by the payer or claimant against the public accountant to whom the payment was made, in a court of competent jurisdiction, 
within thirty days from the date of payment. . . . Any 
action to recover payment of taxes under protest shall be commenced in the tax appeal court. 
3   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with the final assessment; otherwise, if it disagreed with the 
final assessment, it could "appeal in accordance with the 
[attached] Hawaii Taxpayer Bill of Rights." The Taxpayer Bill 
of Rights included information about paying the disputed tax 
assessment under protest and filing an action in tax appeal 
court. 
On December 10, 2021, Tax Department filed a Motion to 
Dismiss or, in the Alternative, Cross Motion for Summary Judgment (Motion), arguing the Tax Appeal Court lacked 
jurisdiction because there was no actual dispute between Boeing 
and Tax Department when Hawaiian made the payment under protest.
5 
The Tax Appeal Court granted Tax Department's Motion. 
The Tax Appeal Court correctly granted Tax 
Department's Motion because, as the Hawai‘ i Supreme Court held, 
"there must be an 'actual dispute' before a taxpayer can make a 
payment under protest and bring an action under" HRS § 40-35. 
Grace Bus. Dev. Corp. v. Kamikawa, 92 Hawai‘ i 608, 612, 994 P.2d 
540, 544 (2000). 
5 We note the Tax Appeal Court held two hearings on Tax Department's 
Motion, however, the transcript from the initial hearing is not included in 
either the Tax Appeal Court's record or in the record on appeal before this 
court. See Hawai‘i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 10(b)(1)(A) and (b)(4); 
Bettencourt v. Bettencourt
, 80 Hawai‘i 225, 230, 231, 909 P.2d 553, 558, 559 
(1995) (leaving the lower court's decision in place without transcripts to 
the relevant hearing, noting "[t]he burden is upon appellant in an appeal to 
show error by reference to matters in the record, and [appellant] has the 
responsibility of providing an adequate transcript") (citations omitted). 
4   
 
 
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawaiian argues the email from Tax Department to 
Boeing, a Tax Department interoffice memorandum not sent to 
Boeing or Hawaiian, and a letter from Tax Department sent to 
Boeing with a notice of proposed assessment were "rulings" 
triggering the Tax Appeal Court's jurisdiction. But in Grace, 
the supreme court rejected "a case-by-case factual analysis of whether the surrounding circumstances are sufficient to 
constitute a 'dispute' and/or 'claim.'" Id. at 613, 994 P.2d at 
545. The supreme court held that "where an administrative 
decision has not been formalized, simply arguing that there is a 
'dispute' or 'difference of opinion' with [Tax] Department 
policy and paying taxes under protest does not present an actual 
dispute under HRS § 40-35." Id.
Here, there was no formal decision until the July 26, 
2021 Notice of Final Assessment, which was after Hawaiian submitted payment under protest and filed the action below. See
generally
, id. at 613, 994 P.2d at 545. Thus, Hawaiian cannot 
rely on HRS § 40-35 to invoke the Tax Appeal Court's 
jurisdiction. 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Tax Appeal 
Court's May 16, 2022 "Final Judgment Re: Order Granting 
Defendant Department of Taxation, State of Hawaii's Motion to 
5   
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dismiss or, in the Alternative, Cross Motion for Summary 
Judgment Filed on December 10, 2021."  
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, March 15, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
 Presiding Judge 
Thomas Yamachika,  
for Plaintiff-Appellant. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
 Associate Judge 
Gary S. Suganuma,  
Mary Bahng Yokota, /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Deputy Attorneys General, Associate Judge 
for Defendant-Appellee.  
6 