NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000747
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
ERIC RICHARD ELESON, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Respondent-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. S.P.P. 18-1-0002)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.)
Petitioner-Appellant Eric Richard Eleson (Eleson)
appeals from the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
Judgment Denying Rule 40 Petition for Post-Conviction Relief
(Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit
(Circuit Court)  on August 30, 2018.  For the reasons explained
below, we affirm the Judgment.1
I.
On April 24, 1984, Eleson pled guilty to one count of
Sexual Abuse in the First Degree and two counts of Bail Jumping
in the First Degree.  He was sentenced to concurrent five-year
prison terms on each count.  He served his sentence.  However,
his conviction was apparently used to enhance the punishment of
his 1995 California conviction for Lewd or Lascivious Acts in
violation of Cal. Penal Code ยง 288(a), for which he was sentenced
to 85 years to life.  See Eleson v. Lizarraga, No. 1:15-cv-00008,
2015 WL 3869594, at *1 (E.D. Cal. June 23, 2015).
1The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On March 14, 2018, Eleson filed a petition for writ of
habeus corpus in the Circuit Court.  The Circuit Court treated
Eleson's petition as a non-conforming Hawai# i Rules of Penal
Procedure ( HRPP) Rule 40 petition for post-conviction relief.  On
August 30, 2018, the Circuit Court entered the Judgment, which
denied Eleson's petition without a hearing.  This appeal
followed.
II.
HRPP Rule 40 (eff. 2006) provides, in relevant part:
(f) Hearings.  . . . [T]he court may deny a hearing if
the petitioner's claim is patently frivolous and is without
trace of support either in the record or from other evidence
submitted by the petitioner. . . .
(g) Disposition.
. . . .
(2)AGAINST THE PETITIONER.  The court may dismiss a
petition at any time upon finding the petition
is patently frivolous, the issues have been
previously raised and ruled upon, or the issues
were waived.  The court may deny a petition upon
determining the allegations and arguments have
no merit.
A circuit court's denial of an HRPP Rule 40 petition without a
hearing based on no showing of a colorable claim is reviewed de
novo to determine whether the circuit court's ruling was right or
wrong.  Maddox v. State, 141 Hawai#i 196, 202, 407 P.3d 152, 158
(2017) (citation omitted).
Eleson first contends that the circuit court in which
he pled guilty in 1984 lacked subject matter jurisdiction
because:
NONE of the alleged GOVERNORS or LT. GOVERNOR'S of STATE OF
HAWAII (1959 to 1989) EVER SUBSCRIBED to the required Oath
of Office, as REQUIRED by Article 16, ยง4, of the (alleged)
Constitution - State of Hawaii.  In Hawaii the COUNTY
PROSECUTOR(s) obtain their authority from the ATTORNEY
GENERAL, and since there was NO VALID Governor or
Lt. Governor to Appoint the Attorney General, the alleged
conviction is VOID for lack of Subject Matter & Personum
[sic] Jurisdiction.
To support his argument, Eleson submitted a copy of a
certification from the state archivist that "Oaths of Office
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
signed by Governors and Lieutenant Governors, State of Hawaii,
are not on file in the STATE ARCHIVES[.]"  The Circuit Court
concluded:
Eleson has failed to adequately establish that Former-
Governor Ariyoshi did not sign an Oath of Office.  The mere
assertion that documents are not in the State Archives,
without more, does not mean that those documents never
existed.  Further, this Court recognizes that the State
comptroller has sole authority over the disposition of aged
government records pursuant to Hawai #i Revised Statutes
ยง 94-3 (effective on June 5, 1984 as Act 258, Haw. Sess.
L. 1984).
The Circuit Court did not err.  Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) 
ยง 94-3(a) (Supp. 2017) provides:
Each public officer, except public officers of the
judiciary and the legislative branch of government, having
the care and custody of any government records shall submit
to the state comptroller a list of records for disposition
authorization, which shall include the name of the office,
department, or bureau, the description of the records for
disposal, the inclusive dates of the records, and the
retention period.  The comptroller shall determine the
disposition of the records; stating whether the records
should be retained by the office, department, or bureau; be
transferred to the state archives, or other agency; or be
destroyed.  The comptroller shall have full power of
disposal of all records submitted for this purpose.  The
disposition authorization of all records, including lists
submitted by the public officers, and the action taken by
the comptroller, shall be kept on proper forms, specified by
the comptroller, one copy of which shall be filed in the
office, department, or bureau where the records originated,
one copy shall be filed in the office of the attorney
general, and the original shall be filed in the state
archives.
(underscoring added).  Eleson's contention that the circuit court
lacked jurisdiction over his guilty plea and sentencing because
Governor Ariyoshi (who was governor when Eleson pled guilty and
was sentenced) did not sign an oath of office is without merit.
Eleson also contends that the United States never
legally acquired the Republic of Hawai# i because the "'Joint
Resolution' (Newland's [sic] Resolution)" failed, and therefore
his conviction was void.  The Circuit Court disagreed, relying on
Corboy v. Louie, 128 Hawai#i 89, 283 P.3d 695 (2011) and Trustees
of the Office of Hawaiian Affairs v. Yamasaki, 69 Haw. 154, 737
P.2d 446 (1987), and found Eleson's "unverified allegations of
vote miscalculations and fraud to be without merit and patently
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
frivolous[.]"  The Circuit Court did not err.  The Hawai#i
Supreme Court has recognized that
the Republic [of Hawai #i] ceded and transferred to the
United States the absolute fee and ownership of all public,
Government, or Crown lands belonging to the Government of
the Hawaiian Islands, together with every right and
appurtenance thereunto appertaining. . . .
Congress then passed the Organic Act, . . . which provided a
government for the territory of Hawaii [Hawai #i] and defined
the political structure and powers of the newly established
Territorial Government.
Corboy, 128 Hawai# i at 91-92, 283 P.3d at 697-98 (cleaned up). 
The Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Judgment Denying
Rule 40 Petition for Post-Conviction Relief entered by the
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit on August 30, 2018, is
affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 30, 2019.
On the briefs:
Eric Richard Eleson,
Self-Represented 
Petitioner-Appellant. Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
4Peter A. Hanano,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
for Respondent-Appellee.