 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS  AND  PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000316 13-APR-2026 09:12 AM Dkt. 37 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000316 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
DAVID WILLIAM LEWIS, Petitioner-Appellee, 
v. 
MIKE BENACQUISTA, Respondent-Appellant. 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
NORTH AND SOUTH KONA DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 3DSS-24-0000136)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.) 
Respondent-Appellant Mike 
Benacquista appeals from 
District Court of the Third Circuit's March 22, 2024 Order 
Granting Petition for Injunction Against Harassment entered in 
favor of Petitioner-Appellee David William Lewis.  1
On appeal, Benacquista contends the circuit court 
improperly extended the fifteen-day requirement to commence a 
1 The Honorable Kimberly B. Tsuchiya presided over both underlying 
cases at issue in this appeal.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 hearing on the merits by allowing Lewis "to 'refile' his 
petition while a prior [temporary restraining order (TRO) was] still in place," violating his due process rights.
2 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve this appeal as discussed below and affirm. 
This appeal involves two underlying district court 
cases: 3DSS-24-0000054 (First Case) and 3DSS-24-0000136 (Second Case). 
The First Case In the First Case, Lewis filed an ex parte petition 
for a TRO on January 24, 2024, and a TRO issued on the same day. The petition was served on January 30. 
On February 5, Benacquista moved to dismiss the 
petition asserting the district court lacked jurisdiction for lack of "lawful service." For this motion, Benacquista relied 
2 In his points of error, Benacquista also contends the district court 
violated its "duty to 'cold neutrality of an impartial judge.'" Benacquista
argues, "Instead of simply dismissing the First Petition, the District Court
advised [Lewis] that he could refile his petition, and that the Court would 
waive the filing fees ."  However, Benacquista does not point to where in the
record he objected or brought this issue to the district court's attention.  
See Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4) (requiring points of
error to set forth where the error was objected to or brought to the court's 
attention). 
Accordingly, we disregard this contention. See 
id. ("Points not
presented in accordance with this section will be disregarded[.] "). 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
   
  
  
   
  
 on the District Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP) Rules 7 
and 12(b).3 
Six days after service of the petition, on February 6, 
the district court held a hearing on the matter. The record on 
appeal contains no transcript of this hearing. Based on the 
district court's minutes, Lewis appeared self-represented and Benacquista appeared represented by counsel. Benacquista challenged service as improper and moved to dismiss. The district court continued the case to February 13 for a hearing on the motion to dismiss and extended the TRO for the same period. 
On February 13, the district court heard arguments and 
witnesses related to Benacquista's motion to dismiss and denied the motion. The district court extended the TRO until February 27, the trial date. The record on appeal contains no transcript of this hearing. 
On February 21, Benacquista again moved to dismiss for 
lack of jurisdiction pursuant to DCRCP Rules 7 and 12(b) and 
Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) § 604-10.5 (2016 & Supp. 2023). 
This time, Benacquista asserted the district court was divested 
3 DCRCP Rule 7 governs pleadings and motions generally, and DCRCP 
Rule 12(b) governs defenses, including lack of jurisdiction. We note however 
that the DCRCP do not apply to proceedings on petitions for injunctions 
against harassment under Hawaiʻ i Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 604-10.5 (2016 & 
Supp. 2023). DCRCP Rule 81(a)(4) (providing that "these rules shall not
apply to . . . [a]ctions for relief from harassment maintained pursuant to 
HRS Section 604- 10.5"). 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  of jurisdiction because a hearing on the merits had not 
commenced within fifteen days. 
On February 27, the district court orally dismissed 
the petition without prejudice. 
During the hearing, Lewis 
protested, saying there was a hearing held within fifteen days. The district court explained, based on its "recollection," that it addressed the motion to dismiss but "didn't have time" to conduct an evidentiary hearing. The district court ruled it was granting the motion, and the "TRO on its face will dissolve today . . . so now it's done." 
On March 5, the district court entered its order 
granting the motion to dismiss without prejudice for lack of 
jurisdiction. The district court dissolved and terminated the 
TRO and any extensions "nunc pro tunc," effective February 27, 2024. 
The Second Case In the Second Case, Lewis filed a petition for an ex 
parte TRO on February 27, immediately after his petition in the First Case was dismissed, asserting the same allegations. A TRO issued on the same day. 
On March 12, the district court held a hearing, but 
Benacquista had not yet been served. The matter was continued and the TRO was extended to March 19. 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 That same day, Benacquista moved to dismiss the 
petition pursuant to DCRCP Rules 12(b)(1) and (6) and Rules of 
the District Court of the State of Hawaiʻ i Rule 7, arguing that 
the TRO in the Second Case was issued before the TRO in the 
First Case was dismissed. 
Benacquista argued that the TRO in 
the Second Case "was entered in direct circumvention of [HRS] § 604-10.5(g)['s] . . . requirement that a hearing commence on 
the merits of a petition within fifteen (15) days." 
On March 19, the district court heard arguments and 
denied the motion to dismiss. Trial commenced, and the matter 
was continued to March 22. 
On March 22, the trial resumed, and the district court 
granted an injunction for six months. 
Benacquista appealed. 
Benacquista contends the district court improperly 
extended the fifteen-day requirement to commence a hearing on 
the merits by allowing Lewis "to 'refile' his petition while a 
prior TRO [was] still in place," violating his right to due process. The gist of Benacquista's contention appears to be that the district court circumvented the fifteen-day requirement by dismissing the petition without prejudice and allowing Lewis to refile his petition. 
To the extent Benacquista contends the district court 
erred in dismissing the First Case without prejudice, we lack 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   jurisdiction over the order dismissing the First Case without 
prejudice as no party appealed from that order. 
Turning to whether the district court circumvented the 
fifteen-day requirement, HRS § 604-10.5(g) provides in relevant 
part, "A hearing on the petition to enjoin harassment shall be 
held within fifteen days after the temporary restraining order is granted." 
However, "[w]hen claims are dismissed without 
prejudice, a party is free to raise those claims in subsequent 
litigation." Smallwood v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 118 Hawaiʻ i 
139, 153, 185 P.3d 887, 901 (App. 2008). 
Because the petition in the First Case was dismissed 
without prejudice, Lewis was free to refile his petition. See
id. As Lewis was free to refile his petition, the circuit court 
did not circumvent the fifteen-day requirement or violate 
Benacquista's due process rights by addressing Lewis's petition 
in the Second Case. 
Benacquista also appears to argue that the district 
court in the Second Case, "standing alone," did not conduct a 
hearing on the merits within fifteen days. 
In addition to requiring a hearing on the petition to 
be held within fifteen days of the TRO, HRS § 604-10.5(g) allows the court to set a new hearing date if service has not been effected: 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
   
  
  
 If service of the temporary restraining order has not been 
effected before the date of the hearing on the petition toenjoin, the court may set a new date for the hearing;
provided that the new date shall not exceed ninety days 
from the date the temporary restraining order was granted. 
Here, the petition in the Second Case was filed on 
February 27 and a hearing was held fourteen days later on 
March 12. However, because service had not yet been effected, the district court continued the hearing seven days to March 19. 
Because HRS § 604-10.5(g) allows for a continuance 
under these circumstances and the seven-day continuance did not exceed the ninety days allowed under the statute, the district 
court did not err. 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the district court's 
March 22, 2024 Order Granting Petition for Injunction Against 
Harassment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i, April 13, 2026. 
On the brief: 
 
David H. Lawton, 
Emil A. Macasinag, 
(Jung & Vassar) 
for Respondent-Appellant./s/ Karen T. Nakasone Chief Judge 
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge 
 
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge  
7 