 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS  AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-18-0000082 29-FEB-2024 08:32 AM Dkt. 58 SO 
NO. CAAP-18-0000082 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
GREEN GLOBAL COMMUNITIES INC., 
a Hawaii Corporation, Plaintiff-Appellee, v. 
NEIGHBORHOOD POWER CORPORATION, 
a California Corporation, Defendant-Appellant. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2CC171000361) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Neighborhood Power Corporation 
(
Neighborhood Power) appeals from the Circuit Court of the 
Second Circuit's January 24, 2018 "Order Denying Defendant's 
Motion to Compel Arbitration and Dismiss Claims and Motion for 
Attorney's Fees, Filed October 25, 2017."1 On appeal, 
Neighborhood Power raises two points of error, challenging the 
1 The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided.   
 
 
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court's denial of its motion to compel arbitration and 
request for attorneys' fees. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve the 
points of error as discussed below, and affirm. 
"[I]n order to be valid and enforceable, an 
arbitration agreement must have the following three elements: (1) it must be in writing; (2) it must be unambiguous as to the 
intent to submit disputes or controversies to arbitration; and 
(3) there must be bilateral consideration." Siopes v. Kaiser
Found. Health Plan, Inc., 130 
Hawai‘i 437, 447, 312 P.3d 869, 879 
(2013) (citations omitted). "The party seeking to compel 
arbitration carries the initial burden of establishing that an 
arbitration agreement exists between the parties. . . . If this 
initial burden is met, the burden shifts to the opposing party 
to 'present evidence on its defenses to the arbitration 
agreement.'" Id. at 446, 312 P.3d at 878 (citations omitted). 
We review a trial court's order granting or denying a motion to compel arbitration de novo, "using the same standard employed by 
the trial court and based upon the same evidentiary materials as 
2   
 
 
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were before [it] in determination of the motion." Id. (citation 
omitted). 
Assuming arguendo, Neighborhood Power established the 
three elements under Siopes, the burden would then shift to 
Plaintiff-Appellee Green Global Communities, Inc. (Green Global) 
to raise any defenses. As a defense, Green Global argued 
because "there are no 'rules of the County of Maui' for the 
parties to arbitrate under[,] such an arbitration is impossible and the Court cannot enforce that which is impossible to 
perform." 
Here, the arbitration clause required disputes be 
arbitrated "under the rules of the county of Maui" as follows: 
All disputes arising out of this Agreement between the 
Developers that is not resolvable by good faith 
negotiations by the same, shall be filed in the county of 
Maui, and shall be settled by binding arbitration under the 
rules of the county of Maui. In so agreeing the parties 
expressly waive their right, if any, to a trial by jury of 
these claims and further agree that the award of the 
arbitrator shall be final and binding upon them as though 
rendered by a court of law and enforceable in any court 
having jurisdiction over the same.  
(Emphasis added.) 
In the first sentence of the arbitration clause, the 
parties agreed all disputes arising from the agreement "shall" 
be arbitrated "under the rules of the county of Maui." There is 
nothing ambiguous about this sentence or the parties' intent. 
3   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
See generally, Siopes , 130 Hawai‘i at 447, 312 P.3d at 879. As 
drafted, the parties made conducting the arbitration "under the 
rules of the county of Maui" an integral part of their agreement. 
See generally
, 6 C.J.S. Arbitration § 36 (2023) 
(explaining "if the parties' agreement specifies that the laws and procedures of a particular forum shall govern any 
arbitration between them, that forum selection clause is an 
important part of the arbitration agreement"). 
The only problem is no one can comply with this 
contractual mandate because, as the parties agree, there are no 
"rules of the county of Maui" governing arbitration. See
generally, 30 Richard A. Lord, Williston on Contracts §§ 77:1, 77:7 (4th ed. 2021) ("The doctrine of impossibility excuses 
performance of a contract when the thing to be done cannot by 
any means be accomplished . . ." and impossibility "of 
performance under a contract [is a] complete defense[] where a 
fact essential to performance is assumed by the parties but does 
not exist at the time for performance."). 
Neighborhood Power urged the circuit court to "blue 
pencil," sever, or simply disregard the language "under the rules of the county of Maui." But, the agreement did not 
provide for these proposed solutions. To the contrary, the 
agreement stated, "[t]his agreement constitutes the entire 
agreement of the parties and may not be altered, unless the same 
4   
 
 
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is agreed upon in writing signed and acknowledged by the 
parties." Moreover, "it is the function of courts to construe 
and enforce contracts made by the parties, and not to make or 
alter them." Scotella v. Osgood, 4 Haw. App. 20, 24, 659 P.2d 
73, 76 (1983); see generally, Sher v. Cella, 114 Hawai‘ i 263, 
267, 160 P.3d 1250, 1254 (App. 2007) ("Arbitration is a matter 
of contract[.]") (citation omitted). 
The agreement between the parties also provided that 
the "agreement shall be governed and construed by the laws of 
the State of Hawaii." Hawai‘i Revised Statutes § 658A-7(a)(2) 
(2016) provides where there is a motion to compel arbitration, 
"the court shall proceed summarily to decide the issue and order 
the parties to arbitrate unless it finds that there is no 
enforceable agreement to arbitrate." The circuit court here did that, by determining it could not enforce the arbitration 
provision in this agreement because it could not order the 
parties to arbitrate their dispute under the non-existent "rules 
of the county of Maui." Thus, the circuit court did not err in 
denying Neighborhood Power's motion to compel arbitration. 
We need not address Neighborhood Power's point of 
error on attorneys' fees as we affirm the circuit court's denial 
of its motion to compel. 
For the above reasons, we affirm the circuit court's 
January 24, 2018 "Order Denying Defendant's Motion to Compel 
5   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Arbitration and Dismiss Claims and Motion for Attorney's Fees, 
Filed October 25, 2017." 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, February 29, 2024. 
6  
  
 On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
Acting Chief Judge 
Rebecca A. Copeland, for Defendant-Appellant. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone Associate Judge 
Gary Robert, 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge 