 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000064
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CHARLES E. GOEBEL, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 12-1-2142)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Charles E. Goebel (Goebel) appeals
 
from the December 3, 2012 Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence/Notice of Entry entered by the Family Court of the First
 Circuit (Family Court).
1 Goebel was convicted of Violation of an
 
Order for Protection, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) § 586-11 (Supp. 2015).
 
On appeal, Goebel contends his right to testify was 
violated by an inadequate colloquy required by Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai
'i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995) and State v. Lewis, 
94 Hawai 'i 292, 12 P.3d 1233 (2000), warranting a reversal of his 
conviction. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Goebel's point of error as follows:
 
Goebel contends that the Family Court failed to
 
adequately advise him of his rights prior to trial as well as
 
1
 The Honorable Darryl Y.C. Choy presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
immediately prior to the close of his defense. Goebel argues
 
that the verbal exchange between himself and the Family Court
 failed to meet the colloquy requirement of Tachibana. Finally,
 Goebel argues that the Family Court's error was not harmless
 beyond a reasonable doubt. We disagree.
 
Prior to trial, a trial court is required "to (1) 
inform the defendant of his or her personal right to testify or not to testify and (2) alert the defendant that, if he or she has not testified by the end of the trial, the court will briefly question him or her to ensure that the decision not to testify is the defendant's own decision." Tachibana, 79 Hawai
'i at 237 n.9, 
900 P.2d 1304 n.9; Lewis, 94 Hawai 'i 297, 12 P.3d 1238 (making 
this advisement mandatory). Prior to the commencement of trial, the Family Court informed Goebel that 
you have the right to testify. You can take the stand. You
 
have the right not to testify. However, though, if you do
take the stand, now, okay, you'd be subject to cross-
examination, okay, and what you say can be used either for
you or against you. So if you do take the stand under the
Tachibana ruling, you're taking your chances. It might
help; it might hurt.
 
MR. GOEBEL:
 I understand.

 
THE COURT: 
And that the prosecutor will cross-examine
you if you take the stand.
 
Now, whether or not you want to testify is up to you,

okay, and you can decide at the end of the State's case if
you want to testify. Okay, I just want you to know that the
Tachibana ruling requires me to inform you of your right to
testify and your right not to testify. It is your choice,
and you need to make the decision for yourself. Okay?
 
MR. GOEBEL:
 Yes, Your Honor.

 
THE COURT:  
All right, do you have any questions what
we're going to do today?
 
MR. GOEBEL:  No, Your Honor.

 
Shortly before this advisement Goebel told the Family Court that
 
he did not intend to call witnesses of his own, thus making the
 end of the State's case the appropriate time for the end-of-trial
 colloquy.
 
Goebel argues that this pre-trial advisement was
 
"severely lacking" and that the Family Court "should have done
 more to ensure that Goebel understood his rights, because he was
 a pro se defendant." However, Goebel does not identify what was
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
lacking or what more the Family Court should have done. As the
 
quoted passage reveals, the Family Court's advisement accurately
 informed Goebel consistent with 
Tachibana and Lewis.
 
As to the end of trial colloquy, 
Tachibana requires
 
that
 
the trial court must be careful not to influence the
 
defendant's decision whether or not to testify and should
limit the colloquy to advising the defendant that he [or
she] has a right to testify, that if he [or she] wants to
testify that no one can prevent him [or her] from doing so,
[and] that if he [or she] testifies the prosecution will be
allowed to cross-examine him [or her]. In connection with
 the privilege against self-incrimination, the defendant
should also be advised that he [or she] has a right not to
testify and that if he [or she] does not testify then the
jury can be instructed about that right. 
Tachibana , 79 Hawai 'i at 236 n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n.7 (citation 
omitted and block format altered). As this was a bench trial, an
 
exchange regarding a jury instruction was not applicable. The
 Family Court's colloquy with Goebel consisted of the following:
 
THE COURT:  . . . At this juncture, though, I need to
remind you of the Tachibana ruling, the one that says you
can testify or you can decide not to testify.
 
MR. GOEBEL:  I don't need to testify . . . Your Honor.

 
THE COURT: Okay, I want to -- I want you to
understand the whole rule first before you tell me yes or
no. I know pretty much in your mind what you want to do.
 
Now, if you do testify, you're subject to cross-
examination by the Prosecuting Attorney's Office. If you
choose not to testify, the court cannot hold that against
you in any way. It is your right to remain silent.
 
Did you have enough time to consider both of your
choices, that is, to testify and not to testify? Have you
considered it?
 
MR. GOEBEL:
 Yes, I've considered not to testify, Your
Honor.
 
THE COURT: Okay. And have you considered the pluses
and minuses with both of those choices?
 
MR. GOEBEL:  Yes, sir.
 
THE COURT:  Okay, at this point, you -- you're
electing to do what?
 
MR. GOEBEL:  
Not testify.
 
THE COURT: 
You're not going to testify at all?
 
MR. GOEBEL:  
Yes, sir.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: Very well. And it is your right not to
testify. 
You are remaining silent at this point? So -­
MR. GOEBEL: Yes, sir.

 
THE COURT: -- you will not be -- will you be calling
any witnesses? 
MR. GOEBEL: No, sir. 
THE COURT: Very well. Okay, you're resting the case 
at this point? 
MR. GOEBEL: Yes, sir. 
THE COURT: Very well. Thank you. 
Goebel argues that the Family Court "failed to conduct 
a complete colloquy, as Goebel was not informed about his right 
to testify or the fact that if he chose to testify, nobody could prevent him from doing so, as required by Tachibana." As the foregoing passage indicates, the Family Court did engage in a colloquy with Goebel. However, it does not reflect that the Family Court discussed with Goebel that if he did choose to testify, no one could prevent him from doing so. As this aspect of the Tachibana colloquy is required, the remaining inquiry is whether the omission harmed Goebel insofar as his waiver of his right to testify was not knowing and voluntary. State v. Akahi, 
92 Hawai
'i 148, 150, 988 P.2d 667, 669 (App. 1999). We conclude 
that the omission was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
"Under the harmless-beyond-a-reasonable-doubt standard, 
the question is whether there is a reasonable possibility that error may have contributed to conviction." Akahi, 92 Hawai
'i at 
150, 988 P.2d at 669 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). "When deciding whether an error is harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, the error must be viewed in the light of the entire proceedings and given the effect which the whole record shows it to be entitled." Akahi, 92 Hawai
'i at 151, 988 P.2d at 
670 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
First of all, it is clear from the exchange that Goebel
 
decided not to testify for himself. As the Family Court began
 its Tachibana colloquy, Goebel interrupted the court to say, "I
 don't need to testify." Our view is supported, not only by the
 Family Court's pre-trial advisement that "whether or not you want
 to testify is up to you" and "[i]t is your choice, and you need
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to make the decision for yourself" but by the nature of Goebel's
 
asserted defenses, that the protective order he was accused of
 violating was invalid, and that the prosecution had no authority
 to prosecute him because his mother, the purported victim in this
 case, did not authorize the prosecution. The former was a
 question of law and the latter was matter of fact that Goebel
 could not testify to from personal knowledge.
 
Second, while Goebel argues on appeal that the Family 
Court should have taken into account "salient facts" that called into question whether Goebel understood and voluntarily waived his right to testify, State v. Han, 130 Hawai
'i 83, 91-92, 306 
P.3d 128, 136-37 (2013) we find none here that indicate Goebel did not knowingly and voluntarily waive this right. 
Goebel argues that his lack of legal representation
 
should be considered a salient fact. However, the record amply
 supports the conclusion that Goebel knew his rights and exercised
 them as he saw fit. In a previous hearing before the Family
 Court, Goebel told the Family Court that he had been arrested
 forty-seven times, in which he represented himself twenty-five
 times and was successful in gaining dismissals or "no further
 action" in all twenty-five, whereas when he was represented by
 the public defender "[he] lost." The record is replete with
 examples of Goebel speaking to the Family Court, often
 interrupting the court, when he had something to say or a
 question to ask. For example, Goebel orally moved to dismiss the
 case when the prosecution asked for a continuance and asked for
 reduction of bail or release on his own recognizance, showing a
 sophisticated understanding of the options available to him as
 well as a willingness to speak up and assert his rights when he
 chose to do so. Thus, Goebel's lack of counsel does not support
 the notion that the Family Court should have taken "extra steps"
 to assure Goebel's understanding of his rights.
 
Moreover, as a pro se litigant, Goebel appears to have
 
made his own decisions regarding the conduct of his defense. 
Unlike Tachibana, there is no indication in the record that any
 person influenced, let alone prevented, Goebel from testifying.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Goebel argues that it is impossible to
 
conclude beyond a reasonable doubt "that if the family court
 
heard Goebel's version of the incident, 'it could not have
 created a reasonable doubt in the mind of the factfinder and,
 hence, that the error could not have contributed to the
 conviction.'"
 
However, such a speculative claim is not consistent
 
with the arguments and factual representations Goebel actually
 made at trial. Goebel's arguments pertained to the validity of
 the underlying order for protection and whether the prosecution
 could proceed with this case without permission or authorization
 by the subject of the order, his mother.
 
Furthermore, Goebel did not refrain from presenting his
 
version of the facts at trial. For example, Goebel interjected,
 during the State's witness's testimony, that he and his mother
 were headed to a grocery store and not the bank and that his
 mother walked with a cane as an objection to testimony that his
 mother could walk on her own. Goebel's insistence on making
 these relatively minor factual assertions at trial is
 inconsistent with the notion that he might have made other, more
 salient representations had he testified. 
On this record, the failure to explicitly advise Goebel
 
that no one could prevent him from testifying was harmless beyond
 a reasonable doubt.
 
Therefore, the Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence/Notice of Entry, entered on December 3, 2012 in the
 Family Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 21, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Page C. Kraker,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Brandon H. Ito,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
6
 