 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000583 05-DEC-2024 08:04 AM Dkt. 82 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000583  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI  
TOMAS EDWARD WILLIAM PEARCE and ALISON JOY PEARCE,  
Plaintiffs-Appellees,  
v.  
HUGH COFLIN and JANET COFLIN, Defendants-Appellants  
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT  
WAILUKU DIVISION  
(CASE NO. 2DRC-21-0000993)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION  ORDER  
(By: Wadsworth, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.)  
This is a summary possession case. Defendants-
Appellants Hugh Coflin and Janet Coflin (the Coflins), appeal 
from the (1) Judgment for Possession entered on July 15, 2021, 
(2) Writ of Possession filed on July 15, 2021,  (3) Order 
Granting Plaintiffs[-Appellees'] [Tomas Edward William Pearce   
 
 
   
 
      
    
      
 
     
 
 
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and Alison Joy Pearce (the Pearces)] Motion for Summary Judgment  
[(MSJ)]  filed on August 23, 2021, and (4) Order Denying [the 
Coflins']  Motion for Reconsideration of Order Granting [the 
Pearces'] Motion for Summary Judgment  [(Motion for 
Reconsideration)], Filed August 23, 2021,  filed on September 27, 
2021, by the District Court of the Second Circuit, Wailuku 
Division (district court ).    1
I. BACKGROUND 
The record reflects that, in October 2017, the Coflins 
entered into a Rental Agreement with Alan Battersby and Lisena 
Quintiliani (collectively, the Prior Owners ), in which they 
agreed to lease property located in Makawao, Maui (the Property)  
pursuant to, inter alia, the following terms,  
LANDLORD'S REMEDIES: 
Failure to Pay Rent. If Tenant does not pay the rent or other 
sums due Landlord, Landlord may give Tenant written notice 
demanding payment. If the rent is not paid within the time 
specified in the notice, (NOT LESS THAN FIVE (5) BUSINESS 
DAYS) after receipt of that notice, Landlord may terminate 
this Rental Agreement . 
Holdover Tenancy.  If Tenant  stays in  the Unit  after this  
Rental  Agreement is  ended,  Tenant  will  be a HOLDOVER  TENANT  
and shall be  liable  for twice the monthly rent  under this  
Rental  Agreement on  a prorated  daily basis for each  day Tenant  
is a Holdover Tenant. . . . Landlord may also go to court to 
obtain  possession  of  the Unit  at  any time  during  the first 
sixty (60)  days  of  Tenant's  holdover. If  Landlord  does  not go  
to  court during  the first sixty (60) days  of  Tenant's  holdover  
and does not enter into a new Rental Agreement at the end of 
that  period, Tenant  will  be  a Month- to-Month Tenant  and Tenant   
must  pay Landlord  the  monthly rent under the prior Rental   
Agreement. 
(Emphasis added .)  . . . . 
1 The Honorable Kirstin M. Hamman presided. 
2   
 
 
   
    
 
  
 
     
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Rental Agreement initially ran until September 30, 
2019, and was twice extended by addenda . The extended lease 
ended on January 3 0, 2020, and the Coflins occupied the Property 
as holdover tenants from February 1, 2020. Because t he Coflins 
refused to vacate the Property, one of the Prior Owners , Alan 
Battersby, filed a Complaint against them on March 6, 2020. 
The Prior Owners sold the Property to the Pearces in 
March 2021. Pursuant to the Rental Agreement and Hawaii Revised 
Statutes ( HRS) §§ 127A-30 (2023)2 and 521-71(a) (2018),3 the 
Pearces sent a Notice of Termination of Rental Agreement 
(Termination Notice ) in March 2021, notifying the Coflins that 
the Pearces had acquired the Property, and th at the Rental 
Agreement would be terminated. 
In May 2021, the Pearces filed a Complaint seeking 
summary possession of the Property, and in June 2021, moved for 
summary judgment . The district court granted the Pearces ' MSJ, 
and, in July 2021, entered the Writ of Possession. The Coflins 
filed their Motion for Reconsideration , which the district court 
denied. This appeal followed. 
2 HRS § 127A -30(a)(2)(A) states "a periodic tenancy for a 
residential dwelling unit may be terminated by the landlord upon forty -five 
days' written notice: (i) [w]hen the residential dwelling unit is sold to a 
bona fide purchaser for value[.] " 
3 HRS § 521 -71(a) states that "[w]hen the tenancy is month -to-
month, the landlord may terminate the rental agreement by notifying the 
tenant, in writing, at least forty -five days in advance of the anticipated 
termination." 
3   
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
The Coflins raise three points of error on appeal, 
contending that the district court erred when it: (1) granted 
the Pearces' MSJ; (2) denied the Coflins' Motion for 
Reconsideration; and (3) entered the "Findings and Conclusions." 
Upon careful review of the record and relevant legal 
authorities , and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve the 
Coflins' contentions as follows : 
(1) We review the district court's grant of summary 
judgment de novo, applying the following standard, 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions, 
answers to interrogatories and admissions on file, together with 
the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to 
any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to 
judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if proof of that 
fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the 
essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by 
the parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non -moving party. In other words, we must view 
all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light 
most favorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Ralston v. Yim , 129 Hawaiʻi 46, 55—56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285 —86 
(2013) (citation omitted). 
We  conclude that the Pearces satisfied their  initial 
burden on summary judgment  by providing evidence, in the form of 
declarations and exhibits, that there were no disputed issues of 
material fact regarding their  entitlement to possession of the 
Property. See  id.  at 60, 292 P.3d at 1290 ("[A]  summary 
judgment movant may satisfy his or her initial burden of 
4   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   . . . . 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
production by either (1) presenting evidence negating an element 
of the non-movant's claim, or (2) demonstrating that the 
nonmovant will be unable to carry his or her burden of proof at 
trial").  
The Pearces established  their right to possession of 
the Property through the Declaration of Alison Joy Pearce  
(Declaration) and attached exhibits. The Declaration provided 
in relevant part,   
1. My husband, Tomas Edward William Pearce, and I 
are the owners of the [Property]. 
2. We purchased the Property from [ the Prior 
Owners], by way of Warranty Deed dated March 25, 2021, and 
recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of the State of 
Hawaiʻi ("Bureau") on March 30, 2021, as Document No. A -
77590470, a true and correct copy of which is attached 
hereto as Exhibit D . 
3. The sale was an arm's -length transaction that was 
closed through Old Republic Title & Escrow. We paid fair 
market value for the Property. 
6. As part of our purchase of the Property, the 
Rental Agreement was assigned to and assumed by us, and we 
are the "landlords" under the Rental Agreement, effective 
March 30, 2021. 
7. On or about April 1, 2021, we had [the Coflins] 
served with a Notice of Termination of Rental Agreement 
("Termination Notice "), a true and correct [ copy] of which, 
together with the Return of Service, is attached hereto as 
Exhibit E and made a part hereof. 
8. The Termination Notice informed [the Coflins] 
that: 
a. We had purchased the Property and were 
its new owners; 
b. Our purchase of the Property "was a 
bonafide [ sic] purchase for value, and was closed by Old 
Republic Title & Escrow" ; 
5   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
c. Sellers assigned the Rental Agreement to 
us, and we are now the "landlords" under the Rental 
Agreement; and 
d. The term of the Rental Agreement had 
expired and [the Coflins] occupied the Property as 
"holdover tenants" on a month -to-month basis. 
9. The Termination Notice gave [the Coflins] written 
notice that the Rental Agreement, and any month -to-month 
and/or periodic tenancy created thereunder, was being 
terminated forty -five (45) days from the date [the Coflins] 
received the Termination Notice . 
10. The Termination Notice expressly stated that: 
a. It was being "given pursuant to Section 
127A-30 [HRS], which applies to rentals during a state of 
emergency"; 
b. We "as the Landlord, plan to and will 
occupy the Property as [our] personal residence as soon as 
you vacate the Property. This is the reason that [we] 
purchased the Property. It is our understanding that you 
were fully aware of this and the purchase of the Property 
by [us]"; and 
c. "This Notice is not for the non -payment 
of rent. This Notice is to terminate the Rental Agreement 
so that [we] can occupy the Property as [our] personal 
residence." (Emphasis in original.) 
11. The Termination Notice instructed [the Coflins] 
to make arrangements to vacate the Property no later than 
forty-five (45) days from the date they received the 
Termination Notice, and asked for [the Coflins] to contact 
[the Pearces] "when you are ready to vacate the Property so 
that arrangements can be made regarding clean up; 
inspection; return of keys; and security deposit, as set 
forth in the Rental Agreement." 
12. Despite the terms of the Rental Agreement and 
the notice provided in the Termination Notice, as of June 
25, 2021, [the Coflins] have failed and refused to vacate 
the Property and comply with their responsibilities under 
the Rental Agreement, including , but not limited to, 
cleaning the Property, removing all of their personal items 
from the Property, and returning all keys for the Property. 
The burden then shifted to the Coflins.  The Coflins 
contend on appeal that they  established a genuine question of  
6   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
material fact as to the existence of a title dispute, such that 
the district court lacked jurisdiction over  the case. See  HRS  
§  604-5(d) (2016) ("The district courts shall not have 
cognizance of real actions, nor actions in which the title to 
real estate comes in question[.]").   As the Hawaiʻ i Supreme Court 
has instructed,  
Pursuant to [District Court Rules of Civil Procedure 
(DCRCP)] Rule 12.1, where a defendant seeks to assert, as a 
defense to the jurisdiction of a district court, that the 
action is one in which title to real estate will come into 
question, the defendant must raise such a defense in a 
written answer or written moti on, and must attach an 
affidavit thereto. 
U.S. Bank Nat 'l Ass'n v. Castro , 131 Hawaiʻi 28, 34, 313 P.3d 
717, 723 (2013) (cleaned up). DCRCP Rule 12.1 provides that the 
defendant's affidavit must "set[] forth the source, nature and 
extent of the title claimed by [the] defendant to the land in 
question, and such further particulars as shall fully apprise 
the court of the nature of [the] defendant's claim." 
Although the Coflins generally alleged that they had 
entered into a n agreement with the Prior Owners to purchase the 
Property , and that they paid $96,500 in partial performance of 
that agreement , these allegations were wholly unsupported by 
their declarations and exhibits . See Nozawa v. Operating Eng 'rs 
Loc. Union No. 3 , 142 Hawaiʻi 331, 342, 418 P.3d 1187, 1198 
(2018) ("Once a summary judgment movant has satisfied its 
initial burden of producing support for its claim that there is 
7   
 
 
    
 
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
no genuine issue of material fact, the party opposing summary 
judgment must demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general 
allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial.") 
(cleaned up). We conclude that the Coflins did not meet their 
burden of establishing a genuine question of material fact as to 
the existence of a title dispute , and that the district court 
was therefore not wrong in granting the Pearces' MSJ. 
(2) We review a "trial court's ruling on a motion for 
reconsideration under the abuse of discretion standard." 
Kaleikini v. Yoshioka, 128 Hawaiʻi 53, 68, 283 P.3d 60, 75 (2012) 
(cleaned up). "[T]he purpose of a motion for reconsideration is 
to allow the parties to present new evidence and/or arguments that could not have been presented during the earlier 
adjudicated motion." Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn &  
Stifel, 117 Hawaiʻ i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008) (cleaned 
up). It is not meant to be "a device to relitigate old matters 
or to raise arguments or evidence that could and should have 
been brought during the earlier proceeding." Id.  
In their Motion for Reconsideration, the Coflins 
reasserted the  title dispute defense  first raised in their 
opposition to the Pearces' MSJ. In support of their motion, the Coflins submitted the following documents for the first time: 
(1) a declaration further explaining the extent of negotiations 
that occurred between them and the Prior Owners; (2) additional 
8   
 
 
  
 
 
   
   
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
emails between the Coflins and the Prior Owners related to the 
purchase agreement; (3) a previous version of the real estate 
purchase agreement that was signed only by the Coflins in 
September 2019; and (4) a document explaining the purchase 
options offered to the Coflins. 
The Coflins did not raise a new argument , and the 
"new" evidence introduced in support of the Motion for 
Reconsideration was available and could have been brought at the 
time they opposed the Pearces' MSJ. Moreover, even if the 
Coflins were unable to present the new evidence when opposing 
the MSJ, the district court did not abuse its discretion in 
denying the Motion for Reconsideration because that evidence did 
not support the existence of a title dispute. 
(3)  The Coflins contend that the district court erred 
in determining that: (1) the Coflins' Motion for Reconsideration 
did not raise any newly discovered evidence or arguments; (2) 
the Coflins did not satisfy the requirements for the DCRCP Rule 12.1 title defense; and (3) the Coflins' answers and 
declarations did not describe "the source, nature, and extent of 
title claims" with detail and specificity. For the reasons set 
forth in sections (1) and (2), supra, we find that the district 
court did not err in making these specific findings and 
conclusions.  
9   
 
 
  
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we  affirm  the district 
court's Judgment for Possession, Writ of Possession, Order 
Granting the Pearces' MSJ, and Order Denying the Coflins' Motion 
for Reconsideration.  
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, December 5, 2024. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth  
 Presiding Judge  
Keith M. Kiuchi,   
for Defendants-Appellants.  /s/ Karen T. Nakasone  
 Associate Judge  
Derek B. Simon,   
for Plaintiffs-Appellees. /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge  
10 