FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
_________________________ 
_________________________ _________________________ IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
NOS. CAAP-13-0000531,
CAAP-13-0000551, AND CAAP-13-0000615
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000531
 
WILLIAM A. ARTHUR, SR., Individually, and
THE ESTATE OF MONA ARTHUR thru William A. Arthur Sr.
 
as the Personal Representative,
Plaintiffs/Appellees,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN HOME LANDS;
KAMEHAMEHA INVESTMENT CORPORATION; DESIGN PARTNERS INC.;
COASTAL CONSTRUCTION CO., INC.; ASSOCIATION OF KALAWAHINE
STREAMSIDE ASSOCIATION; SATO AND ASSOCIATES, INC.;
DANIEL S. MIYASATO, INC.,
Defendants/Appellees,
and
 
JOHN and MARY DOES 1-50, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50,
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50, and OTHER DOE ENTITIES 1-50,
Defendants
 
KAMEHAMEHA INVESTMENT CORPORATION,
Third-Party Plaintiff/Appellee,
v.
 
KIEWIT PACIFIC CO.,
Third-Party Defendant/Appellee
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN HOME LANDS,
Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KIEWIT PACIFIC CO.,
Third-Party Defendant-Appellee
 
KIEWIT PACIFIC CO.,
Fourth-Party Plaintiff/Appellee,
 _________________________ 
_________________________ FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
v.
 
PACIFIC FENCE, INC., et al.,
Fourth-Party Defendant/Appellant 
NO. CAAP-13-0000551
 
WILLIAM A. ARTHUR, SR., Individually,
and THE ESTATE OF MONA ARTHUR thru 
William A. Arthur Sr. as the Personal Representative,
Plaintiffs/Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
v. 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN HOME LANDS;
KAMEHAMEHA INVESTMENT CORPORATION; DESIGN PARTNERS INC.,
Defendants/Appellees/Cross-Appellees
and 
COASTAL CONSTRUCTION CO., INC.;
SATO AND ASSOCIATES, INC.; AND DANIEL S. MIYASATO,
Defendants/Appellees/Cross-Appellants, 
_________________________ 
KAMEHAMEHA INVESTMENT CORPORATION,
Third-Party Plaintiff/Appellee/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
KIEWIT PACIFIC CO.,
Third-Party Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellee
 
_________________________ 
KIEWIT PACIFIC CO.,
Fourth-Party Plaintiff/Appellee/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
PACIFIC FENCE, INC.,
Fourth-Party Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellee 
NO. CAAP-13-0000615
 
WILLIAM A. ARTHUR, SR., Individually, and
THE ESTATE OF MONA ARTHUR thru William A. Arthur Sr.
 
as the Personal Representative,
Plaintiffs/Appellees,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN HOME LANDS;
KAMEHAMEHA INVESTMENT CORPORATION; COASTAL CONSTRUCTION
CO., INC.; ASSOCIATION OF KALAWAHINE STREAMSIDE ASSOCIATION;
SATO AND ASSOCIATES, INC.; DANIEL S. MIYASATO, INC.,
Defendants/Appellees
and
 
DESIGN PARTNERS, INC.,
Defendant/Appellant,
 
KAMEHAMEHA INVESTMENT CORPORATION,
Third-Party Plaintiff/Appellee,
v.
 
KIEWIT PACIFIC CO., Third-Party Defendant/Appellee
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
KIEWIT PACIFIC CO.,
Fourth-Party Plaintiff/Appellee
v.
 
PACIFIC FENCE, INC.,
Fourth-Party Defendant/Appellee
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-5, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-5, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-5,
ROE NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS 1-5, and
ROE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-5,
Fourth-Party Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-1981-11)
 
FEBRUARY 27, 2015
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
This case arises out of an incident that occurred on or 
about November 10, 2003, and resulted in an alleged wrongful 
death, at the Kalawahine Streamside Housing Development (
Project). The Project is located in Honolulu on twenty-seven 
acres of land owned by Defendant/Appellee/Third Party Plaintiff/Cross-Appellee State of Hawai
'i Department of Hawaiian 
Home Lands (DHHL). Plaintiffs/Appellees/Appellants/Cross-
Appellees William A. Arthur, Sr. (William Arthur), individually 
and the Estate of Mona Arthur, through William A. Arthur, as 
Personal Representative (collectively, Arthur) brought suit 
against DHHL, the developer Defendant/Appellee/Third Party 
Plaintiff/Cross-Appellee Kamehameha Investment Corporation (KIC), 
the general housing contractor Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellant 
Coastal Construction Co., Inc. (Coastal), the architecture firm 
Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellee/Appellant Design Partners, Inc. 
(Design Partners), the civil engineers Defendants/Appellees/ 
Cross-Appellants Sato and Associates, Inc. and Daniel S. Miyasato 
(collectively, Sato), and Defendant/Appellee Association of 
Kalawahine Streamside Association (AOAO) (collectively,
Defendants). KIC and DHHL each filed a third-party Complaint for 
indemnification and contribution against the general site 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
development contractor, Third-Party Defendant/Appellee/Fourth-
Party Plaintiff/Cross-Appellee Kiewit Pacific Company (Kiewit)
 
Kiewit filed a fourth-party Complaint against the subcontractor
 
who furnished and installed a chainlink fence, Fourth-Party
 Defendant/Appellant/Appellee/Cross-Appellee Pacific Fence Inc.
 (Pacific Fence). DHHL, KIC, Design Partners, Coastal, AOAO,
 
Sato, Kiewit, and Pacific Fence (Defendant Parties) also filed
 
counterclaims or cross-claims for indemnification and
 
contribution.
 
On April 2, 2013, the Amended Final Judgment (Amended
 
Final Judgment) and underlying orders were entered in the Circuit
 
1
Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court). The Amended Final
 
Judgment superseded the Judgment filed on January 9, 2012, and
 was entered in favor of DHHL, KIC, Design Partners, Coastal,
 AOAO, and Sato and against Arthur. The Amended Final Judgment
 was also entered in favor of Kiewit and against KIC in the Third-
Party Complaint, and in favor of Pacific Fence and against Kiewit
 in the Fourth-Party Complaint. The Amended Final Judgment
 provided judgment on specific claims of contribution, equitable
 indemnity, and contractual defense amongst the parties. Three
 appeals and two cross-appeals resulted from the complaint filed
 by Arthur on November 4, 2005 (Arthur's Complaint) On June 4,
 
2013, this court filed an order consolidating appeal case nos.
 
CAAP-13-0000531, CAAP-13-0000551, and CAAP-13-0000615 under case
 no. CAAP-13-0000531. 
On appeal, Arthur contends the circuit court erred by:
2
 
(1) granting AOAO's motion for summary judgment on any
 
and all claims asserted by plaintiffs due to lack of causation;
 
(2) granting KIC's motion for partial summary judgment
 
as to plaintiff's claim for punitive damages; and
 
(3) denying Arthur's motion for leave to file a
 
1
 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided.
 
2
 Arthur's opening brief fails to comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(3),(4), and (7) because it does not
include record references to page citations or volume numbers; point to "wherein the record" alleged errors were objected to; or contain citations to "theparts of the record relied on." HRAP Rule 28(b) 4 and 7. Arthur's counsel is warned, future noncompliance may result in sanctions. 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complaint against Kiewit.
 
On appeal, Pacific Fence contends the circuit court
 
erred by: 
(1) granting Kiewit's motion for partial summary
 
judgment in 2007, which included the holding, "[a]ny obligation
 
Kiewit has to defend KIC and [Sato] passes through Kiewit, as a
 matter of law, to Pacific Fence."
 
(2) granting KIC's motion for partial summary judgment
 
in 2010, which included the holding that Pacific Fence had a
 joint and several duty to defend KIC from February 9, 2006;
 
(3) granting KIC's motion regarding Coastal in 2010;
 (4) granting KIC's motion regarding Design Partners;
 (5) granting KIC's motion for partial summary judgment
 
regarding Kiewit and Sato in 2010;
 
(6) granting Kiewit's motion in 2010, which included
 
the holding that Kiewit's obligation to reimburse KIC and/or make
 future payments for KIC's defense fees and costs passed through
 Kiewit as a matter of law to Pacific Fence; and
 
(7) holding that Pacific Fence was required to pay KIC
 
fees and costs incurred for periods and in percentages set forth
 in an exhibit to the Amended Final Judgment.
 
On cross-appeal, Sato contends the circuit court erred
 
by: 
(1) holding that Sato had a joint and several duty to
 
defend KIC as of December 15, 2005;
 
(2) finding that Sato was obligated to pay KIC fees or
 
costs; and
 
(3) finding that Sato had a contractual duty to
 
indemnify and defend KIC and a joint and several duty to defend
 KIC.
 
On cross-appeal, Coastal contends the circuit court
 
erred by holding that: 
(1) Coastal and Kiewit assumed KIC's contractual duty
 
to defend DHHL in litigation and thus relieved KIC from
 obligations to defend DHHL;
 
(2) KIC's contractual duty to defend DHHL included
 
defense of claims regarding the negligence or willful acts,
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
omissions, failure to act, or misconduct of DHHL;
 
(3) Coastal was bound to defend DHHL against all claims
 
asserted in litigation and not only against claims attributable
 
to work by Coastal or its subcontractors; and
 
(4) Coastal had a contractual duty to defend DHHL in
 
litigation brought by Arthur under a contract between KIC and
 Coastal.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. Background on Decedent's Death
 
On October 31, 2000, DHHL executed an Assignment of 
Lease and Consent with William Arthur and his wife, Mona Arthur (Mona), for their residence, located at 2273 Kapahu Street in 
Honolulu, Hawai
'i (Residence).
 A hillside was separated from the Residence by an open
 
concrete drainage ditch and a chain link fence. Mona accessed
 
the hillside from the Arthurs' backyard by walking across a four-
foot by eight-foot wooden board to cross the drainage ditch and
 then William Arthur would help her over the fence. There was no
 gate on the fence that allowed access onto the hillside. William
 Arthur and Mona went onto the hillside about three times a week,
 where Mona would wear sneakers with snow spikes attached to
 prevent her from sliding down the hill. Four or five months
 after moving into the Residence, the Arthurs hired someone to
 clear bamboo from the hillside and thereafter the Arthurs planted
 ti leaves and flowers, then vines and grass, allegedly to prevent
 erosion. William Arthur installed stepping stones on the
 hillside.
 
On the afternoon of November 10, 2003, Mona, age 66,
 
and William Arthur, age 68, were gardening on the hillside.
 William Arthur left Mona on the hillside, spent five to fifteen
 minutes getting her ice water, returned and did not see Mona. He
 spent two or three minutes sitting on a swing and then saw Mona's
 "head pop up from the ditch." Mona was lying in the ditch and
 asking for help. William Arthur asked his neighbors, Allen Bird
 (Bird) and Mark Gilbert (Gilbert) for help. Bird testified that
 
he did not see how Mona entered the ditch nor was aware of anyone
 
else who saw her. He also testified that the fence on the
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
upslope side of the ditch was not damaged and that Mona's
 
clothing was not torn. William Arthur was not aware of Mona ever
 slipping or falling down the hillside prior to this incident.
 
Mona was treated for severe head injuries, lapsed into
 
a coma, and died on March 9, 2004. Mona was unable to provide an
 account of the way she fell into the ditch.
B. Defendant Parties' Contractual Relationships
 
By a Development Agreement dated January 16, 1998 (KIC
 
Contract), DHHL engaged KIC to develop 26.5 acres of land for the
 
Project. The KIC Contract provided: "[KIC] will be responsible
 
for all on-site grading, fill and compaction work necessary for
 the Project in accordance with the plans and specifications
 approved by [DHHL]."
 
Section 17, "Indemnification" of the KIC Contract
 
provided that KIC shall:
 
Notwithstanding other provisions in this Agreement, [KIC]
agrees to pay, defend, indemnify, and hold harmless [DHHL]
from any and all claims of any person . . . which arise out
of or in connection with the construction of any unit of the
Project, the sale of the units in the Project or any design
or construction defects which arise or are made within one
 (1) year after completion. 
[KIC] accepts all risks with respect to which [KIC] will be
responsible for disclosing to purchasers and defend,
indemnify, hold harmless [DHHL] against all claims made by
any homeowner or other person arising out of damage
resulting from such risk or from non-disclosure or
inadequate disclosure.
 
[KIC] shall be developing and constructing the Project in
[KIC's] own behalf and shall pay, indemnify, defend, and
hold [DHHL] harmless from all claims, demands, lawsuits,
judgments deficiencies, damages (whether paid by [DHHL] as
part of a settlement or as a result of a judgment) and
expenses, including attorney's fees and all costs of suit,
made against [DHHL] or incurred or paid by [DHHL] arising
out of or in connection with [KIC's] development and
construction of the Project.
 
Section 17 shall not cover the negligence or willful acts,
omissions, failure to act, or misconduct of [the Hawaiian
Homes Commission], [DHHL], or its employees and agents
either related to the development of this Project or related
to the completion of [DHHL's] authorized mission.
 
The KIC Contract also required KIC to draft or provide
 
documents, including a declaration of covenants, conditions, and
 
restrictions that would run with the Project land and be "legally
 binding upon all owners of units in the Project." Arthur would
 later claim that DHHL and AOAO advised homesteaders, including
 
7

  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
himself and Mona, to landscape hillsides behind their homes.
 
The "Declaration of Covenants, Conditions, and
 
Restrictions for Kalawahine Streamside" (Project DCCR) includes
 
the following provisions:
 
5.02 RESIDENTIAL LOTS: USES AND RESTRICTIONS. Each
 
Residential Lot shall be for the exclusive use and benefit of its
 
Owner, subject, however, to the following covenants, conditions
and restrictions:
 
. . . .
 
(d) Each Owner shall landscape and plant ground
covering on such Owner's Residential Lot to prevent erosion
and runoff. Each Owner shall maintain all Improvements
erected on such Owner's Residential Lot and all landscaping
and vegetation planted on such Residential Lot in good,
clean and neat condition and repair . . . .
 
. . . . 
5.09 SPECIAL CONDITIONS. The Owner of each
 
Residential Lot, by acceptance of a Lease for such Residential
Lot, shall be deemed to acknowledge, accept and agree to the
following:
 
. . . . 
(d) STEEP SLOPES. Each Owner acknowledges and
understands that such Owner's Residential Lot will have a
 
steep slope, either uphill or downhill. Each Owner
 acknowledges and understands that such Owner will be
responsible for maintaining and landscaping such Owner's
Residential Lot in a manner that (1) will not prevent proper
drainage . . . . (2) will not promote soils
erosion . . . . Each Owner understands and agrees that such
Owner will be responsible for maintaining such Owner's
Residential Lot so that rocks and other debris do not slide
 or fall into any Improvements or any other portion of the
Project. Each Owner understands and agrees that such Owner
will be responsible for all damage and injury caused by such
sliding or falling rocks and other debris, or as a result of
the improper maintenance or landscaping of such Owner's
Residential Lot, and agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold
[KIC], [DHHL], and [AOAO] harmless from and against any
claim for loss resulting from such circumstances.
 
In addition to hiring KIC as the Project developer,
 
DHHL also employed its own Project manager and at least two land
 
development engineers.
 
By a Project Consultant Agreement dated February 24,
 
1998 (Design Partners Contract), KIC hired Design Partners to
 
design houses for the Project. Paragraph 7 of the Design
 
Partners Contract provided: 
7. INDEMNITY BY CONSULTANT. [Design Partners] hereby
agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless Developer, and
each of its officers, directors and employees, from and
against any and all claims, demands, losses, liabilities,
actions, lawsuits, proceedings, judgments, awards, costs and
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees), arising
directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, out of work
undertaken by [Design Partners] outside the scope of this
Agreement and/or out of the negligence or any willful act or
omission of [Design Partners], or any of its officers,
directors, agents or employees, in connection with this
Agreement or [Design Partner's] services or work hereunder,
whether within or beyond the scope of its duties or
authority hereunder. The provisions of this Section shall
survive completion of [Design Partner's] services hereunder
and/or the termination of this Agreement.
 
By a Project Consultant Agreement dated March 10, 1998
 
(Sato Contract), KIC engaged Sato as the civil engineering firm
 
for the Project. Paragraph 7 of the Sato Contract was identical
 
to that of the Design Partners Contract.
 
By a Standard Form of Agreement Between Owner and
 
Contractor dated April 16, 1999 (Kiewit Contract), KIC engaged
 
Kiewit to complete all grading and site improvements. The Kiewit
 
Contract was executed between the owner (KIC) and the contractor
 (Kiewit), and specified that Sato would be the architect. Under
 the Kiewit Contract, KIC would pay Kiewit $5,263,381.50 for work
 performed. Section 3.18.1 of the Kiewit Contract provided: 
[t]o the fullest extent permitted by law, [Kiewit] shall
indemnify, defend, and hold harmless [KIC], [Sato],
[DHHL] . . . from and against all claims, damages, losses,
costs, and expenses, including but not limited to attorney's
fees, arising out of or resulting from performance of the
Work, provided that such claim, damage, loss or expense is
attributable to to bodily injury, sickness, disease or
death, or to injury to or destruction of tangible property
(other that the Work it self) including loss of use
resulting therefrom, but only to the extent caused in whole
or in part by any negligent acts or omission of the
Contractor, a Subcontractor, . . . or anyone for whose acts
they may be liable, regardless of whether such claim,
damage, loss, or expenses is caused in part by a party
indemnified hereunder.
 
By a Standard Form of Agreement Between Owners and
Contractor dated July 26, 1999 (Coastal Contract), KIC engaged
 
Coastal to build houses for the Project. The Coastal Contract
 
contained an indemnity clause under paragraph 3.18.1 of
 Amendments to the General Conditions of the Contract For
 Construction that was essentially the same indemnity clause as in
 the Kiewit Contract.
 
 
By a subcontract dated October 15, 1999, Kiewit
 
subcontracted construction of the chain link fence to Pacific
 Fence (Pacific Fence Subcontract) for approximately $18,235.74.
 
9

  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Section 11 of the Pacific Fence Subcontract contained an
 
indemnity clause in favor of Kiewit, KIC, and DHHL, providing in
 pertinent part:
 
Section 11. INDEMNIFICATION. To the fullest extent
 
permitted by law, [Pacific Fence] specifically obligates
itself to [Kiewit], [Kiewit's] surety, and [KIC] and any
other party required to be indemnified under the [Kiewit
Contract], jointly and severally, in the following respects,
to-wit:
 
. . . .

 
(b) To defend and indemnify them against and save them
harmless from any and all claims, suits, liability for
damages to property including loss of use thereof, injuries
to persons, including death, and from any other claims,
suits or liability on account of acts or omissions of
[Pacific Fence] . . . whether or not caused in part by the
active or passive negligence or other fault of a party
indemnified hereunder; provided however, [Pacific Fence's]
duty hereunder shall not arise if such claims, suits, or
liability, injuries or death or other claims or suits are
caused by the sole negligence of [Kiewit], unless otherwise
provided in the [Kiewit Contract
].
 
. . . .
 
(f) To assume toward [Kiewit] all obligations and
responsibilities that [Kiewit] assumes toward [KIC] and
others, as set forth in the [Kiewit Contract], insofar as
applicable, generally or specifically, to [Pacific Fence's]
work.
 
To the fullest extent permitted by law, [Pacific
Fence] shall defend and indemnify [Kiewit], [Kiewit's]
surety, [KIC], and other indemnified parties against, and
save them harmless from, any and all loss, damage, costs,
expenses and attorneys' fees suffered or incurred on account
of any breach of the aforesaid obligations and covenants,
and any other provision or covenant of this Subcontract.
Notwithstanding the above, [Kiewit] at is sole discretion
reserves the right to defend any one or all of the
following, [KIC], other indemnified parties, . . . and
itself. Such election to defend by [Kiewit] shall not in
any way limit [Pacific Fence's] responsibility to indemnify
and hold harmless as provided herein.
 
According to KIC's project manager for the Project,
 
Elton Wong (Wong), "[b]ased on the input from the design
 
professionals, it was decided that the steeply sloped portions of
 
the higher elevations of the [Project] would be left in the
 natural condition." Sato's design for the Project's drainage
 system included:
 
a series of shallow (2 ft. deep) surface drainage ditches
that were intended to capture the sheet flow of water from
the higher elevations and divert the water around the homes.
The drainage ditches are located in an eight foot wide
drainage easement that runs across the backyards of the
uphill properties.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Sato's plan also included a single, unbroken debris
 
fence on the upslope side of two-foot deep surface drainage
 
ditches, allegedly pursuant to their understanding that the
 fences were intended solely for the collection of debris. The
 height of the debris fence as originally specified by Sato was to
 be four feet.
 
Prior to 1998, Sato's plans were presented to DHHL for
 
review and comment, as well as to the City and County of
 Honolulu's Department of Planning and Permitting. By facsimile
 dated September 2, 1998, DHHL's Project manager Michele Otake
 (Otake) sent handwritten comments from a DHHL land development
 
engineer, Gerald Lee (Lee) that included a concern regarding the
 
four foot height of the debris fence. On or about September 9,
 
1998, Wong discussed Lee's concern with Richard Fujita (Fujita),
 
another DHHL land development engineer, and they "concurred that
 
the debris fence would be reduced in height from four (4) feet to
 two (2) feet in order to facilitate access to the hillside and
 for ease of maintenance of the ditch and the associate [sic]
 easement." These plans, Drainage Ditch Detail for Ditches A, B,
 C, and D, which were Sheet C-14 of Sato's Construction Plan, were
 approved by DHHL and Sato.
 
By letter dated January 5, 1999, Wong wrote to Sato
 
instructing him to provide comments on the construction plans
 revised in December 1998, including reference to "O. Sheet C-15:
 Change 4' high chain link fence and post to 2'." Because KIC's
 initial construction contractor withdrew their bid, KIC prepared
 a new bid package on February 24, 1999, which included plans that
 depicted a two foot high fence on the upslope side of the
 drainage ditches. According to Wong, the change from a four-foot
 to a two-foot fence "was not made in order to reduce the cost of
 the site work contract, but rather to implement a design that was
 perceived to be better than the prior design in light of the
 purpose of the debris fence."
C. Expert Testimonies
 
Arthur introduced expert testimonies and reports by
 
Richard Gill, Ph.D. (Dr. Gill) of Applied Cognitive Sciences,
 
dated January 2, 2009 (Dr. Gill's Report), and by Laura L.
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Liptai, Ph.D. (Dr. Liptai) of Biomedical Forensics, dated
 
December 19, 2008 (Dr. Liptai's Report). Dr. Gill's Report
 
stated the following:
 
[I]t is our opinion that the concrete drainage canal, its
associated approximately 2 foot high fence, and the
surrounding terrain . . . created an unreasonably dangerous
condition at the time of [Mona's] falling incident. It was
 foreseeable that an incident similar to [Mona's] would occur
if this defective and hazardous condition was not corrected.
 
Dr. Gill's Report opined the record was "replete with
 
examples that demonstrate . . . [Defendants'] failure to conduct
 
any meaningful safety or hazard analysis" of the drainage canal.
 
Dr. Liptai's Report set forth a biomedical and
 
mechanical engineering analysis of Mona's November 10, 2003
 incident based on "information provided to date . . . literature
 review, analysis, and [Dr. Liptai's] knowledge, experience, and
 education." Her report stated, "[Mona's] general orientation at
 impact was inverted cranial (head leading). This is consistent
 with the short fence acting as a trip mechanism which caused
 [Mona's] center of gravity to rotate over the 21" fence in an
 inverted cranial (head leading) posterior/lateral
 (backwards/side) orientation."
 
Dr. Liptai's Report concluded that "the short fence
 
likely generated the tripping mechanism that lead [sic] to the
 inverted cranial (head leading) orientation with impact to the
 posterior lateral (back/side) of the cranium. The unforgiving
 nature of the concrete impact surface, as well as the increased
 fall height generated by the uncovered ditch, further contribute
 to the possibility of head injury."
 
A report by Douglas E. Young, Ph.D. (Dr. Young), of
 
Exponent Failure Analysis Associates, dated November 23, 2009
 (Dr. Young's Report) was attached to KIC's motion for partial
 
summary judgment on Arthur's claim for punitive damages, filed on
 
March 2, 2010. Dr. Young's Report concluded that the design of
 the ditch and fence did not pose an undue risk to individuals who
 behave prudently and with proper care and warnings would not have
 prevented the subject accident.
 
In Dr. Young's March 31, 2010 deposition, he stated
 
that by his use of the phrase "potential hazard associated with
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the subject hillside fence and ditch[,]" he was "referring to the
 
inherent characteristics of these objects and structures that may
 cause harm to an individual or has the potential to cause harm."
 In his deposition, Dr. Young was asked, "with regard to the
 potential hazard associated with the hillside fence and ditch
 collectively, what were the inherent characteristics that may
 cause harm to an individual or has the potential to cause harm to
 an individual?" Dr. Young responded, "it's their proximity in
 terms of their locations and the kinds of interactions that
 individuals would use to move in those areas."
 
Dr. Young's Report concluded that "[t]he subject
 
accident was not foreseeable to the [Defendant Parties]" and
 "[t]he potential hazard associated with the subject hillside
 fence and ditch was open and obvious to those who interacted with
 the subject hillside."
 
In her March 5, 2009 deposition, Dr. Liptai stated that
 
she was asked to do a biomedical engineering analysis and
 affirmed that she was not asked to do an accident reconstruction. 
When asked, "how is it that you can say that it was a fence that
 was the likely tripping mechanism?" Dr. Liptai stated, "I know
 based on the physical evidence [of] how she landed, and I know
 that there's evidence, forceful evidence, in a given direction,
 and that is most likely consistent with the tripping mechanism of
 the fence."
 
By letter dated March 5, 2009, KIC's expert witness, 
Donald M. Schultz (Schultz), a Hawai
'i developer and engineer, 
provided a report of his February 9, 2009 site visit and review of information related to Mona's incident at the Project. Schultz evaluated conditions of the Project and provided his opinion regarding the standard of care to be exercised by a developer in Hawai
'i for a residential development. Schultz 
noted that KIC was responsible for providing the Project DCCR and concluded that KIC "provided reasonable, appropriate and sufficient notice, disclosure and guidance related to the existence of steel [sic] slopes and of the concrete drainage culvert, easements, and hillside rear yards of the individual lots." In regard to Section 5.09, "Special Conditions," Schultz 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
commented that "[t]his section identifies not only that lots will
 
have steep slopes, but that the owner is responsible for the
 lot's maintenance. In addition, the owners are specifically
 advised of their responsibility and liability in the event of the
 owner's improper maintenance or landscaping of the owner's
 residential lot." In regard to the drainage culvert and debris
 barrier, Schultz stated the following: 
[t]he continuity of the [debris] barrier appears appropriate
as breaks in the barrier would compromise its functionality
as debris could easily pass through discontinuities.
Additionally, the continuous nature of the debris barrier
would discourage unnecessary access into the sloping natural
areas beyond. The two-foot height of the debris barrier
also facilitates cleanout of debris buildup without having
to enter upon the sloping lot area beyond as maintenance
could be accomplished by standing in the culvert and simply
reaching over the barrier . . . . A higher continuous fence
on one side of the culvert presents risks mitigated by the
short debris barrier.
 
Schultz's report was attached to KIC's motion for
 
partial summary judgment, filed March 2, 2010.
 
In their response to DHHL's interrogatories, dated
 
March 9, 2009, Arthur stated, "[n]o one was present at the time
 
of the accident, so the manner in which [Mona] ended up in the
 concrete ditch is unknown."
 Gary T. Yamaguchi, PH.D., P.E. (Dr. Yamaguchi),
 
another KIC expert witness, submitted a report dated November 30,
 2009, which provided the results of his biomedical injury
 analysis of Mona's accident to KIC's counsel. Dr. Yamaguchi
 concluded that "[t]here are an infinite number of possible ways
 that [Mona] could have received her injuries and fallen into the
 channel. It is unlikely, however, that she could have fallen
 backwards over the fence and struck her head on the channel,
 because she did not have any scratches, abrasions, or lacerations
 on her posterior legs."
 
During his deposition, Wong said that he had discussed
 
with Sato "how [residents] would get above that property to
 maintain it. And if [the chain link fence] was four feet, it
 would be very difficult and maybe unsafe to try and climb over
 it. Whereas a two-foot fence would have been easier to get over
 and still serve the purpose of catching the debris." Wong
 clarified his earlier deposition by saying that he had become
 
14
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"aware that homeowners [in the Project] were crossing the ditch
 
to get to the upper part of their property." Wong did not recall
 discussing an "alternative of placing breaks in the fence so
 people could travel from the lower portion of the property or the
 property below the drainage ditch to the property above the
 drainage ditch."
 
At Wong's deposition, Arthur's counsel asked Wong to
 
examine Sheet C-14 of the construction plan. Wong stated, "[t]he
 sheet that you show on C-14 refers to a culvert, the drainage
 culvert, the side embankments that retains the wall, and there's
 a good sized [sic] drop into the side walls. So it protects
 people [from falling] into that area and get[ting] hurt."
 
[Arthur's Counsel:] So you're saying that the chain
link fence shown on C-14 was four feet to protect people
from falling into the ditch and getting hurt?
 
[Wong:] That's not a ditch.

 
[Arthur's Counsel:] 
I'm sorry. From falling into the
culvert and getting hurt? 
[Wong:]  
It's a culvert. Yes. 
[Arthur's Counsel:]  
Is that correct? 
[Wong:]  
Yes.
 
In his deposition on February 18, 2010, Kiewit's
 
superintendent, Craig Oshimo (Oshimo) stated that he had "asked
 
what the intent of the fence was. And it was indicated [to
 
Kiewit] that it was a debris barrier." In response to an inquiry
 into whether he asked about "the fence being two feet high
 because it was related to [Kiewit Contract section] 10.2.1[,]"
 Oshimo said, "[i]t was related to make changes to the fence
 design, the ditch, you know, as a whole structure. It wasn't
 just one issue. But knowing what the intent of the fence was, you
 needed to kind of have that –- you need to know what the design
 intent of that structure is for, so you could make the
 appropriate changes." Oshimo also stated the following: 
When we asked the question about that drainage ditch
and the fence and what the intent was, when we're [sic] told
that the fence is going to be used for that, if we were told
the fence was going to be used for something else and we
feel that's not a safe application for the fence, of course
we're going to say something. 
But that's why we ask the question. We ask the
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
question so we can understand what we're building, and then
we build it right.
 
On March 4, 2010, Arthur's counsel deposed Corey
 
Yamashita (Yamashita), a Kiewit engineer and Yamashita stated
 
that Kiewit was "involved in reviewing designs now."
 
Arthur introduced "Exhibit 29," a photograph, as 
evidence that the two foot high fence was later replaced with a 
four foot high fence. Schultz, KIC's expert witness, described the four foot chain-link fence as part of the "rock fall mitigation effort" undertaken by DHHL in 2003. According to Schultz, "[s]ite observations confirm this four-foot intermittent chain link fence does not function as intended by the original design of the debris barrier" and was "not nearly as effective as the original [two foot continuous] debris barrier . . . ." Arthur argued that its reference to the installation of a new, higher fence, was not inadmissible because "measures that are taken after an event but that are predetermined before the event are not 'remedial' under [Hawai
'i Rules of Evidence] Rule 407, 
because they are not intended to address the event." Ranches v. 
City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 115 Hawai 'i 462, 467-68, 168 P.3d 592, 
597-98 (2007) (emphasis in original). Arthur argued that Exhibit 29 would not constitute inadmissible evidence of subsequent remedial measures because Defendant Parties did not submit evidence that this was the intent of the alleged increased height of the fence. 
D. Procedural History
 
On November 8, 2005, Arthur filed a First Amended
 
Complaint (First Amended Complaint) against DHHL as the fee owner
 
of the property, KIC as the developer for the Project within
 
which the Residence was located, Design Partners as the architect
 of the Project, Coastal as the general contractor for the Project
 housing, AOAO who reviewed and controlled the design and
 development of each property, and Sato as the licensed engineer
 who prepared the construction plan for the Project. Kiewit, the
 general contractor for the Project site development, and Pacific
 Fence were not named in the First Amended Complaint. 
By letters dated December 1, 2005 and December 15,
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2005, KIC tendered claims to Kiewit and Sato. KIC's letters
 
stated that KIC fully expected Kiewit, Sato, "and/or its
 insurer(s) to defend and fully indemnify KIC with respect to the
 allegations in the [First Amended Complaint]."
 
Similar cross-claims were filed as follows:
 (1) December 5, 2005 by Design Partners against DHHL,
 
KIC, AOAO, Coastal, and Sato, alleging that any injuries or
 damages to Arthur were the result of cross-claim Defendants'
 negligence or legal fault and, if Design Partners were found
 liable to Arthur, that cross-claim Defendants owed Design
 Partners indemnity and/or contribution;
 
(2) December 9, 2005 by AOAO against DHHL, KIC, Design
 
Partners, Coastal, and Sato;
 
(3) December 9, 2005 by Sato against DHHL, KIC, Design
 
Partners, Coastal, and AOAO;
 
(4) December 20, 2005 by Coastal against DHHL, KIC,
 
Design Partners, AOAO, and Sato; [JROA doc 71 at 174]
 
(5) December 21, 2005 by KIC against DHHL, Design
 
Partners, Coastal, AOAO and Sato;
 
(6) January 12, 2006 by DHHL against KIC, Design
 
Partners, Coastal, AOAO, and Sato;
 
(7) January 31, 2006 by Kiewit against DHHL, Design
 
Partners, Coastal, AOAO, and Sato;
 
(8) February 7, 2006 by AOAO against Kiewit and Pacific
 
Fence;
 
(9) February 9, 2006 by KIC against Pacific Fence,
 
which KIC later contended constituted sufficient notice of
 Pacific Fence's duty to defend. KIC requested the circuit court
 declare that Pacific Fence owed a joint and several duty to
 defend DHHL and KIC with respect to Arthur's allegations; and
 
(10) February 16, 2006 by Pacific Fence against DHHL,
 
KIC, Coastal, Design Partners, AOAO, and Sato.
 
On December 21, 2005, KIC filed a third-party complaint
 
against Kiewit, claiming Kiewit owed a contractual duty to defend
 and indemnify KIC. KIC alleged that Kiewit had "agreed to and
 did perform site work and infrastructure construction relating to
 the Project, including but not limited to the construction of
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
improvements which [Arthur] allege[s] herein was negligently
 
performed."
 
On January 12, 2006, DHHL filed a third-party complaint
 
against Kiewit alleging negligence in performing work on the
 Project in 1999.
 
On January 31, 2006, Kiewit filed a counterclaim
 
against KIC and a fourth-party complaint against Pacific Fence.
 
By letter dated February 9, 2006, Kiewit tendered the
 
defense and indemnity of claims against Kiewit to Pacific Fence.
 
On February 16, 2006, Pacific Fence filed counter­
claims against Kiewit.
 
By letter dated March 1, 2006, KIC tendered their
 
claims to Kiewit to Pacific Fence.
 
By letter dated March 6, 2006, DHHL tendered defense
 
and indemnification of DHHL to KIC.
 
By letter dated March 29, 2006, KIC tendered the
 
defense of DHHL, previously tendered to KIC, over to Kiewit.
 
By letter dated April 18, 2006, Kiewit tendered KIC's
 
tender of DHHL's tender of its defense and indemnification to
 Pacific Fence.
 
By letters dated April 24, 2006, Kiewit and Sato
 
separately responded to KIC's tender of its defense and,
 according to KIC's counsel, agreed to participate on a pro-rata
 basis in KIC's defense subject to conditions.
 
By separate letters dated May 4, 2006 and July 26,
 
2006, Pacific Fence's insurer, Island Insurance Co. (Island
 
Insurance) agreed to provide a defense to Kiewit and a defense to
 
KIC and DHHL.
 
On January 10, 2007, DHHL moved for partial summary
 
judgment against KIC, requesting the circuit court find that KIC
 
was contractually obligated to indemnify and defend DHHL under
 Section 17 of the KIC Contract.
 
On February 3, 2007, Arthur filed responses to KIC's
 
interrogatories. Arthur noted that DHHL had "requested that the
 area [behind their residence] be maintained and cleaned" and
 referred to AOAO guidelines.
 
On March 5, 2007, KIC filed its own motion for partial
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
summary judgment, requesting the circuit court find that Coastal
 
and Design Partners each owed a duty to defend and indemnify KIC
 under the Coastal Contract and Design Partners Contract. KIC
 further requested the circuit court find that Design Partners,
 Kiewit, Sato, and Coastal had a duty to defend DHHL. KIC argued
 that the intent of the indemnification provisions in its
 contracts with these other parties 
was to pass the duty to indemnify and defend against any
third-party claims, including but not limited to claims of
[Arthur] and DHHL, to the persons or entities performing the
actual design and construction work from which a claim might
be made. KIC was in a "sandwich" position between DHHL and
KIC's consultants and contractors. By contract, KIC ensured
that it would not be held "holding the bag," including the
"defense bag," for the parties . . . that actually performed
the design and construction work.
 
On March 23, 2007, oppositions to KIC's motion for
 
partial summary judgment were filed by Sato, Design Partners, and
 
Coastal. Sato argued that it was already participating in the
 defense of KIC on a conditional basis and, based on
 correspondence between Sato's counsel and KIC's counsel, Sato did
 not owe any other party any duty to defend or indemnify. Design
 Partners cited Arthur's interrogatory responses in support of its
 argument that the architectural services that Design Partners
 provided for the Project were unrelated to Arthur's claims of
 negligent design, construction, and maintenance of the hillside,
 debris fence, and culvert. On March 23, 2007, Coastal filed its
 opposition to KIC's motion for partial summary judgment.
 
On March 29, 2007, Coastal filed its motion for summary
 
judgment on KIC's cross-claim, in which Coastal sought a
 determination that it did not owe duties of defense or
 indemnification under the Coastal Contract.
3
 
On March 30, 2007, Coastal filed its motion for summary
 
judgment on Arthur's First Amended Complaint. Coastal stated
 that under the Coastal Contract it had been responsible for only
 the construction of the Arthurs' Residence and not the grading,
 site work, civil engineering work, or fence or culvert
 construction where Mona was found. Coastal argued that it was
 
3
 The file stamp date on this motion is March 29, 2007, but later
filings refer to this motion as "filed on March 30, 2007." 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not liable under any of the claims alleged by Arthur.
 
On April 27, 2007, the circuit court granted in part
 
and denied in part KIC's motion for partial summary judgment. 
The circuit court found that, because there were genuine issues
 of material fact regarding the cause and circumstances of Mona's
 accident, summary judgment was precluded at that time as to any
 party's right to indemnity from another party. The circuit court
 concluded that: 
2. Based upon the allegations in [Arthur's] First Amended
Complaint and the terms of their respective contracts with
[KIC],[Design Partners] and Coastal have a joint and several
duty, as a matter of law, to defend KIC with respect to the
claims asserted herein against KIC;
 
3. Based upon the terms of their respective contracts with
[KIC], [KIC's] duty to defend [DHHL] passes through, jointly
and severally, to [Coastal] and [Kiewit] as a matter of law;
 
4. Based upon the terms of their respective contracts with
[KIC], [KIC's] duty to defend [DHHL] does not, as a matter
of law, pass through to [Design Partners] and Sato.
 
(Emphasis added.) The circuit court further provided that its
 
findings were without prejudice to Coastal's motion for summary
 judgment on Arthur's First Amended Complaint, and Coastal's
 motion for summary judgment on KIC's cross-claim. 
By letter dated May 1, 2007, Sato tendered the defense
 
of Sato to Kiewit. And Kiewit in turn tendered Sato's defense to
 Pacific Fence in a letter dated May 4, 2007.
 
By letter dated May 8, 2007, Island Insurance asserted
 
that "Kiewit and KIC have independent duties to defend and
 indemnify [DHHL] which were neither delegable nor delegated to
 Pacific Fence" and that "Kiewit has an independent duty to defend
 and indemnify KIC which was neither delegable nor delegated to
 Pacific Fence." Island Insurance further asserted that,
 "Kiewit's subcontract with Pacific Fence requires Pacific Fence
 to indemnify KIC against liability because of Pacific Fence's
 performance of work under the subcontract. The subcontract does
 not require that Pacific Fence indemnify KIC against liability
 for Kiewit's performance of work which was not subcontracted to
 Pacific Fence." Island Insurance made a similar assertion in
 regard to the tender of DHHL's defense and indemnification.
 
On May 22, 2007, the circuit court granted in part and
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
denied in part DHHL's motion for partial summary judgment. The
 
circuit court found that KIC was obligated to defend DHHL, found
 a genuine issue of material fact as to DHHL's contractual right
 to indemnification from KIC for Arthur's Complaint against DHHL,
 and denied DHHL's motion as to the issue of KIC's duty to
 indemnify DHHL.
 
On May 22, 2007, the circuit court denied Coastal's
 
motion for summary judgment on the First Amended Complaint. 
On June 8, 2007, Kiewit filed a motion for partial
 
summary judgment against Pacific Fence and asked the circuit
 court to find that Pacific Fence had a duty to defend Kiewit in
 the lawsuit, to assume Kiewit's duty to defend KIC and DHHL, and
 to assume the duty to defend DHHL that had passed through KIC to
 Kiewit. Kiewit argued that under Section 11(b) and (f) of the
 Pacific Fence Subcontract, Pacific Fence agreed to assume
 Kiewit's defense obligations to KIC and others in regard to
 Pacific Fence's work, even though Arthur's complaints alleged
 claims outside of the indemnity provisions.
 
On July 18, 2007, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
Kiewit's motion for partial summary judgment. Pacific Fence
 argued that the circuit court's April 27, 2007 order granting in
 part and denying in part KIC's motion for partial summary
 judgment did not establish the law of the case in regard to
 Pacific Fence's obligations. The circuit court responded "I
 understand that, and I'm assuming that's why [Kiewit] brought
 their motion, is [sic] because it was an outstanding issue." The
 circuit court stated that cases Pacific Fence cited in opposition
 to Kiewit's arguments, which relied on Pancakes of Hawaii, Inc.
 v. Pomare Properties Corp., 85 Hawai
'i 286, 944 P.2d 83 (App. 
1997), were "clearly distinguishable" and orally granted Kiewit's motion for partial summary judgment. Pacific Fence argued further that Kiewit's duty to defend Sato under the Kiewit Contract could not be "passed on" to Pacific Fence unless and until Kiewit acknowledged that it had a duty to defend Sato. The circuit court stated that it did not see how Kiewit could refuse to recognize its duty to defend Sato under the Kiewit Contract. 
On August 8, 2007, the circuit court granted Kiewit's
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
motion for partial summary judgment against Pacific Fence. The
 
circuit court found that Pacific Fence had a duty to defend
 Kiewit, KIC, DHHL, and Sato; that any duty to defend DHHL that
 had passed to Kiewit, passed through to Pacific Fence as a matter
 of law; and any obligation that Kiewit had to defend KIC and Sato
 also passed through to Pacific Fence.
 
On September 22, 2009, Coastal filed its renewed motion
 
for summary judgment on the First Amended Complaint. Coastal
 argued that new facts had come to light since the circuit court's
 May 22, 2007 order denying their motion for summary judgment.
 
On December 3, 2009, Arthur filed a Second Amended
 
Complaint, stating "[o]n or around November 10, 2003, [Mona] was
 gardening on the hillside when she slipped and fell, rolled down
 the slope of the hillside over a fence, fell into a drainage
 embankment and hit her head against the concrete walling." 
Arthur alleged DHHL, KIC, Coastal, Sato, and Design Partners were
 negligent with respect to the design, construction, and
 supervision of the construction of the hillside area; and that
 AOAO was additionally negligent with respect to inspection,
 maintenance, and warning regarding the hillside area, including
 the fence and culvert. Arthur alleged that Wong, KIC's Project
 manager, ordered Sato to lower the height of the chain link fence
 along the concrete drainage ditch from four feet to two feet thus
 reducing construction costs and increasing profits, and that Wong
 knew the fence was intended to protect people from falling into
 the drainage culvert. The Second Amended Complaint added a claim
 for punitive damages against KIC.
 
On February 25, 2010, the circuit court entered its
 
"Order Granting [Coastal's] Renewed Motion for Summary Judgment
 on the First Amended Complaint (Filed November 8, 2005),
 Including Any Pending Amendment and [KIC's] Conditional
 Substantive Joinder," (Order Granting Coastal's Renewed Motion
for Summary Judgment). The circuit court's order provided: 
1. Summary judgment is hereby granted and entered in
favor of [Coastal] and against [Arthur].
 
2. Partial summary judgment is hereby granted and
entered in favor of [KIC] and against [Arthur] and all other
parties hereto with respect to any and all claims by
[Arthur] and any other party hereto against KIC arising out
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of, resulting from, attributed to, connected with, or
otherwise premised upon the work contracted to and/or
performed by [Coastal].
 
3. This order, summary judgment, and partial summary
judgment shall apply to, among other things, [Arthur's]
claims asserted in the [First Amended Complaint] and/or the
[Second Amended Complaint].
 
4. The foregoing summary judgment and partial summary
judgment is without prejudice to and shall not effect [sic]
KIC's rights and Coastal's duties pursuant to Order Granting
in Part and Denying in Part [KIC's] Motion for Partial
Summary Judgment Filed on March 5, 2007, filed on April 27,
2007, except that said summary judgments extinguish
[Coastal's] duty to defend KIC beyond the date of the entry
of this order, summary judgment, and partial summary
judgment.
 
On March 9, 2010, Arthur filed its motion for leave to
 
file a third amended complaint naming Kiewit as a defendant.
 
Arthur's proposed third amended complaint (1) alleged Kiewit was
 negligent and should be subject to punitive damages because
 Kiewit constructed a two foot high fence and knew it was
 dangerous and would naturally and probably result in injury; (2)
 "state[d] and summarize[d] facts adduced at" Oshimo's February
 18, 2010 deposition; and (3) considered the testimony of
 Yamashita, Kiewit's engineer who was assigned to the Project.
 
On March 16, 2010, Kiewit filed its opposition to
 
Arthur's motion for leave to file an amended complaint. On March
 15, 2010, Pacific Fence filed its opposition and Sato filed its
 joinder to Pacific Fence's opposition on March 18, 2010. On
 August 26, 2010, the circuit court denied Arthur's motion for
 leave to file a third amended complaint, specifying that it
 "agree[d] with the arguments and authorities advanced by [Kiewit]
 in its Memorandum in Opposition filed on March 16, 2010."
 
On April 7, 2010, Arthur filed its opposition to KIC's
 
motion for summary judgment as to punitive damages. Arthur
 attached Dr. Gill's Report, dated January 2, 2009 as "Exhibit
 17", and Dr. Liptai's Report, dated December 19, 2008 as "Exhibit
 18".
 
On April 8, 2010, AOAO filed its "Motion for Summary
 
Judgment on Any and All Claims Asserted by Plaintiffs Due to Lack
 of Causation" (AOAO MSJ). On June 9, 2010, Arthur filed their
 
opposition to the AOAO MSJ.
 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On April 15, 2010, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
KIC's motion for partial summary judgment on Arthur's claim for
 
punitive damages and Coastal's motion for summary judgment.
 
On April 26, 2010, KIC filed another cross-claim
 
against Pacific Fence, adding claims for defense and
 indemnification against allegations in Arthur's Second Amended
 Complaint.
 
On May 6, 2010, (1) KIC filed a substantive joinder to
 
the AOAO MSJ and attached the accident reconstruction report from
 Dr. Yamaguchi as an exhibit; (2) KIC filed a motion for
 enforcement of the order granting in part and denying in part
 KIC's March 25, 2007 motion for partial summary judgment against
 Coastal, and (3) Pacific Fence filed a motion for partial summary
 judgment on all claims asserted against it in Kiewit's fourth-
party complaint and cross-claims.
 
On May 11, 2010, KIC filed a motion for enforcement of
 
the April 27, 2007 order granting in part and denying in part
 KIC's March 25, 2007 motion for partial summary judgment as
 against Design Partners.
 
On May 24, 2010, the circuit court granted KIC's motion
 
for partial summary judgment as to Arthur's claim for punitive
 damages.
 
On May 28, 2010, KIC filed two motions. One motion
 
requested partial summary judgment against Sato and Kiewit and
 for enforcement of an order granting its motion. The other
 motion requested partial summary judgment against Pacific Fence.
 
On June 17, 2010, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
the AOAO MSJ and motions for substantive joinder filed by Sato,
 Design Partners, Kiewit, and KIC to the AOAO MSJ. The circuit
 court found there was "no genuine issue of material
 fact . . . that Dr. Liptai's opinion [was] based essentially on
 certain assumptions" and "[o]ther than what Dr. Liptai says,
 there's absolutely no other forensic evidence, for example, to
 explain how [Mona] got from where she was up to the point in time
 where Dr. Liptai's opinions take over."
 
On August 11, 2010, Sato filed its opposition to KIC's
 
motion for partial summary judgment against Sato and Kiewit and
 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for enforcement of the order granting the motion, which had been
 
filed on May 28, 2010.
 
On August 26, 2010, the circuit court denied Arthur's
 
motion for leave to file a third amended complaint.
 
On August 26, 2010, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
the parties' various motions. The circuit court noted the
 parties had not agreed upon an allocation of KIC's defense costs
 and therefore ordered a pro rata allocation, which did not assign
 KIC a share of its own defense costs.
 
On September 8, 2010, the circuit court granted summary
 
judgment against Arthur and in favor of AOAO on any and all
 claims asserted by Arthur due to lack of causation, and granted
 substantive joinders by KIC, Design Partners, Sato, DHHL,
 Coastal, Kiewit, and Pacific Fence.
4
 
On September 16, 2010, the circuit court granted
 
Pacific Fence's motion for partial summary judgment.
 
On December 28, 2010, the circuit court granted
 
Coastal's motion for summary judgment on cross-claims for
 contribution and implied indemnity, which extended to all cross-
claims for contribution and for equitable and implied indemnity
 filed since the December 3, 2009 Second Amended Complaint. This
 order, together with the Order Granting Coastal's Renewed Motion
 for Summary Judgment, relieved Coastal of tort claims and cross-
claims of contribution and indemnity.
 
On May 27, 2011, the circuit court granted KIC's motion
 
for partial summary judgment against Sato and Kiewit. The
 circuit court found that Sato had a joint and several duty to
 defend KIC from December 15, 2005; Kiewit had a joint and several
 duty to defend KIC from December 1, 2005; KIC would furnish
 statements for fees and costs incurred in this matter for the
 period from December 1, 2005 through April 30, 2011; and that
 Sato and Kiewit were required to pay KIC's fees and costs for
 specified periods and in specified percentages. Kiewit and Sato
 were also required to pay their respective pro rata share of
 KIC's legal fees and costs from May 1, 2011 until such time as
 
4
 On January 9, 2012, the circuit court entered the final judgment
confirming this order.
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
KIC's exposure to Arthur "arising out of or related to the work
 
contracted to and/or performed by [Sato] and [Kiewit],
 respectfully [sic] is extinguished[.]"
 
On May 27, 2011, the circuit court granted KIC's March
 
25, 2007 motion for enforcement requiring Coastal to submit pro
 rata payment of KIC's defense costs according to specified
 periods and percentages. Coastal was to pay 50% of KIC's defense
 from December 1-14, 2005 (shared with Kiewit); 25% of KIC's
 defense from December 15, 2005 through February 8, 2006; and 20%
 of KIC's defense from February 9, 2006 through February 25, 2010
 (with contributions from Sato, Kiewit, Pacific Fence, and Design
 Partners).
 
On May 27, 2011, the circuit court granted KIC's May
 
11, 2010 motion for enforcement against Design Partners.
 
On July 1, 2011, Kiewit filed a motion for enforcement
 
of the August 8, 2007 order granting Kiewit's June 8, 2007 motion
 for partial summary judgment.
 
On August 31, 2011, the circuit court held a hearing on 
the various motions. Counsel for Kiewit stated that Kiewit was asking for enforcement of the circuit court's August 8, 2007 order, which decided that any obligation that Kiewit had to reimburse KIC's defense costs passed through to Pacific Fence. The circuit court determined it would grant the motion "for the same reasons that were previously the basis for its ruling relative to the [KIC] motions and more or less adopts the rationale in the Pancakes case[,] at 85 Hawai
'i 286, a 1997 
decision, regarding the duty to defend and that timely enforcement in this court's mind is appropriate." 
On October 3, 2011, the circuit court granted Kiewit's
 
July 1, 2011 motion for an enforcement of the August 8, 2007
 order granting Kiewit partial summary judgment against Pacific
 Fence. This order found that Kiewit's obligation to reimburse
 KIC and to make future payments for KIC's defense fees and costs
 passed through Kiewit as a matter of law to Pacific Fence. The
 circuit court required Pacific Fence to reimburse KIC for the pro
 rata share of defense fees and costs allocated to Kiewit within
 the time period specified in the May 27, 2011 order granting KIC
 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
partial summary judgment against Sato and Kiewit.
 
On November 17, 2011, the circuit court granted
 
Coastal's petition for a determination of a good faith
 
settlement. The petition found the $47,500 settlement between
 Coastal and KIC was executed in good faith, the settlement did
 not apply to claims of Coastal's obligation to defend DHHL, and
 that $49,459.35 would be credited against KIC's defense costs
 through February 25, 2010 for purposes of determining obligations
 of co-obligors in KIC's defense obligation.
 
On February 1, 2012, Arthur filed a notice of appeal 
from the January 9, 2012 Final Judgment in CAAP-12-0000064. On July 27, 2012, this court granted a motion to dismiss CAAP-12­0000064 for lack of jurisdiction because the January 9, 2012 Final Judgment did not specifically identify the claims on which the circuit court intended to enter judgment as required under Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Fleming & Wright, 76 Hawai
'i 115, 119, 
869 P.2d 1334, 1338 (1994). 
On April 2, 2013, the circuit court entered its Amended
 
Final Judgment.
 
On April 30, 2013, Pacific Fence filed its notice of
 
appeal in case no. CAAP-13-0000531 from the Amended Final
 Judgment and eight underlying orders.
 
On April 30, 2013, Arthur filed its notice of appeal in
 
case no. CAAP-13-0000551 from the Amended Final Judgment and
 thirty-three underlying orders.
 
On May 1, 2013, Coastal filed a notice of cross-appeal
 
in case no. CAAP-13-0000551 from the Amended Final Judgment
 insofar as judgment was granted (1) to DHHL by virtue of the
 "Order Granting in Part and Denying In Part [DHHL's] Motion for  
 
Partial Summary Judgment Filed on January 10, 2007, which order
 was filed on May 22, 2007" and the "Order Granting in Part and
 Denying In Part [KIC's] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Filed  
 
on March 5, 2007, which order was filed on April 27, 2007"; and
 (2) to KIC by virtue of "Order Granting in Part and Denying In
 Part [KIC's] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Filed on March  
 
5, 2007, which order was filed on April 27, 2007" and "the Order
 Granting [KIC's] Motion for Enforcement of Order Granting in Part
 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and Denying In Part [KIC's] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment
 
Filed on March 5, 2007, which order was filed on April 27, 2007
 filed May 27, 2011 . . . ."
 
On May 2, 2013, Sato filed a notice of cross-appeal in
 
case no. CAAP-13-0000551 from the Amended Final Judgment and
 orders underlying that judgment, including but not limited to the
 "Order Granting [KIC's] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment
 Against [Sato] and [Kiewit], and for Enforcement of Order
 Granting Motion, filed on May 27, 2011."
 
On May 2, 2013, Design Partners filed its notice of
 
5
appeal in case no. CAAP-13-0000615 from the Amended Final
Judgment, the "Order Granting In Part and Denying In Part [KIC's]

 
Motion For Partial Summary Judgment Filed On March 5, 2007," and
 the "Order Granting [KIC's] Motion For Enforcement Of Order
 Granting In Part And Denying In [KIC's] Motion For Partial
 Summary Judgment Filed On March 5, 2007, As Against [Design
 Partners.]"
 
On June 4, 2013, case nos. CAAP-13-0000531, CAAP-13­
0000551, and CAAP-13-0000615 were consolidated under CAAP-13­0000531 by order of this court.

II. DISCUSSION
 
A. Arthur's Appeal
1.	 Summary judgment on Arthur's negligence claims was
improper.
 
Arthur contends the circuit court erred by granting
 
AOAO's MSJ in regard to Arthur's claims of negligent
 
construction, maintenance, construction supervision, and lack of
 warning.
 
A moving party is entitled to summary judgment if: 
the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any,
show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact
and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a
matter of law.
 
Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(c). To survive 
summary judgment, a party adverse to summary judgment "may not 
5
 The appeal filed by Design Partners under case no. CAAP-13-0000615
will not be considered here because Design Partners did not file an opening
brief presenting their contentions.
 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rest upon the mere allegations or denials of the adverse party's 
pleading, [and] the adverse party's response, by affidavits or as otherwise provided in this rule, must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." HRCP Rule 56(e). "[S]ummary judgment is proper when the nonmoving party-plaintiff 'fails to make a showing sufficient to establish the existence of an element essential to that party's case, and on which that party will bear the burden of proof at trial.'" Miyashiro v. Roehrig, Roehrig, Wilson & Hara, 122 Hawai
'i 461, 
475, 228 P.3d 341, 355 (App. 2010) (citing Exotics Hawai 'i–Kona, 
Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont de Nemours & Co., 116 Hawai 'i 277, 302, 172 
P.3d 1021, 1046 (2007)) (format altered). 
Arthur alleged DHHL, KIC, Design Partners, Coastal, and
 
Sato were negligent in the design, construction, and supervision
 of the construction of the hillside area, and that AOAO was
 additionally negligent with respect to "inspection, maintenance
 and warning regarding the hillside area, including the fence and
 culvert." In order to prevail in their negligence claim, Arthur
 would have to establish that (1) AOAO had a duty "to conform to a
 certain standard of conduct[] for the protection of others
 against unreasonable risks"; (2) AOAO breached that duty; (3)
 there was "[a] reasonably close causal connection between the
 conduct and the resulting injury"; and (4) there was actual loss
 or damage as a result. Knodle v. Waikiki Gateway Hotel, Inc., 69
 
Haw. 376, 385, 742 P.2d 377, 383 (1987) (quoting W.P. Keeton,
 Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts
 § 30, at 164-65 (5th ed.
 
1984), format altered).

 
Arthur contends AOAO and Defendant Parties did not
 
establish a lack of causation because they did not assert a set
 of facts indicating that a connection cannot be made between
 their breach of duties and Arthur's alleged injuries.
 
AOAO and Defendant Parties argued to the circuit court
 
that Arthur would be unable to prove the causation element of his
 negligence claim because Arthur had admitted that the manner in
 which Mona fell into the ditch was "unknown." According to AOAO,
 because Arthur "admitted" to not knowing how Mona fell into the
 ditch, Arthur's causation claims require speculation or
 
29
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conjecture. AOAO thus argues that there is "no circumstantial
 
evidence in this particular case, even if looked at in the light
 most favorable to [Arthur], that would create genuine issues of
 material fact." This conclusion is unwarranted for several
 reasons. 
Causation is established when it is "more likely than
 
not [that the defendant's conduct was] a substantial factor in
 causing the harm complained of . . . ." Knodle, 69 Haw. at 385,
 
742 P.2d at 383 (quoting Bidar v. Amfac, Inc., 66 Haw. 547, 553,
 669 P.2d 154, 159 (1983)). This determination "is normally a
 question for the jury . . . ." Knodle, 69 Haw. at 385, 742 P.2d
 
at 383 (brackets, citation, and internal quotation mark omitted). 
Causation may be proven through circumstantial evidence. 
Wagatsuma v. Patch, 10 Haw. App. 547, 565, 879 P.2d 572, 583
 (1994). In addition, a causal link may be inferred from an
 expert's testimony in light of the evidence admitted at trial.
 
Arthur submitted expert testimony from which a trier of 
fact could reasonably infer a causal link between Defendant Parties alleged negligence and Mona's injuries. Rapoza v. 
Parnell, 83 Hawai
'i 78, 86, 924 P.2d 572, 580 (App. 1996). Dr. 
Liptai analyzed the event from the point when Mona was standing next to the fence. Dr. Liptai's Report concluded that "the short fence likely generated the tripping mechanism" that led to her fatal head injuries. Her report was based on site inspection photographs, medical records, expert reports, and depositions. Because it was unlikely that Mona would have sustained a brain injury from the fall if she landed onto grass, Dr. Liptai opined "even if [Mona] had slipped on the hill, been tripped by the fence and fallen onto grass, it would be unlikely that a brain injury would have been sustained." Dr. Liptai opined "[t]he short fence is responsible for altering the kinematics that caused the inverted cranial (head leading) orientation." 
We conclude the circuit court erred by granting partial
 
summary judgment to AOAO, KIC, Sato, and Design Partners.
2.	 Summary judgment for KIC on Arthur's punitive damages
claim was proper.
 
Arthur contends the circuit court erred by granting
 
30
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
KIC's motion for partial summary judgment as to Arthur's claim
 
for punitive damages. Arthur's Second Amended Complaint alleged
 that Wong, acting as KIC's agent, "ordered the fence lowered
 simply to increase [KIC's] profits, without consideration to the
 safety of persons such as [Mona]. He reduced the height of the
 fence knowing that residents, such as [Mona], were required to
 maintain the steep hillside." Arthur alleges that KIC's
 "overriding concern was for a minimum-expense operation[]
 regardless of the peril involved." Arthur further alleges KIC
 "acted wantonly or oppressively or with such malice as implies a
 spirit of mischief or criminal indifference" so as to warrant
 punitive damages.
 
"[P]unitive damages are recoverable in tort action
 
based on negligence." Masaki v. Gen. Motors Corp., 71 Haw. 1,
 
10, 780 P.2d 566, 572 (1989). "[T]o justify an award of punitive
 damages, 'a positive element of conscious wrongdoing is always
 required.' Thus, punitive damages are not awarded for mere
 inadvertence, mistake, or errors of judgment." Id. at 7, 780
 
P.2d at 571 (citation omitted). To prevail in a punitive damages
 claim,
 
[a] plaintiff must prove by clear and convincing evidence
that the defendant has acted wantonly or oppressively or
with such malice as implies a spirit of mischief or criminal
indifference to civil obligations, or where there has been
some wilful misconduct or that entire want of care which
 would raise the presumption of a conscious indifference to
consequences.
 
Id., 71 Haw. at 16-17, 780 P.2d at 575. 
Clear and convincing evidence must "produce in the mind
 
of the trier of fact a firm belief or conviction as to the
 
allegations sought to be established, and requires the existence
 of a fact be highly probable." Id., 71 Haw. at 15, 780 P.2d at
 
574.
 
Arthur contends that KIC's failure to issue warnings
 
and alleviate the hazard, in combination with its alleged
 knowledge of the "inherent risks" of the fence, constitutes
 conscious indifference to consequences in support of Arthur's
 claim for punitive damages.
 
The factual allegations underlying Arthur's Complaint
 
fail to raise a genuine issue of material fact as to punitive
 
31
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
damages. Wong's instruction to reduce the height of the fence 
and knowledge that residents, including Mona, would access the hillside by climbing over the fence fails to establish KIC's conscious wrongdoing. See Iddings v. Mee-Lee, 82 Hawai
'i 1, 11, 
919 P.2d 263, 273 (1996) (providing the three-part test for conduct rising to the level of "wanton neglect"). Even if KIC's decision to lower the height of the debris fence to two feet was "motivated by a desire to cut costs and boost profits[,]" such a decision would not amount to a conscious element of wrongdoing necessary to support an award of punitive damages. Ass'n of 
Apartment Owners of Newtown Meadows ex rel. its Bd. of Directors v. Venture 15, Inc., 115 Hawai
'i 232, 296-98, 167 P.3d 225, 289­
91 (2007), as corrected on denial of reconsideration (Sept. 20, 2007).
3.	 The circuit court did not abuse its discretion by
denying Arthur leave to file their third amended
complaint against Kiewit.
 
Arthur contends the circuit court erred by denying
 
their March 9, 2010 motion to amend their complaint to add Kiewit
 
as a defendant. 
Under HRCP Rule 15(a)(2), "a party may amend the
 
party's pleading only by leave of court or by written consent of
 the adverse party; and leave shall be freely given when justice
 so requires." The "grant or denial of leave to amend under
 [HRCP] Rule 15(a) is within the discretion of the trial court and
 is subject to reversal on appeal only for an abuse of
 discretion." Keawe v. Hawaiian Elec. Co., Inc., 65 Haw. 232,
 
239, 649 P.2d 1149, 1154 (1982) (citation and internal quotation
 mark omitted). Reasons to deny leave to amend include "undue
 delay, bad faith or dilatory motive on the part of the movant,
 repeated failure to cure deficiencies by amendments previously
 allowed, undue prejudice to the opposing party by virtue of
 allowance of the amendment, [and] futility of amendment[.]" 
Bishop Trust Co., Ltd. v. Kamokila Dev. Corp., 57 Haw. 330, 337,
 555 P.2d 1193, 1198 (1976) (quoting Foman v. Davis, 371 U.S. 178,
 182 (1962) (applying Federal Rules of Civil Procedure Rule
 15(a)). 
32
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Arthur offers no reasonable explanation for their undue
 
delay of more than four years in seeking to file a complaint
 
against Kiewit. Arthur was served with KIC's Third Party
 Complaint, which identified Kiewit as a party, on December 21,
 2005. KIC's complaint alleged that Kiewit had performed site
 work and infrastructure construction on the Project, including
 construction of improvements that Arthur alleged were negligently
 performed.
 
Kiewit contends it would have suffered delay and 
prejudice if the circuit court had granted Arthur leave to amend their complaint nearly five years after KIC filed their third-party complaint against Kiewit. Kiewit contends it would have to "expend additional resources to re-depose witnesses, re-depose expert witnesses both in Hawai
'i and on the mainland, and retain 
new expert witnesses to address the direct claims of [Arthur]." The end date for discovery was April 1, 2010, three weeks after Arthur's March 9, 2010 motion for leave to amend, and would likely have to be reopened to allow for parties to conduct further discovery in light of new claims against Kiewit. Therefore, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying Arthur's belated attempt to add Kiewit as a defendant.
B. Sato's Appeal
 
Sato's appeal includes the contention that Pancakes was
 
wrongly decided and resulted in a "flawed" holding and
 
conclusion. Sato urges this court to depart from precedent. 
This court has declined to "depart from the doctrine of stare
 decisis in the absence of some compelling justification." State
 
v. Claunch, 111 Hawai
'i 59, 67, 137 P.3d 373, 381 (App. 2006) 
(internal quotation marks and emphasis omitted) (citing Hilton v. South Carolina Pub. Ry. Comm'n, 502 U.S. 197, 202 (1991)).
1. Pancakes was correctly decided.
 
Sato contends the circuit court erred by concluding
 
that Sato had a joint and several duty to defend KIC as of
 December 15, 2005, when KIC tendered its defense to Sato. The
 circuit court set forth this conclusion in its May 27, 2011 order
 granting KIC's May 28, 2010 motion for partial summary judgment,
 which required Sato and Kiewit to pay KIC's fees and costs
 
33
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
related to the Arthur case for specific periods and in specific 
percentages dating from KIC's tender of its defense to Sato. Sato contends the circuit court's ruling was erroneous, among other reasons, because Pancakes itself was "wrongly decided." In its motion for summary judgment, KIC argued that Sato and Kiewit had a joint and several duty to defend KIC as a matter of law and that their duty to defend KIC must be determined at the outset of the litigation using the "complaint allegation rule." See 
Pancakes, 85 Hawai
'i at 291, 944 P.2d at 88. The "complaint 
allegation rule" refers to the principle that "the duty to defend is limited to situations where the pleadings have alleged claims for relief that fall within the terms for coverage of the insurance contract. Where pleadings fail to allege any basis for recovery within the coverage clause, the insurer has no obligation to defend." Id., at 291 944 P.2d at 88 (citations, 
internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
According to Sato, the Sato Contract did not require
 
Sato to either defend or indemnify KIC and was void to the extent
 that it required KIC to be indemnified for its own negligent or
 wilful misconduct. Sato contends its duty to defend and
 indemnify KIC, pursuant to the indemnity clause in Sato Contract,
 extends only to claims: 
1. Arising directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, out
of work undertaken by [Sato] outside the scope of the [Sato
Contract], and/or
 
2. Arising out of negligence or any willful act or omission
of Sato in connection with the [Sato Contract] or [Sato's]
work, whether within or beyond the scope of its duties or
authority hereunder.
 
(Emphases in original.)
 
Sato argues that they cannot be held liable for defense
 
costs or indemnity obligations to KIC until wrongful conduct on
 
the part of Sato "is shown to have occurred, and be causally
 related to claims asserted by [Arthur]," because the Sato
 Contract indemnity provision would not apply until that time. 
Sato's conclusion relies on their argument that our
 
holding in Pancakes was wrongly decided. In Pancakes, this court
 interpreted a clause in a management agreement (Responsibility
Clause) between a managing agent, Pomare Properties Corporation
 
34
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(indemnitor-defendant), and a realty corporation manager, Sofos
 
Realty Corporation (indemnified-defendant), which provided: 
except for the willful misconduct or gross negligence of
[indemnified-defendant], [indemnitor-defendant] shall
indemnify, defend and hold [indemnified-defendant] harmless
from and against any and all claims, demands, losses,
liabilities and damages of every kind and nature arising
from any cause whatsoever when [indemnified-defendant]] is
acting under this Agreement or the instructions of
[indemnitor-defendant] or its designated
representative . . . .
 
Pancakes, 85 Hawai 'i at 289 n.2, 944 P.2d at 86 n.2. 
Pancakes held that the law governing the duty of an 
insurer to defend its insured under indemnity provisions of an 
insurance contract applied to an indemnitor's duty to defend an indemnitee under a general indemnity contract. The Pancakes appeals court decided the indemnitor-defendants duty to defend indemnified-defendant arose when the Pancakes plaintiff (Pancakes of Hawai
'i, Inc.) filed its complaint because (1) some of 
Pancakes' claims did not involve "willful misconduct or gross negligence" that was excluded from the subject Responsibility Clause and (2) "portions of [the indemnified-defendant's] alleged conduct were unquestionably leasing activities that fell within the parameters of the management agreement." Pancakes, 85 
Hawai
'i at 295, 944 P.2d at 92. 
Expanding an insurer's duty to defend based on the
 
"complaint allegation rule" to general indemnity contracts makes
 sense "because if the duty to defend was determined only after
 the ultimate issue of liability on each claim has been made, the
 case would be fully resolved before the duty [to defend] was
 triggered, and there would be nothing left to defend." Id., at
 
291, 944 P.2d at 88 (quotation marks omitted). The timing and
 trigger of a duty to defend differs from those of a duty to
 indemnify. In the case of indemnity agreements that limit the
 liability of the indemnitor with a sole negligence exception,
 such as the Sato Contract, "the duty to indemnify cannot be
 determined initially, and sometimes it cannot be determined until
 a verdict is rendered.  Therefore, the duty to indemnify cannot
 be used as the standard for the duty to defend." James E.
 Joseph, Indemnification and Insurance: The Risk Shifting Tools
 
35
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Part I), 79 Pa. B. Ass'n Q. 156, 177-78 (2008) (footnote
 
omitted). 
In light of such reasoning and the lack of a competing
 
argument in Pancakes , we "discern[ed] no logical reason why the
 
duty to defend based on indemnity contracts should not follow the
 same philosophy [of imposing a duty to defend at the outset of
 litigation] used in the insurance context." Pancakes, 85 Hawai
'i 
at 291-92, 944 P.2d at 88-89. 
In our opinion, the procedure used to determine the
duty to defend based on indemnity contracts can follow the
same procedure used in the insurance context. If a
 
complaint alleges claims that fall within the coverage of
the indemnity provision, then, according to the complaint
allegation rule, the duty to defend begins. This is separate
and distinct from the duty to indemnify. Once the trier of
fact makes a determination on the claims in the lawsuit, the
duty to indemnify will either arise or lie dormant. Claims
 falling within the indemnity provision will trigger the duty
to indemnify, while claims falling outside the provision
will relieve the indemnitor of his or her duty to indemnify.
In our view, this is the only equitable interpretation that
gives life to non-insurance indemnity clauses and prevents
indemnitors from benumbing the duty to defend until after a
case has been litigated.
 
Pancakes, 85 Hawai 'i at 292, 944 P.2d at 89 (emphases added). 
Once an indemnitor is found to have a duty to defend,
 
"[t]he indemnitor must bear the cost of a defense whenever any of
 
the claims asserted may potentially come within the scope of an
 indemnity agreement, and the defense must continue until it is
 clear that the liability cannot possibly come within the scope of
 the indemnity." Indemnification and Insurance, 79 Pa. B.A. Q. at
 
178 (citing Jacobs Constructors, Inc. v. NPS Energy Services,
 Inc., 264 F.3d 365, 376 (3d Cir. 2001)); Kiewit E. Co. v. L & R
 Constr. Co., 44 F.3d 1194 (3d Cir. 1995); Bituminous Ins.
 Companies v. Pa. Manufacturers' Ass'n Ins. Co., 427 F. Supp. 539,
 548-49 (E.D. Pa. 1976). Contrary to Sato's contention that its
 duty to defend would not be triggered until wrongful conduct on
 the part of Sato "is shown to have occurred, and be causally
 related to claims asserted by [Arthur]," Sato's duty to defend
 KIC was triggered upon the filing of the complaint and/or the
 tender of KIC's defense to Sato and that duty encompassed all
 claims that could potentially come within the scope of the
 indemnity.
 
36
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2.	 The indemnity provision was valid to the extent it
required KIC to be indemnified for wrongful
conduct that was partly the fault of KIC.
 
Sato also contends that, to obligate Sato to assume 
KIC's entire defense would be contrary to public policy and 
Hawai
'i law, as set forth in HRS § 431:10-222, which provides: 
§ 431:10-222 Construction industry; indemnity
agreements invalid.  Any covenant, promise, agreement or
understanding in, or in connection with or collateral to, a
contract or agreement relative to the construction,
alteration, repair or maintenance of a building, structure,
appurtenance or appliance, including moving, demolition or
excavation connected therewith, purporting to indemnify the
promisee against liability for bodily injury to persons or
damage to property caused by or resulting from the sole
negligence or wilful misconduct of the promisee, the
promisee's agents or employees, or indemnitee, is invalid as
against public policy, and is void and unenforceable;
provided that this section shall not affect any valid
workers' compensation claim under chapter 386 or any other
insurance contract or agreement issued by an admitted
insurer upon any insurable interest under this code.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
In the first instance, KIC countered that HRS § 431:10­
222 is inapposite because it concerns contracts related to
 
"construction, alteration, repair or maintenance of a building,
 structure, appurtenance or appliance, including moving,
 demolition or excavation connected therewith" and not
 "professional design services." The Sato Contract, however,
 included preparation of plans for grading, drainage, roadways,
 sewage, electricity, construction cost estimates, and site work
 civil drawings in Sato's scope of work. Sato's work was
 "relative to the construction, alteration, repair or maintenance
 of a building, structure, appurtenance or appliance, including
 moving, demolition or excavation connected therewith," and thus
 fell under the provisions of HRS § 431:10-222. 
Interpreting language in HRS § 431-453 (1970), which 
was nearly identical to that of its superseding statute, HRS § 431:10-222, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court stated: "[n]othing on 
[HRS § 431-453's] face suggests a subcontractor's promise to indemnify the general contractor against liability resulting from the subcontractor's negligence may be void[.]" Espaniola v. 
Cawdrey Mars Joint Venture, 68 Haw. 171, 178, 707 P.2d 365, 370 (1985). Rather, the statute 
37
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
declares invalid a promisor's agreement to indemnify against
liability flowing from the negligence or misconduct of
persons other than the promisor, his agents or employees.
And a departure from the plain and unambiguous language of
the statute cannot be justified without a clear showing that
the legislature intended some other meaning would be given
the language. 
Id. at 179, 707 P.2d at 370 (citing Kaiama v. Aguilar, 67 Haw.
 
549, 553, 696 P.2d 839, 842 (1985)); see also Kole v. Amfac,
 Inc., 665 F. Supp. 1460, 1465 (D. Haw. 1987) certified question
 answered, 69 Haw. 530, 750 P.2d 929 (1988) ("In construction
 contracts, [HRS] § 431-435 [sic] prohibits an indemnitor from
 indemnifying an indemnitee for the sole negligence of the
 indemnitee."). 
Under Espaniola and Kole, HRS § 431:10-222 would
 
invalidate Sato's promise to indemnify KIC against the "sole
 negligence or wilful misconduct" of any entities other than Sato. 
Espaniola, 68 Haw. at 178, 707 P.2d at 370-71; Kole, 665 F. Supp.
 at 1464-65. HRS § 431:10-222 does not invalidate the
 indemnification provision in the Sato Contract, under the
 circumstances of this case, because Arthur's Complaint did not
 allege that Mona's injuries were solely the result of KIC's
 negligence.
 
HRS § 431:10-222 establishes that Sato could not be
 
held liable for the sole negligence or willful misconduct of KIC,
 but it does not bar Sato's duty to defend, and possibly to
 indemnify, in this case because Sato, as well as the other
 defendants were alleged to have been negligent. Thus, this
 application of HRS § 431:10-222 does not conflict with the
 circuit court's determination (1) that Sato's duty to defend KIC
 includes all claims potentially arising under the Sato Contract
 and not only for those arising from Sato's negligence or wilful
 misconduct, and (2) as discussed in the prior section, that Sato
 was liable for defense costs when KIC tendered its defense rather
 than after a judicial determination of Sato's fault. 
In sum, HRS § 431:10-222 restricts the scope of
 
indemnification provisions in construction contracts, but it does
 not invalidate the application of the provision in the Sato
 Contract to Arthur's claims here, and Sato's duty to ultimately
 indemnify KIC and/or others is separate from its duty to defend.
 
38
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under Pancakes, Sato's obligation to defend KIC extended to 
claims that fell outside the scope of Sato's duty to indemnify KIC. Pancakes, 85 Hawai
'i at 291, 944 P.2d at 88. For these 
reasons, we conclude that the indemnification provision in the Sato Contract was not void under HRS § 431:10-222.
C. Pacific Fence's contentions on appeal
 
Pacific Fence appeals from the following orders: 
(1) April 27, 2007 "Order Granting in Part and Denying
 
in Part Defendant and Third-Party Plaintiff [KIC's] Motion for
 Partial Summary Judgment Filed on March 5, 2007";
 
(2) May 22, 2007 "Order Granting in Part and Denying in
 
Part Defendant [DHHL's] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Filed
 January 10, 2007";
 
(3) August 8, 2007 "Order Granting Third-Party
 
Defendant and Fourth-Party Plaintiff [Kiewit's] Motion for
 Partial Summary Judgment, Filed Herein on June 8, 2007";
 
(4) May 27, 2011 "Order Granting Defendant and
 
Third-Party Plaintiff [KIC's] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment
 Against Fourth-Party Defendant [Pacific Fence] and for
 Enforcement of Order Granting Motion";
 
(5) May 27, 2011 "Order Granting Defendant and
 
Third-Party Plaintiff [KIC's] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment
 Against Defendant [Sato] and Third-Party Defendant [Kiewit] and
 for Enforcement Order Granting Motion";
 
(6) May 27, 2011 "Order Granting Defendant and
 
Third-Party Plaintiff [KIC's] Motion for Enforcement of Order
 Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendant and Third-Party
 Plaintiff [KIC's] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Filed March
 25, 2007, as Against Defendant [Design Partners]";
 
(7) May 27, 2011 "Order Granting Defendant and
 
Third-Party Plaintiff [KIC's] Motion for Enforcement of Order
 Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendant and Third-Party
 Plaintiff [KIC's] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Filed March
 25, 2007, as Against Defendant [Coastal]"; and
 
(8) October 3, 2011 "Order Granting Third-Party
 
Defendant and Fourth-Party Plaintiff [Kiewit's] Motion for
 Enforcement Of Order Granting Third-Party Defendant and
 
39
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fourth-Party Plaintiff [Kiewit's] Motion for Partial Summary
 
Judgment Filed On July 1, 2011."
 
Pacific Fence's appeal presents three contentions: (1)
 
that the language of the Pacific Fence Subcontract was not
 sufficient for Kiewit to "pass through" its duties to defend
 third parties; (2) that multiple indemnitors had an independent,
 concurrent duty to defend the indemnitee and must each be
 allocated defense costs equally on a pro-rata basis; and (3) that
 an indemnitee, such as Kiewit, should be allocated an independent
 share of the defense costs where negligence on the part of the
 indemnitee was alleged.
1. Pacific Fence had a duty to defend.
 
Pacific Fence's contentions primarily concern the
 
circuit court's grant of Kiewit's June 8, 2007 motion for partial
 
summary judgment, in which the circuit court ordered that "[a]ny
 obligation Kiewit has to defend KIC and [Sato] passes through
 Kiewit, as a matter of law, to Pacific Fence." In its motion for
 partial summary judgment, Kiewit argued that, under the Kiewit
 Contract, Pacific Fence was responsible for Kiewit's entire
 defense obligations to KIC, DHHL, and Sato, including defense
 obligations for work not subcontracted to Pacific Fence, under
 the complaint allegation rule as interpreted by Pancakes. Kiewit
 further cited Pancakes for the proposition that Pacific Fence's
 duty to defend Kiewit, and including parties Kiewit was obligated
 to defend under the Kiewit Contract, commenced with the filing of
 Arthur's First Amended Complaint. Kiewit argued that because
 Arthur's First Amended Complaint made direct allegations of
 negligent construction of the fence constructed by Pacific Fence,
 such negligence claims fell within the Pacific Fence Subcontract,
 and therefore, "any party Kiewit is obligated to defend pursuant
 to the [KIC] Contract, commenced with the filing of the First
 Amended Complaint."
 
Section 11 of the Pacific Fence Subcontract obligated

 
Pacific Fence to KIC, Kiewit, Kiewit's sureties, and:
 
any other party required to be indemnified under the [KIC]
Contract, jointly and severally , . . .
 
. . . . 

40
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(b) To defend and indemnify them against and save them
harmless from any and all claims, suits, or liability for damages to
property including loss of use thereof, injuries to persons, including
death, and from any other claims, suits or liability on account of acts
or omissions of [Pacific Fence] . . . whether or not caused in part by
the active or passive negligence or other fault of a party indemnified
hereunder[.]
 
(Emphases added.)
 
Pacific Fence contends that the express terms of the
 
Pacific Fence Subcontract restricts the scope of their duty to
 
defend their acts or omissions. Pacific Fence relies on case law
 from other jurisdictions that rejects a general contractor's
 attempts to "pass through" liability for its own negligence to a
 third party. According to Pacific Fence, insurance law on the
 timing and trigger of the duty to defend under the complaint
 allegation rule may be properly considered in limited
 circumstances. Pacific Fence does not contest the circuit
 court's application of the complaint allegation rule to determine
 the duty to defend at the outset of litigation. Pacific Fence's
 contention in regard to this point of appeal is that it is
 improper "to require a private indemnitor to defend both covered
 and non-covered claims like an insurer."
 
Pacific Fence's duty to defend extends to claims that
 
allege negligence "in part" by Kiewit, KIC, and Sato. Pacific
 Fence states the only claims excluded "from the scope of Pacific
 Fence's defense obligation are those 'caused by the sole
 negligence' of Kiewit." See HRS § 431:10-222.
 
The First Amended Complaint against DHHL, KIC, Design 
Partners, Coastal, and Sato alleged "[n]egligent design of the hillside area, including the fence and culvert; [n]egligent construction of the hillside area, including the fence and culvert; and [n]egligent supervision of the construction of the hillside area, including the fence and culvert." The scope of Pacific Fence's work under its subcontract included furnishing supervision, labor, tools, equipment, materials, and supplies necessary to construct and install a box culvert and four fences in the Project. Pacific Fence's duty to defend extended to Arthur's claims against DHHL, KIC, and Sato because Arthur alleged acts or omissions that fell within the scope of Pacific Fence's contracted work. Pancakes, 85 Hawai
'i at 292, 944 P.2d 
41
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 89 ("If a complaint alleges claims that fall within the
 
coverage of the indemnity provision, then, according to the
 complaint allegation rule, the duty to defend begins.").
2.	 KIC did not waive its claim to the defense and 
indemnification from Pacific Fence.
 
Pacific Fence contends that KIC "waived" its claim to a
 
defense or indemnification from Pacific Fence because it did not
 
send a tender of defense letter to Pacific Fence and instead
 relied on its filing of a cross-claim to give Pacific Fence
 notice of the tender of the defense. Pacific Fence received
 KIC's cross-claim on February 9, 2006, nine days after Kiewit
 filed their fourth-party complaint against Pacific Fence on
 January 31, 2006. The earliest KIC could have tendered its
 defense to Pacific Fence was on November 21, 2005, when it was
 served with Arthur's Complaint. Pacific Fence provided no
 evidence of prejudice caused by alleged delay in receiving notice
 of claims that it was obliged to defend KIC. We conclude that
 KIC did not waive its rights to reimbursement of defense costs.
3.	 The contracts did not state that duties to 
defend "pass-through" to subsequent contractors.
 
The circuit court held that "pass through" provisions 
in the KIC Contract, Kiewit Contract, and Pacific Fence 
Subcontract required Pacific Fence to defend Kiewit, KIC, DHHL, and Sato, to the exclusion of Kiewit's obligation to defend KIC, DHHL, and Sato. Pacific Fence contended that all indemnitees, including DHHL, "must participate in their own defense for their own independent negligence." This contention is consistent with the result in Pancakes, which required a defendant-indemnitor and a defendant-indemnitee to share the cost of the indemnitee's reasonable attorneys' fees and costs as determined by the trial court. See Pancakes, 85 Hawai
'i at 289-90, 944 P.2d at 86-87. 
Requiring contribution from multiple defendants is even more appropriate in the instant case, which unlike Pancakes, involves a chain of indemnitee and indemnitor parties. 
Pacific Fence contended that Pancakes did not require
 
that an indemnitor be solely responsible for the defense of an
 indemnitee where there are other indemnitors with concurrent
 
42
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
obligations to defend or where the indemnitee itself is
 
independently negligent.
 
The circuit court's finding that KIC's duty to defend
 
DHHL passed through KIC to Kiewit was based on the Kiewit
 Contract, which provided: "To the fullest extent permitted by
 law, [Kiewit] shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless
 [KIC], . . . [Sato], . . . [and DHHL] . . . from and against all
 claims, damages, losses, and expenses . . . resulting from or
 attributable to . . . the performance of the Work and [Kiewit's]
 duties under the Contract Documents[.]" The circuit court also
 considered the terms of contracts KIC made with Kiewit, Coastal,
 Design Partners, and Sato to determine whether duties to defend
 "pass[ed] through" to subsequent contractors.
 
2. Based upon the allegations in [Arthur's] First Amended
Complaint and the terms of their respective contracts with
[KIC], [Design Partners] and Coastal have a joint and
several duty, as a matter of law, to defend KIC with respect
to the claims asserted herein against KIC;
 
3. Based upon the terms of their respective contracts with
[KIC], [KIC's] duty to defend [DHHL] passes through, jointly
and severally, to . . . Coastal and [Kiewit] as a matter of
law;
 
4. Based upon the terms of their respective contracts with
[KIC], [KIC's] duty to defend [DHHL] does not, as a matter
of law, pass through to [Design Partners] and Sato.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Under provisions in the Sato Contract and Design 
Partners Contract with KIC respectively, Sato and Design Partners 
"agree[d] to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless [KIC] and its officers, directors and employees[.]" By contrast, indemnity provisions in the Coastal Contract and Kiewit Contract with KIC required Kiewit and Coastal to "indemnify, defend, and hold harmless [KIC], . . . [Sato], . . . [and DHHL.]" The circuit court's consideration of contractual language was proper "[b]ecause the insurer's duty to defend its insured is contractual in nature, we must look to the language of the policy involved to determine the scope of that duty." Hawaiian Holiday 
Macadamia Nut Co. v. Indus. Indem. Co., 76 Hawai
'i 166, 169, 872 
P.2d 230, 233 (1994). 
Pacific Fence concedes that it had an obligation to
 
defend Kiewit, but contends that Kiewit had an independent duty
 
43
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to defend itself, KIC, Sato, and DHHL that did not "pass through"
 
to Pacific Fence. Under section 3.18.1 of the Kiewit Contract,
 Kiewit had a duty to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless KIC,
 Sato, and DHHL "from and against claims, damages, losses, and
 expenses, including but not limited to attorney's fees, arising
 out of or resulting from [work contracted to Kiewit.]" In
 granting Kiewit's motion for enforcement of the order granting
 its motion for partial summary judgment, the circuit court
 ordered that "Kiewit's obligation to reimburse [KIC] and/or make
 future payments for KIC's defense fees and costs . . . passes
 through Kiewit as a matter of law to Pacific Fence"; and required
 Pacific Fence to "reimburse KIC for the pro rata share of defense
 fees and costs allocated to Kiewit within the time period
 requirement under the [May 27, 2011 "Order Granting [KIC's]
 Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Against [Sato and Kiewit] and
 for Enforcement of Order Granting Motion"]. 
Section 11 of the Pacific Fence Subcontract required 
Pacific Fence to defend and indemnify indemnitees "from any and all claims, suits or liability for damages to property including loss of use thereof, injuries to persons, including death, and from any other claims, suits or liability on account of acts or omissions of [Pacific Fence] . . . whether or not caused in part by the active or passive negligence or other fault of a party indemnified hereunder[.]" Pacific Fence's duties to defend encompassed conduct alleged in the complaint that potentially arose under the agreement. See Pancakes, 85 Hawai
'i at 293, 944 
P.2d at 91. Pacific Fence's duty to defend was "limited to situations where the pleadings have alleged claims for relief that fall within the terms for coverage of the insurance contract. Where pleadings fail to allege any basis for recovery within the coverage clause, the insurer has no obligation to defend." Pancakes, 85 Hawai
'i at 291, 944 P.2d at 88 (citation, 
internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted.) 
Hawai'i requires contracts of indemnity be "strictly 
construed, particularly where the indemnitee claims that it should be held safe from its own negligence." Keawe v. Hawaiian 
Elec. Co., 65 Haw. 232, 237, 649 P.2d 1149, 1153 (1982) (citing 
44
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kamali v. Hawaiian Elec. Co., 54 Haw. 153, 161, 504 P.2d 861, 866 
(1972)). Hawai 'i has scrutinized contracts that allegedly hold 
safe an indemnitee from its own negligence for "a clear and unequivocal assumption of liability by [the indemnitor] for [the indemnitee's] negligence." Kamali, 54 Haw. at 162, 504 P.2d at 
866. Strictly construing the Pacific Fence Subcontract indemnity
 
provision, we conclude that it did not extend to Kiewit's
 liability unless it arose at least in part from Pacific Fence's
 work under their subcontract.
 
Pacific Fence's obligations were not coextensive with
 
KIC's obligations to DHHL under Section 17 of the KIC Contract
 and were not coextensive with Kiewit's obligations to KIC under
 Section 3.18.1 of the Kiewit Contract. Section 11 of the Pacific
 Fence Subcontract obligated Pacific Fence "[t]o assume towards
 [Kiewit] all obligations and responsibilities that [Kiewit]
 assumes toward [KIC] and others, as set forth in the [Kiewit]
 Contract, insofar as applicable, generally or specifically, to
 [Pacific Fence's] Work." We interpret this clause to mean that
 Pacific Fence assumed a duty to defend those whom Kiewit was
 obligated to defend under the Kiewit Contract, but only insofar
 as applicable to Pacific Fence's work.
 
Pacific Fence's alleged acts or omissions, as set forth
 
in Arthur's Complaint, were the basis for its duties to defend
 itself as well as portions of the defense of its contractors
 insofar as their liabilities potentially arose from Pacific
 Fence's acts or omissions. Pacific Fence is not liable for
 portions of Kiewit's independent contractual obligation to defend
 DHHL, Sato, and KIC that arose from its decision to enter the
 Kiewit Contract and those obligations do not "pass through" to
 Pacific Fence. The lack of clear language in the Pacific Fence
 Subcontract expressly stating that Pacific Fence would assume all
 liabilities for Kiewit's duties to defend KIC, DHHL, and Sato
 against omissions or acts arising out of Kiewit's work indicates
 that Kiewit retained an independent duty to defend Kiewit, KIC,
 DHHL, and Sato, and that this duty did not exclusively pass
 through to Pacific Fence. Therefore, Kiewit has an independent
 duty to defend DHHL and KIC and should contribute to defense
 
45
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
costs of DHHL and KIC, as well as the cost of its own defense in
 
the Arthur litigation. 
For these reasons, and those discussed elsewhere in
 
this opinion, we conclude that Pacific Fence did not assume
 duties to defend Kiewit, KIC, Sato, and DHHL to the exclusion of
 these other parties' independent obligations to also contribute
 to defense costs. 
4.	 The Pacific Fence Subcontract is not void under HRS
 
§ 431:10-222.
 
Pacific Fence contends that Kiewit and the circuit
 
court interpreted subcontract indemnity provisions to require
 
Pacific Fence to indemnify Kiewit and other indemnified parties
 against their own negligence. This, Pacific Fence contends, is a
 violation of public policy and other case law that prohibits
 indemnification of an indemnitee's own negligence.
 
Pacific Fence contends that agreements which require
 
subcontractors to indemnify general contractors against the
 general contractor's "sole negligence" are void as against public
 policy. The Pacific Fence Subcontract excluded Pacific Fence
 from its duty to defend and indemnify acts or omissions caused by
 the "sole negligence" of Kiewit. However, Pacific Fence does not
 contend that the alleged acts or omissions in Arthur's complaints
 were solely attributable to Kiewit and therefore the Pacific
 Fence Subcontract was not void under HRS § 431:10-222.
5.	 Joint and several provisions in the Pacific Fence
Subcontract required contribution from other parties.
 
Our conclusion that Kiewit had an independent duty to
 
defend KIC and DHHL that did not pass through to Pacific Fence
 
accords with the express language of the Pacific Fence
 Subcontract. The Pacific Fence Subcontract provides that Kiewit,
 Kiewit's surety, KIC, and "any other party required to be
 indemnified under the Kiewit Contract" would be liable, "jointly
 and severally . . . [t]o defend and indemnify . . . ."
 
Under the Pacific Fence Subcontract, KIC, Sato, and
 
Kiewit had a joint and several obligation to defend against
 claims arising from Pacific Fence's acts or omissions, even where
 one of the indemnitees was part of the cause of the negligent act
 
46
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or omission. The circuit court's October 3, 2011 "Order Granting
 
[Kiewit's] Motion for Enforcement of Order Granting [Kiewit's]
 Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Filed on July 1, 2011"
 required Pacific Fence to reimburse KIC for the pro rata share of
 defense fees and costs allocated to Kiewit under the May 27, 2011
 order granting KIC's motion for partial summary judgment against
 Sato and Kiewit. In one of its May 27, 2011 orders, however, the
 circuit court calculated Kiewit's pro rata share of defense
 obligations without considering Sato's and KIC's joint and
 several duty to participate in the defense under the Pacific
 Fence Subcontract.
 
D. Coastal's Cross-appeal
 
Coastal appeals from three circuit court orders: (1)
 
the May 22, 2007 "Order Granting Part and Denying in Part
 
['DHHL's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment'], Filed January 10,
 2007," which concluded that no genuine issue of material fact
 concerning DHHL's right to a defense by KIC existed; (2) the
 April 27, 2007 "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 [KIC's] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Filed on March 5,
 2001," which concluded that KIC's duty to defend DHHL passed
 through, jointly and severally, to Coastal and Kiewit; and (3)
 the May 27, 2011 "Order Granting [KIC's] Motion for Enforcement
 of the Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part [KIC's] Motion
 for Partial Summary Judgment Filed March 25, 2007, as Against
 [Design Partners]."
 
Similar to Pacific Fence's contentions regarding pro­
rata allocation of defense costs amongst Defendant Parties,
 Coastal contends that KIC should be required to contribute to
 DHHL's defense costs, "along with Coastal, Kiewit, and Pacific
 Fence, rather than imposing its share of those costs on Coastal
 and Kiewit."
 
Coastal contends KIC was not obliged to defend DHHL
 
against its own negligence and could not pass that duty on to
 others; that their duty to defend was narrower than an insurer's
 duty to defend; and that apportioning defense costs amongst the
 Defendant Parties would implement this narrower duty.
 
47
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1.	 Coastal owed a duty to defend KIC and DHHL up until the
circuit court granted summary judgment in favor of
Coastal on February 25, 2010.
 
Coastal contends it did not owe a duty to defend DHHL
 
or KIC because alleged negligent acts or omissions could not have
 
arisen from its work on the Project and, therefore, the circuit
 court erred by granting KIC summary judgment on Coastal's duty to
 defend. Coastal contends that in the First Amended Complaint,
 Arthur was "mistaken" and had "misidentified" Coastal as the
 general contractor. Coastal states that "[Arthur] had simply
 assumed that Coastal was the contractor responsible for grading
 and site improvements." Arthur's First Amended Complaint
 identified Coastal as "the General Contractor for this
 development" and did not name Kiewit as a defendant. Coastal
 asserts KIC and other Defendant Parties knew that it was Kiewit
 and not Coastal, who was responsible for the grading and site
 improvements that were the subject of Arthur's First Amended
 Complaint. Together with the narrower duty to defend that is
 applied in the context of non-insurance contracts, this meant
 that "the allegations of the complaint did not warrant a finding
 by the [circuit] court that Coastal owed KIC or the DHHL any
 defense, let a lone [sic] a defense against all claims asserted
 against either of them."
 
The circuit court's February 25, 2010 Order Granting
 
Coastal's Renewed Motion for Summary Judgment, as well as
 subsequent orders addressing Coastal's limited liability for a
 duty to defend, found Coastal had a duty to defend DHHL and KIC
 until Coastal was granted summary judgment.
 The circuit court also determined that Coastal's acts or
 omissions fell outside of the scope of claims "arising out of,
 resulting from or attributable to" Coastal's work under section
 3.18.1 of the Coastal Contract. On May 22, 2007, the circuit
 court denied Coastal's first motion for summary judgment on
 Arthur's First Amended Complaint, finding issues of fact as to
 whether Coastal's scope of work might have included
 responsibility for the debris fence and drainage culvert. 
Therefore, the circuit court did not err in denying Coastal's
 
48
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
first motion for summary judgment.
 
Coastal's contention that it owed no duty to defend is
 
complicated by its agreement to settle its liability for a duty
 
to defend KIC. On June 9, 2011, Coastal filed a "Petition for
 Determination of a Good Faith Settlement" under which it paid
 $47,500 to KIC for defense costs. The circuit court granted this
 petition on November 17, 2011.
 
We need not address Coastal's contention that it owed
 
no duty to defend DHHL or KIC. Coastal does not (1) argue that
 the lack of nexus between its work on the Project and Arthur's
 Complaint negated the basis for granting KIC's motion for summary
 judgment, or (2) indicate whether and how this argument was
 raised to the circuit court. Coastal's opening brief was
 required to present an "argument" that contained its contentions
 and citations to authorities and parts of the record relied upon,
 but did not do so. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). Coastal was also
 
required to set forth points of error in its brief that stated
 "where in the record the alleged error was objected to or the
 manner in which the alleged error was brought to the attention of
 the court . . . ." HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(iii). In light of the
 particular circumstances under which Coastal's duty to defend was
 invoked in this case, Coastal's subsequent agreement to settle
 the issue of its liability for a duty to defend, and because
 Coastal failed to properly present its points of circuit court
 error or argument, we disregard this contention. See HRAP Rule
 
28(b).
2.	 Coastal's obligation to defend extended to claims
potentially arising under the Coastal Contract.
 
Coastal contends the circuit court erred by concluding
 
that Coastal agreed to assume KIC's obligations to DHHL under the
 
indemnity clause of the Coastal Contract, section 3.18.1, does
 not contain an express assumption of KIC's obligations to DHHL
 and was not intended to operate as a "conduit" for assuming KIC's
 obligations. KIC's obligations to DHHL arose under Section 17 of
 the KIC Contract, which provided that KIC would defend DHHL
 against claims related to sales, construction, or design of the
 Project within a year of completion; claims based on non­
49
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disclosure or inadequate disclosure of risks; and legal actions
 
arising from KIC's development and construction work. The KIC
 Contract indicates, however, that KIC would not defend against
 DHHL's negligent acts or omissions related to the Project.
 
Coastal correctly asserts that KIC did not add a 
provision expressly stating that Coastal would assume KIC's duties to defend DHHL. Further, while broader than a duty to indemnify, the duty to defend arises "whenever any of the claims asserted may potentially come within the scope of an indemnity agreement, and the defense must continue until it is clear that the liability cannot possibly come within the scope of the indemnity." Indemnification and Insurance, 79 Pa. B. Ass'n Q. 
156 at 178. Therefore, Coastal's duty to defend KIC and others extended to all of Arthur's claims that potentially arose under the Coastal Contract. See Pancakes, 85 Hawai
'i at 293, 944 P.2d 
at 91. 
Section 3.18.1 of the Coastal Contract required
 
Coastal to defend KIC and DHHL against claims "arising out of,
 resulting from or attributable to . . . the performance of the
 Work and [Coastal's] duties under the Contract Documents[.]" 
Like Kiewit, Coastal contracted to defend KIC and DHHL for all
 claims "arising out of, resulting from, or attributable
 to . . . the performance of the Work and [Coastal's] duties under
 the Contract Documents, caused in whole or in part by any
 negligent act or omission . . . ." Coastal contends that it did
 not intend to assume KIC's obligations to DHHL, which is why
 section 3.18.1 specified it would defend only such claims.
 
KIC argued to the circuit court that its intent in
 
including indemnification provisions in its contracts "was to
 pass the duty to indemnify and defend against any third-party
 claims, including those of [Arthur] and DHHL, to the persons or
 entities performing the actual design and construction work from
 which a claim might be made." Coastal contends that "the
 principal purpose of the [Coastal] Contract was not to provide
 for the defense and indemnity of KIC but instead to provide a
 contractor for the [Project] that would build houses for that
 project."
 
50
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Coastal contends the Coastal Contract specified it
 
could only be liable for claims arising from the scope of
 
Coastal's contracted work. Coastal argues that "in construction-
related litigation involving duties to defend arising between and
 among multiple defendants, a trial court should apportion defense
 costs on the basis of the claims that arise from or are
 attributable to the defendants' respective scope of work." 
Kiewit contends that Coastal's suggested rule would require
 "overturn[ing]" Pancakes and First Ins. Co. of Hawaii, v. State,
 by Minami, 66 Haw. 413, 665 P.2d 648 (1983), insofar as the rule
 is applicable to "situations where the express language of the
 indemnity provision does not limit the defense to the
 indemnitor's scope of work." We disagree.
 
Pancakes held a duty to defend encompasses "claims 
[raised in a complaint] that fall within the coverage of the indemnity provision[.]" Pancakes, 85 Hawai
'i at 292, 944 P.2d at 
89. Only those claims that could potentially be attributable to
 
the contracted work fall under the indemnity provisions in
 contracts under review in the instant case. As discussed in
 regard to Pacific Fence's appeal, apportionment amongst
 indemnitor-parties as well as the indeminitee-defendant is
 consistent with Pancakes. A duty to defend and indemnify cannot
 be passed off entirely onto a subsequent contractor because that
 duty arises whenever a claim is made against acts or omissions
 attributable to the indemnitor's work. The Coastal Contract,
 like the Pacific Fence Subcontract, did not provide that Coastal
 would assume KIC's duties to defend DHHL to the exclusion of
 KIC's or DHHL's potential liability for its own negligence or
 willful acts. The Costal Contract provides:
 
[Coastal] shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless
[KIC], . . . [Sato], . . . [DHHL] . . . from and against all
claims, damages, losses, and expenses, including but not
limited to attorneys' fees, arising out of, resulting from
or attributable to (1) the performance of the Work and
[Coastal's] duties under the Contract Documents, caused in
whole or in part by any negligent act or omission of
[Coastal], a Subcontractor, . . . or anyone for whose acts
they may be liable, regardless of whether such claim,
damage, loss, or expenses is caused in part by a party
indemnified hereunder[.]
 
Under this provision, Coastal was obligated to
 
51
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contribute to the defense of DHHL, shared with Sato, Kiewit,
 
Pacific Fence, KIC, and DHHL; and the defense of KIC, shared with
 Kiewit, Pacific Fence, and Sato. Although Coastal is required to
 defend and indemnify KIC and DHHL, KIC is also obliged to provide
 a share of the defense of DHHL based on the independent duty
 created by the KIC Contract. 
As Coastal properly contends, DHHL also had an
 
independent duty to participate in its own defense under Section
 17 of the KIC Contract, the last paragraph of which specified
 "Section 17 shall not cover the negligence or willful acts,
 omissions, failure to act, or misconduct of [DHHL] either related
 to the development of this Project or related to the completion
 of [DHHL's] authorized mission." (Emphasis added.)
III. CONCLUSION
 
We vacate in part and affirm in part the Circuit Court
 
of the First Circuit's Amended Final Judgment, filed on April 2,
 2013, and remand this case for further proceedings consistent
 with our decisions on the orders, partial summary judgments, and
 summary judgments appealed from as specified supra.
 
In regard to Arthur's appeal, the circuit court's
 
September 8, 2010 "Order Granting Defendant Kalawahine Streamside
 Association's Motion For Summary Judgment On Any And All Claims
 Asserted By Plaintiffs Due To Lack Of Causation Filed on April 8,
 2010" is vacated. The May 24, 2010 "Order Granting Defendant and
 Third-Party Plaintiff Kamehameha Investment Corporation's Motion
 for Partial Summary Judgment as to Plaintiffs' Claim for Punitive
 Damages filed on March 2, 2010" and the August 26, 2010 "Order
 Denying Plaintiff Arthur's Motion For Leave To File Complaint
 Over and Against Third-Party Defendant Kiewit Pacific Co. Filed
 on March 9, 2010" are affirmed. 
In regard to appeals taken by Pacific Fence and cross-
appeals by Sato and Coastal, we vacate the following circuit
 court orders and remand this case for further proceedings to
 newly determine Defendant Parties' respective liabilities for
 their duties to defend under the KIC Contract, Sato Contract,
 Design Partners Contract, Kiewit Contract, Coastal Contract, and
 
52
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the Pacific Fence Subcontract:6
 
(1) the April 27, 2007 "Order Granting in Part and
 
Denying in Part Defendant and Third-Party Plaintiff Kamehameha
 
Investment Corporation's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment
 Filed on March 5, 2007";
 
(2) the May 22, 2007 "Order Granting in Part and 
Denying in Part 'Defendant State of Hawai
'i, Department of 
Hawaiian Home Lands' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment' Filed January 10, 2007"; 
(3) the August 8, 2007 "Order Granting Third-Party
 
Defendant and Fourth-Party Plaintiff Kiewit Pacific Co.'s Motion
 for Partial Summary Judgment, Filed Herein on June 8, 2007";
 
(4) the May 27, 2011 "Order Granting Defendant and
 
Third-Party Plaintiff Kamehameha Investment Corporation's Motion
 for Partial Summary Judgment Against Fourth-Party Defendant
 Pacific Fence, Inc. and for Enforcement of Order Granting
 Motion";
 
(5) the May 27, 2011 "Order Granting Defendant and
 
Third-Party Plaintiff Kamehameha Investment Corporation's Motion
 for Partial Summary Judgment Against Defendant Sato & Associates,
 Inc. and Third-Party Defendant Kiewit Pacific Co. and for
 Enforcement Order Granting Motion";
 
(6) the May 27, 2011 "Order Granting Defendant and
 
Third-Party Plaintiff Kamehameha Investment Corporation's Motion
 for Enforcement of Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 Defendant and Third-Party Plaintiff Kamehameha Investment
 Corporation's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Filed March 25,
 2007, as Against Defendant Design Partners, Inc.";
 
(7) the May 27, 2011 "Order Granting Defendant and
 
Third-Party Plaintiff Kamehameha Investment Corporation's Motion
 for Enforcement of Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 Defendant and Third-Party Plaintiff Kamehameha Investment
 
6
 The "Order Granting Coastal Construction Co., Inc.'s Renewed Motion
for Summary Judgment on the First Amended Complaint (Filed November 8, 2005),
Including Any Pending Amendment and Defendant and Third-Party Plaintiff
Kamehameha Investment Corporation's Conditional Substantive Joinder" filed on
February 25, 2010 is affirmed and consistent with this order, Coastal's
liability for its duty to defend KIC and DHHL ended on February 25, 2010.
 
53
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Corporation's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Filed March 25,
 
2007, as Against Defendant Coastal Construction Co., Inc."; and 
(8) the October 3, 2011 "Order Granting Third-Party
Defendant and Fourth-Party Plaintiff Kiewit Pacific Co.'s Motion
 for Enforcement Of Order Granting Third-Party Defendant and
 Fourth-Party Plaintiff Kiewit Pacific Co.'s Motion for Partial
 Summary Judgment Filed On July 1, 2011."
 
 
Gary Y. Okuda
(Lester K.M. Leu and
Karyn A. Doi with him on the
briefs)
(Leu Okuda & Doi)
and
 Leighton K. Lee
for Plaintiffs/Appellees/ Appellants/
Cross-Appellees William A. Arthur, Sr.,
individually and the Estate of Mona
Arthur, through William A. Arthur,
as Personal Representative.
 
Michael N. Tanoue
 
(Eric H. Kunisaki
(The Pacific Law Group)
and
 Robert P. Richards
 (Hughes Richards & Associates) with
him on the briefs)
for Fourth-Party Defendant/Appellant/
Appellee/Cross-Appellee Pacific
Fence Inc.
 
Michiro Iwanaga
(Wayne M. Sakai and
Max J. Kimura with him on the briefs)
(Sakai Iwanaga Sutton)
for Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellant
Coastal Construction Co., Inc.
 
Kevin P.H. Sumida
 
(Anthony L. Wong and
Lance S. Au with him on the briefs)
(Kevin Sumida & Associates)
and
 Jane Kwan
 (Frank K. Goto, Jr. and
Bennett J. Chin with her on the briefs)
(Law Offices of Frank K. Goto, Jr.)
for Defendants/Appellees/Cross-Appellants
Sato and Associates, Inc. and
Daniel S. Miyasato.
 
54
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Arthur H. Kuwahara
 
(Kim & Kuwahara)
for Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellee/
Appellant Design Partners, Inc.
 
Wade J. Katano
 
(Jonathan L. Ortiz with him on the
brief)
(Wade & Katano)
for Defendant/Appellee Association of
Kalawahine Streamside Association.
 
Brad S. Petrus
 
(Joseph F. Kotowski, III, David R.
Harada-Stone, and Lyle M. Ishida
with him on the briefs)
(Tom Petrus & Miller)
for Defendant/Appellee/Third Party
Plaintiff/Cross-Appellee Kamehameha
Investment Corporation.
 
Greg H. Takase
(Takase & Takase of counsel)
(Cary T. Tanaka and
Dawn N. Nakagawa
(Law Offices of Cary T. Tanaka)
with him on the brief)
and
 Wesley H.H. Ching
(Sheree Kon-Herrera with him
on the brief)
(Fukunaga Matayoshi Hershey & Ching)
for Third-Party Defendant/Appellee/
Fourth-Party Plaintiff/Cross-Appellee
Kiewit Pacific Company.
 
Randall Y. Yamamoto 
(Brian Y. Hiyane with him on thebrief)(Kawashima Lorusso)for Defendant/Appellee/Third PartyPlaintiff/Cross-Appellee State ofHawai
'i Department of Hawaiian
Home Lands. 
55
 