 
   
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-21-0000014 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
LIAM BEALE, Petitioner-Appellee, v.
ROBERT KONRAD ROOS, Respondent-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(FD-DA NO. 20-1-0421) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, C.J., and Leonard and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Respondent-Appellant Robert Konrad Roos (
Roos) appeals 
from the September 21, 2020 Order for Protection entered in favor 
of Petitioner-Appellee Liam Beale (Beale) and against Roos by the 
Family Court of the Second Circuit (Family Court).1/  Pursuant to 
Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 4(a)(3), Roos's notice 
of appeal is also deemed to appeal the Family Court's "Order 
Denying Motion for Reconsideration; Memorandum in Support of Motion for Reconsideration; Affidavit of Defendant Exhibits 1-8." 
On appeal, Roos contends that the Family Court erred in 
granting a temporary restraining order and the Order for Protection and in denying Roos's motion for reconsideration because Beale and Roos were not "household or family members" as defined by Hawaii Revised Statutes (
HRS) § 586-1, quoted infra.2/ 
1/ The Honorable Adrianne N. Heely presided. 
2/ Roos raises several related points of error, which have been
restated and condensed for clarity.  Because we find the above contention 
dispositive (see infra), we do not reach Roos's contention that the FamilyCourt erred in denying the motion for reconsideration.  For the same reason,we do not reach Roos's contention that the Family Court erred in denying his"request to produce relevant evidence through a witness."    
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record, and the brief 
submitted by Roos,3/  and having given due consideration to the 
arguments advanced and the issues raised, we reverse the Order 
for Protection for the reasons set forth below. 
I.  
Background 
On September 14, 2020, Beale filed an ex parte petition 
for a temporary restraining order (TRO) against Roos (Petition), 
pursuant to HRS Chapter 586.  In the Petition, Beale described 
his relationship to Roos as a "roommate."  Beale described the alleged "recent acts of domestic abuse or threats of domestic abuse" as follows: 
2 weeks ago- [Roos] had been out all day.  When he came home 
with his girlfriend he was intoxicated and playing loudmusic at 11 pm.  I told [Roos] to turned [sic] down his music.  [Roos] got mad and aggressive he yelled at metelling me "don't tell him what to do and he can do what hewants."  I asked him nicely again to turn the music down andhe refused.  He got in my face screaming to me and getting mad.  I called the police and [Roos] was acting cool.  Once the police left he continued to yell and swear outside. 
For the past month [Roos] has gotten in my face, he refuses
to leave because he has not paid rent, he threaten [sic] topunch me, he comes home drunk and when I try and speak tohim nicely he will yell at me and get in my faceaggressively.  He calls me a "little bitch, asshole and motherfucker." 
On September 14, 2020, the Family Court issued a TRO 
pursuant to HRS § 586-4(c) (2018),4/ which, among other things, 
3/ Beale did not submit an answering brief. 
4/ HRS § 586-4(c) provides: 
The family court judge may issue the ex parte
temporary restraining order orally, if the person beingrestrained is present in court.  The order shall state that there is probable cause to believe that a past act or actsof abuse have occurred, or that threats of abuse make itprobable that acts of abuse may be imminent.  The order further shall state that the temporary restraining order isnecessary for the purposes of: preventing acts of abuse orpreventing a recurrence of actual domestic abuse andensuring a period of separation of the parties involved. The order shall also describe in reasonable detail the act or acts sought to be restrained.  Where necessary, the ordermay require either or both of the parties involved to leavethe premises during the period of the order; may alsorestrain the party or parties to whom it is directed fromcontacting, threatening, or physically abusing the 
(continued...) 
2   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
ordered Roos to immediately leave the subject residence.5/  Police 
subsequently escorted Roos off the property. 
On September 21, 2020, the Family Court held a hearing 
requiring Roos to show cause why an order for protection should 
not continue against him (OSC hearing).  Both parties were self-represented at the OSC hearing and both testified.  At the outset, Roos noted "big discrepancies" in the Petition and denied the allegations. 
Beale testified that he and Roos lived "in the same 
building together."  Beale stated that his parents are the landlords and Beale served as the "property manager or caretaker[.]"  Beale further testified that Roos had a "verbal agreement" with the "past property manager" and had not paid rent since the beginning of the month (though the hearing transcript is somewhat unclear on the latter point).  Beale stated:  "So we asked [Roos] on May 28, we (inaudible) him to leave.  He did not comply with this notice."
6/    
4
/  (...continued)
applicant's family or household members; and may enjoin or
restrain both parties from taking, concealing, removing,threatening, physically abusing, or otherwise disposing ofany animal identified to the court as belonging to ahousehold, until further order of the court.  The order shall not only be binding upon the parties to the action,but also upon their officers, agents, servants, employees,attorneys, or any other persons in active concert orparticipation with them.  The order shall enjoin the
respondent or person to be restrained from performing any
combination of the following acts: 
(1) Contacting, threatening, or physically abusing
the protected party; 
(2) Contacting, threatening, or physically abusing
any person residing at the protected party'sresidence; 
(3) Entering or visiting the protected party's
residence; or 
(4) Taking, concealing, removing, threatening,
physically abusing, or otherwise disposing ofany animal identified to the court as belongingto a household, until further order of thecourt. 
5/ The Honorable John J. Breen entered the TRO. 
6/ During this time period, an eviction moratorium was in place due 
to COVID-19. 
3 --NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Roos testified that, among other things, he and Beale 
were "not living together as [Beale] stated earlier" and "[t]here 
are two different houses on the premises." 
Following the parties' testimony, the Family Court 
found in part:  "[Y]ou folks live kinda together in the same area and loft or the garage now, but the same area of your [i.e., Beale's] parents' home."  The Family Court further stated: "[Y]ou [(Beale)] don't feel safe with [Roos] around. . . .  I can grant the request for the protective order.  I heard credible evidence from [Beale]."  (Formatting altered.) 
Roos then raised an objection as to the allegation on 
page two, paragraph G of the Petition, which stated: 
 [T] we are now living together. 
(Does not include those who are, or were, adultroommates or cohabitants only by virtue of an economicor contractual affiliation[)] 
The Family Court clarified that Roos was "arguing that you guys 
are not family or household members" and noted his objection, but stated: 
[H]earing the testimony I will overrule it and find that you
are living together.  Um, you folks are adult [sic] orcohabitants, um, by virtue of a contractual affiliation. 
I heard that you were previously living there on a
oral rental -- oral agreement.  That's a contractual, butit's -- recommended that if you have -- so it's -- it's notan oral one.  You have a written one now.  So do you have it 
So even more so this allowed.  I will find that you
folks are family household members or cohabitants living inthe same area. 
I find that his allegation on page two, paragraph G
[of the Petition] is true. 
The Family Court also found the allegation in the 
Petition regarding "recent acts of domestic abuse or threats of 
domestic abuse" to be true.  The Family Court "grant[ed] the request for the protective order[,]" adopting the terms stated in the TRO.  The Order for Protection was filed following the hearing and put in place for two years. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
II.  Discussion 
Roos contends that the Family Court erred in granting 
the TRO and the Order for Protection because Beale and Roos were 
not "household or family members" as defined by HRS § 586-1. 
We apply the following standard of review to Roos's 
contention: 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion.  Thus,[an appellate court] will not disturb the family court'sdecisions on appeal unless the family court disregardedrules or principles of law or practice to the substantialdetriment of a party litigant and its decision clearlyexceeded the bounds of reason. 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(quoting In re Doe, 95 Hawai# i 183, 189-90, 20 P.3d 616, 622-23 
(2001)). 
The Family Court entered the Order of Protection 
pursuant to HRS § 586-5.5.  HRS § 586-5.5(a) (2018) provides in 
relevant part: 
§ 586-5.5. Protective order; additional orders.  (a)
If, after hearing all relevant evidence, the court finds
that the respondent has failed to show cause why the[temporary restraining] order should not be continued andthat a protective order is necessary to prevent domesticabuse or a recurrence of abuse, the court may order that aprotective order be issued for a further fixed reasonableperiod as the court deems appropriate[.] 
(emphasis added); see also HRS § 586-3(a) (2018) ("There shall 
exist an action known as a petition for an order for protection in cases of domestic abuse.") 
In turn, HRS § 586-1 (2018) defines "domestic abuse" 
as: 
(1) Physical harm, bodily injury, assault, or the threat
of imminent physical harm, bodily injury, or assault,
extreme psychological abuse, coercive control, ormalicious property damage between family or householdmembers; or 
(2) Any act which would constitute an offense under
section 709-906 [i.e.,  Abuse of Family or Household
Members], or under part V or VI of chapter 707
committed against a minor family or household memberby an adult family or household member. 
5  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Emphases added.) 
"Family or household member": 
(1) Means spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, former
spouses or former reciprocal beneficiaries, persons
who have a child in common, parents, children, personsrelated by consanguinity, persons jointly residing orformerly residing in the same dwelling unit, andpersons who have or have had a dating relationship;and 
(2) Does not include those who are, or were, adult
roommates or cohabitants only by virtue of an economicor contractual affiliation. 
HRS § 586-1 (emphasis added); see HRS § 709-906(19) (Supp. 2020) 
(setting forth the same definition of "family or household member" for purposes of the criminal offense of Abuse of Family or Household Members); see also HRS § 571-2 (defining "family violence" as certain acts by a "family or household member"). 
We conclude that the Family Court abused its discretion 
in granting the Order for Protection after finding that Beale and Roos were "adult [sic] or cohabitants . . . by virtue of a contractual affiliation."  HRS § 586-5.5 authorizes the issuance of a protective order when necessary to prevent domestic abuse or a recurrence of such abuse, defined by HRS § 586-1 as abuse between family or household members.  As set forth above, HRS § 586-1 explicitly excludes "those who are, or were, adult roommates or cohabitants only by virtue of an economic or contractual affiliation" from the definition of family or household member. 
There is no evidence in the record to support a 
reasonable inference or conclusion that the parties' relationship was one other than a contractual or economic relationship. Indeed, the Family Court expressly concluded that the relationship was a "contractual affiliation."  Because Beale and Roos were not family or household members as defined by HRS § 586-1, the Protective Order was not warranted under HRS § 586-5.5.  Accordingly, the Family Court abused its discretion in issuing the Order for Protection.
7/ 
7/ We further conclude that Roos's challenge to the September 14,
2020 TRO, which has long since expired, is moot.  Roos has shown no reasonable 
(continued...) 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Family Court's September 21, 
2020 Order for Protection is reversed. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 28, 2022. 
On the brief: 
Jordan K. Chee and 
Yukari Murakami,(Legal Aid Society of 
Hawai# i) 
for Respondent-Appellant. /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
7/  (...continued)
possibility that issuance of the short-lived TRO, which was based on theprobable cause standard set forth in HRS § 586-4(c) and superseded by theSeptember 21, 2020 Order for Protection, would cause him reputational harm orany other collateral consequence sufficient to trigger an exception to themootness doctrine.  See Hamilton ex rel. Lethem v. Lethem, 119 
Hawai i #1, 9-
10, 193 P.3d 839, 847-48 (2008).  We thus lack subject matter jurisdiction to decide this issue. 
7 