NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-10-0000102
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
NORMAN SAMSON and FRANCINE SAMSON, Individually,
and as Guardian Prochein Ami of KU 'ULEILANI SAMSON, a Minor,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
 
NOLA ANN NAHULU, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0171)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Norman Samson (Father) and 
Francine Samson (Mother), Individually and as Guardians Prochein 
Ami of Ku 'uleilani Samson (Daughter) (collectively referred to as 
the Samsons), appeal from a Judgment, entered on August 9, 2010, and an "Order Denying Plaintiffs' Motion for Judgment Notwithstanding the Verdict and/or, In the Alternative, for New Trial" entered on September 29, 2010, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).
1 This case arises from an 
accident wherein a vehicle operated by Defendant-Appellee Nola Ann Nahulu (Nahulu) struck Daughter as Daughter crossed Farrington Highway on foot. The Judgment was entered after a jury returned a Special Verdict on June 10, 2010, in favor of Nahulu and against the Samsons. 
On appeal, the Samsons assert that the circuit court
 
erred by (1) denying admission of a photograph of the accident
 
1
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
scene, Plaintiffs' Exhibit 7, that showed markings made or
 
authorized by witness McKenna Benson (Benson); (2) barring Benson
 from testifying that Nahulu was going "too fast for the
 conditions" and witness Paul Day (Day) from testifying that
 Nahulu was traveling at "an unsafe speed"; (3) allowing Nahulu's
 expert witness, Wayne Slagle (Slagle), to give unreliable and
 speculative opinion testimony; (4) admitting and allowing Slagle
 to testify about opinions that were not disclosed to the Samsons
 prior to trial; and (5) giving certain jury instructions
 (Nahulu's proposed instructions 1, 2, and 6, as modified) and
 failing to give an instruction requested by the Samsons
 (Plaintiffs' proposed instruction 12). 
For the reasons stated below, we affirm.
 
I. Discussion
 
A. Exhibit 7 and Related Testimony
 
The parties dispute whether Daughter was in a crosswalk
 
at the time of the accident. Daughter testified at trial that,
 after waiting for her friend to get on a bus, she walked
 alongside Farrington Highway, looked both ways, and then entered
 the road at a crosswalk in front of the bus. To the contrary,
 based on conflicting testimony from witnesses to the accident,
 Nahulu claims that Daughter entered the road quickly from right
 in front of the bus, walking diagonally across the road, and was
 not in a crosswalk when she was struck.
 
The Samsons contend the circuit court abused its
 
discretion when it excluded Plaintiffs' Exhibit 7, a photograph
 of the accident scene that the Samsons assert had markings made
 or authorized by Benson
2
 depicting the point of impact in the
middle of a crosswalk on Farrington Highway. The Samsons argue
 Exhibit 7 was not prejudicial and/or the threat of prejudice was
 
2
 On July 4, 2005, Daughter was struck by Nahulu's vehicle as Daughter
was crossing Farrington Highway near the Jade Street intersection. Nahulu was
 
driving toward Honolulu. The parties do not dispute that for the
Honolulu-bound lane, there is a bus cut-out on the side of the road for buses
to service passengers, that at the time of the accident two buses were using
the cut-out, and that somewhere in front of the first bus was a marked
crosswalk. Benson was the driver of the front bus in the cut-out, but he does
not recall a crosswalk.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
outweighed by its probative value, thus the circuit court had a
 
duty to receive the relevant evidence related to a key factual
 issue. Further, the Samsons contend the circuit court erred when
 it concluded a limiting instruction would not cure any potential
 unfair prejudice. Finally, the Samsons contend the circuit court
 erred when it precluded Benson from testifying at trial that,
 assuming there was a crosswalk as depicted in a different copy of
 the photograph,
3
 it is more likely than not that Daughter was
struck in the crosswalk.
 
During trial, the circuit court ruled Exhibit 7 and its
 
contents inadmissible as offered through Benson. 
The circuit
 
court based this ruling on Benson's lack of personal knowledge as
 to whether the accident occurred in a crosswalk and his inability
 to verify the accuracy of the photograph (related to both the
 layout of the scene and the location of a "X" in the crosswalk).
4
 
The circuit court explained that the unfair prejudice generated
 by Exhibit 7 substantially outweighed its probative value because
 the photograph depicted the collision occurring in the crosswalk
 despite Benson's testimony that he could not state whether in
 fact the collision was in a crosswalk. The court rejected the
 Samsons' proposal for a limiting instruction because the court
 feared the jury could not ignore the fact that Exhibit 7
 indicated the point of impact in the crosswalk. The court then
 noted that nothing prevented the Samsons from using a different
 photograph and Benson's testimony to establish the point of
 impact based on his personal knowledge. 
3 By agreement of the parties, a different copy of the photograph,
without the "X"s, was received into evidence as Plaintiff's Exhibit 3-B prior
to Benson's testimony.
4
 During trial, the circuit court held a Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE)
Rule 104 (1993) hearing on the admissibility of Exhibit 7. Benson testified
 that he could not recall a marked crosswalk on the day of the accident as
depicted in Exhibit 7, and thus could not state that Exhibit 7 accurately
depicted the area at the time of the accident, nor could he testify that the
collision occurred in the crosswalk. Benson further testified that he made
 one of the markings (an "X") on the photograph, indicating where the front of
his bus was stopped, but not the other "X" located in the crosswalk, which
purportedly indicated the point of impact. Benson did acknowledge that the
second "X" marked the spot he pointed to during his deposition to indicate
"about" where Daughter was struck, assuming there was a crosswalk at the time.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The admissibility of evidence requires different
standards of review depending on the particular rule of
evidence at issue.
 
When application of a particular evidentiary
rule can yield only one correct result, the
proper standard for appellate review is the
right/wrong standard. However, the traditional
abuse of discretion standard should be applied
in the case of those rules of evidence that
 require a "judgment call" on the part of the
trial court.
 
. . . An abuse of discretion occurs when the court "clearly
exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or
principles of law to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant."
 
State v. Cordeiro , 99 Hawai 'i 390, 403-04, 56 P.3d 692, 705-06 
(2002) (internal citations omitted).
 
The circuit court ruled that the danger of unfair
 
prejudice substantially outweighed the probative value of Exhibit
 
7. Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) 403 (1993). "[A] trial
 court's balancing of the probative value of . . . evidence
 against the prejudicial effect of such evidence under HRE Rule
 403 . . . is reviewed for abuse of discretion." 
Cordeiro , 99 
Hawai'i at 404, 56 P.3d at 706. 
Benson was not able to provide foundation testimony or
 
other proof that Exhibit 7 was a substantially accurate
 representation of the accident scene as required by HRE Rule 901
 (1993).
5 See HRE Rule 901, cmt. Benson stated he could not
 
testify that the incident occurred in a crosswalk. Further,
 Benson testified that he could not say Exhibit 7 accurately
 depicted the area at the time of the accident. Based on Benson's
 testimony, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 determining that the prejudicial effect of Exhibit 7
 substantially outweighed its probative value. See State v.
 
Sequin, 73 Haw. 331, 338, 832 P.2d 269, 273 (1992) (holding that
 
5
 HRE Rule 901 provides:
 
Rule 901 Requirement of authentication or
identification. (a) General provision. The requirement of
authentication or identification as a condition precedent to
admissibility is satisfied by evidence sufficient to support
a finding that the matter in question is what its proponent
claims.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the trial court did not abuse its discretion when it excluded a
 
photographic exhibit that the court determined could mislead the
 jury because inter alia witnesses could not verify its accuracy). 
In regard to the Samsons' argument that the circuit 
court should have admitted Exhibit 7 and utilized a limiting instruction, the circuit court had discretion to weigh the potential for unfair prejudice. "[W]here the danger of the jury's misuse of the evidence for the incompetent purpose is great, and its value for the legitimate purpose is slight . . . the judge's power to exclude the evidence altogether would be recognized." HRE Rule 105, cmt. (1993) (citation omitted). Here, the circuit court determined that there was great potential the jury would not be able to look past the fact that the second "X" was located in the crosswalk. The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying the use of a limiting instruction. See State v. Palisbo, 122 Hawai
'i 546, 229 
P.3d 364, No. 29133, at *9 (App. Apr. 20, 2010) (mem.) ("[T]he trial court has considerable discretion in determining whether and when to issue a limiting instruction." (citing Cordeiro, 99 Hawai
'i at 418-19, 56 P.3d at 720-21)). 
Similarly, the circuit court did not err in precluding
 
the Samsons from asking Benson whether it was more likely than
 not that Daughter was struck in the crosswalk, if there was a
 crosswalk at the time of the collision, as depicted in a
 photograph similar to Exhibit 7 but without the "X" markings. 
The circuit court sustained Nahulu's objection that there was no
 foundation to permit such testimony, again because Benson could
 not say whether there was a crosswalk at the accident scene. The
 court noted that the Samsons could elicit testimony from Benson
 about how far away he estimated the point of impact to be, but
 that having Benson place the point of impact in the crosswalk
 when he could not say there was a crosswalk was problematic.
 
"When a question arises regarding the necessary
 
foundation for the introduction of evidence, the determination of
 whether proper foundation has been established lies within the
 discretion of the trial court, and its determination will not be
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
overturned absent a showing of clear abuse." State v. Eid, 126 
Hawai'i 430, 440, 272 P.3d 1197, 1207 (2012); see First Ins. Co. 
of Hawaii, Ltd. v. Int'l Harvester Co., 66 Haw. 185, 192-93, 659 
P.2d 64, 69 (1983). Benson testified he could not remember a crosswalk at the scene, but the Samsons sought to have Benson testify that the impact occurred in the crosswalk depicted in the photograph. The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in ruling that there was a lack of foundation for such testimony. 
Therefore, the circuit court did not err in excluding
 
Exhibit 7 and the related testimony that the Samsons claim should
 have been allowed.
 
B. Lay Witness Testimony
 
The Samsons argue the circuit court abused its
 
discretion when it precluded Day and Benson from testifying,
 respectively, that Nahulu was traveling at "an unsafe speed" or
 "too fast."
6 The Samsons contend the proposed testimony is
 
admissible pursuant to HRE Rules 701 and 704 (1993).
 
Prior to trial, the circuit court granted in part
 
Nahulu's motion in limine no. 6 that precluded all opinion
 testimony by lay witnesses as to whether Nahulu complied with
 traffic laws, including testimony that she was traveling "too
 fast" or at an "unsafe speed," but permitted lay witnesses to
 testify regarding their personal observations. The circuit court
 also granted Nahulu's motion in limine no. 5 that precluded any
 and all questions to and testimony by lay witnesses concerning
 the ultimate issue of Defendant's alleged negligence. Based on
 its in limine rulings, the circuit court declared that testimony
 to the effect that Nahulu was driving "too fast for the
 conditions" was tantamount to opinion testimony that Nahulu was
 negligent. Similarly, the circuit court ruled that Day's
 testimony that Nahulu's speed was "unsafe" would not be permitted
 
6
 On appeal, the Samsons point to Day's deposition testimony that
Nahulu was driving at an "unsafe speed," and also refer to potential testimony
from Benson that Nahulu was traveling "too fast for the conditions."
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
because it calls for a legal conclusion. The Samsons challenge
 
these specific rulings. 
The Samsons contend inter alia that the circuit court
 
erred because opinion testimony by a lay witness is permissible
 pursuant to HRE Rule 701,
7
 and moreover, "[t]estimony in the form
of an opinion or inference otherwise admissible is not
 objectionable because it embraces an ultimate issue to be decided
 by the trier of fact." HRE Rule 704 (emphasis added).
 
As to the purported testimony that Benson would have
 
given, Benson's deposition testimony was 
not that Nahulu was
 
traveling "too fast for the conditions," and in fact Benson
 refused to say that on the record.
8 Thus, it was not Benson's
 
opinion and we need not decide if it was admissible.
 
As to Day's proposed testimony, he did testify at his
 
deposition that Nahulu was "traveling at an unsafe speed." This
 
testimony was based on Day's personal observations9
 and may have
been helpful to the jury in its determination of a fact in issue. 
See Am. Broad. Cos. v. Kenai Air of Hawaii, Inc., 67 Haw. 219,
 230, 686 P.2d 1, 8 (1984). It was thus admissible opinion
 testimony by a lay witness pursuant to HRE Rule 701.
 
7 HRE Rule 701 provides:
 
Rule 701 Opinion testimony by lay witnesses.  If the
 
witness is not testifying as an expert, the witness'
testimony in the form of opinions or inferences is limited
to those opinions or inferences which are (1) rationally
based on the perception of the witness, and (2) helpful to a
clear understanding of the witness' testimony or the
determination of a fact in issue.
8
 Benson testified at his deposition: "I couldn't tell you if she was
going too fast. It all depends on everybody's reaction time and judgment. She
could have been driving as fast as she thought and been in well within her
reaction time, to her knowledge. I do not know." He continued: "Ah, I
couldn't tell you the exact answer. I couldn't give you a yes or no, definite
answer." 
9
 Although Day admitted he could not estimate how fast the car was
traveling in terms of miles per hour, he testified that Nahulu's car was
within his line of sight. He perceived the events.
 
7
  
Create 21 Chuo, Inc. v. Sw. Slopes, Inc.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Moreover, the Samsons argue that under HRE Rule 704,10
 
the circuit court erred in excluding Day's purported testimony on
 
the grounds that it embraced the ultimate issue, Nahulu's alleged
 negligence. 
While witnesses may be permitted, in a proper case, to
give an opinion on an ultimate fact involved in the case,
there is a strong consensus among the jurisdictions,
amounting to a general rule, that witnesses may not give an
opinion on a question of domestic law or on matters which
involve questions of law. The fundamental problem with
testimony containing a legal conclusion is that conveying
the witness' unexpressed, and perhaps erroneous, legal
standards to the jury amounts to a usurpation of the court's
responsibility to determine the applicable law and to
instruct the jury as to that law. Expert as well as
nonexpert witnesses are subject to the prohibition against
testifying as to a question of law.
 
, 81 Hawai 'i 512, 522 
n.4, 918 P.2d 1168, 1178 n.4 (App. 1996). The witness is not
 
permitted to give opinion testimony that "would merely tell the
 jury what result to reach[,]" or be "phrased in terms of
 inadequately explored legal criteria." HRE Rule 704, cmt.; 
see
 
State v. Ryan, 112 Hawai 'i 136, 141, 144 P.3d 584, 589 (App. 
2006). 
In our view, Day's purported testimony that Nahulu was
 
traveling at an unsafe speed concerned a factual issue and was
 admissible. "It is well-established that, in order for a
 
10 HRE Rule 704 and relevant commentary to the rule provide:
 
Rule 704. Opinion on ultimate issue.  Testimony in the
form of an opinion or inference otherwise admissible is not
objectionable because it embraces an ultimate issue to be
decided by the trier of fact.
 
RULE 704 COMMENTARY This rule is identical with Fed. R.
 
Evid. 704. It abolishes the common-law rule disallowing
testimony upon an "ultimate issue" in the case of trial.
. . . 
Prior to the adoption of this rule Hawaii adhered to
the "ultimate issue" exclusion, see Friedrich v. Department
of Transportation, 60 H[aw.] 32, 586 P.2d 1037 (1978);
Sherry v. Asing, 56 H[aw.] 135, 147, 531 P.2d 648, 657
(1975); Cozine v. Hawaiian Catamaran, Ltd., 49 H[aw.] 77,
412 P.2d 669 (1966).
The abolition of the "ultimate issue" rule does not
 
leave the court without safeguards. First, the present rule
requires that the testimony be "otherwise admissible."
Second, under the limitations of Rules 701 and 702 supra,
opinion testimony must be helpful to the trier of
fact. . . .
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
plaintiff to prevail on a negligence claim, the plaintiff is 
required to prove all four of the necessary elements of negligence: (1) duty; (2) breach of duty; (3) causation; and (4) damages." Cho v. State, 115 Hawai
'i 373, 379 n.11, 168 P.3d 17, 
23 n.11 (2007) (citation omitted). Day's purported testimony only serves as evidence relevant to breach of a duty, and does not tell the jury what to infer from the evidence or usurp the role of the judge to provide the law. Day did not propose to testify to a question of law regarding whether there was a duty and the nature of that duty, which is to be defined by the trial judge. Any issues related to Day's definition of unsafe, and the fact that Day admits he could not estimate the rate of speed could have properly been explored during cross-examination. 
Although we conclude it was error to preclude Day's
 
purported testimony that Nahulu was traveling at an unsafe speed,
 the circuit court's error was harmless. "Courts have
 consistently held that the improper exclusion of competent
 testimony constitutes harmless error where essentially the same
 evidence is established by the testimony of other witnesses or by
 other means." Kekua v. Kaiser Found. Hosp., 61 Haw. 208, 219,
 
601 P.2d 364, 371 (1979). Day's deposition testimony was that
 Nahulu's car came "around the bus at a good speed, . . . was
 traveling at an unsafe speed and hit the girl hard." Day could
 not provide an estimate as to rate of speed. During trial, Day
 testified that Nahulu's car was traveling "at a speed where it
 couldn't stop in time[,]" and skidded about eight feet. Day
 further testified that "[w]hatever the speed was, it was fast
 enough to cause that damage and it was fast enough to send that
 girl up in the air it hit so hard." Day then described how
 Daughter flew between fifteen and twenty feet after the
 collision. The Samsons also read from Day's deposition that he
 saw Nahulu "come around the bus at a good speed." Day also noted
 to the jury that when he saw Daughter begin to cross in front of
 the bus, he slowed down because he "was driving at a safe speed." 
Therefore, Day provided testimony to the jury relevant to breach
 of duty, without using the word "unsafe."
 
9
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Additionally, Benson testified that upon collision,
 
Daughter "got sent" probably twenty feet and the car came to a
 
stop about ten feet from Daughter. The Samsons' counsel also
 read from Benson's deposition that Nahulu's car was "going fast
 enough that it took 40 feet to stop after she had hit that
 girl[.]"
 
Therefore, there was other evidence presented to the
 
jury that Nahulu may have been driving at an unsafe speed.
C. Nahulu's Expert Witness
 
The Samsons contend the circuit court abused its
 
discretion in permitting Nahulu's expert witness, Slagle, an
 accident reconstructionist, to testify regarding (1) unreliable
 and unsubstantiated opinions on the point of impact and Nahulu's
 reaction time, and (2) undisclosed opinions. 
In applying HRE Rule 702 (1993),
11 trial courts must 
determine whether expert testimony is relevant and reliable. Ass'n of Apt. Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai
'i 97, 117, 58 P.3d 608, 628 (2002). The Samsons do not 
dispute the relevance of Slagle's testimony, but challenge its reliability. We review a trial court's determination as to reliability, as well as generally whether to admit expert testimony, for abuse of discretion. Id. 
1. Point of Impact and Reaction Time
 
The Samsons argue that the circuit court abused its
 
discretion by improperly allowing Slagle to testify that the
 impact occurred outside of the crosswalk based solely on the
 testimony of Benson. They contend on appeal that it is
 
11 HRE Rule 702 provides:
 
Rule 702 Testimony by experts. If scientific,
technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the
trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a
 fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by
knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education may
testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise. In
determining the issue of assistance to the trier of fact,
the court may consider the trustworthiness and validity of
the scientific technique or mode of analysis employed by the
proffered expert.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"inherently unreliable" for an accident reconstructionist to 
calculate point of impact based solely on bystander testimony, citing to
 State v. Pauline , 100 Hawai 'i 356, 60 P.3d 306 (2002) 
and the commentary to HRE Rule 703 (1993)12
 for the proposition
that reliance on bystander testimony renders an accident
 reconstructionist's conclusion on point of impact an "unsupported
 assumption" that would not aid the trier of fact. 
In his report, Slagle concluded "[t]his accident is
 
most consistent with the pedestrian crossing close to the bus and
 outside the crosswalk." 
In support of their motion in limine
 
seeking to exclude Slagle from testifying at trial, the Samsons
 did not argue that Slagle's conclusions were inadmissible because
 of his reliance on Benson's testimony. The Samsons argued
 Slagle's conclusion regarding point of impact violated rules of
 evidence which prohibit witnesses from giving opinions that
 instruct the jury on what result to reach on a factual issue.
 Even when requesting a HRE Rule 104 (1993) hearing on Slagle's
 opinions, the Samsons did not challenge Slagle's point of impact
 opinion testimony based on his alleged reliance on Benson's
 testimony. Thus, the argument that the Samsons now raise on
 appeal has been waived.
 
Moreover, even if their argument was not waived, Slagle
 
did not rely solely on Benson's testimony in rendering his
 opinion as to point of impact. In his report, Slagle states that
 he inspected, measured and photographed the scene, and also
 reviewed the police report (noting "[t]he police report suggests
 that the impact occurred outside the crosswalk"), aerial
 photographs, the depositions of the eyewitnesses, the
 
12 HRE Rule 703 provides:
 
Rule 703 Bases of opinion testimony by experts. The
 
facts or data in the particular case upon which an expert
bases an opinion or inference may be those perceived by or
made known to the expert at or before the hearing. If of a
type reasonably relied upon by experts in the particular
field in forming opinions or inferences upon the subject,
the facts or data need not be admissible in evidence. The
 court may, however, disallow testimony in the form of an
opinion or inference if the underlying facts or data
indicate lack of trustworthiness.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interrogatories of the parties, the Samsons' pre-hearing
 
statement, statements given by eyewitnesses, and photographs
 taken after the incident. The Samsons' challenge to Slagle's
 point of impact opinion therefore lacks merit.
 
The Samsons further assert that Slagle drew self-
serving conclusions unsupported by Benson's testimony and contrary to conflicting evidence of point of impact. These concerns go more properly to the weight, not the admissibility, of Slagle's testimony. See State v. Kanamu, 107 Hawai
'i 268, 
271, 112 P.3d 754, 757 (App. 2005) (stating that an appellant's argument inter alia that other possible explanations exist contrary to the conclusions of the expert go to the weight, not the admissibility, of the expert's opinion). Selective choice of facts and problematic conclusions are to be explored during cross-examination. See HRE Rule 702.1(a); State v. Wilson, 120 
Hawai
'i 48, 200 P.3d 417, No. 28478, at *25 (App. Jan. 7, 2009, 
as amended Apr. 14, 2009) (mem.) ("In the name of efficiency, [Federal Rules of Evidence] Rules 703 and 705 shift the burden to the cross-examiner to reveal the bases of an expert's opinion and the deficiencies therein."). 
Finally, the Samsons assert that Slagle's conclusion 
that Nahulu only had one second to react was based on speculation and assumption of variables. Again, the Samsons' concerns with the conclusion drawn by Slagle goes to the weight, not the admissibility, of the opinion. Slagle was subject to cross-examination such that the Samsons could demonstrate to the jury any problematic assumptions being drawn by Slagle and the effect on his analysis of other potential fact scenarios. See Kanamu, 
107 Hawai
'i at 271, 112 P.3d at 757; State v. Freitas, 62 Haw. 
17, 23, 608 P.2d 408, 412 (1980). 
Thus, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
allowing Slagle to testify regarding the point of impact and
 Nahulu's reaction time.
 
2. Undisclosed Opinion
 
The Samsons allege that certain opinions rendered by
 
Slagle were based on a photograph and methodology not disclosed
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
prior to trial. Specifically, the Samsons allege that Slagle's
 
opinions were based on a photograph that was not Plaintiffs'
 Exhibit 6 as represented by Nahulu's counsel, but a blow-up of
 Exhibit 6.
13 Additionally, the Samsons assert Nahulu failed to
 
disclose Slagle's opinions regarding specific distances based on
 the photograph, as well as his methodology utilizing a manhole
 cover in the photograph for determining the location of the
 crosswalk at the time of the accident. 
The Samsons produced Exhibit 6 after the discovery cut­
off in this case and after Slagle's deposition. After receiving
 it, Nahulu's counsel apparently had Exhibit 6 enlarged, which is
 the photograph that was shown to the jury during Slagle's
 testimony at trial. The Samsons do not challenge on appeal the
 admissibility of the photograph, but rather Slagle's use of it at
 trial. Because Exhibit 6 was not produced by the Samsons until
 after Slagle's deposition, it is understandable that he would not
 have previously rendered an opinion based on Exhibit 6. The
 Samsons' contentions regarding Slagle's use of the enlarged
 Exhibit 6 at trial are thus without merit.
 
As to Slagle's methodology regarding distances, the
 
Samsons fail to establish that Slagle did not disclose his
 methodology prior to trial. Rather, as Nahulu argues, Slagle's
 method of using the manhole cover to determine the location of
 the crosswalk was discussed and disclosed during his deposition. 
Slagle's methodology was not a surprise to the Samsons. The
 Samsons have failed to demonstrate the circuit court abused its
 discretion.
 
13 Exhibit 6 is an aerial photograph of the accident scene taken in
2000 with a scale drawn on it. The accident occurred in 2005. Between 2000
 
and 2005, the crosswalk was restriped. During direct examination, Nahulu's
counsel represented he was showing Slagle Exhibit 6, which was already in
evidence. After the court asked if the photograph being displayed was in fact
Exhibit 6 or a copy, counsel corrected his representation and stated it was a
blown up copy of Exhibit 6. The Samsons' counsel objected because the blow-up
had a black mark on it not present in Exhibit 6. The court overruled the
 objection.
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D. Jury Instructions
 
The Samsons contend that three of the given jury
 
instructions were erroneous articulations of the law and
 
unwarranted by the evidence. Additionally, the Samsons argue the
 court improperly failed to give an instruction that they contend
 correctly states that drivers must exercise greater caution to
 avoid collisions than pedestrians. 
Nahulu counters that the instructions given correctly
 
summarized the law relevant to the factual evidence adduced at
 trial, while the omitted proposed instruction was an inaccurate
 statement of law because it imposes a higher duty of care upon a
 driver beyond that of ordinary care and was contrary to other
 instructions. 
"The standard of review for a trial court's issuance
 
or refusal of a jury instruction is whether, when read and
considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading." Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc.,
111 Hawai' i 286, 297, 141 P.3d 459, 470 (2006) (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted). Generally,
instructions that are found to be an erroneous articulation
 of the law raise a presumption that they were harmful.
Turner v. Willis, 59 Haw. 319, 326, 582 P.2d 710, 715
(1978). The presumption can be overcome however, if it
"affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the
error was not prejudicial." Id.
 
. . . Refusing to give an instruction relevant under
the evidence that correctly states the law is an error if
the point has not been adequately and fully covered by other
instructions. Sherry v. Asing, 56 Haw. 135, 144, 531 P.2d
 
648, 655 (1975)
.
 
Udac v. Takata Corp.
, 121 Hawai 'i 143, 149, 214 P.3d 1133, 1139 
(App. 2009).
 
The three instructions that were given and that the
 
Samsons challenge are:
 
[Nahalu's proposed instruction 1] A pedestrian is
required to obey all traffic laws which are applicable
to her.
 
[Nahalu's proposed instruction 2]  A pedestrian who
crosses a roadway outside of a crosswalk is required to
yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the
roadway.
 
[Nahalu's proposed instruction 6, as modified] A
 
person traveling upon a highway has a right to assume
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
that all other persons using the highway will obey the
law and that one is not bound to keep a lookout for
others who may violate the law applies only to those
cases where the automobile is being driven in
conformity to the law and not in violation thereof, and
it has no application where the automobile is being
driven in a negligent manner.
 
1. Nahulu's Proposed "Instructions 1 and 2"
 
The Samsons contend Instruction 1 is not a proper
 
statement of the law because it imposed an affirmative obligation
 
on Daughter to obey traffic laws that is absent from the relevant
 statute. The Samsons contend Instruction 2 is an inaccurate
 statement of the law because it ignores the possibility that one
 may eventually enter a marked crosswalk as they traverse the
 roadway. Regarding both, the Samsons contend they are
 "untempered by negligence principles or other circumstances."
 Further, the Samsons contend Instructions 1 and 2 suggest that
 violation of an "affirmative obligation" was negligence per se or
 a complete bar to recovery. 
Both Instructions 1 and 2 are accurate reflections of
 
the law. Instruction 1 is based on Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 § 291C-71 (2007).
14 This statute states that a pedestrian must
 
obey traffic control devices and "[a]t all other places,
 pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject
 to the restrictions stated in" the statewide traffic code. 
Therefore, HRS § 291C-71 supports Instruction 1. Similarly,
 Instruction 2 is close to the language of HRS § 291C-73 (2007),
 which provides in pertinent part that "[e]very pedestrian
 
14 HRS 291C-71 provides in pertinent part:
 
[§291C-71] Pedestrian obedience to traffic-control
devices and traffic regulations. (a) A pedestrian shall obey
the instructions of any official traffic-control device
specifically applicable to the pedestrian, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer.
(b) Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and
pedestrian-control signals as provided in sections 291C-32
and 291C-33.
 
(c) At all other places, pedestrians shall be accorded
the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions
stated in this chapter.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
 
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
 shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway." 
HRS § 291C-73 thus supports Instruction 2.
 
The Samsons' argument that Instructions 1 and 2 are
 
erroneous and prejudicial because they ignore that drivers must
 exercise due care in avoiding collisions with pedestrians upon a
 roadway is without merit. When read as a whole, the jury
 instructions did instruct that Hawai
'i law requires a driver to 
exercise due care with regard to pedestrians. The jury was
 instructed that
 
Hawaii law requires that every driver of a vehicle
shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by
sounding the driver's horn when necessary and shall exercise
proper precaution upon observing any child or any obviously
confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
The jury was also instructed that a driver is required to yield
 
to any pedestrian in a marked crosswalk. Further, the circuit
 court instructed the jury that
 
[t]he duty to observe ordinary care requires that a
driver of an automobile must anticipate the possibility of
meeting pedestrians or other vehicles at street crossings
and have his or her automobile under such control as may be
necessary to avoid colliding with a pedestrian on the
roadway.
. . . 
Consistent with the foregoing, it is the law in Hawaii
that every person shall drive at a safe and appropriate
speed when approaching and crossing an intersection and when
special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other
traffic regardless of the posted speed limit.
A motorist's failure to observe these
 
requirements that results in a collision with a
pedestrian is negligence.
 
From the jury instructions as a whole, the circuit court properly
 
instructed the jury on a driver's obligation to drive with due
 care.
 
The Samsons' argument that Instructions 1 and 2 imply
 
negligence per se or a complete bar to recovery is also without
 merit. Prior to giving Instructions 1 and 2, the circuit court
 instructed the jury that 
[t]he violation of a state or city law is evidence of
negligence, but the fact that the law was violated is not
sufficient, by itself, to establish negligence. The
 
16
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
violation of the law must be considered along with all the
other evidence in this case in deciding the issue of
negligence.
 
Whether there was a violation of a state or city law
is for you to determine.
 
The Samsons also argue that Instruction 2 is erroneous 
because a court should not repeat mandatory and unqualified 
language from a statute that might cause the jury to focus on the one statute and not consider all of the facts of the case, citing 
to Radford v. Morris, 52 Haw. 180, 186, 472 P.2d 500, 504 (1970). 
In Radford, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court admonished the trial court 
for reading part of the traffic code verbatim to the jury, and the court instead advised relating the applicable law to the jury in a less formal manner. Id.; see Armstrong v. Cione, 6 Haw. 
App. 652, 661-62, 736 P.2d 440, 447 (1987). Instruction 2 properly sets forth the law under HRS § 291C-73 in an easily understood manner consistent with Radford. 
It was not erroneous or prejudicial to give
 
Instructions 1 and 2.
 
2. Nahulu's Proposed "Instruction 6 (as Modified)"
 
The Samsons contend Instruction 6, as modified by the
 
circuit court, is both incomprehensible and a misstatement of the
 law. Specifically, the Samsons contend the instruction is
 clearly erroneous because the instruction is an attempted quote
 from a judicial opinion, is missing the clause at the beginning
 that frames the entire instruction, misapplies the precedent from
 which it is quoting, improperly assigns a right that may confuse
 the jury in determining negligence, and does not, by its terms,
 apply to vehicle-pedestrian collisions.
15 Thus, the Samsons
 
contend that it was error to give Instruction 6.
 
The legal proposition that Instruction 6, as modified,
 
seeks to set forth is not an erroneous articulation of the law,
 
15 The Samsons' argument that HRS § 291C-74 (2007) precludes
Instruction 6 is without merit. The statute provides that a driver must
exercise due care to avoid hitting pedestrians. Instruction 6 similarly
provides that a driver must exercise due care at all times as well. Once a
 driver operates a vehicle in a negligent manner, the driver is not afforded
the "right" stated in Instruction 6.
 
17
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
but the instruction as given was grammatically incorrect. The
 
instruction was taken from a quote in State v. Arena, 46 Haw.
 315, 331, 379 P.2d 594, 604 (1963) (quoting Cushing Refining &
 Gasoline Co. v. Deshan, 300 P. 312, 317 (Okla. 1931)), but part
 of the quote appears to have been inadvertently left out.
16
 
Notwithstanding the grammatical error, the Samsons fail to show
 this instruction had any detrimental effect on them. See New York
 Life Ins. Co. v. Rogers, 126 F.2d 784, 787 (9th Cir. 1942)
 (holding that an instruction was vague given its wording, but
 there was no apparent prejudice to the appellant). Here, the
 grammatical error was not prejudicial to the Samsons. If
 anything, Instruction 6 is more helpful to Nahulu, and thus its
 vagueness is to Nahulu's detriment. Moreover, Instruction 6
 provides that a negligent driver is not afforded the right to
 expect others to obey the law. The Samsons' burden at trial, to
 prove that Nahulu was negligent, thus remained the same
 regardless of Instruction 6.
 
Next, the Samsons contend that a jury instruction
 
cannot be framed from a judicial opinion, citing Cozine v.
 Hawaiian Catamaran, Ltd., 49 Haw. 77, 87, 412 P.2d 669, 678
 (1966). However, Cozine merely suggests that not all language
 from a judicial opinion is an accurate reflection of the law
 because selective quotation may omit the realities of the court's
 decision. See id. at 87 n.5, 412 P.2d at 678 n.5 ("It is not
 
every statement of the law found in a text-book or opinion of a
 judge, however well and accurately put, which can properly be
 embodied in an instruction." (quoting Territory v. Cutad, 37 Haw.
 182, 186 (Haw. Terr 1945))). Here, if properly quoted, the
 instruction would have accurately reflected the law as set forth
 in Arena. We note that one of the Samsons' proposed instructions
 
16 The jury instruction omits the first clause of the language
contained in Arena: "The rule that a person traveling . . . ." 46 Haw. at
 
331, 379 P.2d at 604. It appears that the first portion was omitted because,
as originally proposed by Nahulu, the instruction stated, "[a] person
traveling upon a highway has the right to assume that all other persons will
obey the law and is not required to keep a lookout for others who violate the
law." The circuit court subsequently added the remainder of the language
from Arena but apparently overlooked the introductory clause.
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that was given to the jury was based on Arena and related a
 
similar idea: "The driver of a motor vehicle may not rely upon
 the right-of-way gained as a result of excessive speed or by
 other negligent act or violation of the law." We thus reject the
 Samsons' argument that Instruction 6 was erroneous because it was
 taken from case law.
 
The Samsons' final contention is that the quoted 
language from Arena is not applicable to a vehicle-pedestrian collision. However, there is no such express limitation in Arena. The Arena court stated that a driver can "assume that other[s] will observe the rules of the road[,]" while the quoted language states "a person traveling upon a highway has a right to assume that all other persons using the highway will obey the law[.]" Id. at 331, 379 P.2d at 604. Hawai
'i law does not omit 
pedestrians as potential users of "highways," see HRS § 291C-1, and the sections of the HRS that deal with "Pedestrian's Rights and Duties" are under the general category of "Rules of the Road." HRS Chapter 291C, Part VII. Further, "traffic" is statutorily defined as "pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes of travel." HRS § 291C-1 (2007) (emphasis added). Clearly, pedestrians are part of the tapestry of travelers who utilize the roadways. 
Review of the given jury instructions as a whole
 
demonstrates that none of the challenged instructions amount to
 reversible error.
 
3. Samsons' Proposed "Instruction 12"
 
The Samsons also argue that the circuit court's failure
 
to give their proposed instruction 12 was erroneous and
 prejudicial. The proposed instruction read:
 
[Plaintiffs' proposed instruction 12] The duty to use
reasonable care does not require the same amount of
caution from drivers and pedestrians. While drivers
 and pedestrians must be aware that motor vehicles can
cause serious injuries, drivers must use more care to
avoid collisions than pedestrians.
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Samsons contend that the above language is a
 
verbatim quote from the Judicial Council of California Civil Jury
 
Instruction instructions for Duties of Care for Pedestrians and
 Drivers and is consistent with other jurisdictions that properly
 acknowledge the gross disparity in capacity to injure between a
 driver and a pedestrian. 
The Samsons contend that HRS § 291C-74 supports their
 
proposed Instruction 12, but that statute does not expressly
 place a greater burden of care on drivers or support the language
 of the proposed instruction. Moreover, another instruction was
 given that more accurately captures the requirements of HRS §
 291C-74.
 
Further, the Samsons point to no Hawai
'i case that 
holds drivers to a different level of caution or care as a matter of law. A person must exercise ordinary care in conducting all activities. Hulsman v. Hemmeter Dev. Corp., 65 Haw. 58, 68, 647 
P.2d 713, 720 (1982). What constitutes ordinary care varies based on the circumstances of each particular case. Doe Parents 
No. 1 v. State, Dept. of Educ., 100 Hawai
'i 34, 82, 58 P.3d 545, 
593 (2002) ("[T]he defendant's conduct is measured against what a reasonable and prudent person would . . . have done under [the] circumstances . . . . However, [t]he conduct of [the mythical reasonable and prudent] person will vary with the situation with which he [or she] is confronted because what is reasonable and prudent in the particular circumstances is marked out by the foreseeable range of danger." (citation and internal quotation marks omitted) (some brackets added and some in original)). Hawai
'i law does not support the proposition that, as a matter of 
law, pedestrians can exercise less caution in their actions than drivers. Thus, the circuit court did not err in refusing to give the Samsons' proposed Instruction 12 to the jury. 
20
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Judgment entered
 
on August 9, 2010, and the "Order Denying Plaintiffs' Motion for
 
Judgment Notwithstanding the Verdict and/or, In the Alternative,
 for New Trial" entered on September 29, 2010, in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 31, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Bruce B. Kim
 
(Law Offices of Bruce B. Kim)
Ronald Albu (Albu & Albu)
for Plaintiffs-Appellants
 
Jonathan L. Ortiz
 
Wade J. Katano Jacqueline E. Thurston
(Ortiz & Katano)
for Defendant-Appellee
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
21
 