NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000435
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MARIA HOCOG RAMANGMOU,
Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CRIMINAL NO. 09-1-0473)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J. and Reifurth, J.;
Ginoza, J. dissenting)
 
Defendant-Appellant Maria Ramangmou (Ramangmou) appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence entered
 
1
May 3, 2011 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit  (circuit
court). 
Ramangmou was found guilty of Abuse of Family or
 
Household Member, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
(HRS) § 709-906(1) (Supp. 2011).2
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 
2
 HRS § 709-906 provides, in pertinent part:
 
§709-906 Abuse of family or household members; penalty.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in concert, to
physically abuse a family or household member[.] 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Ramangmou contends:
 
(1) There was insufficient evidence to negate her
 
parental discipline defense beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
(2) The State of Hawai' i (the State) committed 
prosecutorial misconduct by misstating the law on the parental discipline defense. 
(3) The State committed prosecutorial misconduct by
 
telling the jury that Ramangmou's grandchildren had been removed
 
from her home by Child Welfare Services.
 
(4) She was denied the effective assistance of counsel
 
at trial.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On October 30, 2009, the State charged Ramangmou with
 
one count of Abuse of Family or Household Member, pursuant to
 
HRS § 709-906(1). A jury trial was held on March 15 and 16,
 
2011, at the conclusion of which the jury found Ramangmou guilty
 
as charged. On May 3, 2011, the circuit court entered a judgment
 
of conviction, sentencing Ramangmou to probation for two years,
 
and special conditions including incarceration for six months
 
"with all but thirty days stayed on condition of compliance with
 
the terms and conditions of probation." On May 31, 2011,
 
Ramangmou timely filed a notice of appeal from the judgment of
 
conviction.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Sufficiency of the Evidence
 
The appellate court reviews the sufficiency of evidence
 
on appeal as follows:
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) 
(quoting State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai' i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576 
2
           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(1997)). "'Substantial evidence' as to every material element of 
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient 
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable 
caution to support a conclusion." Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 33, 960 
P.2d at 1241 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
The critical issue on appeal is whether there was
 
substantial evidence presented by the State to support
 Ramangmou's conviction. Viewing the evidence in the light most
 
favorable to the prosecution, we conclude there was insufficient
 
evidence to disprove Ramangmou's parental discipline defense.
 
Ramangmou admitted at trial that she hit Minor, age
 
thirteen, with a guava stick, described as approximately three
 
feet long and the width of a "G2" gel roller pen. Minor
 
indicated Ramangmou also hit her with a wire after the guava
 
stick broke. Ramangmou argues that her use of force was
 
justified under the parental discipline defense as set forth in
 
HRS § 703-309 (Supp. 2011). HRS § 703-309 provides, in pertinent
 
part:
 
§703-309 Use of force by persons with special
responsibility for care, discipline, or safety of others.
The use of force upon or toward the person of another is
justifiable under the following circumstances:
 
(1) The actor is the parent or guardian or
other person similarly responsible for the
general care and supervision of a minor, or a
person acting at the request of the parent,
guardian, or other responsible person, and:
 
(a)	 The force is employed with due regard for
the age and size of the minor and is
reasonably related to the purpose of
safeguarding or promoting the welfare of
the minor, including the prevention or
punishment of the minor's misconduct; and
 
(b)	 The force used is not designed to cause or
known to create a risk of causing
substantial bodily injury, disfigurement,
extreme pain or mental distress, or
neurological damage.
 
"The basic conception of the parental justification
 
defense is to allow a person responsible for a child's welfare to
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
use reasonable force to discipline that child." State v. 
Matavale, 115 Hawai' i 149, 168, 166 P.3d 322, 341 (emphasis 
omitted). To invoke the defense, a defendant bears "the initial 
burden of production with respect to the facts necessary to put 
the parental discipline defense at issue." State v. Stocker, 90 
Hawai'i 85, 95, 976 P.2d 399, 409 (1999). Ramangmou met her 
burden of production. 
The burden then shifted to the State to "disprov[e] 
beyond a reasonable doubt the justification evidence that was 
adduced, or [to] prov[e] beyond a reasonable doubt facts 
negativing the justification defense." State v. Crouser, 81 
Hawai'i 5, 11, 911 P.2d 725, 731 (1996). To defeat Ramangmou's 
justification defense, the State was required to show that one of 
the following circumstances was not met: 
(1) Ramangmou was a guardian responsible for the general
care and supervision of Minor against whom she used
force; 
(2) Ramangmou's use of force was with due regard to the age
and size of Minor and was reasonably related to the
purpose of safeguarding or promoting the welfare of
Minor, including the prevention or punishment of
Minor's misconduct; or
 
(3) the force used was not designed to cause, or known to
create the risk of causing, substantial bodily injury,
3
 
3
 HRS § 707-700 (Supp. 2011) provides, in relevant part:
 
"Substantial bodily injury" means bodily injury which causes:
or other internal organs.
 (1) A major avulsion, laceration, or penetration of the skin;
 (2) A burn of at least second degree severity;
 (3) A bone fracture;
 (4) A serious concussion; or
 (5) A tearing, rupture, or corrosive damage to the esophagus, viscera,
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
disfigurement, extreme pain or mental distress,4 or
 
neurological damage. 
Id. at 10-11, 911 P.2d at 730-31; HRS § 703-309(1).
 
There is no dispute that the first element of the
 
justification defense was met. Ramangmou is Minor's grandmother
 
and had been her legal guardian since 2002, when the court gave
 
Ramangmou custody of Minor and her four siblings. There is also
 
no dispute that Ramangmou used force against Minor when she hit
 
her with a guava stick. Minor and her brother both testified to
 
Ramangmou's use of a wire.
 
The dispute arises in regards to whether the second or 
third elements of the justification defense were disproved or 
negated by the State. Under the second element of the 
justification defense, Ramangmou's use of force must have been 
"with due regard to the age and size of [Minor] and reasonably 
related to the purpose of safeguarding or promoting the welfare 
of [Minor], including the prevention or punishment of [Minor's] 
misconduct[.]" Crouser, 81 Hawai' i at 10-11, 911 P.2d at 730-31. 
"[T]he fact that the use of force may have arisen out of anger or short temper[] does not automatically mean that such force was 
not reasonably related to the purpose of safeguarding or 
promoting the welfare of the minor, or for the prevention or 
punishment of misconduct." State v. Kikuta, 125 Hawai' i 78, 91, 
253 P.3d 639, 652 (2011). 
The justification defense is defeated under the third
 
element of the defense if the State shows the force was "designed
 to cause, or known to create the risk of causing, substantial
 
bodily injury, disfigurement, extreme pain or mental distress, or
 
neurological damage." HRS § 703-309(1)(b). 
4
 The word "extreme" modifies both "pain" and "mental distress," such
that the force used may not be designed to cause, or known to create the risk
of causing "extreme pain" or "extreme mental distress." See State v. Dowling, 
125 Hawai' i 406, 411-12, 263 P.3d 116, 121-22 (App. 2011). 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The reasonableness of force turns on the totality of 
the facts and circumstances of the case. Matavale, 115 Hawai' i 
at 165, 166 P.3d at 338. 
In determining whether force is reasonable, the fact finder
must consider the child's age, the child's stature, and the
nature of the injuries inflicted, i.e., whether the force
used was designed to cause or known to create a risk of
causing substantial bodily injury, disfigurement, extreme
pain or mental distress, or neurological damage given the
child's age and size. . . . [T]he permissible degree of
force will vary according to the child's physique and age,
the misconduct of the child, the nature of the discipline,
and all the surrounding circumstances. It necessarily
follows that the question of reasonableness or excessiveness
of physical punishment given a child by a parent is
determined on a case-by-case basis and is dependent upon the
particular circumstances of the case.
 
Id. at 164-165, 166 P.3d at 337-338 (emphasis omitted). 
Hawai'i case law provides guidance as to the type of 
conduct that falls inside or outside the parameters of parental 
discipline. Matavale, 115 Hawai' i at 165, 166 P.3d at 338. 
Cases in which the conduct fell outside the bounds of
 
parental discipline are as follows:
 
In Crouser, the force used by mother's boyfriend 
(defendant) exceeded the permissible level. Crouser, 81 Hawai' i 
5, 911 P.2d 725. In response to disobedience and lying by the fourteen-year-old complainant, the defendant called the girl a 
liar, hit her across the face, knocked her to the floor and as 
she got up, threw her face-down on to the bed. Id. at 8, 911 
P.2d at 728. At that point, defendant pulled complainant's pants and underwear down and began to hit her buttocks. Id. Defendant 
left the room, only to return with a plastic bat and proceeded to hit complainant on her buttocks, arm, thighs, and torso for 
approximately thirty minutes, until the bat broke. Id. 
Complainant testified that she felt dizzy for the next hour or so, and that at school the next day, she could not sit down 
except on a padded chair because of the pain. Id. She said her 
bottom hurt for a couple of weeks. Id. The school health aide 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
examined her at school the day after the incident and saw that 
complainant's buttocks were bruised and deep reddish-purple in 
color. Id. at 9, 911 P.2d at 729. Considering, among other 
things, the complainant's age and size relative to defendant's; the excessive force causing her to be unable to sit; and the 
nature of her injuries, the Hawai' i Supreme Court concluded that 
the force used by defendant was not reasonably related to protecting the complainant's welfare. Id. at 12, 911 P.2d at 
732. The supreme court also concluded that the force used by
 
defendant exceeded the justifiable level of discipline by causing
 
"extreme pain" that was comparable in degree to other statutorily
 
forbidden results. Id. at 13, 911 P.2d at 733. 
In State v. Tanielu, 82 Hawai' i 373, 922 P.2d 986 (App. 
1996), this court agreed with the family court's rejection of the 
parental discipline defense when a father punched, slapped, and 
kicked his fourteen-year-old daughter in the shins and face and 
pulled her ears in response to her lies and refusal to stop 
seeing her boyfriend. Id. at 377, 922 P.2d at 990. We agreed 
with the family court that the viciousness of the attack "severed any relationship between the use of force and the welfare of 
Daughter which might be considered 'reasonable'." Id. at 381, 
922 P.2d at 994; see also State v. Miller, 105 Hawai' i 394, 98 
P.3d 265 (App. 2004) (holding that punching the face and kicking 
the ribs of eleven-year-old complainant, along with evidence of 
bleeding on the head and scratches on face and ears, was not 
reasonably related to the purpose of safeguarding or promoting 
the welfare of complainant nor was it reasonably proportional to 
the misconduct being punished). 
In State v. Kiese, 126 Hawai' i 494, 273 P.3d 1180 
(2012), the State successfully disproved defendant's parental 
justification defense when defendant employed force without due 
regard for the age and size of the minor. In this case, 
defendant slapped his six-year-old son on the face and hit him 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
several times on the buttocks with a bamboo stick, "causing [son]
 
to feel pain and to cry, and leaving visible red welts a day
 
after the incident." The evidence indicated the boy "was a thin,
 
slight, boy, no more than four feet tall, and that [defendant]
 
was much larger." Id. at 505, 273 P.3d at 1191.
 
Cases in which the conduct of the defendants fell
 
within the parameters of parental discipline are as follows:
 
In Stocker, the Hawai' i Supreme Court concluded that 
the defendant's single slap with an open hand on his eleven-year­
old son's face in response to the boy's refusal to come to him 
was not "an unreasonable, excessive, or disproportionate use of 
force." Stocker, 90 Hawai' i at 88, 96, 976 P.2d at 402, 410. The 
son said the slap "only hurt a little" and "left no mark or bruise." Id. This case represented "the use of mild force" 
permissible under the parental discipline statute. See Matavale, 
115 Hawai' i at 168, 166 P.3d at 341. 
In Matavale, the defendant mother hit her fourteen­
year-old daughter with several objects, including a backpack, a 
plastic hanger, the flat side of a hairbrush, and the plastic 
handle of a metal tool for lying about a report card and 
misleading the mother about the daughter's attendance at 
tutoring. Matavale, 115 Hawai' i at 178, 166 P.3d at 351. The 
daughter described the mother as being taller, heavier, and stronger, but testified that the force employed by the mother 
"was not hard and only caused her temporary pain[.]" Id. at 168, 
166 P.3d at 341. The mother acknowledged "that she lost control" when she started hitting her daughter. Id. at 178, 166 P.3d at 
351. The supreme court held that the mother's conduct fell 
within the parameters of the justified parental discipline 
statute, stating that the court could not "perceive how the force 
employed by Mother . . . could somehow have the potential of 
creating 'substantial bodily injury,'" as defined under 
HRS § 707-700. Matavale, 115 Hawai' i at 168, 166 P.3d at 341. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In State v. Roman, 119 Hawai' i 468, 199 P.3d 57 (2008), 
defendant kicked his girlfriend's seventeen-year-old son 
(complainant) in the back a couple of times and hit him on the 
face with his hand a couple of times after the boy failed to 
grate cheese as defendant had requested. Id. at 470, 199 P.3d at 
59. Complainant testified that he was "[a] little sore" where he
 
had been hit and that the mark on his face was "a lump and was
 
red." Id. The supreme court concluded that the defendant's
 
conduct "was reasonably proportionate to the [complainant's]
 defiant behavior" and "was reasonably believed to be necessary to
 
discipline [complainant] for his attitude and demeanor." Id. at
 
481, 199 P.3d 57, 70. The court also concluded that "the degree
 of force used was 'not designed to cause or known to create a
 
substantial risk of causing bodily injury, disfigurement, extreme
 
pain or mental distress, or neurological damage.'" Id.
 
In Dowling, this court concluded that the State had
 
failed to disprove defendant's parental discipline defense when,
 
in response to his eleven-year-old son lie about jamming the rug
 
under the closet door, defendant pushed the boy on the shoulder
 
and hit him twice on the leg, which caused bruising that the boy
 
showed his grandmother five days later. Id. at 408, 263 P.3d at
 
118.
 
This court determined that
 
[a]lthough Dowling's punches were forceful enough to cause
bruising, they were not forceful enough to rise to the levelof viciousness in Miller, in which the level of attack"severed any relationship between the use of force and thewelfare" of the complaining witness that "might beconsidered reasonable." 105 Hawai' i at 402, 98 P.3d at 273.
It is at most a "gray area" in which some of the communitywould find that Dowling's extent of punishment wasinappropriate. However, under Matavale, such gray areas arenot resolved by criminalizing such parental discipline.Therefore, there was insufficient evidence to disproveDowling's parental discipline defense underHRS § 703–309(1)(a). 
Id. at 414, 263 P.3d at 124.
 
"[T]he line between physical abuse and appropriate
 
parental discipline is a very subjective one. What one parent 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
considers discipline may seem abusive to another." Kikuta, 125 
Hawai'i at 81, 253 P.3d at 642 (quoting Matavale, 115 Hawai' i at 
161, 166 P.3d at 334) (citation and internal quotation marks 
omitted). The Hawai' i Supreme Court has favorably noted the 
recognition by other courts "that, although corporal discipline may be considered excessive when it results in significant 
bruises or welts, 'bruises are not necessarily indicative of 
excessive corporal discipline.'" Matavale, 115 Hawai' i at 166, 
166 P.3d at 339 (quoting T.G. v. Dep't of Children & Families, 927 So.2d 104, 106 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2006)). 
The supreme court has also stated:
 
As other courts have recently expressed and we agree,
 
an isolated instance of moderate or reasonable physical
force . . . that results in nothing more than transient pain
 or temporary marks or bruises is protected under the
 
parental discipline privilege.
 
This protection for parents should exist even if the parent
 
acts out of frustration or short temper. Parents do not
 always act with calmness of mind or considered judgment when
 upset with, or concerned about, their children's behavior.
 Nor do parents always act pursuant to a clearly defined
 circumstance of discipline or control. A reaction often
 
occurs from behavior a parent deems inappropriate that
irritates or angers the parent, causing a reactive,
demonstrative act. Heat of the moment must not result in
 
immoderate physical force and must be managed; however, an
 angry moment driving moderate or reasonable discipline is
 
often part and parcel of the real world of parenting with
 which prosecutors and courts should not interfere. What
 
parent among us can say he or she has not been angered to
some degree from a child's defiant, impudent, or insolent
conduct, sufficient to call for spontaneous, stern, and
meaningful discipline?
 
Matavale, 115 Hawai' i at 166, 166 P.3d at 339 (emphases in 
original).
 Ramangmou described Minor as giving her "a lot of
 
trouble by not listening to what I ask her to do or say to her"
 
and that problems with Minor's behavior began when Minor was in
 
fifth grade. Ramangmou related an incident in which Minor had
 
taken over a thousand dollars from the house and handed the money 
out to friends at school. Minor had also taken Ramangmou's 
10
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
jewelry without permission and given it out at school. Ramangmou
 
spoke to the teachers at school in hopes of getting some help in
 
correcting Minor's behavior.
 
Ramangmou also had problems with Minor not catching the
 
bus after school and not coming home when she was supposed to. 
One time, Minor stayed away the entire weekend and Ramangmou did
 
not know where she was. When Ramangmou received a "very, uh,
 
big" cell phone bill, she confronted Minor, who, according to
 
Ramangmou, admitted to taking the phone and claimed she gave it
 
to a friend at school. Ramangmou asked Minor to get the phone
 
back, but the next day after school, Minor said her friend had
 
moved to Hilo and did not have the phone. In response to the
 
question, "[D]id you and [Minor] have an argument about the
 
phone?", Ramangmou replied "I spanked [Minor] because she was
 
lying to me about the phone."5 The following exchange then took
 
place with defense counsel:
 
[Defense Counsel]: Did you believe it was necessary to
discipline [Minor] due to her stealing and lying?
 
[Ramangmou] (Interpreted): Yes, because I really love
my grandchildren and I wanted to make sure that, you know,
she doesn't do this anymore, but she just refuses to listen
to my advice and counsel.
 
In response to further questions about the general
 
behavior of Minor, Ramangmou expressed concern about how Minor
 
dressed and generally "was worried about [Minor] getting pregnant
 
or getting in a problem. [Minor] has no parents herself, and I
 
worry about the consequences of her behavior." Ramangmou
 
testified that normally she would just talk and advise Minor, but
 
that Minor "refuses to listen."
 
5
 Minor testified that she did not take Ramangmou's telephone, that
she had nothing to do with the missing telephone, and that she did not know
who took the telephone. Minor's testimony, although inconsistent with, does
not explicitly contradict Ramangmou's testimony. Nevertheless, Ramangmou
testified that her decision to discipline Minor was based on multiple factors,
only one of which was the telephone. Even though we view the evidence in the
light most favorable to the prosecution, under the circumstances, and contrary
to the State's claim, Minor's testimony on the telephone issue does not mean
that the defense of justification does not apply.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Ramangmou explained that she spanked Minor in an
 
attempt to correct Minor's wrong behavior. Ramangmou stated that
 
on the day of the incident, she intended to spank Minor on her
 
buttocks. Ramangmou used a guava stick no thicker than a gel
 
roller pen, a stick that quickly broke. She then used a wire of
 
unspecified description, but because Minor kept moving around and
 
running away, some of the hits landed on Minor's arms, shoulder,
 
and back. Minor testified, and photos indicated, that she had
 
bruises on her arms, elbows, shoulder, back, and ankle as a
 
result of the incident. Minor also testified she had a scar on
 
her back from being hit with either the guava stick or wire. She
 
said the bruises were caused by Ramangmou but acknowledged that
 
she kept moving around because "it hurt when [Ramangmou] was
 
hitting me."
 Because Minor kept moving, Ramangmou instructed
 
Minor's brothers to help keep her still. The brothers pulled her
 
out from under the bed and from under the table and held her down
 
by her arms and legs. It is unknown whether their efforts
 
contributed to the bruising. The bruising and the cut from the
 
wire did not cause substantial bodily injury or disfigurement. 
Minor testified that being hit hurt and that she felt pain, but
 
she did not testify to extreme pain or extreme mental distress. 
Evidence showed that Minor sustained bruising and a cut on her
 
back, but there was no testimony as to the duration of the
 
bruising or that she had to seek medical help.
 
Given our case law, the totality of the circumstances
 
in this case leads us to conclude that the State failed to
 
disprove beyond a reasonable doubt Ramangmou's parental
 
discipline defense under HRS § 703-309(1). The force used was
 
"with due regard for the age and size of the minor and [was]
 
reasonably related to the purpose of safeguarding or promoting
 
the welfare of the minor, including the prevention or punishment
 
of the minor's misconduct[.]" See HRS 703-309(1)(a). 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Furthermore, "[t]he force used [was] not designed to cause or
 
known to create a risk of causing substantial bodily injury,
 
disfigurement, extreme pain or mental distress, or neurological
 
damage." See HRS 703-309(1)(b). The State failed to adduce
 
sufficient evidence to rebut Ramangmou's justification defense.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence
 
entered May 3, 2011 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is
 reversed. Ramangmou's other points on appeal are moot.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 22, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Randall M. Oyama
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Jefferson R. Malate Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai' i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
13
 