NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NOS. CAAP-15-0000020 and CAAP-15-0000470
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
CAAP-15-0000020
CENTURY CAMPUS HOUSING MANAGEMENT, L.P.,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee,
v.
ELDA HANA, LLC and 2280 KUHIO AVENUE DEVELOPMENT, LLC,
Defendants/Counterclaim Plaintiffs-Appellants
_________________________
2280 KUHIO AVENUE DEVELOPMENT, LLC,
Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
HAWAIIAN ISLAND HOMES, LTD., PETER B. SAVIO, as President of
Hawaiian Island Homes, Ltd., GARRET TOM, as Chief Financial
Officer of Hawaiian Island Homes, Ltd., Third-Party
Defendants-Appellees,
and
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-10, et al., Defendants
AND
CAAP-15-0000470
CENTURY CAMPUS HOUSING MANAGEMENT, L.P.,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee,
v.
ELDA HANA, LLC and 2280 KUHIO AVENUE DEVELOPMENT, LLC,
Defendants/Counterclaim Plaintiffs-Appellants
________________________
2280 KUHIO AVENUE DEVELOPMENT, LLC,
Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
HAWAIIAN ISLAND HOMES, LTD., PETER B. SAVIO, as President of
Hawaiian Island Homes, Ltd., GARRET TOM, as Chief Financial
Officer of Hawaiian Island Homes, Ltd, Third-Party
Defendants-Appellees,
and
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-10, et al. Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-0680-03)NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
In this consolidated appeal, Defendants-Appellants
Counterclaimants Elda Hana, LLC (Elda  Hana) and 2280 Kuhio Avenue
Development, LLC ( Kuhio Avenue Development)1 appeal from: (1) the
December 22, 2014 "Final Judgment" entered against them and in
favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Counterclaim Defendant Century Campus
Housing Management, L.P. ( Century Campus ) as to Counts III and IV
of the Counterclaim ( Judgment); (2) the November 10, 2014 Amended
Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendants' Non-
Hearing Motion to Amend the Counterclaim ( Amended Order); (3) the
April 16, 2015 Order Granting Century Campus's Motion for
Attorneys' Fees and Costs (Order Granting Fees); and (4) the
September 2, 2015 Order Denying Defendants' Motion to Set Aside
the Order Granting Century Campus's Motion for Attorneys' Fees
and Costs (Order Denying Set Aside ), entered by the Circuit Court
of the First Circuit (Circuit Court ).2
I.BACKGROUND FACTS
A.The Management Agreements
On October 21, 2005, Century Campus, a property
management company, entered into a management agreement with 1138
Student Suites, LLC ( 1138 Student Suites ), which was denominated
in the agreement as the "Owner" (2005 Hana Agreement ).  Century
Campus was appointed as Owner's agent and agreed to manage a 73-
unit student housing project located at 2424 Koa Avenue in
1 Elda Hana and Kuhio Avenue Development may be collectively
referred to as Defendants or Appellants .
2The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided. 
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Honolulu, Hawai #i (Hana Property ).  The 2005 Hana Agreement
states that Peter Savio ( Peter) would be the "Owner
Representative" and that the Owner['s] Representative was
authorized to "approve in writing any ancillary agreements or
documents concerning the Premises . . . or concerning the
construction, operation or maintenance of the Premises or to
alter or amend any such ancillary agreements or to give any
approval or consent of Owner required under the terms of [the]
Agreement" and had no implied authority beyond the specific
authority granted in the management agreement.  Peter signed the
2005 Hana Agreement on behalf of 1138 Student Suites, with no
specification as to his title or capacity.  
On November 11, 2008, Century Campus and 1138 Student
Suites, then named as Hana LLC, entered into an agreement to
terminate the 2005 Hana Agreement, effective August 1, 2008. 
Peter signed the termination agreement for Hana Student Suites
LLC, with no specification as to his title or capacity.
On September 1, 2006, Century Campus entered into a
substantially similar management agreement with Ohia Student
Suites LLC (Ohia Student Suites ), which was denominated in the
agreement as "Owner" ( 2006 Ohia Agreement ).  Century Campus was
appointed as Owner's agent and agreed to manage a 251-unit
student housing project located on 2280 Kuhio Avenue in Honolulu,
Hawai#i (Ohia Property ).  The 2006 Ohia Agreement states that
Peter would be the "Owner Representative" with the same authority
as described in the 2005 Hana Agreement, but with respect to the
Ohia Property.  Peter signed the 2006 Ohia Agreement on behalf of
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Ohia Student Suites, "By: 1138 Development Co., Inc.," but again
with no specification as to his title or capacity.  
Also on November 11, 2008, Century Campus and Ohia
Student Suites, then named as Hawaiian Island Student Suites,
LLC, entered into an agreement to terminate the 2006 Ohia
Agreement, effective August 1, 2008.  Peter signed the
termination agreement, as the President and Director of Hawaiian
Island Holdings, Inc., the sole member of Hawaiian Island Student
Suites, LLC.
It appears that, sometime in 2008, Century Campus
entered into a new agreement to manage the Ohia Property, with
Kuhio Avenue Development ( 2008 Kuhio Agreement ).  It also appears
that, sometime in 2008, Century Campus also entered into a new
agreement to manage the Hana Property, with Elda Hana ( 2008 Elda
Agreement ).  Neither party cites directly to either of these
agreements and upon careful review of the record on appeal, it
does not appear that either of these documents are contained in
the record.
B.Procedural History
On March 30, 2010, Century Campus filed a Complaint
against Elda Hana and Kuhio Avenue Development, asserting claims
of breach of the 2008 Elda Agreement and the 2008 Kuhio Agreement
(collectively, the 2008 Management Agreements ).  Century Campus
asserted that Kuhio Avenue Development had an outstanding and
overdue balance under the 2008 Kuhio Agreement and that Elda Hana
had an outstanding and overdue balance under the 2008 Elda
Agreement.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On July 3, 2014, the parties entered into a stipulation
for partial dismissal with prejudice, wherein it was agreed and
approved that all of the claims in Century Campus's Complaint
were dismissed with prejudice pursuant to Hawai# i Rules of Civil
Procedure ( HRCP) Rule 41(a)(1).
On June 12, 2012, Appellants filed an Answer to the
Complaint ( Answer) and a Counterclaim (Counterclaim ), asserting
claims of breach of contract (Counts I, II, III, and IV), breach
of implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing (Count V), and
fraud (Count VI).3   Count I of the Counterclaim alleges that
Century Campus breached the 2008 Kuhio Agreement, which the
Counterclaim refers to as the Ohia Management Agreement II. 
Count II alleges that Century Campus breached the 2008 Elda
Agreement, which the Counterclaim refers to as the Hana
Management Agreement II.  Count III alleges that Century Campus
breached the 2006 Ohia Agreement "of which [Kuhio Avenue
Development] was an intended third-party beneficiary."  Count IV
alleges that Century Campus breached the 2005 Hana Agreement "of
which [Elda Hana] was an intended-third party beneficiary." 
Count V alleges that Century Campus breached "implied covenants
of good faith and fair dealing in its management agreements" with
Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda Hana.  Count VI alleges that
Century Campus made fraudulent representations to Kuhio Avenue
Development and Elda Hana concerning the amounts owed by them to
3On June 22, 2012, Kuhio Avenue Development filed a Third-Party
Complaint against Hawaiian Island Homes, Ltd., Peter, and Garret Tom, which
was amended on February 25, 2013.  The Third-Party Complaint was dismissed in
an order entered on April 25, 2014.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Century Campus.  Century Campus filed an Answer to the
Counterclaim on July 30, 2012.
On December 20, 2013, Century Campus filed two motions
for partial summary judgment.  The first motion, which is the
subject of this appeal, sought the entry of summary judgment in
favor of Century Campus and against Kuhio Avenue Development and
Elda Hana on Counts III and IV of the Counterclaim on the grounds
that Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda Hana are not intended
third-party beneficiaries of the 2006 Ohia Agreement and the 2005
Hana Agreement, respectively.4  Century Campus further argued
that Texas law should be applied, as both the 2006 Ohia Agreement
and the 2005 Hana Agreement state that "[t]he execution,
interpretation, and performance of this Agreement shall in all
respects be controlled and governed by the laws of the State of
Texas."  In support of the motion, Century Campus submitted
copies of the agreements and the Declaration of Jim G. Short
(Short), the former President of Century Campus's general
partner, as well as certain discovery responses, which are not
otherwise referenced in Century Campus's motion or memorandum in
support.  Short denied that Century Campus had any knowledge or
belief that Hana and Elda Properties were owned by any entity
other than 1138 Student Suites and Ohia Student Suites, at the
time the 2005 Hana and 2006 Ohia Agreements were entered into,
and denied that Century Campus intended to benefit any entities
other than the parties to the agreements.
4The other partial summary judgment motion, which sought summary
judgment on Count VI of the Counterclaim (fraudulent representations), was
granted in an order entered on February 27, 2014.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In a memorandum in opposition filed on January 28,
2014, Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda Hana argued that Century
Campus knew that Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda Hana were the
"true owners" of the subject properties, and that Kuhio Avenue
Development and Elda Hana were clearly the intended beneficiaries
of the agreements and the disclosed principals for whom Century
Campus was working.  Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda Hana
acknowledged the choice of law provision in the agreements but
nevertheless argued that, under Hawai# i conflict of law
jurisprudence, Hawai #i law should be applied to determine Kuhio
Avenue Development and Elda Hana's third-party beneficiary
status.  
In support of the opposition, Kuhio Avenue Development
and Elda Hana submitted, inter alia , the Declaration of Marcus
Fullard-Leo (Fullard-Leo ), Chief Operating Officer of F-L
Management, Inc., their "entity manager of record."  Fullard-Leo
averred, inter alia,  that:  (1) Peter acted as an agent of Kuhio
Avenue Development and Elda Hana for the purposes of managing the
Ohia and Hana Properties; (2) under an attached Subordination
Agreement, Elda Hana leased the Hana Property to 1138 Student
Suites, later known as Hana Student Suites, LLC; (3) the licensed
Principal Broker for the 2005 Hana Agreement was Mary Savio
(Mary), Peter's mother, who was responsible for all real-estate
related contracts, including the management agreements, and that
Mary was fully aware of both properties' ownership; (4) the
Subordination Agreement was signed by Short for Century Campus,
as well as by the principals of Elda Hana; (5) Campus Century
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
also drafted and executed an attached Marketing and Leasing
Agreement for the Ohia Property in March of 2006; (6) upon
Short's request to Fullard-Leo, Kuhio Avenue Development paid
outstanding invoices on the 2006 Ohia Agreement; and (7) Century
Campus has continued to assert that Kuhio Avenue Development and
Elda Hana are responsible for payments due to Century Campus
under the 2005 Hana and 2006 Ohia Agreements.  Defendants also
submitted additional declarations and exhibits, including the
Declaration of Steven Sofos, a real estate professional, who
attested to the duties and industry standards applicable to
property managers and principal brokers.  Century Campus filed a
reply memorandum.
The Circuit Court held a hearing on February 5, 2014. 
Century Campus reiterated arguments advanced in their filings.  
Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda Hana argued that the 2005 Hana
Agreement and 2006 Ohia Agreement are invalid because (1) the
agreements were not signed by a principal broker, and (2) they
are "third-party beneficiaries under Texas law based on the
creditor beneficiary exception."  Defendants acknowledged that
their creditor beneficiary exception argument was not discussed
in its memorandum in opposition, and offered to provide
supplemental briefing.  However, the Circuit Court declined to
consider the newly-raised arguments regarding the validity of the
agreements and the purported creditor beneficiary exception.  The
Circuit Court orally granted the motion for summary judgment on
Counts III and IV of the Counterclaim and a written order was 
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
entered on February 18, 2014 ( Summary Judgment Order).  In the
Summary Judgment Order, the Circuit Court stated:
Both the 2005 Hana Agreement and the 2006 Ohia
Agreement contain choice of law provisions requiring that
they be interpreted and construed under Texas law.  Under a
Texas law analysis, the intention of the contracting parties
is controlling.  Employing Texas law, the Court looks within
the four corners of the agreements to determine whether the
contracting parties intended to confer a direct benefit on
Counterclaimants.  Texas law further requires that the Court
determine whether the contracting parties intended for
Counterclaimants to have the right to file suit to enforce
the agreements. 
Based on its review of the 2005 Hana Agreement and the
2006 Ohia Agreement, the Court finds that the pertinent
contract provisions are clear and unambiguous.  There is no
language in either agreement indicating that the contracting
parties intended to confer a direct benefit and/or any
enforcement rights upon either of the Counterclaimants.  In
fact, Counterclaimants are not referenced in the agreements
at all. 
Accordingly, the Court concludes that Counterclaimants
are not intended third-party beneficiaries under either the
2005 Hana Agreement or the 2006 Ohia Agreement.
As discussed further below, on April 1, 2014, Kuhio
Avenue Development and Elda Hana filed a Motion to Amend the
Counterclaim ( Motion to Amend ), which sought to:  (1) withdraw
claims already dismissed; (2) clarify the claims alleged; and (3)
add additional claims.  On June 18, 2014, the Motion to Amend was
denied.  Ultimately, the Motion to Amend was granted in part and
denied in part in the Amended Order, which was entered on
November 10, 2014.  The Circuit Court denied Defendants' motion
for reconsideration of the Amended Order. 
On May 19, 2014, the Circuit Court entered a
Clarification to Order Granting [Century Campus's] Motion for
Partial Summary Judgment as to Count III and Count IV of the
Counterclaim "[i]n the interest of clarifying the existing record
and eliminating any future discovery disputes on the issue infra,
that have been brought to the court's attention at a status
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
conference"  ( Clarification Order).  In the Clarification Order,
the Circuit Court stated:
No principal/agent relationship theory was pled in
Counts III and IV of the Counterclaim, nor is such theory
mentioned in the incorporated paragraphs preceding Counts
III and IV.
The first and only time the principal/agent theory is
mentioned is on page 2 of the Defendants' Memorandum in
Opposition, filed January 28, 2014, to the summary judgment
motion, filed December 20, 2013, wherein principal/agent
theory is mentioned in one sentence in an introductory
paragraph.  The principal/agent theory was not argued
anywhere in the opposition memorandum.  A single
introductory sentence mentioning principal/agent theory is
not argument. Therefore, the principal/agent theory was not
argued, raised, or preserved, in the opposition memorandum,
as required by court rule.
RCCH Rule 7(b) requires that "A reply must respond
only to arguments raised in the opposition."  (Emphasis
added.)  No argument on principal/agent theory was presented
in the opposition memorandum that the reply herein needed to
respond to.
Presenting oral argument on the principal/agent theory
for the first time during the hearing on the motion, which
was not argued in the opposition memorandum, is insufficient
and improper.  No ruling by the Court can, or should be
made, on a theory that was never pled, never properly raised
or argued, and thus not preserved.
The February 18, 2014 Summary Judgment Order clearly
dismissed the only two counts relating the 2005-2006
management agreements, Counts III and IV, in their entirety.
Accordingly, the only claims remaining in this action,
relate to the 2008-2009 management agreements. 
On July 11, 2014, Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda
Hana moved for reconsideration of the Summary Judgment Order and
Clarification Order under HRCP Rule 54(b) and Rule 60(b), or in
the alternative, requested that the court permit supplemental
briefing.5  Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda Hana made numerous
arguments, including lack of prejudice, inadvertent mistake,
excusable neglect, and exceptional circumstances.  Century Campus
filed an opposition, which included a cross-motion seeking HRCP
5This motion did not seek relief from the Circuit Court's order
denying the motion to amend the Counterclaim.
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Rule 54(b) certification of the Summary Judgment Order and the
Clarification Order.  On September 8, 2014, the Circuit Court
denied the motion for reconsideration and denied the cross-motion
for HRCP Rule 54(b) certification without prejudice.  
Thereafter, on September 25, 2014, Kuhio Avenue
Development and Elda Hana filed a motion for HRCP Rule 54(b)
certification of the Summary Judgment Order, the Clarification
Order, and the order denying reconsideration.  Century Campus
filed a joinder.  On November 17, 2014, the Circuit Court entered
an order granting the requested HRCP Rule 54(b) certification and
vacating the May 18, 2015 trial date.  On December 22, 2014, the
Circuit Court entered the Judgment, which was entitled "Final
Judgment," and which entered judgment in favor of Century Campus
as to Counts III and IV of the Counterclaim pursuant to HRCP Rule
54(b).  On January 10, 2015, Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda
Hana filed a notice of appeal from the Judgment in CAAP-15-
0000020. 
In addition, pursuant to further motions stemming from 
Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda Hana's Motion to Amend, and
denial of reconsideration of that motion, on January 22, 2015,
the Circuit Court entered an Order Granting Elda Hana and Kuhio
Avenue Development's Motion for Leave to File an Interlocutory
Appeal.  The Circuit Court explained that, in light of the HRCP
Rule 54(b) appeal of the judgment on Counts III and IV and the
fact that the trial date was vacated, appellate review of issues
related to Elda Hana and Kuhio Avenue Development's request for 
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
further amendments to the Counterclaim would more speedily
terminate this litigation.
C.Requests to Amend Counterclaim
As noted above, Defendants filed the Motion to Amend on
April 1, 2014.  In opposition, Century Campus contended that the
Motion to Amend was an improper attempt to "circumvent summary
judgment and avoid the consequences of having lost their breach
of contract claims under the prior management agreements" and
that the delay in adding claims was inexcusable and prejudiced
Century Campus.  In addition, Century Campus argued that the
proposed amendments were futile.  After Defendants filed a reply
memorandum, on June 17, 2014, the Circuit Court denied the Motion
to Amend for the following reasons, "as explained more fully in
Century's Opposition and the authorities cited therein:"  (1)
improper circumvention of the Summary Judgment Order; (2) undue
delay; (3) inexcusable delay; and (4) undue prejudice to Century
Campus.
On June 30, 2014, Defendants filed a motion for 
reconsideration, arguing that the continuance of trial to May 18,
2015, along with the extension of the discovery deadlines,
eliminated any potential prejudice to Century Campus and that
amendment was necessary to avoid the manifest injustice of
denying Defendants the right to have their claims heard on the
merits, without any chance to correct inartful drafting.  In
opposition, Century Campus argued, inter alia , that Defendants'
breach of contract claims in Counts III and IV had already been
disposed of without Defendants preserving their agency theory at
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the time of summary judgment.  On September 11, 2014, the Circuit
Court entered an order denying Defendants' motion for
reconsideration.
Nevertheless, at the October 6, 2014 hearing on
Defendants' motion for leave to file an interlocutory appeal, the 
Circuit Court expressed its inclination to sua sponte reconsider
its orders denying leave to amend the Counterclaim because "with
respect to agent-principal liability, [the Summary Judgment Order
was] not an on-the-merits decision.  It was procedural and
technical in nature."  Supplemental briefing was filed by both
parties on October 24, 2014.  Century Campus argued that, if the
Circuit Court was concerned that the Summary Judgment Order did
not adequately address the agency issue, it should enter a
clarification order, rather than to allow Defendants to amend
their breach of contract claims.  Defendants argued that summary
judgment was not entered against them in the Summary Judgment
Order on their claim that they were entitled to prosecute breach
of contract claims based on their principal-agent relationships,
that the Clarification Order specifically ruled that they had not
pled a principal-agent relationship, and that they should be
allowed to amend the Counterclaim to clearly assert those claims.
On November 10, 2014, in the Amended Order, the Circuit
Court allowed Defendants to amend the Counterclaim with respect
to the breach of contract claims arising out of the 2008
Management Agreements (Counts I and II) and the breach of the
implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing claim to the
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
extent it arose out of the 2008 Management Agreements (Count V),
but denied Defendants' motion with respect to the remaining
requested amendments, including Defendants' request to more
clearly assert breach of contract claims arising out of the 2005
Hana Agreement and 2006 Ohia Agreement based on their principal-
agent relationships with 1138 Student Suites and Ohia Student
Suites.  Regarding the denied relief, the Circuit Court stated:
The motion is DENIED IN PART, with respect to the
remaining requested amendments, on the following grounds as
explained more fully in [Century Campus's] Opposition and
the authorities cited therein:
1. Improper circumvention of the Court's prior
rulings on summary judgment;
2. Law of the case;
3. Undue delay;
4. Inexcusable delay;
5. Undue prejudice to opposing party;
6. As to claims arising out of the 2005 and 2006
agreements, futility based on statute of limitations;
7. As to the Fraudulent Inducement, Constructive
Fraud, Negligent Misrepresentation claims,
futility based on violation of HRCP Rule 9(b)
and lack of an actionable claim.
8. As to Breach of Fiduciary Duty, futility based
on lack of an actionable claim.
As noted above, on November 24, 2014, the Circuit Court
denied reconsideration of the Amended Order.
On December 17, 2014, Defendants filed an ex parte
motion for extension of time to file a notice of appeal pursuant
to Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 4(a)(4)(A),
which was granted on December 19, 2014.  
On December 19, 2014, Defendants filed a motion for
leave to assert an interlocutory appeal from the Amended Order
and denial of its reconsideration ( Motion for Leave ).  Following
additional briefing, on January 22, 2015, the Circuit Court
entered an order granting Defendants' Motion for Leave, which
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
determined that the resolution of the issues raised in the
Amended Order "will more speedily terminate this litigation."  
The Circuit Court found that appellate review was the "most
efficient route" for the court and parties because "Defendants
have already filed a Notice of Appeal on Counts III and IV of the
Counterclaim and the Court has previously vacated the trial date
effectively staying the entire case[.]"  On January 23, 2015,
Defendants filed an additional notice of appeal in CAAP-15-
0000020.
D.Motion for Fees and Costs
On January 2, 2015, Century Campus filed a motion for
attorneys' fees and costs (Motion for Fees and Costs), requesting
fees and costs arising out of its defense of Counts III and Count
IV of the Counterclaim.  Century Campus requested fees in the
amount of $72,371.60, general excise taxes of $3,410.15 and costs
in the amount of $1,768.62. 
On January 12, 2015, Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda
Hana filed a memorandum in opposition to Century Campus's Motion
for Fees and Costs, contending that Century Campus's motion for
fees and costs is premature because not all the counts in the
Counterclaim have been decided.  They further argued that Century
Campus's fees are "unreasonable and overinclusive." 
On April 16, 2015, the Circuit Court entered the Order
Granting Fees, awarding $62,750.80 in fees, $2,956.82 in general
excise tax, and $1,137.71 in costs.
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On May 4, 2015, Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda Hana
filed a motion to set aside the Fees Order ( Motion to Set Aside )
under HRCP Rules 7 and 54(b) and HRAP Rule 4(a)(3), arguing that
the Motion for Fees and Costs was deemed denied under HRAP Rule
4(a)(3) and thus, the Order Granting Fees is a "nullity and
should be set aside." 
On May 8, 2015, Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda Hana
filed an ex parte  motion for extension of time to file a notice
of appeal pursuant to HRAP Rule 4(a)(4)(A).  The Circuit Court
granted the motion to extend on May 11, 2015. 
On May 14, 2015, Century Campus filed a memorandum in
opposition to the Motion to Set Aside, arguing that the Circuit
Court lacked jurisdiction to consider the motion.  Century Campus
contended that the entry of the Order Granting Fees "divest[ed]
the [Circuit] Court of any further jurisdiction with respect to
Century's attorneys' fees and costs motion." 
On May 18, 2015, Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda Hana
filed a reply, again asserting that Century Campus's Motion for
Fees and Costs was deemed denied under HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) and
further arguing that the Motion to Set Aside was procedurally
proper under HRCP Rule 54(b) or in the alternative HRCP Rule
60(b). 
On June 17, 2015, Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda
Hana filed a notice of appeal from the Order Granting Fees, in
CAAP-15-0000470. 
16NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On September 2, 2015, the Circuit Court entered an
order denying Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda Hana's Motion to
Set Aside ( Set Aside Order ).  In the Set Aside Order, the Circuit
Court stated that it denied the motion "for the reasons set forth
in [Century Campus's] Memorandum in Opposition[.]" 
On September 18, 2015, Kuhio Avenue Development and
Elda Hana filed a second notice of appeal in CAAP-15-0000470 from
the Set Aside Order.
On November 24, 2015, CAAP-15-0000020 and CAAP-15-
0000470 were consolidated for appellate review.
II.POINTS OF ERROR
In CAAP-15-0000020, Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda
Hana argue that the Circuit Court erred when it granted Century
Campus's Motion for Summary Judgment, including when it refused
to allow supplemental briefing, and when it denied in part
Appellants' Motion to Amend.
In CAAP-15-0000470, Kuhio Avenue Development and Elda
Hana argue that the Circuit Court erred when it:  (1) granted
Century Campus's Motion for Fees and Costs after the motion was
deemed denied under HRAP Rule 4(a)(3); (2) determined that it
lacked jurisdiction to set aside the April 16, 2015 Order
Granting Fees; (3) awarded attorneys' fees under Hawaii Revised
Statutes ( HRS) § 607-14; and (4) awarded an unreasonable and
over-inclusive amount for attorneys' fees.  
17NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
III.APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
The Hawai #i Supreme Court has held:
On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
reviewed de novo.  See State ex rel. Anzai v. City and
County of Honolulu , 99 Hawai #i 508, [515], 57 P.3d 433,
[440] (2002); Bitney v. Honolulu Police Dep't , 96 Hawai #i
243, 250, 30 P.3d 257, 264 (2001).
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law.  A fact is material if
proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties.  The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party.  In other
words, we must view all of the evidence and inferences
drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the
party opposing the motion.
Kahale v. City and County of Honolulu , 104 Hawai #i 341, 344,
90 P.3d 233, 236 (2004) (citation omitted).
Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawai# i 90,
96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008).  Furthermore, 
[t]he burden is on the party moving for summary judgment
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue as
to all material facts, which, under applicable principles of
substantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment as a
matter of law. This burden has two components.
First, the moving party has the burden of producing
support for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material
fact exists with respect to the essential elements of the
claim or defense which the motion seeks to establish or
which the motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed
facts, it is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of
law. Only when the moving party satisfies its initial burden
of production does the burden shift to the non-moving party
to respond to the motion for summary judgment and
demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general
allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of trial.
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion. This burden always remains with the moving party
and requires the moving party to convince the court that no
genuine issue of material fact exists and that the moving
party is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law.
18NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Ralston v. Yim , 129 Hawai #i 46, 56-57, 292 P.3d 1276, 1286-87
(2013) (format altered) (quoting French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut,
Inc., 105 Hawai #i 462, 470, 99 P.3d 1046, 1054 (2004)).  
In sum, this court's case law indicates that a summary
judgment movant may satisfy his or her initial burden of
production by either (1) presenting evidence negating an
element of the non-movant's claim, or (2) demonstrating that
the non-movant will be unable to carry his or her burden of
proof at trial. Where the movant attempts to meet his or her
burden through the latter means, he or she must show not
only that the non-movant has not placed proof in the record,
but also that the movant will be unable to offer proof at
trial. Accordingly, in general, a summary judgment movant
cannot merely point to the non-moving party's lack of
evidence to support its initial burden of production if
discovery has not concluded.
Id. at 60–61, 292 P.3d at 1290–91 (emphasis and citations
omitted).
"The question of the choice of law to be applied in a
case is a question of law reviewable de novo .  Therefore, a
choice of law issue is a question of law we review under the
right/wrong standard."  Mikelson v. United States Auto. Ass'n ,
107 Hawai #i 192, 197, 111 P.3d 601, 606 (2005) (citations,
brackets and internal quotation marks omitted).
[The appellate] court reviews the denial and granting
of attorney's fees under the abuse of discretion standard. 
The same standard applies to [the appellate] court's review
of the amount of a trial court's award of attorney's fees. 
An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearly
exceeded the bounds of reason or has disregarded rules or
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment
of a party litigant.
Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps. Ret. Sys. , 106 Hawai #i 416, 431, 106
P.3d 339, 354 (2005) (citations, quotation marks, original
brackets, and ellipses omitted).
The appellate courts review a denial of leave to amend
a complaint pursuant to HRCP Rule 15(a) under the abuse of
19NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
discretion standard.  Gonsalves v. Nissan Motor Corp. in Haw. ,
Ltd., 100 Hawai #i 149, 158, 58 P.3d 1196, 1205 (2002) (stating
that "this court reviews the [court's] denial of a motion to
amend a complaint under the abuse of discretion standard").  "An
abuse of discretion occurs 'where the trial court has clearly
exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles
of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant.'"  State ex rel. Bronster v. U.S. Steel Corp. , 82
Hawai#i 32, 54, 919 P.2d 294, 316 (1996) (citations omitted).
"The interpretation of a rule promulgated by the courts
involves principles of statutory construction."  Cresencia v.
Kim, 85 Hawai# i 334, 335–36, 944 P.2d 1277, 1278–79 (1997)
(citation omitted).  "[T]he interpretation of a statute . . . is
a question of law reviewable de novo."  State v. Bohannon, 102
Hawai#i 228, 232, 74 P.3d 980, 984 (2003) (citations omitted).
IV.DISCUSSION
A.Summary Judgment on Counts III and IV
1.Third-Party Beneficiary Arguments
Count IV of the Counterclaim alleges that Century
Campus breached the 2005 Hana Agreement, of which Elda Hana was
an intended third-party beneficiary.  As noted above, in its
summary judgment motion, Century Campus argued that Texas law
applies and that, under Texas law, Elda Hana is not a third-party
beneficiary.  Elda Hana urged the Circuit Court to instead apply
Hawai#i law, and to conclude that there is a genuine issue of
material fact as to whether Elda Hana was an intended third-party
20NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
beneficiary, because Elda Hana was the actual owner of the Hana
Property and Century Campus knew that Elda Hana was the actual
owner.  The declarations and exhibits submitted by Elda Hana
offered factual support for the assertion that it was the owner
of the property and that Century Campus knew of its ownership.
On appeal, Elda Hana tacitly acknowledges that Texas
law applies.  We agree.  Section 26 of the 2005 Hana Agreement
provides that "[t]he execution, interpretation, and performance
of this Agreement shall in all respects be controlled and
governed by the laws of the State of Texas."  Hawai #i recognizes
the enforceability of choice of law provisions in contracts.  See
Airgo, Inc. v. Horizon Cargo Transp., Inc., 66 Haw. 590, 595, 670
P.2d 1277, 1281 (1983) ("When the parties choose the law of a
particular state to govern their contractual relationship and the
chosen law has some nexus with the parties or the contract, that
law will generally be applied.").  Thus, Texas law governs our
analysis of whether Elda Hana is entitled to third-party
beneficiary status.
Both parties have cited to the Texas Supreme Court's
analysis of its third-party beneficiary doctrine in MCI Telecomm.
Corp. v. Texas Util. Elec. Co., 995 S.W.2d 647 (Tex. 1999).  The
Texas court's statement of the third-party beneficiary doctrine
under Texas law is as follows:
When a contract is not ambiguous, the construction of
the written instrument is a question of law for the court. 
We review the trial court's legal conclusions de novo. . . .
 
The fact that a person might receive an incidental
benefit from a contract to which he is not a party does not
21NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
give that person a right of action to enforce the contract. 
A third party may recover on a contract made between other
parties only if the parties intended to secure some benefit
to that third party, and only if the contracting parties
entered into the contract directly for the third party's
benefit. 
To qualify as one for whose benefit the contract was
made, the third party must show that he is either a donee or
creditor beneficiary of, and not one who is benefitted only
incidentally by the performance of, the contract.  One is a
donee beneficiary if the performance promised will, when
rendered, come to him as a pure donation.  If, on the other
hand, that performance will come to him in satisfaction of a
legal duty owed to him by the promisee, he is a creditor
beneficiary.  As the court of appeals noted, this duty may
be an "indebtedness, contractual obligation or other legally
enforceable commitment" owed to the third party.
 In determining whether a third party can enforce a
contract, the intention of the contracting parties is
controlling.  A court will not create a third-party
beneficiary contract by implication.  The intention to
contract or confer a direct benefit to a third party must be
clearly and fully spelled out or enforcement by the third
party must be denied.  Consequently, a presumption exists
that parties contracted for themselves unless it "clearly
appears" that they intended a third party to benefit from
the contract. 
. . . .
Furthermore, there is a presumption against, not in
favor of, third-party beneficiary agreements.  Absent clear
indication in the contract that [the parties to the
contract] intended to confer a direct benefit to [the third
party], [the third party] may not maintain an action as a
third-party beneficiary.
 
Id. at 650-52 (citations omitted).
Elda Hana argues on appeal that it is a "creditor
beneficiary" under Texas third-party beneficiary law.  As stated
above, there are two types of third-party beneficiaries under
Texas law, donee beneficiaries and creditor beneficiaries, and a
creditor beneficiary is one who is owed a legal duty, as opposed
to one who simply receives a pure donation.  Id. at 651.  Either
way, however, the "third party may recover on a contract made
between other parties only if the parties intended to secure some
22NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
benefit to that third party, and only if the contracting parties
entered into the contract directly for the third party's
benefit."  Id. (emphasis added).  Indeed, "[t]he fact that a
person might receive an incidental benefit from a contract to
which he is not a party does not give that person a right of
action to enforce the contract."  Id.   Most importantly perhaps,
"[t]he intention to contract or confer a direct benefit  to a
third party must be clearly and fully spelled out  or enforcement
by the third party must be denied."  Id.  (emphasis added).
Citing its well-established jurisprudence, the Texas
Supreme Court recently re-affirmed that this means that the
"direct benefit" to the third party must be "clearly and fully
spelled out" in the contract that the third party is seeking to
enforce:
To determine whether the contracting parties intended
to directly benefit a third party and entered into the
contract for that purpose, courts must look solely to the
contract's language, construed as a whole.  The contract
must include "a clear and unequivocal expression of the
contracting parties' intent to directly benefit a third
party," and any implied intent to create a third-party
beneficiary is insufficient.  Courts may not presume the
necessary intent.  To the contrary, "we must begin with the
presumption" that the parties contracted solely "for
themselves," and only a clear expression of the intent to
create a third-party beneficiary can overcome that
presumption.  If the contract's language leaves any doubt
about the parties' intent, those "doubts must be resolved
against conferring third-party beneficiary status." 
Although a contract may expressly provide that the parties
do not intend to create a third-party beneficiary, the
absence of such language is not determinative.  "Instead,
the controlling factor is the absence of any sufficiently
clear and unequivocal language demonstrating" the necessary
intent. 
First Bank v. Brumitt, 519 S.W.3d 95, 102-03 (Tex. 2017)
(citations omitted; emphasis added).
23NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Here, Elda Hana does not point to any language in the
2005 Hana Agreement.  Instead, Elda Hana argues that Century
Campus owed it a legal duty under a 2005 Subordination Agreement. 
This argument is wholly without merit.  Under the 2005
Subordination Agreement, 1138 Student Suites, as Master Lessee,
and Century Campus, as Property Manager, clearly and
unambiguously acknowledged and agreed that all of their rights
were subordinate to the rights of the secured lender who loaned
moneys to Elda Hana, the Master Lessor.6  Nothing in the 2005
Hana Agreement, or the 2005 Subordination Agreement, clearly,
fully, and unequivocally expressed 1138 Student Suites and
Century Campus's intent to enter into the 2005 Hana Agreement for
Elda Hana's direct benefit.  Therefore, we conclude that under
Texas law, Elda Hana is not a third-party beneficiary entitled to
enforce the 2005 Hana Agreement.
Similarly, Count III of the Counterclaim alleges that
Century Campus breached the 2006 Ohia Agreement, of which Kuhio
Avenue Development was an intended third-party beneficiary. 
Kuhio Avenue Development argues that it is a creditor beneficiary
of the 2006 Ohia Agreement, based on a Marketing and Leasing
Agreement between Kuhio Avenue Development and Century Campus
because at the time Century Campus entered into the Marketing and
Leasing Agreement Century Campus was fully aware that Kuhio
6The 2006 Subordination Agreement contained various notice,
cooperation, and other provisions incident to the subordination, which are not
relevant to this analysis.
24NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Avenue Development was the "true owner" of the Ohia Property. 
This argument is equally without merit.  While Kuhio Avenue
Development's ownership of the Ohia Property may have allowed it
to receive an incidental benefit from the 2006 Ohia Agreement,
that is insufficient under Texas law to create third-party
beneficiary status.  Nothing in the 2006 Ohia Agreement, which is
also expressly governed by Texas law, or the Marketing and
Leasing Agreement, clearly, fully, and unequivocally expressed
Ohia Student Suites and Century Campus's intent to enter into the
2006 Ohia Agreement for Kuhio Avenue Development's direct
benefit.  Therefore, we conclude that under Texas law, Kuhio
Avenue Development is not a third-party beneficiary entitled to
enforce the 2006 Ohia Agreement. 
2.Agency Arguments
On appeal, Elda Hana and Kuhio Avenue Development argue
that summary judgment as to the breach of contract claims in
Counts III and IV should have been denied, at least in part,
because they were the principals, and 1138 Student Suites and
Ohia Student Suites were their agents, with respect to the 2005
Hana Agreement and 2006 Ohia Agreement.  Appellants further argue
that their agency arguments were raised, albeit weakly, in their
written opposition to Century Campus's summary judgment motion,
and more clearly at oral argument on the motion, and that, to the
extent necessary, they should have been allowed supplemental
briefing on the supporting legal authorities.  Century Campus 
25NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
submits that Appellants never properly pled or argued their
principal-agent theory, and thus failed to preserve it.
On the overall record in this case, we consider Century
Campus's argument, and the Circuit Court's ultimate rulings to
that effect, to be inconsistent with Hawai# i's liberal notice
pleading principles, which generally favor allowing claims to be
heard on the merits, and the applicable summary judgment
standard, whereby all evidence and inferences are viewed in the
light most favorable to the non-moving party.  See, e.g.,
Tokuhisa v. Cutter Management Co., 122 Hawai# i 181, 192, 223 P.3d
246, 257 (App. 2009) ("Under Hawai# i's 'notice pleading'
approach, it is 'no longer necessary to plead legal theories with
precision.'") (citation and ellipses omitted); Nuuanu Valley
Ass'n, 119 Hawai# i at 96, 194 P.3d at 537 (summary judgment
standard).  In the first instance, in the Summary Judgment Order,
the Circuit Court was silent as to Defendants' evidence and
argument that they should be allowed to pursue breach of contract
claims as to the 2005 Hana Agreement and 2006 Ohia Agreement
based on their alleged principal-agent relationships with 1138
Student Suites and Ohia Student Suites.  Later however, in the
Clarification Order, the Circuit Court stated that Defendants'
argument on the principal-agent theory was, inter alia ,
"insufficient and improper" and clarified that the Summary
Judgment Order dismissed Defendants' breach of contract claims
arising out of the 2005 and 2006 agreements "in their entirety." 
Thus, we address the summary adjudication of these claims.
26NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Under Texas law, it is well-settled that an agent may
make a contract for a principal in his own name, and that the
latter may sue or be sued on the contract.  See, e.g., Latch v.
Gratty, Inc., 107 S.W.3d 543, 546 (Tex. 2003), citing First Nat'l
Bank of Wichita Falls v. Fite, 115 S.W.2d 1105, 1109-10 (Tex.
1938).  Thus, we examine the evidence in the record before the
Circuit Court on summary judgment.  In his Declaration, Fullard-
Leo avers, inter alia:
2.  Peter Savio ("Savio") acted as an agent of KAD and
Elda for purposes of managing both the property located at
2880 Kuhio Avenue, Honolulu, Hawaii (the "Ohia") and the
property located at 2424 Koa Avenue, Honolulu Hawaii (the
"Hana," and collectively with the Ohia, the "Properties"),
respectively.  In the management of both Properties, Savio
was to be paid a management fee.
3.  As noted in the Subordination Agreement addressed
below, under a ground lease dated November 1, 2005, Elda
leased the Hana property to 1138 Student Suites, LLC, later
known as the Hana Student Suites, LLC ("HSS"). HSS was a
member-managed entity and its sole member was 1138
Development Co., Inc., later known as Hawaiian Island
Holdings Inc. ("HIHI").  Savio was the President of HIHI.
4.  On October 21, 2005, HIHI, through its President
(Savio) caused its subsidiary HSS to enter into a contract
with CCHM to manage the Hana Property.
. . . .
7.  Savio through his real estate brokerage, Hawaiian
Island Homes, Ltd ("HIHL") acted as a broker earning a sales
commission upon Elda's acquisition of the Hana Property,
which closed November 5, 2005. As a part of the acquisition
of the Hana Property by Elda, Savio facilitated getting
financing on the property, which required the Hana Property,
be leased on a long term basis.  Accordingly, Savio's wholly
owned subsidiary HSS leased the property under the November
1, 2005 ground leased described in paragraph 3 above, which
provided that HSS retain 6% of the gross revenues produced
by the Hana Property while the remainder be tendered to Elda
as rent. This "no risk", percentage rent structure is very
much like the percentage of gross rental revenue structure
that most property managers are compensated and is similar
in payment terms to the subsequent property management
agreement related to the Ohia Property.
 
8.  Because Savio was acting as an agent in managing
the Hana property, Elda only collected lease rent when there
were net proceeds generated from the operation of the Hana
27NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
property.  Further, Elda contributed funds to the property
operation when there were not enough revenues to cover
operational shortfalls.  Elda did not charge HSS lease rent,
when the proceeds from the Hana Property operations were
insufficient to pay it without a capital contribution from
Savio to HSS and which would have been due and owing had
Savio through his subsidiary HSS acted solely as a lessee
and not as Elda's Managing agent.
. . . .
13.  Six months after the effective date of the
Marketing and Leasing Agreement, CCHM entered into a
management agreement, effective September 1, 2006, with Ohia
Student Suites, LLC ("OSS") for the management of the Ohia
Property. ("Ohia Agreement")(herein after, OSS and 1138 SS,
discussed infra, will be collectively referred to as the
"Savio Entities") . . .
. . . .
17. Savio, through HIHI also owned OSS exclusively and
the company served as the landlord/agent with respect to all
dorm leases for the Ohia property during the periods prior
to August 2008.
18.  KAD never gave OSS the right to serve as its
leasing agent for the Ohia property and never entered into
an agreement with OSS entitling OSS to lease the Ohia
property.
19.  During periods of the 2005 Agreement and the 2006
Agreement, CCHM took direction from KAD and Elda issued by
among others, Marcus Fullard-Leo as one of the principals of
the companies respectively.
20.  In Summer 2008, CCHM requested and received
payments from KAD and Elda for amounts allegedly due under
the 2005 Agreement and the 2006 Agreement.
In addition, contrary to Century Campus's argument on
appeal, the 2005 Hana and 2006 Ohia Agreements do not
"unambigously" state that 1138 Student Suites and Ohia Student
Suites are the owners of the Hana and Ohia Properties.  Rather,
the agreements use the term "Owner" as a term or convention to
describe that party; neither agreement actually states that the
respective Student Suites entity in fact owns the subject
28NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
property.7  Century Campus also argues that Appellants'
principal-agent theory fails as a matter of law because the 2005
Hana and 2006 Ohia Agreements both state that "Century [Campus]
shall be acting only as agent for Owner."  We cannot conclude
that this language is wholly inconsistent with Elda Hana and
Kuhio Avenue Development having a principal-agent relationship
with 1138 Student Suites and Ohia Student Suites with regard to
the subject agreements, which would permit the principal to sue
or be sued under Texas law.
As stated above, the Summary Judgment Order does not
address Appellants' argument that they are principals entitled to
enforce the 2005 Hana Agreement and 2006 Ohia Agreement entered
into by their alleged agents.  In the Clarification Order, the
Circuit Court also states that no principal-agent relationship
theory was pled in the Counterclaim.  We agree with the Circuit
Court that Defendants' memorandum in opposition to Century
Campus's summary judgment motion, and Defendants' oral argument
for that matter, poorly articulated their principal-agent theory,
but the factual support for this argument that was submitted with
Defendants' memorandum in opposition to Century Campus's summary
7We also note that Peter's execution of the 2005 Hana and 2006 Ohia
Agreements, without reference to the capacity in which he is signing, adds
further ambiguity.  The subject agreements designate Peter as "the initial
Owner Representative," but expressly limit his authority to the specific
authority set forth in the agreements.  1138 Student Suites and Ohia Student
Suites both appear to be "LLCs" or limited liability corporations, but the
subject agreements do not identify Peter's authority or capacity to act on
behalf of those entities – in particular, Peter's authority to enter into
agreements on their behalf, which agreements grant Peter, at least initially,
substantial authority under the agreements.
29NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
judgment motion was significant.8  As stated above, the issue on
summary judgment is whether there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact, thereby entitling the moving party to judgment as
a matter of law.  "A fact is material if proof of that fact would
have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties.
. . . [W]e must view all of the evidence and inferences drawn
therefrom in the light most favorable to the party opposing the
motion."  Nuuanu Valley Ass'n , 119 Hawai #i at 96, 194 P.3d at
537.  Although the Circuit Court did not err in granting summary
judgment on Defendants' third-party beneficiary theory, we
conclude that there was a genuine issue of material fact as to
whether Peter and/or 1138 Student Suites and Ohia Student Suites
were acting as the agents of Elda Hana and Kuhio Avenue
Development when Peter signed the 2005 Hana Agreement and the
2006 Ohia Agreement.  Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit
Court erred in part in granting summary judgment as to
Appellants' breach of contract claims in Counts III and IV, to
the extent that doing so foreclosed reaching the merits of
Defendants' claim that it was entitled to enforce the subject
agreements based on agency. 
8This should not be read as a determination that Defendants
conclusively established a principal-agent relationship with respect to these
agreements.   
30NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B.The Motion to Amend
In the Motion to Amend (and subsequent related
motions), Defendants sought to amend Counts I, II, III, IV, and V
of the Counterclaim, and to add claims for fraud in the
inducement, negligent misrepresentation, breach of fiduciary
duties, and constructive fraud.9  In the November 10, 2014
Amended Order, the Circuit Court allowed Defendants to amend the
Counterclaim with respect to Counts I and II, the breach of
contract claims arising out of the 2008 Management Agreements,
and Count V, the breach of the implied covenant of good faith and
fair dealing claim to the extent arising out of the 2008
Management Agreements, but denied Defendants' motion with respect
to the remaining requested amendments.
HRCP Rule 15(a) provides, in relevant part, that leave 
"shall be freely given" to a party to amend its pleading "when
justice so requires."  Although the granting or denial of an
amendment is discretionary, the Hawai# i Supreme Court has relied
on the following statement of the U.S. Supreme Court:
Rule 15(a) declares that leave to amend "shall be freely
given when justice so requires"; this mandate is to be
heeded.  If the underlying facts or circumstances relied
upon by a plaintiff may be a proper subject of relief, he
ought to be afforded an opportunity to test his claim on the
merits.  In the absence of any apparent or declared
reason-such as undue delay, bad faith or dilatory motive on
the part of the movant, repeated failure to cure
deficiencies by amendments previously allowed, undue
prejudice to the opposing party by virtue of allowance of
the amendment, futility of amendment, etc.-the leave sought
9The revised version of Defendants' proposed First Amended
Counterclaim, which was attached to Defendants' reply memorandum, was
referenced by the Circuit Court in the Amended Order and is the operative
version of the proposed First Amended Counterclaim.
31NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
should, as the rules require, be "freely given."  Of course,
the grant or denial of an opportunity to amend is within the
discretion of the District Court, but outright refusal to
grant the leave without any justifying reason appearing for
the denial is not an exercise of discretion; it is merely
abuse of that discretion and inconsistent with the spirit of
the Federal Rules.
Dejetley v. Kaho #ohalahala, 122 Hawai #i 251, 270, 226 P.3d 421,
440 (2010), quoting Foman v. Davis , 371 U.S. 178, 182 (1962)
(emphasis added by Hawai #i Supreme Court).
In Foman, the Supreme Court held that the court of
appeals erred in affirming the denial of a motion to vacate a
judgment to allow amendment of the complaint because, "[a]s
appears from the record, the amendment would have done no more
than state an alternative theory for recovery."  Foman, 371 U.S.
at 182.  In Dejetley , citing Foman, our supreme court held that 
amendment to the complaint therein would "do no more than state
an alternate theory for relief."  Dejetley, 122 Hawai #i at 270,
226 P.3d at 440 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
The supreme court rejected Kaho #ohalahala's assertion of
prejudice and concluded that the circuit court otherwise based
its denial on a wrong view of the law.  Id. at 270-71, 226 P.3d
at 440-41.  Accordingly, the supreme court concluded that there
was an abuse of discretion and reversed the lower court's order
denying leave to amend.  Id. at 271, 226 P.3d at 441.
Here, the Circuit Court enumerated eight grounds for
rejecting further amendments to the Counterclaim, entered no
findings thereon, and instead referenced the explanation and
authorities presented in Century Campus's opposition.  We address
32NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
these grounds in the context of the specific requested
amendments.
1.Breach of Contract Amendments
It appears that the first six grounds – improper
circumvention of the court's prior rulings on summary judgment,
law of the case, undue delay, inexcusable delay, undue prejudice
to opposing party, and futility based on statute of limitations – 
are applicable to the Defendants' request to amend Counts III
(breach of the 2006 Ohia Agreement) and IV (breach of the 2005
Hana Agreement) to more specifically reference their principal-
agent theory.
Century Campus argued to the Circuit Court, and argues
on appeal, that Appellants' request to amend Counts III and IV
was simply an attempt to circumvent the court's summary judgment
ruling and in contravention of the law of the case doctrine. 
However, as set forth above, the Circuit Court did not rule on
the merits of Appellants' principal-agent theory or on whether
there was a breach of contract.  Instead, the Circuit Court
rejected any substantive consideration of the agency argument,
because it was poorly presented in the written opposition, and
because it had not been specifically pled in the Counterclaim. 
The Circuit Court never considered the evidence supporting this
theory that was submitted in opposition to the summary judgment
motion.  Like the amendments sought in Foman and Dejetley, the
requested amendment to Counts III and IV "would do no more than
state an alternate theory for relief."  Dejetley, 122 Hawai #i at
33NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
270, 226 P.3d at 421 (citation to Foman and internal quotation
marks omitted).
This case is distinguishable from Tokuhisa, 122 Hawai #i
181, 223 P.3d 246, which is cited by Century Campus on appeal. 
In Tokuhisa , this court upheld the denial of amendment of an
unfair and deceptive trade practices (UDAP ) claim.  Id. at 191-
95, 223 P.3d at 256-60.  The original UDAP claim in Tokuhisa was
that the defendants had unlawfully marketed and sold insurance
without a proper certificate of insurance and a license to sell
insurance.  Id.  at 184, 223 P.3d at 249.  Summary judgment was
granted to the defendants on the grounds that the Vehicle Theft
Registration ( VTR) system was not insurance as a matter of law. 
Id. at 191, 223 P.3d at 256.  Thereafter, plaintiffs sought to
amend to add a different UDAP claim, pertaining to the sales and
marketing of the VTR system.  Id.  In that case, the court
reached the merits of the claim that was originally pled and then
plaintiffs sought to pursue a different UDAP claim.  In this
case, the Circuit Court never reached the merits of whether
Century Campus breached the 2005 Hana Agreement and the 2006 Ohia
Agreement.  Instead, it ruled that Defendants could not assert
the claims as third-party beneficiaries under Texas law.  Unlike
the plaintiffs in Tokuhisa , Defendants were not "afforded an
opportunity to test [their] claim on the merits."  Dejetley, 122
Hawai#i at 270, 226 P.3d at 421 (citation to Foman and internal
quotation marks omitted). 
34NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Under the circumstances of this case, improper
circumvention of summary judgment/law of the case does not
justify denial of the amendments to Counts III and IV.
Century Campus also asserts that Defendants unduly and
inexcusably delayed seeking the amendment and caused Century
Campus undue prejudice.  However, prejudicial or undue delay has
generally been found in cases where the movant has waited
multiple years or has repeatedly failed to cure deficiencies by
amendments previously allowed.  See, e.g., Adams v. Dole Food
Company, Inc., 132 Hawai# i 478, 488, 323 P.3d 122, 132 (App.
2014) (no undue delay one year after filing of complaint); Arthur
v. State, 135 Hawai# i 149, 169, 346 P.3d 218, 238 (App. 2015),
vacated on other grounds, 138 Hawai #i 85, 377 P.3d 26 (2016)
(this court found undue delay when there was a third request for
leave to amend more than four years after the filing of the
complaint).  Here, similar to Adams, and unlike in  Arthur,
amendment was sought less than two years after the Counterclaim
was filed and there were no previous amendment requests.  
The prejudice argued by Century Campus and incorporated
by reference by the Circuit Court was that Century Campus had
been forced to file two summary judgment motions.  On appeal,
Century Campus argues that they had already conducted "targeted
discovery on Appellants' claims related to the [2005 Hana and
2006 Ohia Agreements]" and then based on that discovery
successfully prosecuted summary judgment.  First, the claims of
breach of contract by Century Campus have not changed; the only
35NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
change is whether Appellants can prosecute the claims as
principals.  So, any discovery regarding the underlying claims is
still applicable to the defense on the merits of the claim.  In
addition, as noted above, the Circuit Court did not reach the
merits of the breach of contract claims on the summary judgment
motion.  As such, we are not persuaded that Century Campus would
suffer undue prejudice by having to face evidence and argument on
the merits of Appellants' contract claims.
Finally, based on Century Campus's argument, the
Circuit Court denied amendment of the contract claims arising out
of the 2005 Hana and 2006 Ohia Agreements on the grounds of
futility based on the statute of limitations.  On appeal, Century
Campus does not argue futility with respect to Counts III and IV. 
As argued by Appellants, the proposed amendments to Counts III
and IV relate back to the date of the original pleading.  See
HRCP Rule 15(c)(2) (amendment relates back when "the claim . . .
in the amended pleading arose out of the conduct, transaction, or
occurrence set forth or attempted to be set forth in the original
pleading").  "The trial court abuses its discretion if it bases
its ruling on an erroneous view of the law[.]"  Dejetley , 122
Hawai#i at 270-71, 266 P.3d at 440-41 (citation omitted).
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court refused
to grant leave to amend Counts III and IV without any justifying
reason for the denial.  Therefore, it abused its discretion.  Id.
at 270, 266 P.3d at 440, citing Foman, 371 U.S. at 182. 
36NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2.Fraud, Negligent Misrepresentation, and
Constructive Fraud Amendments
It appears that the first five and the seventh grounds
– improper circumvention of the court's prior rulings on summary
judgment, law of the case, undue delay, inexcusable delay, undue
prejudice to opposing party, and futility based on violation of
HRCP Rule 9(b) - are applicable to Defendants' request to add new
fraudulent inducement, negligent misrepresentation claims, and
constructive fraud claims.
In its original claim alleging fraudulent
representations, Count VI, Defendants alleged:
61. [Defendants] incorporate all of the allegations
set forth above as if fully stated herein.
62. By virtue of the foregoing, [Century Campus] has
made fraudulent representations to both [Kuhio Avenue
Development and Elda Hana] concerning amounts owed by
[Defendants] to [Century Campus].
63. As a result of the above, [Defendants] have been
damaged in amounts to be proven at trial and are entitled
to, among other things, punative damages, prejudgment
interest and attorneys' fees and costs.
The Circuit Court granted summary judgment in favor of
Century Campus and against Defendants on this claim, concluding
that "the [Defendants] have failed to present any evidence that
Century [Campus] made a false representation concerning the
amounts owed, and therefore, cannot satisfy the first element of
a fraud claim."10 
Century Campus argued to the Circuit Court, and argues
on appeal, that Appellants' request to add new Counts VII (Fraud
10The Circuit Court also noted that no fraud in the inducement claim
had been pled.
37NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
in the Inducement), VIII (Negligent Misrepresentation), XI and
XII (Constructive Fraud) was an attempt to circumvent the court's
summary judgment ruling and in contravention of the law of the
case doctrine.  Unlike with Counts III and IV, the Circuit Court
ruled on the merits of Count VI and determined that Defendants
presented no evidence supporting their claim.  Unlike with
Defendants' requested amendments to the breach of contract
claims, after the summary adjudication dismissing its false
representation claim, in the Motion to Amend, Defendants sought
to raise completely different misrepresentation claims:  (1) a
new Count VII, alleging that Century Campus fraudulently induced
Defendants to enter into the 2008 Kuhio Agreement and 2008 Elda
Agreement; (2) a new Count VIII, alleging, inter alia, that
Century Campus negligently misrepresented that the deficient
performance under the prior agreements was due to Peter's
interference and would be corrected, that the dorms would be
ready for the Fall 2008 school year, and that Century Campus's
management of the properties would exceed industry standards; (3)
a new Count XI, alleging, inter alia , that Century Campus engaged
in fraudulent activities with respect to the 2008 Kuhio and Elda
Agreements including charging its overhead, expenses related to
other projects, corporate software, travel, and other improper
expenses to the subject properties' operations; and (4) a new
Count XII, alleging fraudulent activities including misallocation
of charges with respect to the 2006 Ohia Agreement.  Again,
Century Campus asserted that it had conducted "targeted
38NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
depositions" to explore the factual viability of Defendants'
fraud claim.  Unlike with the discovery concerning Defendants'
breach of contract claims in Counts III and IV, discovery
concerning Defendants' original fraud claim would have little or
no applicability to the proposed new claims.  
We conclude that Defendants' request to add new and
different misrepresentation claims after its original claims were
dismissed on summary judgment is much like the Tokuhisa
plaintiffs' attempt to add a new and different UDAP claim. 
Indeed, as in Tokuhisa, the Circuit Court here reached the merits
of the misrepresentation claim that was originally pled before
Defendants sought to pursue different misrepresentation claims. 
Like the plaintiffs in Tokuhisa, Defendants were "afforded an
opportunity to test [their] claim on the merits."  Cf. Dejetley,
122 Hawai# i at 270, 226 P.3d at 421 (citation to Foman and
internal quotation marks omitted). 
Therefore, under the circumstances of this case, we
conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
denying Defendants' request to add four new misrepresentation
claims.  Accordingly, we need not reach the other grounds relied
on by the court.
3.Fiduciary Duty Amendments
It appears that the third, fourth, fifth, and eighth
grounds – undue delay, inexcusable delay, undue prejudice to
opposing party, and futility based on lack of an actionable claim 
39NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
- are applicable to Defendants' request to add new Counts IX and
X, breach of fiduciary duty claims.  
Century Campus argued, and the Circuit Court concluded
in part, that Defendants' request to add breach of fiduciary duty
claims were not actionable because Century Campus never acted in
a fiduciary capacity for Defendants.  Century Campus has cited no
cases or other legal authorities to support this assertion,
either before the Circuit Court or on appeal, instead arguing
"Century [Campus] is not aware of any case law supporting the
proposition that the two contracting parties in an arms-length
transaction of property management services are in a fiduciary
relationship."  Appellants cite a single case, an appeal from a
bankruptcy court's finding that a debt was, in part,
nondischargeable because "1) an express trust existed, 2) the
debt was caused by fraud or defalcation, and 3) the debtor acted
as a fiduciary to the creditor at the time the debt was created." 
In re Niles , 106 F.3d 1456, 1459 (9th Cir. 1997).  However, in
that case, there was no dispute that an express trust existed and
that the debtor was acting as a fiduciary with respect to a
property management account because the debtor was acting in her
capacity as a licensed real estate broker and California law
imposes a fiduciary duty.  Id.
Under Hawai #i law, to claim breach of fiduciary duty, a
plaintiff must show that a fiduciary relationship existed between
the parties, the defendant breached a fiduciary duty to the
plaintiff, and the breach proximately caused injury to the
40NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
plaintiff.  See Meheula v. Hausten , 29 Haw. 304, 314 (Haw. Terr.
1926).  This case is distinguishable from the case relied on by
Appellants, which relied on California law imposing a fiduciary
duty on a licensed broker.  Appellants present no other support
for their claim that a fiduciary duty, in addition to a
contractual duty, arose out of the parties' contractual
relationship in this case.  We cannot conclude that the Circuit
Court's denial was based on an erroneous view of the law.  Thus,
we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion
in denying Appellants' request to add new breach of fiduciary
duty claims.
C.Attorneys' Fees and Costs Appealed in CAAP-15-0000470
Appellants argue that Century Campus's Motion for Fees
and Costs was deemed denied by operation of law under HRAP Rule
4(a)(3).   At the time Century Campus filed its Motion for Fees
and Costs, HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) provided:11
(3) TIME TO APPEAL AFFECTED BY POST-JUDGMENT MOTIONS.
If any party files a timely motion for judgment as a matter
of law, to amend findings or make additional findings, for a
new trial, to reconsider, alter or amend the judgment or
order, or for attorney's fees or costs, the time for filing
the notice of appeal is extended until 30 days after the
entry of an order disposing of the motion; provided, that
the failure to dispose of any motion by order entered upon
the record within 90 days after the date the motion was
filed shall constitute a denial of the motion.   
HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) "provides that the court has 90 days
to dispose of [the post-judgment tolling motion] regardless of
when the notice of appeal is filed."  Buscher v. Boning , 114
11HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) was subsequently amended on June 4, 2015 and
March 7, 2016. 
41NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Hawai#i 202, 221, 159 P.3d 814, 833 (2007).  Furthermore, a post-
judgment motion is deemed denied when the trial court fails to
enter an order on the motion within ninety days after the filing
of the motion.  Cty of Haw. v. C & J Coupe Family Ltd. P'ship ,
119 Hawai# i 352, 367, 198 P.3d 615, 630 (2008).  
In the instant case, the Circuit Court entered the
Judgment on December 22, 2014.  Century Campus filed its Motion
for Fees and Costs on January 2, 2015.  Under HRAP Rule 4(a)(3),
the Circuit Court had ninety days or until April 2, 2015, to
dispose of the motion.  See HRAP Rule 26.  However, the Circuit
Court did not enter its Order Granting Fees until April 16, 2015. 
Under the plain language of HRAP Rule 4(a)(3), the Motion for
Fees and Costs was deemed denied on April 2, 2015.  As such, the
April 16, 2015 Order Granting Fees was a nullity for the purposes
of awarding fees and costs.  See In re Int'l Union of Painters &
Allied Trades, Painters Local Union 1791 v. Endo Painting Serv.
Inc., Nos. CAAP-12-0000661, CAAP-12-0001094, CAAP-13-0000187,
2015 WL 3649836 at *4 (Haw. App. June 10, 2015) (mem. op.).
On appeal, Century Campus argues that the Circuit Court
retains jurisdiction to enter an order disposing of a post-
judgment motion after the ninety day deadline under Ass'n of
Condominium Homeowners of Tropics at Waikele v. Sakuma, 131
Hawai#i 254, 256, 318 P.3d 94, 96 (2013).  In Sakuma, the
appellant filed a post-judgment motion for reconsideration on
June 7, 2012.  Id. at 255, 318 P.3d at 95.  The circuit court did
not dispose of the motion for reconsideration within ninety days. 
42NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Id.  The ICA determined that the motion for reconsideration was
deemed denied under HRAP Rule 4(a)(3) on September 5, 2012.  Id. 
The ICA concluded that appellant's notice of appeal was untimely
because it was not filed within ninety days of the deemed denial
of the motion.  Id.  The supreme court vacated the ICA's
dismissal order.  Id.  at 256, 318 P.3d at 96.  The supreme court
held that "when a timely post-judgment tolling motion is deemed
denied, it does not trigger the thirty-day deadline for filing a
notice of appeal until entry of the judgment or appealable order
pursuant to HRAP Rule 4(a)(1) and 4(a)(3)."  Id. at 256, 318 P.3d
at 96.  The supreme court did not disagree with the ICA's
determination that a motion is deemed denied when the circuit
court fails to dispose of the motion within ninety days.  Id.  at
255-56, 318 P.3d at 95-96.  Rather, the supreme court clarified
that the deadline for filing a notice of appeal is triggered by
the filing of an entry or order, and not by the deemed denial of
a post-judgment motion.  There is nothing in Sakuma to suggest
that a trial court may grant a post-judgment motion after it has
been deemed denied under HRAP Rule 4(a)(3).  As such, we are not
persuaded by Century Campus's reliance on Sakuma.     
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the April 16, 2015
Order Granting Fees.  Accordingly, we need not address the 
43NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
parties' remaining arguments regarding the award of attorneys'
fees and costs.12 
V.CONCLUSION
For these reasons, and as more specifically set forth
above, the Circuit Court's December 22, 2014 Judgment is affirmed
in part and vacated in part, the Amended Order is affirmed in
part and vacated in part, and the Order Granting Fees is vacated. 
This case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further
proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 31, 2018.
On the briefs:
R. Laree McGuire,
Linda E. Ichiyama,
(Jennifer M. Porter,
with them on the briefs
in No. CAAP-15-0000020),
(Porter McGuire Kiakona &
 Chow, LLP),
for Defendants/Counterclaim
 Plaintiffs-Appellants.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Randall K. Schmitt,
Jesse J.T. Smith,
(McCorriston Miller Mukai
 MacKinnon LLP),
for Plaintiff/Counterclaim
 Defendant-Appellee.
12This court's conclusion that the Order Granting Fees was deemed
denied should not be construed as deciding whether the Order Granting Fees was
otherwise infirm or premature or as precluding the Circuit Court from
reconsidering the Order Granting Fees on other grounds.
44