NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0005758
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
EUSTAQUIO UY and CARMELITA UY,
Plaintiffs/Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
v.
 
SPENCER HOMES, INC., A DOMESTIC FOR-PROFIT CORPORATION,
Defendant/Cross-Claim Plaintiff/Cross-Claim
Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
 
MICHAEL RILEY AND JADE RILEY, AS PARENTS OR GUARDIANS OF M.R.,
A MINOR; MICHAEL RILEY, AN INDIVIDUAL;
JADE RILEY, AN INDIVIDUAL,
Defendants/Cross-Claim Plaintiffs/Cross-Claim
Defendants/Appellee/Cross-Appellee,
 
RAE INOKUMA, AS PARENT OR GUARDIAN OF K.I., A MINOR;
and RAE INOKUMA, AN INDIVIDUAL,
Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/Cross-Claim
Plaintiff/Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
 
M.K. III, AN INDIVIDUAL; LUANA KAUPE, AN INDIVIDUAL; K.R.,
AN INDIVIDUAL; MARILYN REINHARDT-ORTIZ, AN INDIVIDUAL,
Defendants/Appellees/Cross-Claim Defendants/Cross-Appellees,
 
JOHN DOES 2-10, JANE DOES 6-10, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10,
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, AND DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants/Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0947)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J. and Fujise, J.,
with Ginoza, J. concurring and dissenting separately)
 
This case arises from property damage to a house caused
 
by a water tanker truck after it was operated and abandoned by
 
allegedly drunk teenagers. Plaintiffs/Appellants/Cross-Appellees
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Eustaquio Uy (Eustaquio) and Carmelita Uy (Carmelita) (together,
 
the Uys) appeal from the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit's1
 
(circuit court):
 
(1) "Third Amended Final Judgment" filed on November
 
14, 2013;
 
(2) "Order Granting Defendant Spencer Homes, Inc.'s
 
Motion for Judgment as a Matter of Law, and Defendant Rae
 
Inokuma, Individually, and as Parent to K.I., a Minor's Joinder
 to Motion, as to Plaintiffs' Claim for Stigma Damages, filed
 7/30/12" filed on September 24, 2012 (Stigma Damages Order);
 
(3) "Order Granting Defendant Spencer Homes, Inc.'s
 
Motion for Judgment Notwithstanding the Verdict With Regard to
 the Jury's Award of Punitive Damages, filed 8/15/12" filed on
 September 28, 2012 (Punitive Damages Order);
 
(4) "Order Denying Plaintiffs' Motion for Prejudgment
 
Interest Filed on 9/6/12" filed on November 14, 2012;
 
(5) "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 
Plaintiffs' Motion for Taxation of Costs Against Defendants Filed
 on 9/6/12" filed on November 14, 2012 (First Order on Taxation of
 
Costs);
 
(6) "Order Granting Defendant Rae Inokuma, Individually
 
and as Parent or Guardian of K.I., a Minor's, Motion for Taxation
 
of Costs Against [the Uys], filed on August 30, 2012" filed on
 November 23, 2012 (Second Order on Taxation of Costs); and
 
(7) "Order Granting Defendant Spencer Homes, Inc.'s
 
Motion for Costs Against [the Uys] filed on 9/7/12" filed on
 November 23, 2012.
 
Defendant/Cross-Claim Plaintiff/Cross-Claim Defendant/
 
Appellee/Cross-Appellant Spencer Homes, Inc. (Spencer Homes)
 
cross-appeals from the "Third Amended Final Judgment" filed on
 
November 14, 2013, and the circuit court's "Order Denying Spencer
 Homes, Inc.'s Motion for Judgment as a Matter of Law that
 Defendant Spencer Homes Owes No Duty to Plaintiffs" filed on
 September 28, 2012 (Order Denying Spencer Homes' Motion for JMOL
on Duty).
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/Cross-Claim
 
Plaintiff/Appellee/Cross-Appellant Rae Inokuma (Inokuma),
 
individually and as parent or guardian of "K.I.," cross-appeals
 
from the "Third Amended Final Judgment" filed November 14, 2013.
 
2
On appeal, the Uys contend  that the circuit court
erred by:
 
(1) granting, with prejudice, Spencer Homes' motion for
 
summary judgment as to all claims for bodily injury;
 
(2) deeming relevant and admissible evidence of the
 
Uy's collateral sources of funds, including homeowners insurance,
 in order to prove bias, interest, or motive;
 
(3) excluding the Uys' evidence explaining their
 
reasons for filing suit, which was that the Uys believed the
 offer from their homeowners insurance company would not be
 adequate to fix their home; 
(4) granting Spencer Homes' motion for directed verdict
 
on the issue of stigma damages; 
(5) granting Spencer Homes' motion for judgment
 
notwithstanding the verdict with regard to the jury's award of
 punitive damages; and
 
(6) enforcing the $50,000 offer made by Spencer Homes 
and Inokuma pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
Rule 68. 
On cross-appeal, Spencer Homes contends that the
 
circuit court erred by: 
(1) denying Spencer Homes' motion for judgment
 
regarding its duty to the Uys and thereby finding Spencer Homes
 owed a duty to protect the Uys from the criminal acts of third
 parties; and 
(2) denying Spencer Homes' motion for judgment
 
notwithstanding the verdict regarding Spencer Homes' duty to the
 
2
 The Uys' opening brief fails to comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(3) because it does not contain accurate
citations to the record; the Uys' opening brief cites to "ROA" but does notspecify the volume of the Record on Appeal (ROA) to which it refers, and theUys' page citations do not appear to correspond with any volume of the ROA.See HRAP Rule 28(b)(3) ("Record references shall include page citations andthe volume number, if applicable."). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Uys, again thereby finding that Spencer Homes owed a duty to
 
protect the Uys from the criminal acts of third parties.
 
On cross-appeal, Inokuma contends that the circuit
 
court erred by: 
(1) denying Inokuma's motion for judgment as a matter
 
of law (JMOL) as to the inapplicability of Hawaii Revised
 
3
Statutes (HRS) § 663-41 (Supp. 2014)  to the instant case because
there was inadequate evidence to support findings against Inokuma
 
and the statute was unconstitutionally vague; 

(2) denying Inokuma's motion for JMOL as to the

 
inexistence of her legal duty to control the intentional criminal
 conduct of Defendant M.K., the son of Defendant Luana Kaupe;
 M.R., the son of Defendants Michael and Jade Riley (collectively,
 the Rileys); and K.R., the son of Defendant Marilyn Reinhardt-
Ortiz (Reinhardt-Ortiz), and/or that the intentional criminal
 
conduct of M.K., M.R., and K.R. constituted a superseding cause
 
of the Uys' damages; and
 
(3) denying Inokuma's motion for JMOL on the issue of
 
punitive damages.
I.	 BACKGROUND
 
In the early morning on December 16, 2007, a water
 
tanker truck belonging to Spencer Homes rolled down a hill and on
 
to the Uys' property in Wailuku, Maui, causing damage to their
 rock wall and home. Later that morning, C.M., a friend of M.K.,
 
3
 HRS § 663-41(a) provides, in pertinent part:
 
§663-41 Right of action.  (a) Any person twenty-one
years or older who:
 
(1)	 Sells, furnishes, or provides alcoholic
beverages to a person under the age of
twenty-one years; or
 
(2)	 Owns, occupies, or controls premises on which
alcoholic beverages are consumed by any person
under twenty-one years of age, and who knows of
alcohol consumption by persons under twenty-one
years of age on such premises, and who
reasonably could have prohibited or prevented
such alcohol consumption;
 
shall be liable for all injuries or damages caused by the
intoxicated person under twenty-one years of age.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
filed an "unauthorized control of propelled vehicle" report with
 
Maui County Police Department that led to the arrest of M.K.
 
By letter dated March 27, 2009 and addressed to the
 
Uys, an Allstate Insurance Company (Allstate) agent stated, in
 
part:
 
As previously discussed, we were waiting to hear back from
you and your contractor to further discuss the necessary
repairs to your home as a result of this loss.
Unfortunately, we have not yet heard back from either of
you. 
In an effort to expedite your claim, enclosed please find a
copy of our MSB Adjuster Summary pertaining to the damages
to your home due to this incident, and a two-party
settlement check in the amount of $18,866.08 which
corresponds to this Summary.
 
In a repair estimate dated August 28, 2009, Badua
 
Contracting, LLC quoted $119,790.90 (Badua Estimate) as the cost
 
to repair the Uys' home. In a repair estimate dated September
 
20, 2009, Charles Sohn Construction Co., Inc. quoted $127,423.14
 (Sohn Estimate) as the cost of repairing the Uys' home. In an
 
email dated November 16, 2010, David Knox (Knox) of ConstRX, Ltd.
 
stated that he had conducted an analysis of the project site and
 
his company could undertake the repair of the Uys' home for an
 estimated cost of $25,158.
 
In a "Purchase Contract" and an "'As Is' Condition
 
Addendum," both dated November 6, 2009, the Uys contracted to
 sell their home for $375,000 upon the "special term" that the Uys
 agreed "to complete repairs to the damaged building structure
 prior to closing." The Uys did not repair or sell their home.
4
 
A. The pleadings and pre-trial proceedings
 
On December 14, 2009, the Uys filed their complaint
 
(Complaint) and demand for jury trial, which named as defendants: 
Spencer Homes; the parents or guardians of minors M.K., M.R.,
 
K.R., and Jane Doe (collectively, Defendants). The Uys alleged
 
that Spencer Homes "negligently failed to secure the water tanker
 
heavy equipment by failing to restrict access and by leaving a
 key in the water tanker heavy equipment." The Uys further
 alleged that the water tanker truck "rolled downhill, over the
 
4
 At trial on July 19, 2012, Carmelita testified that the Uys paid
approximately $4,000 to repair the wall and fence.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[their] rock wall and lawn, and crashed into their home, causing
 
substantial damage." The Uys also alleged that the minor
 defendants' parents or guardians "may have contributed to or be
 directly or vicariously responsible for the injuries suffered by
 [the Uys] . . . ."
 
The Complaint includes eight claims for relief. The
 
first claim alleged that Spencer Homes was liable to the Uys for
 negligence and gross negligence because it breached its "duty to
 exercise reasonable care to eliminate and/or protect against
 hazards to residents in the area where its heavy equipment was
 used and stored." The second claim alleged that the minor
 Defendants' parents or guardians were liable to the Uys for
 negligence and gross negligence because they failed "to protect
 against their children entering" the water tanker truck owned by
 Spencer Homes. The third claim alleged that Spencer Homes was
 liable to the Uys because it failed to protect against a known
 hazard - the "unattended, unlocked, and accessible" water tanker
 truck. The fourth claim alleged that Spencer Homes was liable to
 the Uys because the water tanker truck was an attractive
 nuisance. The fifth claim alleged that all defendants were
 liable for negligent infliction of emotional distress because the
 Uys "suffered severe and devastating emotional distress as a
 result of [Spencer Homes' water tanker] truck crashing into their
 home in the middle of the night[.]" The sixth claim alleged that
 all Defendants were liable for the Uys' economic losses incurred
 as a result of the accident. The seventh claim alleged that all
 Defendants were liable for the Uys' loss of consortium that
 resulted from the accident. The eighth claim alleged that all
 Defendants were liable for punitive damages.
 
On March 29, 2010, Spencer Homes filed its answer to
 
the Uys' First Amended Complaint. Spencer Homes contended, inter
 alia, that its alleged negligent acts or omissions were not the
 cause of the accident, it had no duty to the Uys, it breached no
 duty to the Uys, the alleged negligent acts or omissions of the
 other Defendants caused the accident, and that the Uys were
 precluded from recovery because they failed to mitigate their
 damages.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On September 21, 2010, the Uys filed a "Second Amended
 
Complaint" adding Luana Kaupe, the Rileys, Reinhardt-Ortiz, K.R.,
 
and Inokuma as defendants. The Second Amended Complaint alleged
 that Inokuma was liable for negligence because on December 15,
 2007, she "furnished and/or permitted alcohol to be consumed in
 her home" by the defendants who were minors at the time of the
 accident.
 
On October 7, 2010, Spencer Homes filed its answer to
 
the Second Amended Complaint and a cross-claim against M.K.,
 Luana Kaupe, the Rileys, M.R., Reinhardt-Ortiz, and Inokuma.
 Spencer Homes' cross-claim alleged that if Spencer Homes "was in
 any way negligent, engaged in any wrongful conduct and/or failed
 any duty," it should be fully indemnified by the cross-defendants
 because while their "negligence, omissions, and/or other wrongful
 conduct was active and primary," Spencer Homes "was only
 secondary and passive[.]"
 
On October 14, 2010, Inokuma filed her answer to the
 
Second Amended Complaint and a cross-claim against Spencer Homes,
 M.K., Luana Kaupe, the Rileys, K.R., and Reinhardt-Ortiz.
 Inokuma's cross-claim essentially alleged that she was in no way
 liable for the damage to the Uys' home and that the actions or
 omissions of the other Defendants caused the accident. Inokuma's
 cross-claim also alleged that if she was found liable, the other
 Defendants must be found jointly and severally liable and Inokuma
 must be found "entitled to reimbursement, contribution, and/or
 indemnity from Cross-Claim Defendants."
 
Inokuma testified to the following version of events in
 
her January 12, 2011 deposition. At the time of the water tanker
 truck accident, Inokuma lived at her house in Wailuku (the
Inokuma residence) with her boyfriend and two of her three
 
daughters. On December 15, 2007, she and her boyfriend returned
 
home from dinner around 9 p.m. and went to her bedroom around
 10:00 p.m. Inokuma's daughters, R.I. and K.I., were home at the
 time. Sometime around 11 P.M. or midnight, Inokuma woke up
 because she heard loud noises coming from the garage area. 
Inokuma heard people "talking and laughing and screaming and
 tickling." Inokuma went to the garage door to tell K.I. to come
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in the house and saw a truck in the driveway. K.I., K.I.'s
 
boyfriend - M.K., C.M., and others were in the garage and on the
 driveway. Inokuma was upset and told K.I. to come in the house
 and the others to leave. K.I. complied and her visitors packed
 up their things and someone started up the truck. Inokuma went
 back to bed. Inokuma awoke later that night when she heard what
 she believed to be K.I. and someone talking in the garage.
 Because Inokuma did not feel well and did not want to leave her
 bedroom, she called K.I.'s cell phone and told her to come back
 into the house. K.I. complied and told Inokuma "good night."
 Early the next morning, Inokuma received a call from Mark Spencer
 (Spencer), the project manager for Spencer Homes at the time of
 
the incident, from K.I.'s phone. Inokuma believes that Spencer
 
said "I've just found [K.I.'s] phone in one of my water trucks
 that ran into your neighbor's yard." Inokuma got up to check on
 K.I. and found her and M.K. in K.I.'s room, another person
 sleeping on the floor in K.I.'s room, and "people all over the
 living room."
 
Inokuma denied witnessing her daughters or any of their
 
friends consuming alcohol at the Inokuma residence. Inokuma
 stated that she prohibited underage drinking in her house and her
 daughters knew of this rule, but she kept wine, beer, and hard
 liquor in the house.
 
In his February 24, 2011 deposition, Spencer said that
 
to his best recollection, in December 2007, Spencer Homes stored
 three or four water tanker trucks adjacent to the Waikapu
 Subdivision construction site in an open field. Spencer stated
 that "[t]here would normally be a set area where [the water
 tanker truck] was parked. As we moved through the site work for
 such a large project, that site would move as we moved with the –
 our site work." Spencer said Spencer Homes kept the keys to its
 heavy equipment in its office and issued keys to certain
 employees that drove the heavy equipment on a daily basis.
 
In his March 28, 2011 deposition, Spencer Homes'
 
representative David Brown (Brown) testified that he "believed"
 
the water tanker truck had door locks in December 2007 but did
 
not know if they were in working condition at that time; the door
 
8
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
locks on the water tanker truck were currently not working; the
 
normal practice was for the employee who was the last to use the
 water tanker truck was the one who had the keys; he was not aware
 of the identity of the last employee that drove the water tanker
 truck before the accident; and he did not know if Spencer Homes
 kept a record of which employee drove which equipment on any
 given day. Brown agreed that the operation of the water tanker
 truck by an untrained person could be a threat to the safety of
 the motoring public.
 
On May 18, 2011, Spencer Homes and Inokuma jointly
 
offered a pretrial settlement offer of $50,000 pursuant to HRCP
 
5
Rule 68,  which the Uys rejected.
On August 18, 2011, Spencer Homes moved for summary

 
judgment on the Uys' bodily injury claims. Spencer Homes argued
 that the Uys' bodily injury claims were barred because they were
 not pled in conformance with the requirements to sustain a tort
 claim under HRS § 431:10C-306(b)(1)-(4) (2005 Repl.).
6
 
5	 HRCP Rule 68, provides, in pertinent part:
 
Rule 68. OFFER OF SETTLEMENT OR JUDGMENT.
 
At any time more than 10 days before the trial begins,
any party may serve upon any adverse party an offer of
settlement or an offer to allow judgment to be taken against
either party for the money or property or to the effect
specified in the offer, with costs then accrued. . . . If
the judgment finally obtained by the offeree is not more
favorable than the offer, the offeree must pay the costs
incurred after the making of the offer.
 
6
 HRS § 431:10C-306 abolishes tort liability for "accidental harm
arising from motor vehicle accidents occurring in this State" but provides in
part that:
 
§431:10C-306 Abolition of tort liability.
 
. . . .
 (b) Tort liability is not abolished as to the
following persons, their personal representatives, or their
legal guardians in the following circumstances:
 
(1)	 Death occurs to the person in such a motor
vehicle accident;
 
(2)	 Injury occurs to the person which consists, in
whole or in part, in a significant permanent
loss of use of a part or function of the body;
 
(3)	 Injury occurs to the person which consists of a
permanent and serious disfigurement which
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On September 19, 2011, the Uys filed their opposition
 
to Spencer Homes' motion for summary judgment on bodily injury
 
claims. The Uys argued that HRS § 431:10C-306(e)(1) (2005 Repl.)
 exempted their claims from the $5,000 threshold under HRS
 § 431:10C-306(b)(4) because Spencer Homes failed to maintain its
 equipment in a non-defective state. HRS § 431:10C-306(e)(1)
 provides: 
(e) No provision of this article shall be construed
to exonerate, or in any manner to limit:
 
(1)	 The liability of any person in the business of
manufacturing, retailing, repairing, servicing,
or otherwise maintaining motor vehicles, arising
from a defect in a motor vehicle caused, or not
corrected, by an act or omission in the
manufacturing, retailing, repairing, servicing,
or other maintenance of a vehicle in the course
 of the person's business[.]
 
On October 20, 2011, the circuit court entered the
 
order granting Spencer Homes' motion for summary judgment as to
 
all claims for bodily injury.
 
On February 9, 2012, the Uys filed their motion in
 
limine no. 1 to exclude references to the their homeowners'
 insurance, interactions between them and their insurance
 companies after the collision, and any offers made by their
 insurance company for the repair of their home.
 
On July 18, 2012, the circuit court granted the Uys'
 
motion in limine no. 1 to preclude evidence of the Uys'
 homeowners insurance and any adjuster summaries or offers.
 
On February 13, 2012, Spencer Homes filed their motion
 
in limine no. 5 to preclude the Uys' punitive damages claim
 against Spencer Homes.
B.	 The testimonies of M.K. and M.R.
 
M.K., who was seventeen years old at the time of the
 
water tanker truck accident, testified at trial to the following
 
version of events. On the evening of December 15, 2007, M.K.
 
results in subjection of the injured person to
mental or emotional suffering; or
 
(4)	 Injury occurs to the person in a motor vehicle
accident and as a result of such injury that the
personal injury protection benefits incurred by
such person equal or exceed $5,000[.]
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
went to the Inokuma residence to hang out with K.I. and two of
 
her girlfriends. C.M. picked up M.K., K.I., and one of K.I.'s
 girlfriends, and they drove to pick up M.R. The group then drove
 to Hawaiian Homes to pick up another friend. The group then
 drank vodka, provided by C.M., out of water bottles while
 "cruising" in the car for about two hours, and then drove to
 Lower Waiehu Beach. After hanging out at the beach for a while
 the group left. They drank some more vodka in the car while
 driving to pick up K.R. at Hawaiian Homes and dropping off the
 other friend. They drove to the Inokuma residence, arriving
 around 10 or 11 p.m.
 
The group entered the Inokuma residence through the
 
front door and "talked story" in the living room while drinking
 more vodka. When their two water bottles from earlier in the
 night were empty, M.K. grabbed vodka from Inokuma's kitchen, went
 in to K.I.'s room, and filled the bottles up with Inokuma's vodka
 so that the group could continue drinking. The group hung out in
 the living room and K.I.'s bedroom for about an hour or two and
 consumed "more than two [water] bottles" of vodka, one of which
 was filled with Inokuma's vodka. On a scale of one to ten,
 M.K.'s level of intoxication at the Inokuma residence after
 midnight was a "ten or 11." While they were drinking, Inokuma
 came out of her bedroom, walked through the living room past the
 group, went into the kitchen to get a glass of water, and then
 went back to her bedroom. Sometime thereafter, C.M., Nohea, and
 K.I. fell asleep.
 
Around 2 or 3 a.m., M.K. asked C.M. if he could borrow
 
his truck to go get food with M.R. and K.R., and C.M. said "yeah,
 yeah, go." On the way to get food, M.K. "got crazy on the side
 of" a dirt road in Wailuku and tried to do "doughnuts" with the
 truck. He lost control of the truck and crashed into a ditch.
 Unable to get the truck out of the ditch, M.K., M.R., and K.R.
 began walking back to the Inokuma residence. The three young men
 took a shortcut through an unlit construction site and found a
 water tanker truck that was not guarded by a fence or a security
 guard and had no blocks around the tires. After jumping up on
 the truck and discovering that the doors were unlocked, they
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entered the truck and discovered that the keys were in the
 
ignition. With M.R. and K.R. as passengers, M.K. turned the
 truck on and started driving it towards another construction site
 near the Inokuma residence where he intended to drop it off.
 
When the three young men drove up on the second
 
construction site, M.K. saw a security guard on duty at the site
 and turned the water tanker truck around so that it was facing
 downhhill. When the security guard came up right behind the
 water tanker truck, the young men "panicked," M.K. stopped the
 truck and turned it off, and then the three young men jumped out
 of the truck and started running to the Inokuma residence. As he
 was running, M.K. saw the water tanker truck roll down the hill
 in the direction of the Uys' house and heard the truck crashing
 into their house after he had run out of view. M.K. was arrested
 the next morning at the Inokuma residence.
 
M.R., who was fifteen years old at the time of the
 
water tanker truck accident, also testified at trial. His
 testimony corroborated M.K.'s, except that M.R. testified the
 group drank vodka and rum at the Inokuma residence on the night
 of the water tanker truck accident. He also testified that while
 at the Inokuma residence, the group drank the alcohol from liquor
 bottles, not water bottles and that M.K. took C.M.'s truck
 without asking because C.M. was asleep and that C.M. had let M.K.
 borrow his truck in the past. M.R. testified that he believed
 Inokuma was home while they were drinking because her bedroom
 light was on when they got there. M.R. stated that the group
 drank in the Inokuma residence living room for a few hours with
 the lights on while watching TV and were not trying to be quiet.
 M.R. stated that at the time of the accident his level of
 intoxication was a "ten out of ten." On the morning of December
 16, 2007, C.M. woke him up at the Inokuma residence to say his
 truck was stolen.
 
M.K. and M.R. also testified about their history of
 
drinking alcohol at the Inokuma residence prior to the accident. 
M.K. testified that during the fall of 2007, he and M.R. drank
 alcohol at the Inokuma residence at least once a week on the
 weekends; never took alcohol with them to the Inokuma residence;
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Inokuma kept wine, beer, and liquor in the house and had
 
served M.K. alcohol at least once a week; that Inokuma would
 drink alcohol with her daughters and certain friends such as
 himself and M.R.; that he had permission to help himself to
 Inokuma's alcohol and that Inokuma had witnessed him helping
 himself to her alcohol; and that he considered all of the alcohol
 he drank at the Inokuma residence to belong to Inokuma. M.R.
 testified that on Friday and Saturday nights during the fall of
 2007, he and his friends drank alcohol at the Inokuma residence. 
On the weekends, Inokuma would be home and would witness M.R. and
 his friends drinking alcohol. M.R. testified that Inokuma
 provided the alcohol and sometimes drank alcohol with them; that
 he would get "very intoxicated" at the Inokuma residence and
 sometimes "black out" and "puke"; and that he would sleep in the
 living room of the Inokuma residence after drinking, waking the
 next morning with a hangover.
C. Repair costs and insurance.
 
On July 17, 2012, Arne LaPrade (LaPrade), a witness
 
with expertise in building construction and the scope and cost of
 
construction repairs, testified that the cost to repair the Uys'
 home in 2011 would have been $93,000. LaPrade testified that his
 recommended repairs would correct all accident-related damage and
 restore the house to its pre-accident condition.
 
On July 19, 2012, Carmelita testified that she and
 
Eustaquio paid $720,090 for the home in July 2006. Carmelita
 testified that after the accident she called her insurance
 company and contractors to get a estimate for the cost of
 repairing the damage. Carmelita testified, "I did call several
 contractors to come to my house. They did come. They look at
 it. They never come back to fix our house." Carmelita testified
 that they attempted to sell their home in its unrepaired state in
 June 2009 with a listed price of $575,000. Carmelita testified
 that they received only one offer of $375,000 in November 2009,
 but that they did not accept the offer because it was contingent
 on the completion of the repairs on the house and they had not
 fixed the house.
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At the July 19, 2012 hearing, Inokuma's attorney,
 
Curtis C. Kim (Kim) argued that the circuit court should revisit
 
its grant of the Uys' motion in limine no. 1. Kim argued that
 
the prohibition against references to liability insurance under
 
7
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 411  was inapplicable because
it pertained only to the liability insurance of tortfeasors and
 
further, the Allstate letter was being offered for the purpose of
 refuting the Uys' position that they did not have the opportunity
 to fix their house. Kim argued the Uys were "trying to portray
 this case as one in which these poor people simply had no means
 and no opportunity to fix their house. . . . And it's totally
 inaccurate and totally untrue. . . . That is straight bias,
 interest, or motive evidence." The Uys argued that evidence of
 their homeowners' insurance was barred by the collateral source
 rule. The circuit court stated that it felt it had "to give
 defense counsel some leeway into following up as far as bias,
 interest, and motive" but the ruling on motion in limine no. 1
 still stood. The circuit court sought suggestions from counsel
 about whether a particular limiting instruction could be given to
 the jury to keep questions about the Uys' homeowner's insurance
 "proper."
 
At its July 23, 2012 hearing, the circuit court stated
 
that it would allow Kim to inquire into whether the home could
 have been repaired and the Uys' decision not to pursue that
 avenue. At this hearing, the Uys offered Carmelita as an expert
 in the field of real estate. Carmelita testified that she had
 been a licensed realtor since 2004, had not researched the value
 of homes that had been similarly damaged, and had "no idea" what
 the value for a home that had been damaged would be. The circuit
 
7
 HRE Rule 411 provides:
 
Rule 411 Liability insurance.  Evidence that a person
was or was not insured against liability is not admissible
upon the issue whether the person acted negligently or
otherwise wrongfully. This rule does not require the
exclusion of evidence of insurance against liability when
offered for another purpose, such as proof of agency,
ownership, or control, or bias or prejudice of a witness. 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court found Carmelita to be an expert in the field of real
 
estate, but not in the field of damaged homes or stigma damages.
 
Kim introduced into evidence, a notice of intent to
 
foreclose on the Uys' home into evidence. Kim also introduced
 documents titled "Short Sale Addendum to Purchase Contract" and
 "Distressed Property Addendum to Purchase Contract" which
 referenced the proposed November 6, 2009 purchase contract for
 the Uys' home. Carmelita testified the Uys' property was
 classified as "distressed" because it was in the process of being
 foreclosed upon. Carmelita stated that in November 2009 the real
 estate market "was at rock bottom" and the market had improved
 since November 2009; confirmed she had not attempted to sell
 their house since November 2009; and acknowledged that the
 damages to her house had worsened in the four and a half years
 since the accident.
 
Upon redirect examination of Carmelita, the Uys
 
attempted to introduce the Allstate letter. Outside of the
 presence of the jury, the circuit court heard arguments from the
 parties' counsel as to whether the Uys should be allowed to
 present arguments and evidence concerning the Uys' homeowner's
 insurance and the reasons they filed the Complaint. The Uys
 argued that Inokuma and Spencer Homes had pointed out that the
 Uys had not attempted to sell their home after the November 2009
 offer did not go through and that they should be able to explain
 (1) why they did not fix the home; (2) why they put their home on
 the market in "as is" condition; and (3) how they "spiraled into
 the foreclosure."
 
Kim argued that the Distressed Property and Short Sale
 
documents were part of the November 6, 2009 purchase contract
 introduced by the Uys and had not expanded the scope to include
 the Uys' proposed areas of inquiry; the Uys were relying on the
 November 6, 2009 offer in order to establish stigma damages; and
 the purpose of the November 6, 2009 offer was "an attempt to
 compromise the mortgage and to get the [Uys] and the bank to be
 able to walk away." Kim argued that the Allstate letter was
 beyond the scope of his cross-examination and should not be
 admitted. Spencer Homes' counsel did not object to the admission
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the Allstate letter, but stated that if it were admitted he
 
would use it to "declare a failure to mitigate claim."
 
The circuit court decided not to allow the Uys to
 
discuss their homeowner's insurance and found that "the door has
 not been opened" and that the topic was beyond the scope of the
 cross-examination.
 
In the afternoon session of the July 23, 2012 hearing,
 
the circuit court at first sustained objections to the Uys'
 counsel's attempts to admit the Badua Estimate and Sohn Estimate
 upon objection that they were hearsay and had not been moved into
 evidence. During the same proceedings, the circuit court heard
 arguments from parties' counsel concerning the Badua Estimate and
 Sohn Estimate. Spencer Homes had no objection to admitting the
 two estimates. The Uys' counsel argued it would be unfair to
 admit evidence of the Allstate letter without also admitting the
 Badua Estimate and Sohn Estimate, but also clarified that she was
 not offering the Allstate letter at that time. The circuit court
 stated it would not receive the Allstate letter into evidence at
 that time.
 
Upon direct examination at the July 23, 2012 hearing,
 
Carmelita testified that the Uys listed the price of their home
 as $575,000 because "a couple of properties were sold" for over
 $600,000. Over objection, the Uys' attorney inquired if "the
 comparable that you found for $620[,000], was is [sic] similar to
 your house?" Carmelita affirmed that it was.
 
At the close of Carmelita's direct examination, the
 
court gave the jury the following limiting instruction: "during
 the course of the questioning, you will hear questions about
 homeowners insurance. You should not consider the testimony
 whatsoever for the consideration of the damages."
 
Spencer Homes then cross-examined Carmelita. Carmelita
 
said she called the Allstate adjuster who said she would send a
 contractor, but the contractor never came so Carmelita got
 estimates in August or September and gave them to Allstate. On
 July 31, 2012, Knox testified that on November 15, 2010, his
 construction company prepared a repair estimate for the Uys' home
 in the amount of $25,158. Knox said he reviewed materials sent
 
16
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to him from the employee who conducted the site visit of the Uys'
 
home and found the damages "did not look like a complex issue,
 certainly well within what I normally do in sending somebody for
 an initial inspection[.]"
D. Construction equipment
 
On July 25, 2012, Charles Kulesa (Kulesa) appeared on
 
behalf of Spencer Homes. Kulesa testified that in December 2007,
 the contruction site had twenty-five or thirty pieces of movable
 construction equipment, including the water tanker truck. Kulesa
 testified that no commercial licensed driver was needed for the
 water tanker truck because it was only driven on private
 property.
 
Kulesa testified that Spencer Homes did not maintain a
 
record of which drivers were using different pieces of equipment
 on a daily basis; there was no gate or other obstruction to
 prevent someone from entering the construction site; Spencer
 Homes had not hired a security guard prior to December 16, 2007;
 and no alarm devices were installed in their vehicles. Kulesa
 testified that Spencer Homes did not have a policy regarding
 locking the doors of its heavy equipment, but noted that "a lot
 of the heavy equipment doesn't have doors on it and so there is
 no lock to lock." Kulesa denied knowledge of whether or not the
 doors on the water tanker truck had locking capabilities. Kulesa
 testified that "the general practice was to close the door on the
 vehicle when a work day was done[.]" Kulesa testified that key
 access to the water tanker truck was limited to four or five
 employees.
 
Kulesa testified that Spencer Homes had one key to the
 
water tanker truck and it would be in the possession of the
 employee who last drove the water tanker truck. Kulesa denied
 knowledge of employees leaving the key in the water tanker truck
 cab for convenience and acknowledged Spencer Homes did not have a
 central repository for the water tanker truck key or a sign-out
 system for tracking the key. Kulesa testified that Spencer
 Homes' policy was "[t]hat if an individual had planned not to be
 in to work on the following workday or over the weekend or
 whatever, that he would have handed off his key to another guy." 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kulesa acknowledged that the operation of the water tanker truck
 
by an untrained person would be a threat to the motoring public,
 and that he himself would not be able to safely park the water
 tanker truck.
 
On July 30, 2012, Spencer testified that no heavy
 
equipment had ever been stolen from the Waikapu construction site
 other than the water tanker truck on the morning of the accident,
 but that a Jeep and a flat-bed truck had been stolen and the
 thefts were reported to the police. Counsel for Spencer Homes
 argued that at the time of the accident, there was "no reason"
 for Spencer Homes to hire security for its construction site.
E. Motions
 
On July 30, 2012, Spencer Homes moved for directed
 
verdicts on the Uys' claims for negligence and stigma damages on
 the grounds that it did not have a duty to protect the Uys from
 the criminal acts of third parties and that the Uys had not
 established that their home would not return to its pre-accident
 value if repaired, respectively. Inokuma took no position on the
 Spencer Homes' motion for a directed verdict on its duty and
 joined in the motion for a directed verdict on stigma damages.
 The circuit court denied Spencer Homes' directed verdict motion
 on the issue of duty. The circuit court found "no evidence that
 lingering negative public perception would exist even after the
 house is fully repaired and there is no evidence for diminution
 of value after the property is repaired[;]" "no experts or
 appraisers testified as to stigma[;]" "no comparisons to a
 similarly damaged home[;]" "no opinion as to the amount of stigma
 that existed or the methods used to determine stigma[;]" and
 "[Carmelita's] testimony cannot establish stigma because she was
 not qualified as an expert on this issue . . . [and] had no prior
 experience or knowledge regarding stigma or damaged homes."
 
Inokuma made several oral motions at the July 30, 2012
 
hearing: (1) for JMOL that Inokuma had no actual knowledge of
 alcohol consumption by minors at her residence on the night of
 December 15 through December 16, 2007; (2) for a finding that
 insufficient evidence existed to establish that M.K., M.R., and
 K.R. were legally intoxicated at the time the water tanker truck
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was abandoned; (3) for a finding that insufficient evidence
 
existed to attribute the source of the minors' alcohol was the
 Inokuma residence; (4) for JMOL that Inokuma had no duty to
 control the behavior of M.K., M.R., and K.R. on the basis that no
 special relationship existed; and (5) for a finding that the
 intentional criminal conduct of M.K., K.R., and M.R. were
 superseding causes of the Uys' damages.
 
Specifically, Inokuma argued that no special
 
relationship existed between herself and the three young men
 because "[s]he was never their legal guardian, never their
 adopted parent, never agreed to supervise them or anything like
 that." With regard to Inokuma's motion for a finding that the
 three young men were the superseding causes of the Uys' damages,
 Inokuma argued that even if she was negligent, her negligence was
 passive and therefore superseded by the intentional criminal
 conduct of the three young men. The Uys opposed all of Inokuma's
 oral motions.
 
On August 2, 2012, the Uys filed a motion for JMOL as
 
to the liability of Spencer Homes.
 
At its August 3, 2012 hearing, the circuit court denied
 
Spencer Homes' motion for JMOL that Spencer Homes owed no duty to
 the Uys. The circuit court found that a duty existed because
 there was a special relationship on behalf of Spencer Homes and
 Inokuma to protect the Uys from the criminal acts of third
 parties.
F. Verdict
 
On August 8, 2012, the jury returned its verdict,
 
finding Spencer Homes, Inokuma, Luana Kaupe, the Rileys, and
 Reinhardt-Ortiz negligent and liable for damages in the amount of
 $42,500. Inokuma was found liable for damages under HRS § 663­41.
 
As relevant to the instant appeal, the special verdict
 
form included the following questions and answers:
 
(1) Question No. 9 asked if Inokuma was liable to the
 
Uys under HRS § 663-41, and the jury answered "Yes";
 
(2) Question No. 10 asked the jury to allocate
 
liability for the Uys' property damage, which the jury did as
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
follows: Spencer Homes (30%), Luana Kaupe (60%), the Rileys
 
(2.5%), Reinhardt-Ortiz (2.5%), and Inokuma (as an individual)
 (5%); and
 
(3) Question No. 13 asked if punitive damages should be
 
awarded against the defendants, and the jury answered in the
 affirmative and awarded punitive damages against Spencer Homes in
 the amount of $12,500 and against Inokuma (as an individual) in
 the amount of $5,000.
 
G.
 More motions, costs and Judgment
 
On August 15, 2012, Spencer Homes filed a motion for
 
JMOL that it owed no duty to the Uys. Spencer Homes argued that
 it had no duty to protect the Uys from the criminal acts of the
 minor defendants because no special relationship existed between
 Spencer Homes and the Uys or the minor defendants.
 
On August 15, 2012, Spencer Homes filed a renewed
 
motion for JMOL with regard to the jury's award of punitive
 damages.
 
On August 30, 2012, Inokuma filed a motion for taxation
 
of costs against the Uys.
 
On August 31, 2012, Inokuma filed a substantive joinder
 
to Spencer Homes' renewed motion for JMOL with regard to the
 jury's award of punitive damages.
 
On September 6, 2012, the Uys filed a motion for
 
taxation of costs against all defendants. The Uys sought
 $47,772.28 in costs, but did not distinguish costs incurred prior
 to the May 18, 2011 settlement offer from those incurred
 afterwards.
 
On September 7, 2012, Spencer Homes filed a motion for
 
costs against the Uys and an exhibit listing total costs in the
 amount of $24,813.10.
 
On September 24, 2012, the circuit court filed its
 
order denying Spencer Homes' motion in limine no. 5 to preclude
 the Uys' punitive damages claim against Spencer Homes. On the
 same day, the circuit court filed its Stigma Damages Order
 granting Spencer Homes' motion for JMOL, and Inokuma's joinder to
 the motion, as to the Uys' claim for stigma damages. 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Also on September 24, 2012, the circuit court filed its
 
order denying Spencer Homes' motion for JMOL that it owed no duty
 
to the Uys.
 
On September 28, 2012, the circuit court filed its
 
Punitive Damages Order granting Spencer Homes' renewed motion for
 JMOL with regard to the jury's award of punitive damages, which
 reduced the Uys' award by $12,500.
 
On October 23, 2012, the Uys filed their notice of
 
taxation of costs, appending a schedule of cost expenses totaling
 $13,887.53.
 
On November 9, 2012, the Uys filed an amended notice of
 
taxation of costs in the amount of $12,107.43. The Uys' attorney
 declared that this amount represented costs incurred up until May
 19, 2011.
 
On November 14, 2012, the circuit court filed its First
 
Order on Taxation of Costs granting in part and denying in part
 the Uys' motion for taxation of costs against all defendants. 
The circuit court awarded the Uys costs as the prevailing party
 from December 16, 2007, the date of the subject incident, through
 May 19, 2011, the date Spencer Homes and Inokuma served an offer
 of settlement, which limited the Uys' recovery of costs pursuant
 to HRCP Rule 68.
 
On November 23, 2012, the circuit court filed an order
 
granting Spencer Homes' motion for costs against the Uys.
 
Also on November 23, 2012, the circuit court filed its
 
Second Order on Taxation of Costs granting Inokuma's motion for
 taxation of costs against the Uys, which awarded Inokuma
 $27,150.86 in costs.
 
On January 29, 2013, the circuit court entered its
 
Final Judgment. The Final Judgment was entered in favor of the
 Uys and against all defendants, and specified that, inter alia,
 all defendants were jointly and severally liable to the Uys in
 the amount of $42,500 for property damage, and that Inokuma was
 individually liable for punitive damages in the amount of $5,000. 
Because the Uys were prevailing parties in the action, the
 circuit court awarded them $12,107.43 in costs. The Final
 Judgment allowed Inokuma and Spencer Homes to recover costs
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
accrued after May 18, 2011, the date of their HRCP Rule 68
 
settlement offer, in the amounts of $27,150.86 to Inokuma and
 $24,813.10 to Spencer Homes.
 
On February 6, 2013, the circuit court filed its order
 
granting the Uys' November 9, 2012 amended notice of taxation of
 costs. The circuit court awarded the Uys' costs against Spencer
 Homes and Inokuma, jointly and severally, in the amount of
 $12,107.43.
 
Also on February 6, 2013, the circuit court filed its
 
order denying the Uys' motion for JMOL as to the liability of
 Spencer Homes.
 
On February 8, 2013, Inokuma filed a motion to alter or
 
amend the Final Judgment on the basis that it failed to state the
 attribution of liability amongst the defendants; failed to set
 forth specific amounts owed by each defendant pursuant to the
 jury verdict; and improperly stated that Inokuma's cross-claims
 for contribution were dismissed.
 
On February 12, 2013, the Uys filed their notice of
 
appeal from the Final Judgment and six underlying orders in
 appellate case no. CAAP-13-0000088.
 
On March 11, 2013, Spencer Homes filed a substantive
 
joinder to Inokuma's February 8, 2013 motion to alter or amend
 the Final Judgment. Spencer Homes requested the circuit court
 enter the judgment as proposed in Inokuma's motion.
 
On April 16, 2013, the circuit court filed its order
 
granting Inokuma's motion to alter or amend the Final Judgment.
 
On April 26, 2013, the circuit court entered its
 
Amended Final Judgment, which clarified that the defendants were
 liable for the following percentages of the damages awarded to
 the Uys: Spencer Homes (30%), Luana Kaupe (60%), the Rileys
 (2.5%), Reinhardt-Ortiz (2.5%), and Inokuma (as an individual)
 (5%). The Amended Final Judgment also clarified that Inokuma's
 liability was found pursuant to HRS § 663-41.
 
On April 29, 2013, the Uys filed an amended notice of
 
appeal. Spencer Homes filed a notice of cross-appeal on April
 30, 2013.
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On June 28, 2013, this court filed an order dismissing
 
the Uys' appeal and Spencer Homes' cross-appeal in appellate case
 
no. CAAP-13-0000088 for lack of appellate jurisdiction.
 
On September 5, 2013, the circuit court entered its
 
Second Amended Final Judgment, which clarified how the circuit
 court was disposing of each claim with regard to each defendant.
 The Second Amended Final Judgment also clarified that its
 Punitive Damages Order resulted in a directed verdict of $0 in
 punitive damages against Spencer Homes instead of the $12,500
 awarded by the jury.
 
On September 13, 2013, Spencer Homes filed a motion to
 
alter or amend the Second Amended Final Judgment because it did
 not include orders denying Spencer Homes' motion for judgment and
 motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict on the issue of
 duty, and then on October 18, 2013, Spencer Homes withdrew the
 motion.
 
On November 14, 2013, the circuit court filed its Third
 
Amended Final Judgment, which clarified that with regard to the
 circuit court's September 28, 2012 Order Denying Spencer Homes'
 Motion for JMOL on Duty, the circuit court "will not enter a
 judgment that Defendant Spencer Homes owes no duty to [the Uys]." 
On November 27, 2013, the Uys filed its notice of
 
appeal in this case no. from the Third Amended Final Judgment and
 underlying orders.
 
On December 6, 2013, Spencer Homes filed its notice of
 
cross-appeal from the Third Amended Final Judgment and the
 September 28, 2012 Punitive Damages Order.
 
On December 10, 2013, Inokuma filed her notice of
 
cross-appeal from the Third Amended Final Judgment.
II.	 The Uys' Appeal
A.	 The circuit court did not err in granting Spencer
Homes' motion for summary judgment on the Uys' bodily
injury claims.
 
The Uys contend the circuit court erred by finding that
 
8
the $5,000 limitation of HRS § 431:10C-306(b)(4)  precluded the
8
 HRS § 431:10C-306(b)(4) provides that "[t]ort liability is not
abolished as to the following persons, their personal representatives, or
their legal guardians" when "[i]njury occurs to the person in a motor vehicle
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Uys' bodily injury claims because their claims were viable under
 
HRS § 431:10C-306(e)(1) and (2)(c).
 
HRS § 431:10C-306(e) provides:
 
§431:10C-306 Abolition of tort liability.
 
. . . .
 (e) No provision of this article shall be construed to
exonerate, or in any manner to limit:
 
(1)	 The liability of any person in the business of
manufacturing, retailing, repairing, servicing,
or otherwise maintaining motor vehicles, arising
from a defect in a motor vehicle caused, or not
corrected, by an act or omission in the
manufacturing, retailing, repairing, servicing,
or other maintenance of a vehicle in the course
 of the person's business;
 
(2)	 The criminal or civil liability, including
special and general damages, of any person who,
in the maintenance, operation, or use of any
motor vehicle:
 
(A)	 Intentionally causes injury or damage to a
person or property;
 
(B)	 Engages in criminal conduct that causes
injury or damage to person or property;
 
(C)	 Engages in conduct resulting in punitive
or exemplary damages; or
 
(D)	 Causes death or injury to another person
in connection with the accident while
 operating the vehicle in violation of
section 291E-61 or section 291-4 or 291-7,
as those sections were in effect on or
 before December 31, 2001.
 
1.	 The circuit court did not err with regard to HRS
§ 431:10C-306(e)(1) because it did not apply to
Spencer Homes.
 
The Uys contend the circuit court erred because it did
 
not conclude that the lock to the water tanker truck was broken
 
at the time of the accident and that Spencer Homes' failure to
 correct this defect "was a substantial factor in the theft" of
 the truck and therefore that Spencer Homes failed to maintain the
 vehicle in the course of business under HRS § 431:10C-306(e)(1).
 The Uys contend that summary judgment was inappropriate because a
 genuine issue of material fact existed as to whether Spencer
 
accident and as a result of such injury that the personal injury protection
benefits incurred by such person equal or exceed $5,000[.]" (Emphasis added.)
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Homes "maintained" motor vehicles under HRS § 431:10C-306(e)(1).
 
In their opposition to Spencer Homes' motion for summary
 judgment, the Uys argued that Spencer Homes maintained vehicles
 "in its business capacity" and a genuine issue of material fact
 existed as to whether it failed to maintain the water tanker
 truck.
 
Spencer Homes argues that it "is a general building
 
contractor" and that the Uys failed to present any evidence that
 Spencer Homes is "in the business of manufacturing, retailing,
 etc. motor vehicles" under HRS § 431:10C-306(e)(1).
 
The Uys' argument is without merit because HRS
 
§ 431:10C-306(e)(1) does not apply to Spencer Homes. In
 determining whether or not Spencer Homes was in the business of
 "otherwise maintaining motor vehicles" under HRS § 431:10C­306(e)(1), we are guided by the following principles of statutory
 interpretation: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain and
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain
and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, when
there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an
ambiguity exists. And fifth, in construing an ambiguous
statute, the meaning of the ambiguous words may be sought by
examining the context, with which the ambiguous words,
phrases, and sentences may be compared, in order to
ascertain their true meaning.
 
Hawaii State Teachers Ass'n v. Abercrombie, 126 Hawai 'i 318, 320, 
271 P.3d 613, 615 (2012) (quoting Hawaii Gov't Emp. Ass'n, AFSCME 
Local 152, AFL-CIO v. Lingle, 124 Hawai 'i 197, 202, 239 P.3d 1, 6 
(2010)) (emphasis added). 
When read in context, it is clear that HRS § 431:10C­
306(e)(1) applies to businesses whose primary purpose relates to
 motor vehicles, such as a car dealerships, service stations, or
 auto-body shops, not businesses whose maintenance, operation, or
 use of motor vehicles is secondary to their primary purpose, such
 as construction companies. Compare HRS § 431:10C-306(e)(1)
 
(providing that it applies to "any person in the business of
 manufacturing, retailing, repairing, servicing, or otherwise
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
maintaining motor vehicles"), with HRS § 431:10C-306(e)(2)
 
(providing that it applies when specific injury, damage, or
 damages result from a person's maintenance, operation, or use of
 a motor vehicle). We therefore hold that the circuit court did
 not err with regard to HRS § 431:10C-306(e)(1) because that
 provision did not apply to Spencer Homes as a matter of law.
2.	 The circuit court did not err with regard to HRS
§ 431:10C-306(e)(2)(C) because it did not apply to
Spencer Homes.
 
The Uys contend that the circuit court erred because
 
"genuine issues of material fact existed as to whether Spencer
 
Homes had engaged in conduct that could have resulted in punitive
 damages" and therefore its October 20, 2011 grant of summary
 judgment was inappropriate "given the statutory exception listed
 in HRS § 431:10C-306(e)(2)(C)." The Uys contend that punitive
 damages were warranted because Spencer Homes exhibited gross
 negligence by storing the water tanker truck unlocked "on a dark,
 unguarded and unfenced jobsite" and with the key in the ignition
 even though there was "a recent history of multiple vehicle
 thefts from the site[.]" The Uys contend the circuit court's
 September 24, 2012 order denying Spencer Homes' motion in limine
 No.5 to preclude the Uys' motion for punitive damages against
 Spencer Homes "implicitly recognized the existence of genuine
 issues of material fact" as to whether punitive damages were
 appropriate.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court discussed punitive damages in 
Masaki v. General Motors Corporation, 71 Haw. 1, 780 P.2d 566, (1989): 
Punitive or exemplary damages are generally defined as
those damages assessed in addition to compensatory damages
for the purpose of punishing the defendant for aggravated or
outrageous misconduct and to deter the defendant and others
from similar conduct in the future.
 
Since the purpose of punitive damages is not
compensation of the plaintiff but rather punishment and
deterrence, such damages are awarded only when the egregious
nature of the defendant's conduct makes such a remedy
appropriate. Thus, where the defendant's wrongdoing has
been intentional and deliberate, and has the character of
outrage frequently associated with crime, all but a few
courts have permitted the jury to award punitive
damages. . . .
 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In determining whether an award of punitive damages is
appropriate, the inquiry focuses primarily upon the
defendant's mental state, and to a lesser degree, the nature
of his conduct. In the case of most torts, ill will, evil
motive, or consciousness of wrongdoing on the part of the
tort-feasor are not necessary to render his conduct
actionable. In a negligence action, for example, the
defendant may be required to make compensation if it is
shown that he failed to comply with the standard of care
which would be exercised by an ordinary prudent person, no
matter how innocent of desire to harm. In contrast, to
justify an award of punitive damages, a positive element of
conscious wrongdoing is always required. Thus, punitive
damages are not awarded for mere inadvertence, mistake, or
errors of judgment.
 
Masaki, 71 Haw. at 6–7, 780 P.2d at 570–71 (emphasis added,
 
citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
The Masaki court further noted that to sustain a claim
 
for punitive damages,
 
[t]he plaintiff must prove by clear and convincing evidence
that the defendant has acted wantonly or oppressively or
with such malice as implies a spirit of mischief or criminal
indifference to civil obligations, or where there has been
some wilful misconduct or that entire want of care which
 would raise the presumption of a conscious indifference to
consequences.
 
Id. at 16-17, 780 P.2d at 575 (emphasis added). 
Moreover, punitive damages may be awarded for gross 
negligence. See Kang v. Harrington, 59 Haw. 652, 663, 587 P.2d 
285, 293 (1978) ("The proper measurement of punitive damages 
should be the degree of malice, oppression, or gross negligence . . . ." (citation, internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). "Gross negligence is an aggravated form of negligence, which differs from ordinary negligence only in degree and not in kind. It falls short of recklessness which is not wilful or wanton." State v. Bunn, 50 Haw. 351, 358, 440 P.2d 
528, 534 (1968) (internal citation omitted). Gross negligence has also been described as a reckless and conscious indifference to the consequences that could arise. Ditto v. McCurdy, 86 
Hawai
'i 84, 92, 947 P.2d 952, 960 (1997). Ordinary negligence, 
on the other hand, "is the failure to do what a reasonable and prudent person would ordinarily have done under the circumstances of the situation, or doing what such person would not have done." Ward v. Inter-Island Steam Navigation Co., 22 Haw. 66, 69 (Haw. Terr. 1914). To establish negligence, the plaintiff must show "[f]irst, a breach of duty which defendant owed to him; second, a 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
negligent breach of that duty; and, third, injuries received
 
thereby resulting proximately from that breach of duty." Grace
 
v. Kumalaa, 47 Haw. 281, 292, 386 P.2d 872, 879 (1963) (citation
 and internal quotation mark omitted). 
As noted above, HRS § 431:10C-306(e)(2)(C) applies to
 
conduct that occurs while a person is maintaining, operating, or
 using a motor vehicle. While Spencer Homes' alleged actions and
 omissions suggest the company was negligent in its maintenance,
 operation, and use of the water tanker truck, its acts and
 omissions do not rise to the level of gross negligence or other
 conduct warranting punitive damages. The Uys did not put forth
 clear and convincing evidence that Spencer Homes acted with "a
 positive element of conscious wrongdoing" (Masaki, 71 Haw. at 7,
 780 P.2d at 571) or conducted itself in a manner as to "raise the
 presumption of a conscious indifference to consequences." 
Masaki, 71 Haw. at 17, 780 P.2d at 575. We therefore hold that
 the circuit court did not err with regard to HRS § 431:10C­306(e)(2)(C).
 
Therefore, the circuit court did not err in granting
 
summary judgment in favor of Spencer Homes on the Uys' bodily
 injury claims because neither HRS § 431:10C-306(e)(1) nor HRS
 § 431:10C-306(e)(2)(C) applied to Spencer Homes.
B.	 The circuit court did not err in granting Spencer Homes
motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict in
regard to the Uys' claim for punitive damages. 
The Uys contend the circuit court erred by granting
 
Spencer Homes' motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict
 
with regard to the jury's award of punitive damages because when
 considering the evidence and reasonable inferences in the light
 most favorable to the Uys, Spencer Homes' employees were grossly
 negligent. The Uys contend Spencer Homes' admission that the
 operation of the water tanker truck by an untrained person would
 be a public threat and the history of vehicle thefts from Spencer
 Homes' job sites constituted evidence of Spencer Homes'
 "conscious wrongdoing . . . ." The Uys further contend Spencer
 Homes knew its employees' alleged practice of leaving the key in
 the water tanker truck ignition was "wrong, and dangerous" and
 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
therefore "ma[de] up that story" that a search for the driver
 
with the water tanker truck key ensued whenever workers were
 assigned the task of spraying down the job site.
 
Spencer Homes' alleged failure to maintain the lock on
 
the water tanker truck or to ensure that it was locked, hire a
 security guard, fence or gate its construction site, or otherwise
 prevent theft of its vehicles constitutes evidence of negligence
 and a failure to act reasonably in maintaining the Waikapu
 construction site. As stated supra, however, an award of
 punitive damages must be supported by more than evidence of
 negligence; an award of punitive damages requires evidence of a
 "positive element of conscious wrongdoing" (Masaki, 71 Haw. at 7,
 780 P.2d at 571) on the part of the defendants or evidence that
 the defendants conducted themselves in a manner as to "raise the
 presumption of a conscious indifference to consequences." 
Masaki, 71 Haw. at 17, 780 P.2d at 575. The evidence presented
 by the Uys did not support an inference that Spencer Homes'
 conduct included a positive element of conscious wrongdoing and
 therefore fell short of the level of egregious conduct for which
 punitive damages could be awarded.
C.	 The circuit court did not err with regard to its
evidentiary rulings.
 
The Uys have not established that the circuit court
 
erred in its application of HRE Rule 403. They contend that the
 
circuit court prohibited them from presenting evidence supporting
 their reasons for bringing the case when it denied the Uys'
 request to present the Allstate letter. The Uys contend that
 they filed the suit because the offer from Allstate ($18,866.08)
 would cover only a small portion of the projected costs of fixing
 the damage to their home, according to the Badua Estimate
 ($119,790.90) and Sohn Estimate ($127,423.14).
 
The Uys contend that the circuit court "compounded its
 
error by permitting defense counsel to imply, without any factual
 basis, that [the Uys] were greedily attempting to 'double dip' by
 collecting a judgment, only to allow their house to slide into
 foreclosure, while abundant collateral sources of funds existed
 with which [the Uys] could have fixed their home and paid their
 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
mortgage" and preventing the Uys from admitting evidence "to
 
demonstrate their real reasons for resorting to a lawsuit[.]"
 
The Uys have not established that the circuit court 
abused its discretion in applying HRE Rule 403. See Tabieros v. 
Clark Equip. Co., 85 Hawai 'i 336, 351, 944 P.2d 1279, 1294 
(1997). 
The Uys contend that the circuit court erred by
 
permitting cross-examination concerning the Uys' home insurance
 for the purpose of establishing bias, interest, or motive in
 filing their complaint because such evidence was "completely
 irrelevant and highly prejudicial, requiring reversal." The Uys
 argue that "evidence of collateral sources of funds available to
 a plaintiff in a lawsuit, such as insurance proceeds, have been
 deemed irrelevant and inadmissible . . . to prove bias, interest
 or motive."
 
Spencer Homes contends that the circuit court did not
 
err in allowing Spencer Homes' cross-examination of the Uys with
 regard to their home insurance because the cross-examination
 concerned the Uys' failure to mitigate damages prior to trial and
 that the Uys opened the door to the topic of mitigation damages.
 Spencer Homes contends that its cross-examination regarding the
 Uys' insurance sources of funds was a defense against the Uys'
 assertion that they could not accept the offer to purchase their
 home "[b]ecause the house is not fixed."
 
The circuit court allowed Spencer Homes' cross-
examination in regard to the Uys' home insurance because it
 wanted "to give defense counsel some leeway into following up as
 far as bias, interest, and motive."
 
HRE Rule 411 provides: 
Rule 411 Liability Insurance. Evidence that a person
was or was not insured against liability is not admissible
upon the issue whether the person acted negligently or
otherwise wrongfully. This rule does not require the
exclusion of evidence of insurance against liability when
offered for another purpose, such as proof of agency,
ownership, or control, or bias or prejudice of a witness.
 
The circuit court's ruling to admit evidence of the
 
Uys' home insurance pursuant to HRE Rule 411 did not constitute
 
reversible error because it went to the issue of mitigation of
 damages. See State v. Taniguchi, 72 Haw. 235, 239, 815 P.2d 24,
 
30
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
26 (1991) ("[T]the decision below is correct [and] it must be
 
affirmed by the appellate court even though the lower tribunal
 gave the wrong reason for its action."). 
Moreover, "[t]he 'collateral source rule,' in general, 
provides that benefits or payments received on behalf of a plaintiff, from an independent source, will not diminish recovery from the wrongdoer." Bynum v. Magno, 106 Hawai
'i 81, 86, 101 
P.3d 1149, 1154 (2004) (footnote omitted). The collateral source rule did not prohibit Spencer Homes' cross-examination of the Uys with regard to their insurance because it was not conducted for the purpose of diminishing the Uys' recovery, but rather to address the Uys' failure to mitigate damages.
D.	 The circuit court did not err in granting Spencer
Homes' motion for a directed verdict JMOL on stigma
damages.
 
The Uys contend that the circuit court erred in 
granting Spencer Homes' motion for a directed verdict JMOL on 
stigma damages because (1) the "lowball" offer on their house that was "contingent upon the home being repaired to seller satisfaction" and (2) Carmelita's testimony as an expert in real estate constituted substantial evidence that the Uys' "home suffered a permanent stigma from being cracked open by a water tanker [truck]." The Uys argue "[e]xpert appraiser testimony was not necessary to establish stigma damages" because Hawai
'i law 
requires experts only in "medical and legal malpractice cases." The Uys also argue that the issue of stigma damages should have gone to the jury because the "actual events supply evidence of value." 
Spencer Homes argues that the circuit court did not err
 
in granting Spencer Homes' motion for JMOL on stigma damages
 because the Uys "failed to prove the existence or value of any
 stigma damage to their house associated with the subject
 accident[.]" Spencer Homes argues that the Uys "failed to meet
 their burden of proving permanent, irredeemable damage to their
 property . . . [and] failed to prove that there will be any
 lasting stigma damage or diminution of value after the property
 is repaired."
 
31
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court granted Spencer Homes' motion for a
 
directed verdict on stigma damages because it found "no evidence
 
that lingering negative public perception would exist even after
 the house is fully repaired and there is no evidence for
 diminution of value after the property is repaired[;] . . . no
 experts or appraisers testified as to stigma[;] . . . no
 comparisons to a similarly damaged home[;] . . . no opinion as to
 the amount of stigma that existed or the methods used to
 determine stigma[;] . . . [and Carmelita's] testimony cannot
 establish stigma because she was not qualified as an expert on
 this issue . . . [and] had no prior experience or knowledge
 regarding stigma or damaged homes."
 
Because no Hawai
'i cases specifically address "stigma" 
damages, we look to other jurisdictions for guidance. The plaintiffs in Bradley v. Armstrong Rubber Co., 130 F.3d 168 (5th Cir. 1997) brought claims against a tire company for nuisance, trespass, strict liability, and negligence, alleging that the company "blew carbon black onto their properties and introduced a plume of petroleum naphtha into the soil and water under their properties." Bradley, 130 F.3d at 170. The plaintiffs argued 
that they were entitled to damages because even though the defendant tire company agreed to complete remediation, the completed remediation could take twenty years and would not remove all of the contamination and thus the value of their homes significantly decreased and suffered from "market stigma" as a result of the contamination. Id. at 171-72. The Bradley court 
held that the "phenomenon of 'market stigma' is a reduction in market price caused by the public's fear of contaminated property, which lingers even after contamination has been remediated." Id. at 175. In interpreting Mississippi law, the 
Bradley court held that stigma damages were recoverable when the subject property was permanently and physically injured and there is convincing evidence of market stigma. Id. at 176. The 
Bradley court further held that the plaintiffs failed to produce sufficient evidence to sustain their claim for stigma damages because their "expert provided no estimate of the amount by which 
32
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the value of the homes was reduced" and therefore they did not
 
prove the diminution value with reasonable certainty. Id.
 
In another contamination case, Walker Drug Co. v. La
 
Sal Oil Co., 972 P.2d 1238 (Utah 1998), plaintiffs brought claims
 for nuisance and trespass against two oil companies alleging
 "that gasoline migrated underground from service stations owned
 by defendants . . . to properties owned [by the plaintiffs]." 
Walker Drug Co., 972 P.2d at 1241. The plaintiffs alleged that
 the gasoline "contaminated the groundwater and soil . . . [and]
 damaged the value of all three [of the plaintiffs'] properties
 and impinged upon their ability to use their properties as
 collateral for a loan." Id. The plaintiffs sought "stigma
 
damages for an alleged decrease in the market value of" one of
 their properties. Id. at 1247. The Utah Supreme Court defined
 
stigma damages as damages that "compensate for loss to the
 property's market value resulting from the long-term negative
 perception of the property in excess of any recovery obtained for
 the temporary injury itself." Id. at 1246. The Walker Drug Co.
 
court held that stigma damages are recoverable "when a plaintiff
 demonstrates that (1) defendants caused some temporary physical
 injury to plaintiff's land and (2) repair of this temporary
 injury will not return the value of the property to its prior
 level because of a lingering negative public perception." Id. at
 
1247. The court held that the issue of stigma damages should
 have been submitted to the jury because the testimonies offered
 by the plaintiffs' witnesses were "the best evidence available
 for proving stigma damages given the circumstances." Id. at
 
1248. 
In Bartleson v. United States, 96 F.3d 1270 (9th Cir.
 
1996), plaintiffs brought suit against a military base alleging
 permanent nuisance and seeking damages for stigma to their
 properties allegedly caused by the military base's "live fire
 exercises . . . ." Bartleson, 96 F.3d at 1272. The Ninth
 
Circuit held that "the district court correctly allowed the
 plaintiffs to proceed on a permanent nuisance theory" on their
 damages claim for "the diminution in their property values due to
 stigma caused by the past shelling of their properties and the
 
33
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
uncertainty regarding future shelling and the possible presence
 
of unexploded shells on the properties." Id. at 1275. The court
 
held that the permanent nuisance theory was appropriate
 "[b]ecause the artillery range is an instrument of the government
 that cannot be enjoined, like a public utility, and the shelling
 activities will continue[.]" Id. at 1276.
 
We find these authorities instructive and therefore
 
hold that to sustain a claim for stigma damages, a plaintiff must
 produce convincing evidence that the defendant caused injury to
 the plaintiff's real property, and remediation will not return
 the value of the property to its prior level because of a
 lingering negative public perception. We also hold that the best
 available evidence is sufficient to send the issue of stigma
 damages to a jury; expert testimony is not required.
 
In the instant case, Carmelita testified that Eustaquio
 
purchased their home in 2005; the Uys received only one offer of
 $375,000 in November 2009 and did not accept it because it was
 contingent on the completion of the repairs on the house and they
 had not fixed the house; a "comparable" home sold for $620,000;
 the real estate market "was at rock bottom" in November 2009 but
 had improved since;, Carmelita had not attempted to sell the Uys'
 house since November 2009; and the damages to the Uys' house had
 worsened in the four and a half years since the accident. 
LaPrade testified that his recommended repairs would correct all
 accident-related damage and restore the house to its pre-accident
 condition.
 
The circuit court did not err in granting Spencer
 
Homes' motion for JMOL on stigma damages because Carmelita's
 testimony did not constitute the best available evidence that
 even if repairs were completed, the value of the Uys' property
 would not return to its pre-water tanker truck accident level due
 to a lingering negative public perception.
E.	 The circuit court erred in enforcing the HRCP Rule 68
offer.
 
The Uys contend the circuit court erred by enforcing
 
the $50,000 offer made pursuant to HRCP Rule 68 by Spencer Homes
 
and Inokuma because the offer "was unenforceable . . . ; it
 
34
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failed to bring finality, and it violated public policy." The
 
Uys argue that the offer was unenforceable because it "did not
 fully and completely resolve the claim or claims to which the
 offer was directed" and was ambiguous and lacked finality and
 thus was illusory. The Uys felt the offer was void as a matter
 of public policy because it was conditioned on "the acceptance of
 the offer by the other Plaintiff" and therefore was illusory. 
The Uys contend the circuit court erred in enforcing the offer
 because the final judgment awarded the Uys was $54,607.43, more
 than the $50,000 offer.
 
Spencer Homes argues that the HRCP Rule 68 offer is
 
enforceable because Spencer Homes and Inokuma were held liable
 for 30% and 5% of the repair damages awarded to the Uys,
 respectively, and therefore, "[e]ven if the punitive damages
 awarded against Spencer Homes is kept in the mix, the total jury
 award attributable to Spencer Homes and [Inokuma] is only
 $32,375.00, or $17,625.00 less than the $50,000.00 offer
 settlement." Spencer Homes also argues that the terms of the
 offer were "clear, unambiguous, and final."
 
It is undisputed that defendants Spencer Homes and
 
Inokuma made a joint offer of settlement to the Uys in the amount
 of $50,000, inclusive of all costs and attorneys' fees accrued
 through the time of the settlement.
 
The circuit court entered its Final Judgment in favor
 
of the Uys and against all defendants and specified that all
 defendants were jointly and severally liable to the Uys in the
 amount of $42,500 for property damage, and that Inokuma was
 individually liable for punitive damages in the amount of $5,000. 
The circuit court awarded the Uys $12,107.43 in costs, the amount
 that the Uys sought for costs incurred up to May 19, 2011, the
 date of the settlement offer. Because the circuit court did not
 include the Uys' pre-offer costs in its calculation, it concluded
 that the Uys' judgment was for $47,500 and therefore that Inokuma
 and Spencer Homes were entitled to recover costs accrued after
 the date of their $50,000 settlement offer pursuant to HRCP Rule
 68.
 
HRCP Rule 68, provides, in pertinent part:
 
35
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Rule 68. OFFER OF SETTLEMENT OR JUDGMENT
 
At any time more than 10 days before the trial begins,
any party may serve upon any adverse party an offer of
settlement or an offer to allow judgment to be taken against

either party for the money or property or to the effect
specified in the offer, with costs then accrued. . . . If
the judgment finally obtained by the offeree is not more
favorable than the offer, the offeree must pay the costs 

incurred after the making of the offer.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
An offer made pursuant to HRCP Rule 68 includes the

 
costs accrued up until the date of the settlement offer, and
 
therefore when determining whether a final judgment is more
 favorable than the offer, a court should include the pre-offer
 costs awarded in its calculation. 
See, e.g. , Marek v. Chesny,
 
473 U.S. 1, 7 (1985) (holding that post-offer costs should not be
 included in the calculation made pursuant to Federal Rules of
 Civil Procedure (FRCP) Rule 68 
9
); Bell v. Bershears, 92 S.W.3d
32, 37 (Ark. 2002) (holding that pre-offer costs should be
 considered in determining whether the judgment exceeds the offer
 
10
made pursuant to Arkansas Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 68) ; 20
Am. Jur. 2d Costs § 17 (providing that costs and attorneys' fees
 incurred prior to an offer should be included in the calculation
 
9
 FRCP Rule 68 is very similar to HRCP Rule 68. It provides, in
pertinent part:
 
(a) Making an Offer; Judgment on an Accepted Offer. At least
 
14 days before the date set for trial, a party defending
against a claim may serve on an opposing party an offer to
allow judgment on specified terms, with the costs then
accrued.
 
. . . .
 (d) Paying Costs After an Unaccepted Offer. If the judgment
that the offeree finally obtains is not more favorable than
the unaccepted offer, the offeree must pay the costs
incurred after the offer was made. 
10
 Arkansas Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 68 ("OFFER OF JUDGMENT")is
almost identical to that of HRCP Rule 68:
 
At any time more than 10 days before the trial begins, a
party defending against a claim may serve upon the adverse
party an offer to allow judgment to be taken against him for
the money or property or to the effect specified in his
offer, with costs then accrued. . . . If the judgment
exclusive of interest from the date of offer finally
obtained by the offeree is not more favorable than the
offer, the offeree must pay the costs incurred after the
making of the offer. 
36
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
used to determine whether the judgment obtained was more
 
favorable than the rejected offer).11
 
The circuit court erred because it did not include the
 
pre-offer costs awarded to the Uys in its calculation used to
 determine whether the judgment obtained was more favorable than
 the rejected offer. Excluding the punitive damages assessed
 against Inokuma, the Uys' final judgment was for $54,607.43 and
 therefore the circuit court's awards of costs to Inokuma and
 Spencer Homes pursuant to HRCP Rule 68 must be vacated.
III. Spencer Homes' cross-appeal
 
On cross-appeal, Spencer Homes contends that the
 
circuit court erred by denying Spencer Homes' motion for JMOL
 
that it owed no duty to the Uys and by finding a special
 relationship on behalf of Spencer Homes and Inokuma to "protect
 [the Uys] from the criminal acts of third parties." Spencer
 Homes contends that no special relationship existed between
 itself and either the minor defendants or the Uys and therefore
 judgment that they owed no duty to the Uys was proper as a matter
 of law.
 
The Uys contend that "Spencer Homes' duty did not flow
 
from a special relationship, but rather, from its creation of
 foreseeable, and serious, harm in the storage of its heavy
 vehicular equipment in and around its job site." The Uys argue
 that the circuit court did not err in denying Spencer Homes'
 motion for JMOL on the issue of duty because as "the owner of a
 52,000 pound [water tanker truck], stored on a lot with a history
 of vehicle theft, and subject to rolling away (unless an unmarked
 yellow valve switch is set)," Spencer Homes should have taken
 "reasonable steps to avoid the foreseeable serious injury and
 damage which could flow from the misappropriation and misuse of
 its [water tanker truck]."
 
The "general rule is that a person does not have a duty
 
to act affirmatively to protect another person from harm." Lee
 
v. Corregedore, 83 Hawai
'i 154, 159, 925 P.2d 324, 329 (1996). 
11
 Nothing in HRCP Rule 68 supports Spencer Homes' argument that the
circuit court's awards of costs to Spencer Homes and Inokuma should be
affirmed because the jury found them responsible for only 30% and 5% of the
repair damages, respectively. 
37
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Exceptions to this general rule exist where there is a "special 
relationship" between a "defendant and either the third person who may threaten harm or the party who is the [potential] victim of the harm[.]" Knodle v. Waikiki Gateway Hotel, Inc., 69 Haw. 
376, 386, 742 P.2d 377, 384 (1987). "In determining whether such a relationship exists, this court looks to section 314A of the Restatement (Second) of Torts, which sets forth a non-exclusive list of 'special relationships' upon which a court may find a duty to protect." Maguire v. Hilton Hotels Corp., 79 Hawai
'i 
110, 113, 899 P.2d 393, 396 (1995). The Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314A (1965) provides: 
(1) A common carrier is under a duty to its passengers to
take reasonable action
 (a) to protect them against unreasonable risk of physical
harm, and
 (b) to give them first aid after it knows or has reason to
know that they are ill or injured, and to care for them
until they can be cared for by others.
 
(2) An innkeeper is under a similar duty to his guests.
 
(3) A possessor of land who holds it open to the public is
under a similar duty to members of the public who enter in
response to his invitation.
 
(4) One who is required by law to take or who voluntarily
takes the custody of another under circumstances such as to
deprive the other of his normal opportunities for protection
is under a similar duty to the other.
 
In addition to this non-exclusive list, other special 
relationships may exist because "[w]hether a person owes another 
a duty reasonably to protect the other from foreseeable harm by a third person depends upon whether the circumstances warrant the imposition of such a duty." Doe Parents No. 1 v. State, Dep't of 
Educ., 100 Hawai
'i 34, 71, 58 P.3d 545, 582 (2002). 
In Cruz v. Middlekauff Lincoln-Mercury, Inc., 909 P.2d
 
1252 (Utah 1996), the Utah Supreme Court identified the following
 "special circumstances" under which "key-in-ignition" cases have
 been permitted to go forward:
 
(1) significant criminal activity in the area in which the
vehicle was left, (2) prior thefts of the defendant's
vehicles, (3) irresponsible or reckless nature of people
frequenting the area, (4) lack of surveillance of the
vehicle, (5) vehicle left for extended period of time, and
(6) type and size of vehicle uniquely attractive or capable
of inflicting serious damages. 
38
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Cruz, 909 P.2d at 1255-56 (citations omitted).
 
The Cruz court also noted that "[o]ther special
 
circumstances include the vehicle's access to public highways,
 
its accessibility to the public, its operational condition, and
 the time of day or night the vehicle was taken." Id. at 1256. 
The plaintiffs in 
Cruz suffered serious injuries and
 
the death of their unborn child when they were struck by a
 vehicle that had been stolen from a car dealership. Id. at 1253. 
The plaintiffs brought suit against the car dealership alleging
 that "it was foreseeable that its thief-operated cars would be
 recklessly or negligently driven and cause injury and death to
 members of the public." Id. In concluding that the trial court
 
correctly denied the car dealership's motion to dismiss because
 the issue of foreseeability should have been determined by the
 jury, the Cruz court explained:
 
Obviously a vehicle is more likely to be stolen if it is
unlocked and its key is in its ignition. However, the
Cruzes point to other conditions that significantly
increased the likelihood of the theft. These include the
 numerous prior thefts of Middlekauff's key-in-ignition cars,
the public's unlimited access to the cars, Middlekauff's
management policy of leaving keys in the ignitions of cars
parked for lengthy periods of time in a commercial area, the
cars' location permitting their unobstructed exit, and
Middlekauff's lack of surveillance or security, even during
evening hours. If these unusual circumstances can be
 proved, a fact finder could determine that the theft was
foreseeable.
 
The foreseeability of the theft alone, however, does
not create a duty by Middlekauff to the Cruzes. The duty
arises only if it was also foreseeable that Middlekauff's
thief-operated cars would be recklessly or negligently
driven and cause injury and death to members of the public.
The Cruzes allege that it was foreseeable "that a thief who
took one of Middlekauf[f]'s cars would attempt to evade
capture by fleeing a police officer at high speed, which
would result in a serious accident to an innocent motorist."
 Other courts have observed that thief-driven vehicles often
 collide with third parties, causing injury and death. A
 thief primarily concerned with avoiding detection and arrest
may disregard traffic laws, endangering pedestrians and
motorists alike. Also relevant in this case is the
 relatively short time-a few hours at most-between the theft
of the car and the accident injuring the Cruzes. 
Id. at 1256 (footnote and citations omitted).
 
We find Cruz highly instructive and applicable. It was
 
foreseeable that Spencer Homes' water tanker truck could be
 
stolen if measures were not taken to prevent theft, and that if
 stolen, the thief was likely to have difficulty driving the water
 
39
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
tanker truck safely, and therefore that members of the public
 
would be at risk of incurring damages and/or suffering injuries. 
Our conclusion is supported by the following circumstances: (1)
 a Jeep and a flat-bed truck had been stolen from Spencer Homes'
 construction site prior to the accident; (2) at night, the water
 tanker truck was stored in an unlit, unfenced, and unguarded area
 within the construction site; (3) the doors of the water tanker
 truck either did not lock or were broken on the night of the
 accident, and Spencer Homes did not have a policy requiring
 drivers to lock the doors of heavy equipment; (4) Spencer Homes'
 representatives testified that the water tanker truck posed a
 danger when driven by untrained drivers due to its size and
 weight; and (5) the water tanker truck was stored in area easily
 accessible by the public via public roads and in close proximity
 to residences.
 
We hold that the circuit court did not err in denying
 
Spencer Homes' motion for JMOL on the issue of duty because the
 imposition of a duty is warranted under the circumstances of the
 instant case. Spencer Homes was negligent for leaving the keys
 to the water tanker truck easily accessible to thieves, whether
 in the ignition or merely in the truck and regardless of whether
 Spencer Homes had a policy prohibiting its employees from doing
 so. We therefore affirm the circuit court's denial of Spencer
 Homes' motion for JMOL on the issue of duty.
IV.	 Inokuma's cross-appeal
 
On cross-appeal, Inokuma contends that the circuit
 
court erred by: (1) denying Inokuma's motion for JMOL as to the
 
inapplicability of HRS § 663-41; (2) denying Inokuma's motion for
 JMOL as to the inexistence of her legal duty to control the
 intentional criminal conduct of M.K., M.R., and K.R.; and (3)
 denying Inokuma's motion for JMOL on the issue of punitive
 damages.
A.	 The circuit court did not err in denying Inokuma's
motion for JMOL with regard to her liability under HRS
§ 663-41.
 
Inokuma contends that the circuit court erred by 
40
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
denying her motion for JMOL under HRCP Rule 50(a) because
 
inadequate evidence supported the finding that Inokuma violated
 HRS § 663-41. Inokuma argues that there was no evidence that she
 provided alcohol to minors or knew that the minors were consuming
 alcohol at her home as required to find a violation of HRS § 663­41(a)(1) and (2). Inokuma contends the circuit court's error was
 compounded by the phrase "acts knowingly" in jury instruction No.
 41 because "acts knowingly" is not included in HRS § 663-41.
 Inokuma also contends that there was insufficient evidence to
 establish that the minor defendants were intoxicated when they
 abandoned the water tanker truck so as to meet a requirement
 under HRS § 663-41.
 
Both M.K. and M.R. testified that on the weekends
 
during the fall of 2007, they drank alcohol at the Inokuma
 residence, the alcohol was knowingly supplied by Inokuma, and
 sometimes Inokuma drank alcohol with them. M.R. also testified
 that at the time of the water tanker truck accident, his level of
 intoxication was a "[t]en out of ten." M.K. testified that on a
 scale of one to ten, his level of intoxication at the Inokuma
 residence after midnight on the morning of the accident was a
 "ten or 11 . . . ."
 
When reviewing a motion for JMOL under HRCP Rule 50, 
"the evidence and the inferences which may be fairly drawn therefrom must be considered in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party and [the] motion may be granted only where there can be but one reasonable conclusion as to the proper judgment." Kramer v. Ellett, 108 Hawai
'i 426, 430, 121 P.3d 406, 410 (2005) 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Nelson v. University of Hawaii, 97 Hawai
'i 376, 393, 38 P.3d 95, 112 (2001)). 
The circuit court did not err in denying Inokuma's
 
motion for JMOL because M.K. and M.R.'s testimonies indicate that
 there is more than one reasonable conclusion as to whether
 Inokuma was liable under HRS § 663-41(1) for furnishing or
 providing alcohol to minors who became intoxicated and caused
 damage to the Uys' property. 
41
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B.	 The circuit court did not err in denying Inokuma's
motion for JMOL on the issue of duty.
 
Inokuma also contends that the circuit court erred by
 
denying her motions for JMOL as to the inexistence of a legal
 
duty obligating her to control the behavior of M.K., M.R., and
 K.R. and for a finding that the intentional criminal conduct of
 the three young men constituted a superseding cause of the Uys'
 damages. At the hearing where Inokuma raised the motions, she
 argued that no special relationship existed between herself and
 the three young men because "[s]he was never their legal
 guardian, never their adopted parent, never agreed to supervise
 them or anything like that[,]" and that even if Inokuma was
 negligent, her negligence was passive and therefore superseded by
 the intentional criminal conduct of the three young men.
 
As noted above, in determining whether a special 
"relationship exists, this court looks to section 314A of the Restatement (Second) of Torts," Maguire, 79 Hawai
'i at 113, 899 
P.2d at 396, which provides in relevant part: 
(4) One who is required by law to take or who voluntarily
takes the custody of another under circumstances such as to
deprive the other of his normal opportunities for protection
is under a similar duty to the other.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Comment (b) to section 314A provides:
 
This Section states exceptions to the general rule, stated
in § 314, that the fact that the actor realizes or should
realize that his [or her] action is necessary for the aid or
protection of another does not in itself impose upon him [or
her] any duty to act. The duties stated in this Section
 arise out of special relations between the parties, which
create a special responsibility, and take the case out of
the general rule. The relations listed are not intended to
 be exclusive, and are not necessarily the only ones in which
a duty of affirmative action for the aid or protection of
another may be found. . . . The law appears, however, to be
working slowly toward a recognition of the duty to aid or
protect in any relation of dependence or of mutual
dependence.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
As discussed supra, it is reasonable to conclude, based
 
on the testimonies of M.R. and M.K., that Inokuma habitually
 
permitted, and perhaps even encouraged, M.R. and M.K. to drink
 
42

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
her alcohol to the point of intoxication at the Inokuma
 
residence. It is also reasonable to conclude that once
 intoxicated, the young men became dependent on Inokuma because
 they "were deprived of their normal opportunities for protection"
 and therefore Inokuma had a duty to protect them from harm and to
 prevent them from harming others. Restatement (Second) of Torts
 § 314A(4). The circuit court did not err in denying Inokuma's
 motion for JMOL on the issue of duty.
C.	 The circuit court did not err in denying Inokuma's
motion for JMOL on punitive damages.
 
Inokuma's third contention is that the Uys failed to
 
present clear and convincing evidence to support an award of
 
punitive damages against Inokuma and that the jury's assessment
 should be set aside.
 
As discussed supra, to sustain a claim for punitive
 
damages,
 
[t]he plaintiff must prove by clear and convincing evidence
that the defendant has acted wantonly or oppressively or
with such malice as implies a spirit of mischief or criminal
indifference to civil obligations, or where there has been
some wilful misconduct or that entire want of care which
 would raise the presumption of a conscious indifference to
consequences.
 
Masaki, 71 Haw. at 16-17, 780 P.2d at 575 (emphasis added). 
At trial, both M.K. and M.R. testified that they drank
 
alcohol in the living room of the Inokuma residence on the night
 
prior to the morning of the accident. M.K. was seventeen at the
 time of the accident and M.R. was fifteen. M.K. testified that
 while they were drinking, Inokuma came out of her bedroom, walked
 through the living room and past the group, went into the kitchen
 to get a glass of water, and then went back to her bedroom. M.R.
 testified that he believed Inokuma was home while they were
 drinking because her bedroom light was on when they got there.
 M.R. also testified that while in the living room of the Inokuma
 residence, the youths were drinking vodka and rum out of liquor
 bottles, and that they drank there for a few hours with the
 lights on while watching TV and were not trying to be quiet.
 Additionally, both young men testified that they regularly drank
 
43
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
alcohol that belonged to Inokuma at the Inokuma residence on the
 
weekends during the fall of 2007, and Inokuma either served them
 the alcohol or gave them permission to help themselves to
 Inokuma's alcohol. A reasonable jury could have found, based on
 the testimonies of M.K. and M.R., that the Uys presented clear
 and convincing evidence that Inokuma exhibited criminal
 indifference to civil obligations by recklessly permitting M.K.
 and M.R. to possess intoxicating liquor while at the Inokuma
 residence in violation of HRS § 712-1250.5 (Supp. 2006), which
 provides, in pertinent part:
 
§712-1250.5 Promoting intoxicating liquor to a person
under the age of twenty-one. (1) A person . . . commits the
offense of promoting intoxicating liquor to a person under
the age of twenty-one if the person knowingly:
 
. . . .
 
(b)	 Permits a person to possess intoxicating liquor
while on property under his control, and the
person possessing the intoxicating liquor is a
person under the age of twenty-one.
 
. . . .
 
(3) The fact that a person engaged in the conduct
specified by this section is prima facie evidence that the
person engaged in that conduct with knowledge of the
character, nature, and quantity of the intoxicating liquor
possessed, distributed, or sold.
 
. . . .
 
(4) Promoting intoxicating liquor to a person under
the age of twenty-one is a misdemeanor.
 
We therefore hold that the circuit court did not err in
 
denying Inokuma's motion for JMOL on the issue of punitive
 
damages and affirm the circuit court's award of punitive damages
 against Inokuma.
V.	 CONCLUSION
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the November 14,
 
2013 "Third Amended Final Judgment," entered in the Circuit Court
 
of the Second Circuit is vacated in part and affirmed in part. 
We vacate the parts of the "Third Amended Final Judgment"
 awarding costs to Spencer Homes and Inokuma. We affirm the
 circuit court in all other respects. The September 28, 2012
 "Order Denying Spencer Homes Inc.'s Motion for Judgment as Matter
 
44
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Law that Defendant Spencer Homes Owes No Duty to Plaintiffs,"
 
also entered in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 29, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Mark S. Davis
 
Michael K. Livingston
 
Loretta A. Sheehan 
Matthew C. Winter
 Clare E. Connors
 (Davis Levin Livingston)
for Plaintiffs/Appellants/
Cross-Appellees Eustaquio Uyand Carmelita Uy.
 Presiding Judge

Associate Judge
Leslie R. Kop
Brenda E. Morris
 Randall Y. Kaya
Adrian Y. Chang
(Law Offices of Leslie R. Kop)
for Defendant/Cross-Claim
Plaintiff/Cross-Claim
Defendant/Appellee/Cross-
Appellant Spencer Homes, Inc.,
a Domestic For-profit
Corporation.
 
Curtis C. Kim
 
for Defendant/Cross-Claim
Defendant/Cross-Claim
Plaintiff/Appellee/Cross-
Appellant Rae Inokuma, as
Parent or Guardian of K.I., a
Minor; and Rae Inokuma, an
Individual.
 
45

 