NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000027
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CLARENCE L. MONTALVO, III, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 07-1-0686(1))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Clarence L. Montalvo, III
 
(Montalvo) appeals from a December 14, 2011 Judgment of the
 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court) convicting
 Montalvo of the lesser-included offense of Negligent Homicide in
 the Third Degree (NH3), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) § 707-704 (2014).
1 On appeal, Montalvo maintains that the
 
Circuit Court erred when it (1) denied his "Motion to Dismiss
 Indictment for Selective Prosecution and/or in the Alternative,
 to Compel Discovery and for Bill of Particulars" (Selective
 
2
Prosecution Motion) ; (2) denied his Motion for Dismissal of
Indictment Based Upon Double Jeopardy Grounds (Motion to
 Dismiss); (3) instructed the jury on the lesser-included offense
 of NH3 over his objection that there was no rational basis in the
 evidence to support the lesser-included offense; and (4) denied
 his motion for judgment of acquittal due to lack of medical
 evidence that Montalvo caused Decedent's death.
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided, unless otherwise noted. 
2
 The Honorable Joel E. August presided. 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
After reviewing the record on appeal, the points
 
raised, the parties' arguments and the applicable legal
 
authority, we resolve Montalvo's points as follows and affirm. 
1. The Circuit Court did not err when it denied
 
Montalvo's Selective Prosecution Motion. The "burden of proving
 discriminatory enforcement of the law rests upon the party
 raising the defense[;] [t]hat party must present sufficient
 evidence to establish the existence of intentional or purposeful
 discrimination that is deliberately based upon an unjustifiable
 standard such as race, religion or other arbitrary
 classification." State v. Kailua Auto Wreckers, Inc., 62 Haw.
 
222, 226-27, 615 P.2d 730, 734-35 (1980) (emphasis added,
 footnote, citations, and internal quotation marks omitted). In
 addition, it "is insufficient to show merely that other offenders
 have not been prosecuted[.]" Id., at 227, 615 P.2d at 735. 
Montalvo failed to carry his burden of proving that the decision
 to prosecute him for the instant offense was based on an
 impermissible motive.
 
2. The Circuit Court did not err in denying 
Montalvo's Motion to Dismiss. The prohibition against double jeopardy generally "attaches when the jury is empaneled and sworn[.]" State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai
'i 128, 141, 938 P.2d 559, 
572 (1997) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). However, "'retrial is not automatically barred [by the double jeopardy clause] when a criminal proceeding is terminated without finally resolving the merits of the charges against the accused.' [Arizona v. Washington, 434 U.S. 497, 505 (1978).]" Id. at 141­
42, 938 P.2d at 572-73 (quoting State v. Lam, 75 Haw. 195, 200, 857 P.2d 585, 589 (1993), overruled on other grounds by State v. Wilmer, 97 Hawai
'i 238, 35 P.3d 755 (2001)). In the instant 
case, the Circuit Court declared a mistrial after the jury had been sworn in, but the case was terminated without reaching the merits of the charge. 
Where a mistrial is declared because of "manifest 
necessity" a retrial is not barred. Quitog, 85 Hawai
'i at 143, 
938 P.2d at 574. "Manifest necessity is defined as circumstances in which it becomes no longer possible to conduct the trial or to 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reach a fair result based on the evidence." State v. Wilmer, 97 
Hawai'i 238, 244, 35 P.3d 722, 761 (2001) (citation, internal 
quotation marks, and ellipsis points omitted); see also, HRS 
§ 701-110(4)(b)(iii). "A trial court's declaration of a mistrial is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard. Quitog, 85 
Hawai
'i at 142, 938 P.2d at 573. A determination of manifest 
necessity is likewise left to the sound discretion of the trial court[,]" Wilmer, 97 Hawai
'i at 243, 35 P.3d at 760 (citation 
omitted), and great deference will be given to such a determination. Quitog, 85 Hawai
'i at 143, 938 P.2d at 574. 
Montalvo argues that his first trial was improperly
 
terminated because the mistrial was declared as a consequence of
 the prosecution failing to provide all discovery--certain
 photographs--to him prior to trial. The State counters that it
 had sent a letter containing the photographs to defense counsel
 prior to trial and cited defense counsel's failure to timely file
 a notice of change of address as an explanation for why defense
 counsel may not have received the discovery. The failure of
 discovery did not come to light until trial had begun. The
 Circuit Court examined counsel for both parties regarding the
 circumstances of the discovery failure and concluded that it was
 not possible to determine fault between them.
 
The Circuit Court also considered other alternatives, 
Quitog, 85 Hawai
'i at 143, 938 P.2d at 574, and noted that the 
State would be prejudiced if it could not use the photographs--as the State's expert had prepared his report based on them--and the defense would be prejudiced by going forward with trial without giving time to the defense to prepare. Observing that continuing the trial to give the defense--including an expert witness--the opportunity to review the photographs and prepare for resumption of trial would cause a delay of several months, the Circuit Court concluded that it would be impracticable to have the jury return after several months, and ruled that manifest necessity justifying a mistrial was present. 
Given the circumstances, the Circuit Court did not
 
abuse its discretion in declaring a mistrial based on manifest
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
necessity and consequently did not err in denying Montalvo's
 
Motion to Dismiss.3
 
3. The Circuit Court did not err in instructing the 
jury on the lesser included offense of NH3. Pursuant to HRS §§ 701-109(4)(a) and 701-109(5) (2014), a defendant may be convicted of an included offense.
4 "[J]ury instructions on 
lesser-included offenses must be given where there is a rational basis in the evidence for a verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and convicting the defendant of the included offense." State v. Flores, 131 Hawai
'i 43, 51, 314 P.3d 120, 128 
(2013) (emphasis added). Montalvo argues that there was no rational basis in the evidence here to support the giving of an instruction on NH3. We disagree. 
As instructed in this case, the only difference between
 
the offenses of Negligent Homicide in the Second and Third
 Degrees is the required mens rea for each, "negligence" and
 "simple negligence" respectively. HRS §§ 707-703(1)(a) and ­704(1). Negligence as defined requires awareness of a
 substantial and unjustifiable risk, whereas simple negligence "is
 essentially a civil standard of negligence." HRS § 702-206(4)
 and supplemental commentary. 
Here, the prosecution presented expert and eyewitness
 
testimony that Montalvo was speeding in his cement truck,
 following too close to Decedent's vehicle, and may have been
 inattentive when he collided with Decedent's vehicle from behind. 
3 Because of our decision regarding manifest necessity, we need not
address the State's argument that Montalvo implicitly consented to the
mistrial.
 
4	 HRS § 701-109(4)(a) provides, in relevant part:
(4) A defendant may be convicted of an offense
included in an offense charged in the indictment or the
information. An offense is so included when:
 
(a)	 It is established by proof of the same or less
than all the facts required to establish the
commission of the offense charged[.] 
HRS § 701-109(5) provides: 
(5) The court is not obligated to charge the jury with
respect to an included offense unless there is a rational
basis in the evidence for a verdict acquitting the defendant
of the offense charged and convicting the defendant of the
included offense. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Montalvo was quoted as having told police personnel that he was
 
distracted by something on the side of the road just before he
 noticed Decedent's truck. Montalvo presented his own expert's
 testimony that supported the theory that Decedent entered the
 roadway from the shoulder and "cut off" Montalvo. Montalvo
 concurred, and testified that Decedent pulled out in front of
 him, giving him no opportunity to stop, and denied telling an
 officer that he had been distracted.
 
As the jury was free to assess the credibility of these
 
witnesses and give weight to each as the jury saw fit, it was
 reasonable for the Circuit Court to conclude that the jury could
 disbelieve or give little weight to the witnesses who supported a
 set of facts showing Montalvo was aware of a substantial and
 unjustifiable risk presented by speeding and following another
 vehicle too closely in his cement truck, while crediting those
 whose testimony supported the conclusion he was aware of a mere
 risk, such as the possibility that a hazard might present itself
 when he took his eyes off the road. We find no error in
 instructing the jury on the lesser included offense here.
 
4. The Circuit Court did not err in denying
 
Montalvo's motion for judgment of acquittal. Montalvo argues
 that, because the medical examiner could not testify that
 Decedent's injuries were caused by Montalvo's collision with
 Decedent's truck, there was insufficient evidence to support
 Montalvo's conviction. 
The standard to be applied by the trial court in ruling upon
a motion for a judgment of acquittal is whether, upon the
evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the
prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the
jury, a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. An appellate court employs this same
standard of review.
 
State v. Alston, 75 Haw. 517, 528, 865 P.2d 157, 164 (1994)
 
(citation omitted). 
The testimony presented at trial showed that Decedent's
 
truck was first struck from behind by Montalvo's cement truck,
 and was propelled over the dividing line into oncoming traffic,
 colliding with a SUV. An eyewitness to the collisions testified
 that he "observed a (sic) glass flying in the air and a truck
 with the front fenders jumped and shuttered, and a small pickup
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
or pickup with a flatbed came shooting off quickly from the
 
impact, and crossed the center line in front of me and off into
 the -- over the embankment to the ocean side, the west side." 
The witness further testified that Decedent's flatbed truck
 "lurched forward" approximately 100 to 150 yards after Montalvo
 struck it. When he approached the truck, he saw that the flat
 bed of the truck "had been pushed up and collapsed the back part
 of the cab. The door would not open. . . . So it obviously had
 been crushed forward." The witness could see that the driver had
 severe trauma to the top back of his head. Decedent expired
 shortly thereafter.
 
Although the medical examiner could not determine, as a
 
pathologist, which of Decedent's injuries were caused by
 Montalvo's collision with his truck and which were caused by the
 subsequent collision with the SUV, there was no dispute that the
 former collision began the series of events that caused
 Decedent's death. Therefore, taking the evidence in the light
 most favorable to the prosecution, a reasonable jury could have
 found Montalvo caused the death of Decedent.
 
Therefore, the December 14, 2011 Judgment of the
 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 30, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Shawn A. Luiz,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
 
Artemio C. Baxa,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
6
 