NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000494
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
WADE H. NAKAYAMA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-0668(4))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Wade H. Nakayama (Nakayama) appeals
 
from a Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence (Judgment)
 
entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit
 
1
Court), dated June 2, 2011.  After a four-day jury trial, the
 Circuit Court convicted Nakayama on one count each of: (1)
 
Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree, in violation of Hawaii
 
2
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-733(1)(b) (1993)  (Count I); (2)
 
1
 The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-733 provides in relevant part:
 
Sexual Assault in the fourth degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of sexual assault in the fourth degree
if:
 
. . . .
 (b) The person knowingly exposes the person's genitals
to another person under circumstances in which the actor's
conduct is likely to alarm the other person or put the other
person in fear of bodily injury; . . .
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Indecent Exposure, in violation of HRS § 707-734(1) (1993)3
 
(Count II); and (3) Unauthorized Entry into Motor Vehicle in the
 
Second Degree, in violation of HRS § 708-836.6 (Supp. 2013)4
 
(Count III). On appeal, Nakayama argues that his conviction
 should be vacated and the case should be remanded for a new trial
 
due to various alleged errors in jury selection and certain
 evidentiary rulings.
 I. RELEVANT FACTS
 
On December 27, 2010, the State of Hawai
'i (State) 
filed a Complaint against Nakayama, charging him with the above-referenced offenses, which arose from an August 18, 2010 incident in which Nakayama allegedly made lewd and sexual comments towards Complainant (Complainant) and then, reportedly, entered into the 
back seat of Complainant's car (which was parked in her garage), 
masturbated, and ejaculated. 
A. Exclusion of Defense Witnesses
 During a pre-trial motion in limine hearing, the
 
defense noted that it intended to call two "[p]ositive character
 
3 HRS § 707-734 provides in relevant part:
 
Indecent exposure. (1) A person commits the offense
of indecent exposure if, the person intentionally exposes
the person's genitals to a person to whom the person is not
married under circumstances in which the actor's conduct is
 likely to cause affront.
 
4
 HRS § 708-836.6 provides:
 
Unauthorized entry into motor vehicle in the second
degree. (1) A person commits the offense of unauthorized
entry into a motor vehicle in the second degree if the
person intentionally or knowingly enters into a motor
vehicle without being invited, licensed, or otherwise
authorized to do so.
 (2) Unauthorized entry into a motor vehicle in the
second degree is a misdemeanor.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
witnesses," David and Judy Mikami (the Mikamis). Defense
 
counsel, Hayden Aluli (Aluli), informed the court that the
 Mikamis were offered to show Nakayama's "law abidingness and
 
honesty." At that point, the court reserved ruling on whether to
 permit the defense to call the Mikamis. During trial, the
 Circuit Court did not allow the Mikamis to testify as to
 Nakayama's character for being law-abiding and truthful, citing
 Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 608, on the grounds that
 
Nakayama's character for being law-abiding and truthful had not
 
been attacked.
 
B. Voir Dire
 1. Prospective Juror 4
 
The Circuit Court began jury selection with its initial
 
voir dire of the potential jurors. It was revealed that Aluli
 represented one of the jurors and the juror's husband in an
 unrelated legal matter in July 2010, less than a year prior to
 the trial in the instant case. The juror, Prospective Juror 4
 (Juror 4), advised the trial court that Aluli "did do a great
 
service for my husband and I" and that they were appreciative of
 
that. The court asked Juror 4, "you think you might favor Aluli
 more because you had a positive experience with him?" Juror 4
 responded: "Probably yes. I'm going to say yes." After further
 questioning by the parties, the court excused Juror 4. Aluli did
 not immediately object to the court's act of excusing Juror 4.
 
2. Prospective Juror 63 and Prospective Juror 21
 
The court also allowed the parties to conduct their own
 
individual voir dire of the jurors. When Aluli questioned
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Prospective Juror 63 (Juror 63), the following exchange took
 
place:
 
[Mr. Aluli]: I know, [Juror 63], that you answered
honestly that there are, you know, issues with -- or you

have perhaps issues about the nature of the charges here.
And I'll be more -- I'll be very clear. The evidence is
 going to show that an allegation is going to be made that
Wade masturbated and ejaculated in the complainant's car.
Okay. Now, given the nature of these allegations, [Juror
63], do you have any concerns about the nature of the
charges?
THE JUROR: No, not really.

MR. ALULI: Not really? Okay. You mentioned it's
 
going to be very -- impacts upon person's lives, right?

What do you mean by that?
THE JUROR: Well, I didn't really know that -- the
exact charges, but if things that -- to me, any sexual act

to someone, that hangs in your mind for your whole life.
MR. ALULI: Okay. And is the nature --
THE JUROR:
 Abuse. Any kind of abuse. 
MR. ALULI:
 And does that -- those issues and nature
of these allegations cause you to perhaps want to continue
sitting as a juror in this case?

 
THE JUROR: I feel I probably can be pretty fair
about, you know, hearing the information and making a 

decision. 
MR. ALULI: Okay.
THE JUROR:
 Based on the information. 
MR. ALULI: When you said probably, what did you mean
by probably?
THE JUROR: Well, I have to hear the information and
weigh it. 
So based on that, I could make a decision whether
I feel a person's guilty.
MR. ALULI: Okay. So, you know, when I heard you say
probably, I guess, no doubt, the prosecution and defense

want to be sure that each and every one of you are gonna be
fair and unbiased and give both the Government and the
defendant a fair trial. And that's one of the things that
you need to bind to. Okay. And if any one of you,
including [Juror 63], honestly feel that you can't give the
Government and the defendant a fair trial -- and I'm talking
to be honest like it's not probably can, because you're not
dealing with probably, because that's not binding one's self
to the principles that really inure to our democracy.
Because based on probably, I probably think the Judge would
be the first one to say probably is not good enough. So I
 guess I want to ask you again, [Juror 63], please, honestly,
given the hearts of your heart and knowing who you are, can
you give defendant a fair trial, ma'am?
THE JUROR: I feel once I hear evidence, I can make a
fair decision from what I hear. 

MR. ALULI: Thank you, ma'am, for your honesty.
Appreciate it.

 
Aluli questioned Prospective Juror 21 (Juror 21), in
 
relevant part, as follows:
 
[Mr. Aluli:]  [Juror 21], you talked about -- about
having doubt and whether or not if that doubt is slight.
If, after hearing all the evidence, and listening to the
 
4

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court's instructions, that will be based that if you have a
doubt and it's based upon reason and common sense, would you
be able to return a verdict of not guilty?
THE JUROR: 
I would like to say yes.
 
But, Juror 21 later noted that,
 
And then, just when you said that, about the
masturbating in the car, I went back to when I was seven
years old and I was -- I was walking down the street, and
there's some guy at a red light masturbating in his car.
And I -- and I looked over and I thought, oh, what's that.
You know, I was seven years old. And I'm 54 now, and I can
still remember it. So will that -- will that taint my -- my
-- my decision? I don't know. You know what I mean?
 
Juror 21 stated: 
But I wasn't -- I mean, I wasn't -- I mean, my life went on,
of course, but I remember that. But I don't know if -- this
 is difficult. The flip side of that should -- should he
have been charged with some horrendous thing? I -- I don't
 think so. I don't know.
 
Thereafter, Aluli asked Juror 21, "can you be fair,
 
knowing the nature of the charge and knowing your hearts of
 
hearts, to be fair to both prosecution and [Nakayama]?" Juror 21
 responded: "No, I don't think so." 
However, when subsequently questioned by the court,
 
Juror 21 reconciled her answer to the court as:
 
Your Honor, because [defense counsel] asked -- he
asked -- in our gut, can we honestly say -- knowing our
background and taking into consideration our gut feelings,
would we honestly be able to say we would be fair. When
 it's asked that way, no, I can't honestly say, but if the
trial goes on and I know it happened and hear the whole
story, then I could -- then I could make a decision of guilt
or innocence. But right now, following letter of the law,
the man is presumed to be innocent.
 
Later, both Juror 63 and Juror 21 assured the court and
 
defense counsel that they would not hold it against Nakayama
 
should he choose not to testify during trial, that they both
 accept the principle that Nakayama was presumed to be innocent
 until proven guilty, and also that the burden of establishing
 such guilt was on the State. The court ruled not to excuse
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
either Juror 63 or Juror 21 for cause. Subsequently, the defense
 
used two of its peremptory challenges to excuse both Juror 63 and
 Juror 21. 
3. Juror 11
 
During jury selection, one of the jurors, Juror 11,
 
informed the court that he knew one of the witnesses, Damien
 Pires (Pires), and the following exchange occurred:
 
[The Court:] Damien Pires, could be Pires, P-I-R-E-S,
also with the Maui Electric Company, Kaunakakai. Anybody
know this person?
THE JUROR: I know him, sir.
THE COURT: [Juror 11], all right. Is it the same way
that you know Mr. Sambajon?
THE JUROR: That's correct. However, I worked even
more closely with Damien as he was in a supervisory
capacity.
THE COURT: Okay.
THE JUROR: And I was a manager.
THE COURT: I guess I'll ask the same question. Do
 
you feel that because you've worked with Mr. -- is it Pires?
Is the last name pronounced Pires or Pires.
THE JUROR: Pires. 
THE COURT:
 Do you think you can put aside your
previous work relationship and can you evaluate his
testimony as you would any other witness?
THE JUROR: I believe so, Your Honor.
THE COURT: All right. 
Again, the attorneys may want
to follow up and ask more questions, [Juror 11]. Thank you.

 
During the earlier voir dire, the court had asked the
 
jurors if anyone knew potential witness, Jerry Sambajon:
 
[THE COURT:]  Jerry Sambajon or Sambajon,
S-A-M-B-A-J-O-N, care of Maui Electric on Kaunakakai. 
Does
 
anyone know this person?
THE JUROR: 
I know him, Judge.
THE COURT: All right. That's [Juror 11]. Can you
tell us how you know Jerry Sambajon?
THE JUROR: I'm a retired employee of Maui Electric
Company.
THE COURT: Okay.
THE JUROR: And subsequently had contact with Jerry
when I went to Molokai. 

THE COURT:  Okay. How long ago, when was the last
time you recall having contact?
THE JUROR: I can't recall that, but I retired from
Maui Electric about four -- four and-a-half years ago.
THE COURT: Okay. So you haven't seen -- this Mr. -­
is it Jerry? 
Is he a he?
 
THE JUROR: I'm sorry?
THE COURT: Is he a male, Jerry Sambajon?
THE JUROR: That's correct. 
6

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: So you last saw him maybe five -- more
than four and-a-half years ago?

THE JUROR: 
That's correct.
 
THE COURT: 
All right. If Mr. Sambajon is called as a
witness in this case, can you be fair and impartial to both

sides? Can you put aside your previous work with Mr.
Sambajon?
THE JUROR:  
I believe so. 
THE COURT: 
All right. The attorneys will follow up.
They'll ask more questions of you, [Juror 11]. 
Thank you.
Anyone else know Mr. Sambajon? Let the record reflect no
 
response.
 
The trial court permitted each party twenty minutes to
 
directly question the prospective jurors, during which time Aluli
 
did not ask Juror 11 any questions. Ultimately, Jerry Sambajon
 was not called to testify during the trial.
 
Subsequently, as discussed below, Juror 11 was
 
questioned again during trial, after informing the bailiff that
 he was aware of certain circumstances involving the Defendant's
 only witness. 
C. The Trial
 1. Testimony of Witnesses Generally
 
The trial began on March 14, 2011 and ended on March
 
17, 2011. The State called five witnesses in its case-in-chief: 
Pires; Sybil Lopez (Lopez); Complainant; Officer David Roarty
 
(Officer Roarty); and Complainant's brother (Brother).
 
Complainant testified that at approximately 12:00 p.m.
 
on August 18, 2010, Nakayama drove onto her driveway, exited his
 
vehicle, and made lewd and sexual comments to her, exposed
 himself to her, and then entered into the back seat of her
 vehicle that was parked in her garage and masturbated. Further,
 Complainant testified that after Nakayama ejaculated, he cleaned
 himself and her car with a shirt or rag, apologized to her, and
 then left. Complainant testified that she called her friend
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Pires, who accompanied her to the Moloka 'i police station in 
Kaunakakai, where she made a report to Officer Roarty. She 
testified that she told Officer Roarty everything that Nakayama had allegedly done earlier that day. After making her report, Complainant and Pires had lunch with Brother, and Brother was informed of what Nakayama allegedly had done. Later that day, Brother brought Nakayama to the Moloka
'i Youth Center, where 
Nakayama apologized to Complainant. 
Officer Roarty testified that at about 1:02 p.m. on
 
August 18, 2010, Complainant, who was accompanied by a male,
 provided a statement to him about what Nakayama had allegedly
 done earlier that day. However, Officer Roarty's testimony was
 not entirely consistent with Complainant's trial testimony. 
Officer Roarty testified that Complainant told him Nakayama made
 lewd sexual comments towards her, such as: "[y]ou make me
 fucking hard" and "[w]e don't need to fuck, I'll just eat you,"
 and that Nakayama had also unzipped his pants. But, according to
 Officer Roarty, Complainant said that Nakayama did not expose
 himself to her. Further, Officer Roarty testified that
 Complainant did not tell him that Nakayama went into her vehicle,
 that he "exposed his penis," that he "stroked his penis in her
 presence," or that he "ejaculated in the back of her car."
 Officer Roarty answered in the affirmative when asked whether he
 would have "put it down" in the report if Complainant had relayed
 any of the above-referenced details to him. 
Brother testified that he, Complainant, and Pires had
 
lunch together on August 18, 2010, and that both Pires and
 
8
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Brother wanted "to confront [Nakayama] to get to the bottom of" 
it. Brother stated that he was "angry" and "pissed off." Later that day, Brother found Nakayama and "confronted" him on the street near Nakayama's residence, and he told Nakayama that he needed to meet with him. During the later encounter with Brother, Pires showed up and was "as angry" with Nakayama as Brother was. Brother stated that he had to ask Pires to "back off" of Nakayama during that encounter. Brother took Nakayama in his van to meet with Complainant at the Moloka
'i Youth Center. 
Brother described his role at the youth center "as like a mediator" and described that he did "act as a mediator between [Complainant] and [Nakayama]." At the youth center, Brother brought Complainant to his van where Nakayama was waiting and told Nakayama to apologize to Complainant. Brother explained: "She didn't wanna [sic] come out [of the youth center], but I told her I needed to know, you know, I -- I didn't know any other way to get closure. I wanted to squash this." 
Lopez testified that she worked at the Moloka
'i Youth 
Center, and she corroborated Brother's testimony that he "kind of mediat[ed] the situation" between Nakayama and Complainant in the youth center's parking lot. From Lopez's perspective, Brother was "mediating . . . to get [Nakayama] and [Complainant] to kind of settle this issue," which she recalls as having lasted approximately 15-30 minutes. Lopez testified that she overhead Nakayama apologize to Complainant. 
Pires testified that he had accompanied Complainant
 
when she provided her statement to Officer Roarty on August 18,
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2010. Further, Pires testified that prior to accompanying
 
Complainant to the police station, Complainant told him that
 Nakayama had masturbated in the back of her car, and that she
 told the same to Officer Roarty. Additionally, Pires testified
 that later that day, he went to look for Brother and found him
 "talking" with Nakayama. Pires stated that he exited his vehicle
 "to make sure [that Brother and Nakayama] didn't get into any
 altercation." He testified that Brother and Nakayama got into
 Brother's van, where Brother "drove off" so Nakayama could
 "apologize to [his] sister at the youth center." Pires followed.
 
At the youth center, Pires explained that Brother told
 
Nakayama: "Eh, go ahead and tell my sister what you wanna say." 
Pires stated that Brother attempted to exclude Pires from hearing
 the apology by Nakayama towards Complainant and that Brother
 stated: "It's between us. It's us Japanese people." 
Nakayama did not testify at trial, and he called only
 
one witness, Malu Dunnam (Dunnam), who provided negative
 
character testimony about Complainant and Pires. In particular,
 
Dunnam testified that Pires "is not an honest person. . . . He
 doesn't have it in him to be honest and do what is right." 
Similarly, Dunnam testified that she did not believe Complainant
 to be a truthful person. 
In rebuttal, the State re-called Pires, who testified
 
that he was Dunnam's supervisor when the two worked at Maui
 Electric Company and that because Dunnam "failed to do what she
 was trained to do," an island-wide blackout in 2008 resulted. 
Shortly thereafter, Dunnam was terminated from Maui Electric
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Company. In short, Pires was brought back to attack Dunnam's
 
credibility.
 
2. Further Voir Dire of Juror 11
 
During the recess in the middle of Dunnam's testimony,
 
the court informed the parties as follows:
 
My bailiff just made mention to me about juror in Seat
Number 11, [Juror 11], which was a former employee of Maui
Electric. In essence, he does not know the witness, but
thought she looked familiar. And I guess when she described
where she's worked before, that's (inaudible). He thinks he
 might have heard about this issue, the power outage that
happened in 2008, whatever incident that was, whatever year
that was, he might have some information about that. He's
 not sure if any issues of the Maui Electric discussion might
come into play. Does anybody want to voir dire him or talk
with him about this issue?
 
Subsequently, the court and parties agreed that the
 
parties would complete Dunnam's testimony and then voir dire
 
Juror 11. Immediately prior to the voir dire of Juror 11, the
 following exchange took place:
 
THE COURT: So should we isolate [Juror 11] and ask
him questions?

MR. ALULI: Sure. 
MR. PHELPS: Yes. 
THE COURT: I'm going to clear the courtroom, either
that or go back to Chambers, because I don't want this to be

-- I don't want the juror to feel uncomfortable. Okay? All
 right.
 
After the court excused the rest of the jurors for the
 
day, the court asked Juror 11 to remain:
 
[THE COURT:]  [Juror 11], I'm going to ask you to
remain. 
All right.
Everyone else is excused. We'll see you tomorrow
morning.
In fact you can come sit up here [Juror 11], at the
witness -- yeah, can you come sit over here. The Court's
 going to clear the courtroom.
Everyone here who is not a party, please step outside.
(Outside the hearing of the jury.)
THE COURT: 
Be seated, Mr. Nakayama.
Let the record that the Court has excused the panel.
Based on the earlier Bench conference, the Court has asked
[Juror 11] to remain for perhaps further voir dire on him.
He had raised an issue or concern with the bailiff during
our last break. 
No one had anticipated or, I think, had maybe
considered that Ms. Dunnam is a former employee of the Maui
 
11

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Electric Company, both on Maui as well as on Molokai. We
 
all learned during voir dire that [Juror 11] himself was
also a retired employee, supervisor, with the Maui Electric
Company. And he had revealed that in knowing some of the
parties whose names were read. I guess Ms. Dunnam's name
did not ring a bell to him. Perhaps she was there for a
brief time, but that he thought he may have recognized her,
but did not know her. But the other thing I think he
mentioned was that he might have been aware of the incident
that was spoken about regarding, perhaps, her -- or the
blackout that occurred on Molokai. 
So the Court has simply asked [Juror 11] to remain so
that if the -- the attorneys would like to ask any further
questions, you may do so at this time. Is anyone seeking
further clarification or any questions for [Juror 11]?
 
Thereafter, Juror 11 testified that he retired from
 
Maui Electric Company in November 2006. Juror 11 confirmed that
 
at the outset, during jury selection, he did not recognize
 Dunnam's name when it was read as a potential witness. 
Referencing the 2008 blackout and Dunnam's resulting termination,
 Juror 11 described his association with Dunnam as follows: 
Well, I'm not sure that I recall the specific incident
that she's talking about. What I can say is that after
seeing and hearing her on the stand, I realized that I –- I
wouldn't even say I know her, but I know of her because I
was employed by Maui Electric Company.
 
Juror 11 further elaborated that "any contact I've had
 
with her would have been minimal." Despite this, the reason why
 
Juror 11 brought the issue to the court's attention was because:
 
[Dunnam] claimed - - the witness claimed - - said that
she was working in the Molokai power plant in 2006. Now,
I'm not sure what the – what the month is, or - - I was
 
there at the time, but I retired from Maui Electric Company
st
in 2006, November 1 , 2006.  So . . . I want to make sure
 that, you know, the Court is aware of that. And what she
 had mentioned in testimony lead me to have some –- some
questions that, based on my experience with Maui Electric,
and being the manager of power supply there, her claim that
she didn't do anything wrong, it wasn't her fault, when
investigation showed that likely her action or inaction was
cause of the problem [sic]. So based on that, I want to let
the Court know that, well, her testimony may impact my
decision on her credibility.
 
After defense counsel's multiple attempts to further
 
question the juror about whether his personal experience and
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
knowledge caused him to question the witness's credibility were
 
rebuffed by the court, Juror 11 indicated that he would do his
 best to be as impartial as he possibly could, as he stated during
 jury selection. When asked again about how he would carry out
 his juror duties "based upon what [he] heard today," Juror 11
 responded that "all I said was that knowing what I know may
 impact the credibility of the witness." Upon further questioning
 by the judge, Juror 11 informed the court that he felt he could
 be a fair and impartial juror. 
Following the voir dire of Juror 11, the court denied
 
Aluli's request to remove Juror 11 for cause by reasoning that
 Juror 11 did not appear to work with Dunnam and that Juror 11
 appears to qualify under the standard of being capable of serving
 as a "fair and impartial juror." 
Immediately after the trial court's ruling, the defense
 
objected to the trial court's holding a private hearing to
 privately voir dire Juror 11:
 
MR. ALULI: Your Honor, I want to object to the Court
clearing the courtroom to have this proceeding. It's a
 
public trial. I don't see any basis for excluding --
THE COURT: Okay. You didn't object to that when I
asked at the Bench. 
MR. ALULI: Your Honor --
THE COURT:
 No. I said I would being clearing,
because it was a juror, and you agreed, Mr. Aluli. And now

 
you --
MR. ALULI: No. I did not object to it, I didn't
object to it then.

THE COURT: I asked if that would be okay, or else we

would go in my Chambers. I would have reviewed the juror in
my Chambers, then.
MR. ALULI: Okay. Well, then, frankly, Judge, if it's
-- it's clear that you wanted it private. Right?
THE COURT: For the sake of the juror, correct.
MR. ALULI: Well, I just object on grounds that this

is a open trial and I object on behalf of my client to that
proceeding. Simply that, Judge.

. . . .
 
THE COURT: I thought I made it clear at the Bench, by

the way, when I asked, that I would be clearing the
courtroom for the sake of the juror. 
I asked if there was
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
any objection to that. Now, the fact that you remained
silent indicates a waiver, Mr. Aluli. You are now saying you
did not -- you're now objecting to that. I would have
 gladly done this in Chambers or somewhere else. So I'm
 advising you that in the future if you do not object, then
I'm indicating that as a waiver.
MR. ALULI:
 
Well, I mean, if -- to me, it's an
ineffective waiver if you're gonna put it in Chambers. So
the record speaks for itself. You did not have the family
or the public have -- participated in hearing this query
with the jury. I'm objecting under Federal and
Constitutional right.
THE COURT:  
It was a juror.
MR. ALULI: A juror.
THE COURT: Who brought an item to the Court. That's
 
right. And I did not want that to be public knowledge.
MR. ALULI:  All right.
THE COURT: And I would have excluded, most
importantly, the press from hearing that.

 
3. Officer Roarty's Police Report
 
During Complainant's testimony, the defense attempted
 
to admit Officer Roarty's entire police report into evidence, to
 
which the State objected. According to the court, "there are
 three pages to this report. The first two give background
 information, which is not relevant in this case, but the third
 page refers to a statement that [Complainant has] been testifying
 to." The defense argued that the report was being submitted
 into evidence "for the jury to weigh . . . what [Complainant]
 said happened on August 18th." The court allowed the defense to
 enter only the third page of the report. 
Later, during Officer Roarty's testimony, the defense
 
again attempted to enter the remainder of the police report into
 evidence. According to defense counsel, the report was being
 offered to show the classification of the alleged offense
 (harassment) as originally lodged. Defense counsel also argued
 that "[p]age 1 and 2 are relevant [because] it comes in as a
 complete report by this officer as a complete prior inconsistent
 statement." The court again denied admission of the remainder of
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the report because "none of that contains her statement,"
 
referring to the first two pages of the report. 
4. Brother's Alleged Prior Bad Acts

 
During cross-examination of Brother, defense counsel
 
attempted to introduce evidence of Brother's alleged prior bad
 acts, which included allegations of abuse of family member and
 the issuance of temporary restraining orders. The following
 exchange took place:
 
THE COURT:  Okay. So tell me what you're offering
this under, under 404(b)?

MR. ALULI: I'm offering it under, actually, two.
404(b) --
THE COURT: 404(b).
MR. ALULI: 404(b). And it has to do with -- with,
basically, I believe he has a motive and the motive to help

his sister, right. And it's also under 405(b) --
THE COURT:  Wait, wait. You want to show his violence
 
as his proof of a motive?

MR. ALULI: I want to show his violence. 
THE COURT: (Inaudible.)
MR. ALULI: Yeah. 
THE COURT: You think his violence, what you're
characterizing as violence, is a pertinent trait?

MR. ALULI: Is a pertinent trait of [Brother].
THE COURT: Of [Brother]. To show what? 
MR. ALULI: To show that he was --
THE COURT: That he acted in conformity --
MR. ALULI: He acted in conformity of being aggressive
and belligerent and threatening on August the 18th, which

ended up with statements my client made.

And that's coupled with --
THE COURT: How do you intend to -- I know what you're
trying to do. 
You're trying to show support for that
theory. My question to you is -- and, again, I think this
is premature -- if you're analogizing this to initial
aggressor or something like that. Is that what you're
trying it to analogize this to?
MR. ALULI: 
I'm not -- I don't think the same --
THE COURT: Or propensity for violence.
MR. ALULI: I don't think it should be analyzed like
aggressive, like self-defense. 
I'm not raising it under
that theory, Your Honor. Although -- but although by -- by
analogy, under the way the courts have looked at it, it's
similar. Okay. Although I'm not raising a self-defense, I
am raising that it is the context of [Brother's] character,
character for aggressiveness. This is not a self-defense,
but my defense is pertinent that -­
THE COURT:
 
What is the relevance of his character for
 
violence? I guess what I'm trying to narrow down.
MR. ALULI: 
That he has character that resulted in my
client's case. And he may -- you know, I want him to admit
or prove up that he's been aggressive when he's angry, he's
been belligerent, threatening when he's angry, and that I
 
15

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
want to show that it is corroborative of what occurred on
 
August the 18th.
 
The court then denied the defense's request to admit
 
evidence of Brother's alleged prior bad acts.
 
5. Evidence of Apology and Offer to Pay $100
 
Finally, several of the State's witnesses testified
 
that Nakayama apologized to Complainant. Complainant testified
 
that after Nakayama ejaculated in her car, Nakayama started
 wiping himself and said, "[s]orry, sorry, sorry, couldn't help
 myself." Lopez testified that she overheard Nakayama apologize
 to Complainant while they were at the youth center. Pires
 testified that he heard Nakayama say "I'm sorry" to Brother and
 Complainant. Brother testified that, on the day of the incident,
 when Brother met up with Nakayama, Nakayama jumped out of his
 truck, grabbed and hugged Brother, and said that he was sorry. 
Brother also testified that, a few days after the incident,
 Nakayama called Brother and offered to give Brother one hundred
 dollars to have Complainant's car cleaned by a local cleaner. 
After the State rested, the defense moved the Circuit
 
Court to strike the testimony regarding the apologies as well as
 Nakayama's alleged offer to pay one hundred dollars, pursuant to
 HRE Rule 408. In denying the motion, the court stated:
 
I don't believe this section applies to what you're
arguing in this case. The testimony from [Brother] is that
the defendant offered to pay that the day after this alleged
meeting took place. I mean, that's the state of the
evidence, is that after this -- what [Brother] was
attempting was to resolve this matter between two families,
that there be no further, I guess, bad feelings or residual
feelings. That's according to his testimony. And that it
 was Mr. Nakayama who called him the next day to say he
wanted to offer money for the purpose of cleaning the
vehicle, not for the purpose of settling any sort of case.
The apology that you allude to also was testified to. So
 far, the evidence is that it was Mr. Nakayama who agreed to
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
apologize, for the same reason, to resolve this matter
between two families. Not to resolve the legal or the
criminal case, because that's a decision that only the
police and the prosecution can make. It was not within
 [Brother's], or even [Complainant's], authority to resolve
this case on behalf of the State of Hawaii. They could
resolve this case on a personal level between families,
which -- which is always a good thing. But the case that's
 before the Court now is a criminal case filed by the Police
Department and, eventually, by the Prosecutor's Office. So
 this is not a situation where an offer of compromise from
the Prosecutor's Office was made to [Brother] -- excuse me
-- to Mr. Nakayama and, somehow, that has found its way into
this trial. Because, of course, the Court would preclude
that. 
So for those reasons, the Court denies [the defense's]
request [to strike].
 
The defense then moved for judgment of acquittal,
 
pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 29, 
incorporating its earlier motion to strike. The Circuit Court
 
also denied the motion for judgment of acquittal.
 
On March 17, 2011, the jury returned a verdict of
 
guilty for each count charged. The Circuit Court entered its
 Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence on June 2, 2011.
 II.
	 POINTS OF ERROR
 
Nakayama raises eight points of error on appeal:
 (1) The trial court plainly erred by sua sponte
 
closing the courtroom proceedings to all members of the public
 during voir dire of a sitting juror who raised an issue during
 Nakayama's case-in-chief;
 
(2) The trial court reversibly erred by denying
 
Nakayama's motion to excuse a sitting juror and replacing him
 with an alternate juror;
 
(3) The trial court reversibly erred by excusing, over
 
Nakayama's objection, a prospective juror simply because she had
 a positive experience with defense counsel's prior legal
 representation;
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4) The trial court reversibly erred by overruling
 
Nakayama's challenges to two prospective jurors for cause during
 
voir dire;
 
(5) The trial court reversibly erred by excluding a
 
complete police report because it was relevant and admissible as
 his complete report and provided the context of the Complainant's
 inconsistent statement;
 
(6) The trial court reversibly erred by limiting
 
Nakayama's cross-examination of prosecution witness, Brother,
 regarding evidence of his multiple, prior bad acts;
 
(7) The trial court reversibly erred by denying
 
Nakayama's motion to strike evidence relating to Nakayama's
 offers to compromise and/or mediate under HRS 408; and
 
(8) The trial court reversibly erred by precluding
 
three defense witnesses from testifying.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
The appellate court "will apply the plain error 
standard of review to correct errors which seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings, to serve the ends of justice, and to prevent the denial of fundamental rights." State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai
'i 
327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006) (citation omitted). An appellate court's "power to deal with plain error is one to be exercised sparingly and with caution because the plain error rule represents a departure from a presupposition of the adversary system--that a party must look to his or her counsel for protection and bear the cost of counsel's mistakes." Nichols, 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
111 Hawai 'i at 335, 141 P.3d at 982 (citation omitted). 
"We answer questions of constitutional law by 
exercising our own independent judgment based on the facts of the
 
case." State v. Ortiz , 91 Hawai 'i 181, 188, 981 P.2d 1127, 1134 
(1999) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
In Hawai 'i, the appellate courts "review the trial 
court's decision to pass a juror for cause under the abuse of
 discretion standard." 
State v. Kauhi , 86 Hawai 'i 195, 197, 948 
P.2d 1036, 1038 (1997) (citation and internal quotation marks
 omitted).
 
The admissibility of evidence requires different
standards of review depending on the particular rule of
evidence at issue. When application of a particular
evidentiary rule can yield only one correct result, the
proper standard for appellate review is the right/wrong
standard. However, the traditional abuse of discretion
standard should be applied in the case of those rules of
evidence that require a judgment call on the part of the
trial court.
 
"Prior bad act" evidence under [HRE] Rule 404(b)
(1993) is admissible when it is 1) relevant and 2) more
probative than prejudicial. A trial court's determination
 that evidence is "relevant" within the meaning of HRE Rule
401 (1993) is reviewed under the right/wrong standard of
review. However, a trial court's balancing of the probative
value of prior bad act evidence against the prejudicial
effect of such evidence under HRE Rule 403 (1993) is
reviewed for abuse of discretion. An abuse of discretion
 occurs when the court clearly exceeds the bounds of reason
or disregards rules or principles of law to the substantial
detriment of a party litigant.
 
State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai 'i 390, 403-04, 56 P.3d 692, 705-06 
(2002) (citations and some internal quotation marks omitted;
 
format altered).
 IV. DISCUSSION
 A. The Closed Further Voir Dire of Juror 11
 Nakayama argues that the Circuit Court plainly erred by
 
sua sponte closing the courtroom to members of the public during
 the further voir dire of Juror 11, which took place during a
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
recess during Dunnam's testimony. Nakayama appears to contend
 
that (1) the closure violated his due process rights under the
 Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments of the U.S. Constitution, and (2)
 he did not voluntarily waive his right to a public trial.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has explained: 
The Sixth Amendment provides that in all criminal
prosecutions, the defendants shall have the right to a
speedy and public trial. Article I, Section 14, of the
Hawaii Constitution, which was modeled after the Sixth
Amendment to the United States Constitution contains a
 similar mandate. The purpose of the requirement of a public
trial was to guarantee that the accused would fairly be
dealt with and not unjustly condemned. But so deeply
ingrained has been our traditional mistrust for secret
trials that the general policy of open trials has become
firmly embedded in our system of jurisprudence.
 
State v. Ortiz , 91 Hawai 'i 181, 190, 981 P.2d 1127, 1136 (1999) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
Further, "the United States Supreme Court has observed that,
 without exception, all courts have held that an accused is, at
 the very least, entitled to have his friends, relatives and
 counsel present, no matter with what offense he may be charged." 
Id. (citation, internal quotation marks, brackets, and emphasis
 omitted).
 
However, this right is not absolute:

 
The presumption of openness may be overcome only by an
overriding interest based on findings that closure is
essential to preserve higher values and is narrowly tailored
to serve that interest. The interest is to be articulated
 along with findings specific enough that a reviewing court
can determine whether the closure order was properly
entered.
 
Id. at 191, 981 P.2d at 1137 (citations, internal quotation
 
marks, and emphasis omitted). A four-part test has been applied
 
to determine whether the courtroom may be closed over the
 defendant's objection:
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) the party seeking to close the hearing must
advance an overriding interest that is likely to be
prejudiced, (2) the closure must be no broader than
necessary to protect that interest, (3) the trial court must
consider reasonable alternatives to closing the proceeding,
and (4) it must make findings adequate to support the
closure.
 
Id. (citation omitted).
 
Nakayama heavily relies upon the U.S. Supreme Court's
 
holding in Presley v. Georgia for the proposition that a
 
defendant's right to a public trial is violated where the trial
 court excluded the public from voir dire of prospective jurors. 
558 U.S. 209 (2010). Presley is distinguishable. In Presley,
 
the public was excluded from the entirety of the voir dire
 process because there was limited space in the courtroom. Id. at
 
212, 214-16.
 
Here, the Circuit Court, rather than either party,
 
raised the issue of closing the hearing because it did not "want
 the juror to feel uncomfortable." Neither party voiced any
 objection until after the further voir dire was completed and the
 court ruled. Indeed, it appears that the courtroom closure was
 no broader or longer than necessary for the stated purpose of
 making Juror 11 comfortable for the limited follow up voir dire
 on an issue that the juror had raised as a concern. The court
 considered the alternative of examining the juror in chambers,
 and neither party offered any other alternative or suggested that
 the public should remain. Finally, the Circuit Court stated its
 specific finding that the closure was for the limited purpose of
 making the juror feel comfortable to respond to questions from
 counsel on his knowledge and relationship with Dunnam for the
 time during which they were both working at Maui Electric
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Company. Under these circumstances, we conclude that the Circuit
 
Court did not plainly err by sua sponte closing the courtroom for
 its limited, mid-trial voir dire of a juror, which was conducted
 on the record in the presence of the defendant and his counsel,
 who was given the opportunity to question the juror.
 
B.	 Nakayama's Motion to Excuse Juror 11
 
Nakayama argues that the Circuit Court reversibly erred

 
by denying his motion to excuse Juror 11 for cause, contending:
 
The trial court reversibly erred in failing to excuse
[Juror 11] for cause. Given his admission that defense
 
witness Dunnam's testimony "may impact" his decision on her
credibility, the trial court abused its discretion by
denying defense counsel's motion to excuse [Juror 11].
 
Generally, the trial court's exercise of its discretion
 
to excuse or retain a prospective juror is governed by HRS § 612­
7 (Supp. 2013), which states: "A prospective juror shall not be
 excused by a court for slight or trivial cause, but only when it
 appears that jury duty would entail a serious personal hardship,
 or that for other good cause the prospective juror should be
 excused either temporarily or otherwise." Here, Nakayama argues
 that good cause exists because Juror 11 indicated that his
 experience and knowledge gained at Maui Electric might impact his
 opinion about the credibility of Dunnam, the defense's only
 witness, who was called principally for the purpose of raising
 doubt about Complainant's credibility and the credibility of
 Pires, a fellow Maui Electric supervisor that Juror 11 worked
 with "more closely" than another potential witness. Notably,
 Pires had been Dunnam's supervisor at Maui Electric, and Dunnam
 testified that Pires (not Dunnam) had been responsible for the
 power outage that led to her being fired.
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Although not set forth in its entirety above, the
 
transcript of Juror 11's further voir dire reveals that the
 
juror, who (like Pires) had been in a supervisory role at Maui
 Electric, had extra-judicial information that impacted his view
 of Dunnam's testimony about her role in the blackout, and thus
 her credibility. Juror 11 noted that Dunnam said it was not her
 fault, but the "investigation showed that likely her action or
 inaction was [the] cause of the problem." Nakayama's attorney,
 Aluli, tried several times to ask whether the juror's prior
 knowledge and experience at Maui Electric caused him to question
 Dunnam's credibility. The court did not allow that inquiry, but
 acknowledged that the juror was the one who had first raised the
 concern that his knowledge might cause him to doubt Dunnam's
 credibility. Aluli did ask Juror 11: "Just because the nature
 of where you retired from, and knowledge as a supervisor about
 how workers are supervised, how complaints are investigated and
 all of that, it appears that you have such a superior ability,
 outside the court, to weigh the credibility of one witness. Is
 that fair?" Juror 11 answered "yes" and also agreed that the
 other jurors did not have that context. After confirming that he
 had out-of-court knowledge about Maui Electric's grievance
 process, how investigations are put together, and "all the levels
 that an employee can take," Juror 11 agreed with Aluli that the
 information he possessed was the reason he came forward to the
 Court with the concern, stating: "That's correct. But I might
 add that it was not my intent to share that with -- with other
 witnesses, you know. All I'm –- all I said was that knowing what
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I know may impact the credibility of the witness." Presumably,
 
he meant that it was not his intent to share that information
 with other jurors.
 
Clearly the Circuit Court had some concerns about Juror
 
11's extra-judicial personal knowledge about issues testified to
 at trial because the court instructed the juror: "In addition,
 I'm going to ask that you not share with your fellow jurors any
 particulars of this incident that's been referred to, this
 firing, this termination [of Dunnam]. I'm not asking you not to
 use your life experiences, but I'm saying anything you might
 recall about this particular incident, either Ms. Dunnam, her
 reference to the grievance or whatever, the firing, that you not
 share those with the jury as well."
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held, citing the U.S. 
Supreme Court, that "the right to jury trial guarantees to the criminally accused a fair trial by a panel of impartial [] jurors." State v. Graham, 70 Haw. 627, 633, 780 P.2d 1103, 1107 
(1989) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). The court explained: 
When a juror is challenged on grounds that he has
formed an opinion and cannot be impartial, the test is
whether the nature and strength of the opinion are such as
in law necessarily raise the presumption of partiality. The
 question is one of mixed law and fact . . . . Furthermore,
the reviewing court is bound by the proposition that
findings of impartiality should be set aside only where
prejudice is manifest.
 
Id. at 633-34, 780 P.2d at 1107 (citations and internal quotation
 
marks omitted). In addition, the supreme court has held:

 
Once there is a claim that an accused is being denied
his or her right to a fair trial because of outside
influences infecting a jury, the initial step for the court
to take is to determine whether the nature of the outside
 influences rises to the level of being substantially
 
24

  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prejudicial. If it does not rise to such a level, the trial
court is under no duty to interrogate the jury. And whether
it does rise to the level of substantial prejudice is
ordinarily a question committed to the trial court's
discretion. Where the trial court does determine that such
 influence is of a nature which could substantially prejudice
the defendant's right to a fair trial, a rebuttable
presumption of prejudice is raised. The trial judge is then
duty bound to further investigate the totality of
circumstances surrounding the outside influence to determine
its impact on jury impartiality. The standard to be applied
in overcoming such a presumption is that the outside
influence on the jury must be proven harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt. The trial court, in its investigation of
the totality of circumstances, should include individual
examination of potentially tainted jurors, outside the
presence of the other jurors, to determine the influence, if
any, of the extraneous matters.
 
State v. Samonte, 83 Hawai 'i 507, 523-24, 928 P.2d 1, 17-18 
(1996) (quoting State v. Williamson, 72 Haw. 97, 102, 807 P.2d 
593, 596 (1991)); see also State v. Okumura, 78 Hawai 'i 383, 393­
94, 894 P.2d 80, 90-91 (1995). 
Here, notwithstanding Juror 11's statement that he 
could still be "fair and impartial," he was clearly signaling to 
the court that, based on his specific extra-judicial knowledge from his job at Maui Electric Company, he did not believe the testimony of the defendant's only witness, such that it might impact his assessment of her credibility. While the juror was, understandably, not willing to say that he could not be fair and impartial, under the circumstances of this case, that averment is not sufficient. See Kauhi, 86 Hawai
'i at 199, 948 P.2d at 1040 
(stating that the trial court is "not bound by a [] juror's statement that he or she will be fair and impartial" (citation omitted)). The nature and strength of Juror 11's opinion, which was based on his thirty-year career with the electric company, raised a presumption of partiality that impinged on Nakayama's right to a fair and impartial jury. It is not enough to tell a 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
juror to keep information to himself or herself and to not share
 
it with other jurors. The trial court's assessment that this
 juror had personal knowledge and information that needed to be
 withheld from his fellow jurors was indicative that the nature
 and strength of Juror 11's opinion was much more substantive and
 significant than something a juror might have been exposed to in,
 for example, media accounts of an incident. Cf. Graham, 70 Haw.
 
at 634, 780 P.2d at 1108.
 
In addition, we conclude that the prejudice to Nakayama
 
was manifest. Dunnam was the defense's only witness, her
 testimony was provided for the sole purpose of discrediting that
 of Complainant and Pires, and Juror 11 worked "closely" with
 Pires because they were both supervisors at Maui Electric
 Company. After the Circuit Court ruled that Juror 11 would not
 be excused for cause, the State brought Pires back on rebuttal to
 further attack Dunnam's credibility by testifying that the 2008
 island-wide blackout was Dunnam's fault because she did not
 follow standard operating procedures, the very subject of Juror
 11's extra-judicial knowledge that he brought to the court's
 attention as a concern. Accordingly, the Circuit Court abused
 its discretion in denying Nakayama's motion to excuse Juror 11
 and failing to replace him with an alternate juror.
 
C. Aluli's Prior Representation of Juror 4
 Nakayama maintains that the Circuit Court reversibly
 
erred by dismissing Juror 4 for cause because of her recent prior
 legal representation by Aluli. Although Juror 4 responded in the
 affirmative to Aluli's questions of whether she could give the
 
26
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
government a fair trial in this case, or whether she could put 
her positive experience with him aside and be fair and unbiased, she nonetheless answered in the affirmative when the court asked her, "[do y]ou think you might favor Mr. Aluli more because you had a positive experience with him?" As noted above, the Circuit Court is "not bound by [Juror 4's] statement that [] she will be fair and impartial." See Kauhi, 86 Hawai
'i at 199, 948 
P.2d at 1040 (citation omitted). Therefore, having stated that she might favor defense counsel, showing her apparent bias for the defense, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion by excusing Juror 4. See id. ("[i]f the revealed details of the 
relationship are such that bias or prejudice may be reasonably implied, a juror may be properly refused for cause" (citation and internal quotation marks omitted)). 
D. Nakayama's Motion to Remove Jurors 63 and 21 for Cause
 Nakayama maintains that the Circuit Court reversibly
 
erred by failing to excuse Jurors 63 and 21 "given their honest
 answers that they could not be fair and impartial. The trial
 court's sua sponte questioning of them, which focused entirely on
 one principle of law -- the presumption of innocence -­constituted an abuse of discretion."
 
During voir dire, defense counsel informed Juror 63
 
that the "allegation is going to be made that [Nakayama]
 masturbated and ejaculated in the complainant's car." Juror 63
 expressed her view that any sexual act "hangs in your mind for
 your whole life", but stated that she "probably can be pretty
 fair about . . . hearing the information and making a decision,"
 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and that she was "very good at following instructions." Further,
 
she assured the court that Nakayama was presumed innocent until
 proven guilty and that she would not hold it against him for not
 testifying. 
Similarly, Juror 21 assured the court and defense
 
counsel that she would not hold it against Nakayama should he
 choose not to testify during trial, that she accepted the
 principle that Nakayama was presumed to be innocent until proven
 guilty, and also that the burden of establishing such guilt was
 on the State. Therefore, although she initially stated that she
 did not feel that she could be fair, it was because she felt that
 her childhood experience of seeing someone masturbating in a car
 might taint her view, depending on the evidence presented. 
However, when placed within the overriding principles reiterated
 by the Circuit Court, Juror 21 accepted those principles and
 stated that she could uphold them in her role as juror. Finally,
 unlike Juror 11, other than their own initial claims of having
 preconceived notions about a case of this nature, Jurors 63 and
 21 did not demonstrate any link to the parties or personal
 knowledge of the evidence to be presented such that a presumption
 of impartiality would arise.
 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 
abuse its discretion in denying Nakayama's motion to remove
 Jurors 63 and 21 for cause.
 
E. The Police Report
 Nakayama argues that Officer Roarty's entire police
 
report should have been admitted into evidence, rather than
 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
merely the last page of the three-page report, pointing to HRE
 
Rules 402, 401, and 803(b)(8).
 
HRE Rule 402 (1993) provides: 
All relevant evidence is admissible, except as
otherwise provided by the Constitutions of the United States
and the State of Hawaii, by statute, by these rules, or by
other rules adopted by the supreme court. Evidence which is
 not relevant is not admissible.
 
HRE Rule 401 (1993) provides: 
'Relevant evidence' means evidence having any tendency
to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to
the determination of the action more probable or less
probable than it would be without the evidence.
 
Finally, HRE Rule 803(b)(8) (Supp. 2013) (emphasis
 
added) provides:
 
Public records and reports. Records, reports,
statements, or data compilations, in any form, of public
offices or agencies, setting forth (A) the activities of the
office or agency, or (B) matters observed pursuant to duty
imposed by law as to which matters there was a duty to
report, 
excluding, however, in criminal cases matters
observed by police officers and other law enforcement
personnel, or (c) in civil proceedings and against the
government in criminal cases, factual findings resulting
from an investigation made pursuant to authority granted by
law, unless the sources of information or other
circumstances indicate lack of trustworthiness.
 
The Circuit Court admitted the third page of the police
 
report as a prior inconsistent statement of the Complainant, in
 
accordance with HRE Rule 613(b); however, the court declined to
 admit the first two pages because they did not contain any
 statements by the Complainant. In citing the hearsay exception
 in HRE Rule 803(b)(8), Nakayama omits the above underlined
 portion of HRE Rule 803(b)(8). The omitted section states that,
 while government reports are generally allowed as a hearsay
 exception, "matters observed by police officers and other law
 enforcement personnel" in criminal cases are excluded from the
 general hearsay exception. HRE Rule 803(b)(8). We conclude that
 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Circuit Court did not err in omitting the first two pages of 
the police report, and only admitting page 3, which was relevant as a prior inconsistent statement. See State v. Espiritu, 117 
Hawai
'i 127, 136, 176 P.3d 885, 894 (2008) (holding that a 
"police report is not an exception to hearsay as a public record or report under HRE Rule 803(b)(8)"). 
F. Cross-Examination of Complainant's Brother
 Nakayama maintains that the Circuit Court reversibly
 
erred in limiting Nakayama's cross-examination of Brother
 regarding alleged prior bad acts, including allegations of abuse
 of a family member and the issuance of temporary restraining
 orders. Nakayama apparently wanted to admit Brother's prior bad
 acts to show that Brother had a motive to help his sister, that
 violence was a pertinent trait of Brother's, that he acted in
 conformity with that trait on the date in question, and, although
 the record is somewhat unclear on this last part, that Brother's
 violent nature explained why Nakayama apologized to Complainant
 even though he was (purportedly) not guilty of the alleged
 offenses.
 
After a thorough discussion of the evidence of prior
 
bad acts, the court denied the defense's request to admit
 evidence of Brother's alleged prior bad acts, but permitted
 defense counsel to directly ask Brother whether he coerced
 Nakayama into apologizing to Complainant. In denying the
 request, the court made the following ruling:
 
THE COURT:  All right. The Court is not going to
allow, at this stage, the defense to introduce the prior

record of violence. I don't believe it's relevant at this 
30

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stage. If I had to, maybe, at this point, I would find it to be
more prejudicial than probative.
The issue is not the apology, in its entirety. The
issue is the alleged offense on the date of August 18th.
That's the (inaudible). The facts of the apology,
obviously, are not (inaudible) factors in this case. I
 realize that's one of the prongs the defense is trying to
explain, I guess. However, no foundation has been laid
(inaudible). The Court is not going to allow it.
 
The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in 
ruling that the evidence would be more prejudicial than 
probative. The court found that only Nakayama could testify that he was coerced to apologize, but if Nakayama chose not to open the door with that defense (or chose to not testify altogether), it would be too late for the court to strike the evidence of Brother's prior bad acts. Nakayama incorrectly contends on appeal that Brother's statement saying, "I know the consequences of being violent," opened the door for admission of this testimony, because Brother had already answered defense counsel's question regarding coercion, as permitted by the court, but his propensity for violence was not put into issue. Accord State v. 
Maddox, 116 Hawai
'i 445, 173 P.3d 592 (App. 2007) (holding that 
trial court did not abuse its discretion in preventing defendant from questioning victim about victim's alleged past acts of violence until evidence raising a factual issue as to whether victim was the first aggressor was introduced). Further, defense counsel admitted that the foundation for this evidence was not properly laid and notice was not given to opposing counsel, as required by HRE Rule 404(b). Thus, the Circuit Court did not err in excluding this evidence. 
31
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
G. The Apology Evidence
 
Nakayama maintains that the Circuit Court reversibly
 
erred by denying his motion to strike what he characterizes as

 
evidence of offers to compromise and/or mediate, pursuant to HRE
 Rule 408 (1993).
5 The Circuit Court did not err when it
 
concluded that Rule 408 was not applicable.
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held that "HRE Rule 408 
applies in criminal proceedings in that related compromises or attempts to compromise civil liability are not admissible in a criminal trial because of the danger that such evidence may be taken as criminal guilt." State v. McCrory, 104 Hawai
'i 203, 
209, 87 P.3d 275, 281 (2004) (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). Nakayama's apology and offer to pay Complainant one hundred dollars do not fall under the purview of HRE Rule 408. Nakayama's statements were not "made in the course of compromise" nor were the statements "made to a party to the proceedings." McCrory, 104 Hawai
'i at 209, 87 P.3d at 281 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). There is no 
5 HRE Rule 408 provides:
 
Rule 408 Compromise, offers to compromise, and
mediation proceedings. Evidence of (1) furnishing or
offering or promising to furnish, or (2) accepting or
offering or promising to accept, valuable consideration in
compromising or attempting to compromise a claim which was
disputed as to either validity or amount, or (3) mediation
or attempts to mediate a claim which was disputed, is not
admissible to prove liability for or invalidity of the claim
or its amount. Evidence of conduct or statements made in
 compromise negotiations or mediation proceedings is likewise
not admissible. This rule does not require the exclusion of
any evidence otherwise discoverable merely because it is
presented in the course of compromise negotiations or
mediation proceedings. This rule also does not require
exclusion when the evidence is offered for another purpose,
such as proving bias or prejudice of a witness, negativing a
contention of undue delay, or proving an effort to obstruct
a criminal investigation or prosecution.
 
32
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
evidence in the record that a "compromise" was offered or reached 
as a result of Brother carrying out his self-proclaimed role of being a "mediator." Complainant is not a party to the proceeding, but rather it is the State that is the opposing party. Further, no civil suit was pending at the time the apology or offer were made. See Gano, 92 Hawai
'i at 169-70, 988 
P.2d at 1661-62. 
Therefore, the Circuit Court did not err in denying
 
defense counsel's motion to strike the evidence.
 
H. The Excluded Defense Witnesses
 Finally, Nakayama argues on appeal that the Circuit
 
Court reversibly erred, pursuant to HRE Rule 404(a)(1) (Supp.
 
6
2013), in excluding three defense witnesses who would have
testified that Nakayama had a character trait for being law

 
abiding.
 
Below, the defense offered the testimonies of the

 
Mikamis and Lahela Aiwoki to establish that Nakayama has
 character traits of being "honest and truthful and law abiding." 
The Circuit Court correctly cited State v. Torres for the
 proposition that evidence as to one's character for honesty and
 truthfulness may only be admitted once that character has been
 
6
 HRE Rule 404 provides, in relevant part:
 
Rule 404 Character evidence not admissible to prove
conduct; exceptions; other crimes. (a) Character evidence
 generally. Evidence of a person's character or a trait of a
person's character is not admissible for the purpose of
proving action in conformity therewith on a particular
occasion, except:
(1) 	 Character of accused. Evidence of a pertinent
trait of character of an accused offered by an
accused, or by the prosecution to rebut the
same[.]
 
33
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attacked, which was not done here because Nakayama did not take 
the stand in his own defense, and this character trait is not an element of the crime. See 85 Hawai
'i 417, 419, 423-24, 945 P.2d 
849, 851, 855-56 (App. 1997) (referencing HRE Rule 608(a)(2)). 
Nevertheless, the Intermediate Court of Appeals has
 
held that "[t]he defendant's law-abidingness is a character trait
 pertinent to all crimes" (although the proffered reputation
 evidence cannot relate to any time after the offense was
 committed). State v. Rabe, 5 Haw. App. 251, 263, 687 P.2d 554,
 
562 (1984). Thus, on the remand of this case for a new trial,
 Nakayama should be permitted to offer evidence of his law­abidingness up to the time of the alleged incident.
 V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's June 2, 2011
 
Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence is vacated and
 remanded for a new trial.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 31, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Hayden Aluli
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Peter A. Hanano Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
34
 