  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000078 22-DEC-2023 08:14 AM Dkt. 52 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000078 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI#I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MICAH S.K. VASCONCELLOS, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
KANE
#OHE DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-18-03320) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, C.J., and Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.)  
Defendant-Appellant Micah S.K. Vasconcellos 
(Vasconcellos) appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment 
and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, entered on December 22, 2020, in 
the District Court of the First Circuit, Kane#ohe Division 
(District Court)./ Following a bench trial, Vasconcellos was 
convicted of Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2018),
/ and Operating a Vehicle After 21
1/ The Honorable William M. Domingo presided over the December 22,
2020 trial and entered the Judgment. The Honorable Florence Nakakuni presided
over the December 31, 2019 hearing ( suppression hearing ) on Vasconcellos's
December 11, 2018 Motion to Suppress Statements ( Motion to Suppress ). 
2/ At the time of the alleged offense, HRS § 291E-61 provided, in
relevant part: 
Operating a vehicle under the influence of an
intoxicant.  (a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the personoperates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle: 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair the person's normal
(continued...)   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
License and Privilege Have Been Suspended or Revoked for 
Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVLPSR-
OVUII), in violation of HRS § 291E-62(a)(1) and (a)(2) (Supp. 
2018)./  3
On appeal, Vasconcellos contends that: (1) the "case 
must be dismissed pursuant to State v. Thompson[, 150 Hawai# i 
262, 500 P.3d 447 (2021),] where the [C]omplaint did not meet the 
requirements of HRS § 805-1" and Vasconcellos was arraigned on the "fatally defective Complaint";
/ (2) the District Court 
conducted a defective colloquy under Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai#i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995); (3) the District Court erred 
in "failing to suppress Vasconcellos's responses to the [medical rule-out (MRO)] questions and all subsequent evidence and 
statements as the 'fruit of the poisonous tree'"; and (4) the 
District Court erred "in allowing [Officer Joseph] Amasiu's [(Officer Amasiu)] testimony on the [standardized field sobriety 
test (SFST)] where he had no present recollection of the test." 4
2/ (...continued) 
mental faculties or ability to care for the
person and guard against casualty[.] 
3/ At the time of the alleged offense, HRS § 291E-62 provided, in
relevant part: 
Operating a vehicle after license and privilege have
been suspended or revoked for operating a vehicle under theinfluence of an intoxicant; penalties. (a) No person whose
license and privilege to operate a vehicle have beenrevoked, suspended, or otherwise restricted pursuant to thissection or to part III or section 291E-61 or 291E-61.5, orto part VII or part XIV of chapter 286 or section 200-81,291-4, 291-4.4, 291-4.5, or 291-7 as those provisions werein effect on December 31, 2001, shall operate or assumeactual physical control of any vehicle: 
(1) In violation of any restrictions placed on theperson's license; [or] 
(2) While the person's license or privilege tooperate a vehicle remains suspended orrevoked[.] 
4/ We have reordered Vasconcellos's points of error and have
consolidated his first point of error for clarity. Vasconcellos raised his first point of error in a supplemental brief filed on May 19, 2022, pursuantto this court's April 21, 2022 Order. Plaintiff-Appellee State of 
Hawai #i 
(State) filed a supplemental brief on May 20, 2022, pursuant to the same
Order. The Order permitted the parties to file supplemental briefs addressingthe supreme court's decision in 
Thompson, which was issued after briefing in
this appeal was closed. 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Vasconcellos's points of error as follows. 
(1) On October 12, 2018, Vasconcellos was charged by 
Complaint with OVUII and OVLPSR-OVUII. The Complaint was signed by a deputy prosecuting attorney, but was not subscribed under oath by a complainant or accompanied by a declaration in lieu of affidavit. 
On December 10, 2021, the Hawai# i Supreme Court 
decided Thompson, which held that a penal summons or arrest warrant cannot be issued on the basis of a complaint that is not compliant with HRS § 805-1.
5/ 150 Hawai# i at 267-69, 500 P.3d at 
452-54; see State v. Mortensen-Young, 152 Hawai# i 385, 393-95, 
526 P.3d 362, 370-72 (2023) (construing Thompson). Based on Thompson, Vasconcellos argues that the Complaint was "fatally defective" because it did not meet the requirements of HRS § 805-1. Vasconcellos further argues that his arraignment "was 
effectively a nullity" because it was based on the Complaint. Vasconcellos concedes that he did not raise these issues in the District Court. 
We assume without deciding that Vasconcellos did not 
waive these issues by failing to raise them below. The Hawai# i 
Supreme Court recently held in Mortensen-Young
 that HRS § 805-1 
(2014) applies only to criminal complaints used to obtain a penal summons or arrest warrant. 152 
Hawai#i at 393-95, 526 P.3d at 
5/ At the time of the alleged offense here and in Thompson, HRS
§ 805-1 (2014) provided, in pertinent part: 
When a complaint is made to any prosecuting officer of the
commission of any offense, the prosecuting officer shall examinethe complainant, shall reduce the substance of the complaint towriting, and shall cause the complaint to be subscribed by thecomplainant under oath, which the prosecuting officer is herebyauthorized to administer, or the complaint shall be made bydeclaration in accordance with the rules of court. . . . Uponpresentation of the written complaint to the judge in whosecircuit the offense allegedly has been committed, the judge shallissue a warrant, reciting the complaint and requiring the sheriff,or other officer to whom it is directed, except as provided insection 805-3, to arrest the accused and to bring the accusedbefore the judge to be dealt with according to law; and in thesame warrant the judge may require the officer to summon suchwitnesses as are named in the warrant to appear and give evidenceat trial. The warrant may be in the form established by the usageand practice of the issuing court. 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
370-72. In other cases, such as the OVUII prosecutions at issue 
in Mortensen-Young, HRPP Rule 7 provides the proper framework to analyze the sufficiency of complaints. In Mortensen-Young, the supreme court held that the trial court improperly dismissed the complaints against the appellees, reasoning that the charging instruments had complied with HRPP Rule 7(d), and were thus sufficient to initiate prosecutions for OVUII. Id. at 399, 526 
P.3d at 376. 
Here, as in Mortensen-Young, HRS § 805-1 is 
inapplicable because the Complaint was not used to obtain a penal summons or arrest warrant; Vasconcellos was already arrested and had posted bail when the State filed the Complaint. See id. at 
395, 526 P.3d at 372. The Complaint set forth a plain and concise statement of the essential facts, was signed by the prosecutor, and referenced the statutes that Vasconcellos allegedly violated, as required by HRPP Rule 7(d). Therefore, HRS § 805-1 was inapplicable and the Complaint was sufficient to initiate the subject prosecution. Further, because the Complaint was not "fatally defective," Vasconcellos's arraignment based on the Complaint was not a nullity. Vasconcellos's first point of error is without merit. 
(2) Vasconcellos contends that the District Court's 
Tachibana colloquy was defective in several respects, and as a result, it cannot be concluded that Vasconcellos waived his right to testify knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily.
6/ Because 
we conclude that the District Court's Tachibana colloquy failed to maintain an even balance between Vasconcellos's right to testify and his right not to testify, we do not reach his remaining contentions about the colloquy. 
6/ Vasconcellos argues that the colloquy was defective in the
following respects: "(1) the court added 'the right not to make incriminating
statements' to the colloquy which implied that Vasconcellos's testimony wouldnecessarily be incriminating and not exculpatory; (2) the court also statedthat 'anything you say can be used against you,' again implying that anytestimony that Vasconcellos might give would be used against him and not inhis favor; (3) the court advised Vasconcellos that if he testified that hewould be required to answer all of the prosecutor's questions on cross-examination which is incorrect as he would not be required to answer improperquestions; and (4) the court accepted Vasconcellos's response, "I'm good," asa waiver of his right to testify when this statement is ambiguous and did notclearly confirm that he was waiving his right to testify and that it was hisdecision." 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
After the State rested, defense counsel indicated his 
understanding that Vasconcellos did not wish to testify, and the 
District Court engaged in the following colloquy with Vasconcellos: 
THE COURT: All right. Have you ever testified before
in any court proceeding? 
[VASCONCELLOS]: No. 
THE COURT: Okay. You understand that you have a
right to testify and a right not to testify? You understand 
that? 
[VASCONCELLOS]: Yes. 
THE COURT: You understand that . . . you have a
constitutional right not to make any incriminating
statements? You understand that? 
[VASCONCELLOS]: Yes. 
THE COURT: You understand that you have the
constitutional right to remain silent and not testify at
this trial? 
[VASCONCELLOS]: Yes. 
THE COURT: You understand if you do not testify, the
Court cannot hold –- hold it against you that you're not
testifying? You understand that? 
[VASCONCELLOS]: Yes, sir. 
THE COURT: You understand that you also have a right
to testify, but anything you say can be held against you?
You understand that? 
[VASCONCELLOS]: Yes. 
THE COURT: All right. You understand that if you do
testify, you'll be subject to cross-examination, where the
prosecutor will be permitted to ask you questions and youwill be required to answer those questions? You understandthat? 
[VASCONCELLOS]: Yes. 
THE COURT: Although you should confer with your
attorney whether to testify or not, you understand that the
final decision is entirely up to you? 
[VASCONCELLOS]: Yes, sir. 
THE COURT: No one can prevent you from testifying if
that is what you wish because that is your right to testify.
You understand that? 
[VASCONCELLOS]: Yes, sir. 
THE COURT: Do you have any questions about what I've
explained to you? 
[VASCONCELLOS]: No, sir. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Understanding all that I've explained to
you, do you wish to testify today? 
[VASCONCELLOS]: I'm good. 
THE COURT: All right. Court finds that Mr. 
Vasconcellos has intelligently, knowingly, and voluntarily
waived his right to testify. 
The supreme court has repeatedly emphasized that "the 
[trial] court's advisory to the defendant must maintain an 'even 
balance' between a defendant's right to testify and the right not to testify." State v. Monteil
, 134 Hawai#i 361, 370, 341 P.3d 
567, 576 (2014) (citing 
State v. Lewis
, 94 Hawai#i 292, 295, 12 
P.3d 1233, 1236 (2000)). This balance is intended to ensure that the trial court's advisement does not influence the defendant's decision one way or the other. 
See Tachibana
, 79 Hawai#i at 236 
n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n.7. 
Here, the District Court failed to maintain an even 
balance between its advisements, adding elements that potentially cast the right to testify in a negative light and risked influencing Vasconcellos's decision whether or not to testify. For example, the court asked Vasconcellos, "You understand that . . . you have a constitutional right 
not to make any incriminating 
statements?" and "You understand that you also have a right to testify, but anything you say can be held against you? (Emphases added.) See State v. Watanabe, No. CAAP-20-0000155, 2021 WL 
2624643, at *3 (App. June 25, 2021) (SDO) (concluding that "[w]ithout more, the [trial] court's questions — 'And do you understand that you have the constitutional right not to make any incriminating statements?' and 'Do you understand that if you elect to testify, anything you say can and may be used against you?['] — did not maintain an even balance between Watanabe's right to testify and the right not to testify." (quoting Monteil, 134 Hawai# i at 370, 341 P.3d at 576) (brackets and some internal 
quotation marks omitted)). These questions advised Vasconcellos of his rights in a manner that implied he could or would be incriminating himself by testifying. See id. On this record, we 
cannot conclude that Vasconcellos's waiver of his right to testify was knowingly, intelligently and voluntarily made. 
6    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
As Vasconcellos did not exercise his right to testify, 
we cannot conclude that the District Court's error was harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt because it is not knowable whether Vasconcellos's testimony, had he given it, could have established reasonable doubt that he committed the charged offenses. See 
State v. Celestine, 142 Hawai# i 165, 173, 415 P.3d 907, 915 
(2018). 
We therefore vacate Vasconcellos's OVUII and OVLPSR-
OVUII convictions. 
(3)
 Prior to trial, Vasconcellos filed the Motion to 
Suppress, by which he sought an order precluding the State from introducing any statements made by Vasconcellos to Honolulu Police Department (HPD) officers and any evidence gained by the 
HPD after Vasconcellos was placed under arrest. Vasconcellos 
argued that any such statements and evidence should be suppressed because he was not advised of his Miranda
7/ rights after being 
stopped and before being subjected to "custodial interrogation" in the form of MRO questions by Officer Amasiu. Following the suppression hearing, the District Court denied the Motion to Suppress, ruling in part that Vasconcellos was not in custody when he was asked the MRO questions and participated in the SFST. 
On appeal, Vasconcellos argues that the District Court 
erred in failing to suppress Vasconcellos's responses to the MRO questions and "all subsequent evidence and statements as the 'fruit of the poisonous tree.'" He further argues that without Officer Amasiu's testimony as to Vasconcellos's performance on the SFST, which followed his responses to the MRO questions, there was no substantial evidence to support the OVUII conviction. 
The supreme court recently reiterated in State v. 
Hewitt
, 153 Hawai#i 33, 526 P.3d 558 (2023): 
The Miranda rule is, at core, a constitutionally prescribed
rule of evidence that requires the prosecution to lay asufficient foundation—i.e., that the requisite warnings wereadministered and validly waived before the accused gave thestatement sought to be adduced at trial—before it may adduceevidence of a defendant's custodial statements that stem from interrogation during their criminal trial. 
7/ Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966). 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
The prosecution's burden of establishing that the requisite
warnings were given, however, is not triggered unless thetotality of the circumstances reflect that the statement itseeks to adduce at trial was obtained as a result of "custodial interrogation," which, as the United StatesSupreme Court defined it in Miranda, consists of"questioning initiated by law enforcement officers after aperson has been taken into custody or otherwise deprived oftheir freedom of action in any significant way." In other words, the defendant, objecting to the admissibility oftheir statement and, thus, seeking to suppress it, mustestablish that their statement was the result of (1)"interrogation" that occurred while they were (2) "incustody." 
Id. at 43, 526 P.3d at 568 (brackets omitted) (quoting State v. 
Wallace, 105 Hawai# i 131, 137, 94 P.3d 1275, 1281 (2004)). 
Here, the threshold issue is whether Vasconcellos was 
"in custody" when he was asked the MRO questions by Officer Amasiu. A person is "in custody" for purposes of article I, section 10 of the Hawai# i Constitution when probable cause to 
arrest has developed. 
See Hewitt, 153 Hawai# i at 36, 526 P.3d at 
561; see id. at 43, 526 P.3d at 568 ("[W]hen probable cause to arrest exists upon an initial stop or detention, the Hawai# i 
constitution requires that Miranda rights be given before 'interrogation' occurs." (citing State v. Ketchum, 97 Hawai# i 
107, 126, 34 P.3d 1006, 1025 (2001)). In addition: 
When a bright-line rule regarding "custody" (such as the
existence of probable cause) has yet to be triggered,"[w]hether the defendant was in custody or otherwisedeprived of [their] freedom of action for Miranda purposesis to be determined from the totality of the circumstances,objectively appraised." "These [circumstances] wouldinclude the place and time of the interrogation, the lengthof the interrogation, the nature of the questions asked, theconduct of the police, and all other relevantcircumstances." 
Hewitt, 153 Hawai#i at 45, 526 P.3d at 570 (citations omitted) 
(quoting State v. Patterson, 59 Haw. 357, 361, 581 P.2d 752, 755 
(1978)). 
Here, the evidence adduced during the suppression 
hearing included the following: 
On September 23, 2018, at around 
3 a.m., Officer Amasiu initiated a traffic stop after observing a pickup truck driven by Vasconcellos make a wide U-turn and "end[] up climbing up onto the sidewalk cur[b]ing" in completing the turn. After approaching the vehicle and speaking to Vasconcellos, Officer Amasiu observed "a strong odor of . . . 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
alcohol emitting from his breath[,]" "like a slurred speech[,]" 
"glassy eyes, blood-shot red, and basically a flushed face." At that point, Officer Amasiu had a suspicion that Vasconcellos was under the influence of alcohol and asked him if he was willing to participate in the SFST. When Officer Amasiu asked Vasconcellos if he would participate in the SFST, Vasconcellos "was not free to leave the scene," and Officer Amasiu would have arrested Vasconcellos if he had refused to participate in the SFST. Vasconcellos agreed to participate in the SFST. He "staggered" when he exited his vehicle. Officer Amasiu then asked Vasconcellos the MRO questions.
8/ Vasconcellos answered "no" to 
each of the questions. Officer Amasiu then administered the SFST. 
On this record, we conclude there was sufficient 
probable cause that Vasconcellos was operating his vehicle while under the influence of an intoxicant, such that he was in custody prior to the MRO questions. See State v. Ramseyer, No. CAAP-21-
0000216, 2023 WL 2728785, at *2-*3 (Haw. App. Mar. 31, 2023) (SDO) (holding officer had probable cause to arrest defendant for OVUII after observing her driving, and after stopping defendant, observing her eyes "appeared to be red, bloodshot and watery, there was a very strong alcoholic-type beverage odor on her breath and her speech sounded a little bit slurred" (brackets omitted)); State v. Ogata, No. CAAP-18-0000619, 2020 WL 3430060, at *1, *3 (Haw. App. June 23, 2020) (SDO) (holding officer had probable cause to arrest defendant for OVUII after defendant was removed from his vehicle and officers observed, inter alia, that defendant could not respond to questions or verbal commands, and "was very disoriented; had red, bloodshot, and watery eyes; slurred speech; gave off a strong odor of alcohol; and could not stay on his feet"). 
We thus turn to whether the MRO questions were 
"interrogation" requiring Miranda warnings. In State v. Skapinok, 151 Hawai# i 170, 510 P.3d 599 (2022), the supreme court 
8/ The MRO questions directed at Vasconcellos included "if he was
under the care of a doctor, an eye doctor, if he was epileptic or diabetic,
whether or not he had contacts, a glass eye[,]" and other questions OfficerAmasiu read from the SFST form. 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
held that all seven MRO questions that the defendant was asked 
while in custody were likely to elicit an incriminating response, and therefore Miranda warnings were required. Id. at 184-85, 510 
P.3d at 613-14. Because such warnings were not given, the defendant's answers had to be suppressed. Id. at 185, 510 P.3d 
at 614. Here, based on Officer Amasiu's testimony, the MRO questions that Vasconcellos was asked appear to be the same or substantially similar to the questions that Skapinok was asked. See supra note 8. The MRO questions that Vasconcellos was asked while in custody were thus "interrogation" requiring Miranda warnings. Because such warnings were not given, the District Court erred in failing to suppress Vasconcellos's responses to the MRO questions. Evidence of these responses must be excluded in any retrial. 
We also conclude that the evidence gathered after the 
Miranda violation, including questions asked subsequent to the MRO questions as part of the SFST and Vasconcellos's performance on the SFST (to which we will refer collectively as "the SFST"), was not "fruit of the poisonous tree."
9/ See Skapinok , 151 
Hawai#i at 186, 510 P.3d 599, 615. Based on Officer Amasiu's 
testimony, he had already set out to administer the SFST before asking the MRO questions, and in fact had asked for and received Vasconcellos's consent for the tests. "The officer[] did not exploit the illegality by continuing to gather evidence that [he] had already set out to gather." 
Id.
 at 187, 510 P.3d at 616 
(quoting State v. Manion
, 151 Hawai#i 267, 273, 511 P.3d 766, 772 
(2022)). "[T]hat the illegally-obtained evidence is relevant to interpreting subsequently-obtained evidence does not mean that discovery of the latter 'exploits' the former." 
Id.
 (emphases 
and original brackets omitted) (quoting Manion
, 151 Hawai#i at 
273, 511 P.3d at 772). Thus, the SFST was not the fruit of the poisonous tree, and the District Court did not err in admitting the SFST into evidence. 
9/ Other than his performance on the SFST, Vasconcellos does not
identify any specific "statements" that he made following the Miranda
violation which he claims were fruit of the poisonous tree. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Vasconcellos argues that without Officer Amasiu's 
testimony as to Vasconcellos's performance on the SFST, i.e., if 
the SFST testimony had been suppressed, there was no substantial evidence to support the OVUII conviction. As we have concluded that the District Court did not err in admitting the SFST testimony into evidence, this argument is without merit. 
(4) Vasconcellos contends that the District Court erred 
in denying his oral motion at the suppression hearing to strike Officer Amasiu's testimony on the SFST under State v. Dibenedetto, 80 Hawai# i 138, 906 P.2d 624 (App. 1995). He argues 
that the officer had no present recollection of Vasconcellos's performance on the SFST and was testifying only to what he had read in his police report. He further argues that without Officer Amasiu's testimony as to Vasconcellos's performance on the SFST, there was no substantial evidence to support the OVUII conviction. 
Hawai
#i Rules of Evidence Rule 612 permits "a witness 
[to] use[] a writing to refresh the witness'[s] memory for the purpose of testifying . . . ." 
When used to refresh the witness's present recollection, a
writing is solely employed to jog the memory of thetestifying witness." 1 J. Strong, McCormick on Evidence §9, at 29 (4th ed. 1992). Accordingly, when a writing isused to refresh a witness's recollection, the witness shouldtestify from "a memory thus revived," resulting in testimonyfrom present recollection, not a memory of the writingitself." Id. 
Dibenedetto, 80 Hawai# i at 144, 906 P.2d at 630. "[A]fter 
reviewing a writing while testifying, testimony of the witness 
laying a foundation that the witness's memory has actually been refreshed after reviewing the writing is required before the witness's testimony can be admitted under HRE Rule 612." State 
v. Wakamoto, 143 Hawai# i 443, 452, 431 P.3d 816, 825 (2018). 
At the suppression hearing, Officer Amasiu recounted 
Vasconcellos's performance on the SFST as follows: As Officer Amasiu administered the horizontal gaze nystagmus test, Vasconcellos showed impairment with his eyes and had a hard time following instructions and keeping his head still. He kept moving his head. During the walk-and-turn test, Vasconcellos was not able to walk in a straight line and stepped off line and 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
grabbed onto a nearby guide wire to keep from falling. 
Vasconcellos did not follow instructions, took eight steps at times instead of the nine as instructed, raised his arms, and missed heel-to-toe. During the one-leg stand test, Defendant dropped his foot several times, raised his arms more than six inches, and swayed as he tried to maintain his balance. Vasconcellos was able to count as instructed. After the completion of the SFST, Officer Amasiu asked another officer to place Vasconcellos under arrest for OVUII. 
On cross-examination, Officer Amasiu testified that he 
reviewed his report before the hearing. He said he would have remembered the traffic violation whether or not he had put it in his report. The report did help refresh his recollection as to other things that happened. Officer Amasiu was candid about particular details that he did not recall, such as what Vasconcellos was wearing (other than black sneakers) on the night of the incident, and at what point during the instructional stage of the test Vasconcellos could not keep his balance. 
The District Court "f[ou]nd that [Officer Amasiu] was 
credible in his testimony and that he was testifying, as he said, from his present memory. . . . He has a present recollection that was refreshed." 
Vasconcellos argues that Officer Amasiu's "claim that 
he . . . was testifying from his present recollection was simply not credible given his admission that he did not recall significant details of what had occurred." The record reflects, however, that Officer Amasiu recalled many of the details, including the material aspects, of Vasconcellos's performance on the SFST. He recalled, for example, that during the walk-and-turn test, Vasconcellos was not able to walk in a straight line and grabbed a guide wire for balance, and during the one-leg stand test, Vasconcellos dropped his foot several times and swayed. In these circumstances, we will not disturb the District Court's finding that Officer Amasiu was credible and that he was testifying from his present recollection, which was refreshed after he reviewed his report. See State v. Kaleohano, 
99 Hawai# i 370, 376, 56 P.3d 138, 144 (2002) (on a motion to 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
suppress, it is for the trial judge to assess the credibility of 
witnesses). 
Accordingly, the District Court did not err in denying 
Vasconcellos's motion to strike the testimony of Officer Amasiu on the SFST. Vasconcellos's argument that the District Court lacked sufficient evidence to support his OVUII conviction is based on his argument that Officer Amasiu's testimony on the SFST should not have been admitted. As we have concluded that the District Court did not err in admitting the officer's testimony, this argument is without merit. 
For the reasons discussed above, we vacate the Notice 
of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, entered on December 22, 2020, in the District Court of the First Circuit, Kane#ohe Division. The case is remanded to the District Court 
for further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 22, 2023. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Alen M. Kaneshiro Chief Judge
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Loren J. Thomas, /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, Associate Judge
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
/s/ Clyde J. WadsworthAssociate Judge 
13 