NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000578
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
RAYMOND RODRIGUEZ, SR., Petitioner-Appellant
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 03-1-0053 (CR. NO. 98-2504))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Raymond Rodriguez, Sr.
 
(Rodriguez), appeals from the order denying his petition to
 
vacate, set aside, or correct judgment, or to release petitioner
 from custody (Order Denying Petition) filed by the Circuit Court
 of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)
1
 on July 1, 2011.  On 
appeal, Rodriguez contends that the Circuit Court erred in denying his petition, which was filed pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules 
of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 (2006). In particular, Rodriguez argues that the Circuit Court erred in rejecting his claim that his court-appointed counsel in his direct appeal, Edwin Baker (Baker), provided ineffective assistance, when Baker "failed to have any meaningful communication with [Rodriguez] before and during the appellate briefing process[.]" Rodriguez 
1The Honorable Richard W. Pollack presided over the
proceedings relevant to this appeal.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
also argues that he is entitled to relief because his court-
appointed counsel in the HRPP Rule 40 proceeding, Joseph Mottl,
 III (Mottl), "failed to elicit any testimony at the Rule 40
 hearing as to how the lack of communication with Baker resulted
 in the omission of appealable issues." As explained below, we
 affirm. 
BACKGROUND
 
In the underlying criminal case, Rodriguez was found
 
guilty after a jury trial of one count of attempted first-degree
 sexual assault of a person under fourteen years old (Count 2);
 and two counts of third-degree sexual assault of a person under
 fourteen years old (Counts 3 and 4). The complaining witness
 (CW) for these counts was a member of Rodriguez's family and was
 six years old at the time of the charged offenses. The Circuit
 Court
2
 sentenced Rodriguez to twenty years of imprisonment on
Count 2 and five years of imprisonment as to each of Counts 3 and
 4, all terms to be served concurrently. The Circuit Court
 entered its Judgment on March 6, 2000, and an Amended Judgment on
 March 13, 2000.
 
Rodriguez filed a direct appeal of his conviction. 
R. 
Richard Ichihashi had served as Rodriguez's trial counsel. After the notice of appeal was filed, Tae Chin Kim (Kim) was appointed as appellate counsel for Rodriguez effective September 21, 2000. Prior to appellate briefing, Kim was permitted to withdraw as counsel, and on March 2, 2001, Baker was appointed as Rodriguez's appellate counsel. By Memorandum Opinion issued on March 6, 2003, this court affirmed Rodriguez's Amended Judgment. State v. 
Rodriguez, No. 23425, 2003 WL 1084720 (Hawai
'i App. Mar. 6, 
2003). With respect to the issues raised by Rodriguez on appeal, we concluded that: (1) the Circuit Court did not err in denying Rodriguez's request for a hearing to determine whether the CW was competent to testify; (2) the Circuit Court did not abuse its 
2The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided over Rodriguez's
sentencing.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
discretion in qualifying Dr. Victoria Schneider as an expert
 
witness; (3) Dr. Schneider did not offer an opinion as to the
 CW's truthfulness or credibility; (4) the Circuit Court was not
 required to issue a limiting instruction warning the jury not to
 use Dr. Schneider's testimony as evidence of the CW's
 truthfulness or credibility; and (5) there was sufficient
 evidence to support Rodriguez's convictions. 
Id., 2003 WL
 
1084720, at *7-15. 
On December 1, 2003, Rodriguez filed a "Petition to
 
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner
 from Custody" (Petition), pursuant to HRPP Rule 40, that is at
 issue in this appeal. In the Petition, Rodriguez asserted seven
 grounds for relief, including Ground 7 which stated:
 
Appellate counsel failed to introduce himself to
[Rodriguez]. [In] other words, [Rodriguez] did not meet
with appellate counsel to prepare an appeal, nor did
[Rodriguez] even know that he had an attorney appointed to
file his appeal.
 
Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) filed an 
answer and supplemental answer to the Petition in which it argued
 
that Rodriguez's claims for relief were without merit. With
 respect to Ground 7, the State represented in its supplemental
 answer that it had spoken to Baker and received the following
 information:
 
Mr. Baker related that at the time he was appointed to
represent [Rodriguez], [Rodriguez] was incarcerated on the
mainland at Florence Correctional Center in Arizona. Mr.
 Baker then reviewed the records and files provided by prior
appellate counsel -- Tae Chin Kim, Esq. -- and notified
[Rodriguez] by letter that he would be representing him on
appeal. At that time, Mr. Baker enclosed a copy of the
order appointing him as counsel and informed [Rodriguez]
that he was in the process of reviewing the records and
transcripts, however, he had yet to discover any significant
appellate issues. In that same letter, Mr. Baker asked
[Rodriguez] to notify him of anything that occurred to him
concerning the appeal. Per Mr. Baker, he never received any
reply or other information from [Rodriguez].
 
After reviewing the records and transcripts, Mr. Baker
was nonetheless able to identify and thereafter brief three
potentially viable issues for appeal.
 
On August 10, 2004, the Circuit Court issued an amended
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
order appointing Mottl, effective July 1, 2004, to represent
 
Rodriguez in the HRPP Rule 40 proceeding. Between August 10,
 2004, and February 20, 2007, the hearing that the Circuit Court
 had set for Rodriguez's Petition was rescheduled numerous times
 at Rodriguez's request or the mutual agreement of the parties. 
On February 20, 2007, Rodriguez filed a First Supplemental
 Petition, in which he raised six additional grounds for relief. 
On June 20, 2007, the State filed its answer to the First
 Supplemental Petition.
 
On August 23, 2010, a status conference was held. 
Rodriguez's counsel explained that he had not earlier requested
 the scheduling of a hearing on the Petition and First
 Supplemental Petition for various reasons, including: "(1) the
 case had been reviewed by the Office of Disciplinary Counsel, (2)
 [Rodriguez] had signed an agreement to allow the file to be
 reviewed by the Hawaii Innocence Project at the William S.
 Richardson School of Law, (3) personal family issues of
 [Rodriguez's] counsel and the assigned deputy prosecuting
 attorney, and (4) [Rodriguez] had requested and continued to
 request that his counsel perform follow-up work on various
 matters relating to [his claims]." The Circuit Court scheduled a
 hearing for August 27, 2010, but Rodriguez requested time to file
 another supplement to the Petition. 
On September 21, 2010, Rodriguez filed a Second
 
Supplemental Petition, which asserted an additional seven grounds
 for relief, resulting in a total of twenty grounds for relief
 asserted by Rodriguez in his Petition.
3 On February 24, 2011,
 
the State filed its answer to the Second Supplemental Petition.
 The Circuit Court held a hearing and continued hearing on
 Rodriguez's Petition on February 25, 2011, and April 11, 2011.
 
At the February 25, 2011, hearing, Baker was asked to
 
3Unless otherwise indicated, our reference hereinafter to
the "Petition" collectively includes the Petition, First
Supplemental Petition, and Second Supplemental Petition.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
verify that the statements attributed to him in the State's
 
supplemental answer to Rodriguez's initial Petition were true. 
Baker testified that he had "very little independent recollection
 of this matter," but that the statements attributed to him by the
 State 
appear to be an accurate account of what I told [the deputy
prosecuting attorney] at that time which was that upon
appointment by the Court, I sent a copy of the order to Mr.
Rodriguez with correspondence introducing myself and asking
him for information regarding the case and issues to be
raised on appeal.
 
I'm recalling in seeing Tae Chin Kim's name here that
Mr. Rodriguez may have identified to him previously certain
issues, and I think I recall telling him that we could only
raise matters that were in the record, and later that's why
I indicated at the end of the opening brief that if the
appeal was denied, it would not be with prejudice to
bringing a Rule 40 motion so that those issues outside the
record could be brought in. That's about the essence of it.
 
Baker further testified that he did not recall receiving a reply
 
to his correspondence from Rodriguez, and that 
he did not recall having any communications from Rodriguez or
 receiving information from Rodriguez with respect to Rodriguez's
 direct appeal.
 
Rodriguez testified at the February 25, 2011, hearing
 
that he "didn't receive no communication, no telephone calls, or
 nothing" from Baker regarding the direct appeal. 
On July 1, 2011, the Circuit Court filed its Order
 
Denying Petition. The Circuit Court ruled that Rodriguez had
 waived his claims for relief by failing to rebut the presumption
 that he knowingly and understandingly failed to raise them on
 direct appeal. The Circuit Court further ruled that even
 assuming that the claims raised in Rodriguez's Petition had not
 been waived, the allegations and arguments Rodriguez asserted in
 his twenty grounds for relief had no merit. Accordingly, the
 Circuit Court denied the relief sought by Rodriguez in his
 Petition.
 
After Rodriguez filed his notice of appeal from the
 
Order Denying Petition, Mottl was permitted to withdraw, and
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Randall Hironaka was appointed to represent Rodriguez.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
A.
 
In his appeal, Rodriguez focuses on the Circuit Court's
 
denial of his claim for relief under Ground 7 of the Petition. 
In Ground 7, Rodriguez contended that: "Appellate counsel failed
 to introduce himself to [Rodriguez]. [In] other words,
 [Rodriguez] did not meet with appellate counsel to prepare an
 appeal, nor did [Rodriguez] even know that he had an attorney
 appointed to file his appeal." Rodriguez argues that the Circuit
 Court erred in denying his claim for relief as to Ground 7
 because he claims that Baker, Rodriguez's attorney in his direct
 appeal, provided ineffective assistance of counsel by failing "to
 have any meaningful communication with [Rodriguez] before and
 during the appellate briefing process." We disagree.
 
"In order to establish the ineffective assistance of 
counsel on appeal, a petitioner must show that (1) his appellate counsel omitted an appealable issue, and (2) in light of the entire record, the status of the law, and the space and time limitations inherent in the appellate process, a reasonably competent, informed and diligent criminal attorney would not have omitted that issue." Domingo v. State, 76 Hawai
'i 237, 242, 873 
P.2d 775, 780 (1994). "An 'appealable issue' is an error or omission by counsel, judge, or jury resulting in the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. Every appealable issue is not required to be asserted." Briones 
v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 465-66, 848 P.2d 966, 977-78 (1993)
 (footnote omitted).
 
If an appealable issue is omitted, then both the
issues actually presented on appeal as well as those omitted
are evaluated in light of the entire record, the status of
the law and, most importantly, counsel's knowledge of both.
Counsel's scope of review and knowledge of the law are
assessed, in light of all the circumstances, as that
information a reasonably competent, informed and diligent
attorney in criminal cases in our community should possess.
Counsel's informed decision as to which issues to present on
appeal will not ordinarily be second-guessed. Counsel's
 
performance need not be errorless. If, however, an
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appealable issue is omitted as a result of the performance
of counsel whose competence fell below that required of
attorneys in criminal cases then appellant's counsel is
constitutionally ineffective.
 
Id. at 466-67, 848 P.2d at 978 (footnotes omitted).
 
"The quality of the legal briefs and argument
 
concerning the issues actually appealed is considered as one
 
factor indicative of whether counsel's omission of other
 appealable issues was the result of an informed decision or
 constitutionally inadequate preparation." Id. at 466 n.16, 848
 
P.2d at 978 n.16. An HRPP Rule 40 petitioner bears the burden of
 showing that his or her appellate counsel provided ineffective
 assistance. Id. at 460, 848 P.2d at 975.
 
B.
 
Although the Circuit Court found that Baker "did not
 
communicate with [Rodriguez] during the pendency of [Rodriguez's] 
appeal[,]" it concluded that Rodriguez had failed to show that
 this failure to communicate denied Rodriguez the effective
 assistance of appellate counsel. In particular, the Circuit
 Court concluded that Rodriguez failed to indicate what appellate
 issues he would have brought to Baker's attention if
 communication had been established or to demonstrate that any
 appealable issue was omitted as the result of Baker's alleged
 incompetent performance. The Circuit Court also concluded that
 its review of the record indicated that Baker had made an
 informed decision regarding the issues to present on appeal. The
 Circuit Court therefore rejected Rodriguez's claim for relief as
 to Ground 7. 
The Circuit Court explained its reasoning as follows:
 
In this case, although the Court has found that
[Rodriguez's] appellate counsel did not communicate with
[Rodriguez] during the pendency of his appeal, [Rodriguez]
has failed to demonstrate how this absence of communication
 affected the outcome of his appeal. Specifically, despite
the filing of the Petition and two supplemental petitions,
[Rodriguez] has failed to indicate which appealable issues
he would have brought to the appellate counsel's attention
with respect to errors or omissions at trial "resulting in
the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
meritorious defense[,]" nor has [Rodriguez] demonstrated
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that "appealable issue[s] [were] omitted as a result of the
performance of counsel whose competence fell below that
required of attorneys in criminal cases[.]" See Briones, 74
Haw. at 465-67.
 
Furthermore, assuming other appealable issues could
have been raised by appellate counsel that were not raised
on direct appeal, the legal briefs submitted by appellate
counsel contained extensive citations to the transcripts of
Cr. No. 98-2504 [(the underlying criminal case)] and to case
law relevant to the issues raised on appeal, which indicates
that appellate counsel had "informed [himself] enough to
present appropriate appealable issues in the first
instance." 
Id. at 465. The quality of the legal briefs
submitted by appellate counsel and the arguments contained
therein also demonstrate appellate counsel's knowledge of
the record and the status of the law. Specifically, the
issues raised in [Rodriguez's] Opening Brief–-which
concerned (1) [Rodriguez's] request for a hearing to
determine the complaining witness's competency, (2) the
testimony of Dr. Schneider regarding the credibility of the
complaining witness, and (3) the insufficiency of the
evidence to support [Rodriguez's] convictions–-were
"appropriate appealable issues in the first instance." See
Briones, 74 Haw. at 465.
 
Based on this examination, the Court finds that
[Rodriguez] was not denied effective assistance of appellate
counsel, and [Rodriguez's] claim in Ground Seven has no
merit. Moreover, an analysis of the remaining grounds
asserting ineffective assistance of appellate counsel herein
do not demonstrate that appellate counsel omitted an
appealable issue in the direct appeal of [Rodriguez's]
conviction. 
See discussion infra Parts IV.O, IV.Q, IV.S.
 
(Some brackets added.)
 
C. 
We agree with the Circuit Court's analysis. 
Rodriguez's contention that the Circuit Court erred is premised
 
on his argument that Baker's failure to communicate with him
 during the pendency of his direct appeal is sufficient, in
 itself, to establish ineffective assistance of appellate counsel. 
However, Rodriguez cites no authority for the proposition that
 the failure of appellate counsel to communicate with a defendant
 constitutes per se ineffective assistance of counsel. Moreover,
 Rodriguez's claim of per se ineffective assistance of appellate
 counsel for failure to communicate is inconsistent with Hawai
'i's 
standard for ineffective assistance of appellate counsel, and
 Rodriguez's claim has also been specifically rejected by other
 jurisdictions. 
E.g. Campbell v. Green , 440 F. Supp. 2d 125, 152
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(N.D.N.Y. 2006) ("[A]n appellate attorney's failure to
 
communicate with his or her client, by itself, does not
 constitute per se ineffective assistance of counsel." (internal
 quotation marks and citation omitted)); State v. Gaither, 935
 A.2d 782, 785 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 2007) (rejecting the
 argument that the failure to communicate by appellate counsel
 with his client is per se ineffective assistance of counsel).
 
Here, Rodriguez failed to meet his burden of showing 
that Baker omitted an "appealable issue." See Domingo, 76 
Hawai
'i at 242, 873 P.2d at 780; Briones, 74 Haw. at 465-66, 848 
P.2d at 977. In particular, Rodriguez failed to show that if Baker had communicated with him, Rodriguez would have brought to Baker's attention "an error or omission by counsel, judge, or jury resulting in the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense[,]" see Briones, 74 Haw. at 465­66, 848 P.2d at 977, which Baker failed to present on appeal. Rodriguez also failed to show that there was an appealable issue which Baker omitted that "a reasonably competent, informed and diligent criminal attorney would not have omitted[.]" See 
Domingo, 76 Hawai
'i at 242, 873 P.2d at 780. We therefore affirm 
the Circuit Court's decision to deny Rodriguez's claim for relief as to Ground 7. 
II.
 
Rodriguez also argues on appeal that Mottl, his counsel
 
in the HRPP Rule 40 proceedings in Circuit Court, provided
 ineffective assistance. Specifically, he contends that Mottl
 provided ineffective assistance because Mottl "failed to elicit
 any testimony at the Rule 40 hearing as to how the lack of
 communication with Baker resulted in the omission of appealable
 issues."
 
We note that Rodriguez does not cite any authority
 
establishing that he had the right to effective assistance of
 HRPP Rule 40 counsel. See Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U.S. 722, 752
 
(1991) (concluding that because there is no right under the
 United States Constitution to an attorney in state post­
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conviction proceedings, "a petitioner cannot claim
 
constitutionally ineffective assistance of counsel in such
 proceedings"). Even assuming arguendo that Rodriguez was
 entitled to the effective assistance of HRPP Rule 40 counsel, we
 conclude that Rodriguez's argument is without merit.
 
Rodriguez's argument assumes crucial facts he is 
required to prove -- namely, the existence of an "appealable issue" (as defined in Briones) that Baker failed to assert on appeal and which would have been revealed if Baker had communicated with him during the pendency of the direct appeal. If no such appealable issue existed, then Mottl cannot be faulted for failing to elicit testimony regarding non-existent facts. Because Rodriguez simply assumes, and fails to prove, the existence of crucial predicate facts necessary to support his claim that Mottl provided ineffective assistance, we reject this claim. See State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 
1247 (1998) (concluding that to establish the ineffective assistance of trial counsel, a defendant has the burden of showing: "1) that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." (format altered and citation omitted)). 
CONCLUSION 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Order Denying Petition. DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 30, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Randall K. Hironaka 
(Miyoshi & Hironaka)for Petitioner-Appellant Chief Judge 
Loren J. Thomas Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Respondent-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
11
 