NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000562
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
IN THE INTEREST OF LLR
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(FC-S NO. 15-1-0109)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, and Reifurth, J.,
and Ginoza, J., concurring and dissenting separately)
Appellant-Guardian Ad Litem Renata Foster-Au appeals
from an Order Revoking Jurisdiction and Terminating Foster
Custody ("Order"), issued on July 27, 2016, by the Family Court
of the Second Circuit ("Family Court").1  The Order awarded
guardianship of LLR, a minor child, to Interested Party-Appellee
RN, Mother's boyfriend.  RN is the natural father of LLR's
younger sister, LR, but not of LLR. 
Foster-Au argues that the Family Court reversibly erred
by terminating the Department of Human Service's ("DHS's") foster
custody of LLR and awarding guardianship of LLR to RN2 where (1)
1/The Honorable Keith E. Tanaka presided.
2/In its December 2, 2016 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
Order Revoking Jurisdiction of [LLR] to the Department of Human Services and
Terminating Foster Custody," the Family Court granted a motion for
reconsideration filed by RN in a guardianship case, FC-G No. 15-1-0061;
revoked jurisdiction over the underlying case, FC-S No. 15-1-0109; and
terminated foster custody of LLR.  In the July 27, 2016 Order, the court,
referring to said motion for reconsideration, appointed RN as guardian of LLR
and revoked jurisdiction over the underlying case and terminated foster
custody of LLR.
   
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
the preponderance of the evidence showed that LLR had been
sexually abused by RN, and (2) the court failed to consider
evidence of RN's domestic violence in the presence of LLR and LR
(collectively, the "Children"); drug use in the home; and
possible exposure of the Children to sadomasochism, or bondage,
discipline, and sadomasochism ("S&M/BDSM").  Related to these
arguments is Foster-Au's contention that the Family Court's
Conclusions of Law ("COLs") 1-3 are wrong and Findings of Fact
("FOFs") 6-18 are clearly erroneous. 
The Family Court did not err in terminating foster
custody to DHS and awarding guardianship of LLR to RN because the
challenged FOFs were not clearly erroneous and concerned matters
within the province of the Family Court.  Accordingly, COLs 1–3
are not wrong because they are based on FOFs that are supported
by substantial evidence in the record.
COL 23 is based on FOFs 6-18.  FOFs 8, 9, 10, and 14-
174 consist of credibility determinations, which we decline to
2/(...continued)
The record of FC-G No. 15-1-0061 is not before this court, and there is
no evidence before us that the Family Court consolidated FC-G No. 15-1-0061
with the underlying case, although it appears the court consolidated them for
hearing.  Nevertheless, because the court's appointment of RN as guardian of
LLR is so intertwined with the revocation of jurisdiction and
revocation/termination of foster custody, we address the guardianship
appointment to the extent possible based on the record before us.
3/COL 2 provides, "Based upon a preponderance of the evidence
standard, and upon the credible evidence and totality of the circumstances,
the court concludes that [RN] poses no sexual risk to [the Children]."
4/FOF 8 provides:
The court has viewed the videos of L.L.R.'s
purported disclosures created by [Grandmother] and
considered all of L.L.R.'s subsequent disclosures and
finds that all of L.L.R.'s disclosures of [RN]'s
alleged sexual abuse, which began on or about July 13,
2014, are not reliable.  The manner in which
[Grandmother] created these videos and other writings
and/or statements of L.L.R.'s purported disclosures is
highly problematic and suggests that L.L.R. had been
coached by [Grandmother].  Moreover, the unreliability
of L.L.R.'s disclosures is corroborated by her
recantation to her therapist, Una Starbuck, on October
15, 2014.
FOF 9 and 10 provide, in relevant part:
9.  The court has weighed the testimony of
[Grandmother], observed her demeanor while testifying,
(continued...)
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
review because they consist of credibility-of-the-witness and
weight-of-the-evidence determinations, and implicate the Family
Court's prerogative to draw reasonable inferences from the
evidence presented to it.  See In re Doe , 95 Hawai #i 183, 190, 20
P.3d 616, 623 (2001); In re Doe , 107 Hawai #i 12, 19, 108 P.3d
966, 973 (2005).  Thus, we conclude that FOFs 8, 9, 10, and 14–17
are not clearly erroneous.
Additionally, FOF 9 (in part)5 and FOFs 10-136 are not
4/(...continued)
and finds that she is not a credible witness. . . .
10.  The court has weighed the testimony of
[Dr.] Marvin Acklin, qualified as an expert in the
field of clinical and forensic psychology, observed
his demeanor while testifying, and finds that he is a
credible expert witness. . . .  
FOF 14-17 provides:
14.  The unreliability of L.L.R.'s purported
disclosures of [RN's] alleged sexual abuse has tainted
all of the opinions of witnesses [Grandmother]; Earan
Larry-Fiakpuyi; Leslie Armstrong; Jocelyn Chang; Santo
Triolo, Ph.D.; Virginia Cantorna, Ph.D.; Beverly
Lundquist; Robin Winters; Chelsea Hill; [Foster-Au];
Mother; and Det. Anthony Krau.  Based upon L.L.R.'s
contaminated disclosures that were disseminated to
these witnesses, the court finds that the testimony of
these witnesses are [sic] similarly unreliable and not
credible.
15.  The court has weighed the testimony of
[RN], observed his demeanor while testifying, and
finds that he is a credible witness.
16.  The court has weighed the testimony of
Mother, observed her demeanor while testifying, and
finds that she is not a credible witness.
 
17.  The court has weighed the testimony of
Michelle Goldberg, Skip Goldberg, Trisha Bissett and
Shawna Collard; observed their demeanor while
testifying; and finds that they are credible
witnesses.
5/The remainder of FOF 9 provides:
The court finds that [Grandmother] has demonstrated a
confirmatory bias against [RN].  She had searched for
and recorded numerous allegations that [RN] had
sexually abused L.L.R. due to her preexisting beliefs,
hypotheses or fears.  [Grandmother's] confirmatory
bias has completely corrupted, contaminated and
tainted all of L.L.R.'s purported disclosures, which
the court finds cannot be fixed.  Moreover,
[Grandmother's] confirmatory bias also corrupted,
contaminated and tainted all of the witnesses that she
had discussed L.L.R.'s purported disclosures with,
(continued...)
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
clearly erroneous based on the Family Court's finding that Dr.
Acklin was credible, and its adoption of his opinions and parts
of his Report of Psychosexual Evaluation ("Psychosexual
Evaluation").  As stated above, we decline to review the
credibility-of-the-witness and weight-of-the-evidence
determinations and, therefore, do not disturb the Family Court's
characterization of Dr. Acklin's opinions.  See Doe, 95 Hawai# i
at 190, 20 P.3d at 623.
Furthermore, while FOFs 6, 7, and 187 are mixed FOFs
5/(...continued)
which made their testimony unreliable and not
credible.
6/FOFs 10-13 provide, in relevant part:
10.  . . . . Dr. Acklin reviewed the evidence of
L.L.R.'s purported disclosures for forensic
reliability and conducted a psychosexual examination
of [RN].
11.  The court adopts Dr. Acklin's opinion and
finds that all of L.L.R.'s purported disclosures that
he reviewed appeared to be of "no forensic reliability
whatsoever" and the product of a "terribly flawed
evidentiary process" that contaminated all of L.L.R.'s
subsequent disclosures during the Children's Justice
Center's [("CJC")] interviews and to other
professionals and/or witnesses.
12.  The court adopts Dr. Acklin's opinion and
finds that the "CJC interviews are fatally flawed by
interviewer incompetence and the presence of
fantastical information which appears to be the
product of coaching of the child and encouragement to
fabricate movie-influenced fantasy fabrication which
impugn the reputation and conduct of [RN]."
13.  The court adopts Dr. Acklin's opinion and
finds that [RN] poses no sexual risk to [the
Children].
7/FOF 6 provides: 
Based upon a preponderance of the evidence
standard, and upon the credible evidence and totality
of the circumstances, the court finds that [RN] has
not harmed L.R.'s and/or L.L.R.'s physical or
psychological health or welfare, or subjected them to
threatened harm by any acts or omissions.
FOF 7 provides:
Based upon a preponderance of the evidence
standard, and upon the credible evidence and totality
of the circumstances, the court finds that
[Grandmother] has harmed L.R.'s and/or L.L.R.'s
(continued...)
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
and COLs, they are not clearly erroneous because they are either
supported by substantial evidence in the record, or are based on
the Family Court's finding that Dr. Acklin was credible, and the
adoption of his opinions and parts of the Psychosexual
Evaluation.  Accordingly, we conclude that there is substantial
evidence to support the Family Court's FOFs.  See In the Interest
of LR, No. CAAP-16-0000512, 2017 WL 2829536 (Haw. Ct. App.
June 29, 2017, as amended).
The Family Court did not err in finding that DHS failed
to prove that RN harmed LLR or subjected her to a threat of harm,
and COL 18 is not wrong.  See Haw. Rev. Stat. § 587A-5 (Supp.
2013) (requiring that the Family Court base its finding that a
child is subject to imminent harm on the facts and circumstances
reported to DHS).  See also Haw. Rev. Stat. § 587A-28(f) (Supp.
2013) (requiring the court to dismiss a petition if it finds a
child has not been subjected to threatened harm by the child's
family), and Haw. Rev. Stat. §587A-4 (Supp. 2013) (defining
"harm").  Furthermore, COL 1 is supported by the Family Court's
finding in the June 6, 2016 Order Continuing Foster Custody that
"DHS did not show by a preponderance of the evidence that [LLR's]
physical or psychological health or welfare was subject to
imminent harm by the allegations of alleged sex abuse, alleged
domestic violence, and alleged substance abuse by [RN,]" and
sufficient evidence supports the finding.  Further, sufficient
7/(...continued)
physical or psychological health or welfare, or
subjected them to threatened harm, by creating and
disseminating 35 different videos and other numerous
statements of L.L.R.'s purported disclosures of [RN]'s
alleged sexual abuse to others, including potential
witnesses.
FOF 18 provides, "Based upon a preponderance of the evidence
standard, and upon the credible evidence and totality of the circumstances,
the court finds that [RN] poses no sexual risk to [the Children]."  
8/ COL 1 provides:
Based upon a preponderance of the evidence
standard, and upon the credible evidence and totality
of the circumstances, the court concludes that DHS has
failed to prove, pursuant to Hawai #i's Child
Protective Act, [HRS] § 587A-5, that [RN] has harmed
L.R.'s and/or L.L.R.'s physical or psychological
health or welfare, or subjected them to threatened
harm by any acts or omissions.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
evidence supports the court's finding that DHS failed to prove
that RN exposed the Children to S&M/BDSM. 
COL 39 is not wrong because it is based on substantial
evidence.  The Family Court was not wrong to conclude in COL 3
that appointing RN as LLR's guardian was in LLR's best interest. 
See Haw. Rev. Stat. §§ 560:5-204(b) and -206(a) (2006) (the court
may appoint a guardian if doing so is in the best interest of the
minor) and Haw. Rev. Stat. § 560:5-205(b) (2006) (the court,
after a hearing, may appoint a qualified person as guardian if it
is in the best interest of the minor).  As discussed, there was
sufficient evidence to support the court's conclusion that RN did
not harm or threaten to harm LLR.  Moreover, evidence was adduced
that RN, as LLR's de facto parent, had been providing her with a
stable home and emotional, educational, and financial support for
years. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order Revoking
Jurisdiction and Terminating Foster Custody, issued on July 27,
2016, by the Family Court of the Second Circuit, is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 13, 2017.
On the briefs:
Elizabeth C. Melehan
for Guardian Ad Litem-
Appellant
Nicole Forelli
(Legal Aid Society of Hawaii)
for Mother-Appellee
Erin Lowenthal, Julio Herrera
and Jay Goss,
Deputy Attorneys General,
for DHS-Appellee
Hayden Aluli
for Interested Party-AppelleePresiding Judge
Associate Judge
9/COL 3 provides that "[b]ased on a preponderance of the evidence
standard, and upon the credible evidence and totality of the circumstances,
the court concludes that it is in the best interest of L.L.R. that [RN] be
appointed as her guardian."
6NOT FOR PUBLICATIO N IN W EST'S HAWAII REP ORTS O R TH E PACIF IC REP ORTER
7