NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-15-0000841
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ARTHUR BIRANO, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(SPECIAL PROCEEDING PRISONER NO. 09-1-0040)

(CRIMINAL NO. 01-1-1154)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
Petitioner-Appellant Arthur Birano (Birano) appeals
 
from the September 2, 2015, "Order Denying Petition to Vacate,
 
Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from
 Custody, Filed on September 9, 2009" (2015 Order Denying
 Petition) entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (Circuit Court).
1 We affirm.
 
I.
 
Details concerning Birano's underlying criminal case 
are described in State v. Birano, 109 Hawai 'i 327, 126 P.3d 370 
(App. 2005) (Birano I), and State v. Birano, 109 Hawai 'i 314, 126 
P.3d 357 (2006) (Birano II). 
1/ The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided over the proceedings relevant to
this appeal.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A.
 
After a jury trial, Birano was convicted of the
 
following offenses: (1) first-degree robbery (Count I), in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-840(1)(b)(ii)
 (1993 & Supp. 2004); (2) kidnapping (Count II), in violation of
 HRS § 707-720(1)(e) (1993); (3) first-degree burglary (Count
 III), in violation of HRS § 708-810(1)(c) (1993); (4) possession
 of a prohibited firearm (Counts IV and V), in violation of HRS 
§ 134-8(a) (1993); (5) ownership or possession of any firearm or
 ammunition by a person convicted of certain crimes (Counts VI and
 VII), in violation of HRS § 134-7(b) and (h) (Supp. 2004); and
 (6) carrying, using, or threatening to use a firearm in the commission of a separate felony (Count VIII), in violation of HRS § 134-6(a) and (e) (Supp. 2004). Birano II, 109 Hawai
'i at 316­
17, 126 P.3d at 359-60. The Circuit Court sentenced Birano to extended terms of imprisonment and entered its Judgment on February 18, 2003. Id. at 316-17, 322, 126 P.3d at 359-60, 365. 
In Birano I, this court affirmed the Circuit Court's 
Judgment. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court granted Birano's petition 
for writ of certiorari and also affirmed the Circuit Court's Judgment in an opinion issued on January 11, 2006, in Birano II. 
B.
 
On April 3, 2007, Birano filed a "Petition to Vacate,
 
Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner From
 Custody" in S.P.P. No. 07-1-0012 (First Petition), which the
 Circuit Court denied on September 26, 2007. While Birano's
 appeal of the order denying the First Petition was pending before
 this court, Birano moved to supplement the record on appeal with
 a declaration by prosecution witness Nicolas Nakano (Nakano), in
 which Nakano stated he had testified falsely at trial. This
 court subsequently denied the motion to supplement on the ground
 that the declaration was not considered by the Circuit Court when
 it denied the First Petition.
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On April 24, 2009, this court issued a Summary
 
Disposition Order in Appeal No. 29050, which directed the Circuit 
Court to vacate Birano's extended term sentence and remanded the case for resentencing, but otherwise affirmed the Circuit Court's order denying the First Petition. This court stated that "[e]xcept as to Birano's claim of new evidence, Grounds One through Seven have previously been ruled upon in [
Birano II , 109 
Hawai'i at 323-25, 126 P.3d at 366-68,]" and therefore, relief 
was not available pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP) Rule 40. With respect to Birano's claim of new evidence, namely, that Nakano indicated that his trial testimony was not truthful, this court concluded that no evidence was submitted in the Circuit Court to support this claim, and therefore, the Circuit Court did not err in denying it. 
C. 

On September 9, 2009, Birano filed a "Petition to
 
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner
 from Custody" in S.P.P. No. 09-1-0040 (Second Petition), which
 the Circuit Court denied on April 21, 2010.
 
On February 28, 2013, in Appeal No. 30480, this court
 
affirmed in part and vacated in part the Circuit Court's order
 denying the Second Petition. This court held, in relevant part:
 
The circuit court erred by failing to conduct a
hearing on Ground Three. The statements in Nakano's Amended
 
Declaration appear to constitute newly discovered evidence
in accordance with [HRPP] Rule 40(a)(1)(iv) because Birano
claims that Nakano contacted him in 2008 and provided him
with the Amended Declaration after he filed the First
 Petition.
 
The additional evidence that Birano points to is that
"Nakano has indicated that the prosecutor put pressure on
him to testify and that his testimony was not truthful."
Birano stated a colorable claim for relief on the grounds
that his due process rights were violated because Nakano's
testimony was untruthful and the result of coercion by the
prosecutor.
 
(Brackets omitted.) This court remanded the case for a hearing
 
on Ground Three.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D.
 
On remand, Birano filed a motion to amend his Second 
Petition to add additional grounds for relief. The Circuit Court 
granted the motion in part and permitted Birano to amend the Second Petition to add Grounds Six, Seven, and Eight. The Circuit Court held evidentiary hearings on Birano's amended Second Petition. At the hearings, Birano called Nakano and a private investigator, Terry Pennington, as witnesses. Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) called the judge who 
presided over Birano's trial, Judge Sandra A. Simms (Judge Simms); the trial prosecutor, Lori Wada (Wada); Nakano's lawyer at Birano's trial, Myles Breiner (Breiner); and the detective who obtained a post-arrest statement from Nakano, Michael Church. After the evidentiary hearings, the Circuit Court, on September 2, 2015, denied the Second Petition, as amended, and filed its 2015 Order Denying Petition. 
In its 2015 Order Denying Petition, the Circuit Court
 
stated:
 
At their core, grounds three, six, seven, and eight
are rooted in Nakano's assertion that [Ms.] Wada, Attorney
Breiner, and/or Judge Simms orally promised him that he
would be sentenced as a young adult defendant if he
cooperated in the prosecution of [Birano] and that this
off-the-record plea agreement, which was never disclosed to
[Birano] or his trial counsel, violated [Birano's]
constitutional rights to confrontation, a fair trial, and
due process. Resolution of grounds three, six, seven, and
eight turns on the court's assessment of witness
credibility. It is the court's responsibility to judge the
credibility of the witnesses and resolve factual conflicts
in the testimony.
 
The Circuit Court found that the State's witnesses, including
 
Judge Simms, Wada, and Breiner, were credible and that Nakano was
 not credible. The Circuit Court further found that "there was no
 off-the-record plea agreement that induced Nakano's cooperation
 to testify against [Birano]," and that "[i]nasmuch as there was
 no plea agreement, there was nothing for the prosecution to
 disclose to [Birano] or his trial counsel, nor was there any
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
reason for the prosecution to correct Nakano's assertion at trial
 
that he did not have a plea agreement."2
 
II.
 
On appeal, Birano contends that the Circuit Court erred
 
in denying the claims he raised in Grounds Three, Six, Seven, and
 Eight of the amended Second Petition. In particular, Birano
 contends that the Circuit Court erred by finding that there was
 no off-the-record agreement that induced Nakano's cooperation to
 testify against Birano at Birnao's trial. Birano argues that the
 "crux of this case is whether or not there was an off the record
 agreement between Nakano and the State to testify against
 Birano." Birano claims that Nakano had an agreement with the
 State that if Nakano testified against Birano, the State would
 recommend that Nakano be sentenced to eight years in prison as a
 youthful offender.
3 Birano asserts that the State's failure to
 
disclose this off-the-record agreement, or to correct Nakano's
 "false [trial] testimony" denying the existence of such an
 agreement, violated Birano's rights. We conclude that Birano's
 challenge to the Circuit Court's 2015 Order Denying Petition is
 without merit.
 
Birano does not contend that there was a written
 
agreement between the State and Nakano relating to Nakano's
 testimony. Birano argues that Nakano was credible when he
 testified at a hearing on the amended Second Petition and
 
2/ We note that in this court's summary of the factual background in
Birano I, which the supreme court adopted in Birano II, we stated that after
Nakano invoked his Fifth Amendment rights at trial, the circuit court judge
held a meeting in chambers with the prosecutor, Nakano, and Nakano's attorney.
However, the minutes of the chambers conference indicate that Wada and Breiner
were present, but do not indicate that Nakano was present. Moreover, the
trial transcripts reflect that when trial reconvened after the chambers
conference, Judge Simms stated on the record that she met with Wada and
Breiner in chambers, but did not state that Nakano was present during this
meeting. At the hearings on the amended Second Petition, Judge Simms, Wada,
and Breiner all testified that they met during the recess called after Nakano
invoked his Fifth Amendment rights at trial, but that Nakano was not present
during this meeting.
 
3/ See HRS § 706-667 (1993 & Supp. 2000), authorizing special terms of
imprisonment for young adult defendants.
 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
asserted in his amended declaration that Wada verbally agreed
 
that if he testified against Birano, Wada would recommend that
 Nakano be sentenced as a youthful offender to eight years of
 imprisonment rather than twenty years. 
At a hearing on the amended Second Petition, Wada
 
testified that she did not have an agreement with Nakano, or make
 any promise to Nakano, to recommend an eight-year sentence in
 exchange for Nakano's testimony against Birano. Wada testified
 that after Nakano asserted his Fifth Amendment rights at Birano's
 trial, she did not talk to Nakano about his sentencing. Wada
 further testified, "I've never spoken to Mr. Nakano about
 sentencing, ever." 
Breiner testified that there was no written or oral
 
agreement between the State and Nakano for Nakano to testify
 against Birano in exchange for a sentencing recommendation.
 Breiner testified, "There was no agreement, period." It was
 
Breiner's understanding that if Nakano cooperated, Wada would
 
take that into consideration, and Breiner and Nakano hoped that
 Wada would recommend youthful offender treatment. 
Whether there was an off-the-record verbal agreement 
between the State and Nakano for Nakano to testify against Birano in exchange for the State's recommending an eight-year sentence as a youthful offender for Nakano was a question of fact that turned on the Circuit Court's assessment of the credibility of the witnesses. In evaluating the conflicting testimony, the Circuit Court found Wada and Breiner credible and Nakano not credible. "[I]t is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the [trier of fact]." State v. Buch, 83 Hawai
'i 308, 321, 926 P.2d 599, 612 
(1996) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). We conclude that the Circuit Court's finding that there was no off­the-record agreement between the State and Nakano that induced Nakano to testify against Birano was not clearly erroneous and 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the Circuit Court did not err by denying Birano's amended
 
Second Petition.
 
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's
 
2015 Order Denying Petition. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, January 26, 2017. 
On the briefs:

 
Keith S. Shigetomi
for Petitioner-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge

Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Respondent-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge

 
7
 