NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000176
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
JARRET C. KO, Petitioner-Appellee, v.
DAVID D. ADAMUS, fka David D. Ko, Respondent-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DA NO. 10-1-1134)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant David D. Adamus ("Adamus"),
 
formerly known as David D. Ko, appeals from the Order for
 
Protection ("Protective Order") filed on October 25, 2010 in the
 Family Court of the First Circuit ("Family Court").
1 The
 
Protective Order, inter alia, prohibits Adamus from contacting
 Petitioner-Appellee Jarret H. C. Ko ("Ko"), Adamus's father, for
 ten years. 
On appeal, Adamus argues that the Family Court 
erroneously adopted Ko's proposed findings of fact ("FOFs") and
 conclusions of law ("COLs") in their entirety, where doing so is
 discouraged.
2 Adamus also argues that the Family Court erred in
 
granting Ko's Petition for an Order for Protection despite
 insufficient supporting evidence. Finally, Adamus argues that
 the court made numerous errors at trial by admitting into
 evidence disputed testimony of Ko's witnesses and crediting Ko's
 
1
 The Honorable Sherri L. Iha presided.
 
2
 Adamus does not explain the connection between the issues that he
addresses in his argument and those that he lists in the points of error
section of his brief. As a result, we address what we perceive to be Adamus's
central arguments, and draw what connections we can between those arguments
and Adamus's points of error.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
witnesses over his.3
 
Adamus asks that we remand this case with instructions
 
to the Family Court to file the parties' respective proposed FOFs
 
and COLs, so that we may see that the court improperly adopted
 Ko's proposed FOFs and COLs without change. Alternatively, he
 asks that we set aside the challenged FOFs and reverse the
 Protective Order. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Adamus's arguments as follows:
 
(1) Adamus provides no authority for the notion that
 
the Family Court erred if it adopted Ko's proposed FOFs and COLs
 in their entirety, and we find none. See Haw. Fam. Ct. R. 52. 
Regardless, there was substantial evidence in the record to
 support the court's FOFs and COLs. The FOFs are not clearly
 erroneous, and the COLs are not wrong. 
(2) With regard to Adamus's argument that the Family 
Court erred in admitting and relying upon the testimony of various witnesses whom Adamus contends should not have been believed, or should or should not have been allowed to testify, we decline to review the Family Court's credibility determinations. Kie v. McMahel, 91 Hawai' i 438, 444, 984 P.2d 
1264, 1270 (App. 1999) ("[A]n appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon [the] credibility of witnesses . . . ; this is the province of the trial judge.") . 
The Family Court did not err by prohibiting Adamus's
 
witness, Natalie Adamus, from testifying about statements
 Veronica Ko ("Veronica") made to her regarding Veronica's fear of
 Ko, where the testimony would have constituted hearsay without
 exception and was inadmissible. Haw. R. Evid. 801 & 802.
 
The Family Court was also not wrong to find Katherine
 
Ko ("Katherine") competent to testify. Haw. R. Evid. 601 &
 
3
 Adamus contends in his second point of error that the Family Court
"erred in ordering a ten year order for protection." Adamus's second point of
error differs from his first point of error, which focuses solely on the
order, to the extent that it addresses the term of the order. Adamus,
however, addresses no argument toward the term of the order and, for that
reason, we deem the point to have been waived. Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7).
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
603.1. Even omitting the court's question "So you can get in
 
trouble [for committing perjury]?" and her response, "Yeah, I
 
know already," Katherine's testimony showed that she understood
 the duty of a witness to tell the truth. 
Finally, even if we assume that the Family Court erred 
in admitting Veronica's testimony of what Ko said to her over the telephone shortly after the July 31, 2010 incident ("Incident") because Ko's statements did not fall under the "present sense impression" or "excited utterance" exceptions to the prohibition against hearsay, Haw. R. Evid. 803(b)(1) & (2), any error was harmless as Veronica's testimony in this area was merely cumulative and substantial evidence was presented to support the conclusion that the Incident occurred as Ko said it did, and as the court concluded in COL 32. See State v. Ikeda, No. 29926, 
2011 WL 927669, *1 (Haw. Ct. App. March 16, 2011) (harmless error when improperly admitted evidence was merely cumulative); In re Estate of Herbert, 90 Hawai' i 443, 454, 979 P.2d 39, 50 (1999) 
(we will not disturb the trial court's findings if there is substantial evidence to support them). FOFs 13-21 summarize the incident, including the events that Veronica claimed Ko described to her, and are all derived from and accurately reflect Ko's trial testimony, which the Family Court had the discretion to credit. Kie, 91 Hawai' i at 444, 984 P.2d at 1270. Sufficient 
evidence can be established by the testimony of a single witness. State v. Pulse, 83 Hawai' i 229, 244, 925 P.2d 797, 812 (1996). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order for Protection
 
filed on October 25, 2010 in the Family Court of the First
 Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 30, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Presiding Judge
Scot Stuart Brower
 
for Respondent-Appellant
 
Associate Judge
Steven J. Kim
 for Petitioner-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
 
3
 