NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000486 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
DENEANE M. HAMBY, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
WAILUKU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 2DTA-19-00046) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Deneane M. Hamby (Hamby) appeals 
from the Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment, filed on June 
5, 2019, in the District Court of the Second Circuit, Wailuku Division (district court
).1 
After a bench trial, the district court convicted Hamby 
of operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-
61(a)(1) (Supp 2019).
 2
1 The Honorable Kirstin M. Hamman presided. 
2 HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) states, in relevant part:
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the 
person operates or assumes actual physical control ofa vehicle: 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an 
amount sufficient to impair the person's normal mentalfaculties or ability to care for the person and guardagainst casualty[.] NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Hamby claims the district court failed to 
conduct an adequate Tachibana colloquy. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we affirm. 
The validity of a defendant's waiver in a criminal case 
of the right to testify is a question of constitutional law reviewed by this court under the right/wrong standard. State v. Celestine, 142 
Hawai# i 165, 169, 415 P.3d 907, 911 (2018). 
The constitutional right to testify is violated
when the Tachibana colloquy is inadequate to provide
an "objective basis" for finding the defendant"knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily"relinquished his or her right to testify. In determining whether a waiver of the right to testifywas voluntarily and intelligently made, this courtlooks to the totality of the facts and circumstancesof each particular case. 
Id. at 171, 415 P.3d at 913 (internal citations omitted). 
In this case, the district court advised Hamby pre-
trial of her rights to testify and not testify, which Hamby does 
not challenge. Rather, Hamby challenges the following colloquy: 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Um, we don't have any witnesses.
Defense rests. I know that you have to colloquy my client about herright to testify. 
THE COURT: Right. All right.
So, Ms. Hamby, I have some questions for you. 
THE DEFENDANT: Okay. THE COURT: As we discussed, ah, prior to the start of
the trial, you do have a constitutional right totestify in your own defense. Do you understand? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes. THE COURT: And although you should consult with your
lawyer regarding the decision to testify, it is yourdecision and no one can prevent you from testifyingshould you choose to do so. Do you understand? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes. THE COURT: All right. If you decide to testify, the
prosecutor will be allowed to cross-examine you. Do you understand? 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes. 
THE COURT: All right. And you also have the
constitutional right not to testify and to remainsilent. Do you understand? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes. THE COURT: If you choose not to testify the Court can
not and will not hold your silence against you indeciding your case. Do you understand? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes. THE COURT: All right. And again, you should consult
with your lawyer regarding the decision not totestify, but the decision not to testify and to remainsilent is your decision and nobody can force you totestify. Do you understand? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes. THE COURT: All right. Do you have any questions? THE DEFENDANT: Um, I don't have any questions. I just
have one comment. Ah, you know, in regards to mywalking, if you can --
THE COURT: So, I -- I'm asking if you have any
questions about – 
THE DEFENDANT: No. No. THE COURT: It sounds like you're trying to tell me
something about the case, ah, but your attorney hastold me that you wish, ah, to remain silent. 
THE DEFENDANT: Okay. THE COURT: So, but it is your decision if you wish to
testify. Um, it's your decision to make with in --consultation with your attorney. But ultimately it'syour decision. So have you made a decision aboutwhether you will testify or not? 
THE DEFENDANT: I don't -- not going to testify. THE COURT: All right. Is anybody, um, forcing you to
not testify or coercing you or promising you anythingto not testify? 
THE DEFENDANT: No. THE COURT: All right. The Court will find that the 
defendant has knowingly, intelligently, andvoluntarily waived the right not to testify and toremain silent. Okay. 
(a) Hamby's argument that her right to testify was 
violated because the district court failed to obtain a waiver of 
her right to testify immediately before she rested her case lacks 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
merit in this case. In Tachibana, the Hawai# i Supreme Court 
stated that the ideal time for a court to conduct the Tachibana 
colloquy in a jury trial is immediately prior to the close of the defendant's case, because of the potential prejudice to the defendant if the colloquy is conducted after the defense rests and the defendant then asserts a right to testify. Tachibana v. 
State, 79 Hawai# i 226, 237, 900 P.2d 1293, 1304 (1995). Even 
then, the supreme court noted: 
If the trial court is unable to conduct the colloquy at that
time, however, such failure will not necessarily constitutereversible error. If a colloquy is thereafter conducted andthe defendant's waiver of his or her right to testifyappears on the record, such waiver will be deemed validunless the defendant can prove otherwise by a preponderanceof the evidence. 
Id. In this case, Hamby was tried in a bench trial. Hamby 
presents no basis suggesting a similar potential for prejudice in a bench trial and presents no evidence of actual prejudice in this case. Furthermore, the supreme court noted in Tachibana: 
Of course, the trial court judge cannot independently
foresee when the defense is on the verge of resting andconduct the colloquy at that precise moment. Consequently,the trial courts will require the cooperation of defensecounsel to enable them to conduct the colloquy immediatelyprior to the close of the defendant's case. 
Id. at 237 n.9, 900 P.2d at 1304 n.9. Here, immediately after 
the district court ruled on a motion for judgment of acquittal, defense counsel stated the defense had no witnesses and the defense rests. The district court immediately thereafter initiated the Tachibana colloquy. 
Given the circumstances in this case, we conclude 
Hamby's right to testify was not violated based on when the Tachibana colloquy occurred. 
(b) Hamby argues that her waiver of the right to 
testify was invalid because the district court found that she waived her right "not to testify" but failed to find she waived her right "to testify." 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The district court's finding appears inconsistent with 
the record.3 Nonetheless, a reviewing court is not bound by the 
trial court's finding of a valid waiver, but by the record. 
Appellate review of the sufficiency of the
Tachibana colloquy is necessarily based on a cold
record. We are tasked with scrutinizing the language
used by both the court and the defendant to  assess 
whether a defendant knowingly, intelligently, and
voluntarily waived his or her right to testify. That 
task cannot be accomplished were we to defer to the
trial court's apparent assessment of the defendant'sunderstanding whenever the express language on the
record leaves us with any doubt about the validity ofthe colloquy and/or the defendant's waiver. 
State v. Pomroy, 132 Hawai# i 85, 93 n.7, 319 P.3d 1093, 1101 n.7 
(2014) (emphasis added). 
Here, the record shows that Hamby knowingly, 
intelligently, and voluntarily waive her right to testify. 
There are two components of a Tachibana colloquy. The 
first is informing the defendant of fundamental principles 
pertaining to the right to testify and the right not to testify, which should consist of the following: 
that he or she has a right to testify, that if he or
she wants to testify that no one can prevent him orher from doing so, and that if he or she testifies theprosecution will be allowed to cross-examine him orher. In connection with the privilege againstself-incrimination, the defendant should also beadvised that he or she has a right not to testify andthat if he or she does not testify then the jury canbe instructed about that right. 
Tachibana, 79 Hawai# i at 236 n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n.7 (citations 
and brackets omitted). 
The second component involves the trial court engaging 
in a "true 'colloquy' with the defendant," which "consists of a 
verbal exchange between the judge and the defendant in which the judge ascertains the defendant's understanding of the proceedings and of the defendant's rights." Celestine, 142 
Hawai# i at 170, 
415 P.3d at 912 (citations and quotation marks omitted) (emphasis 
3 The district court stated "that the defendant has knowingly,
intelligently, and voluntarily waived the right not to testify and to remain 
silent," but did not state that the defendant waived the right to testify.
The statement appears to be in error because Hamby decided not to testify. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in original). The "trial court [should] engage in a verbal 
exchange with the defendant at least twice during the colloquy in order to ascertain the defendant's understanding of significant propositions in the advisement." Id. (citation and quotation 
marks omitted). 
Here, the district court advised Hamby that: she had 
the right to testify and the right to not testify; no one can prevent her from testifying if she wants to or force her to testify if she does not want to; the prosecution will be allowed to cross-examine her if she testifies; if she does not testify, then the district court cannot consider that against her in deciding her case. The district court gave the first advisement prior to trial and gave the second advisement immediately after the defense rested, and Hamby stated she would not be testifying. During each advisement, the district court asked Hamby several times whether she understood her rights, and Hamby unequivocally indicated that she did. Thus, the district court's colloquy was adequate to indicate that Hamby knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily waived her right to testify. 
(c) Hamby argues that her waiver was nonetheless 
invalid because the district court failed to suspend the colloquy when she indicated an intent to speak so that she and her counsel could resolve the discrepancy. This argument lacks merit, as Hamby's post-colloquy comments do not reflect doubt or uncertainty about her right-to-testify. Cf. Pomroy, 132 Hawai# i 
at 93, 319 P.3d at 1101 (finding the waiver to be invalid because the defendant repeatedly expressed doubt and uncertainty over what the trial court was telling him regarding his right-to-testify).
 Hamby did not express any doubt or uncertainty about 
her rights. Hamby clearly stated: "I don't have any questions, I just have one comment. Ah, you know, in regards to my walking, if you can --"
4 That Hamby wanted to tell the district court 
4 In this case, Officer Justin Reiner testified that he stopped Hamby’s
vehicle after observing it swerve and cross traffic lanes several times. He 
also conducted a field sobriety test, during which Hamby stumbled twice. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
something about the case does not mean that she wanted to testify 
about it, or that she had any confusion, doubt, or uncertainty about her rights regarding testimony. If anything, Hamby's response confirmed her understanding that if she wanted to bring any additional facts into evidence, it would have to be in the form of testimony, and that she did not want to testify. After Hamby's comment, the district court told Hamby the decision to testify was her decision to make in consultation with her attorney. Thereafter, Hamby told the court she was not going to testify. 
Under the right/wrong standard, the totality of the 
circumstances indicate that Hamby knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily waived her right to testify. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment and 
Notice of Entry of Judgment, filed on June 5, 2019, in the District Court of the Second Circuit, Wailuku Division, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 5, 2021. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge
7 William H. Jameson, Jr.,Deputy Public Defender, for Defendant-Appellant. 
Gerald K. Enriques, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, for Plaintiff-Appellee. 