NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000003
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant, v.
LARRY IKIMAKA, Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
LIANE HENDERSON, CHERI NUMAZAWA,
Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 14-1-0306)
AMENDED MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Larry Ikimaka
(Ikimaka) appeals from the December 30, 2015 Second Amended
Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence Notice of Entry
(Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit
(Circuit Court).   After a jury trial, the Circuit Court
convicted Ikimaka of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Second
Degree (Promoting Second) in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
(HRS) § 712-1242(1)(b)(i) (Supp. 2018),  and Prohibited Acts
Related to Drug Paraphernalia (Possession of Paraphernalia) in21
1The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
2HRS § 712-1242(1)(b)(i) provides:  "(1) A person commits the
offense of promoting a dangerous drug in the second degree if the person
knowingly: . . . (b)  Possesses one or more preparations, compounds, mixtures,
or substances of an aggregate weight of:  (i) One-eighth ounce or more,
containing methamphetamine, heroin, morphine, or cocaine or any of their
respective salts, isomers, and salts of isomers[.]"NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a) (2010).   Ikimaka was sentenced,
inter alia , to a four-year term of probation with the special
condition that he serve nine months in prison.3
Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant State of Hawai#i
(State) appeals from the December 11, 2015 Order Granting
Defendant Larry Ikimaka's Motion for Stay of Execution of
Sentence Pending Appeal (Order Granting Stay).
Ikimaka contends in his appeal that the Circuit Court
erred by denying his Motion for a New Trial because:  (1) the
State failed to lay a proper foundation to admit drug weight or
composition test results; (2)  the court permitted improper
hearsay evidence; (3) a police officer witness was permitted to
speculate as to Ikimaka's state of mind; (4) the deputy
prosecutor (DPA) committed misconduct by eliciting testimony on
Ikimaka's silence after receiving Miranda warnings; and (5) the
court failed to sever Ikimaka's trial from that of the
3HRS § 329-43.5(a) read at the time of the conviction:
(a) It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with
intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of this chapter.  Any person who
violates this section is guilty of a class C felony and upon
conviction may be imprisoned pursuant to section 706-660
and, if appropriate as provided in section 706-641, fined
pursuant to section 706-640.
HRS § 329-1 (2010) defines "drug paraphernalia" to mean, in
relevant part:
all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are
used, primarily intended for use, or primarily designed for
use . . . storing, containing, concealing, . . . ,
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human
body a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. 
It includes but is not limited to:
. . . .
(9) Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other
containers used, primarily intended for use, or
primarily designed for use in packaging small
quantities of prohibited controlled substances;
(10) Containers and other objects used, primarily
intended for use, or primarily designed for use
in storing or concealing prohibited controlled
substances[.]
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
codefendant.  Ikimaka also argues that his Motion for Judgment of
Acquittal should have been granted because there was insufficient
evidence of actual or constructive possession.4
On cross-appeal, the State argues the Circuit Court
abused its discretion by granting Ikimaka's Motion to Stay of
Execution of Sentence Pending Appeal because it failed to adhere
to the requirements of HRS § 804-4(b) (2014).5
4Ikimaka's points of error are in noncompliance with Hawai #i Rules
of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) as they fail to state "where in
the record the alleged error was objected to or the manner in which the
alleged error was brought to the attention of the court[,] . . . [including] a
quotation of the grounds urged for the objection and the full substance of the
evidence admitted or rejected[.]"  Consequently, "[p]oints not presented in
accordance with this section will be disregarded, except that the appellate
court, at its option, may notice a plain error not presented."  Id.  
Furthermore, subpoint (5) as it appears in his opening brief, in
which Ikimaka alleges "the Court's jury instruction regarding constructive
possession was incomplete[,]" is not discussed in his argument section and is
deemed waived.  HRAP Rule 28(b)(7); see also Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 Hawai #i
126, 144 n.16, 276 P.3d 695, 713 n.16 (2012) (citing In re Guardianship of
Carlsmith, 113 Hawai #i 236, 246, 151 P.3d 717, 727 (2007) ("noting that this
court may 'disregard a particular contention if the appellant makes no
discernible argument in support of that position'") (brackets omitted). 
Counsel is warned that future violation of the HRAP may result in sanctions,
including striking the brief or portions thereof and monetary sanctions.
Finally, to facilitate our review, Ikimaka's points have been
reorganized and renumbered for coherence.
5HRS § 804-4(b) provides:
(b)The court shall order that a person who has been
found guilty of an offense and sentenced to a term of
imprisonment, and who has filed an appeal or a petition for
a writ of certiorari, be detained, unless the court finds:
(1) By clear and convincing evidence that the person
is not likely to flee or pose a danger to the
safety of any other person or the community if
released; and
(2) That the appeal is not for purpose of delay and
raises a substantial question of law or fact
likely to result in reversal or an order for a
new trial.
If the court makes these findings, the court shall order the
release of the person in accordance with section 804-7.1. 
No defendant entitled to bail, whether bailed or not, shall
be subject, without the defendant's written consent, to the
operation of any sentence passed upon the defendant, while
any proceedings to procure a review of any action of the
trial court or jury in the premises are pending and
undetermined, except as provided in section 641-14(a)
[regarding stays of sentence during the time for filing the
notice of appeal] or section 712-1207 [regarding street
solicitation of prostitution].
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Background
On October 13, 2014, at approximately 2:30 a.m., Kaua#i
Police Department (KPD) Officer Hanson Hsu (Officer Hsu) was
dispatched to respond to a report alleging Cheri Numazawa's
(Numazawa) purse was in a gold Chevy truck.  On the way to the
scene, Officer Hsu recognized the truck driving the opposite
direction on Kuhio Highway and initiated a traffic stop.  Ikimaka
was driving the truck.  Officer Hsu, who was familiar with
Ikimaka, informed Ikimaka that Numazawa had made a complaint
against Ikimaka.  Officer Hsu asked Ikimaka and passenger Liane
Henderson (Henderson) to exit the vehicle and sit on the curb
until KPD could contact Numazawa.  Officer Hsu's beat partner
Officer Roldan Agbayani (Officer Agbayani) arrived to assist him. 
Other officers located Numazawa who stated she wanted her purse
back from Ikimaka but did not want to press charges.  Officer Hsu
initiated an evidence tow for the truck.  Officer Agbayani
informed Officer Hsu that he had advised Ikimaka of his
constitutional rights, that Ikimaka wanted to talk to a lawyer,
and that Ikimaka walked over to Officer Agbayani and
"spontaneously uttered that [he had] Cheri's bag in [his] truck,
can you just arrest me for theft and don't take my truck[?]"  The
truck was towed to the KPD evidence warehouse and put into the
custody of Evidence Custodian Kristal Nebre (Nebre).
Pursuant to a search warrant for the truck, police
retrieved:  (1) one black purse containing Henderson's driver's
license and zip-lock bags containing crystallized substances,
(2) one Dooney and Burke purse in which a wallet containing
numerous items bearing Numazawa's name, a glass pipe with
residue, a digital scale, a sponge, a clear zip-lock bag with
crystallized substances or residue were found, and (3) a maroon
bag found under the driver's seat containing a glass pipe with
residue, an Ace Hardware receipt bearing the name "Larry
Ikimaka," $1,400 in cash, a scale, and several zip-lock bags.
Ikimaka was charged with Promoting Second and
Possession of Paraphernalia.  In the same Felony Information and
Non-Felony Complaint (Information) that charged Ikimaka,
Henderson was charged with Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Third Degree in violation of HRS § 712-1243(1) (2014)  (Promoting
Third), Possession of Paraphernalia, and Promoting a Detrimental
Drug in the Third Degree in violation of HRS § 712-1249 (2014).  
Numazawa was also charged in the same Information with Promoting
Third and Possession of Paraphernalia.76
Prior to trial, the Circuit Court took argument on
Ikimaka's motion to sever his trial from that of Numazawa.   
Ikimaka anticipated that Numazawa would attempt to blame him for
the drugs and argued there was an irreconcilable conflict in the
defenses.  The court rejected this basis and denied the motion.  
The court also noted that jury instructions could clarify which
defendant was being accused of possessing particular drugs.8
On August 10, 2015, the court heard argument on motions
in limine, the transcript of which is not part of the record on
appeal.  Ikimaka's four motions in limine sought to exclude: 
(1) witnesses not disclosed before the pretrial deadline;
(2) "any testimony or evidence referencing any items not related
to charges filed against" Ikimaka; (3) any testimony or evidence
"referencing the Ace Hardware receipt" on the basis that the
information contained therein was more prejudicial than
probative; and (4) statements made by Ikimaka or Numazawa
unrelated to the present charges.  Specifically, Ikimaka sought
to exclude his statements:  "I have Cheri's bag in my truck.  Can
you just arrest me for theft and don't take my truck[?]"; and
"Could I just give her purse back in [sic] be done with it?"  
Ikimaka also sought to exclude Numazawa's statements from: 
(1) when police made contact:
6HRS § 712-1243(1) provides:  " Promoting a dangerous drug in the
third degree.   (1)  A person commits the offense of promoting a dangerous drug
in the third degree if the person knowingly possesses any dangerous drug in
any amount."
7HRS § 712-1249(1) provides:  " Promoting a detrimental drug in the
third degree.   (1)  A person commits the offense of promoting a detrimental
drug in the third degree if the person knowingly possesses any marijuana or
any Schedule V substance in any amount."
8Henderson had previously entered a plea of no contest.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
What the fuck are you guys doing here?  Did you guys arrest
Larry?  I just like my purse back.  There's a Rolex in it. 
I no like press charges.  Can you guys just get my purse
back from Larry?  I no like make one statement.  Yeah, he
took my purse but I no like get him in trouble.
and (2) the scene of the traffic stop:
Can I take my purse out of the truck?  Why are you guys
seizing the truck?  See Larry is all your fucking fault. 
Nah, I know what for say, I just going tell them that I had
lie [sic] because I was mad.  All you fuckas is crooked
cops.
The court denied motions in limine (2), (3), and (4), but
excluded references to the Rolex watch and "evidence and/or
testimony in which Defendant NUMAZAWA accuses Defendant IKIMAKA
of striking her or stealing her purse."  The court, however,
specifically permitted testimony of Numazawa's ownership of the
purse.
At trial, the State presented six witnesses:  State
Drug Analyst Stacy Riede (Riede),  KPD Records Unit Supervisor
Eunice Apeles (Apeles), Officer Hsu, Officer Agbayani, Nebre, and
KPD Officer Creighton Tamagawa (Officer Tamagawa).9
Riede testified to the weights and composition of the
substances that she identified as methamphetamine seized from the
truck as well as to the instruments used in making those
identifications, discussed in detail below.  During Riede's
testimony, Ikimaka objected to instrument service records for
lack of foundation.  The Circuit Court admitted the records over
Ikimaka's objections.
On direct examination, Officer Hsu testified to:  his
experience as an officer; the events on the morning of
October 13, 2014; seeing Ikimaka driving the truck previously;
the process of seizing the truck; obtaining and executing the
search warrant for the truck at the KPD warehouse; and the
exhibits and their locations within the truck.  Ikimaka renewed
his objection to the Ace Hardware receipt bearing his name.  
Ikimaka elicited the following testimony from Officer Hsu on
cross-examination:
9Inconsistently identified in briefs and transcripts as Stacey (or
Stacy) Reide (or Riede).
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
[Ikimaka's counsel]:  And you have no way of knowing
whether Mr. Ikimaka -- 
THE COURT:  Approach.  
(The following was heard at the bench.) 
THE COURT:  You just realize you asked a very
open-ended question and -- 
[Ikimaka's counsel]:  I knew the answer, Judge.  
THE COURT:  So it's real risky.  I just want to say I
thought it was a very risky question and that is open for
the redirect examination.  Okay.  Thank you. 
(The following was heard in open court.)
[Ikimaka's counsel]:  Officer [Hsu], you have no way
of knowing whether Mr. Ikimaka ever intended to possess any
of those drugs; correct? 
[Officer Hsu]: Correct.
The State objected on the bases of speculation and that it was a
question for the jury.  The court stated:
I think I'm going to allow him to answer because this
is another area of redirect that you can go into.  The door
was opened, how you establish intent and all of that.  You
can do what you need to, but the issue of intent was raised
by [Ikimaka's counsel], but only for Mr. Ikimaka[.]
Officer Hsu acknowledged that he did not know if Ikimaka shopped
at Ace Hardware, did not know if the receipt was genuine, had not
interviewed Ace Hardware employees, had not checked store
surveillance cameras, had not questioned anyone whether they
shopped at Ace Hardware, and that club card accounts do not
verify the user's identity.  On cross-examination, he was asked,
"So you started an investigation based on the fact that she
reported that somebody had taken her items without permission;
correct?"  Ikimaka objected to the phrase "without permission[,]"
and the court struck that portion of the question.  Officer Hsu
agreed that he was aware Ikimaka said to Officer Agbayani that
"he had Cheri's bag in his truck.  'Can you just arrest me for
theft and don't take my truck[?]'"
On redirect examination, the following exchange took
place:
[Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (DPA)]:  Now, I believe
[Ikimaka's counsel] asked about Larry Ikimaka's intent
regarding the drugs found in the vehicle.  As a police
officer, would you say that Larry Ikimaka had intent to
possess drugs, had knowledge of drugs, if he stated "Just
arrest me and don't take my truck"? 
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
[Ikimaka's counsel]:  May we approach? 
[Officer Hsu]:  Yes. 
THE COURT:  Approach.  (The following was heard at the
bench.)
[Ikimaka's counsel]:  I think it calls for
speculation.
THE COURT:  This is all the intent questions that was
asked about what the intent that was asked during
cross-examination.
[Ikimaka's counsel]:  But the intent--but he can't
testify--he's speculating as to what my client.
THE COURT:  You asked him to speculate about intent,
so this is just a reasonable--a logical, reasonable follow
up to the questions.  That's why I brought you here when the
question was asked.
[Ikimaka's counsel]:  Well, I thought you were talking
about 404(b).  I asked him whether he has any way to know
Mr. Ikimaka's opinion, and she's asking him and saying hey,
he's speculating about what Mr. Ikimaka's intent is.
THE COURT:  But you asked him to speculate on the
issue of intent. He answered.  So now I'm going to allow the
State to ask the question. . . .
. . . .
THE COURT:  You opened the door on that.  I don't know
whether there's any information on that.  That's why I
brought you up and said this was a risky line of
questioning.  I mean, it was apparent to the Court.  But the
strategy you take during your questioning, I don't get
involved in.
. . . .
. . . But as far as the intent part, sure, I'm going
to allow [DPA] to question about intent given it was raised
by you in cross-examination.  So you cannot raise an issue
and then not expect the other parties to follow up on that,
so this is just a reasonable follow up.  So your objection
is overruled.  Thank you.
(The following was heard in open court.) 
THE COURT:  [DPA]. 
[DPA]:  And, Officer [Hsu], would the fact that
Mr. Ikimaka tried to stop the police from taking his truck
by saying that indicate his intent to possess drugs in the
truck?
[Officer Hsu]:  Yes.  
Officer Agbayani testified to the circumstances of
Ikimaka making the statement, "I have Cheri's bag in my truck.
Can you just arrest me for theft and don't take my truck?" 
During Officer Agbayani's testimony, the court struck a line of
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
questioning as comment on Ikimaka's right to remain silent; this
testimony is discussed in depth below.  During Ikimaka's cross-
examination, Officer Agbayani made reference to Ikimaka not
wanting to answer questions.
Ikimaka moved for a judgment of acquittal for
insufficiency of evidence of possession.  The Circuit Court
denied the motion.
Neither Ikimaka nor Numazawa presented evidence or
witnesses.
The jury found Ikimaka guilty as charged in both counts
and acquitted Numazawa of both charges against her.  This appeal
followed.
Ikimaka's Appeal
A. Denial of Motion for New Trial.
1.Ikimaka has failed to show plain error in
admitting the drug test results.
"Part of the foundational prerequisite for the
reliability of a test result is a showing that the measuring
instrument is 'in proper working order.'"  State v. Wallace, 80
Hawai#i 382, 407, 910 P.2d 695, 720 (1996)).  Ikimaka challenges
only this requirement for admissibility.  He states that the
"Circuit Court improperly admitted the drug weight and/or test
results" (capitalization modified) where the State failed to lay
a proper foundation, and argues that the State's expert, Riede,
did not know how to calibrate "that machine" and admission of the
records of the calibration was error because they are hearsay and
do not qualify as business records of Hawai# i's Narcotics
Enforcement Division (NED), and because Riede was not properly
qualified as a custodian of the records.
a. Admission of the FTIR test results.
In this case, analysis to identify the substance
recovered was done, in part, by the use of the Fourier Transform
Infrared Spectrometer (FTIR).  However, it does not appear that
Ikimaka is challenging evidence of the FTIR test results. 
Ikimaka provides no record citations for the testimony or
exhibits in his points or argument sections, does not present a
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
description of the evidence he challenges nor identify the
"machine" whose results he claims was accepted in error.  More
importantly, Ikimaka does not explain how his arguments pertain
to the FTIR test results.  We therefore conclude his arguments do
not pertain to the FTIR results and we deem any challenge to
these results waived.  HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).
b. Admission of the Analytical Balance results.
While Ikimaka has not provided record citations for,
nor description of, the evidence he challenges, he does
specifically mention the record of the "chemical balance's
manufacturer" and "admission of the weight of the drugs".  We
therefore conclude that Ikimaka's challenge pertains to the
results of the Analytical Balance, which provided the weight of
the substances submitted for analysis.
Riede testified that she determined whether the balance
was in proper working condition by doing a performance check
every day before work by using a set of certified weights, and if
the weight results were within tolerances the balance is
considered operable.  State's Exhibit 46 is the Balance Check
Worksheet, which appears to bear Riede's initials for a check
completed on January 28, 2015.  While the State did not present
the testimony of the person who performed the calibration of the
weights used to check the Analytical Balance, it did present
State's Exhibit 47, a Report of Calibration prepared by Quality
Control Services, which identified the weight set by the same
serial number as Exhibit P-46, and certified that the weights
were in good condition and within established tolerances.  The
State also produced Exhibits 44 and 45, A2LA Accredited
Certificates of Calibration With Data, dated June 16, 2014 and
January 28, 2015 respectively, that were also prepared by Quality
Control Services for the NED, both pertaining to the same make
and model as reflected in Exhibit 46, and both notarized by Riede
on their respective dates.
Ikimaka challenges the introduction of these exhibits 
because they were prepared by a third party and Riede could not
authenticate the exhibits.  "[W]hen an entity incorporates
records prepared by another entity into its own records, they are
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
admissible as business records of the incorporating entity,
provided that it relies on the records, there are other indicia
of reliability, and the requirements of [Hawaii Rules of Evidence
(HRE)] Rule 803(b)(6)[ ] are otherwise satisfied."  State v.
Fitzwater, 122 Hawai#i 354, 367-68, 227 P.3d 520, 533-34 (2010). 
Here, based on Riede's testimony, it is clear NED has
incorporated the documents into its own records, NED relies on
these records, and that they comply with HRE Rule 803(b)(6).10
As to other indicia of reliability, in Fitzwater, the
supreme court identified evidence of a contractual relationship
between the entity creating the record and the incorporating
entity as a significant factor in establishing the necessary
indicia of trustworthiness.  Id. at 369, 227 P.3d at 535.  Here,
the document itself identifies the NED as the entity for whom the
tests were being conducted.  In addition, the same firm that
certified the weights on December 2, 2013, in Exhibit 47, also
calibrated the balance and certified it was working properly on
June 16, 2014, and January 28, 2015, thereby indicating an
ongoing business relationship.  In addition, the Quality Control
Services technician, Steven Michael King, who conducted the
testing reflected in both Exhibits 44 and 45, attested that he
was trained and currently certified to conduct, and did conduct
the tests in accordance with his training, and certified that the
10HRE Rule 803(b)(6) provides, 
Hearsay exceptions; availability of declarant immaterial.
The following are not excluded by the hearsay rule, even
though the declarant is available as a witness: 
. . . .
(b) Other exceptions.
. . . .
(6) Records of regularly conducted activity.  A
memorandum, report, record, or data compilation,
in any form, of acts, events, conditions,
opinions, or diagnoses, made in the course of a
regularly conducted activity, at or near the
time of the acts, events, conditions, opinions,
or diagnoses, as shown by the testimony of the
custodian or other qualified witness, or by
certification that complies with rule 902(11) or
a statute permitting certification, unless the
sources of information or other circumstances
indicate lack of trustworthiness.
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
information contained in these reports was accurate, true and
correct to the best of his knowledge.  These documents were
properly admitted as business records because the evidence showed
NED incorporated the documents into their own records, NED relied
on them, and there was sufficient indicia of reliability.  Thus,
the State produced sufficient foundation for admission of the
Analytic Balance test results.
2. Ikimaka waived challenge to the Ace Hardware
Receipt.
Ikimaka contends the Circuit Court erred in admitting
hearsay in the form of an Ace Hardware receipt bearing the name
"LARRY IKIMAKA" insofar as it also contained the name of the
merchant, the date of the receipt, items purchased, and method of
payment.  However, Ikimaka waived this hearsay argument by
objecting at trial on HRE Rule 403 grounds and not objecting to
admission of the exhibit on this ground.  State v. Vliet, 91
Hawai#i 288, 298, 983 P.2d 189, 199 (1999) ("Waiver [under HRE
Rule 103(a)(1) ] will also occur when the trial objection,
properly overruled, differs from that pressed on appeal."). 
Ikimaka concedes the receipt may have been admissible for the
limited purpose of showing that "a piece of paper bearing
[Ikimaka's] name was found" and does not argue that the Circuit
Court's ruling on his motion in limine based on HRE Rule 403 was
error.11
Based on this record, we cannot conclude that the
alleged hearsay items affected Ikimaka's substantial rights and
therefore choose not to notice plain error.  See e.g., State v.
Fox, 70 Haw. 46, 56, 760 P.2d 670, 676 (1988).
11HRE Rule 103(a)(1) provides, in pertinent part:  "Error may not be
predicated upon a ruling which admits or excludes evidence unless a
substantial right of the party is affected, and . . . [i]n case the ruling is
one admitting evidence, a timely objection or motion to strike appears of
record, stating the specific ground of objection, if the specific ground was
not apparent from the context[.]"
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3.The Circuit Court Did Not Abuse Its Discretion by
Allowing Officer Hsu to Give His Lay Opinion .
Ikimaka contends the Circuit Court erred by denying his
New Trial Motion because Officer Hsu was allowed to testify to
his opinion regarding Ikimaka's state of mind.  Ikimaka argues
that, under HRE Rules 602 and 701  taken together, Officer Hsu's
testimony on Ikimaka's intent was impermissible speculation.12
The challenged testimony was elicited on redirect in
the following exchange:
Q.  Officer [Hsu], when you made the stop of Larry
Ikimaka, were you aware if anyone else had told Larry
Ikimaka why you were pulling him over?
A.  No.
Q.  Now, I believe Mr. Meyers asked about Larry
Ikimaka's intent regarding the drugs found in the vehicle.
As a police officer, would you say that Larry Ikimaka had
intent to possess drugs, had knowledge of drugs, if he
stated "Just arrest me and don't take my truck"?
. . . .
(The following was heard at the bench.)
[Ikimaka's Counsel] MR. MEYERS:  I think it calls for
speculation.
THE COURT:
  This is all the intent questions that was
asked about what the intent that was asked during cross-
examination.
MR. MEYERS:  But the intent--but he can't testify--
he's speculating as to what my client.
12HRE Rule 602 provides:   
A witness may not testify to a matter unless evidence is
introduced sufficient to support a finding that the witness
has personal knowledge of the matter.  Evidence to prove
personal knowledge may, but need not, consist of the
witness' own testimony.  This rule is subject to the
provisions of rule 703, relating to opinion testimony by
expert witnesses.  
HRE Rule 701 provides:  
If the witness is not testifying as an expert, the witness'
testimony in the form of opinions or inferences is limited
to those opinions or inferences which are (1) rationally
based on the perception of the witness, and (2) helpful to a
clear understanding of the witness' testimony or the
determination of a fact in issue. 
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
THE COURT:  You asked him to speculate about intent,
so this is just a reasonable--a logical, reasonable follow
up to the questions.  That's why I brought you here when the
13question was asked.[ ]
13The exchange during Ikimaka's cross-examination was as follows: 
Q.  You never saw Mr. Ikimaka smoking or otherwise
ingesting any drugs; correct?
A.  For that night or--
Q.  Ever?
A.  Yes.  I never seen him do that, yes.
Q.  And you have no way of knowing whether
Mr. Ikimaka--
THE COURT:  Approach.
(The following was heard at the bench.)
THE COURT:  You just realize you asked a very open-
ended question and--
MR. MEYERS:  I knew the answer, Judge.
THE COURT:  So it's real risky.  I just want to say I
thought it was a very risky question and that is open for
the redirect examination.  Okay.  Thank you.
(The following was heard in open court.)
BY MR. MEYERS:
Q.  Officer [Hsu], you have no way of knowing whether
Mr. Ikimaka ever intended to possess any of those drugs;
correct?
A.  Correct.
[DPA]:  Your Honor, approach.
THE COURT:  Approach.
(The following was heard at the bench.)
THE COURT:  This is an interesting question.  So,
[DPA], let me hear the argument.
[DPA]:  First of all, it's speculation.  The officer's
not going to (inaudible).  Third, it's a question for the
jury--I mean intended--
THE COURT:  I think I'm going to allow him to answer
because this is another area of redirect that you can go
into.  The door was opened, how you establish intent and all
of that.  You can do what you need to, but the issue of
intent was raised by Mr. Meyers, but only for Mr. Ikimaka.
It wasn't raised for Ms. Numazawa.
You have to see how Mr. Castillo addresses this issue,
whether you're able to question Mr. Officer [Hsu] along
(inaudible) but the issue of intent was raised.
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
MR. MEYERS:  Well, I thought you were talking about
404(b).  I asked him whether he has any way to know
Mr. Ikimaka's opinion, and she's asking him and saying hey,
he's speculating about what Mr. Ikimaka's intent is.
THE COURT:  But you asked him to speculate on the
issue of intent.  He answered.  So now I'm going to allow
the State to ask the question.  You also asked questions
about whether he had prior drug use.  I don't know whether
he did or didn't, but that certainly opens the door.
MR. MEYERS:  I didn't ask that question. I asked on
that date and he said "ever?"  So I didn't want to leave it
hanging for the jury.  That's why I said "yeah" after.
That's the way he responded.
THE COURT:  You opened the door on that.  I don't know
whether there's any information on that.  That's why I
brought you up and said this was a risky line of
questioning.  I mean, it was apparent to the Court.  But the
strategy you take during your questioning, I don't get
involved in.
MR. MEYERS:  I did that but what I'm saying with
regards to--I don't think she's allowed to ask him if he has
a prior history unless she can go through the whole 404(b).
That's not what I asked him.  I asked him on that day and he
asked me "ever?"  So it wasn't fair to me to leave it
hanging for the jury.
THE COURT:  I don't know what's fair or not.  All I
know is the question was asked so I'm going to allow it.  I
don't know if there's any relevant information.  But as far
as the intent part, sure, I'm going to allow [DPA] to
question about intent given it was raised by you in cross-
examination.  So you cannot raise an issue and then not
expect the other parties to follow up on that, so this is
just a reasonable follow up.  So your objection is
overruled.  Thank you.
(The following was heard in open court.)
THE COURT:  [DPA]
BY[DPA]:
Q.  And, Officer [Hsu], would the fact that
Mr. Ikimaka tried to stop the police from taking his truck
by saying that indicate his intent to possess drugs in the
truck?
A.  Yes.
In State v. Tucker, we set forth a liberal standard for
admitting lay opinions into evidence under HRE Rule 701.  10 Haw.
App. 73, 91, 861 P.2d 37, 47 (1993), on remand from 10 Haw. App.
43, 861 P.2d 24 (1993) (discussing the commentary to the
identical federal rule).  "As long as (1) the witness has
personal knowledge of matter that forms the basis of the
testimony; (2) the testimony is rationally based on the witness'
perception; and (3) the opinion is 'helpful' to the jury (the
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
principal test), the opinion testimony is admissible."  Id.
(citation omitted).  "[A]dmission of opinion evidence is a matter
within the discretion of the trial court, and only an abuse of
that discretion can result in reversal."  Id. at 89, 861 P.2d at
46 (citation omitted).
Tucker was a case of child murder by omission in which
we affirmed the admission of lay opinion evidence regarding the
defendant-mother's lack of remorse for not seeking medical
attention for her child as evidence of intent to murder the
child.  Id. at 91–92, 861 P.2d at 47.  We concluded the opinions
were based on personal knowledge, observations, and perceptions
of the defendant gleaned from extensive discussions following the
child's admission to the hospital and his death, and that the
testimony was helpful to the jury to determine the defendant's
intent to murder because a lack of remorse would be expected if
she intentionally did not take her baby to the hospital knowing
that he was seriously injured.  Id.  We deemed the opinion
evidence admissible.  Id.
Here, while Officer Hsu did not have personal knowledge
of the statement, he testified that his beat partner told him
that Ikimaka made the statement and there is no dispute that
Ikimaka made the statement.  Officer Hsu was the officer that
first made contact with Ikimaka, was present throughout the
traffic stop, was aware that drugs were later found in the car,
had interacted with Ikimaka in the past, and had seven years of
experience as an officer interacting with criminal suspects. 
Thus, the opinion was rationally related to Officer Hsu's
knowledge, experience, and perceptions. 
Moreover,
The law recognizes the difficulty by which intent is proved
in criminal cases.  We have consistently held that since
intent can rarely be proved by direct evidence, proof by
circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences arising
from circumstances surrounding the act is sufficient to
establish the requisite intent.  Thus, the mind of an
alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct and
inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances.
Tucker, 10 Haw. App. at 92, 861 P.2d at 47 (quoting State v.
Sadino, 64 Haw. 427, 430, 642 P.2d 534, 536-37 (1982)).  Thus,
Officer Hsu's testimony was helpful to the jury to determine the
16NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
defendant's intent to possess the contraband because it provided
an opinion of an individual with experience in conducting vehicle
stops.  See State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai# i 87, 105, 997 P.2d 13, 31
(2000) (non-expert police opinion helpful because of experience
in gun transport).  Ikimaka does not suggest this opinion would
have required "scientific, technical, or other specialized
knowledge," such that expert testimony would have been required
pursuant to HRE Rule 702.  Officer Hsu's testimony was not that
Ikimaka had the requisite intention, but that in his experience
Ikimaka's actions manifested an indication of intent, which is
properly admissible lay opinion.  See State v. Yip, 92 Hawai#i
98, 107, 987 P.2d 996, 1005 (App. 1999) ("There is a small but
significant difference between a witness testifying directly as
to another's state of mind . . . and a witness testifying that
another person manifested" state of mind.).
Finally, the evidence was more probative than
prejudicial under HRE Rule 403.14  Tucker, 10 Haw. App. at 92,
861 P.2d at 48.  Evidence is unfairly prejudicial when it has "an
undue tendency to suggest decision on an improper basis."  State
v. Kassebeer, 118 Hawai# i 493, 507, 193 P.3d 409, 423 (2008)
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted).  Generally, when
a party raises an issue it may be fully explored by the adverse
party.  See State v. McElroy, 105 Hawai#i 352, 357, 97 P.3d 1004,
1009 (2004).  Here, the testimony was relevant to an element of
the offenses--knowledge or intent--and was thus probative. 
Additionally, Ikimaka opened the door--in spite of the court's
warning--by questioning Officer Hsu about Ikimaka's intent.  The
State properly explored Officer Hsu's knowledge or impressions of
Ikimaka's intent, giving context to Officer Hsu's answer to
Ikimaka's question.  The jury had already heard Officer Hsu
testify that he "had no way of knowing" Ikimaka's intent to
possess the drugs, as well as that he was aware of the
circumstances surrounding and reasons for Ikimaka's arrest when
14HRE Rule 403 provides, "Although relevant, evidence may be
excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of
unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
consideration of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of
cumulative evidence."
17NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
he heard Ikimaka's statement, "Just arrest me and don't take my
truck."  On this record, we cannot say the jury would have been
misled into making a decision on an improper basis by this
testimony.  Therefore, the questioning was permissible under HRE
Rule 403.
Thus, as there was a proper basis to admit HRE Rule 701
lay opinion testimony and the evidence was not improper under HRE
Rule 403, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
permitting Officer Hsu's testimony.
4. The DPA Did Not Commit Misconduct by Eliciting
Testimony on Ikimaka's Silence After Receiving
Miranda Warnings.
Ikimaka asserts the prosecutor committed misconduct by
eliciting testimony about Ikimaka's silence after he received
Miranda warnings in violation of his Fifth Amendment privilege to
remain silent.
In cases where the prosecution elicits from a witness
information regarding the defendant's prearrest silence, the
test is whether the prosecutor intended for the information
elicited to imply the defendant's guilt or whether the
character of the information suggests to the factfinder that
the defendant's prearrest silence may be considered as
inferential evidence of the defendant's guilt.
State v. Tsujimura, 140 Hawai#i 299, 315, 400 P.3d 500, 516
(2017). 
Here, unlike the cases Ikimaka cites, the complained-of
examination of the officer was in the course of introducing
Ikimaka's statement  to the police.  The exchange was as follows: 
[DPA]:  When you first got to the Kintaro's area, who
was there? 
[Officer Agbayani]:  Officers [Hsu], Larry Ikimaka,
and Liane Henderson. 
[DPA]:  Okay. And did you speak to Larry? 
[Officer Agbayani]:  Yes.  
[DPA]:  And you asked Larry if he wanted to talk to
you about what had happened with the purse? 
[Officer Agbayani]:  Yes.  
[DPA]:  And he didn't want to talk to you?  
[Officer Agbayani]:  Yes.
18NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
[DPA]:  And because he didn't want to talk to you, you
didn't ask him any questions? 
[Officer Agbayani]: No, I did not.  
[DPA]:  And after he initially told you that he didn't
want to talk to you -- 
THE COURT:  Approach.  
The court then stopped the questioning and instructed the jury: 
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, the last line of
questioning I'm striking for you not to consider in any way.
If a person decides to exercise their right to remain
silent, it's not to be used against them.  They have a
constitutional right to do that.  You are not to consider it
in any way in your deliberations.
Immediately following this instruction, the DPA requested another
bench conference when the following took place:
[DPA]:  I did want to ask him the fact that he was
walking away when the statement was made.  Is that -- 
THE COURT:  Why then are you leading whether he
actually (inaudible). 
[DPA]:  Well, there was follow up as to how far he
was, but the fact -- 
THE COURT:  I'm going to -- I'm already allowing the
statement.  The issue of whether it's admissible or not,
whether it's objectionable, that's already been addressed.
So I'm trying not to relitigate pretrial rulings. 
[DPA]:  So don't ask the questions about--
THE COURT:  Just ask statement.  Was this his
statement? 
[DPA]:  Okay. 
THE COURT:  You don't want to get into the
circumstances.  That's why I had to strike the prior
testimony.
[DPA]:  Okay.
The DPA then asked, "And, Officer Agbayani, while you were at
Kintaro's, Larry Ikimaka stated to you, 'I have Cheri's bag in my
truck.  Can you just arrest me for theft and don't take my
truck?'" which the officer affirmed.
Based on the foregoing, it appears that, while
inartful, the DPA was attempting to set the physical
circumstances of the permitted statement:  that Officer Agbayani
was walking away from Ikimaka when the latter approached and
called out the statement.  The DPA was not attempting to comment
19NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
on Ikimaka's silence.  Thus, it does not appear the prosecutor
intended to use Ikimaka's silence to imply his guilt.15
Neither is the second part of the test, whether the
character of the information suggests to the fact finder that the
defendant's prearrest silence may be considered as inferential
evidence of the defendant's guilt, present here.  Again, the
challenged testimony set the stage for the statement that Ikimaka
made.  The implication--that despite initially declining to
answer questions, Ikimaka chose to speak--is not reflective of
guilt.  Furthermore, the Circuit Court immediately struck the
challenged exchange and twice warned the jury "not to consider
[the line of questioning] in any way[.]"  It is well-settled that
"[a] jury is presumed to have followed the court's instructions." 
State v. Balanza, 93 Hawai#i 279, 289, 1 P.3d 281, 291 (2000). 
Ikimaka's silence was not considered as inferential evidence of
his guilt because the jury was instructed not to consider the
testimony about Ikimaka not wanting to talk.16
15We note that, at the time of this trial, it had not been decided
by either the United States Supreme Court nor the Hawai #i Supreme Court that a
defendant's right to remain silent existed prior to arrest, or whether
prearrest silence could be used against a defendant at trial.  Tsujimura, 140
Hawai#i at 309-12, 400 P.3d at 510-12.  Nevertheless, from the context of the
examination, we are convinced it was not the DPA's intent to do so.
16Ikimaka argues that Officer Agbayani's response on cross-
examination by Ikimaka where he mentioned Ikimaka's unwillingness to answer
questions "underscored" his position that the "risk that the jury will not, or
cannot, follow instructions is so great" that we cannot presume the jury
followed the Circuit Court's cautionary instruction.  However, we disagree
with Ikimaka's interpretation of the record.  It appears that, like the DPA's
questions, the officer's statement was made in the context of clarifying the
circumstances of Ikimaka's statement regarding arresting him for theft and not
taking his truck.  It appears that Ikimaka's counsel was mistaken about the
physical circumstances of Ikimaka's statement and Officer Agbayani made the
challenged reference in the course of this discussion, apparently explaining
why he was walking away from Ikimaka at the time.  The exchange, in pertinent
part, was as follows:
Q.  And when Mr. Ikimaka made whatever statement he
made, he was walking away from you; right? 
A.  Say it again. He was walking away? Is that what
you're saying, sir? 
Q.  Yeah. 
A.  He's not walking away.  
Q.  He wasn't walking away? He was right in front of
you face to face? 
(continued...)
20NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Therefore, because the prosecutor's intent was not to
adduce evidence of Ikimaka's guilt and the fact finder could not
infer guilt from the evidence, the State did not violate
Ikimaka's right against compelled self-incrimination and did not
commit misconduct.
5. The Circuit Court Did Not Err by Refusing to Sever
Ikimaka's Trial from Numazawa's Trial.
Ikimaka argues the Circuit Court erred when failing to
sever his trial from Numazawa's trial because a joint trial
substantially prejudiced his rights and impaired his ability to
present his defense.
Hawai#i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 14, which
provides for severance, states:
If it appears that a defendant or the government is
prejudiced by a joinder of offenses or of defendants in a
charge or by such joinder for trial together, the court may
order an election or separate trials of counts, grant a
severance of defendants or provide whatever other relief
justice requires.
"When deciding an HRPP Rule 14 motion for severance,
the trial court must 'balance the possible prejudice to the
defendant from joinder with the public interest in efficient use
16(...continued)
A.  Yes. 
Q.  So when you said he was 15 to 20 feet away, what
did you mean when you answered [the DPA] that he was 15 to
20 feet away? 
A.  That's when he said something to me.  
Q.  Okay.  And when he was 15 to 20 feet away from you
and said something to you, you were walking away from him or
he was walking away from you or no? 
A.  I was walking away from him, but this is--he's
also approaching me.  Because when I left him, I have to
inform my beat partner that he wasn't--he doesn't want to
answer my questions.  And then, you know--I mean, I'm not
saying that I have good peripheral views, but we always look
--for security reasons, we always like this, our head is
always on swivel.  I can see him, you know, kind of like
coming towards me. 
Q.  And that's when he talked to you? 
A.  When he said, yes, that statement, sir.  
Q.  Nothing further, your Honor.
21NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of judicial time through joint trial of defendants and offenses
which are connected.'"  State v. Timas, 82 Hawai# i 499, 512, 923
P.2d 916, 929 (App. 1996) (quoting State v. Matias, 57 Haw. 96,
98, 550 P.2d 900, 902 (1976)).  "Upon review, the appellate court
may not conclude that the defendant suffered prejudice from a
joint trial unless it first concludes that a defendant was denied
a fair trial.  What might have happened had the motion for
severance been granted is irrelevant speculation." Id. (block
quote format altered, brackets and ellipses omitted) (quoting
State v. Gaspar, 8 Haw. App. 317, 327, 801 P.2d 30, 35 (1990)). 
"It is well settled that defendants are not entitled to severance
merely because their defenses are inconsistent or they may have a
better chance of acquittal in separate trials."  State v. Walton,
133 Hawai#i 66, 84, 324 P.3d 876, 894 (2014) (citing Zafiro v.
United States, 506 U.S. 534, 540 (1993)).  "Rather, 'in order to
establish an abuse of discretion, the defendant[ ] must
demonstrate that clear and manifest prejudice did occur.'"  Id.
at 85, 324 P.3d at 895 (quoting United States v. Tootick, 952
F.2d 1078, 1083 (9th Cir. 1991)) (brackets in original).
Ikimaka contends he was denied a fair trial because
(1) evidence was introduced that would not have been admissible
in a separate trial, and (2) he was prevented from introducing
evidence that would have been admissible in a separate trial.  
Ikimaka does not contend that he and Numazawa had irreconcilable
defenses.
As to the first ground, Ikimaka argues that "None of
[Numazawa's] statements, or any reference to her purse, or the
contents of the purse, would have been permissible in a separate
trial involving only [Ikimaka], and the specific charges actually
levied against him."  This unequivocal statement is not supported
by the record before us.  The most significant evidence regarding
Numazawa's purse was Ikimaka's own statement, "I have Cheri's bag
in my truck.  Can you just arrest me for theft and don't take my
truck?"  As discussed above, this statement would have remained
highly probative of Ikimaka's intent to possess the items inside
the truck irrespective of Numawaza's joinder, subject to HRE Rule
403 balancing, in a severed trial.
22NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Further, the Circuit Court excluded the 911 call, which
contained specific reference to theft, but ordered that "the
parties shall be allowed to reference that Defendant Numazawa
called 911 and informed dispatch that Defendant Ikimaka took her
purse."   The facts leading to Ikimaka's stop by police would
also have remained relevant and been subject to HRE Rule 403
balancing.  To the extent that other witnesses testified or
Numazawa's counsel argued about a theft, presentation of this
evidence was not, strictly speaking, due to the failure to sever
trials.  Rather, it was incumbent upon Ikimaka's counsel to
object and request that the references be stricken.  17
The burden is on Ikimaka to demonstrate that he
received an unfair trial because evidence was introduced that
would not have been admissible in a separate trial.  Timas, 82
Hawai#i at 511, 923 P.2d at 928.  Thus, had the motion to sever
been granted, the evidence that Ikimaka raises as prejudicial may
or may not have been admitted because it would have been subject
to HRE Rule 403 balancing.  On appeal, we will not speculate as
to what might have happened had the motion to sever been granted,
therefore Ikimaka has not met his burden.  Id. at 512, 923 P.2d
at 929.
As to his second ground, Ikimaka asserts he was
prejudiced because he was prevented from introducing evidence
that would have been admissible in a separate trial.  Ikimaka
argues that he was prevented from eliciting testimony from
Officer Hsu that the vehicle was seized in part because of
Numazawa's prior drug history.  Prior to trial, in a hearing on
the motion to quash the search warrant and suppress the evidence,
Ikimaka questioned Officer Hsu on whether Numazawa's drug history
played a part in seizing the vehicle.  Officer Hsu acknowledged
that was one of the reasons, but that the main reason was that
the alleged theft occurred.
17The transcript of the hearing on the motions in limine is not on
the record before us, so the court's specific reasoning is not clear.  In its
Answering Brief, the State cites to this undocketed transcript in anticipation
of its entry, but it appears that it was never entered.
23NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The defendant bears the burden of demonstrating
prejudice.  Timas, 82 Hawai# i at 511, 923 P.2d at 928.  In
Walton, the supreme court, discussing State v. Mabuti, 72 Haw.
106, 807 P.2d 1264 (1991), noted that prejudice occurs when the
defendant is prevented from presenting exculpatory evidence.  133
Hawai#i at 85-86, 324 P.3d at 895-96.  Here, evidence that
Numazawa had a prior drug history was not exculpatory of
Ikimaka's possession of the methamphetamine and paraphernalia
with which he was charged and we will not speculate on what
effect that evidence would have had.  Therefore, Ikimaka fails to
meet his burden of demonstrating that he was prejudiced because
he was prevented from introducing evidence that would have been
admissible in a separate trial.
Thus, Ikimaka does not demonstrate he received an
unfair trial and his point of error is without merit.
B. The Circuit Court Did Not Err in Declining to
Enter a Judgment of Acquittal Where There Was
Sufficient Evidence Presented of Constructive
Possession.
Ikimaka argues there was insufficient evidence
presented to support possession of the contraband. [OB at 27.] 
HRS § 712–1242(1)(b).  "To support a finding of constructive
possession the evidence must show 'a sufficient nexus between the
accused and the [item] to permit an inference that the accused
had both the power and the intent to exercise dominion and
control over the [item].'  Mere proximity is not enough."  State
v. Mundell, 8 Haw. App. 610, 622, 822 P.2d 23, 29 (1991),
overruled on other grounds by Jenkins, 93 Hawai# i at 112, 997
P.2d at 38 (citation omitted).
In State v. Moniz, this court listed several factors
that other courts have considered to infer a nexus between a
defendant and drugs to support a finding of drug possession:
1) the defendant's ownership of or right to possession of
the place where the controlled substance was found; 2) the
defendant's sole access to the place where the controlled
substance was found; 
3) defendant under the influence of
narcotics when arrested; 4) defendant's presence when the
search warrant executed; 5) the defendant's sole occupancy
of the place where the controlled substance was found at the
time the contraband is discovered; 6) the location of the
contraband; 7) contraband in plain view; 8) defendant's
proximity to and the accessibility of the narcotic;
24NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9) defendant's possession of other contraband when arrested;
10) defendant's incriminating statements when arrested;
11) defendant's attempted flight; 12) defendant's furtive
gestures; 13) presence of odor of the contraband;
14) presence of other contraband or drug paraphernalia, not
included in the charge; 15) place drugs found was enclosed.
92 
Hawai#i
 472, 476, 992 P.2d 741, 745 (App. 1999) (citation and
alteration omitted).  Additional factors that have been deemed
relevant include, the presence of large sums of money, and the
fact that drugs were found among the defendant’s personal
belongings.  Id. (citations omitted).
Here, there was testimony that the maroon pouch in
which the drugs and zip-lock bags were found was discovered under
Ikimaka's seat in the truck, he was seen "maybe more than two
times" in the past driving the same truck, he asked Officer
Agbayani "to just arrest [him] for theft and don't take [his]
truck," there was $1,400 in cash, glass pipes with
methamphetamine residue and scales, and an Ace Hardware receipt
bearing the name "Larry Ikimaka" found in the maroon pouch. 
Taking this evidence in the light most favorable to the
prosecution, State v. Timoteo, 87 Hawai#i 108, 112-13, 952 P.2d
865, 869-70 (1997), the evidence presented was sufficient to
establish Ikimaka's constructive possession of the drugs and
paraphernalia.
Therefore, we conclude Ikimaka's appeal to be without
merit.
State's Cross-Appeal
The Circuit Court Erred in Granting Ikimaka's Motion to
Stay Because It Failed to Make the Necessary Findings
The State argues the Circuit Court abused it discretion
by granting Ikimaka's Motion to Stay without entering the
findings required by State v. Cullen, 86 Hawai#i 1, 946 P.2d 955
(1997).  On January 13, 2017, in response to the State's
December 15, 2016 motion for revocation of bail, this court
entered an order denying the motion but temporarily remanding
this case for the Circuit Court to enter a written statement of
its reasons for granting Ikimaka's motion for stay of sentence
pending appeal.   On January 27, 2017, the Circuit Court entered
its Findings of Fact; Conclusions of Law; Order Granting
25NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Defendant Larry Ikimaka's Motion for Stay of Execution of
Sentence Pending Appeal.  To date, no renewed motion for
revocation of bail has been filed.  Therefore, it appears that
the State's appeal is moot.
Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons the December 30, 2015 Second
Amended Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence Notice of
Entry entered by the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit is
affirmed.  The State's Cross-Appeal in this case is dismissed as
moot.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 18, 2019.
On the briefs:
Rosa Flores,
for Defendant-Appellant/
Cross-Appellee.
Tracy Murakami,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Kauai,
for Plaintiff-Appellee/
Cross-Appellant.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
26