NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000715
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DINO J. D'ANNIBALE, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CR NO. 12-1-0348)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Dino J. D'Annibale (D'Annibale)
 
appeals from the Judgment, Guilty Conviction, and Probation
 
Sentence entered on November 13, 2013 (Judgment), in the Circuit
 
1
Court of the Fifth Circuit (Circuit Court),  convicting him of
Count 1, Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver, in violation of Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 134-25 (2011), and Count 5, Possession
 
of Prohibited Ammunition, in violation of HRS § 134-8(c) and (d)
 
(2011). 
D'Annibale agreed to a plea deal whereby he entered

 
pleas of no-contest to counts one and five and the State agreed
 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to drop the remaining counts.  The court agreed to be bound by
 
the plea agreement, pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure 
Rule 11(e)(1). After entering his plea, D'Annibale moved to
 
defer acceptance of the no contest plea (DANC) pursuant to HRS §
 
853-1 (2014). The Circuit Court denied the motion, accepted the
 
plea, and entered the sentence. On appeal, D'Annibale raises a
 single point of error, which challenges the Circuit Court's
 denial of the motion for DANC, as well as the court's denial of
 his motion for reconsideration.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve D'Annibale's point of error as follows:
 
HRS § 853-1 provides, in relevant part:

 
§853-1 Deferred acceptance of guilty plea or nolo
contendere plea; discharge and dismissal, expungement of
records.  (a) Upon proper motion as provided by this
chapter:
(1) 	When a defendant voluntarily pleads guilty or
nolo contendere, prior to commencement of trial,
to a felony, misdemeanor, or petty misdemeanor;
(2) 	It appears to the court that the defendant is
not likely again to engage in a criminal course
of conduct; and
(3) 	The ends of justice and the welfare of society
do not require that the defendant shall
presently suffer the penalty imposed by law,
the court, without accepting the plea of nolo contendere or
entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the defendant
and after considering the recommendations, if any, of the
prosecutor, may defer further proceedings.
(b) The proceedings may be deferred upon any of the
conditions specified by section 706-624. . . .
 
In addition, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held: 
Whether a court grants or denies a motion for DAG
plea, when seasonably made, is properly within the
discretionary province of a trial judge. It is also
 abundantly clear that when properly exercised, the judge's
discretionary action will not be disturbed on appeal unless
there has been a plain and manifest abuse of such a
discretion. Normally, there is no readily available
yardstick or measuring device to determine whether a court
 
2

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
has exceeded its authority or acted beyond the bounds of
reason or disregarded rules or principles of law to the
substantial detriment of a litigant in arriving at a
decision. Where, however, as here, the sentencing judge,
arbitrarily and capriciously, refuses to entertain at any
time a seasonable and proper motion made by a defendant for
DAG plea, we hold that such judicial conduct is improper,
and prejudicially denies appellant due process of law. By
blind adherence to predetermined rigid conduct, the court
precluded any enlightened and just resolve of the criminal
charge placed against appellant. Discretionary action must
be exercised on a case-by-case basis, not by any inflexible
blanket policy of denial.
 
State v. Martin, 56 Haw. 292, 294, 535 P.2d 127, 128 (1975)
 
(internal citations omitted). 
In arguing that the statutory factors strongly favored
 
his receipt of a DANC, D'Annnibale challenges the oral "findings"
 by the Circuit Court that can be described as follows: (1) that
 there is a disconnect between what happened with the gun and
 reasons D'Annibale gave as to why he took it with him in the
 backpack; (2) that D'Annibale took the gun to a park on a
 holiday, in the presence of a number of young people, in a
 backpack that he placed on a bench, and then got distracted, in
 effect allowing someone to grab his backpack containing the
 loaded gun, albeit that he did so unintentionally, and assuming
 the persons grabbing the backpack did so surreptitiously; and (3)
 that D'Annibale lacked an explanation as to why the handgun was
 loaded with ammunition. We recognize the positive factors cited
 by D'Annibale, which tended to support the granting of the motion
 for a DANC, but we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court was
 wrong or clearly erred in its assessment of the above-referenced
 facts or acted improperly in its exercise of discretion. It is
 clear from the record that the court's denial of the DANC motion
 was based on the "ends of justice and welfare of society" factors
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
stated in HRS § 853-1(a)(3), based on the potential danger to the
 
public associated with D'Annibale's admitted conduct. 
Similarly, it is clear from the record that the Circuit
 
Court gave careful consideration to the additional evidence (Dr.
 Hall's evaluation of D'Annibale) and further arguments made in
 conjunction with the motion for reconsideration, but concluded
 that they did not outweigh D'Annibale's actions with respect to
 the proper exercise of the court's discretion as to the DANC. 
This assessment was not arbitrary and capricious, did not exceed
 the court's authority or the bounds of reason, and therefore, we
 conclude, it did not constitute an abuse of the Circuit Court's
 discretion.
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's November 13,
 
2013 Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 26, 2017. 
On the briefs: Phyllis J. Hironaka,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Tracy J. Murakami,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Kauai,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 