NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000575
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JERRY HALVORSON, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 3P811-0000164)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jerry Halvorson appeals from the
 
"Amended Judgment of Conviction & Sentence" filed June 14, 2012
 
nunc pro tunc to April 18, 2012 in the District Court of the
 
1
Third Circuit  (district court).  Halvorson was convicted of
 
criminal property damage in the fourth degree pursuant to Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-823 (Supp. 2012) and sentenced to
 
probation for a term of six months, made to pay restitution, and
 
fined $500.
 
On appeal, Halvorson contends the district court erred:
 (1) in concluding he knowingly and intelligently
 
waived his constitutional right to counsel;
 
(2) in violating his right to testify when it failed
 
to properly advise him of his right to testify pursuant to
 Tachibana v. State
 and ensure whether his waiver of his right to
 
testify was voluntary and knowing; and
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo presided.
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(3) in abusing its discretion by precluding his
 
presenting an alibi defense.
 
On June 5, 2011, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i 
(State) charged Halvorson, via complaint, with the offense of 
criminal property damage in the fourth degree in violation of HRS 
§708-823(1). The complaint read as follows: 
On or about the 5th day of June, 2011, in Ka' u, County
and State of Hawai' i, [Halvorson], by means other than fire,
intentionally or knowingly damaged property of another,
sign, without [complaining witness's] consent, therebycommitting the offense of [c]riminal [p]roperty [d]amage inthe [f]ourth [d]egree, in violation of Section 708-832(1),[HRS], as amended. 
On February 16, 2012, Halvorson appeared at the Ka' u 
District Court for Pretrial Conference where the district court 
addressed Halvorson's request to waive his right to an attorney. 
Halvorson executed the Waiver of Right to an Attorney form and 
answered questions from the district court regarding his right to 
an attorney and his decision to proceed pro se. The following 
exchange occurred: 
THE COURT:  Okay. Mr. Halvorson, did you read and
understand this waiver of right to attorney?
 
[HALVORSON]: Yes.
 
THE COURT:  And are these your initials in paragraphs
one through nine? 
[HALVORSON]: Yes. 
THE COURT:  Is this your signature on the back?
 
[HALVORSON]: Yes, THE COURT: What is your age?
 [HALVORSON]: Sixty-two.
 THE COURT: 
And how many years of education have you
received?
 
[HALVORSON]: Just about twelve.
 THE COURT: All right. Have you taken any
drugs, alcohol, or medication before you appeared here?
 
[HALVORSON]: No.
 
THE COURT: 
All right. Now, do you understand what
the maximum penalty is?
 
[HALVORSON]: Yes.
 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Do you understand that if you represent
yourself, you will be required to follow the Court's rules
and Rules of Procedure and Rules of Evidence -­
[HALVORSON]: Yes.
 
THE COURT: -- and other directions of the Court?
 
[HALVORSON]:
 Yes, sir.
 
THE COURT:  Do you understand what an attorney is? 
[HALVORSON]:
 Yes.
 
THE COURT:   An attorney can provide you with information
and advice, can represent you in court, can raise any defense that
you might have, and can negotiate with the state to secure a plea
agreement to dismiss or reduce the charge against you. Do you
understand?
 
[HALVORSON]:  Yes.
 
THE COURT:  Do you wish to give up your right to an
attorney?
 
[HALVORSON]:  Yes, For a defense attorney, yes.
 
THE COURT: All right. Is anyone forcing you to do this?
 
[HALVORSON]: No.
 
After the district court's colloquy, it made the
 
following findings:
 
THE COURT:  All right. The Court will find that
[Halvorson] has knowingly and voluntarily waived his right to
counsel. I'll find the plea negotiations closed, so I
won't permit any further plea agreement. The trial will be
 for the offense that is charged.
 
The district court went on to advise Halvorson to
 
"disclose to the [S]tate any defenses that you may wish to raise
 
at trial and include a list of any proposed witnesses that you
 
plan to call, together with contact information for those
 
witnesses." The district court also warned Halvorson, "if you
 
don't disclose to the [S]tate your defenses and your witnesses,
 
the [district court] may impose sanctions upon you. . . . And the
 
[district court] may not allow you to present witnesses or
 
evidence, particularly if they're brought to court at the last
 
minute."
 
This court, in State v. Dickson, 4 Haw. App. 614, 673
 
P.2d 1036 (1983), set forth the following requirements when a
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
defendant waives his right to counsel and elects to proceed pro
 
se:
 
The trial court should first examine the particular
facts and circumstances relating to the defendant, such as
the defendant's age, education, mental capacity, background
and experience, and his conduct at the time of the alleged
waiver. This is necessary to allow the trial court to
determine the level and depth to which its explanation and
inquiry must extend.
 
Secondly, in order to fully assure that the defendant
is informed of the risks of self-representation, the trial
court should make him aware of the nature of the charge, the
elements of the offense, the pleas and defenses available,
the punishments which may be imposed, and all other facts
essential to a broad understanding of the whole matter.
 
Finally, the trial court should inform the defendant:
of his right to counsel, whether private or appointed, that
self-representation is detrimental to himself; that he will
be required to follow all technical rules and substantive,
procedural, and evidentiary law; that the prosecution will
be represented by able counsel; that a disruption of the
trial could lead vacation of the right to self-
representation; and that if voluntary self-representation
occurs, the defendant may not afterward claim that he had
inadequate representation.
 
The trial judge is not required to give the defendant
a short course in criminal law and procedure, since a
defendant's technical legal knowledge is not 
 relevant to an
assessment of his knowing exercise of the right to defend
himself. However, the record should reflect some
interchange on the above matters such as will indicate to a
reviewing court that the defendant knew and understood the
dangers and disadvantages of self-representation.
 
Those matters, which we shall call here "specific
waiver inquiry" factors, provide a guideline for the trial
court in dealing with a demand for waiver of counsel. The
 
record need not reflect a discussion between the court and a
 defendant illuminating every such factor. However, where
the record fails to reflect that the trial court has
 sufficiently examined the defendant so as to establish that
he is aware of the dangers and disadvantages of
self-representation, or that the defendant has made a
knowing and intelligent waiver, an appellate court will be
hard-pressed to find that a defendant has effectively waived
counsel. In such situations, the conviction of a pro se
 
criminal defendant is vulnerable to reversal unless the
 record also contains overwhelming circumstantial evidence
indicating that the requirements of a knowing and
intelligent waiver have otherwise been met.
 
Id. at 619-21, 673 P.2d at 1041-42 (citations and footnote
 
omitted).
 
In this case, the district court failed to inform
 
Halvorson about the elements of the offense, the pleas and
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defenses available to him, and the possible penalties against
 
him. The district court inquired about Halvorson's age,
 
education, and any barriers to a clear understanding of the
 
proceeding; however, it did not ask about Halvorson's contacts
 
with the criminal justice system. Halvorson had told the
 
district court "I'm not good at this court stuff" during the
 
Pretrial Conference prior to the waiver of counsel. It does not
 
appear from the record that Halvorson had any familiarity with
 
the judicial system, and the district court failed to make an
 
inquiry as to Halvorson's background and experience with the
 
judicial system.
 
The district court also failed to inform Halvorson of
 
the possible defenses available to him, except for the fact that
 
the State had the burden of proving the charges beyond a
 
reasonable doubt. The district court was made aware of one
 
possible defense when Halvorson stated, "I could represent myself
 
real easy. I simply wasn't there. And I have a witness." The
 
district court could have informed Halvorson that, in additional
 
to a reasonable doubt defense, an alibi defense would be
 
available to him.
 
In Dickson , we held:
 
the record does not show that the trial judge sufficiently
informed Defendant of the dangers and disadvantages of
proceeding pro se, or made sufficient inquiry into his
awareness thereof. Although the record indicates that the
court and Defendant discussed the latter's right to
counsel . . . the record does not show that the court made
 an adequate "specific waiver inquiry" to satisfy the
requirement that the Defendant be sufficiently made aware of
the pitfalls of proceeding pro se so as to indicate a
 
knowing and intelligent waiver.
 
Id. at 622, 673 P.2d at 1043
 
This is also the case here. The error by the district
 
court in failing to inform Halvorson of the dangers and
 
disadvantages of self-representation was not harmless beyond a
 
reasonable doubt. In Dickson, we held: 
notwithstanding the error of the trial judge to adequately
inform the defendant of the dangers and disadvantages of
self-representation, where there is no reasonable
possibility that the error affected the outcome of the
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
trial, the error is considered harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt and the conviction will stand. However, the error is
presumed to be prejudicial and the State must rebut that
presumption and prove that the error was harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt.
 
Id. at 623, 573 P.2d at 1043 (citations omitted). The State made
 
no attempt to show such error was harmless.
 
CONCLUSION
 
The "Amended Judgment of Conviction & Sentence" filed
 
June 14, 2012 nunc pro tunc to April 18, 2012 in the District
 
Court of the Third Circuit is vacated and this case is remanded
 
to the district court. 
Halvorson's other points on appeal are
 
moot.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 19, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Page C. Kraker
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge Linda L. Walton 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
6
 