 
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000487 24-MAR-2026 07:50 AM Dkt. 51 SO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000487 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
ʻI 
IN THE MATTER OF THE 
REVOCABLE TRUST OF ITSUTO OKAMOTO, 
DATED OCTOBER 15, 1993 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CTR-22-0000102) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
Beneficiary/Trustee/Respondent/Petitioner-Appellant 
Marshall Tetsuo Okamoto (Marshall
)1 appeals from the "Judgment on 
Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part [Petitioner/ 
Respondent-Appellee Derin Okasaki's (Derin)] Petition to Compel 
1 Marshall filed this appeal as a beneficiary of the "Revocable 
Trust of Itsuto Okamoto" (Trust). Marshall takes no position with respect to 
this appeal in his capacity as Trustee.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
  
 Distribution of Trust Property" (Trust Distribution Judgment), 
and "Judgment on Order Denying [Marshall's] Petition for Further 
Instructions" (Instructions Judgment), both filed on July 19, 
2023, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit2 (probate 
court).3 
This matter arises from the "Petition to Compel 
Distribution of Trust Property" (Petition to Compel) filed by Derin in June 2022. The Petition to Compel asked the probate court to compel Marshall, as the Trustee, to distribute property
4 
pursuant to the terms of a Trust executed by Itsuto Okamoto (Itsuto), and naming Itsuto and his wife, Kimiko Yamanaka 
Okamoto (Kimiko), as the initial trustees. Itsuto and Kimiko 
passed in 1994 and 2016, respectively. Upon Kimiko's passing, 
their children, Marshall and Carol Saeko Okasaki (Carol), became 
the successor trustees. Upon Carol's passing, in 2021, Marshall 
became the sole acting successor trustee. 
2 The Honorable R. Mark Browning presided. 
3 Marshall also appeals from the "Findings o f Fact [(FOFs )], 
Conclusions of Law [(COLs )], and Order Granting i n Part a nd Denying i n Part 
Petition to Compel Distribution o f Trust Property," "Order Granting i n Part 
and Denying i n Part Petition t o Compel Distribution o f Trust Property," and 
"[FOFs], [COLs ], and Order Denying [Marshall's] Petition f or Further 
Instructions," all filed on July 19, 2023, by the probate court. 
4 The real property at issue is located in Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, and 
will be referred to herein as the Emekona Property. 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 At issue is Article VI, paragraph 3 of the Trust, 
which instructs that the Emekona Property should be distributed 
as follows: 
Disposition of Trust Property Upon Death of [Itsuto] and 
[Kimiko]. Upon the death of [Kimiko] after [Itsuto's] death, the trustee shall hold and distribute the Residuary 
Trust, as then constituted . . . . 
(a) Division of Trust Estate. . . . With respect to 
the [Emekona Property] , said property shall be distributed 
to [Carol], provided, however that said [Carol] shall pay to [Marshall] a sum of [$25,000] before said property shall 
be conveyed to [Carol]. In the event that said [Carol] is 
not surviving, then said interest in the above- mentioned 
real property shall be distributed to the issue of [Carol], 
in equal shares, per stirpes, pursuant to the terms of 
subparagraph (iv) of this paragraph. 
(Emphasis added.) 
It is undisputed that Carol, in the years between 
Kimiko's passing and her own passing, did not pay to Marshall 
the sum of $25,000. The Emekona Property could not, therefore, 
have been conveyed to Carol prior to her passing. Derin contends that because Carol survived both Itsuto and Kimiko, 
"her conditional right to the [Emekona Property] was triggered," 
and that Carol's interest in the Emekona Property "is 
transmissible through Carol's [e]state." Marshall contends that 
because Carol did not pay Marshall $25,000, the Emekona Property 
fell to the Residuary Trust. 
Marshall asserts three points of error on appeal, 
contending that the probate court erred in: (1) "granting in 
part the [Petition to Compel] because it misinterpreted [Itsuto's] intent and failed to apply relevant rules of law"; 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 (2) "granting in part the [Petition to Compel] because it failed 
to consider whether conveyance of the Emekona Property to 
Carol's estate should be barred as a matter of equity"; and (3) 
"denying [Marshall's] Petition for Further Instructions 
(Petition for Instructions)] because preserving the status quo 
pending appeal was proper under the circumstances, would not 
have caused the parties any prejudice, and would have prevented 
irreparable harm to Marshall." (Formatting altered.) 
Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we resolve Marshall's points of error as follows: 
(1) Marshall contends that the probate court 
misinterpreted Itsuto's intent with regard to the Trust's terms, 
and failed to apply relevant rules of law in interpreting 
Itsuto's intent. 
We review the probate court's construction of 
the Trust de novo under the right/wrong standard. Tr. Created
Under the Will of Damon, 76 Hawaiʻ i 120, 123-24, 869 P.2d 1339, 
1342-43 (1994). 
"The duty of the court is to interpret, not to 
construct [a trust]." In re Est. of Campbell, 33 Haw. 799, 802 
(Haw. Terr. 1936). 
Therefore, the court must determine the 
settlor's intent based on "a sound and reasonable construction 
of the words [that were] used," and "not by speculation or 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
  
 conjecture as to what the [settlor] may have intended." Tr.
Created Under the Will of Damon, 76 Hawaiʻ i at 127, 869 P.2d at 
1346 (citation omitted). 
As relevant here, Article VI, paragraph 3 of the Trust 
provides that the Emekona Property "shall be distributed to 
[Carol], provided, however that said [Carol] shall pay to 
[Marshall] a sum of [$25,000] before said property shall be 
conveyed to [Carol]."5 Marshall contends that the Emekona 
Property fell to the Residuary Trust because Carol, who survived Itsuto and Kimiko, did not pay Marshall $25,000 prior to her own 
passing. 
The Trust provisions do not impose a time limit for 
Carol to fulfill the condition of paying Marshall $25,000. And while the Trust expressly provides that specific property would 
fall to the Residuary Trust under certain circumstances, it does 
not provide that the Emekona Property would fall to the 
Residuary Trust if Carol, upon surviving Itsuto and Kimiko, 
failed to pay Marshall $25,000 prior to her death.
6 
5 Article VI, paragraph 3 alternatively provided that the Emekona 
Property would be conveyed to "the issue of [Carol]," in the event that Carol 
did not survive both Itsuto and Kimiko.  Because Carol survived Itsuto and 
Kimiko, that provision was not invoked. 
6 We note that if the Emekona Property fell to the Residuary Trust, 
neither Carol nor her issue would have claim to any part of the Emekona 
Property.  The Trust provided that the Residuary Trust was to be conveyed to 
Marshall, and not to Carol or her issue. 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 We therefore conclude that, consistent with Itsuto's 
intent, Carol's contingent interest in the Emekona Property 
passed to her estate. "The rule is well settled that a 
contingent remainder of inheritance is transmissible to the 
heirs of the person to whom it is limited, if such person dies 
before the contingency happens, unless the remainder is so 
limited as to depend on the life of the remainderman." Crescent
City Motors, Ltd. v. Nalaielua, 31 Haw. 418, 425-26 (Haw. Terr. 
1930) (citation omitted); see Alexander v. UMB Bank, NA, 
497 S.W.3d 323, 328 (Mo. Ct. App. 2016) (explaining that modern 
rules of property suggest that a remainder interest conditioned 
on survival is descendible through an estate so long as the 
beneficiary survives until the preceding interests are 
terminated). 
(2) Marshall contends that the probate court erred in 
"fail[ing] to consider" his equitable defenses of laches, 
unclean hands, and equitable estoppel. We review the probate court's application of equitable doctrines under the abuse of 
discretion standard. 7's Enters., Inc. v. Del Rosario
, 
111 Hawaiʻi 484, 489, 143 P.3d 23, 28 (2006). 
The probate court did not make any specific FOFs or 
COLs as to Marshall's equitable defenses. 
And the record does 
not reflect why the probate court did not provide any 
explanation for the lack thereof. We are therefore unable to 
6   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 determine whether the probate court appropriately considered 
Marshall's equitable defenses. See HawaiiUSA Fed. Credit Union
v. Monalim, 147 Hawaiʻ i 33, 43, 464 P.3d 821, 831 (2020) 
(explaining that "based on the circuit court's lack of findings 
as to the laches defense, [the appellate court is] unable to 
determine on review whether the circuit court appropriately 
considered this defense" (cleaned up)). 
We vacate the Trust Distribution Judgment, and remand 
with instructions that the probate court consider and address 
Marshall's equitable defenses. 
(3) Marshall contends that the probate court erred in 
denying his Petition for Instructions, which sought to "preserve the status quo" during the pendency of Marshall's appeal.
7 We 
review the probate court's refusal to exercise its inherent power for abuse of discretion. Richardson v. Sport Shinko
(Waikiki Corp.), 76 Hawaiʻ i 494, 508, 880 P.2d 169, 183 (1994).   
Marshall represented that he did not, or could not, 
seek a stay or injunctive relief because the probate rules do 
not permit the filing of a motion for stay. See Hawaiʻ i Probate 
7 Marshall filed his Petition f or Instructions on December 5, 2022, 
following the probate court's entry of the October 14, 2022 "Order Granting 
in Part and Continuing in Part Petition to Compel Distribution of Trust 
Property." The parties entered into a "Stipulation a nd Order t o Preserve 
Status Quo Pending Resolution o f Petition f or Further Instructions," in which 
Marshall represented that he intended to appeal the October 14, 2022 o rder, 
and the parties "agreed that the Emekona Property should not be distributed, 
sold, or otherwise transferred out of Carol's Estate while the [Petition for 
Instructions] remain[ed] pending." The probate court entered its "Order 
Denying [Marshall's] [ Petition for Instructions] " on March 8, 2023. 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 Rules Rule 3 (allowing pleadings in the form of "a petition and 
a response or objection," and providing that "[n]o other 
pleading shall be allowed"). Nevertheless, it appears that, by 
asking the probate court to "preserve the status quo," Marshall 
was effectively requesting that the probate court grant some 
form of stay or injunctive relief through the exercise of its 
equitable powers. It also appears that the probate court 
generally understood Marshall's request as such, but, in the absence of a formal "request for a stay, injunctive relief, or 
reconsideration," summarily "decline[d] to find that the 
standard to preserve the status quo is a distinct relief and 
legal standard from that of a stay or injunction." 
We conclude that the probate court erred by narrowly 
construing and rejecting Marshall's request in this manner, and 
by not addressing the request on its merits, where Marshall was 
effectively requesting a stay. See In re Helen-Edythe
Richardson Revocable Living Tr. Dated September 14, 1987, 
No. CAAP-23-0000028, 2025 WL 2902421, at *4 (Haw. App. Oct. 13, 
2025) (SDO) (vacating the probate court's denial of the 
appellants' request for a stay, and remanding the matter to be 
considered through further proceedings). We therefore vacate 
the Instructions Judgment and instruct the probate court to 
consider on remand whether a stay or injunctive relief is 
appropriate under the circumstances of this case. 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
  
 For the foregoing reasons, we affirm in part and 
vacate in part the Trust Distribution Judgment, and we vacate 
the Instructions Judgment. We remand for further proceedings 
consistent with this summary disposition order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, March 24, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
Andrew J. Lautenbach, 
for Beneficiary/Trustee/ 
Respondent/Petitioner-
Appellant.  
Ronald T. Ogomori, 
for Petitioner/Respondent-Appellee. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone Chief Judge  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Associate Judge 
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge 
9 