NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000151
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI fI 
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF DISCOVERY BAY, Plaintiff-
Appellee, v. RALPH MITCHELL, Defendant-Appellant, and JOHN DOES
1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE GOVERNMENTAL
AGENCIES 1-10; DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-1871-08)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this appeal challenging the award of declaratory and
 
injunctive relief, apartment owner Defendant-Appellant Ralph
 
Mitchell (Mitchell) appeals from the February 16, 2011 Judgment
 entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
1
Court) in favor of the Association of Apartment Owners of
Discovery Bay (Discovery Bay).
 
On appeal, Mitchell argues that the Circuit Court
 
improperly granted Discovery Bay's Motion for Summary Judgment
 (MSJ), erroneously denied his Motion for Reconsideration, and
 consequently abused its discretion in awarding $10,730.92 in
 attorneys' fees and costs to Discovery Bay.
 
However, on February 10, 2014, Mitchell notified this
 
court that he has recently sold his apartment in the condominium. 
Thus, it appears that Mitchell no longer has an ownership
 interest in the condominium project out of which this case
 arises. 
1
 The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Courts may not decide moot questions or abstract 
propositions of law." Queen Emma Found. v. Tatibouet, 123 
Hawaifi 500, 506, 236 P.3d 1236, 1242 (App. 2010) (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). "The doctrine seems 
appropriate where events subsequent to the judgment of the trial court have so affected the relations between the parties that the two conditions for justiciability relevant on appeal -- adverse interest and effective remedy -- have been compromised." Id. at 
507, 236 P.3d at 1243 (citation omitted; block quote format altered). Mootness is an issue of subject matter jurisdiction, which is reviewed de novo. Id. at 506, 236 P.3d 1242. 
Therefore, we must first consider whether this appeal is moot. 
In Tatibouet, this court held that the defendants'
 
challenge to the circuit court's grant of declaratory relief was
 moot because "the controversy underlying [the fee holder's]
 complaint for declaratory judgment and the circuit court's grant
 of declaratory relief -- whether Defendants are entitled to
 convert the Hotel into a condominium under the Lot 30-A Amended
 Lease -- is no longer a present, live controversy" id. at 508,
 236 P.3d at 1244, where defendant Tatibouet had transferred his
 leasehold interest in the property to a third party and the
 defendant development company had been administratively
 terminated. Id. 
We further reasoned:
 
A decision by this court overturning the circuit court's
grant of declaratory relief on the merits would not provide
Defendants with an effective remedy regarding their dispute
with the Foundation over their entitlement under the Lot 30­A Amended Lease to convert the Hotel into a condominium. 
Even if we were to adopt Defendants' interpretation of the
Lot 30-A Amended Lease, they no longer have the ability to
carry out their plans to convert the Hotel into a
condominium. Thus, a decision by this court on the merits
of the circuit court's interpretation of the Lot 30-A
Amended Lease and the circuit court's grant of declaratory
relief would be an advisory opinion on abstract propositions
of law.
 
Id.
 
Applying this analysis to the instant case, we
 
similarly conclude that Mitchell's appeal is moot in light of the
 
fact that Mitchell has since sold his property at Discovery Bay
 to a third party as of February 10, 2014. Thus, the controversy
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
underlying Discovery Bay's complaint –- whether Mitchell obtained 
the requisite twenty-five percent of owners' signatures and is entitled to hold his special meeting seeking the removal of one or more Board Members -- is no longer a present, live controversy. See Tatibouet, 123 Hawai
fi at 508, 236 P.3d at 
1244; Like the defendants in Tatibouet, Mitchell no longer has any property interest in Discovery Bay, having transferred his property interest to a third party. See id. 
A decision by this court overturning the Circuit 
Court's grant of declaratory and injunctive relief on the merits would not provide Mitchell with an effective remedy regarding his dispute with Discovery Bay over his entitlement to conduct a special meeting seeking the removal of one or more of the Board Members. Even if we were to find that Mitchell could hold the special meeting, Mitchell no longer has the ability to carry out his plans to do so, as he is no longer an owner of property at Discovery Bay. Thus, a decision by this court on the merits would be an advisory opinion on abstract propositions of law. See id.; see also Lathrop v. Sakatani, 111 Hawai
fi 307, 312, 141 
P.3d 480, 485 (2006) ("Courts will not consume time deciding abstract propositions of law or moot cases, and have no jurisdiction to do so.") (quoting Wong v. Bd. of Regents, Univ. of Hawai
fi, 62 Haw. 391, 395, 616 P.2d 201, 204 (1980)). Nor 
will a claim for attorneys' fees and costs keep alive an otherwise moot controversy. Tatibouet,123 Hawai
fi at 510, 236 
P.3d at 1246. 
Accordingly, Mitchell's appeal with regard to the
 
Circuit Court's grant of Discovery Bay's MSJ and denial of
 Mitchell's Motion for Reconsideration is moot.
 
We now turn to the question of how we should resolve
 
Mitchell's appeal of the attorneys' fees and costs award as "the
 question of attorney's fees is ancillary to the underlying action
 and survives independently under the Court's equitable
 jurisdiction." Id. (quoting United States v. Ford, 650 F.2d
 
1141, 1144 (9th Cir. 1981)) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
Therefore, although Mitchell's appeal of attorneys' fees and
 costs does not preserve this case, where the underlying
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
controversy has become moot on appeal, we have jurisdiction to
 
decide whether Discovery Bay can be considered to be the
 prevailing party in the underlying action, "without regard to
 whether we think the trial court's decision on the underlying
 merits is correct." Id. (quoting Bishop v. Comm. on Prof'l
 
Ethics & Conduct of Iowa State Bar Ass'n, 686 F.2d 1278, 1290
 (8th Cir. 1982)) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted).
 
We examine whether Discovery Bay "was the 'prevailing
 
party' based on the outcome of the circuit court proceedings and
 without inquiring into the correctness of the circuit court's
 grant of declaratory judgment on the merits." Id. at 511, 236
 
P.3d at 1247. "In general, a prevailing party is a party who has
 prevailed on the disputed main issue, even though not to the
 extent of the party's original contention[.]" Id. (quoting Food
 
Pantry, Ltd. v. Waikiki Bus. Plaza, Inc., 58 Haw. 606, 620, 575
 P.2d 869, 879 (1978)) (internal quotation marks and brackets
 omitted). 
Here, viewing the outcome of the Circuit Court
 
proceedings without considering the underlying merits of the
 Circuit Court's decision, we conclude that Discovery Bay was the
 prevailing party. Discovery Bay sought declaratory and
 injunctive relief, bringing the litigation in order to prevent
 Mitchell from going forward with his plans to conduct a special
 meeting without the requisite twenty-five percent of owners'
 signatures. The Circuit Court's grant of Discovery Bay's MSJ
 effectively prevented Mitchell from continuing with his plans to
 hold the special meeting and thus, Discovery Bay was the
 prevailing party. We therefore consider Mitchell's other
 challenges to the attorneys' fees and costs award.
 
"The trial court's grant or denial of attorney's fees 
and costs is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard." Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp. of State of Hawai
fi, 120 Hawai fi 
181, 197, 202 P.3d 1226, 1242 (2009) (citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Mitchell argues that attorneys' fees were not
 
2
authorized by HRS § 514B-157(a)(3) (2006)  because "this was not
an enforcement action within the meaning of that statute[.]" As
 
the entire point of Discovery Bay's lawsuit was to enforce the
 twenty-five percent requirement of Chapter 514B, this argument is
 without merit.
 
2
 
[§514B-157] Attorneys' fees, delinquent assessments,
and expenses of enforcement.  (a) All costs and expenses,
including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by or on
behalf of the association for:
 
(1)	 Collecting any delinquent assessments against
any owner's unit;
 
(2)	 Foreclosing any lien thereon; or
 
(3)	 Enforcing any provision of the declaration,
bylaws, house rules, and this chapter, or the
rules of the real estate commission; 
against an owner, occupant, tenant, employee of an owner, or
any other person who may in any manner use the property,
shall be promptly paid on demand to the association by such
person or persons; provided that if the claims upon which
the association takes any action are not substantiated, all
costs and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees,
incurred by any such person or persons as a result of the
action of the association, shall be promptly paid on demand
to such person or persons by the association.
 
(b) If any claim by an owner is substantiated in any
action against an association, any of its officers or
directors, or its board to enforce any provision of the
declaration, bylaws, house rules, or this chapter, then all
reasonable and necessary expenses, costs, and attorneys'
fees incurred by an owner shall be awarded to such owner;
provided that no such award shall be made in any derivative
action unless:
 
(1)	 The owner first shall have demanded and allowed
 
reasonable time for the board to pursue such
enforcement; or
 
(2)	 The owner demonstrates to the satisfaction of
 
the court that a demand for enforcement made to
 the board would have been fruitless.
 
If any claim by an owner is not substantiated in any
court action against an association, any of its officers or
directors, or its board to enforce any provision of the
declaration, bylaws, house rules, or this chapter, then all
reasonable and necessary expenses, costs, and attorneys'
fees incurred by an association shall be awarded to the
association, unless before filing the action in court the
owner has first submitted the claim to mediation, or to
arbitration under subpart D, and made a good faith effort to
resolve the dispute under any of those procedures.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mitchell alternatively argues that even if the award of
 
fees is appropriate, it was error for the Circuit Court to award
 
fees of $110 per hour for paralegal and legal assistants, and to
 award fees for the preparation of a temporary restraining order
 when "[Discovery Bay] proffered no evidence on its entitlement to
 the equitable remedy." Mitchell also argues that even though the
 Circuit Court "reduced attorneys' fees in some regards, it did
 not remove the charges segregated by [Mitchell] as those that
 clearly did not belong in the case[.]"
 
It is clear from the discussion the Circuit Court had 
with counsel that the Circuit Court carefully examined the invoices before adjusting the fee award. As to the hourly rate that Mitchell objected to, it is also clear from the transcript of the hearing that the Circuit Court specifically considered the rates for the fees requested. It is well established in Hawai
fi that "if reasonable compensation requires it, a 
prevailing party must be compensated for paralegal costs." Schefke v. Reliable Collection Agency, Ltd., 96 Hawai
fi 408, 458, 
32 P.3d 52, 102 (2001). Furthermore, "in appropriate cases, a request or award of attorneys' fees may include compensation for separately billed legal services performed by a paralegal, legal assistant, or law clerk[.]" Blair v. Ing, 96 Hawai
fi 327, 334, 
31 P.3d 184, 191 (2001) (emphasis omitted). Here, the $110 per hour rate for Paralegal and Legal Assistant was less than the $185 and $200 per hour rates requested for Associates, and the $250 per hour rate for Partners. On this record, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in awarding fees based on that rate. 
Finally, Mitchell argues that Discovery Bay's refusal
 
to mediate should preclude it from being awarded attorneys' fees
 and costs under HRS § 514B-161.
3 Assuming Discovery Bay did
 
3
 The statute states in pertinent part: 
§514B-161 Mediation. (a) If an apartment owner or the
board of directors requests mediation of a dispute involving
the interpretation or enforcement of the association of
apartment owners' declaration, bylaws, or house rules, the
other party in the dispute shall be required to participate
in mediation. Each party shall be wholly responsible for
(continued...)
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
refuse to mediate, the statute provides that such refusal may be
 
taken into consideration in the award of attorneys fees and
 costs, but does not mandate that it be considered. We conclude
 that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in awarding
 the attorneys' fees and costs in this case.
 
Therefore, the February 16, 2011 Judgment entered by
 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
fi, February 24, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Lila Barbara Kanae,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Carlos D. Perez-Mesa,
(Motooka Yamamoto & Revere),
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
3(...continued)
its own costs of participating in mediation, unless both
parties agree that one party shall pay all or a specified
portion of the mediation costs. If a party refuses to
participate in the mediation of a particular dispute, a
court may take this refusal into consideration when awarding
expenses, costs, and attorneys' fees.
 
7
 