NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000599
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
CAROLYN LAI YOSHIMOTO, as Successor Trustee under that
certain General Revocable Trust Agreement dated
March 27, 1991, made by Lily Tom Lai, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
HARRISON Y.H. LAI, Individually and as Successor Trustee
under that certain General Revocable Trust Agreement dated
March 27, 1991, made by Henry S.L. Lai, Defendant-Appellant,
and
KELLIE F.T. LAI, Defendant-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-0264)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Harrison Y.H. Lai ( Harrison), as
Successor Trustee under that Certain General Revocable Trust
Agreement dated March 27, 1991, made by Henry S.L. Lai (Henry)
(the Henry Trust), appeals from the post-judgment Order Granting
Plaintiff's Motion for Distribution of Net Sale Proceeds
(Distribution Order ) entered on July 29, 2016, by the Circuit
Court of the First Circuit ( Circuit Court).1
1The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Plaintiff-Appellee Carolyn Lai Yoshimoto (Carolyn ), as
Successor Trustee under that Certain General Revocable Trust
Agreement dated March 27, 1991, made by Lily Tom Lai ( Lily) (the
Lily Trust ), brought a partition action against Harrison,
Harrison's wife Kellie F.T. Lai (Kellie), and the Henry Trust to
partition certain real property located at 44-596 Kaneohe Bay
Drive, Kaneohe, Hawai #i (the Property ).  Following the completion
of the sale of the Property at auction, Carolyn filed a Motion
for Distribution of Net Sale Proceeds (Distribution Motion).  In
the Distribution Order, after allocating various expenses and
costs as chargeable against specific parties, and considering the
equities of the case, the Circuit Court determined the respective
amounts to be received by each of the parties with an interest in
the Property. 
The Henry Trust appeals the Distribution Order.   
I.BACKGROUND
A.  Creation of Trusts and Financing Secured by Property
Henry and Lily are the parents of Harrison and Carolyn. 
The Property is a residence purchased by Henry and Lily, never
occupied by them, in which Harrison and his family lived from
1983 until they needed to relocate as a result of the partition
sale of the Property in 2015.2  In 1991, Henry and Lily
individually created their respective trusts.  At that time, the
ownership of the Property was transferred to the Henry Trust and
the Lily Trust.   Lily died in 1997, at which time Henry became
2Kellie moved off the Property in 2010 and did not reside there
after that time. 
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the successor trustee for the Lily Trust in addition to serving
as trustee for the Henry Trust.
In 1994, Henry, Lily, Harrison, and Kellie procured a
loan in the amount of $304,000, secured by a mortgage on the
Property.  On January 15, 2004, the loan was refinanced in the
amount of $310,000, which paid off the first loan, with the
excess sum distributed to Harrison and Kellie.  A second
refinancing of this loan occurred on October 3, 2006.  Kellie
executed a promissory note for a loan in the amount of $488,000
(2006 Loan ) secured by a mortgage on the Property.3  Concurrent
with the 2006 mortgage, Henry, acting as trustee for both the
Henry Trust and the Lily Trust, executed a Warranty Deed
conveying the Property to Henry, Harrison, and Kellie in their
individual capacities.  Immediately thereafter, the Property was
transferred by Henry, Harrison, and Kellie back to the Henry
Trust with an undivided forty-five percent (45%) interest, to the
Lily Trust with an undivided fifty percent (50%) interest, and to
Harrison and Kellie with undivided five percent (5%) interest as
tenants by the entirety.
On December 19, 2011, Henry resigned as trustee of both
the Henry Trust and the Lily Trust, after which time Carolyn
served as trustee for both trusts.  On November 8, 2013, Carolyn 
3Although Kellie was listed as the sole borrower on the promissory
note, Harrison admitted that he always understood that he and Henry were also
borrowers on the note, and that Henry, Harrison, and Kellie obtained the
benefits of that loan.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
resigned as trustee of the Henry Trust; thereafter, Harrison has
served as successor trustee of the Henry Trust.4   
B.  Default on 2006 Loan, Foreclosure and Partition
The 2006 Loan went into default, and a foreclosure
proceeding against the Property was commenced by the mortgage-
holder on February 7, 2013.  Carolyn, as a trustee for the Lily
Trust, secured a buyer for the Property who was willing to pay
$1.1 million, a price close to the Property's assessed value in
2015, which was $1.14 million.  Harrison refused to cooperate
with the voluntary sale of the Property.   Therefore, the Lily
Trust initiated the partition action from which the Distribution
Order arises (the Partition Action). 
Harrison, individually and as trustee of the Henry
Trust, opposed the partition and sought to remove Carolyn from
4A Petition for Appointment of Conservator and Guardian was filed
by Harrison on August 31, 2016 seeking a determination that Henry is
incapacitated and seeking the appointment of a conservator and guardian.  The
court ordered that Carolyn was to be appointed as Henry's guardian and
conservator. Carolyn argues that the case is now moot as she will hold title
to all of the Henry Trust's assets that are payable to or for Henry to be held
and used for his benefit.
[A] case is moot where the question to be determined
is abstract and does not rest on existing facts or
rights. Thus, the mootness doctrine is properly
invoked where events have so affected the relations
between the parties that the two conditions for
justiciability relevant on appeal—adverse interest and
effective remedy—have been compromised.
Bank of New York Mellon v. R. Onaga, Inc., 140 Hawai #i 358, 365, 400 P.3d 559,
566 (2017) (quoting Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 99 Hawai #i 191,
195-96, 53 P.3d 799, 803-04 (2002)).  We disagree that the case is now moot. 
Nothing in the record suggests that the Henry Trust, with Harrison as trustee,
will not continue on as a separate legal entity controlled by him.  Although
the assets in the trust are to be used for Henry's benefit, Harrison, as
trustee, controls the assets of the trust and the current litigation.  In
addition, as explained herein, the Henry Trust, as a legal entity, is
vulnerable to the claims of Henry's creditors and, as such, which trust is
allocated the net proceeds of the sale of the Property is still of practical
and legal import.    
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
her position as trustee of the Lily Trust in a separate
proceeding in probate court.  See In re that Certain General
Revocable Trust Agreement Dated March 27, 1991, Made by Lily Tom
Lai, T. No. 15-1-0071 (the Probate Action ).  Harrison and the
Henry Trust sought to delay the Partition Action while the
Probate Action was ongoing.  In the Probate Action, Harrison
claimed that Carolyn committed various misdeeds while acting as
trustee for the Lily Trust.  The Probate Action was resolved on
December 30, 2015 when the probate court found that there was no
factual or legal basis to grant the relief sought by Harrison. 
Although Harrison and the Henry Trust sought to delay
the Partition Action, the relief was not granted, and the
Property was sold at auction for the sale price of $1,210,000,
which was confirmed by the Circuit Court over Harrison's
objection.  The Circuit Court instructed that the net proceeds
from the sale of the Property be held in escrow pending further
order from the Circuit Court as to the final distribution.
On May 23, 2016, the Lily Trust filed the Distribution
Motion.  The Lily Trust, as a fifty-percent (50%) owner of the
Property, agreed to its interest being charged one-half of the
balance due on the 2006 Loan at the inception of the foreclosure,
which totaled $253,322.21.5  The proceeds from the sale of the
Property paid all the claims of the mortgagee in the foreclosure
action, state and federal tax liens stemming from certain unpaid
5The balance due on the 2006 Loan at the beginning of the
foreclosure was $458,519.18 plus interest, late charges, and advances in the
amount of $48,125.21, for a total amount of $506,644.39.  One-half of the
total amount appears to be $253,322.21.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
taxes of Henry, as an individual, property taxes, and the
Commissioner's fees.  The Distribution Motion sought equitable
adjustments to the distribution of the net sale proceeds from the
sale of the Property, which equaled $476,120.82 ( Net Proceeds),
to compensate the Lily Trust for amounts paid out of the proceeds
of the sale of the Property that it argues should be charged to
other parties.  On June 30, 2016, a hearing was held by the
Circuit Court on the Distribution Motion.  The Lily Trust
requested, and the Circuit Court ordered, over Harrison and the
Henry Trust's objections, that the Net Proceeds be distributed as
follows:
(1)  $420.00 to the Commissioner;
(2)  $463,808.30 to the Lily Trust;
(3)  $11,892.52 to Kellie;
(4)  $0.00 to the Henry Trust.
In determining that the Henry Trust should receive none
of the Net Proceeds, the Circuit Court found that IRS and state
tax liens that encumbered the Property due to Henry's unpaid
taxes should be charged to the Henry Trust in the amount of
$90,651.44.6   The Circuit Court also found that foreclosure
expenses in the amount of $120,187.12 (Foreclosure Expenses) were
chargeable to the Henry Trust and Harrison.7  In addition, the
Circuit Court found that the Lily Trust was entitled to recover
6The Lily Trust sought a credit for half of the tax liens paid in
resolving the foreclosure on the Property in the amount of $45,325.72.
7The Circuit Court accepted the Lily Trust's proposed allocation of
ninety-five percent (95%) of foreclosure expenses to the Henry Trust and five
percent (5%) to Harrison.  This is because Kellie moved off the Property in
2010 and default did not occur until 2011, at which time Henry, Harrison, and
Harrison's sons were living on the Property.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
$63,242.52 in attorneys' fees and costs from the Henry Trust's
portion of the Net Proceeds, representing a ninety percent (90%)
allocation to the Henry Trust and ten percent (10%) allocation to
Harrison.  The total of the above amounts found to be
attributable to the Henry Trust exceeded the forty-five percent
(45%) share of the Net Proceeds to which the Henry Trust
otherwise would have been entitled, resulting in the $0.00
distributed by the Circuit Court to the Henry Trust.8  
On August 26, 2016, the Henry Trust filed its Notice of
Appeal.
II.POINTS OF ERROR
The Henry Trust raises three points of error on appeal,
arguing that the Circuit Court erred when it:  (1) adopted the
Lily Trust's calculations as to the allocation of certain costs
and liens in making its equitable division of the Net Proceeds;
(2) distributed a share of the Net Proceeds to Kellie when she
was the sole borrower on the promissory note and a signor on the
mortgage; and (3) denied the Henry Trust the opportunity to
discover and present evidence as to which trust was responsible
for the liens that encumbered the property, when the taxes should
have been paid, and who benefitted from the loans.
8$476,120.82 [Net Proceeds] x forty-five percent (45%) [Henry
Trust's ownership interest in the Property] = $214,254.36 [ Henry Trust's Net
Proceeds Share ]. $45,325.72 [IRS and State Tax Liens] + $120,187.12
[Foreclosure Expenses] + $63,242.52 [Attorneys' Fees and Costs] = $228,755.36
[Equitable Adjustments Chargeable to the Henry Trust ]. Accordingly, the
Equitable Adjustments Chargeable to the Henry Trust are greater than the Henry
Trust's Net Proceeds Share, thereby wiping out the Henry Trust's proceeds from
the sale of the Property.
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
III.APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
Since a partition action is an action in equity,
we review a partition finding under the abuse of
discretion standard.  Under the abuse of discretion
standard, unless there is abuse, a trial court's
discretion should not be disturbed.  Abuse is apparent
when a trial court's discretion clearly exceeds the
bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a
party litigant.  In exercising its discretion, the
court should act in the interest of fairness and
prudence, and with a just regard to the rights of all
concerned.
Kimura v. Kamalo , 106 Hawai #i 501, 506-07, 107 P.3d 430, 435-36
(2005) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).   
It is well-established that discovery rulings by the
courts below are reviewed for an abuse of discretion.  Anastasi
v. Fidelity Nat. Title Ins. Co., 137 Hawai# i 104, 111, 366 P.3d
160, 167 (2016).  
The Hawai #i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) reflect a
basic philosophy that a party to a civil action should
be entitled to the disclosure of all relevant
information in the possession of another person prior
to trial, unless the information is privileged.
However, the extent to which discovery is permitted
under Rule 26 is subject to considerable latitude and
the discretion of the trial court. Thus, the exercise
of such discretion will not be disturbed in the
absence of a clear abuse of discretion that results in
substantial prejudice to a party.
Id. (citation omitted).  Likewise, the Circuit Court's ruling on
a motion for a continuance is reviewed for an abuse of
discretion.  See Kaleikini v. Yoshioka, 128 Hawai #i 53, 67, 283
P.3d 60, 74 (2012) (In denying a request for a continuance, "[a]n
abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court clearly exceeded
the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or
practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant")
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IV.DISCUSSION
A.The Allocation of the Net Proceeds
1.The general power to make equitable adjustments
The Henry Trust disputes the equitable adjustments made
by the Circuit Court to the Net Proceeds that resulted in the
Henry Trust receiving none of the proceeds.  The Henry Trust
contests the Circuit Court's power to make the equitable
adjustments in the first instance, arguing that the Circuit Court
erred by failing to distribute the Net Proceeds to the Henry
Trust in proportion to its forty-five percent (45%) interest in
the Property. 
A court sitting in equity "administers its relief ex
aequo et bono,[9] and by its decree adjusts the equitable rights
of all the parties."  Hawaiian Commercial & Sugar Co. v. Waikapu
Sugar Co., 9 Haw. 417, 423, 1894 WL 3187, at *5 (Haw. Rep. 1894);
see also Sugarman v. Kapu , 104 Hawai #i 119, 124, 85 P.3d 644, 649
(2004).  This necessarily broad mandate has been given in some
form by statute.  Among the various equitable powers vested in
the Circuit Court when sitting in equity in the partition of real
estate, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) § 668-7(a) (2016) provides,
inter alia , that the Circuit Court has the power
(4)   To cause the property to be equitably divided between
the parties according to their respective
proportionate interests therein, as the parties agree,
or by the drawing of lots;
(5) To set apart any particular portion or portions of
land to any particular party or parties who by prior
occupation or improvement or otherwise may be
equitably entitled thereto, and make any proper
adjustment or equalization thereof by the sale of
9Latin for "according to what is equitable and good."
bono, BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 679 (10th ed. 2014).  Ex aequo et
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
other portions and the application of the proceeds for
such purpose, or as a condition of any such particular
allotment to require payment by the parties of any
value of the portion set apart to them in excess of
their proportionate interest in the value of the whole
property.
The power of the court is not restricted to the powers
explicitly set forth in HRS chapter 668; rather, the statutory
provisions supplement the court's general powers.  See Sugarman,
104 Hawai# i at 124, 85 P.3d at 649.10
It is evident from HRS § 668–1 that the legislature
intended that the provisions of HRS chapter 668 supplement
the court's equitable power.  The statute recognizes the
power of the courts to act "according to the usual practice
of courts in equity," and "according to this chapter in
enlargement thereof."  HRS § 668–1 (emphasis added).
Traditionally, courts of equity exist for the purpose of
"do[ing] equity" by ensuring that "no injustice is done to
either party" involved.  Wodehouse v. Hawaiian Trust Co., 32
Haw. 835, 842 (1933).  Inherent in the power to "do equity"
is, of necessity, discretion to accomplish a just result
under the circumstances. As indicated by HRS § 668–1, the
legislature did not mean to restrict the powers granted to
the circuit courts to only those enumerated in the specific
provisions of HRS chapter 668.  In enacting HRS § 668–1, the
legislature thus contemplated that the courts would exercise
equitable discretion in partition proceedings.
Id.
Thus, we reject the Henry Trust's argument that the
Circuit Court did not have the power to make equitable
adjustments to the division of the Net Proceeds between the
interested parties.  Moreover, the point was conceded at the
hearing on the Distribution Motion when the Circuit Court
inquired:
[THE COURT]: So in terms of how should the Court
distribute this dollar amount, the 476,000 and change. . . 
Now in terms of the Court's equitable power, the Court . . . 
10We note that the Hawai #i Supreme Court granted a motion for
reconsideration in the Sugarman case.  See Sugarman v. Kapu, 105 Hawai #i 483,
99 P.3d 1067 (Table) (2004).  However, upon review of the order filed by the
supreme court on September 17, 2004, in No. 24090, it appears that the motion
was related to a request for fees and costs, and Sugarman remains persuasive
and good law.
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
has the authority and discretion to consider any offsets
and credits, agreed, counsel, looking at the case law?
[LILY TRUST COUNSEL]: Yes.
[HARRISON AND HENRY TRUST COUNSEL]: Yes, Your Honor.
Generally, an argument not raised below is deemed to
have been waived on appeal.  See State v. Moses, 102 Hawai #i 449,
456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003).  Regardless, the Circuit Court
clearly had the equitable powers to make adjustments to the
amounts distributed to the parties out of the Net Proceeds
according to the equities of the case.
2.The Foreclosure Expenses
The Henry Trust argues that the Circuit Court erred by
attributing the Foreclosure Expenses to Harrison and the Henry
Trust.  The Foreclosure Expenses, totaling $120,187.12, consist
of interest, late charges, and other fees incurred in the
foreclosure action after the Lily Trust filed its complaint
seeking the partition of the Property.
The Lily Trust argues that none of the Foreclosure
Expenses should be charged against it because the 2006 Loan,
secured by a mortgage on the Property, inured solely to the
benefit of Harrison, Kellie, and Henry.  It was conceded by
Harrison and the Henry Trust that the Lily Trust was not a party
to the 2006 Loan and they do not argue that the Lily Trust
obtained any benefit from the loan, even though the Lily Trust's
fifty percent (50%) interest in the Property was burdened by the
loan and the mortgage securing the loan.   The Lily Trust argued
that Carolyn had secured a ready, willing, and able buyer to
purchase the Property at or near the appraised value of the
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Property, and Harrison and the Henry Trust (a) refused to sell
the Property voluntarily and (b) opposed partition and took
numerous steps to delay the Partition Action.  Therefore, the
Lily Trust argued that equity demands that the Foreclosure
Expenses, as incurred from time of the Lily Trust's filing of the
Partition Action, should be charged against Harrison and the
Henry Trust and deducted from their shares of the Net Proceeds. 
The Henry Trust argues that the Foreclosure Expenses
should not be charged to it and separates those expenses into two
categories:  (1) late charges in the amount of $107,303.62 ( Late
Charges)  and (2) an escrow advance in the amount of $12,883.50
(Escrow Advance ).  With respect to the Late Charges, Harrison and
the Henry Trust argue that the Late Charges should not be charged
solely to the trust as Harrison and the Henry Trust acted within
their rights and were justified in opposing the sale of the
Property.  Harrison and the Henry Trust characterize the Circuit
Court's decision to charge the late charges to the Henry Trust as
a penalty for opposing the sale of the Property and for
protecting Henry's right to possess the Property while he was
alive and competent.  The Henry Trust argues that it and Harrison
were justified in opposing the partition because it was Carolyn's
fault that the 2006 Loan went into foreclosure and they were
justified in waiting until the end of the Probate Action to
proceed with the sale.
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its
discretion in allocating the Late Charges to the Henry Trust. 
The Circuit Court, exercising its equitable powers, is primarily
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
concerned with providing a just result for all the parties.  See
Sugarman, 104 Hawai# i at 124, 85 P.3d at 649.  Assuming that
Harrison and the Henry Trust had the right to pursue the legal
course they did in opposing the Partition Action, it does not
follow that the Circuit Court could not, within its discretion,
find that this course of action was unreasonable and caused
unnecessary delay and unnecessary foreclosure expenses to the
detriment of the Lily Trust.  This appears to be, in fact, the
calculation made by the Circuit Court.  The Lily Trust was able
to secure a buyer of the Property following the initiation of the
foreclosure action by the mortgagee, but Harrison and the Henry
Trust's actions, including a failed attempt in probate court to
remove Carolyn from her role as trustee of the Lily Trust,
delayed the sale of the Property for approximately a year.  We
cannot conclude that the Circuit Court's decision "clearly
exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles
of law or practice" to the Henry Trust's substantial detriment in
so deciding.  In re Ishida-Waiakamilo Legacy Trust , 138 Hawai #i
98, 102, 377 P.3d 39, 43 (App. 2016) (quoting Ueoka v. Szymanski,
107 Hawai# i 386, 393, 114 P.3d 892, 899 (2005)).
Regarding the Escrow Advance of $12,883.50, the Henry
Trust argues that it should not have been fully charged to the
Henry Trust because the total escrow advance amount of $25,767.00
reflects a cost to be shared by both trusts.  It appears that the
escrow advances were sums advanced by the mortgagee for real
property taxes and insurance on the Property, which were the
responsibility of the owners of the Property but were actually
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
paid by the lender.  Notably, the Lily Trust has only sought a
credit for one-half of the escrow advances advanced by the
lender.  The full amount of the escrow advances, $25,767.00, was
paid out of the proceeds from the sale of the Property, and the
Lily Trust requested that one-half of that amount, allocated
between The Henry Trust and Harrison, be charged against their
portion of the Net Proceeds.  We reject the argument that this
constituted an abuse of discretion.
3.  Tax Liens charged to the Henry Trust
The Henry Trust next argues that the Circuit Court
erred by charging the trust with the federal and state tax liens
against Henry in the amount of $90,651.44 ( Tax Liens).11  It is
undisputed that the Tax Liens stemmed from taxes that were
determined by the taxing authorities to be owed by Henry,
individually, and that no appeals were taken contesting that
determination.  It was also undisputed that the Tax Liens were
paid off from the proceeds from the sale of the Property.
The Lily Trust argues that it was just and equitable
that the Tax Liens be charged against the Henry Trust as that
trust, as a self-settled trust, is subject to the claims of
Henry's creditors and the Tax Liens stemmed from taxes that were
previously found to be owed by Henry, as an individual.  The
Henry Trust argues that the Tax Liens accrued during Carolyn's
tenure as trustee of the Henry Trust and resulted from the
failure to pay the appropriate taxes following the sale of a
11The Lily Trust sought a credit for one-half of the tax liens paid
out of the proceeds of the sale of the Property in the amount of $45,325.72.
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
second property, the Malukai house  (Malukai Property ), which was
an asset of both the Henry Trust and the Lily Trust.   
HRS § 668-11 provides that the court has the power in a
partition action to satisfy an encumbrancer's claim out of the
encumbered party's portion of the proceeds from the sale of that
property.12  The dispute is not whether the Circuit Court had the
power to satisfy the Tax Liens from the proceeds of the sale of
the Property, but whether it was equitable to satisfy the liens
from the Henry Trust's share of the proceeds.  We conclude that
the Circuit Court's decision to charge the Tax Liens to the Henry
Trust was not an abuse of discretion.  Hawai #i follows the rule
found in the majority of jurisdictions that a spendthrift trust
established by the settlor for his own benefit is invalid against
the settlor's creditors.  See Cooke Trust Co. v. Lord , 41 Haw.
12HRS § 668-11 (2016) provides:
Where partition is made of any property which is
subject as a whole to any lien or incumbrance, the court may
with the consent of the incumbrancer apportion the
incumbrance against the separate portions as partitioned to
the parties, or if the property is sold and the
incumbrancer's claim is due and may be discharged by payment
the court may discharge the same out of the proceeds.
Otherwise, unless the incumbrancer consents to receive
payment, the court may without disturbing or then making any
adjudication as to the incumbrance, sell, subject to the
incumbrance, the property affected thereby; or if any lien
or incumbrance is only upon the undivided share or interest
of any particular party the court may by its decree make the
same a lien and charge only upon the parcel of land
partitioned to the party or a charge against the party's
share of the proceeds of sale thereof . In every case the
property sold shall first be charged with its just
proportion of the costs of the partition in preference to
the lien or charge. Any party holding a lien or incumbrance
and also having other securities, may in the court's
discretion be required to exhaust such others before a
distribution of the proceeds of sale in partition, or the
court may order a just deduction to be made from the amount
of the lien on the property on account of such other
security.
(Emphasis added).
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
198, 202 (Haw. Terr. 1955); see also Holualoa Aloha, LLC v.
Anekona Aloha, LLC, No. 30068, 2013 WL 709670, *1 (App. Feb. 27,
2013) (SDO).  Accordingly, the assets of the Henry Trust are
subject to the claims of Henry's creditors.  It is reasonable for
the Circuit Court to have determined that since the Henry Trust
is subject to the claims against Henry, it was prudent and
equitable to satisfy the Tax Liens with the portion of the Net
Proceeds from the sale of the Property apportioned to the Henry
Trust.
We conclude that the decision by the Circuit Court to
allocate responsibility for the Tax Liens to the Henry Trust was
not an abuse of discretion.
4.  The Lily Trust's attorneys' fees and costs 
The Henry Trust argues that the Circuit Court erred in
awarding the Lily Trust its attorneys' fees and costs in the
amount of $63,242.52 (Attorneys' Fees) from the Henry Trust's
share of the Net Proceeds.  The Lily Trust's position, adopted by
the Circuit Court, is that the Henry Trust should be responsible
for these fees as they represent the costs incurred by the Lily
Trust in initiating and prosecuting the Partition Action, which
was unnecessary, as a ready, willing, and able buyer for the
Property had been secured, but Harrison and the Henry Trust
refused to cooperate.
First, the Henry Trust argues that it should not be
responsible for any fees incurred before it filed its answer in
the Partition Action opposing the sale of the Property.  The Lily
Trust provided evidence to the Circuit Court that, following the
16NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
initiation of an action to foreclose on the Property, Harrison
and the Henry Trust refused to cooperate to voluntarily sell the
Property to a buyer who was willing to pay the appraised value of
the Property.  It was not an abuse of discretion for the Circuit
Court to agree that the Henry Trust should reimburse the Lily
Trust for the fees it incurred in both initiating and prosecuting
the Partition Action, as HRS § 668-17, discussed below, allows
apportionment of all fees and costs of the proceedings in
partition.  
Second, the Henry Trust argues that fees incurred by
the Lily Trust in the Probate Action were erroneously included in
the award of Attorneys' Fees.  The Henry Trust submits that this
award was in error because the Probate Action was separate from
the present cause of action and the Henry Trust was not a party
to the Probate Action.  The Lily Trust responds that this claim
is factually incorrect and the Attorneys' Fees only include
amounts incurred for the Partition Action.  The Lily Trust's
request for attorneys' fees was supported by the declaration of
counsel that the fees requested were for legal services in the
Partition Action.  The declaration of counsel was supported by
billing statements detailing the work performed by counsel.  The
Henry Trust, having reviewed approximately sixty-six pages of
billing statements, has identified three entries it claims
supports its contention that the Lily Trust's charges include
work performed by counsel in the Probate Action.  The challenged
entries are as follows:
17NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(1)  On March 31, 2015, counsel billed for the
"[r]eview of memorandum in opposition to motion for
partition sale and probate petition."
(2) On April 3, 2015, counsel billed for the "[r]eview
of Plaintiff's response to allegations in Harrison
Lai's Probate Petition and Document to Produce per
Defendant Harrison Lai's discovery request."
(3) On May 6, 2015, counsel billed for "[t]elephone
conference with Carolyn Yoshimoto re status of matter;
strategy concerning Partition action and Probate
matter."
Regarding entry (1), it is undisputed that the
Partition Action and the Probate Action were interconnected and
each action was factually relevant to the other.  It was not
unreasonable for the Circuit Court to award a minimal amount of
attorneys' fees for work incurred in the Partition Action that
included the review of work done in the Probate Action. 
Regarding entry (2), it appears that the review of the Probate
Petition was in response to Harrison's discovery request made in
the Partition Action, as the Plaintiff's response in the Probate
Action was reviewed in order to be produced  per Harrison's
discovery request.  The Circuit Court could have reasonably
inferred that the discovery request was, therefore, connected to
the Partition Action.  Finally, regarding entry (3), the stated
purpose of the telephone call was to develop a strategy for both
the Partition Action and the Probate Action.  As explained
regarding entry (1), the matters were interconnected.  Out of
18NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
sixty-six pages, the Henry Trust has identified three entries
that mention the Probate Action, but each entry can reasonably be
construed as fees incurred in the Partition Action.  We find no
abuse of discretion.  
Finally, the Henry Trust argues that, pursuant to HRS §
668-17 (2016), the Circuit Court should have apportioned the
Attorneys' Fees and Costs based on the parties' respective
interests in the Property.  HRS § 668-17 states:
§ 668-17  Costs.  All costs of the proceedings
in partition shall be paid by the plaintiff in the
first instance, but eventually by all of the parties
in proportion to their interests, except such costs
which may be occasioned by contests as to particular
shares or interests, which shall be charged against
the particular shares or interests involved and be
paid as determined by the result of the trial of the
particular issue. In addition to costs of the
proceeding the judge may allow any fee or fees for
legal services rendered by the attorneys for any of
the parties, and apportion the same for costs for
payment by and between the parties or any of them, all
as to the judge shall seem equitable in the light of
the services performed and the benefits derived
therefrom by the parties, respectively. When more than
ten defendants are named in a complaint for partition,
no greater payment for costs shall be required of the
plaintiff than would be required if there were but ten
defendants.
In the first instance, the statute presumes that the
costs of the partition proceeding are to be paid "by all of the
parties in proportion to their interests," except in
circumstances not relevant here.  However, "[i]n addition to
costs of the proceeding," the judge may also apportion "any fee
or fees for legal services" between the parties, " all as to the
judge shall seem equitable in the light of the services performed
and the benefits derived therefrom by the parties, respectively."
(Emphasis added).  Thus, although the presumption is that the
costs in prosecuting a partition action are to be paid by the
19NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
parties in proportion to their interests, the court retains
discretion to allocate the burden of costs as it deems to be
equitable.  See also Kimura v. Kamalo , 106 at 511, 107 at 440
(the court has the power "under HRS § 668-17 and in equity to
allocate costs" as between defendants).
Here, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court's
decision to allocate the entire burden of the fees and costs of
the Partition Action to the Henry Trust and Harrison "clearly
exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of
law or practice" to the Henry Trust's substantial detriment. Id.
at 507, 107 P.3d at 436 (citation and internal quotation marks
omitted).  As argued by the Lily Trust below, it did not benefit
from the loan; in addition, as a result of the foreclosure and
the subsequent proceedings, the value of the Lily Trust's fifty
percent (50%) interest in the Property will not be fully paid to
it, even after the equitable adjustments awarded by the Circuit
Court.  The Henry Trust makes no other argument as to why it was
inequitable to allocate full responsibility to Harrison and the
Henry Trust.  Rather, the Henry Trust summarily states that,
pursuant to HRS § 668-17, the Circuit Court should have
apportioned attorneys' fees and costs based on interests.  We
conclude that, based on the circumstances before it, the Circuit
Court did not abuse its discretion in the allocation of the Lily
Trust's Attorneys' Fees.
B.The Distribution to Kellie
The Henry Trust argues that the Circuit Court abused
its discretion in distributing any amount of the Net Proceeds to
20NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Kellie.  The Henry Trust argues that neither Harrison nor Kellie
as individuals should receive any share of the Net Proceeds
because they were joint borrowers on the 2006 Loan that went into
default and they both benefitted from that loan.  Because the
proceeds will not be able to compensate the Lily Trust and the
Henry Trust, non-borrowers which did not benefit from the 2006
Loan, the Henry Trust argues that Kellie and Harrison are
entitled to none of the proceeds for their five percent (5%)
interest in the Property.
The Henry Trust fails to address the primary argument
Kellie made to the Circuit Court as to why she deserved to
receive a share of the Net Proceeds.  Counsel for Kellie argued
that the primary equitable consideration in support of Kellie's
request for $11,892.5213 was to allow a partial reimbursement for
attorneys' fees she necessarily incurred as a result of Harrison
and the Henry Trust's opposition to the voluntary sale of the
Property and the unnecessarily prolonged Partition Action.  The
Lily Trust agreed that Kellie had been cooperative with the
voluntary sale of the Property, opposed by Harrison and the Henry
Trust, and that it was just that she receive a portion of her
attorneys' fees out of the Net Proceeds.
Even if we were to accept the Henry Trust's position
that Kellie as a borrower on the defaulted loan was not entitled
13Harrison and Kellie had an undivided five percent (5%) interest in
the Property.  The sum of $11,892.52 was reached by taking one-half of that
interest, two and five tenths percent (2.5%) of the Net Proceeds of the
Property (less $420 paid to the Commissioner). [($476,120.82 - $420 =
$475,700.82) x 2.5% = $11,892.52] Kellie's counsel submitted a declaration to
the Circuit Court, supported by billing statements, that Kellie had incurred
more than $18,000 in attorneys' fees in the Partition Action.
21NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to receive a proportionate share of the sale proceeds because
they were insufficient to compensate the Lily Trust and the Henry
Trust for their ownership interests, it is a separate question
whether the court, in equity, abused its discretion in awarding
Kellie part of her attorneys' fees.  The Henry Trust provides no
argument as to why it was an abuse of discretion for the Circuit
Court to award Kellie a sum to compensate her for attorneys' fees
incurred as a result of the Partition Action.  HRS § 668-17
specifically permits the court to "allow any fee or fees for
legal services rendered by the attorneys for any of the parties." 
(Emphasis added).  Under the circumstances of this case, which
are discussed above, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not
abuse its discretion in ordering a distribution to Kellie for
part of the attorneys' fees she incurred in the Partition Action. 
C.Discovery and Evidence Regarding the Tax Liens
Finally, the Henry Trust argues that the Circuit Court
erred in denying it the opportunity to present evidence regarding
which trust was responsible for the liens that encumbered the
Property, when they should have been paid, and who benefitted
from the loans.  The only liens on the Property were the Tax
Liens assessed against Henry and paid out of the proceeds from
the sale of the Property. 
At the hearing on the Distribution Motion, the Henry
Trust initially took the position that it needed more time to
conduct discovery before it could adequately address, through the
presentation of additional evidence, the issue of who should be
responsible for the liens.  At that hearing, however, the Circuit
22NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Court thoroughly examined the issues before it to understand
whether it could rule or whether more discovery was, in fact,
needed.  In considering the Henry Trust's request, the Circuit
Court observed that the additional discovery sought by the Henry
Trust related to the issues raised in the Probate Action. 
Therefore, discovery regarding those issues would have been
already been obtained in the Probate Action, for which Harrison
was the plaintiff.  Although issues of res judicata and
collateral estoppel were discussed, the Circuit Court did not, in
fact, find that either of those theories precluded discovery into
those issues; rather, the Circuit Court observed that, since
Harrison was the trustee of the Henry Trust, he would already
have had access to the records of the Henry Trust that were
identified as subject to further discovery.  It appears,
therefore, that the Circuit Court did not believe additional
discovery was needed.  In addition, since there was no dispute
that the Tax Liens stemmed from taxes assessed against Henry as
an individual, which assessment was unchallenged, the Circuit
Court determined that any disputes as to the liability underlying
those liens should have been raised in another forum. 
The Circuit Court walked through each of these issues
with the Henry Trust's counsel, and it appears that the Henry
Trust conceded that the Circuit Court could rule absent
additional discovery.  The discussion regarding pending discovery
issues concluded as follows:
THE COURT: All right.  So is there any reason
why the Court cannot rule because I am affording you
every opportunity in terms of the dollar amount,
what's not at issue, the tax liens, the adjustments to
23NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the foreclosure ... [Y]ou've already acknowledged that
your client is not asking for any credit or offset
that's of monetary value, true?
[HENRY TRUST COUNSEL]: True.
THE COURT:  But on the other hand, plaintiff
Carolyn Yoshimoto as successor trustee for [the Lily
Trust] is claiming adjustments, credit, offset, and
they detailed it when they filed their [Distribution
Motion] and that's set forth in Exhibit I.  So that's
what the Court is dealing with regarding any
adjustments.  
And we've gone through quite a bit of time
trying to elicit from you, counsel, in terms of your
request for discovery, how does it pertain to those
issues, true?
[HENRY TRUST COUNSEL]:  True.
THE COURT: So there's nothing else that you need
for discovery.
[HENRY TRUST COUNSEL]:  That's correct.  So if
the Court is –- 
THE COURT: Because if there's anything else as
[Lily Trust Counsel] mentioned that it might be not
for this particular forum, but maybe some other forum
between the two sides.
[HENRY TRUST COUNSEL]:  That's right.
We conclude that, based on the evidence and arguments
presented, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
determining that additional discovery was unnecessary and,
therefore, no further continuance was warranted.  The Partition
Action had been filed and continued on for over a year, and
discovery regarding the issues the Henry Trust sought to explore 
had been raised in the Probate Action.  Harrison had access to
that discovery and, as trustee for the Henry Trust, the Henry
Trust did as well.  Finally, having thoroughly inquired of the
Henry Trust's counsel, it appears all parties agreed that the
Circuit Court could rule on the Distribution Motion and any other
issues would be more properly disposed of in another forum. 
Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not
abuse its discretion in ruling on the Distribution Motion without
further discovery.
24NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
V. CONCLUSION
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's July 29, 2016
Distribution Order is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii, May 25, 2018. #
On the briefs:
Margery S. Bronster,
Catherine L. Aubuchon,
Tyler A. Tsukazaki,
(Bronster Fujichaku Robbins),
for Defendant-Appellant.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Yuriko J. Sugimura,
(Bendet Fidell Sugimura),
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge
25