NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000127
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
OAHU PUBLICATIONS, INC., doing business as
Honolulu Star-Advertiser, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
NEIL ABERCROMBIE, in his official capacity as Governor of the
State of Hawai' i, Defendant-Appellant, and DOE GOVERNMENTAL
AGENCIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-1871-08 KKS)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge and Leonard, J.,
with Ginoza, J., dissenting)
  
Defendant-Appellant Neil Abercrombie, in his official 
capacity as Governor of the State of Hawai
'i (Gov. Abercrombie), 
timely appeals from the February 8, 2013 second amended judgment 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit 
1
Court) that found in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Oahu
Publications, Inc. (Oahu Publications) on all counts in Oahu
 
Publications's complaint and awarded attorneys' fees and costs to
 
Oahu Publications.
 
As his sole point of error, Gov. Abercrombie challenges
 
the Circuit Court's award of attorneys' fees and costs to Oahu
 
Publications on the basis that the number of attorneys' hours and
 
photocopying costs claimed were unreasonable. 
Based on our
 
1
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided over all proceedings in
this case.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
review of the record, the point raised, the arguments of the
 
parties and the applicable authority, we resolve Gov.
 
Abercrombie's appeal as follows.
 
Oahu Publications brought this suit for judicial
 
enforcement under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 92F-15 (1993)
 
of the Uniform Information Practices Act (UIPA). The award of
 
attorneys' fees and costs in the amount of $69,027.06 was made
 
pursuant to HRS ยง 92F-15(d).
 
[The appellate] court reviews the denial and granting
of attorney's fees under the abuse of discretion standard.
The same standard applies to [the appellate] court's review
of the amount of a trial court's award of attorney's fees.
An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearly
exceeded the bounds of reason or has disregarded rules or
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment
of a party litigant.
 
Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps.' Ret. Sys. of State of Hawai' i, 106 
Hawai'i 416, 431, 106 P.3d 339, 354 (2005) (Chun II) (quoting 
Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps.' Ret. Sys. of State of Hawai' i, 92 
Hawai'i 432, 439, 992 P.2d 127, 134 (2000)) (citations, internal 
quotation marks, brackets in original, and ellipses omitted). 
Thus, Gov. Abercrombie carries the burden of demonstrating on 
appeal that the Circuit Court "clearly exceeded the bounds of 
reason" in its award of attorneys' fees and costs. Chun II, 106 
Hawai'i at 431, 106 P.3d at 354 (citation and internal quotation 
marks omitted). 
A.	 Whether the Circuit Court Lacked Sufficient
 
Information to Determine the Reasonableness
 of the Number of Hours Spent on the Case.
 
HRS ยง 92F-15(d) requires the court to "assess against 
the agency reasonable attorney's fees and all other expenses 
reasonably incurred in the litigation." When reviewing the trial 
court's decision for abuse, "the question is whether the trial 
court's award of attorneys' fees and costs was reasonably 
supported by the record." Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & 
Stifel, 117 Hawai' i 92, 122-23, 176 P.3d 91, 121-22 (2008). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Gov. Abercrombie first argues that the "Description
 
portion of 56 of the 173 entries on the 'billables'/invoices
 
. . . were redacted, and essentially blank[,]" and that as a
 
result, the fees awarded must be reduced by the amount of these
 
hours "because the circuit court had insufficient information
 
with which to determine whether that time was 'reasonably
 
expended.'"
 
However, despite the redactions, the general nature of 
the services rendered, e.g., "legal research," "review and revise 
memo re UIPA and case strategy," or "continued drafting of 
complaint," and the time spent on the service still appear on 
these invoices. Together with its knowledge of the nature of the 
case, the quality of the documents filed, and performance in 
court by Oahu Publications's attorneys, the Circuit Court, who 
presided over all proceedings in this case, had a substantial 
basis upon which to determine that the fees requested were 
reasonable. Thus, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court 
"clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or has disregarded rules 
or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of 
a party litigant" in granting the request for attorneys' fees and 
costs. Chun II, 106 Hawai' i at 431, 106 P.3d at 354 (citation 
and internal quotation marks omitted). 
B.	 Whether the Invoice Descriptions were too
Generalized.
 
Gov. Abercrombie also argues that, in addition to the 
descriptions that were redacted, the descriptions for 10% of the 
time entries were too generalized. Gov. Abercrombie provides no 
support for this assertion. Moreover, Gov. Abercrombie does not 
point to where this argument was made before the Circuit Court. 
A failure to raise or properly preserve issues at the trial level 
will generally be grounds to deem those issues waived. Enoka v. 
AIG Hawai
'i Ins. Co., Inc., 109 Hawai' i 537, 546, 128 P.3d 850, 
859 (2006). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C.	 Whether an Estimate of Time was Sufficient
 
for an Award of Attorneys' Fees.
 
Gov. Abercrombie argues that "without hours with which 
to calculate the 'lodestar,' the fee awarded cannot be 
reasonable." However, once again, Gov. Abercrombie did not 
object to the provision of only an estimate for the time spent on 
the motion for attorneys' fees and costs. We note that the 
Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) require that "the motion 
[for attorneys' fees] must . . . state the amount or provide a fair estimate of the amount sought." HRCP Rule 54(d)(2)(B) 
(emphasis added). Finally, counsel for both parties presented 
their arguments to the Circuit Court regarding the reasonableness 
of the fees claimed for this purpose. Thus, without more, it was 
not an abuse for the Circuit Court to award fees on this basis. 
D.	 
Whether the Fees and Costs Award was
 
Unreasonable.
 
Gov. Abercrombie contends that some of the hours used
 
to calculate the award were excessive, not productive,
 
unnecessary, or spent performing tasks unrelated to litigating
 
the UIPA Claim.
 
In its order granting attorneys' fees and costs, the
 
Circuit Court specifically found that "given the novel and
 
complex issues presented by this case and the extensive research
 
it entailed, the time expended by the attorneys for the Plaintiff
 . . . was reasonable[.]"
 
1.	 Whether Fees for "Work Not Actually
Used" in the Case were Unreasonable.
 
Gov. Abercrombie argues that 4.6 hours of work for
 
analyzing issues for appeal, analyzing jury demand issues,
 
drafting a motion for judicial notice, and preparing a discovery
 
plan should not be included in the fees awarded because "none of
 
this work was actually used in the case." 
Gov. Abercrombie
 
argues that fees awarded on the basis of time spent analyzing
 issues on appeal before the case on the merits was decided was
 
"premature, self-imposed, avoidable, and unnecessary." This
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
argument is based on Gov. Abercrombie's assessment of the 
attorneys involved and their experience and his opinion regarding 
how long their work should take. Without more, Gov. Abercrombie 
has not demonstrated that the Circuit Court "exceeded the bounds 
of reason" in its award of attorneys' fees and costs. Chun II, 
106 Hawai' i at 431, 106 P.3d at 354 (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
2.	 Whether the Time Spent on the Same
Activity by Multiple Attorneys was
Unreasonably Spent.
 
Gov. Abercrombie argues that the more than 29 hours 
spent drafting the complaint and the more than 70 hours spent 
drafting the motion for summary judgment contained time that was 
"redundant and duplicative[.]" However, Gov. Abercrombie's 
reliance on Fought & Co., Inc. v. Steel Eng'g & Erection, Inc., 
87 Hawai' i 37, 56, 951 P.2d 487, 506 (1998) for the proposition 
that "[m]ultiple attorneys billing hours for the same activity is unreasonable as a matter of law[,]" is misplaced. In Fought, the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court disallowed charges sought by Fought's 
general counsel that it found were "duplicative of charges also claimed by Fought's Hawai' i counsel" and appeared unreasonable 
under the circumstances presented there. Fought, 87 Hawai' i at 
56, 951 P.2d at 506. The Court was asked to decide whether the 
attorneys' fee request was reasonable under HRS ยง 607-14 (Supp. 
2012) and Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 39 and not 
whether the trial court abused its discretion in making the award. Id. The practice of billing for reasonable time spent by 
multiple attorneys from the same firm was not categorically outlawed by Fought. 
Gov. Abercrombie further contends that a similar case
 
that addressed the disclosure of the list of judicial nominees,
 
Pray v. Judicial Selection Comm'n of State, 75 Haw. 333, 861 P.2d
 
723 (1993), and three Office of Information Practices opinions
 
should have reduced the time that was needed to prepare the
 
motion for summary judgment. Gov. Abercrombie suggests that "20
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hours should have been more than sufficient" and a "particularly
 
reasonable" amount of time to spend.
 
However, Gov. Abercrombie does not provide the 
authority or point to evidence supporting his position that no 
more than twenty hours was reasonable. Gov. Abercrombie's view 
of how much time was reasonable or sufficient is not the 
applicable test. The Circuit Court noted that it "did not see 
any duplicative or excessive hours charged[.]" The Circuit Court 
noted in its written order granting attorneys' fees and costs 
that due to the "novel and complex issues presented by this case 
and the extensive research it entailed," the time submitted was 
reasonable. The Hawai' i Supreme Court has stated that "the judge 
is an expert [her]self and knows as well as a legal expert what are reasonable attorney fees, and that the amount of attorney's 
fees is within the judicial discretion of the court, and in 
fixing that amount the trial court may proceed upon its own 
knowledge of the value of the solicitor's services." Stanford 
Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawai' i 286, 306, 141 
P.3d 459, 479 (2006) (citation and internal quotation marks 
omitted). 
3.	 Whether the Cost of Photocopying was
Wrongfully Included in the Award.
 
Finally, Gov. Abercrombie argues that because the
 
photocopying costs were not documented with more specific
 
information, this cost should be rejected. Upon examination of
 
the record, it appears that the only documentation given for the
 
photocopying costs totaling $564.60 is a single line-item in a
 
table titled "Bill of Costs." No further breakdown of the
 
photocopying costs are provided. The only support for Oahu
 
Publications's requested copying costs is in the written
 
declaration of one of its attorneys who stated that the total
 
costs request was, in his opinion, "reasonable." Gov.
 
Abercrombie contends that the "single page, four-item list titled
 
'Bill of Costs,' attached to the motion as Exhibit 5" was
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
insufficient because it contained no information about "how many
 
pages of what[] was photocopied, when, or for what part of the
 
litigation." We agree.
 
Therefore, the February 8, 2013 second amended judgment
 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed as
 
to the award of attorneys' fees and vacated as to the
 
photocopying costs. The case is remanded for further proceedings
 
regarding the photocopying costs.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 18, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Charleen M. Aina and 
Robyn B. Chun,Deputy Attorneys General,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Diane D. Hastert,Robert H. Thomas, andMark M. Murakami,(Damon Key Leong KupchakHastert)for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
7
 