NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000034
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
MARY JANE DELGADO PONCE, aka Mary Jane Dalumpinis,
Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 16-1-0734)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Fujise, Acting Chief Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant, Mary Jane Delgado Ponce, aka Mary
Jane Dalumpinis (Ponce), appeals from the Judgment of Conviction
and Sentence (Judgment), entered on January 10, 2017, by the
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).1  Plaintiff-
Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) charged Ponce with theft in the
second degree, alleging that from April 1, 2010 through April 30,
2014, Ponce received $3,723.00 in food stamps overpayment due to
her intentional failure to disclose her marriage to Frank Smith
(Smith) to the Department of Human Services (DHS).  After a trial
by jury, Ponce was found guilty and sentenced to five (5) years
imprisonment with a mandatory minimum term of one year, eight
months.
1  The Honorable Shirley Kawamura presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Ponce contends that (1) The circuit court
improperly admitted State's Exhibits 5 and 8 into evidence under
the business record exception to hearsay, (2) there was
insufficient evidence to support her conviction, (3) the circuit
court erred by denying Ponce's Motion for Judgment of Acquittal
because the State failed to prove the element of "deception", and
(4) the circuit court erred when it denied Ponce's Motion for New
Trial upon the late discovery of Ponce's inability to read.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Ponce's
points of errors as follows.
I. State's Exhibits 5 and 8 Were Properly Admitted Pursuant to
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 803(b)(6)
Ponce contends that the circuit court erred in
admitting State's Exhibits 5 and 8 under HRE Rule 803(b)(6)
because the exhibits were prepared in anticipation of litigation
and were testimonial, making them subject to sixth amendment
confrontation.  See Crawford v. Washington , 541 U.S. 36, 124
S.Ct. 1354 (2004).
HRE Rule 803(b)(6) is an exception to the hearsay rule
that allows the admission of records of "regularly conducted
activities."  HRE Rule 803(b)(6) provides:
Rule 803  Hearsay exceptions; availability of
declarant immaterial.   The following are not excluded by the
hearsay rule, even though the declarant is available as a
witness:
. . . .
(b) Other exceptions.
. . . .
(6) Records of regularly conducted activity.  A
memorandum, report, record, or data compilation,
in any form, of acts, events, conditions,
opinions, or diagnoses, made in the course of a
regularly conducted activity, at or near the
time of the acts, events, conditions, opinions,
or diagnoses, as shown by the testimony of the
custodian or other qualified witness, or by
certification that complies with rule 902(11) or
a statute permitting certification, unless the
sources of information or other circumstances
indicate lack of trustworthiness.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Ponce argues that the circuit court improperly admitted
State's Exhibits 5 and 8 under HRE Rule 803(b)(6).  State's
Exhibits 5 and 8 are Eligibility Review (ER) forms filled out and
submitted to DHS by Ponce, dated January 16, 2013 and January 24,
2014, respectively.  In order to continue receiving food stamp
benefits, later referred to as Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP) benefits,2 ER forms are automatically mailed to
welfare benefit recipients a year after an initial Application
for Financial and SNAP Assistance is processed.  ER forms are
blank pre-printed forms in which the applicant responds to
questions with respect to any changes which may have transpired
in the preceding year affecting eligibility.  Applicants must
complete the ER form by reviewing their eligibility information
contained in the form and by listing, among other things, any
changes to the applicant's household composition, income, and
assets.  If changes occur, DHS makes adjustments to the
applicants eligible benefits.  After the applicant completes the
ER form, it can be mailed, faxed, or brought directly to DHS's
processing center where a DHS clerk registers the ER form and
assigns an eligibility worker to schedule an in-person or over-
the-phone interview for the purpose of reviewing the submitted
form with the applicant.
The initial eligibility worker assigned to Ponce's case
to review her 2013 and 2014 ER forms was Edison Espiritu
(Espiritu), who was, at the time of trial, on vacation and unable
to testify.  At trial, David Kihara (Kihara), a DHS eligibility
worker, testified as the custodian of records for DHS.  Kihara
had been employed by DHS as an eligibility worker for thirty-five
years, in which the past ten years his responsibilities included,
reviewing DHS cases to determine eligibility factors, ensuring
the accuracy of eligibility benefits, and computing corrected
amounts if an overpayment was made.
Kihara testified that case files for all welfare
2  After 2010, the Food Stamps Program became known as the federal
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
benefit recipients are kept and maintained by DHS.  Records that
are kept in the case file include, all applications, reporting
systems, changes reported, and any supporting documentation
submitted by the recipient, which include the annual ER forms.
The ER forms are used by DHS to determine household composition
and the income of applicants to allow for proper assessment of
the amount a recipient is entitled to receive in benefits.  As to
State's Exhibit 5 and 8, Kihara testified that both forms were
filled out and signed by Ponce and were prepared in the course of
DHS's regularly conducted activity as an annual assessment and
determination of SNAP eligibility benefits.  He stated that
State's Exhibits 5 and 8 were the types of forms that would be
kept in the case file for all welfare recipients and the types of
records that are regularly maintained and updated.  Kihara
further testified that the ER forms are the types of records that
are entered into a recipients case file at the time that they are
received or made.
Ponce contends that State's Exhibit 5 and 8 should not
have been admitted under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) because they were not
records made in the regular course of business and rather were
prepared primarily in anticipation of litigation.  See Palmer v.
Hoffman, 318 U.S. 109, 63 S.Ct. 477, (1943).  In Palmer , the
Supreme Court held that an accident report prepared by a railroad
employee following a railroad accident was not a business record
because it was not made in the regular course of business.  Id.
at 115, 63 S.Ct. at 481.  The Supreme Court explained that the
regularity with which the reports are prepared did not by itself
mandate admissibility.  Id. at 111-12, 63 S.Ct. at 479-80.
Rather, the records should first appear to be required "for the
systematic conduct of the business as a business."  Id.  at 113,
63 S.Ct. at 480.
Ponce asserts that the inclusion of warnings of
criminal penalties along with a certification required by both
recipient and eligibility worker attesting to the truthfulness of
the form, clearly indicate that the forms will likely be used in
the prosecution of a recipient, should the need arise.  The ER
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
form states, in relevant part:
YOUR AUTHORIZATION :
• I agree that the information I provide to the
Department will be subject to verification by Federal,
State and local officials to determine if such
information is factual; and if any information is
incorrect, food assistance may be denied and I may be
subject to criminal prosecution for knowingly
providing incorrect information.  
I UNDERSTAND :
1.  The questions on this form and the penalty for hiding
or giving false information.
. . . .
6. If I do not report a change that is required to be
reported, or report incorrectly, and am overpaid:
a) I must repay the department.
b) I may be fined, imprisoned, and/or disqualified 
from receiving benefits in the future.
c) I may be subject to prosecution under applicable
state and/or federal laws.
YOUR CERTIFICATION (Must be signed to be considered a valid
application):
• I certify under penalty of perjury, that my answers
are correct and complete to the best of my knowledge.
• I certify that I have been informed of my rights and
responsibilities by the worker and I agree to heed
these responsibilities.
Additionally, the eligibility worker that is assigned to the
recipient's case upon receiving the ER form is also required to
certify that "the applicant/recipient has been informed of
his/her rights and responsibilities and the possibility of
criminal charges for misrepresenting or concealing facts which
determine eligibility."
In State v. Fitzwater , 122 Hawai #i 354, 227 P.3d 520
(2010), the Hawai# i Supreme Court distinguished between business
records made in the "regular course" of business and those that
are prepared for the sole purpose of litigation in its
admissibility determination of a police officer's speed check
card used to prove the accuracy of the police vehicle's
speedometer.  The supreme court held that although there was an
understanding that the results of a speed check would likely be
used in the prosecution of speeding cases, the card could still
qualify as a business record under HRE Rule 803(b)(6).  Id.  at
364, 227 P.3d at 530.  The supreme court explained that "[t]he
speed check card here was not created for use in a particular
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
dispute.  Rather, the speed check card is more akin to documents
that reflect the results of regularly conducted tests, which have
been held to be admissible as business or government records even
if they are frequently used in litigation."  Id.
Similar to the speed check card in Fitzwater , although
the ER forms are the type of business records that are likely to
be used in litigation, the ER forms are not created for use in a
particular dispute nor are they "created with the motivation of
prevailing against a particular party" making its
"trustworthiness [] inherently questionable."  Id.   ER forms are
systematically utilized by DHS on a daily basis to establish a
recipient's eligibility for SNAP benefits.  The ER form's primary
function is to determine and/or confirm the recipient's household
composition and income to assess the amount of benefits the
applicant is entitled to receive for the upcoming year.  Further,
Kihara's testimony established the foundation necessary for the
admissibility of the ER Forms as business records.  Accordingly,
the circuit court properly admitted State's Exhibit 5 and 8 as
business records pursuant to HRE Rule 803(b)(6).
Business records are not testimonial.  Crawford v.
Washington, 541 U.S. 36, 56 (2004).  Because we hold that State's
Exhibits 5 and 8 were properly admitted as a business record, and
were not testimonial, we conclude that the Exhibits did not
violate the confrontation clause.  See U.S. v. Ray , 930 F.2d
1368, 1371 (9th Cir. 1990)(holding that a welfare fraud
investigator's testimony was sufficient to establish foundational
requirements under the business record exception to hearsay
regarding a recipient's welfare records, which included the
recipients application for benefits reviewed by an eligibility
worker, and that the properly admitted exhibits did not violate
the confrontation clause); See also Terry v. State , 397 S.W.3d
823, 835 (Tex. App. 2013)(finding that the primary purpose for a
caseworker's generic worksheets generated following a welfare
recipient's interview, is to document recipient's statements to
determine eligibility and the amount of an applicant's SNAP
benefits and holding that the statements contained in the
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
worksheets are not testimonial, therefore its admission did not
violate recipient's rights under the Confrontation Clause).
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the circuit
court did not err by admitting State's Exhibits 5 and 8 under HRE
Rule 803(b)(6) and holding that the exhibits were not
testimonial.
II. The Prosecution Presented Sufficient Evidence to Support The
Guilty Verdict
We review the sufficiency of evidence on appeal as follows:
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or jury.  The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai #i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998)
(quoting State v. Quitog , 85 Hawai #i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576
(1997)).  "'Substantial evidence' as to every material element of
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
caution to support a conclusion."  Id. (citation omitted).
The jury found Ponce guilty of Theft in the Second
Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 708-
831(1)(b) and 708-830(2).
HRS § 708-831 (2014) provides in relevant part:
§708-831  Theft in the second degree . (1) A person
commits the offense of theft in the second degree if the
person commits theft:
. . . .
(b) Of property or services the value of which exceeds
$300[.]
HRS § 708-830 (2014) defines "theft" in relevant part:
§ 708-830  Theft . A person commits theft if the person
does any of the following:
. . . .
(2) Property obtained or control exerted through
deception. A person obtains, or exerts control
over, the property of another by deception with
intent to deprive the other of the property.
The evidence provided at trial indicates that Ponce
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
exerted control over the property of another from April 1, 2010
through April 30, 2014.  Kihara reviewed Ponce's entire public
assistance case file, which included all of her DHS applications,
verification records, report of earnings, eligibility review
forms and DHS's investigation report on Ponce.  Kihara was also
assigned to review Ponce's electronic benefits transaction (EBT)
activity printout and an overpayment schedule prepared by DHS
Eligibility Worker, Nena Vallejo (Vallejo) who was unavailable to
testify at trial.  Kihara stated that he had performed his own
independent calculation as to the overpayment amount by
determining the amount Ponce should have received and comparing
it against what she had actually received.  Kihara testified that
after reviewing Ponce's case file, he was able to confirm that
from April 1, 2010 through April 30, 2014, Ponce was receiving
welfare assistance in the amount of $3,723 to which she was not
entitled to.  Kihara testified that the overpayment resulted from
Ponce's failure to report her marriage to Smith in March 2010.
Additionally, there was substantial evidence to support
a finding that Ponce engaged in deception to acquire benefits to
which she was not entitled to.  HRS § 708-800 (2014) provides:
§ 708-800  Definitions of terms in this chapter.
. . . . 
"Deception" occurs when a person knowingly:
(1) Creates or confirms another's impression which
is false and which the defendant does not
believe to be true;
(2) Fails to correct a false impression which the
person previously has created or confirmed[.]
Ponce appears to argue that the State did not prove the
element of "deception" because the State failed to present any
evidence that Ponce possessed the requisite intent to deceive
DHS, i.e. that from April 1, 2010 through April 30, 2014, Ponce
had actual knowledge of what she would have received had she
reported her marriage to DHS and deliberately chose not to
disclose her marriage or correct DHS's impression that Smith was
a non-related co-habitant.
Given the difficulty of proving the requisite state of mind
by direct evidence in criminal cases, "[w]e have
consistently held that . . . proof by circumstantial
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
evidence and reasonable inferences arising from
circumstances surrounding the [defendant's conduct] is
sufficient . . . .  Thus, the mind of an alleged offender
may be read from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly
drawn from all the circumstances."  State v. Sadino , 64 Haw.
427, 430, 642 P.2d 534, 536-37 (1982) (citations omitted);
See also State v. Simpson , 64 Haw. 363, 373 n.7, 641 P.2d
320, 326 n.7 (1982).
State v. Staley, 91 Hawai #i 275, 286, 982 P.2d 904, 915 (1999)
(citations omitted).
In this case, DHS Eligibility Workers, Imelda
Makishima, Dustan Canne, David Kihara, and Jacqueline Kaleiwahea
all testified that Ponce was orally advised of her rights,
responsibilities, and her continuing duty to disclose changes in
her household that affect sources of income, including her
marital status.  Ponce submitted an Application for Financial and
Food Stamps Assistance in 2010, an Application for Financial and
SNAP Assistance in 2011, and ER Forms for 2012, 2013, and 2014,
all indicating that Smith was either a friend, caregiver, or
roommate.
Furthermore, at trial, Ponce confirmed that she had
been receiving food stamp/SNAP benefits since 1983.  Ponce
acknowledged that she was previously married in 1983 and at that
time, she had informed DHS of her marriage and identified her
husband as a household member in her welfare case.  In regards to
the State's Exhibits that were entered into evidence at trial,
Ponce testified that she was the one who filled out all the
applications for welfare benefits, the signatures on the exhibits
were hers, the letters and other documents submitted to DHS were
hers, she had received the EBT card from DHS, and she received
the benefits as shown on the EBT printout.  Ponce testified that
she was aware that she was required to report her marriage with
Smith and acknowledged that instead she had listed Smith as
either her friend, caregiver, roommate and/or indicated that her
marital status was single in the DHS applications and ER Forms
submitted by her.
Based on the foregoing, considering the evidence in the
strongest light for the prosecution, we conclude that there was
substantial evidence to support the conclusion that Ponce
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
deceived DHS by failing to report her marriage to Smith, thereby
obtaining SNAP benefits in excess of $300 to which she was not
entitled, as a result of that deception.
III. The Circuit Court Properly Denied Ponce's Motion for
Judgment of Acquittal
Based on our holding that the evidence presented at
trial was sufficient to sustain Ponce's conviction, we conclude
that the circuit court did not err when it denied Ponce's Motion
for Judgment of Acquittal.  State v. Davalos , 113 Hawai #i 385,
389, 153 P.3d 456, 460 (2007) (quoting State v. Okumura , 78
Hawai#i 383, 403 n.15, 894 P.2d 80, 100 n.15 (1995) (stating that
"[a]lthough different language is sometimes used to describe the
standard of review when the denial of a motion for judgment of
acquittal is appealed, the test on appeal is actually identical--
if there was sufficient evidence to support the conviction, the
motion for judgment of acquittal was properly denied; if there
was insufficient evidence, the denial of the motion was error")).
IV. The Circuit Court Properly Denied Ponce's Motion for New
Trial
Ponce contends that the circuit court abused its
discretion in denying her motion for new trial, based on "newly
discovered evidence," specifically, the discovery of Ponce's
inability to read after trial at the hearing on her Motion for
New Trial on December 29, 2016.  Ponce argues that had the
evidence of her inability to read been available at trial, it
would have been further investigated to determine whether it
affected her filling out and signing of documents and used to
prove that she did not have the requisite state of mind for the
charge of theft.
A motion for new trial based on newly discovered evidence
will only be granted if (1) the evidence has been discovered
after trial; (2) such evidence could not have been
discovered before or at trial through the exercise of due
diligence; (3) the evidence is material to the issues and
not cumulative or offered solely for purposes of
impeachment; and (4) the evidence is of such a nature as
would probably change the result of a later trial.
State v. Mabuti , 72 Haw. 106, 113, 807 P.2d 1264, 1268 (1991).
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Ponce's post-trial admission of her inability to read
does not constitute newly discovered evidence in the context of a
motion for a new trial because Ponce was aware of her inability
to read at all times before trial, at trial, and after trial.
Additionally, the evidence is not material to the issues nor
would it have changed the result of a later trial.  Upon DHS
receiving Ponce's Applications and ER Forms for welfare benefits,
the Eligibility Worker assigned to her case would review Ponce's
submission with her to verify her responses during which time
Ponce always confirmed that Smith was nothing more than a non-
related co-habitant rather than her husband.  During these in-
person or telephone interviews, Ponce was orally instructed of
her rights and responsibilities, the requirement to report any
changes in household or income, and requirement to report
truthfully.  Further, prior to Ponce's initial interview in 2010,
Ponce was required to watch an instructional video on the welfare
system.  All evidence indicating that the ability to read was not
necessary to establish the requisite intent to deceive.
Based on the foregoing, we hold that the circuit court
did not abuse its discretion in denying the Motion for New Trial.
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of
Conviction and Sentence, entered on January 10, 2017, by the
Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 17, 2018.
On the briefs:
Dana S. Ishibashi,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Karen Droscoski,
Deputy Attorney General,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Acting Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
11