NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-13-0000252 AND CAAP-13-0001096
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CAAP-13-0000252
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ALATAUA S. FANENE, Defendant-Appellant
 
AND
 
CAAP-13-0001096
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MICHAEL K. SANCHEZ, also known as "Black",
Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
ALATAUA S. FANENE and SEAN D. WALLACE,
Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CR. NO. 11-1-0356)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendants-Appellants Alataua S. Fanene (Fanene) and Michael K.
 
Sanchez (Sanchez), along with co-defendant Sean D. Wallace
 (Wallace), in an eleven-count indictment. The State alleged that
 Fanene and Sanchez kidnapped the complaining witness (CW), beat
 him, robbed him, and stole his van. It also alleged that Wallace
 was an accomplice to the kidnapping and robbery.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fanene and Sanchez were both charged with attempted
 
first-degree assault (Count 1); first-degree robbery (Count 2);
 
kidnapping (Count 3); and unauthorized control of a propelled
 vehicle (UCPV) (Count 6 for Sanchez and Count 7 for Fanene). 
Fanene was additionally charged with four counts of carrying or
 use of a firearm in the commission of a separate felony (Counts
 4, 5, 8, and 9). Wallace was charged with being an accomplice to
 first-degree robbery (Count 10) and being an accomplice to
 kidnapping (Count 11).
 
The indictment was returned on March 16, 2011. Wallace
 
pleaded guilty pursuant to a cooperation agreement and testified
 for the State at trial. After numerous continuances, trial was
 set for the week of December 3, 2012. Fanene and Sanchez waived
 their right to a jury, and they agreed to a bench trial before
 the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 On the
 
day before trial, Fanene made a request to substitute privately-
retained counsel for his court-appointed counsel if the Circuit
 Court was willing to continue the trial. The Circuit Court
 denied the request for a trial continuance, and Fanene proceeded
 to trial with his appointed counsel.
 
At the close of the evidence, the Circuit Court found
 
Fanene and Sanchez guilty as charged of attempted first-degree
 assault, kidnapping, and UCPV, and guilty of the included offense
 of second-degree robbery. The Circuit Court further found that
 the second-degree robbery count (Count 2) merged into the
 kidnapping count (Count 3), and it acquitted Fanene of the
 firearms offenses. The Circuit Court sentenced Fanene and
 Sanchez to imprisonment of ten years for attempted first-degree
 assault, twenty years for kidnapping, and five years for UCPV,
 all terms to run concurrently with each other and to any other
 sentence they were serving. The Circuit Court also imposed
 mandatory minimum terms of incarceration on Sanchez based on his
 status as a repeat offender. The Circuit Court entered its
 
1The Honorable Michael D. Wilson presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Judgment as to Fanene on February 26, 2013, and its Judgment as
 
to Sanchez on April 11, 2013.
 
On appeal, Fanene and Sanchez argue that there was
 
insufficient evidence to support their convictions for attempted
 first-degree assault. Fanene also contends that the Circuit
 Court abused its discretion in denying his motion to continue
 trial, "thereby in effect denying [Fanene] his choice of private
 counsel." (Capitalization altered.)
2 As explained below, we
 
affirm the Circuit Court's Judgments.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The CW moved to Hawai 'i in 1986 and graduated from 
Waialua High School in 1996. In 2001, he became disabled after a car accident, and he collected disability benefits while living with his mother. After his mother died in 2005, the CW became homeless. In 2011, he purchased a Dodge van, modified the interior, and began living in the van. The CW kept all his belongings in the van, including a "BB gun" made of plastic and a "miniature bat" that was about two feet long and made of wood. As part of his daily routine, the CW would stay with other homeless people at Kaiaka Beach Park during the day until the park closed at 6:45 p.m., then drive his van to Hale
'iwa Harbor. 
When the harbor closed at 10:00 p.m., the CW would drive his van and park it at Hale
'iwa Beach Park at a place known as "Walls," 
which was an area where homeless people parked at night. 
The CW testified that on March 5, 2011, at around 10:30
 
p.m., he was parked at "Walls." The CW saw Fanene and Sanchez
 being dropped off by a third person. The CW recognized Fanene
 because Fanene's mother, who was homeless like the CW and parked
 at "Walls" during the night, was the CW's friend and Fanene would
 come to visit his mother. Fanene and Sanchez approached the CW,
 and Fanene asked the CW if Fanene could buy drugs for $10. The
 
2By order filed on May 7, 2014, the separate appeals filed by Fanene and
Sanchez were consolidated for disposition. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
CW sold Fanene $20 worth of "ice" for $10. Fanene and Sanchez
 
asked if they could smoke the "ice" in the CW's van, and the CW
 agreed. After Fanene and Sanchez finished smoking, they asked
 the CW if he could drive them to meet their friend. The CW
 agreed, and he drove them and parked behind a car they identified
 as their friend's car.
 
As the CW turned to shake their hands and say goodbye,
 
Fanene and Sanchez suddenly attacked. Fanene punched the CW in
 the mouth, and Fanene and Sanchez pulled the CW from the driver's
 seat to the back of the van. While the CW lay on his side,
 Fanene and Sanchez punched the CW and demanded drugs and money. 
Fanene and Sanchez continued to strike the CW with fists and a
 wooden bat, while demanding "[W]here's the shit?" "[W]here's the
 stuff?" and searching the CW's pockets. Sanchez used the wooden
 bat to "whack" the CW in the eye and the head, and the CW
 estimated that Fanene and Sanchez each struck him about ten
 times. The CW felt pain "just all on my head" and also on his
 body.
 
At some point, the CW was held face down in the back of
 
his van, with Fanene putting his knee on the CW's back. Fanene
 and Sanchez pulled the CW's hands behind his back and bound them
 so the CW could not move his arms. They continued to strike the
 CW as they were tying him up. Fanene and Sanchez took about $400
 and an eighth of an ounce of "ice" that the CW was keeping in his
 van.
 
After the CW's hands were bound, Fanene continued to
 
hold the CW down in the back of the van while Sanchez drove the
 van away. Based on the conversation between Fanene and Sanchez,
 the CW believed they were looking for a place to "dump" him. The
 CW testified that he felt Fanene place a gun against the CW's
 head, pointed at his left temple. Fanene told the CW to "shut
 up, don't move," or he was going to "get it." Fanene advised the
 CW that Fanene was holding a gun and that it was "the real thing" 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and "not like your little pellet gun." The CW was scared and
 
thought he "was going [to] die."
 
The van stopped, and Fanene and Sanchez switched
 
places, with Fanene driving. Eventually, the van stopped again. 
Fanene pulled the CW out of the van and walked him into some
 bushes. It was dark, "[l]ike pitch black[,]" with "[n]o lights
 around[,]" and the CW did not know where he was. The CW's "lip,
 . . . head and stuff" were bleeding, and he felt dizzy. The CW's
 hands remained tied behind his back. Fanene walked the CW to a
 "certain spot," pushed the CW down, hit him a "[c]ouple times" in
 the head, and warned the CW to stay there and not to come out. 
The CW lost consciousness.
 
The CW regained consciousness in the "middle of the
 
day, probably early." He was in bushes and there was "all
 California grass" around him. The CW was fatigued and exhausted. 
His hands were still bound and he did not know where he was. The
 CW again lost consciousness. He recalled being dizzy, which he
 attributed to the loss of blood from bleeding "plenty." When the
 CW regained consciousness a second time, it appeared to be around
 noon time. About 36 hours had passed from the time the CW was
 first abducted until he regained consciousness the second time.
 
Upon regaining consciousness the second time, the CW 
kept moving his hands and was able to free himself. He was able
 to walk from the bushes where he had been dumped to a residence
 where he asked for water. A friend drove by and gave the CW a
 ride back to Kaiaka Beach Park. When the CW arrived at Kaiaka
 Beach Park, it was already 2:30 in the afternoon on March 7,
 2011. At the park, the CW reported what had happened to him to
 the police. The police had been looking for the CW because Abel
 Abrojina (Abrojina), a friend of the CW, had reported him missing
 earlier that morning. 
Abrojina testified that Fanene and another person were
 
dropped off at "Walls" one evening. The next morning, Abrojina 
did not see the CW's van parked in its usual place. Abrojina
 began looking for the CW's van, and later that night, he located
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the van parked near a gymnasium with no one around. Belongings 
that the CW normally kept in the van appeared to be missing, and the keys were still in the ignition. Abrojina drove the van to Hale
'iwa Beach Park, and he notified a police officer that the CW 
was missing and that there was blood in the CW's van. 
On March 7, 2011, at about 4:30 a.m., Honolulu Police
 
Department (HPD) Officer Christopher Reid (Officer Reid) was
 informed by Abrojina that the CW was missing. Abrojina showed
 Officer Reid the CW's van. Officer Reid examined the CW's van
 and observed a "large amount of blood in the van[.]" Officer
 Reid testified, "it looked like somebody was bleeding heavily in
 the van because there was a big, almost still wet puddle of blood
 in the middle of the van on the rug."
 
II.
 
Pursuant to a cooperation agreement, Wallace testified 
for the State. Wallace testified that he spent the day on March 5, 2011, driving Fanene around and smoking "ice" and marijuana with him. During the evening, Wallace picked up Sanchez at Fanene's request, and all three of them smoked "ice" where Sanchez was staying. At about 10:30 p.m., Wallace dropped off Fanene and Sanchez at Hale
'iwa Beach Park at a place called 
"Walls." Fanene told Wallace to drive up the road and wait, and Wallace did so because he expected to receive a "bag of weed" for driving Fanene around that day. 
Later, Fanene, Sanchez, and the CW arrived in a Dodge
 
van and parked fifteen to twenty feet behind Wallace's car. 
Wallace saw the van "shaking" and went to investigate. Through
 the partially opened passenger-side door, Wallace saw that Fanene
 was on top of the CW and that the CW was "getting beaten up." 
Wallace heard "a lot of yelling and screaming and shouting[,]"
 which sounded like the beating was painful. Wallace heard Fanene
 telling the CW to "Give me the shit." Fanene noticed that
 Wallace was there and demanded that Wallace "get back in [your]
 fuckin' car." Wallace was scared and complied with Fanene's
 demand.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Subsequently, Fanene and Sanchez drove the van away and
 
told Wallace to follow them and that they were looking for a
 
place to "dump this guy." Wallace followed the van until it
 stopped near a burned-down clubhouse at Poamoho Camp. Wallace
 saw Fanene and Sanchez get out of the van and open the sliding
 door, but from his vantage point could not see whether they took
 anything out. Wallace eventually saw Fanene and Sanchez return
 to the van. Wallace thought the CW was dead.
 
Wallace then followed the van until it stopped at the
 
back of the Whitmore Village gym. Fanene and Sanchez removed
 things from the van and put them in Wallace's car. Wallace then
 drove the three of them away and they later divided the items
 taken from the van.
 
After the incident, both Fanene and Sanchez talked to
 
Wallace about what they had done to the CW in the van. Fanene
 told Wallace that he had "stomped the guy" and showed Wallace
 blood on Fanene's pants. Sanchez told Wallace that it "felt good
 to hit [the CW]."
 
III.
 
The State called T.F., who was Fanene's girlfriend and
 
the mother of his child. T.F. had provided the police with a
 recorded interview statement on March 10, 2011. In her recorded
 statement, T.F. told the police that when she found out that the
 police were looking for Fanene regarding an "attempted murder and
 that robbery[,]" she called him. T.F. stated that "[Fanene] told
 me he killed the guy, but he didn't do no robbery, he tried to
 kill the guy, but he left not knowing the guy wasn't dead." She
 told the police that Fanene said "[Fanene] attacked [the guy],
 tried to kill him" and that Fanene said he "wanted to kill the
 guy." T.F. stated that in a subsequent phone call, she told
 Fanene that the guy was not dead. T.F. stated that Fanene did
 not say anything in response, and she stated that "[h]e thought
 the guy was dead." T.F. also hand-wrote next to a picture of
 Fanene, "This is my boyfriend Alataua Fanene as know as taua,
 he's the one who told me he killed [the CW] 5 days ago. And I
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
also been dating taua for 6 months but I know him for 2 years." 
T.F. signed and dated this written statement.
 
At trial, T.F. recanted these statements that she had
 
made to the police. T.F. testified at trial that Fanene
 "basically just told me that nothing happened" and she denied
 that Fanene had ever told her he had killed the guy or thought he
 had killed the guy. The State confronted T.F. with the prior
 inconsistent statements she had made to the police. However,
 T.F. testified that her statements to the police were lies, and
 that she had lied to the police because she was angry at Fanene
 and afraid of the police.
 
The State called HPD Officer Alan Oku (Officer Oku),
 
who had obtained the recorded interview statement and the written
 statements from T.F. Officer Oku authenticated the transcript of
 the recorded statement (Exhibit 116) and T.F.'s written statement
 (Exhibit 117). The State then offered T.F.'s prior inconsistent
 statements as set forth in Exhibits 116 and 117 as substantive
 evidence under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rules 802.1 and
 613(b) (1993). The Circuit Court admitted Exhibits 116 and 117
 as prior inconsistent statements over the objection of Fanene and
 Sanchez.
 
IV.
 
The defense called Dr. Oakley Davis (Dr. Davis), the
 
emergency room physician who treated the CW. Dr. Davis treated
 the CW at the Wahiawa General Hospital Emergency Room on March 7,
 2011, after the CW had spoken to the police. Dr. Davis testified
 that his final diagnosis of the CW was "facial contusions and
 abrasions, scalp lacerations, and a closed head injury." Dr.
 Davis identified the injuries to the CW as "a 1.5-centimeter
 semicircular laceration to the left superior scalp[,]"
 "half-centimeter laceration to the right forehead at the
 hairline, contusion and abrasions to the lips, contusion to the
 left eye, and blood in the right external nares, basically in the
 nose, dry blood." In filling out a form provided by the police,
 Dr. Davis concluded that the CW's injuries amounted to
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"substantial bodily injury" because the injury did "cause a major
 
avulsion, laceration, or penetration of the skin[.]" In this
 regard, Dr. Davis noted the CW's scalp laceration. Dr. Davis
 concluded that the CW's injuries did not amount to "serious
 bodily injury" because they did not "create a substantial risk of
 death"; "cause any serious permanent disfigurement"; or cause
 "protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily
 member or organ[.]" The CW was released from the hospital the
 same day he was treated by Dr. Davis. 
Dr. Davis stated that based on the information he had
 
been provided, at least 36 hours had elapsed between the time the
 CW's injuries were inflicted and the CW was treated at the
 hospital. Dr. Davis noted that the CW reported that he had been
 assaulted on the night of March 5th and that he had managed to
 free himself on the morning of March 7th. Dr. Davis explained
 that he decided not to suture the CW's wounds because: "you don't
 want to suture a wound that could be contaminated and get
 infected; you don't generally want to suture wounds at 36 hours;
 and based on their size, they were already closing on their own,
 so it was not necessary[.]" 
Dr. Davis testified that there are potential dangers
 
attendant to the loss of consciousness:
 
If you're unconscious, there's a potential that you will be
unable to breathe appropriately if you're in a position that
blocks your airway with resulting loss of oxygen to the
brain which can itself result in a brain injury. Also some
 risk of aspirating, which means vomiting -- basically vomit
or blood, for that matter, going into your airway also
causing a loss of oxygen to the brain and subsequent damage.
 
Dr. Davis stated that the potential risks of an unconscious 
person's breathing being obstructed are increased if the unconscious person is (1) lying face down; (2) in heavy brush like the weeds along Kamehameha Highway in Hale
'iwa; and (3) with 
his arms tied behind his back. Dr. Davis noted that if someone is rendered unconscious for a prolonged period of time, brain damage due to hypoxia, or oxygen deficiency, is a potential danger. Dr. Davis explained that there is a concern about a 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
person vomiting while unconscious because head injuries can cause
 
vomiting and an unconscious person cannot clear their own airway. 
Dr. Davis stated if a person were unconscious for "a
day," it would present a risk of breathing problems, hypoxia, and
 the potential of aspiration of vomit. The risk of death would be
 increased if the person was unconscious for that time period face
 down with his hands tied behind his back in a heavily vegetated
 area. Dr. Davis also stated that a person's scalp is "very
 vascular" and that he would expect to see heavy bleeding from the
 lacerations the CW sustained to his scalp and forehead.
 

 
V.

 
At the conclusion of the bench trial, the Circuit Court
found Fanene and Sanchez guilty of attempted first-degree
 assault, the included offense of second-degree robbery,
 kidnapping, and UCPV. The Circuit Court merged the second-degree
 robbery count into the kidnapping count. The Circuit Court made
 the following pertinent findings:
 

 
After reviewing the relevant evidence, including the
exhibits and the testimony offered in this case, the Court
finds that on the evening of March 5th, 2011, Defendants
Fanene and Sanchez did hold [the CW] against his will,
subjecting him to beating within his van that continued
intermittently until his release on the morning of March 6,
2011. The beating was done in concert by Mr. Fanene and Mr.
Sanchez. It included repeated blows to the body and head of
[the CW]. A small bat was used by Defendant Sanchez to
strike [the CW] repeatedly in the head. 

The beating caused extensive bleeding, and I mean the
beating inflicted by both Mr. Fanene and Mr. Sanchez. It
 did cause extensive bleeding from [the CW's] head.
Notwithstanding the bleeding, both Mr. Fanene and Mr.
Sanchez continued to beat [the CW] about the head and body.
 
During the beating, [the CW] was threatened with death
by Mr. Fanene with the knowledge of Mr. Sanchez. The threat
 included the threat to use a gun to kill [the CW]. 
[The CW's] hands were tied behind his back by
Defendant Fanene while he lay bleeding in his van. He was
 released by Mr. Fanene while bleeding with hands tied behind
his back in a field near Poamoho Camp. Mr. Fanene struck
 [the CW] on the head after he was forced to lie in the
field. [The CW] was bleeding from his head at the time.
 
Mr. Fanene and Mr. Sanchez drove [the CW's] car

without authorization. Over $400 in cash, electronic 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
equipment, and drugs belonging to [the CW] were taken from
[the CW] without his consent by Mr. Fanene and Mr. Sanchez.
 
Dr. Oakley Davis' testimony established that [the CW]
experienced lacerations and contusions to his eyes, lip,
forehead, and scalp.
 
In finding Fanene and Sanchez guilty of attempted
 
first-degree assault, the Circuit Court stated:
 
With respect to Count I, the Court finds that on or about
the 5th day of March, 2011, to and including the 6th day of
March, 2011, in the City and County of Honolulu, State of
Hawaii, Alataua S. Fanene and Michael K. Sanchez did
intentionally engage in conduct which is a substantial step
in a course of conduct intended or known to cause serious
 bodily injury to [the CW], thereby committing the offense of
attempted assault in the first degree in violation of
Section 705-500 and 707-710 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
A.
 
On appeal, both Fanene and Sanchez argue that there was
 
insufficient evidence to support their convictions for attempted
 first-degree assault. We apply the following standard of review
 to such challenge:
 
In reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence on
appeal, we view the evidence in the light most favorable to
the prosecution. State v. Ildefonso, 72 Haw. 573, 576, 827
P.2d 648, 651 (1992).

 
The same standard applies whether the case was before
a judge or a jury. 
The test on appeal is not whether guilt
is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there
was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the
trier of fact. Indeed, even if it could be said in a bench
trial that the conviction is against the weight of the
evidence, as long as there is substantial evidence to
support the requisite findings for conviction, the trial
court will be affirmed.
 
"Substantial evidence" as to every material element of
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
reasonable caution to support a conclusion. And as trier of
 fact, the trial judge is free to make all reasonable and
rational inferences under the facts in evidence, including
circumstantial evidence.
 
State v. Hoe, 122 Hawai 'i 347, 349, 226 P.3d 517, 519 (App. 2010) 
(block quote format altered; citation and brackets omitted). 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Regarding proof of intent, "it is an elementary
 
principle of law that intent may be proved by circumstantial
 
evidence; that the element of intent can rarely be shown by
 direct evidence; and it may be shown by a reasonable inference
 arising from the circumstances surrounding the act." State v.
 
Hopkins, 60 Haw. 540, 544, 592 P.2d 810, 812-13 (1979) (internal
 quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted).
 
B.
 
The completed offense of first-degree assault requires
 
that the defendant "intentionally or knowingly causes serious
 bodily injury to another person." Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 707-710 (1993). The term "serious bodily injury" is defined as
 follows:
 
"Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury which
creates a substantial risk of death or which causes serious,
permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of
the function of any bodily member or organ.
 
HRS § 707-700 (1993).
 
In this case, Fanene and Sanchez were not charged with
 
the completed offense of first-degree assault, but rather with
 
the offense of attempted first-degree assault. HRS § 705-500
 (1993), which proscribes criminal attempts, provides in relevant
 part:
 
(2) When causing a particular result is an element of
the crime, a person is guilty of an attempt to commit the
crime if, acting with the state of mind required to
establish liability with respect to the attendant
circumstances specified in the definition of the crime, the
person intentionally engages in conduct which is a
substantial step in a course of conduct intended or known to
cause such a result.
 
(3) Conduct shall not be considered a substantial step
under this section unless it is strongly corroborative of
the defendant's criminal intent.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
C.
 
Fanene and Sanchez assert that although the State
 
established that the CW sustained substantial bodily injury, it
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failed to prove that the CW sustained serious bodily injury.3
 
Fanene and Sanchez argue that because the State failed to adduce
 
substantial evidence that the CW had suffered serious bodily
 injury, the Circuit Court erred in concluding that they were
 guilty of attempted first-degree assault. 
This argument misses the mark. Proof of serious bodily
 
injury is only necessary to establish the completed offense of
 first-degree assault. Fanene and Sanchez, however, were charged
 with attempted first-degree assault, which does not require proof
 that they actually caused serious bodily injury, but rather that
 they "intentionally engage[d] in conduct which [was] a
 substantial step in a course of conduct intended or known to
 cause" serious bodily injury. See HRS §§ 705-500, 707-710. In
 
other words, for an attempted first-degree assault, the focus is
 not on the injury the defendant actually causes, but on the
 injury which the defendant intended to cause. Accordingly, the
 State could establish the charged first-degree assault through
 proof that Fanene and Sanchez intentionally took a substantial
 step in a course of conduct intended to cause serious bodily
 injury.
 
When viewed in the light most favorable to
 
the State, we conclude that there was sufficient evidence to
 
3A person commits the offense of second-degree assault by, among other
means, "intentionally or knowingly causing substantial bodily injury to
another[.]" HRS § 707-711(a) (1993). The term "substantial bodily injury" is
defined as follows: 
"Substantial bodily injury" means bodily injury which causes:
 
(1) A major avulsion, laceration, or penetration of the
skin; 
(2) A burn of at least second degree severity; 
(3) A bone fracture; 
(4) A serious concussion; or 
(5) A tearing, rupture, or corrosive damage to theesophagus, viscera, or other internal organs.
 
HRS § 707-700 (Supp. 2013).
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
support the Circuit Court's finding that Fanene and Sanchez were
 
guilty of attempted first-degree assault. The evidence showed
 that Fanene and Sanchez, acting in concert, beat the CW with
 their fists and a wooden bat, repeatedly striking him in the
 head, and causing the extensive loss of blood. Officer Reid's
 testimony that "there was a big, almost still wet puddle of blood
 in the middle of the van on the rug" more than 24 hours after the
 assault shows that the CW had been bleeding heavily. Fanene and
 Sanchez tied the CW's hands behind his back and took him to a
 heavily vegetated area, where Fanene pushed the CW down and
 delivered more blows to the CW's head. The CW lost consciousness
 and, while regaining consciousness once, appears to have been
 unconscious for at least twenty-four hours. Before Fanene
 learned that the CW was still alive, Fanene told his girlfriend
 that he killed the CW. Fanene also told his girlfriend that he
 tried and wanted to kill the CW, and that he had left the CW "not
 knowing [the CW] wasn't dead."
 
In addition, Dr. Davis, the emergency room doctor who
 
treated the CW, testified that the CW had suffered lacerations
 and contusions to his eyes, lip, forehead, and scalp, and that
 the CW's head wounds would cause extensive bleeding. Dr. Davis
 opined that if a person was rendered unconscious for "a day," it
 would present a risk of breathing problems, hypoxia, and the
 potential of aspiration of vomit. Dr. Davis further opined that
 the circumstances indicated by the evidence in this case -- a
 person rendered unconscious for a prolonged period of time, lying
 face down, in heavy vegetation, with his hands tied behind his
 back -- created an increased risk of death.
 
Based on the evidence presented, the Circuit Court
 
could reasonably find that Fanene and Sanchez intentionally took
 a substantial step in a course of conduct intended to "create[] a
 substantial risk of death" or cause "protracted loss or
 impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ." HRS 
§ 707-700 (1993). Viewed in the strongest light for the
 government, we conclude that there was substantial evidence that
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fanene and Sanchez intentionally engaged in conduct which was a
 
substantial step in a course of conduct intended to cause serious
 bodily injury. Accordingly, we affirm their convictions for
 attempted first-degree assault.
 
II.
 
Fanene argues that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in denying his motion to continue trial, and thereby
 effectively denied Fanene his right to privately retained counsel
 of his choice. We disagree.
 
A.
 
The pertinent facts underlying this issue are as
 
follows. The indictment was filed on March 16, 2011. Fanene was
 arraigned on March 21, 2011, and trial was originally set for the
 week of May 30, 2011. Based on requests by Wallace and the
 State, the trial was continued several times, over Fanene's
 objection, which resulted in trial being rescheduled for June 
2012. On June 26, 2012, both Fanene and the State stipulated to
 continue the trial, and the Circuit Court rescheduled the trial
 for the week of October 15, 2012. On September 25, 2012, the
 State declared that it was ready for trial, but Fanene and
 Sanchez moved for a trial continuance because they wanted more
 time to prepare and review discovery. The State objected to the
 requested continuance, and the Circuit Court denied the motion. 
On October 2, 2012, a status conference was held which resulted
 in the trial week being continued and a "firm trial" setting for
 the week of December 3, 2012. During November 2012, several
 chambers conferences were held. The minutes for these
 conferences indicate that the trial was expected to last six days
 and that negotiations for Fanene and Sanchez to change their
 pleas were taking place. The minutes for a November 27, 2012,
 chambers conference indicate that a change of plea hearing was
 set for November 30, 2012, but that the State requested that its
 witnesses be ordered to appear for trial if Fanene and Sanchez
 did not change their pleas. 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At the hearing on November 30, 2012, Fanene and Sanchez
 
did not change their pleas, but they waived their right to a jury
 
trial. At this hearing, the Circuit Court, at the State's
 request, ordered T.F., Fanene's girlfriend, to appear on December
 5, 2012, for trial. At a hearing held on December 3, 2012, the
 Circuit Court, at the State's request, ordered Abrojina to appear
 for trial on December 5, 2012, and stated that it would issue a
 bench warrant if Abrojina did not appear.
4
 
The minutes for a chambers conference held on December
 
4, 2012, reflect that Michael Green, Esq. (Green) informed the
 Circuit Court that he would take Fanene's case if the Circuit
 Court was willing to continue the trial. The Circuit Court noted
 that it would not continue the trial and that the jury waived
 trial would commence the next day.
 
On December 5, 2012, the parties appeared for the
 
beginning of the bench trial. Prior to the State calling its
 first witness, the following exchange took place:
 
MR. GOO [(Fanene's appointed counsel)]: If I may, Your
Honor, on Monday I was informed that my client was in the
process of retaining attorney Michael Green on a private
basis. I am court-appointed in this case, Your Honor. And
 that's when I informed the attorneys and the Court and so a
status conference was scheduled yesterday, Tuesday, December
3rd. And of course today -- I'm sorry, that would be
December -- Monday is December 3rd, yesterday -- well,
Tuesday, on the 4th is when we had our status conference and
of course trial is starting today, December 5th.
 
At the status conference Mr. Green did appear. He did
 
state that a check in a sufficient amount was tendered to
 him and he requested that he be allowed to be attorney of
record, withdrawal and substitution of counsel, but he would
be asking for a continuance because of the fact that he
needed to have time to prepare. There's over a thousand
 pages of discovery and so on and so forth.
 
And, Your Honor, my client, you know, does desire to
retain Mr. Green. And so -- so that is the -- the request
from my client that this case be continued so that his -- so
that a private attorney can come aboard who's willing and
able to do so but at some future point.
 
4At trial, Abrojina testified that he was a friend of both the CW and
Fanene, and that he had been in a relationship with Fanene's mother.
 
16
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: Mr. Bell [(the Deputy Prosecuting
Attorney)]?
 
MR. BELL: Ask the Court to take judicial notice of
the records and files and the procedural history of this

case. At that status conference, the prosecution took no
position with regards to the potential withdrawal and
substitution but did make clear its position that the trial
should go on as scheduled. Motions to continue are
 committed to the discretion of the trial court and the trial
 court made its ruling. My recollection is that there would
be no opposition to Mr. Green entering the case with the
understanding that we were beginning today, December 5, as
scheduled. And thereafter Mr. Green elected not to
 continue.
 
THE COURT: And your position regarding the request to
continue, Mr. Bell?

 
MR. BELL: The State objects, the State is ready to
proceed. 
Thank you.
 
THE COURT: Yes. Given the nature of this case, it's
been subject to a number of continuances and the efforts

that have been made by the parties to prepare, the request
of Mr. Green at this time, the day before trial, to continue
the trial will be denied. And to find that it would
 potentially interfere with the preparation of the State's
case, State having witnesses some of whom are homeless, that
it has been making a great effort to subpoena and to gain
the appearance of the Court (sic).
 
And the request of Mr. Green to enter the case as
counsel for Mr. Fanene, certainly a request that is

agreeable as long as Mr. Green was prepared to enter the
case and proceed to trial. But, understandably, given the
timing of the case where Mr. Green was just retained
yesterday, he's not able to prepare. And, accordingly, we
will proceed with the trial today and his request to
continue is denied.
 
B.
 
We review a trial court's decision on a motion for
 
continuance under the abuse of discretion standard. "[A] motion
 
for continuance is addressed to the sound discretion of the trial
 court, and the court's ruling will not be disturbed on appeal
 absent a showing of abuse of that discretion." 
State v. Cramer,
 
129 Hawai 'i 296, 300, 299 P.3d 756, 760 (2013) (internal 
quotation marks and citation omitted).
 
With regard to a criminal defendant's request for

 
substitution of counsel,
 
the right to counsel of choice is qualified, and can be
outweighed by countervailing governmental interests. But in
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
light of the right to counsel, and in the absence of
countervailing considerations, a criminal defendant should
have his, her, or its choice of privately retained counsel.
Whether a change in counsel should be permitted rests in the
sound discretion of the trial court.
 
Id. (block quote format altered; citation and ellipsis points
 
omitted).
 
Under Article I, section 14 of the Hawai 'i 
Constitution, a criminal defendant has a constitutional right to privately retained counsel of his or her choice. Id. at 300-01, 
299 P.3d at 760-61. This right, however, "is qualified, and can be outweighed by countervailing government interests." Id. at 
300, 299 P.3d at 760 (block quote format altered; citation omitted). In Cramer, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court identified the 
following factors that can be relevant in examining the countervailing government interests that should be balanced against the right to counsel of choice: 
(1) length of the continuance; (2) whether there was a
dilatory motive for the continuance; (3) whether the
prosecution knew of the motions beforehand and whether the
prosecution objected; (4) whether the delay would have
inconvenienced the prosecution or its witnesses; (5) whether
current court-appointed counsel was prepared to proceed; (6)
whether the defendant had already retained private counsel;
and (7) whether the continuance would interfere with the
efficient administration of justice[].
 
Id. (citing People v. Butcher, 79 Cal. Rptr. 618, 621 (1969)).
 
C.
 
Fanene's principal argument is that because the Circuit
 
Court had, at the beginning of the case, granted lengthy requests
 
for continuances made by the State and Wallace, the Circuit Court
 abused its discretion in denying Fanene's request for a
 continuance to permit the substitution of Green as retained
 counsel. We are not persuaded. For the reasons discussed below,
 we cannot say that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in
 denying Fanene's request for a continuance to permit substitution
 of retained counsel, which was made on the eve of trial.
 
As this court has previously observed:
 
[C]ourts generally 'view with disfavor requests for a
continuance made on the day set for trial or very shortly
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
before.' . . .
 
An attorney cannot reasonably expect a court to alter
its calendar, and disrupt a scheduled trial to which
witnesses have been subpoenaed and to which the
adverse party is ready, simply by the filing by
counsel of a last minute motion for continuance. All
 weight of authority is contrary to such wishful
speculations.
 
State v. Lee, 9 Haw. App. 600, 603-04, 856 P.2d 1279, 1281-82
 
(1993) (citations omitted). The State had declared itself ready
 for trial on September 25, 2012, and on October 2, 2012, the
 Circuit Court, two months in advance of trial, firm set the trial
 date for the week of December 3, 2012. The indictment had been
 pending for almost two years, and Fanene offered no explanation
 for why he waited until the day before trial to seek the
 substitution of Green. In stating his request for a continuance
 on the record, Fanene did not specify the length of the
 continuance he sought, but suggested that the delay would be long
 in referring to the over one thousand pages of discovery that
 Green would have to review.
 
There is no indication that the State was aware of
 
Fanene's plan to seek substitution of counsel beforehand, and the 
State objected to the continuance of the trial, but it did not
 object to the substitution of counsel as long as no continuance
 was required. The Circuit Court found that a continuance would
 potentially interfere with the State's ability to prepare its
 case, noting that some of the State's witnesses were homeless and
 that the State had been making a great effort to subpoena its
 witnesses. The Circuit Court's finding was supported by the fact
 that it had previously ordered, at the State's request, two of
 the State's witnesses to appear for trial and that the State
 actually called fourteen witnesses on the first day of trial.
 
Fanene does not challenge the preparation of his court-
appointed counsel or the ability of his court-appointed counsel
 to try the case as scheduled. The record suggests that Fanene
 had not fully retained Green, as Green informed the Circuit Court
 that he would take Fanene's case if the Circuit Court granted a
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
continuance. The Circuit Court's findings also reveal that it
 
believed a continuance would interfere with the efficient
 administration of justice. Under the circumstances of this case,
 we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion,
 or violate Fanene's right to privately retained counsel of his
 choice, in denying Fanene's belated request to continue the
 trial. 
CONCLUSION
 
We affirm the Circuit Court's February 26, 2013,
 
Judgment with respect to Fanene and its April 11, 2013, Judgment
 with respect to Sanchez.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 30, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Nelson W.S. Goo 
for Defendant-Appellant
Alataua S. Fanene
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Arthur Indiola

 
for Defendant-Appellant 
Michael K. Sanchez
 
Brandon H. Ito
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
20
 