NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000366
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
ABIGAIL K. KAWANANAKOA, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU, Defendant-Appellee,
and DOE DEFENDANTS 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; 
DOE GOVERNMENT ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-1756)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Reifurth, Presiding Judge, and Chan, J., with Circuit 
Judge Kim, in place of Nakamura, C.J., Fujise, Leonard,
and Ginoza, JJ., all recused, concurring separately)
This case arises out of a complaint for declaratory and
injunctive relief filed in September 2015 by Plaintiff-Appellant
Abigail K. Kawananakoa in her capacity as a taxpayer challenging
twelve ordinances and resolutions adopted between 2006 and 2012
by Defendant-Appellee City and County of Honolulu related to the
City's rail transit system (the "Actions").1/  Kawananakoa
appeals from the April 1, 2016 Final Judgment entered by the
Circuit Court of the First Circuit ("Circuit Court"),2/ which
dismissed the complaint with prejudice.  We affirm.
1/Kawananakoa asserts that the following bills and resolutions
adopted by the Honolulu City Council ("City Council") are null and void: Bill
82 (2006), enacted as Revised Ordinances of Honolulu ("ROH" or "Revised
Ordinances") no. 06-50 (December 22, 2006); Bill 79 (2006), enacted as ROH no.
07-001 (Jan. 8, 2007); Resolution 10-124 (adopted June 9, 2010); Bill 5
(2010), enacted as ROH no. 10-6 (May 6, 2010); Resolution 10-49 (adopted
May 12, 2010); Resolution 10-68 (adopted April 21, 2010); Resolution 10-86
(adopted May 12, 2010); Bill 33 (2012), enacted as ROH no. 12-22 (June 22,
2012); Bill 31 (2012), enacted as ROH no. 12-22 (June 22, 2012); Bill 32
(2012), enacted as ROH no. 12-23 (June 22, 2012); Bill 37 (2012), enacted as
ROH no. 12-17 (June 15, 2012); and Bill 51 (2009), enacted as ROH 09-32
(October 30, 2009).
2/The Honorable Virginia Lea Crandall presided.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
I. BACKGROUND  
On November 6, 2015, Kawananakoa filed the First
Amended Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief ("First
Amended Complaint"), alleging that the Actions were void and
unenforceable because they were enacted by councilmembers who
failed to disclose conflicts of interest or received gifts in
excess of $200 in violation of the limit set by ROH section 3-
8.8(b).3/
The City filed a motion to dismiss the First Amended
Complaint for lack of subject matter jurisdiction and failure to
state a claim under Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure Rules
12(b)(1) and (6).  The City argued that Kawananakoa did not have
a private right of action to enforce the standards of conduct
cited in the First Amended Complaint, the First Amended Complaint
addressed non-justiciable political questions, and the First
Amended Complaint failed to state a cause of action for
declaratory judgment and injunctive relief.
Kawananakoa countered that a taxpayer does not need a
private right of action to challenge the validity of an
ordinance; she was not raising a political question because she
was not attempting to enforce an ordinance or recover damages,
but was seeking to apply the long-standing rule ("common-law
principle") that a city council measure passed on a disqualified
vote is invalid;4/ and there was a genuine controversy for which
3/Kawananakoa alleges that between April 2008 and 2011 Councilmember
Nestor R. Garcia voted on at least fifty bills and resolutions, including the
proposed rail mass transit system, without disclosing to the City Council and
the Honolulu Ethics Commission his position with the Kapolei Chamber of
Commerce as required by Revised Charter of the City and County of Honolulu
("RCH" or "Revised Charter") section 11-103.  Councilmember Garcia is also
alleged to have violated ethics laws involving gift cap violations between
2008 and 2013, and voted on forty-two bills and resolutions without first
disclosing conflicts of interest arising from his receipt of prohibited gifts.
Kawananakoa alleges that between 2006 and 2008 Councilmember Romy M. Cachola
accepted prohibited gifts from lobbyists and failed to disclose that conflict
prior to voting on approximately one hundred bills and resolutions.  Finally,
Kawananakoa alleges that "[a]t least five additional members of the City
Council" also voted on a number of the Actions while under undisclosed
conflicts of interest, which appear to involve alleged gift cap violations. 
4/Kawananakoa argues that "disqualification by interest of 'a
majority of those voting for the ordinance, or even one vote, if that vote
determined the passage of the ordinance,  would establish the invalidity of the
ordinance [,]'" quoting Waikiki Resort Hotel, Inc. v. City & Cty. of Honolulu ,
(continued...)
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
declaratory relief was appropriate.  
The Circuit Court granted the City's motion with
prejudice and without leave to amend, concluding that "Plaintiff
must have a private right of action to seek the relief requested
in this complaint, and . . . that the Plaintiff does not have a
private right of action to seek the relief requested in this
case[.]"  The court considered Kawananakoa's common-law argument
and concluded that "Plaintiff's interest as a taxpayer is not
protected by the common law doctrine that is submitted."  The
Circuit Court issued its Order Granting Defendant City and County
of Honolulu's Motion to Dismiss First Amended Complaint ("Order")
and entered the Final Judgment in favor of the City.  Kawananakoa
appealed. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
On appeal, Kawananakoa alleges that the Circuit Court
erred when it dismissed the First Amended Complaint on the basis
that (1) a taxpayer must have a private right of action in order
to challenge the validity of a municipal act or ordinance, and
(2) the "long-standing rule that a municipal measure passed on a
disqualified vote is invalid did not apply to legislative
actions."
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
Motion to Dismiss
A trial court's grant or denial of a motion to dismiss
for "lack of subject matter jurisdiction is a question of law,
reviewable de novo."  Norris v. Hawaiian Airlines, Inc., 74 Haw.
235, 239, 842 P.2d 634, 637 (1992), aff'd, Hawaiian Airlines,
Inc. v. Norris , 512 U.S. 246 (1994).  
4/(...continued)
63 Haw. 222, 248, 624 P.2d 1353, 1371 (1981) (quoting  Marshall v. Ellwood City
Borough, 41 A. 994 (1899)).  See also Hui Malama Aina O Ko'olau v. Pacarro , 4
Haw. App. 304, 666 P.2d 177 (1983) (recognizing that a lawmaker's undisclosed
personal interest in a matter before him disqualifies him from voting and
renders his vote a nullity for purposes of determining whether a matter was
properly enacted).
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Standing
Whether the plaintiff had standing to bring his or her
claim presents a question of law, reviewable de novo. Haw.
Med. Ass'n v. Haw. Med. Serv. Ass'n, Inc. , 113 Hawai #i 77, 90,
148 P.3d 1179, 1192 (2006); see also Keahole Def. Coal., Inc.
v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res. , 110 Hawai #i 419, 427–28, 134 P.3d
585, 593–94 (2006). Further, standing must be addressed before
we reach the merits, and "may be addressed at any stage of a
case." Keahole Def. Coal., Inc. , 110 Hawai #i at 427, 134 P.3d
at 593 [("The issue of standing implicates this court's
jurisdiction, and, therefore, must be addressed first.")]
McDermott v. Ige , 135 Hawai #i 275, 282, 349 P.3d 382, 389 (2015).
Interpretation of Municipal Charter and Ordinance
Statutory interpretation is "a question of law
reviewable de novo." State v. Levi , 102 Hawai #i 282, 285, 75
P.3d 1173, 1176 (2003) (quoting State v. Arceo , 84 Hawai #i 1,
10, 928 P.2d 843, 852 (1996)). This court's statutory
construction is guided by established rules:
First, the fundamental starting point for
statutory interpretation is the language of the
statute itself. Second, where the statutory
language is plain and unambiguous, our sole duty
is to give effect to its plain and obvious
meaning. Third, implicit in the task of statutory
construction is our foremost obligation to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily
from the language contained in the statute
itself. Fourth, when there is doubt, doubleness
of meaning, or indistinctiveness or uncertainty
of an expression used in a statute, an ambiguity
exists.
Peterson v. Hawaii Elec. Light Co., Inc. , 85 Hawai #i 322,
327–28, 944 P.2d 1265, 1270–71 (1997), superseded on other
grounds by [Haw. Rev. Stat.] § 269–15.5 (Supp. 1999) . . . .
"When interpreting a municipal ordinance, we apply the
same rules of construction that we apply to statutes."
Weinberg v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu , 82 Hawai #i 317, 322, 922
P.2d 371, 376 (1996) (quoting Bishop Square Assoc. v. City &
County of Honolulu , 76 Hawai #i 232, 234, 873 P.2d 770, 772
(1994) (quoting Waikiki Resort Hotel v. City & County of
Honolulu , 63 Haw. 222, 239, 624 P.2d 1353, 1365 (1981))). "The
purpose of the ordinance may be obtained primarily from the
language of the ordinance itself[.]" Id.
Rees v. Carlisle, 113 Hawai# i 446, 452, 153 P.3d 1131, 1137
(2007).
IV. DISCUSSION
A. The Circuit Court did not conclude that a taxpayer can
only challenge a municipal action if she can first
establish a private right of action.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Kawananakoa's first point of error misstates the basis
for the Circuit Court's Order.  She contends that the Circuit
Court erred when it dismissed the First Amended Complaint "on the
grounds that a taxpayer can only challenge the validity of a
municipal act or ordinance if she can establish the existence of
a private right of action."  (Emphasis added.)  In dismissing the
First Amended Complaint, however, the Circuit Court was not so
broad in its holding, stating only that "Plaintiff must have a
private right of action to seek the relief requested in the
complaint , and . . . Plaintiff does not have a private right of
action to seek the relief requested in this case." (Emphasis
added.) 
In her First Amended Complaint, Kawananakoa seeks
declaratory and injunctive relief on the basis that the Actions
are invalid under RCH, art. XI, sections 11-101-104,5/ and ROH,
5/RCH, art. XI, sections 11-101-104 provide that:
11-101. Declaration of Policy -
Elected and appointed officers and employees shall
demonstrate by their example the highest standards of ethical
conduct, to the end that the public may justifiably have trust
and confidence in the integrity of government.  They, as
agents of public purpose, shall hold their offices or
positions for the benefit of the public, shall recognize that
the public interest is their primary concern, and shall
faithfully discharge the duties of their offices regardless of
personal considerations.
11-102. Conflicts of Interest -  
1.  No elected or appointed officer or employee
shall:
(a) Solicit or accept any gift, directly or
indirectly, . . . under circumstances in
which it can reasonably be inferred that
the gift is intended to influence the
officer or employee in the performance of
such person's official duties.  Nothing
herein shall preclude the solicitation or
acceptance of lawful contributions for
election campaigns.
. . . .
(c) Engage in any business transaction or
activity or have a financial interest,
direct or indirect, which is incompatible
with the proper discharge of such person's
official duties or which may tend to impair
the independence of judgment in the
performance of such person's official
(continued...)
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
art. VIII, section 3-8.8(b)6/ (collectively, the "Ethics Code
Provisions").7/  Specifically, Kawananakoa seeks:
A. A declaration that (1) the votes cast by
[Councilmember] Cachola, [Councilmember] Garcia, and other
councilmembers while under undisclosed conflicts were invalid,
and (2) the resulting laws that turned on said invalid votes
are void and unenforceable;
5/(...continued)
duties.
* * * *
11-103. Disclosure of Interest -
Any elected or appointed officer or employee who
possesses or who acquires such interests as might reasonably
tend to create a conflict with the public interest shall make
full disclosure in writing to such person's appointing
authority or to the council, in the case of a member of the
council, and to the ethics commission, at any time such
conflict becomes apparent.  Such disclosure statements shall
be made a matter of public record and be filed with the city
clerk.  Any member of the council who knows he or she has a
personal or private interest, direct or indirect, in any
proposal before the council, shall disclose such interest in
writing to the council.  Such disclosure shall be made a
matter of public record prior to the taking of any vote on
such proposal.
11-104. Fair and Equal Treatment -
Elected or appointed officers or employees shall not use
their official positions to secure or grant special
consideration, treatment, advantage, privilege or exemption to
themselves or any person beyond that which is available to
every other person.
6/ROH, art. VIII, section 3-8.8(b) & (d) provide that:
Gifts to councilmember-Prohibition under certain circumstances.
. . . .
(b) During each one-year period beginning on July 1st
and ending on June 30th, no councilmember shall
solicit, accept, or receive, directly or
indirectly, from any one source any gift or
gifts, not exempted by subsection (c), valued
singly or in the aggregate in excess of $200.00.
. . . .
(d) A violation of this section by a councilmember
shall be punishable in accordance with Section 3-
8.5.
7/Kawananakoa argues that she does not seek to enforce the Ethics
Code Provisions, but the common-law right to invalidate a municipal action
taken by disqualified lawmakers.  The claim that the lawmakers are
disqualified in the first place, however, is based on alleged violations of
the Ethics Code Provisions.  We take up that issue further as part of our
consideration of Kawananakoa's second point of error.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B. The issuance of appropriate equitable and
injunctive relief enjoining the City from enforcing or
continuing to fund the laws whose passage turned on the
invalid votes until such time as the laws are ratified in
accordance with orders of this Court; [and]
C. The entry of an order directing the City Council
to hold a new vote on each invalid measure of non-conflicted
City Council members who are not otherwise disqualified from
voting[.]
The Ethics Code Provisions, however, explicitly provide for the
relief available for their violation.8/  That relief includes
impeachment, actions for recovery brought by the City,
8/Penalties under the RCH for violations of article XI include:
The failure to comply with or any violation of the standards
of conduct established by this article of the charter or by
ordinance shall be grounds for impeachment of elected officers
. . . .  The ethics commission may also impose civil fines
established by ordinance for violations of the standards of conduct
committed by elected and appointed officers and employees of the
city with significant discretionary or fiscal power as determined by
ordinance.
Rev. Charter Hon., art. XI, § 11-106 (2015).
Penalties under the ROH for violation of the Ethics Code
Provisions include:
(a) The failure to comply with or any violation of the standards
of conduct of this article or of Article XI of the revised
charter shall be grounds for impeachment of elected officers
and for the removal from office or from employment of all
other officers and employees. . . .
(b) In addition to any other penalty provided by law, any contract
entered into by the city in violation of Article XI of the
revised charter or of this article is voidable on behalf of
the city; provided, that in any action to void a contract
pursuant to this article the interest of third parties who may
be damaged thereby shall be taken into account, and the action
to void the official act or action is initiated within six
months after the matter is determined by the ethics
commission.
(c) The city, by the corporation counsel, may recover any fee,
compensation, gift or profit received by any person as a
result of a violation of the standards in this article or in
Article XI of the revised charter by an officer or employee or
former officer or employee.  Action to recover under this
subsection shall be brought within four years of such
violation.
(d) In addition to any other penalty, sanction or remedy provided
by law, the ethics commission may impose a civil fine against
a former or current officer or exempt employee of the city who
has been found by the ethics commission to have violated the
standards of conduct in Article XI of the revised charter or
this article.
Rev. Ord. Hon., art. VIII, § 3-8.5 (2015). 
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
cancellation of certain contracts, and civil fines imposed by the
Ethics Commission, but does not include invalidation of
ordinances or resolutions, prospective de-funding of City
projects, or directives for City Council re-votes.
Because Kawananakoa's first point of error posits and
then argues against a position not advanced by the Circuit Court,
and because Kawananakoa does not address the court's holding that
a private right of action is necessary to seek the relief
requested, we deem the latter point to have been waived. 
Although Kawananakoa's first point of error misses the mark, we
proceed to consider Kawananakoa's second point of error that the
common law allows for invalidation of municipal actions
irrespective of the fact that the purportedly violated Revised
Ordinances and Revised Charter provisions do not themselves
provide for the form of relief requested.
B. Whether councilmembers violated the Ethics Code
Provisions and whether any such violations warrant
invalidation of the Actions or de-funding of the laws
whose passage turned on the invalid votes involves
resolution of non-justiciable political questions.
Kawananakoa's second point of error contends that the
Circuit Court erred when it dismissed Kawananakoa's First Amended
Complaint on the basis that the common-law principle did not
apply to legislative actions.  We begin by noting, as we did with
regard to Kawananakoa's first point of error, that the Circuit
Court does not explicitly claim to do what Kawananakoa says it
did.9/  As to this point, however, we conclude that Kawananakoa's
characterization of the court's action is a fair extrapolation,
and that the court did, at least in part and in partial effect,
what Kawananakoa says it did.
9/Specifically as to this subject, the court stated:
This case involves legislative actions. . . .
The Court, having also reviewed the cases cited by
Defendant drawing the distinction between legislative and
non-legislative or quasi-judicial action, finds the
Defendant's arguments persuasive and finds that . . . the
Plaintiff's interest as a taxpayer is not protected by the
common law doctrine that she has submitted.
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Before reaching the Circuit Court's ruling with regard
to the common-law principle,10/ however, we are confronted with
the question of whether application of the principle presents a
political question, the resolution of which "threatens
confrontation with the other branches of government."  Hussey v.
Say, 139 Hawai #i 181, 188, 384 P.3d 1282, 1289 (2016) (quoting
Trustees of Office of Hawaiian Affairs v. Yamasaki , 69 Haw. 154,
169, 737 P.2d 446, 455 (1987)).  Kawananakoa recognizes that the
Circuit Court's application of the common-law principle here
"suggests [that] the court was somehow influenced by the
'political question' doctrine." 
The political-question doctrine "is the result of the
balance courts must strike between preserving separation of
powers yet providing a check upon the other two branches of
government."  Nelson v. Hawaiian Homes Comm'n , 127 Hawai # 185,
194, 277 P.3d 279, 288 (2012) (citing Yamasaki , 69 Haw. at 171,
737 P.2d at 456).  In determining whether a case presents a
nonjusticiable political question, the Hawai #i Supreme Court has
adopted the six-part test enunciated by the United States Supreme
Court in Baker v. Carr, 369 U.S. 186 (1962).11/  The instant
appeal appears to implicate at least the first three of the Baker
tests.
10/The federal district court has held that "[i]f a case presents a
political question, the federal court lacks subject matter jurisdiction to
decide that question."  Williams v. United States , CIV. No. 08-00547 SOM-KSC,
2008 WL 5225870, *2 (D. Haw. Dec. 15, 2008) (citing Corrie v. Caterpillar,
Inc., 503 F.3d 974, 981 (9th Cir. 2007)).
11/The following six tests signal the presence of a nonjusticiable
political question:
[(1)] a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of
the issue to a coordinate political department; or [(2)] a
lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards for
resolving it; or [(3)] the impossibility of deciding without
an initial policy determination of a kind clearly for
nonjudicial discretion; or [(4)] the impossibility of a
court's undertaking independent resolution without expressing
lack of respect due coordinate branches of government; or
[(5)] an unusual need for unquestioning adherence to a
political decision already made; or [(6)] the potentiality of
embarrassment from multifarious pronouncements by various
departments on one question.
Nelson, 127 Hawai #i at 194, 277 P.3d at 288 (quoting Yamasaki , 69 Haw. at 170,
737 P.2d at 455 (quoting Baker, 369 U.S. at 217)) (brackets in original).
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Because the Ethics Commission has been delegated the
authority to determine violations of the ethics code, and
together with the City Council has been delegated the authority
to determine the penalty for such violations,12/ thereby
suggesting "a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of
[Kawananakoa's claims] to a coordinate political department";
because we are unable to discern any "judicially discoverable and
manageable standards" that we might apply in determining a
violation or the necessary nexus between an alleged violation and
the challenged legislative actions in the absence of an
executive-branch-determined violation of the law as required by
the law itself; and because invalidation of the Actions or the
de-funding of laws whose passage turned on alleged invalid votes
appears impossible "without an initial policy determination" by
the City Council with regard to third-party consequences, we
conclude that Kawananakoa's complaint presents a political
question over which the Circuit Court lacked jurisdiction.  See
Nelson, 127 Hawai # at 194, 277 P.3d at 288 (quoting Yamasaki, 69
Haw. at 170, 737 P.2d at 455). 
Kawananakoa contends that the political-question
doctrine does not preclude the courts from exercising
jurisdiction in this case because (1) the City Council is a
municipal legislative body which lacks "co-equal" status, and (2)
the political-question doctrine requires a case-by-case inquiry
12/The Revised Charter establishes the Ethics Commission and empowers
it, in pertinent part, as follows:
The commission is authorized to hold hearings and to
conduct investigations concerning the application of this
article of the chapter and shall have the powers provided in
Section 13-114 of this charter. 
. . . .
The commission may impose civil fines established by
ordinance against elected and appointed officers and employees
of the city with significant discretionary or fiscal power as
determined by ordinance, found by the commission to have
violated the standards of conduct established by this article
of the charter or by ordinance.  The commission shall
recommend appropriate disciplinary action against officers and
employees found to have violated the standards of conduct
established by this article of the charter or by ordinance.
Rev. Charter Hon., art. XI, § 11-107 (2015).
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
that the Circuit Court was not in a position to make at this
point in the proceedings.  Neither of these arguments is
sufficient to overcome the application of the first three of the
Baker tests in this case.
1. The political-question doctrine applies to actions
of the City's legislative and executive branches.
Kawananakoa concedes that the political-question
doctrine would bar judicial consideration of the internal
workings of a co-equal branch of government, but, citing to
County of Kaua #i ex rel. Nakazawa v. Baptiste , 115 Hawai #i 15, 165
P.3d 916 (2007), stresses that "[t]he City is a mere creature of
statute, a subdivision of the State, not the State Legislature,
and has only the status and power 'allocated' to it by the
State."  Thus, Kawananakoa argues, no action taken by a non-equal
branch of the City government warrants deference by the state
courts.  We disagree.
The Hawaii Constitution provides that "[e]ach
political subdivision shall have the power to frame and adopt a
charter for its own self-government . . . ."  Haw. Const. art.
VIII, § 2.  Furthermore, it explicitly states that "[c]harter
provisions with respect to a political subdivision's executive,
legislative and administrative structure and organization shall
be superior to statutory provisions, subject to the authority of
the legislature to enact general laws allocating and reallocating
powers and functions."  Id .  Thus, the constitution commits the
structure and organization of Hawai #i's political subdivisions to
their respective charters, and satisfies Hussey's "textually
demonstrable constitutional commitment" requirement for
application of the political-question doctrine.
#
Although the political-question doctrine seeks to
preserve separation of powers—which Hawai #i has recognized as
between three co-equal branches, Asato v. Procurement Policy
Board, 132 Hawai #i 333, 360, 322 P.3d 228, 255 (2014)—nothing in
Hawai#i case law suggests that "co-equal" status is a
precondition to the application of the political-question
doctrine.  Moreover, Hawai #i courts have never held that the
political-question doctrine does not apply to local governments. 
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In fact, courts in other jurisdictions have acknowledged that
"[t]he political question doctrine. . . is equally applicable to
prevent interference by. . . state courts into the powers granted
to the executive and legislative branches of our state and local
governments."  E.g., Skokos v. Corradini,  900 P.2d 539, 541 n.3
(Utah Ct. App. 1995) ("Municipalities, as political subdivisions
of the state. . . , are also subject to separation of powers
notions in the context of their legislative/administrative
operations and the state judiciary.").13/  
Therefore, the fact that local government powers in
Hawai#i are allocated rather than shared does not bar the
application of the political-question doctrine.  The doctrine
applies to each of the three branches, irrespective of whether
the challenged actions are legislative or quasi-judicial, as long
as the actions fail one of the six Baker tests. 
2. The Circuit Court had sufficient facts to conclude
that the political question doctrine bars
consideration of Kawananakoa's claims.
Kawananakoa argues that "even if the lower court could
appropriately draw a distinction between legislative and other
acts by self-interested council-persons, it did not have a
sufficient record before it to make such distinctions at this
early stage in the proceedings."  To this end, Kawananakoa
focuses on Hawai #i's lack of a fixed definition of the terms
"legislative," "nonlegislative," and "quasi-judicial" in the
context of a lawmaker's conflict of interest.  This reasoning has
no bearing on the application of the political-question doctrine
because the application does not turn on rigid categories of
actions, but rather, taking one of the Baker tests for example,
13/See also Warda v. City Council of City of Flushing , 696 N.W.2d
671, 673 (Mich. 2005) ("Because the city council's decision under this statute
constitutes a discretionary act of a separate branch of government, the
judiciary is without authority to review it."); Mutz v. Mun. Boundary Comm'n ,
688 P.2d 12, 19 (N.M. 1984) (citation omitted) ("Whether municipal services
are adequate is a political question to be addressed, not by the courts, but
by the state legislature or the municipality."); Wilson v. Hidden Valley Mun.
Water Dist. , 63 Cal. Rptr. 889, 897 (Cal. Ct. App. 1967) ("The nature of the
powers conferred upon municipal and quasi-municipal corporations and the
territory included within such organizations are political questions to be
determined in the discretion of the state, subject only to constitutional
limitations; the solution of such questions rests with the Legislature.").
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
on an analysis of whether there is "a textually demonstrable
constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate political
department."  Hussey, 139 Hawai #i at 188, 384 P.3d at 1289
(quoting Yamasaki, 69 Haw. at 170, 737 P.2d at 455).
In the alternative, Kawananakoa contends that "the
Court should decline to engage in the level of appellate fact-
finding required to sustain the lower court's judgment on
political question grounds[,]" and that the city is not entitled
to judicial notice of disputed facts related to the rail
controversy.  It is unnecessary, however, for us to find facts or
take judicial notice of disputed facts related to the rail
controversy to analyze whether one or more of the Baker tests is
or are met in the present case.
The relevant facts here are contained in Kawananakoa's
First Amended Complaint, which establishes that she sued in
September 2015, seeking the invalidation of certain council
actions taken between 2006 and 2012.  See  n.16, infra , at 16. 
She claimed entitlement to invalidation of the Actions on the
basis that certain councilmembers voted on the Actions while in
alleged violation of the City's Ethics Code Provisions including,
(1) in the case of Councilmember Garcia, a conflict of interest
and failure to disclose that conflict related to his employer's
interest between 2008 and 2011, and violations of the gift-cap
limit during that same time period; (2) in the case of
Councilmember Cachola, the acceptance of forty-four "prohibited
gifts" and failure to disclose unexplained "conflicts" resulting
from his receipt of those gifts between 2008 and 2012, as well as
apparent violations of the gift-cap limit between 2006 and 2012;
and (3) as to other councilmembers, alleged violations of the
gift-cap limit by Councilmembers Anderson, Apo, Dela Cruz, and
Kobayashi at various times between 2006 and 2012.
Kawananakoa alleges that the Ethics Commission
initiated investigations with regard to Councilmembers Garcia and
Cachola.  In both cases, Kawananakoa concedes that the Ethics
Commission reached settlements that included civil fines against
the councilmembers with no admission of ethics law violations and
no findings or conclusions by the Ethics Commission as to whether
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the laws were violated.  Kawananakoa does not allege that the
commission initiated or settled any other related investigations
of any other councilmembers.
Finally, Kawananakoa directs us to the Hawaii
Constitution, the Revised Charter, and the Revised Ordinances. 
The constitution empowers political subdivisions to adopt their
own charters "for its own self-government," which are superior to
statutory provisions, subject only to the legislature's authority
to enact general laws allocating and reallocating powers and
functions.  Haw. Const. art. VIII, § 2.#
The Revised Charter commits the task of passing
ordinances and resolutions, like the Actions, to the City
Council.  Rev. Charter Hon., art. III, § 3-101.  Furthermore, it
establishes and empowers the Ethics Commission.  Rev. Charter
Hon., art. XI, § 11-107.  Among other powers, the Ethics
Commission is charged with determining violations of the
standards of conduct established by the Revised Charter and the
Revised Ordinances, and is authorized to impose civil fines
established by ordinance against elected and appointed officers
and employees and to hold hearings and conduct investigations in
matters implicating standards of conduct related to article XI of
the Revised Charter.  Furthermore, the commission is to recommend
disciplinary action against officers and employees found to have
violated the standards of conduct.
The Revised Charter further provides that the failure
to comply with or any violation of the standards of conduct shall
be grounds for impeachment of elected officers.  Rev. Charter
Hon., art. XI § 11-106.  The Revised Ordinances reiterate that
anyone violating the standards of conduct may be impeached and
removed from office; authorize the city to "recover any fee,
compensation, gift or profit received" by any violator; empower
the Ethics Commission to impose civil fines against violators;
and make any contract entered into by the city in violation of
the article voidable.14/  Rev. Ord. Hon., art. VIII, § 3-8.5
14/The Revised Ordinances further provide that, "in any action to
void a contract pursuant to this article the interest of third parties who may
be damaged thereby shall be taken into account, and the action to void the
(continued...)
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Despite Kawananakoa's insistence that she is not trying
to enforce the City's Ethics Code, her claims nonetheless stem
entirely from its alleged violation.  See  First Amended
Complaint, ¶¶ 18, 22-25.  The unresolved questions we are left
with present far-reaching policy implications, while highlighting
the lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards for
resolving those questions and the impossibility of deciding them
without an initial policy determination of a kind clearly for
nonjudicial discretion.15/  On that basis, we conclude that a
sufficient basis exists upon which we might affirm the Circuit
Court's judgment on political question grounds.
3. The Ethics Code Provisions do not provide for
invalidation of votes as a remedy.
Finally, Kawananakoa alleges that although the Ethics
Commission is charged with enforcing the ethics laws, no
regulatory scheme exists that places within the special
competence of the Ethics Commission the question whether votes
cast by City Council members while under undisclosed conflicts of
interest are invalid, and the commission lacks the power to
declare a law null and void.  We agree, although the conclusion
that we reach from those facts differs from the one advanced by
Kawananakoa.  Specifically, the fact that the remedies afforded
14/(...continued)
official act or action is initiated within six months after the matter is
determined by the ethics commission ."  Rev. Ord. Hon., art. VIII, § 3-8.5(b)
(emphasis added).  Here, of course, the commission has made no such
determination.
15/For example, as noted by the City:
(i) What constitutes an interest in a proposal? (ii) How
strong must such interest be to require disclosure or to
trigger the need for a judicial remedy? (iii) What is the
status of a vote if the undisclosed interest is adverse to the
proposal or partially adverse? (iv) Is a city council action
with sufficient "void votes" void or voidable, and if so, by
whom? (v) What is the status of an action on which third
parties have relied, which appropriates money already spent,
which has been partially repealed or amended, or which itself
amends or repeals another ordinance? (vi) If the action is
void, then is it void ab initio or void as of the court's
decision? and (vii) If void, what is the status of subsequent
legislative executive actions taken pursuant to or in reliance
on the voided action?
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
by the Ethics Code Provisions do not include Kawnanakoa's
preferred remedy does not mean that the court is authorized to
assume jurisdiction and create the remedy for itself.
The Revised Charter and the Revised Ordinances limit
the court's involvement in enforcing the standards of conduct to
three situations: (1) impeachment of a councilmember in certain
circumstances, Rev. Charter Hon., art. XII, § 12-202; (2)
recovering fees or gifts in violation of the Ethics Code through
actions by corporation counsel, Rev. Ord. Hon., art. VIII, § 3-
8.5(c); and (3) voiding contracts (but not the actual laws that
implicate the contracts) "entered into by the city in violation
of [the Ethics Code,]" Rev. Ord. Hon., art. VIII, § 3-8.5(b). 
The relief Kawananakoa seeks, however, goes well beyond that.
To address Kawananakoa's complaint, the court would
hear evidence to determine whether the Ethics Code Provisions
were violated by councilmembers between 2006-2012, and whether
there was any connection between any violations and City Council
votes taken thereafter on any measures, presumably to the
present.16/  Kawananakoa would then have the court (1) declare
that the votes cast by councilmembers while under "undisclosed
conflicts of interest" were invalid and that "resulting laws" are
void and unenforceable if their passage turned on those invalid
votes, (2) prohibit the City from enforcing those invalid laws,
and (3) direct the City Council to hold a new vote on each
invalid measure of "non-conflicted" councilmembers who are not
otherwise disqualified from voting.
The political nature of the question posed by
Kawananakoa's complaint is made evident by the multi-step
analysis required to come to Kawananakoa's posited conclusion. 
Labeling the challenge as a procedural one does not insulate it.
Challenges to a legislative body's action based, for instance, on
16/Although the First Amended Complaint expressly contests the
Actions, which it contends turned on votes cast by councilmembers while under
undisclosed conflicts, the claim for relief speaks more broadly to "any other
bills or resolutions that may be identified through further investigation and
discovery" while the prayer for relief refers to "the resulting laws."  It
would appear necessary to achieve Kawananakoa's goals in the case, that she
would ultimately take the position that all Council rail-related measures that
have as their basis any of the identified Actions should be invalidated and
require a re-vote.  See n.17 at 17-18, infra.
16NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the body's failure to apply super-majority or voter-ratification
requirements, or the conduct of the vote in closed rather than
open session, address subjects where violations are determinable
by reference to an underlying statute, ordinance, or rule, and
where invalidation flows directly from the alleged violation. 
Challenges of this sort are readily determinable by the courts. 
E.g., Long Island Pine Barrens Soc'y, Inc. v. Cnty. of Suffolk,
122 A.D.3d 688, 692 (N.Y. App. Div. 2014) (allowing taxpayer to
challenge a resolution amending a water protection program on the
basis that there had not been the requisite public referendum on
the amendment); Walleri v. City of Fairbanks, 964 P.2d 463,
467–68 (Alaska 1998) (declining to apply the political-question
doctrine to preclude review when plaintiff claimed that defendant
violated its open meetings law).
On the contrary, the challenges in this case require
determining whether an ethics code violation has occurred in the
absence of a conclusion reached by the agency charged with
investigating ethics-code-violation allegations, the appropriate
sanction in the absence of an analysis of various third-party
factors by the body charged with making penalty-assessment
determinations, whether the ethics code violations have any
relationship to the challenged actions,17/ and whether under any
17/It is not clear what principle would limit an invalidation remedy
to the twelve challenged Actions such that it would not invalidate every
legislative action taken by the City Council over some undetermined period of
time following the violation.  Councilmember Garcia's alleged employment-
related/failure to disclose conflict of interest might relate directly to the
Actions, but as Kawananakoa alleges in her complaint, the scope is potentially
broader than that:
36.  Between April 2008 and 2011, Garcia voted on at
least fifty (50) bills and resolutions, many of which involved
testimony by Kapolei Chamber of Commerce members, relating to
various proposed projects affecting development in Kapolei and
other parts of West Oahu, including but not limited to  the
proposed rail mass transit system, without disclosing his
position with the Kapolei Chamber of Commerce to the City
Council and the Ethics Commission as required by RCH § 11-103.
(Emphasis added.)  The specific allegations that Councilmember Cachola
violated the gift-cap ordinance are similarly not limited to the challenged
Actions:
55.  Between 2006 and 2008, Cachola accepted prohibited
gifts from lobbyists with an aggregate value of nearly $5,000.
(continued...)
17NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
circumstances to apply an overarching common-law principle to
invalidate a particular subset of votes and legislative actions
when the ethics-code provisions do not provide for invalidation
as a remedy.  The lack of judicially-discoverable and manageable
standards for resolving these questions and the impossibility of
deciding these questions without an initial policy determination
of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion, in light of the
textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to
a coordinate political department, signal the presence of
political questions best left to the Ethics Commission and City
Council to whom the issues have been constitutionally committed
(via the Revised Charter) and make this a particularly
inappropriate subject for judicial resolution.
Hawai#i courts follow the teachings of the Supreme
Court where "political questions" are concerned.  Central among
those are that we remain mindful of the limits of our own
authority while being respectful of the functions assigned to the
"political branch of government."  Yamasaki, 69 Haw. at 172, 737
P.2d at 456-57 (quoting Bulgo v. Cty. of Maui , 50 Haw. 51, 56,
430 P.2d 321, 325 (1967).  
"A case involving a nonjusticiable political question
must be dismissed when there is 'a textually demonstrable
constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate political
department.'"  Hussey, 139 Hawai #i at 188, 384 P.3d at 1289
(quoting Yamasaki, 69 Haw. at 170, 737 P.2d at 455).  Taken
together, the Hawai #i Constitution, the Revised Charter, and the
Revised Ordinances demonstrate a textually demonstrable
17/(...continued)
56.  During the period 2008 through 2012, Cachola
accepted 44 prohibited gifts from lobbyists with matters of
interest before the City Council consisting of expensive
meals, wines, and golf outings worth nearly $3,800.
57.  The interest of lobbyists identified in the above
paragraph 56 included , inter alia , the support of rail
transit, land use, rezoning and development in certain
districts, economic development, and environmental issues.
(Emphasis added.)  As to the "five additional members of the City Council" who
Kawananakoa alleges "voted on a number of the measures identifed herein while
under undisclosed conflicts of interest", Kawananakoa similarly does not
contend that those councilmembers limited their votes during the time frame in
question to the challenged Actions.
18NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
constitutional commitment of the Actions to the City Council and
of violations of the standards of conduct to the Ethics
Commission.  Mindful of the delicate political balance
established by these sources, as well as the processes they
establish and the protections they afford, we conclude that the
political-question doctrine applies to this case, deprives the
courts of jurisdiction over Kawananakoa's First Amended
Complaint, and requires that we affirm the Circuit Court's Final
Judgment.  Therefore, we do not reach the question whether the
common law allows for invalidation of municipal actions
irrespective of the fact that the purportedly violated Revised
Ordinances and Revised Charter provisions do not themselves
provide for the form of relief requested.
V. DISPOSITION
Based on the foregoing, the April 1, 2016 Final
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 21, 2018.
On the briefs:
James J. Bickerton and
Bridget G. Morgan
(Bickerton Dang,
A Limited Liability Law
Partnership)
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Paul S. Aoki and
Robert M. Kohn,
Deputies Corporation Counsel,
and Mark J. Bennett,
Special Deputy Corporation
Counsel,
for Defendant-Appellee.  Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
19