NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000517
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MICHAEL L. ARKIN, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 3DTC-13-02654)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Michael Louis Arkin (Arkin) with operating a
 
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII), in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1) and/or
 (a)(3) (2007).
1/  After a bench trial, the District Court of the
 
1/ HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) and (3) provide:
 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates or
assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 
(1)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an amount
 sufficient to impair the person's normal mental
faculties or ability to care for the person and guard
against casualty;
 
. . . [or]
 
(3)	 With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two hundred ten
liters of breath[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2/
Third Circuit (District Court )  found Arkin guilty of OVUII
under HRS § 291E-61(a)(1), but not guilty of the HRS § 291E­
61(a)(3) means of committing OVUII.

 
Arkin appeals from the Judgment entered by the District

 
Court on February 4, 2014. On appeal, Arkin contends that the
 District Court: (1) plainly erred in admitting the testimony of 
Officer Paula Jelsma (Officer Jelsma) regarding the results of
 the Horizontal Gaze Nystagmus (HGN) test she administered to
 Arkin; (2) clearly erred in interpreting Officer Jelsma's
 testimony about how she would conduct the walk-and-turn test if
 the area was sloped, which Arkin claims invalidated the District
 Court's reliance on Officer Jelsma's testimony about Arkin's poor
 performance on this test; and (3) plainly erred in admitting
 Officer Jelsma's testimony that Arkin performed poorly on the
 one-leg-stand test and erred in relying on this testimony. 
The State concedes error regarding the admission of the 
HGN test results and further concedes that there is insufficient evidence to sustain Arkin's conviction, even though Arkin did not raise sufficiency of the evidence as a point of error. As explained below, we conclude that the State's concession of error regarding the HGN test results and its concession that there is insufficient evidence to sustain Arkin's conviction are misguided, and we reject these concessions. See State v. Hoang, 
93 Hawai
'i 333, 336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 (2000) ("[E]ven when the 
prosecutor concedes error, before a conviction is reversed, it is incumbent on the appellate court first to ascertain that the confession of error is supported by the record and well-founded in law and second to determine that such error is properly preserved and prejudicial." (internal quotation marks, citation, brackets, and ellipsis points omitted)). We further conclude that Arkin's arguments on appeal are without merit, and we affirm the District Court's Judgment. 
2/ The Honorable Andrew P. Wilson presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
At 11:15 p.m., Officer Jelsma pulled over Arkin's
 
pickup truck because his right headlight was out. Upon
 
approaching Arkin, Officer Jelsma smelled "an odor of
 intoxicating liquor coming from his breath[,]" and she observed
 that his eyes were red, his speech was "kinda slurred[,]" and he
 appeared "kinda sleepy" or "drowsy." When Arkin exited the truck
 to look at his headlight, Officer Jelsma smelled "a strong odor
 of liquor coming from him." She also noticed that Arkin was
 "slightly unbalanced on his feet[,]" was walking very
 deliberately, and was holding onto his truck.
 
Officer Jelsma conducted field sobriety tests on Arkin
 
consisting of the HGN test, the walk-and-turn test, and the one-
leg stand test. On the HGN test, Officer Jelsma observed six out
 of the six possible clues, with more clues signifying a greater
 likelihood of impairment. On the walk-and-turn test, Arkin had
 difficulty maintaining his balance and stepped off the line
 during the instructional phase, and he had to raise his arms to
 keep his balance and repeatedly stepped off the line while
 performing the test. On the one-leg-stand test, Arkin had a
 "hard time" balancing on one leg, had to put the foot he raised
 back on the ground to keep his balanced after two seconds, and
 raised his arms to keep his balance after being instructed to
 keep them by his sides. Officer Jelsma was familiar with the
 appearance of people who consume alcohol, and it was her opinion
 that Arkin was under the influence of alcohol.
 
Officer Jelsma placed Arkin under arrest. At the
 
police station, Arkin took a breath test by blowing into the
 "Intoxilyzer 5000." The breath test showed a breath alcohol
 concentration of .104 grams of alcohol per 210 liters of 
breath.
 
Arkin testified that he had prior injuries that affect
 
his ability to perform field sobriety tests, but did not disclose
 this to Officer Jelsma because "she never asked." Arkin admitted
 that prior to being stopped by Officer Jelsma, he had been
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
drinking beer. He said that he drank "two tall Heineken[s]" that
 
were twenty-two ounces each, whereas a normal beer is twelve
 ounces.
 
The District Court found that based on Officer Jelsma's
 
testimony, which the District Court found was credible ("I was
 impressed with her credibility"), and Arkin's admission that he
 had consumed forty-four ounces of Heinekin beer before being
 stopped, the State had shown a violation of HRS § 291E-61(a)(1). 
The District Court found that because the State failed to show
 that the "Intoxilyzer 5000" which Officer Jelsma referred to in
 her testimony was the same as the "Intoxilyzer 5000-EN" that
 produced Arkin's breath test result, it would not find Arkin
 guilty of violating HRS § 291E-61(a)(3).
 
II.
 
We resolve the arguments Arkin raises on appeal as
 
follows:
 
A.
 
Arkin contends that the District Court plainly erred in 
admitting Officer Jelsma's testimony about the results of the HGN test she administered to Arkin because the State failed to lay a sufficient foundation for such testimony. However, Arkin did not raise any objection to Officer Jelsma's HGN testimony at trial, much less an objection based on lack of foundation. Accordingly, Arkin waived the right to challenge this testimony on appeal. See State v. Wallace, 80 Hawai
'i 382, 410, 910 P.2d 695, 723 
(1996) (concluding that the defendant's challenge to testimony based on lack of foundation was waived for failure to object at trial on this basis); State v. Samuel, 74 Haw. 141, 147, 838 P.2d 1374, 1378 (1992) ("The general rule is that evidence to which no objection has been made may properly be considered by the trier of fact and its admission will not constitute grounds for reversal."); State v. Kassebeer, 118 Hawai
'i 493, 505, 193 P.3d 
409, 421 (2008) (holding that the defendant waived the right to 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
challenge testimony relating to a handgun due to his failure to
 
object).3/
 
B.
 
Arkin contends that the District Court clearly erred in
 
interpreting Officer Jelsma's testimony about how she would
 conduct the walk-and-turn test if the area was sloped, which
 Arkin claims invalidated the District Court's reliance on Officer
 Jelsma's testimony about Arkin's poor performance on this test. 
This point of error concerns Arkin's theory at trial that the
 walk-and-turn test was conducted on an area that was sloped and
 therefore Officer Jelsma's observation of Arkin's poor
 performance was not a valid indication of whether Arkin was
 impaired. 
Officer Jelsma testified at trial that she looks for
 
the flattest, least sloped area to conduct the walk-and-turn
 test, and that if there is a side-to-side slope, she would have
 the person walk straight up the slope, so it would be even on
 both sides and easier for the person to keep his or her balance. 
Arkin testified and presented evidence, including photographs, to
 support his contention that the line where he performed the walk-
and-turn test had a "combined slope," that is, both a slope in
 the direction he was walking and a slope side-to-side,
 perpendicular to the direction he was walking. The State
 questioned the accuracy of Arkin's slope measurements, and
 Officer Jelsma did not confirm that she conducted the walk-and­turn test on the line depicted in the photographs, but only
 stated that the line depicted could have been, or possibly was,
 the line where the test was conducted.
 
In any event, the record shows that Arkin's evidence
 
regarding the "combined slope" was presented and argued to the
 District Court, and that the District Court considered this
 
3/
 The Hawai' i Supreme Court has held that a non-specific "lack of
foundation" objection does not preserve the issue for appeal unless, based on
the context, it is evident what the objection was meant to convey. State v. 
Long, 98 Hawai' i 348, 353-54, 48 P.3d 595, 600-01 (2002). Here, Arkin failed
to even assert a general "lack of foundation" objection to Officer Jelsma'sHGN testimony. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence along with other evidence relating to the walk-and-turn 
test in rendering its verdict. In essence, Arkin challenges the District Court's assessment of the credibility of the witnesses and the weight of the evidence regarding the walk-and-turn test. However, these determinations are the province of the District Court as the trier of fact, and we decline to second-guess the District Court's evaluation of the walk-and-turn evidence. See 
State v. Buch, 83 Hawai
'i 308, 321, 926 P.2d 599, 612 (1996) 
("[I]t is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the [trier of fact]." (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)). We conclude that this point of error is without merit. 
C.
 
We reject Arkin's claim that the District Court plainly 
erred in admitting Officer Jelsma's testimony that Arkin performed poorly on the one-leg-stand test and erred in relying on this testimony. Arkin did not object to this testimony at trial, and it was within the province of the District Court to evaluate the credibility of and to determine what weight to give this testimony. See Samuel, 74 Haw. at 147, 838 P.2d at 1378; 
Buch, 83 Hawai
'i at 321, 926 P.2d at 612. 
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the District Court's
 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 21, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Phyllis J. Hironaka
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Jason R. Kwiat Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6

 