 
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
   
   
    
  
 
  
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000112 24-APR-2026 07:53 AM Dkt. 74 SO 
NO. CAAP -24-0000112  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE S TATE OF HA
WAI‘I  
MARYANNE CSIZMAZIA, as Executrix for   
the Esta
te of BRIAN MCCOY,  Plaintiff -Appellant,  
v.  
SHELAGH BRADY, an individual, Defendant- Appellee  
APPEAL FROM
 THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2CCV-23-0000088) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By:  Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.) 
Plaintiff- Appellant Maryanne Csizmazia (Csizmazia) 
appeals from the "Order Granting Defendant[ -Appellee] Shelagh 
Brady's [(Brady)] Motion to Dismiss Filed October 17, 2023" 
(Dismissal Order ), entered on January 30, 2024 by the Circuit 
Court of the Second Circuit (circuit court).1 
This matter arises out of a Complaint, filed in March 
2023, by Csizmazia, as Committee2 and Attorney in Fact for Brian 
1 The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided. 
2 It appears that, in Canada, a "Committee" is akin to a court-
appointed guardian or personal representative.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
     
  
   
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
   
 
  
 McCoy (Brian).3 The Complaint alleged that Brady "wrongfully 
took advantage of her disabled brother Brian by using [her power 
of attorney for Brian ] to take for her own use substantial funds 
from the sale of his investment property in Maui , thereby 
unjustly enriching herself at his expense." Brady, a citizen of 
Canada, filed a "Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Personal 
Jurisdiction or, in the Alternative, to Stay Proceedings" 
(Motion to Dismiss ).  Following a hearing, the circuit court 
granted the Motion to Dismiss, on the grounds that it lacked 
personal jurisdiction over Brady, and entered the Dismissal 
Order. In July 2024, on temporary remand, the circuit court 
entered its Final Judgment. 
On app
eal, Csizmazia raises two points of error, 
contending that the circuit court erred in entering i ts 
Dismissal Order because: (1) "[Csizmazia] made a prima facie 
showing that [Brady's] activities in Hawaiʻi fall into a category 
specified by Hawaiʻi's long -arm statute in order to establish 
specific jurisdiction"; and (2) "[Csizmazia] made a prima facie 
showing that [Brady] purposefully and continuously interjected 
herself into the forum state such that [the] constitutional due 
process requirements are satisfied." 
3 Csizmazia filed the Complaint on behalf of Brian and, following 
his death during the pendency of the trial court proceedings, was substituted 
as executrix for Brian's estate. 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
  
  
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 We review the circuit court's Dismissal Order de novo. 
City & Cnty. of Honolulu v. Sunoco LP, 153 Hawaiʻi 326, 340, 537 
P.3d 117
3, 1187 (2023). Upon careful review of the record, 
briefs, and relevant legal authorities, and having given due 
consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by 
the parties, we resolve Csizmazia's contentions of error as 
follows. 
In Yamashita 
v. LG Chem, Ltd., the Hawaiʻi  Supreme 
Court held that "Hawaiʻi 's long- arm statute incorporates the 
limits of due process," and accepted that "the personal 
jurisdiction analysis under the Hawai[ ʻ]i long-arm statute" can 
be "co
llapse[d] into a single due process inquiry."  152 Hawaiʻi 
19, 21-22, 518 P.3d 1169, 1171- 72 (2022) (citations omitted).  
Thus, "[a]s long as federal due process is satisfied, under the long-arm statute a Hawai ʻi court may assert personal jurisdiction 
over an injury that 'relates to,' but does not 'arise from,' a 
defendant's in- state acts."  Id. at 21, 5
18 P.3d at 1171. 
The following three- part test applies in determining 
whether due process is satisfied: 
(1) the nonresident defendant must purposefully avail
itself of the privilege of conducting activities within the 
forum state; (2) plaintiff's claims must arise out of or relate to the defendant's contacts within the forum; and 
(3) the exercise of jurisdiction must not offend 
traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice. 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
   
  
 
   
     
 Womble Bond Dickinson (US) LLP v. Kim, 153 Hawaiʻi 307, 313, 537 
P.3d 
1154, 1160 (2023) (cleaned up).  
With reg
ard to the third prong of the test, "[t]he 
exercise of specific jurisdiction must 'comport with fair play 
and substantial justice, i.e. it must be reasonable.'"  Sunoco 
LP, 153 Hawaiʻi at 345, 537 P.3d at 1192 ( qu oting In r
e Doe, 83 
Hawaiʻi 367, 374, 926 P.2d 1290, 1297 (1996)).  The Hawaiʻi 
Sup
reme Court has adopted the following seven -factor test to aid 
in determining whether the exercise of jurisdiction is reasonable: 
(1) the extent of the defendants' purposeful interjection 
into the forum state's affairs; (2) the burden on the
defendant of defending in the forum; (3) the extent of any 
conflict with the sovereignty of the defendants' state; (4) the forum state's interest in adjudicating the dispute; (5)
concerns of judicial efficiency; (6) the significance of 
the forum to the plaintiff's interest in relief; and (7) the existence of alternative fora. 
Id. at 346, 537 P.3d at 1193 (citation omitted). 
We 
conclude that the above factors do not weigh in 
favor of exercising jurisdiction over Brady.  Csizmazia contends 
that Brady has had "continuous and systematic" contacts with 
Hawaiʻi, having been a frequent visitor to Hawaiʻi "both for 
recreation and for visits with family, including to help her 
brother Brian in 2017."  Csizmazia points in particular to 
Brady's role in facilitating the sale of Brian's property, 
namely the sale of his 51% interest in a Maui rental property, 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
     
    
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
    
 
   
    
  
  
 
    
  
 
  
 
  the proceeds of which (amounting to $264,768) were deposited 
into a joint Hawaiʻi b ank account held by Brian and Brady.4 
The record reflects that Brady traveled to Hawaiʻ i in 
2017, following Brian's debilitating medical emergency, to help 
Brian put his personal and financial affairs in order . 
Csizmazia and Brian did not know each other at the time; Brady 
was the only person available to help Brian and had to come here from Canada to do so. Brady arranged for Brian to live in a 
care home on Maui.  It was there that Brian met Csizmazia. 
Brady's "purposeful interjection into the forum state's affairs" was thus limited to caring for Brian and tending to his affairs 
after his medical emergency.
5 The money from the sales of 
Brian's properties were either used to satisfy outstanding 
expenses and debts or transferred into a Canadian bank account. 
Brian, himself, relocated to Canada in July 2017. Csizmazia 
followed Brian to Canada. Upon Brian' s passing in 2023, Brian 
had no bank accounts or property in Hawaiʻ i. Brian's estate is 
being probated in Canada, where a will contest remains pending. 
On this record, we conclude that the burden on Brady, 
a Canadian citizen , to defend a proceeding in Hawaiʻi is 
4 Brady represents that she used the money to pay Brian's hospital 
and medical expenses, as well as his outstanding debts related to a farm he 
partially owned. 
5 It is undisputed that Brady held power of attorney for Brian at 
the time of the property sale. 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
    
   
 
 exceedingly high.  Moreover, "the forum state's interest in 
adjudicating the dispute" is minimal, "the significance of the 
forum to [Csizmazia's] interest in relief" is low, and 
"alternative fora" exist in which to resolve the matter.  In 
this regard, the present matter has the potential to "conflict with the sovereignty" of Canada, where legal proceedings relating to Brian's estate are pending .  And, for all of the 
reasons discussed supra , exercising jurisdiction over Brady 
would raise "concerns of judicial efficiency" for Hawaiʻi courts. 
Under these circumstances, we conclude that the exercise of 
personal jurisdiction over Brady by Hawaiʻi courts is not 
rea
sonable, and would therefore not comport with "traditional 
notions of fair play and substantial justice." 
The ci
rcuit court was not wrong in determining that 
Csizmazia failed to establish a prima facia case of personal 
jurisdiction.  We therefore affirm the Final Judgment. 
DAT
ED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, April 24, 2026. 
On the briefs:  
Timothy Vandeveer,  
for  Plaintiff -Appellant.  
 
Adam G. Lang,  
for  Defendant -Appellee.  /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka  
Presiding Judge  
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
Associate Judge  
 /s/ Ki mberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge  
6 