 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000328 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
TAMIRA L. CALLENDER,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellant,
v. 
BENNET M. BALDWIN,
Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant-Appellee,
and 
ROBERT FORTINI, JR.,
Defendant/Counterclaimant/Cross-Claimant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(Case No. 2CC131001052) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
This appeal involves a dispute over real property 
located in Ha# ikû  on the island of Maui (the Property) and a 
previously filed lawsuit between the parties. Self-represented 
Plaintiff/Counterlaim Defendant-Appellant Tamira L. Callender (
Callender) appeals from the Judgment in favor of Defendant/ 
Cross-Claim Defendant-Appellee Bennet M. Baldwin (Baldwin) and 
Defendant/Counterclaimant/Cross-Claimant-Appellee Robert Fortini, 
Jr., also known as William Robert Fortini, Jr. (Fortini), entered 
by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit1 on January 11, 2017. 
For the reasons explained below, we vacate the Judgment and the 
"Order Granting Defendant William Robert Fortini, Jr.'s Motion 
1 The Judgment was signed by the Honorable Peter T. Cahill. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for Summary Judgment Filed on December 14, 2015" entered by the 
circuit court on February 17, 2016. The "Order Denying Plaintiff Tamira L. Callender's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Filed on December 31, 2015" entered by the circuit court on March 7, 2016, is affirmed. This matter is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this order. 
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
On November 21, 2013, Callender (then represented by 
counsel) filed the complaint below against Baldwin and Fortini. The complaint alleged that on July 18, 2013, Fortini wrongfully attempted to eject Callender from the Property. Fortini claimed to have acquired title to the Property on April 4, 2013, by deed from Baldwin. Callender alleged that Baldwin could not have acquired title to the Property before May 3, 2013, when the circuit court clerk executed a warranty deed conveying the Property from Callender to Baldwin pursuant to a circuit court order granting Baldwin's motion to enforce the settlement of a previous lawsuit, Baldwin v. Callender, Civil No. 08-1-0120, Circuit Court of the Second Circuit, State of Hawai# i 
(Foreclosure Action).  Callender prayed for: (1) declaratory 
relief and to quiet title to the Property against Fortini; 
(2) injunctive relief against Fortini; (3) specific performance against Baldwin; (4) damages for breach of contract against Baldwin; (5) damages for fraud/fraudulent inducement against Baldwin; and (6) equitable relief for unjust enrichment against Baldwin. 
On December 14, 2015, Fortini filed a motion for 
summary judgment (MSJ). Baldwin joined in Fortini's motion. On 
December 31, 2015, Callender (who was by then self-represented) 
filed a motion for partial summary judgment (MPSJ). The circuit 
court granted Fortini's MSJ by order entered on February 17, 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2016.2 The circuit court denied Callender's MPSJ by order 
entered on March 7, 2016. 
On April 12, 2016, Callender filed a notice of appeal 
from the orders granting Fortini's MSJ and denying her MPSJ.3 On 
January 11, 2017, the circuit court entered the Judgment in favor 
of Fortini and Baldwin and against Callender. 
DISCUSSION 
We review a trial court's grant or denial of summary 
judgment de novo using the same standard applied by the trial court. Nozawa v. Operating Engineers Local Union No. 3, 142 
Hawai# i 331, 338, 418 P.3d 1187, 1194 (2018). The moving party 
has the burden to establish that summary judgment is proper. Id. 
at 342, 418 P.3d at 1198. Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, affidavits or declarations, and admissible evidence show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. Id. A fact is material if proof of that fact would have 
the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. Id. "When reviewing a summary judgment, an appellate court's 
consideration of the record is limited to those materials that were considered by the trial court in ruling on the motion." Kondaur Capital Corp. v. Matsuyoshi, 134 Hawai# i 342, 350, 341 
P.3d 548, 556 (2014) (citations omitted). 
2 The record on appeal does not contain an order disposing of
Baldwin's joinder. 
3 Rule 4(a)(2) of the Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP )
(eff. July 1, 2006) provides that "[i]f a notice of appeal is filed after
announcement of a decision but before entry of the judgment or order, suchnotice shall be considered as filed immediately after the time the judgment ororder becomes final for the purpose of appeal." 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fortini's MSJ 
Fortini's MSJ alleged that: Baldwin purchased the 
Property in 2005 and placed title in Callender's name; Callender 
mortgaged the Property to Baldwin for $1.3 million; Callender defaulted on the mortgage; Baldwin filed the Foreclosure Action and moved for summary judgment; the circuit court orally granted Baldwin's motion but a written order was never filed; Callender allegedly agreed to settle the Foreclosure Action by conveying title to the Property to Baldwin; Baldwin moved to enforce the settlement; the circuit court granted the motion, instructing the circuit court clerk to sign a deed on behalf of Callender conveying the Property to Baldwin; Baldwin then filed a petition to eject Callender from the Property; the circuit court granted the petition and issued a writ of possession against Callender. 
In support of his MSJ, Fortini attached copies of the 
following documents filed in the Foreclosure Action: (1) the April 26, 2013 order granting Baldwin's motion to enforce the alleged settlement of the Foreclosure Action; (2) Callender's memorandum in opposition to Baldwin's petition to eject Callender from the Property in the Foreclosure Action; (3) the order granting Baldwin's petition; and (4) the writ of possession entered on September 28, 2015. Fortini argued: 
Since the claims [Callender] has made in the present
case . . . have already been litigated in [the Foreclosure
Action], she is barred by the doctrine of res judicata fromlitigating those claims again. 
During the hearing on Fortini's MSJ the circuit court 
stated: 
The Defendant Fortini's motion it [sic] granted, as
well as the joinder by [Baldwin]. [Callender]'s motion isdenied. 
The bottom line is, Ms. Callender, regardless of this
lawsuit and the claims you're making here, all of theseissues, all of these matters were raised in the [ForeclosureAction]. A judgment has been entered in this  [sic] case . 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
That judgment is res judicata on these issues. You had an 
opportunity to litigate them there. 
. . . . 
I did check to make sure you [Fortini] have an
affirmative claim. 
And you did. There is a counterclaim
requesting the relief you're requesting in your order.[ ]
So that will be granted. I wanted to make sure you had thataffirmative claim rather than just a dismissal in the samething. 4
. . . . 
But the bottom line is that the motion for summary
judgment, there does not appear to be any facts in dispute.The interpretation of this agreement and all, I don't needto go that far because you're not entitled to judgment as amatter [sic] law because the other case has all resolved,all of the issues that you're attempting to raise here. And that's what res judicata is all about. 
(Emphasis and footnote added.) Despite the circuit court's 
mention of a "judgment" having been entered in the Foreclosure Action, the record on appeal contains no judgment or any other order, stipulation, or other document finally terminating the Foreclosure Action. 
The circuit court erred by applying the doctrine of res 
judicata. A party asserting res judicata or claim preclusion: 
has the burden of establishing that (1) there was a final
judgment on the merits, (2) both parties are the same or inprivity with the parties in the original suit, and (3) theclaim decided in the original suit is identical with the onepresented in the action in question. 
Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai# i 43, 54, 85 P.3d 150, 161 (2004) 
(underscoring added). The record on appeal does not show entry 
of a final judgment on the merits, a stipulation or order dismis-sing all other claims against all other parties, or any other 
4 On January 28, 2016 (the day after the hearing on Fortini's MSJ),
the circuit court issued an order of dismissal of Fortini's counterclaim filed 
on December 23, 2013, pursuant to Rule 29 of the Rules of the Circuit Court ofthe State of Hawai #i. The record on appeal contains no motion to set aside
the dismissal. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
document finally terminating the Foreclosure Action.   In Jenkins 
v. Cades Schutte Fleming & Wright, 76 Hawai# i 115, 869 P.2d 1334 
(1994), the supreme court held: 5
(1) An appeal may be taken from circuit court orders
resolving claims against parties only after the orders havebeen reduced to a judgment and the judgment has been enteredin favor of and against the appropriate parties pursuant toHRCP 58; (2) if a judgment purports to be the final judgmentin a case involving multiple claims or multiple parties, thejudgment (a) must specifically identify the party or partiesfor and against whom the judgment is entered, and (b) must(i) identify the claims for which it is entered, and (ii)dismiss any claims not specifically identified; (3) if thejudgment resolves fewer than all claims against all parties,or reserves any claim for later action by the court, anappeal may be taken only if the judgment contains thelanguage necessary for certification under HRCP 54(b); and(4) an appeal from any judgment will be dismissed aspremature if the judgment does not, on its face, eitherresolve all claims against all parties or contain thefinding necessary for certification under HRCP 54(b). 
Id. at 119, 869 P.2d at 1338. Fortini did not meet his burden of 
establishing that "there was a final judgment on the merits" in the Foreclosure Action. Bremer, 104 
Hawai# i at 54, 85 P.3d at 
161. Accordingly, the circuit court erred in granting Fortini's MSJ. 
Callender's MPSJ 
Callender did not dispute that she and Baldwin agreed 
to a settlement. 
However, she alleged that the terms of the 
settlement were renegotiated and documented in the "First Amended 
5 The order entered in the Foreclosure Action granting Baldwin's
petition to eject Callender from the Property, and the writ of possession,
were immediately appealable under the Forgay doctrine. Ciesla v. Reddish
, 78
Hawai #i 18, 20, 889 P.2d 702, 704 (1995) ("[A]n exception to the finality
requirement for appeals . . . allows an appellant to immediately appeal ajudgment for execution upon property, even if all claims of the parties havenot been finally resolved." (citing 
Forgay v. Conrad, 47 U.S. 201 (1848))).
Callender did not file a notice of appeal under the Forgay doctrine. However,if in fact there was no final judgment and/or order dismissing all otherclaims and parties, Callendar could still appeal from the writ of possessionwithin 30 days after entry of a final judgment in the Foreclosure Action. See 
HRAP Rule 4(a)(1) ("When a civil appeal is permitted by law, the notice ofappeal shall be filed within 30 days after entry of the judgment or appealableorder."). 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Settlement Agreement" that was signed by Callender and Baldwin 
and attached as Exhibit D to Fortini's MSJ. According to Callender, Baldwin agreed to forgive Callender's promissory note and allow Callender to retain title to the Property. Baldwin did not oppose the MPSJ. Fortini's opposition to Callender's MPSJ did not dispute that Baldwin signed the First Amended Settlement Agreement. However, he restated the argument (made in his MSJ) that the First Amended Settlement Agreement was illegal and unenforceable because it required that Baldwin not report the forgiveness of Callender's debt to the Internal Revenue Service. 
"It is well settled under ordinary contract law . . . 
that a partially illegal contract may be upheld if the illegal portion is severable from the part which is legal." Ai v. Frank 
Huff Agency, Ltd., 61 Haw. 607, 619, 607 P.2d 1304, 1312 (1980), overruled on other grounds by Robert's Haw. Sch. Bus, Inc. v. Laupahoehoe Transp. Co.
, 91 Hawai# i 224, 982 P.2d 853 (1999). 
"[S]everance of an illegal provision of a contract is warranted and the lawful portion of the agreement is enforceable when the illegal provision is not central to the parties' agreement and the illegal provision does not involve serious moral turpitude, unless such a result is prohibited by statute." 
Beneficial Haw., 
Inc. v. Kida
, 96 Hawai# i 289, 311, 30 P.3d 895, 917 (2001) 
(citations omitted). Whether the provision that Baldwin not report the forgiveness of Callender's debt to the Internal Revenue Service was "central to the parties' agreement" or involved "serious moral turpitude" presents an issue of fact which made summary judgment inappropriate. Accordingly, the circuit court did not err in denying Callender's MPSJ, albeit for different reasons. 
See Delos Reyes v. Kuboyama
, 76 Hawai# i 137, 
140, 870 P.2d 1281, 1284 (1994) (holding that "where the circuit court's decision is correct, its conclusion will not be disturbed on the ground that it gave the wrong reason for its ruling.") (citations omitted). 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment entered on 
January 11, 2017, and the "Order Granting Defendant William 
Robert Fortini, Jr.'s Motion for Summary Judgment Filed on December 14, 2015" entered on February 17, 2016, are vacated. The "Order Denying Plaintiff Tamira L. Callender's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment filed on December 31, 2015" entered on March 7, 2016, is affirmed. This matter is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 30, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
Tamira L. Callender, /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate JudgeSelf-represented Plaintiff/CounterclaimDefendant-Appellant. 
Paul Howard Peters,for Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant-Appellee Bennett M. Baldwin. 
Richard Fried, Jr.,
Gregory L. Lui-Kwan,for Defendant/Counterclaimant/Cross-Claimant-AppelleeWilliam Robert Fortini, Jr.,also known as William Robert Fortini, Jr. 
8 