FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
BARDWELL JOSEPH EBERLY, Defendant-Appellant, and
ANTONY M. MOORE, CHRISTINA WHITLEY, Defendants
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000593
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 11-1-1117)
 
MARCH 31, 2014
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD AND GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
 
Defendant-Appellant Bardwell Joseph Eberly (Eberly)
 
appeals from an April 2, 2013 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
(Judgment of Conviction), which was entered by the Circuit Court
 
of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1
 The Judgment of
 
Conviction was entered pursuant to Eberly's guilty plea to
 
Forgery in the Third Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) § 708-853 (1993), which provides:
 
Forgery in the third degree.  (1) A person commits
the offense of forgery in the third degree if, with intent
to defraud, the person falsely makes, completes, endorses,
or alters a written instrument, or utters a forged
instrument.
 (2) Forgery in the third degree is a misdemeanor.
 
Eberly's sole argument on appeal is that the Hawai 'i 
forgery statutes do not apply to counterfeit U.S. currency, and 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided, unless otherwise noted.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
therefore, the Judgment of Conviction should be reversed. For
 
the reasons set forth below, we affirm.
 I.	 RELEVANT FACTS
 
On August 17, 2011, the State of Hawai 'i (State) 
charged Eberly, along with two co-defendants, Antony M. Moore
 (Moore) and Christina Whitley (Whitley), by a Felony Information
 
and Non-Felony Complaint.
2 Eberly was charged with, inter alia,
 
Forgery in the First Degree, in violation of HRS § 708-851(a)
 
(Supp. 2013)3
 (Count VII). In Count VII, the State alleged:
 
On or about the 14th day of August, 2011, in the City
and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, Bardwell Joseph
Eberly did, with intent to defraud, utter a forged
instrument, to wit, a written instrument purported to be
United States Currency, which is or purports to be, or which
is calculated to become or to represent if completed, part
of an issue of stamps, securities, or other valuable
instruments issued by a government or governmental agency,
thereby committing the offense of Forgery in the First
Degree, in violation of Section 708-851(a) of the Hawaii
Revised Statutes.
 
At the arraignment and plea hearing, Eberly, Moore, and
 
Whitley each entered a plea of not guilty.
 
On March 28, 2012, the State transmitted the following
 
plea offer to Eberly, through his counsel, Venetia Carpenter-Asui
 
(Carpenter-Asui):
 
1. Defendant shall plead GUILTY to the lesser offense of
Forgery in the Third Degree in Count 7 of the Information;
2. The State will agree to Defendant being released on
Supervised Release pending his sentence with the standard
terms and conditions of release;
 
2
 On August 18, 2011, the State filed and the Circuit Court granted
an Ex Parte Motion to Notice Clerical Mistakes in Felony Information and Non-
Felony Complaint and in Warrant of Arrest for Information Charging, to File
Amended Felony Information and Non-Felony Complaint, and to Correct All
Records Hereafter. On the same day, the State filed an Amended Felony
Information and Non-Felony Complaint.
 
3
 HRS § 708-851(a) provides:
 
Forgery in the first degree. (1) A person commits the
offense of forgery in the first degree if, with intent to
defraud, the person falsely makes, completes, endorses, or
alters a written instrument, or utters a forged instrument,
or fraudulently encodes the magnetic ink character
recognition numbers, which is or purports to be, or which is
calculated to become or to represent if completed:
(a) 	 Part of an issue of stamps, securities, or other
valuable instruments issued by a government or
governmental agency; or . . . .
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3. The Court must bind itself to this agreement pursuant to
Rule 11, Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure.
 
Eberly signed and filed a guilty plea form on April 12,
 
2012, which stated as the plea's factual basis: "On 8/14/11[,] I
 
committed forgery in the 3rd degree with intent to defraud[.] I
 gave Christina Whitley a counterfeit $20.00 bill." On the same
 day, the Circuit Court held a hearing on Eberly's change of plea,
 and stated, after Eberly was examined by the court concerning his
 change of plea:
 
I find that Mr. Eberly voluntarily, intelligently, and
knowingly enters his plea with an understanding of the
nature of the charge against him and the consequences of his
plea. I also find that there's a factual basis for his
 plea. His plea is accepted. And I find Mr. Eberly guilty
of Forgery in the Third Degree.
 
Pursuant to the plea agreement, Eberly was released on
 
supervised release pending sentencing. At a sentencing hearing
 
on June 26, 2012, the Circuit Court stated that sentencing would
 be continued because:
 
Under the [plea] agreement, I was inclined to give you
probation, but you had another matter that was in front of
Judge Town when Judge Town was sitting as a judge, and
apparently you got convicted in that matter and Judge Town
sentenced you to the open term, but he stayed the jail
pending an appeal. The appeal had come back from the
Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court affirmed the
conviction, and under the law I cannot put you on probation
if you're gonna go to jail. You cannot be on probation and
in jail at the same time, so Judge Town's judgment needs to
be executed. So what I'm gonna do is continue these
matters, continue this - your sentencing for 30 days . . . .
 
On October 26, 2012, based on Eberly's alleged
 
violation of various conditions of his supervised release, the
 
State filed a Motion for Revocation of Supervised Release;
 Issuance of Bench Warrant on October 26, 2012. The Circuit Court
 issued the bench warrant on the same day, and Eberly was arrested
 on October 31, 2012.
 
At the December 7, 2012 hearing on Eberly's sentencing
 
and motion to revoke his supervised release, Eberly's counsel
 informed the court that Eberly indicated that he would like to
 "get a new court-appointed attorney. And he would like to orally
 revoke his plea of guilty." The court instructed counsel to file
 a motion to withdraw, and stated that sentencing would be
 
4
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
continued until after the motion to withdraw could be heard.  The
 
court stated that Eberly's desire to withdraw his plea would have
 
to be discussed with his new counsel, once he or she was
 appointed. Carpenter-Asui filed a motion to withdraw as court-
appointed counsel on December 21, 2012. 
At a hearing on January 29, 2013, the Circuit Court
 
granted counsel's motion to withdraw and continued sentencing
 until Eberly was represented by new counsel. On January 30,
 2013, the Circuit Court (Honorable Richard K. Perkins presiding)
 appointed new counsel, Shawn A. Luiz, who has represented Eberly
 throughout the remainder of the proceedings, including on appeal. 
At Eberly's April 2, 2013 sentencing hearing, the
 
Circuit Court first granted the State's motion for nolle prosequi
 as to the other charges made against Eberly. Thereafter, the
 court again explained that
 
because . . . the Supreme Court had affirmed Mr. Eberly's
prior felony conviction in which he was sentenced to five
years in prison, and that's why Mr. Eberly is currently
incarcerated under that case, the Court cannot place Mr.
Eberly on probation for anything less than a jail term
because he cannot be on probation and in jail at the same
time under the statute.
 
So, the Court's inclination at this point is to
sentence Mr. Eberly to one year in jail, credit for time
served, concurrent.
 
Defense counsel agreed: "Yes, Your Honor. Just
 
looking at the procedural posture of the case today, it seems
 
that that's the only thing that can be done at this point. And
 because it's concurrent and credit for time served, then Mr.
 Eberly is almost -- done or almost complete with his sentence." 
When asked if he had anything to say, Eberly responded in the
 negative and stated: "I just want to get this over with at this
 time." In response, the court reiterated that
 
I would have put you on probation, but because the
other case came down and the Supreme Court said that . . .
the sentence was valid . . . I cannot put you on probation
and jail at the same time. But I will make it concurrent,
which means with credit for time served. Okay? So which
 means you're almost finished - I think you're almost
finished with the sentence on this already anyhow. And it
 will expedite matters before the Parole Board for you.
 
The Judgment of Conviction was entered on April 2,
 
2013. Eberly timely filed a Notice of Appeal on May 1, 2013.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. POINT OF ERROR
 
Eberly's sole point of error on appeal is that the
 
plain and unambiguous language of the forgery statutes, including
 
HRS §§ 708-851 (Forgery in the First Degree) and 708-753 (Forgery
 in the Third Degree), and the canon of ejusdem generis, compel a
 finding that the forgery statutes do not apply to counterfeit
 U.S. currency. Eberly characterizes his contention as being
 jurisdictional, i.e., that there is no subject matter
 jurisdiction because the forgery statutes do not apply to
 counterfeit U.S. currency.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Where the appellant cannot point to "where in the 
record the alleged error was objected to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought to the attention of the court or agency" below, this point of error "will be disregarded, except that the appellate court, at its option, may notice a plain error not presented." Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 
28(b)(4). "Normally, an issue not preserved at trial is deemed to be waived. But where plain errors were committed and substantial rights were affected thereby, the errors may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the trial court." State v. Fagaragan, 115 Hawai
'i 364, 367-68, 167 
P.3d 739, 742-43 (App. 2007) (citations, internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
The "existence of jurisdiction is a question of law 
that we review de novo under the right/wrong standard. Questions regarding subject matter jurisdiction may be raised at any stage of a cause of action." Amantiad v. Odum, 90 Hawai
'i 152, 158-59, 
977 P.2d 160, 166-67 (1999) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). "If a court lacks jurisdiction over the subject matter of a proceeding, any judgment rendered in that proceeding is invalid." Bush v. Hawaiian Homes Comm'n, 76 Hawai
'i 128, 133, 
870 P.2d 1272, 1277 (1994). IV. DISCUSSION
 
As noted by the State, "a guilty plea made voluntarily
 
and intelligently precludes a defendant from later asserting any
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
nonjurisdictional claims, including constitutional challenges to 
the pretrial proceedings." State v. Morin, 71 Haw. 159, 162, 785 
P.2d 1316, 1318 (1990). We may consider, however, Eberly's claim as to whether the circuit court had jurisdiction. Pursuant to HRS § 603-21.5(a)(1) (Supp. 2013), "[t]he several circuit courts shall have jurisdiction, except as otherwise expressly provided by statute of . . . [c]riminal offenses cognizable under the laws of the State, committed within their respective circuits or transferred to them for trial by change of venue from some other circuit court[.]" (Emphasis added). See also State v. Alagao, 77 
Hawai
'i 260, 261-62, 883 P.2d 682, 683-84 (App. 1994) 
("Jurisdiction of the offense charged (subject matter jurisdiction) . . . [is a] fundamental and indispensable prerequisite[] to a valid prosecution. A court has subject matter jurisdiction over a case if it is authorized to take cognizance of, try, and determine a case involving that subject matter." (citation omitted)). The supreme court has defined "offense" as "a breach of the criminal laws, i.e., a violation of law for which a penalty is prescribed." State v. Dudoit, 90 
Hawai
'i 262, 269, 978 P.2d 700, 707 (1999) (citation, internal 
quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
In this case, Eberly argues that the offense charged is 
not a breach of Hawai 'i criminal laws, i.e., the forgery 
statutes, because the Hawai 'i Legislature did not intend for HRS 
§§ 708-851 and/or 708-853 to apply to counterfeit U.S. bills. Eberly bases his argument on a "plain meaning" reading of the statutory language and the doctrine of ejusdem generis. 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain and
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain
and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself. Fourth, when there
is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness or
uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an ambiguity
exists. In the event of ambiguity in a statute, the meaning
of the ambiguous words may be sought by examining the
context, with which the ambiguous words, phrases, and
 
7
       FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sentences may be compared, in order to ascertain their true
meaning.
 
State v. Bayly , 118 Hawai 'i 1, 6-7, 185 P.3d 186, 191-92 
(2008) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted; format
 
altered).
 "It is a basic rule of statutory interpretation that provisions
 of a penal statute will be accorded a limited and reasonable
 interpretation . . . in order to preserve its overall purpose and
 to avoid absurd results." 
Id. at 7, 185 P.3d at 192 (citation,
 
internal quotation marks and brackets omitted).
 
The statute with which Eberly was charged, HRS § 708­
851 (emphasis added), provides in relevant part:
 
Forgery in the first degree. (1) A person commits
the offense of forgery in the first degree if, with intent
to defraud, the person falsely makes, completes, endorses,
or alters a written instrument, or 
utters a forged 
instrument, or fraudulently encodes the magnetic ink
character recognition numbers, which is or purports to be,
or which is calculated to become or to represent if
completed:
(a) 	 Part of an issue of stamps, securities, 
or other
valuable instruments issued by a government or
governmental agency; or . . . .
 
Using similar language, the statute to which Eberly pled guilty,
 
HRS § 708-853 provides (emphasis added):
 
Forgery in the third degree.  (1) A person commits
the offense of forgery in the third degree if, with intent
to defraud, the person falsely makes, completes, endorses,
or alters a written instrument, or
 utters a forged
instrument.
 (2) 	Forgery in the third degree is a
misdemeanor.
 
The charge against Eberly points to the "utters a
 
forged instrument" portion of the above statutes:
 
On or about the 14th day of August, 2011, in the City
and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, Bardwell Joseph
Eberly did, with intent to defraud,
 utter a forged
instrument, to wit, a written instrument purported to be
United States Currency, which is or purports to be, or which
is calculated to become or to represent if completed, part
of an issue of stamps, securities, or other valuable
instruments issued by a government or governmental agency,
thereby committing the offense of Forgery in the First
Degree, in violation of Section 708-851(a) of the Hawaii
Revised Statutes.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Legislature has defined "forged instrument," which
 
is used in both statutes above, as "a written instrument which
 
has been falsely made, completed, endorsed, or altered." HRS
 § 708-850(7) (1993). "Written instrument" means:
 
(a)	 Any paper, document, or other instrument containing
written or printed matter or its equivalent; or
(b)	 Any token, coin, stamp, seal, badge, trademark, or
other evidence or symbol of value, right, privilege,
or identification[.]
 
HRS § 708-850(1) (1993). Finally, "utter," in relation to a
 
forged instrument, "means to offer, whether accepted or not, a
 forged instrument with representation by acts or words, oral or
 in writing, that the instrument is genuine." HRS § 708-850(8)
 (1993).
 
The factual basis of Eberly's guilty plea was as 
follows: 
"On 8/14/11[,] I committed forgery in the 3rd degree 
with intent to defraud[.] I gave Christina Whitley a counterfeit $20.00 bill." A counterfeit $20 bill falls squarely within the statutory definition of "written instrument" in that it is paper, containing printed matter. See HRS § 708-850(1). Thus, we 
conclude, based upon the plain and unambiguous language of the statute, Eberly's act of giving Whitley a counterfeit $20 bill, under the circumstances described in his plea, constitutes a violation of law pursuant to Hawai
'i's forgery statutes. Accord 
F.C. v. State, 742 So.2d 200, 202 (Ala. Crim. App. 1999)
 (concluding, with respect to an analogous statutory provision,
 that a "counterfeit $100 bill falls within the plain meaning of
 'written instrument'–-it is paper containing printed matter, as
 required by § 13A-9-1(1) [of Ala. Code 1975]" and holding that
 "counterfeit currency falls within the definition of forged
 instrument."). Accordingly, we reject Eberly's argument that
 based on their plain language, the forgery statutes do not apply
 to counterfeit U.S. currency.
 
Eberly also urges this court to apply the doctrine of
 
ejusdem generis, which has been stated as follows: "[W]here
 general words follow specific words in a statute, the general
 words are construed to embrace only objects similar in nature to
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
those objects enumerated by the preceding specific words." 
Singleton v. Liquor Comm'n, Cnty. of Hawai 'i, 111 Hawai 'i 234, 243 
n.14, 140 P.3d 1014, 1023 n.14 (2006) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). Eberly points to the phrase "or other valuable instruments" in HRS § 708-851(1)(a) as the general term, which is preceded by "stamps, securities" as the specific terms. Eberly's reasoning is flawed. As an alternative method of statutory interpretation, ejusdem generis is secondary to the "language of the statute itself," which is dispositive in this case. Bayly, 118 Hawai
'i at 6, 185 P.3d at 191. 
As explained above, although "U.S. currency" is not 
specifically included in the definition of "written instrument," a $20 bill is "paper . . . containing written or printed matter." HRS § 708-850(1)(a). Morever, HRS § 708-850(1)(b) specifically includes "coin" in the definition of "written instrument." The result would be absurd if the utterance of a counterfeit penny, with the intent to defraud, would be considered an offense based on our interpretation of the definition of "written instrument" in the context of forgery statutes, yet the utterance of a counterfeit $20 bill, which has more value, would not be included as an offense. See Bayly 118 Hawai
'i at 7, 185 P.3d at 192 ("It 
is a basic rule of statutory interpretation that provisions of a penal statute will be accorded a limited and reasonable interpretation . . . in order to preserve its overall purpose and to avoid absurd results." (citation, internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
For these reasons, we hold that Eberly's conduct of
 
uttering counterfeit U.S. currency, with the intent to defraud,
 constituted an offense pursuant to Hawaii's forgery statutes.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
V. CONCLUSION
 
Therefore, the Circuit Court's April 2, 2013 Judgment
 
of Conviction is affirmed.
 
On the briefs:
 
Shawn A. Luiz
 
for Defendant-Appellant
 
James M. Anderson
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
11
 