  
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000039
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
THOMAS REED, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-1284)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Thomas Reed ("Reed") appeals from
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, filed on December 26,
 
2012, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit ("Circuit
 Court").
1/ After Reed was found guilty by a jury, the Circuit
 
Court entered judgment against him for one count of Robbery in
 the Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 ("HRS") ยง 708-841.
2/ Reed was originally sentenced to ten years
 
imprisonment, but upon a motion for reconsideration of the
 
1/ The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided. 
2/ HRS ยง 708-841 provides, in relevant part: 
A person commits the offense of robbery in the second degree
if, in the course of committing theft . . . : 
(a) The person uses force against the person of anyone
present with the intent to overcome that person'sphysical resistance or physical power of resistance; 
(b) The person threatens the imminent use of force againstthe person of anyone who is present with intent tocompel acquiescence to the taking of or escaping withthe property[.] 
H
AW. REV. STAT. ยง 708-841(1)(a) and (b) (Supp. 2012). 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
sentence, the Circuit Court entered the March 6, 2013 Judgment of 
Conviction and Probation Sentence. It thereby vacated its original judgment and sentence, reentered judgment against Reed on the robbery count, and resentenced him to a five-year term of probation.
3/ On appeal, Reed challenges the sufficiency of the 
evidence, contending that the State of Hawai 'i ("State") failed 
to adduce substantial evidence to support his conviction. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Reed's point of error as follows:
 
Jewel Sawada ("Sawada") testified that, while walking
 
to work, she was confronted by a man who grabbed her, yanked at
 her purse, and ordered her at gunpoint to let go of her purse. 
She let go and the man then ran off with the purse. She called
 out for help, and thereafter observed the same man rummaging
 through her purse only a short distance away.
 
Two witnesses each testified to observing a man running
 
from the vicinity and then encountering Sawada, who related that
 she had been robbed. One of those witnesses, via a photographic
 lineup, identified the man as Reed. Sawada also related her
 account of robbery at gunpoint to police. Police later
 apprehended Reed and found a couple of Sawada's possessions in
 his van. 
Reed testified in his own defense, relating a different
 
explanation of these events. He maintained that he had been
 rummaging through his own bag, placing his items on the ground,
 when, at one point, he looked up and noticed a woman walking
 towards him. He continued to rummage through his bag and when he
 looked up again, the was woman nearly upon him. Startled, he
 stood up and put his hands on her arms to keep her from falling. 
At that point she began screaming and yelling for help. Upon
 
3/
 Reed did not refile his notice of appeal. Pursuant to Hawai' i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure 4(b)(4), however, we deem his notice of appeal to
have been timely filed on March 6, 2013. See Haw. R. App. P. 4(b)(4); State 
v. Keawe, 107 Hawai' i 1, 3 n.4, 108 P.3d 304, 306 n.4 (2005) (deeming timely
filed a notice of appeal filed after guilty finding but before entry of
written judgment). 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
hearing another man call out and seeing the man running towards
 
them, Reed panicked. He quickly stuffed the items on the ground
 into his bag and ran off. He returned to his van and discovered
 that he had the woman's purse in his bag, along with her employee
 identification badge. Intending to return her purse, he took it
 to her place of employment. Rather than give the purse to any of
 the number of police officers who had assembled there, he left
 the purse with the identification badge visible on an information
 desk and departed.
 
Reed explained that, being black, he was afraid to hand
 
over Sawada's purse to police. He also explained his panicked
 reaction to his encounter with Sawada as motivated by concerns
 over racial profiling. Reed testified that he never attempted to
 rob Sawada nor threatened her with a gun.
 
The jury had full opportunity to hear these contrary
 
accounts and found that the State had proven its case beyond a
 reasonable doubt. In doing so, the jury plainly credited
 Sawada's testimony and discredited Reed's.
 
Considering the evidence, as we must, in the light most 
favorable to the State, there was substantial evidence to support Reed's conviction. See State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 33, 960 
P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998). Along with the undisputed facts at trial proving that Reed encountered Sawada, engaged with her, and departed with her belongings, Sawada's testimony is sufficient to 
4/
sustain Reed's conviction. See State v. Souza, 119 Hawai 'i 60, 
72, 193 P.3d 1260, 1272 (App. 2008) ("Sufficient evidence to support a conviction can be established through the testimony of a single witness." (citing State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai
'i 131, 141, 
913 P.2d 57, 67 (1996))). We therefore conclude that Reed's appeal is without merit. 
Therefore,
 
4/
 Reed asks this court to compare Sawada's testimony with Reed's and
determine that a reasonable jury could not have found him guilty. It is not 
our role, however, to second-guess a jury's credibility determination as
between conflicting testimony. See State v. Martinez, 101 Hawai' i 332, 340,
68 P.3d 606, 614 (2003) ("[I]t is well-settled that an appellate court will
not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and theweight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." (quoting
Doe Parents v. State, Dep't of Educ., 100 Hawai' i 34, 58, 58 P.3d 545, 569
(2002) (internal quotation marks omitted))). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Probation Sentence, filed on March 6, 2013, in the Circuit
 
Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 5, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
William H. Jameson, Jr.,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Donn Fudo,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 