   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001116
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
IN KUK SONG, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 1DCW-13-0000044)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant In Kuk Song (Song) appeals from the
 
Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order, filed on September 10,
 
2014 (Judgment), in the District Court of the First Circuit,
 
Honolulu Division (District Court).1
 
On January 3, 2013, Song was charged with three counts
 
of Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree, in violation of Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 707-733(1)(a) (2014). On May 30, 2013,
 
Song pled not guilty and demanded a jury trial. The case was
 
committed to the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
Court). After a June 13, 2013 hearing at which Song voluntarily
 
1
 The Honorable James H. Ashford presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2
relinquished his right to a trial by jury,  and elected to be
tried in the District Court, the case was remanded to the
 
District Court.
 
On February 13, 2014, Song pled no contest, waived
 
trial, and requested a deferral. 
Song was convicted of three
 
counts of Sexual Assault in the Fourth Degree. Song's request
 for a deferral was denied, Song was sentenced to one year
 probation for each count (concurrent), two days jail for each
 count (concurrent), psychosexual evaluation and treatment, if
 necessary, and registration as a sex offender. After the
 District Court denied Song's request for a deferral and imposed a
 sentence, Song requested a trial. The request for a trial was
 denied.
 
On February 19, 2014, through newly-retained counsel,
 
Song filed a Motion to Withdraw No Contest Plea. After an
 evidentiary hearing, which was conducted on June 17, 2014, August
 13, 2014, September 3, 2014, and September 10, 2014, Song's
 Motion to Withdraw No Contest Plea was denied.
 
On appeal, Song contends that: (1) Song did not
 
knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently waive his right to a
 jury trial; (2) the District Court erred in denying his Motion to
 Withdraw No Contest Plea on the grounds that there was a
 requisite showing of manifest injustice; and (3) Song received
 ineffective assistance of counsel leading up to and during his no
 contest plea.
 
2
 The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Song's
 contentions as follows:
 
(1) On May 30, 2013, Song appeared in District Court,
 
pled not guilty to the charges, and demanded a jury trial. After
 the case was committed to the Circuit Court, Song waived his
 right to a jury trial on June 13, 2013, and the case was remanded
 back to the District Court on June 27, 2013. During a hearing on
 October 16, 2013, Song claimed that he did not understand that he
 was waiving his right to a jury trial and informed the District
 Court that he wanted a jury trial. After a hearing on December
 16, 2013 the District Court denied Song's Motion to Withdraw Jury
 Waiver. 
"[T]he validity of the waiver of a right to a jury 
trial is reviewed under the totality of the circumstances surrounding the case, taking into account the defendant's background, experience, and conduct." State v. Gomez-Lobato, 130 
Hawai
'i 465, 470, 312 P.3d 897, 902 (2013) (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). Citing United States v. Duarte-Higareda, 113 F.3d 1000, 1102 (9th Cir. 1997), the court in Gomez-Lobato stated that in determining whether a defendant has knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently waived the right to a jury trial, the court may inform the defendant that: (1) a jury is composed of twelve members of the community; (2) the defendant may take part in jury selection; (3) a jury verdict must be 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
unanimous; and (4) the court alone decides guilt or innocence if
 
the defendant waives a jury trial. Id. However, the four-
factor, Duarte-Higareda colloquy is not required and only
 provides guidance on whether the right to a jury trial was
 knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently waived. Id. at 471,
 
312 P.3d at 903. 
The transcript of the June 13, 2013 hearing shows that
 
Song knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently waived his right
 to a jury trial. During a colloquy in which the Circuit Court
 directly addressed Song, with the aid of an interpreter, Song
 admitted that he signed a form waiving his right to a jury trial
 after going over the form with the interpreter. Song stated that
 he was 57 years old, lived in the United States for twenty-nine
 years, and went to high school in South Korea. Song next stated
 that his mind was clear and he was not under the influence of any
 medication, alcohol, or drugs. Song denied that he was under
 treatment for mental illness. After Song stated that he did not
 
meet with his attorney, a recess was taken, and Song consulted
 
with his attorney on the matter. Song then stated, after the
 charges were explained to him by his attorney, that he understood
 the charges. Song agreed that he understood that he had a right
 to a jury trial and no one could force him to give up that right.
 Song confirmed that he understood that in a jury trial, a jury of
 twelve people from the community would decide whether he was
 guilty or not guilty, all twelve people on the jury had to agree,
 he would be allowed to help pick the people on the jury, trial
 would not increase his sentence or punishment, and that if he
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
gave up his right to a jury trial that a single judge alone would
 
decide his guilt or innocence. Song also confirmed that if he
 gave up his right to a jury trial that he could not change his
 mind later and denied that anyone was threatening, pressuring, or
 forcing him to give up his right to a jury trial. Song agreed
 that he understood everything that was talked about. When Song
 was first asked if he had any questions, he stated that he wanted
 to say something. It appears that his counsel directed Song to
 ask her questions, and after Song conferred with her, Song's
 counsel stated that they would talk later about something. Song
 then stated to the court: "Ok. I wanted a single judge." The
 Circuit Court then again asked if Song had any questions and Song
 replied no. Song then responded affirmatively when asked whether
 he was giving up his right to a jury trial, and the Circuit Court
 found that he knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently waived
 his right to a jury trial. 
The Circuit Court's colloquy included advising Song of
 
the four Duarte-Higareda factors. The Circuit Court inquired
 about Song's background and education. Song also conferred with
 his attorney during the colloquy and confirmed that he did not
 have any questions after doing so. A review of the hearing
 demonstrates that there was no evidence that he did not
 understand that he was waiving his right to a jury trial or that
 he did not understand the proceeding due to the Korean
 interpreter that was provided. Based on the record, and under
 the totality of the circumstances, it appears that Song
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently waived his right to a
 
jury trial. 
"Generally, [w]here it appears from the record that a 
defendant has voluntarily waived a constitutional right to a jury trial, the defendant carries the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that his/her waiver was involuntary." State v. Baker, 132 Hawai
'i 1, 6, 319 P.3d 1009, 
1014 (2014) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). During the hearing on Song's Motion to Withdraw Jury Waiver, Song claimed that he did not understand the seriousness of the offense, he did not understand that he was waiving his right to a jury trial, that he did not speak English very well, and his daughter advised him to waive his right to a jury. Song's contentions are contradicted by the colloquy conducted on June 13, 2013. Song was also provided an interpreter during all appearances before the court. Therefore, Song failed to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that his waiver was involuntary. 
(2 & 3) Song argues that the District Court erred by
 
denying his Motion to Withdraw No Contest Plea because he did not
 understand that he could have had a trial simply by asking, he
 was misled into believing that he had to enter a guilty plea or
 hire private counsel in order to proceed to trial because his
 court-appointed attorney would not handle a trial, and his court-
appointed attorney provided ineffective assistance of counsel
 regarding his no contest plea. Song contends that his attorney's
 failure to be ready for trial on January 24, 2014, failure to
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
subpoena witnesses, and failure to conduct an adequate
 
investigation of the facts, and his attorney's alleged misleading
 of the court into believing that Song wanted to fire his court-
appointed attorney and retain private counsel, are specific acts
 or omissions that demonstrate a lack of skill, judgment, or
 diligence that resulted in the withdrawal or substantial
 impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. Song further
 contends that he was deprived of his right to dictate or devise a
 trial strategy because he was denied the opportunity to have a
 trial.
 
Song's February 13, 2014 no contest plea was entered
 
well after his Motion to Withdraw Waiver of Jury Trial was denied
 on December 16, 2013. Song's claim that he did not understand
 that he was entitled to a trial when he entered his no contest
 plea is particularly unavailing in light of his extensive prior
 testimony about withdrawing his waiver of a jury trial, as well
 as the District Court's extensive inquiry into his plea waiver. 
Song's court-appointed attorney, Tae Won Kim (Kim),
 
testified, inter alia, that Song wanted an assurance of the
 outcome if he changed his plea and that the issue of Song
 retaining private counsel arose after Kim would not guarantee the
 outcome. Kim also stated that he conducted over 100 non-jury
 trials and told Song several times that he would take the case to
 trial. The District Court found Kim credible and Song not
 credible. "It is well-settled that an appellate court will not
 pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and
 the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fact." State v. Mattiello, 90 Hawai 'i 255, 259, 978 P.2d 693, 
697 (1999) (citations, internal quotation marks and brackets 
omitted; block quote format changed). 
Song did not demonstrate that he was provided with
 
ineffective assistance of counsel. Kim was appointed on December
 26, 2013, after the Office of the Public Defender withdrew. 
Trial had been scheduled for January 24, 2014, after Song's
 Motion to Withdraw Jury Trial Waiver was denied on December 16,
 2013. On the morning of January 24, 2014, court minutes indicate
 that the case was rescheduled for the afternoon because of court
 congestion.
3 When the case was called in the afternoon, Kim
 
stated that he had not completed his investigation, having been
 appointed one month earlier, so he was not prepared to proceed to
 trial. Kim also reported that Song wanted to retain private
 counsel. The case was continued and Song was ordered to appear
 with counsel on February 12, 2014, for a status hearing. Trial
 was set for March 7, 2014. Kim's lack of preparation for trial
 on January 24, 2014, does not constitute a withdrawal or
 substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense
 because the trial was continued to March 7, 2014. Also, Kim
 testified that he had told Song that he was having a hard time
 contacting the defense witnesses, and asked Song to tell them to
 contact Kim to meet with him. Thus, it appears that Kim did
 attempt to investigate the facts of the case prior to the March
 7, 2014, trial date. 
3
 No transcript for the morning of January 24, 2014, is in the
record on appeal.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kim did not mislead the court into believing that Song
 
wanted to change his counsel. On January 24, 2014, the District
 
Court addressed Song personally by asking whether he wanted to
 hire a new attorney and Song responded "Yes." Song confirmed
 that he no longer wanted Kim as his court-appointed attorney and
 had asked another private attorney to represent him. At the no
 contest plea hearing, Song informed the court that he had decided
 he did not want private counsel and that he was satisfied with
 Kim representing him.
 
Song was not deprived of his right to dictate trial
 
strategy. Song waived that right when he entered his no contest
 plea on February 13, 2014. Song failed to demonstrate manifest
 injustice that entitled him to withdraw his no contest plea. 
For these reasons, the District Court did not err by
 
denying Song's Motion to Withdraw No Contest Plea. 
Accordingly, the District Court's September 10, 2014
 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 5, 2016. 
On the briefs: Mark S. Kawata,
Colleen Mari Jones,for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 