NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000221
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JAYLENE K. PATE, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
KONA DIVISION

 
(CASE NO. 3DTA-12-02258)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jaylene K. Pate (Pate) appeals from
 
the Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment, entered on
 
February 22, 2013 in the District Court of the Third Circuit,
 Kona Division (District Court).
1
 
Pate was convicted of Operating a Vehicle Under the
 
Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2014) and acquitted
 of Refusal to Submit to Breath, Blood, or Urine Test, in
 violation of HRS § 291E-68 (Supp. 2014).
 
On appeal, Pate contends (1) there was insufficient
 
evidence to find her guilty of OVUII and (2) the District Court
 improperly considered her conduct in refusing to cooperate with a
 breath test, for which she was acquitted, as a factor in her
 sentencing.
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Pate's points of error as follows:
 
(1) There was sufficient evidence to convict her of 
OVUII. When the evidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in the strongest light for the prosecution, State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai
'i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 (2007), 
there was sufficient evidence that Pate operated or assumed actual physical control of a vehicle on a public highway while under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair her normal mental faculties or ability to care for herself and guard against casualty, in violation of HRS § 291E-61(a)(1). 
Officer McDaniel testified that Pate did not stop at a 
stop sign while driving her vehicle, when he spoke to Pate there was a strong odor of an intoxicating beverage coming from Pate, she had red, glassy, and watery eyes, she slurred her speech, she swayed back and forth, she exhibited signs of intoxication by missing heel-to-toe, staggering off the line and not finishing the heel-to-toe field sobriety test, and swayed back and forth, began the test too soon, and put her foot down during a one-leg stand field sobriety test. The District Court found the testimony by officers that Pate participated in the field sobriety tests more credible than Pate's testimony that she did not perform the field sobriety tests at all. "It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." State v. Mattiello, 90 
Hawai
'i 255, 259, 978 P.2d 693, 697 (1999) (internal quotation 
marks, citation, and brackets omitted; block quote format changed). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(2) The District Court did not plainly err by
 
considering, at sentencing, Pate's conduct after her arrest as
 
2
she blew into the Intoxylizer. HRS § 706-606 (2014)  governs the
factors that must be considered in imposing a sentence. Pate
 
argues that the District Court erred when it considered
 "unsubstantiated allegations of misconduct against her."
 
The conduct considered by the District Court was

 
neither unsubstantiated nor uncharged. Pate was charged but
 found not guilty of Refusal to Submit to Breath, Blood, or Urine
 Test, in violation of HRS § 291E-68 because the District Court
 determined that the failure to provide a sufficient breath sample
 when blowing into the Intoxylizer did not constitute a "refusal"
 under the statute. Pate's conduct, testified to by the State's
 witness at trial, consisted of her twice failing to direct all of
 her breath into the mouthpiece as instructed and forcing her
 saliva into the mouthpiece, resulting in a failure to provide an
 adequate breath sample into the machine. The District Court
 
2	 HRS § 706-606 provides,
 
§706-606 Factors to be considered in imposing a
sentence.  The court, in determining the particular sentence
to be imposed, shall consider:
 
(1)	 The nature and circumstances of the offense and
 
the history and characteristics of the
defendant;
 
(2)	 The need for the sentence imposed:
 
(a)	 To reflect the seriousness of the offense,
to promote respect for law, and to provide
just punishment for the offense;
 
(b)	 To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;
 
(c)	 To protect the public from further crimes
of the defendant; and
 
(d)	 
To provide the defendant with needed
educational or vocational training,
medical care, or other correctional
treatment in the most effective manner;
 
(3)
	 The kinds of sentences available; and
 
(4)	 The need to avoid unwarranted sentence
 disparities among defendants with similar
records who have been found guilty of similar
conduct.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
found that Pate "sabotaged the breath test so that they couldn't
 
get a reading from you, and to me that was deliberate and
 conscious decision." As the District Court was required to take
 into account the circumstances of the offense, Pate's
 characteristics, and the need to promote respect for the law, see
 HRS § 706-606 (1) & (2)(a), in fashioning an appropriate
 sentence, considering Pate's conduct during the testing process
 after arrest was proper as relevant to that consideration. We
 cannot conclude the District Court committed plain error.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment and
 
Notice of Entry of Judgment, entered on February 22, 2013 in the
 District Court of the Third Circuit, Kona Division is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 16, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Titiimaea N. Ta 'ase,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Linda L. Walton,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai
'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4

 