 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI  RE PORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000762 13-APR-2026 09:07 AM Dkt. 64 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000762 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
IN THE INTEREST OF B.P. 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-S NO. 24-0000108)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and McCullen, JJ.) 
Mother-Appellant D.P. (Mother) appeals from the Family 
Court of the First Circuit's October 9, 2024 order granting 
Petitioner-Appellee the Department of Human Services' (DHS) 
request to withdraw its August 28, 2024 Petition for Temporary 
Foster Custody (Order Withdrawing Petition).
  1
On appeal, Mother challenges the family court's 
admission of exhibits that DHS and the Guardian Ad Litem (GAL) 
offered and that the family court relied on in concluding that 
Father-Appellee T.P. (Father) could provide a safe family home 
1 The Honorable Lesley N. Maloian presided.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 for B.P. (Child) and closing the underlying Child Protective Act 
Case. Mother also challenges the family court's authority to 
enter its findings and conclusions after she filed her notice of 
appeal.2 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve this 
appeal as discussed below and vacate and remand. 
Child was born to Mother and Father in 2019. Since 
March 2024, DHS has received and investigated multiple reports of abuse or neglect to Child by Mother, Father, and K.P. 
(Maternal Grandmother). Without physical evidence, allegations 
of sexual abuse and threats of abuse by Father went unconfirmed, 
"but there was a concern of coaching by Maternal Grandmother." 
In April 2024, Father filed for divorce from Mother in 
1FDV-24-0001010 (Divorce Case).
3 A visitation order in the 
Divorce Case limited Father's contact with Child to three times 
a week, for approximately four hours at a time. 
2 Although Mother's notice of appeal identifies and appends only the 
October 9, 2024 Order Withdrawing Petition, Mother's abbreviated opening 
brief indicates she also appeals from the family court's September 9, 2024 
order granting DHS's Petition and awarding temporary family supervision with 
placement to Father (Temporary Family Supervision Order). Given our 
decision, we need not address Mother's arguments as to the September 9, 2024 Temporary Family Supervision Order, including alleged insufficiency of 
service of process and the protective order. 
3 The Honorable Robert J. Brown presided in the Divorce Case. 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 On August 24, 2024, DHS received and confirmed "a 
report of threat of abuse and threatened neglect to" Child by 
Mother and Maternal Grandmother. DHS assumed temporary foster 
custody of Child on August 25. 
On August 28, DHS filed its Petition and requested an 
inquiry into the abuse allegations. 
On August 30, the family court conducted a temporary 
foster custody hearing. The family court judicially noticed the 
"related records and files" in the Divorce Case and accepted 
into evidence, over Mother's objection, twenty exhibits offered by DHS, including: (1) the August 28, 2024 Safe Family Home 
Report; (2) the August 28, 2024 Family Service Plan; (3) Child's 
medical and dental records; and (4) the August 24, 2024 Hawaiʻ i 
State Medical-Legal Record and Sexual Assault Information Form. 
Also over Mother's objection, the family court ordered 
"temporary family supervision to [DHS] as that is [its] 
recommendation and findings at this time based on [its] 
investigation with placement to Father." The family court 
entered its order to that effect on September 9, and stated 
Mother had "thirty (30) days to submit written objections." The 
family court scheduled a contested return hearing for October 8.
4 
4 Mother waived the requirement under Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 587A-12(c)(2) (2018) that the return hearing be conducted within fifteen 
days of the date of the Petition's filing or the August 30 hearing. Mother 
explained she wanted "more time than 15 days to prepare her case." 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 In the meantime, on September 18, the family court in 
the Divorce Case "took judicial notice of the records and files 
in [the Divorce Case], including the related [Child Protective 
Act] Case." (Formatting altered.) Father offered, and the 
family court received, into evidence DHS's Petition — which 
asserted that Father was "willing and able to provide Child with 
a safe family home with the assistance of a service plan" and 
Mother was not — and the September 9, 2024 Temporary Family 
Supervision Order. 
Mother's counsel objected, given the outstanding Child 
Protective Act Case, and requested that the "matter be taken under advisement and appropriate orders be issued at a later 
time." (Formatting altered.) Nonetheless, arguments were had. 
The family court orally awarded Father "temporary sole 
legal/physical custody of the Child." (Formatting altered.) 
The family court entered a written order on September 25 to that 
effect (Custody Order), "award[ing] temporary sole legal and sole physical custody of [Child]" to Father and authorized 
Mother to "have supervised visitation with [Child] at the 
discretion of DHS or the GAL." 
On September 30, in the Child Protective Act Case, DHS 
filed a "Motion for Immediate Review," pursuant to Hawaiʻ i 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
   
 
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 587A-30(a) (2018)5 and in light of the 
Custody Order entered in the Divorce Case, to address DHS's 
request to withdraw its Petition. DHS explained that "the only 
reason DHS had not placed the Child with Father was due to a 
visitation order" in the Divorce Case; the family court 
subsequently awarded Father sole legal custody of Child in the 
Divorce Case; and DHS "assessed Father to be a safe and 
protective parent" and believed "all remaining issues" should be 
litigated in the Divorce Case without DHS's involvement. 
On October 1, Mother filed (self-represented) her 
objections in the Child Protective Act Case, including (1) three letters, (2) an exhibit list referencing and appending (a) a 
scan of an unidentified document with handwritten notes 
disputing various statements, (b) provider notes taken during an 
unscheduled visit to Child's primary care physician in which 
Mother, Maternal Grandmother, and Child made allegations of 
abuse by Father, and (c) a scan of the July 15, 2024 DHS update to the family court containing more handwritten notes. 
On October 8, the family court conducted its contested 
return hearing. Over Mother's objection, the family court 
5 Under HRS § 587A-30, a party may move to set a case for a periodic 
review hearing during which the court must determine, inter alia, whether the 
child is safe and enter orders "[t]o terminate jurisdiction if the court 
finds that the child's parents are willing and able to provide the child with 
a safe family home without the assistance of a service plan." HRS § 587A-
30(b)(1). 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 received into evidence four exhibits offered by DHS and one by 
the GAL: 
•
 DHS Exhibit 21: Résumé of Jessica Wong-Sumida, M.A., J.D.; 
• DHS Exhibit 22: Résumé of Winnie Ann Q. Nishimiya; 
• DHS Exhibit 23: DHS Supplemental Safe Family Home Report to Court dated October 2, 2024; 
• DHS Exhibit 24: September 25, 2024 Custody Order in Divorce Case; and 
• GAL Exhibit 1: Guardian Ad Litem's First Short Report to the Court. 
In particular, DHS Exhibit 23 opined that "Father is able to 
provide a safe family home without the assistance of a service 
plan" and recommended "Temporary Family Supervision be revoked 
and [the] case closed." 
With no witness testimony, the family 
court orally granted DHS's motion, allowing DHS to withdraw its Petition, and closed the case, stating Mother had thirty days to 
appeal.  
On October 9, the family court entered its written 
Order Withdrawing Petition, granting DHS's Motion for Immediate Review, withdrawing the Petition, and terminating jurisdiction. 
As relevant to Mother's appeal, the family court made the 
following two findings: 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 A. [Father] can provide a safe family home without the 
assistance of a service plan at this time; 
B. [DHS] exhibit nos. 21 through 24 and GAL's exhibit 
no. 1 were received into evidence by the Court subject to cross- examination; [Mother] and [Father] 
shall have thirty (30) days to submit any objections 
and/or clarifications[.] 
(Formatting altered.) Despite closing the case and terminating 
jurisdiction, the Order Withdrawing Petition stated Mother had "thirty (30) days to submit any objections and/or 
clarifications." 
Mother appealed on November 8. Also on November 8, 
Mother filed her objections. 
On December 20, the family court entered its findings 
of fact (FOF) and conclusions of law (COL). FOF 79 and COL 16 
both stated, "Mother is not currently willing and able to provide the Child with a safe family home, even with the 
assistance of a service plan." 
(1) As a threshold matter, DHS challenges Mother's 
standing to appeal because Mother "was neither affected nor 
prejudiced" by the Order Withdrawing Petition and, thus, not 
aggrieved. 
"An interested party aggrieved by any order or decree 
of the court under this chapter may appeal as provided in 
section 571-54." HRS § 587A-36 (2018). HRS § 571-54 (2018) provides, in relevant part, "An interested party, aggrieved by 
any order or decree of the court, may appeal to the intermediate 
7
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 appellate court for review of questions of law and fact upon the 
same terms and conditions as in other cases in the circuit 
court." An aggrieved party is "one who is affected or 
prejudiced by the appealable order." Leone v. Cnty. of Maui, 
141 Hawaiʻ i 68, 89, 404 P.3d 1257, 1278 (2017) (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
Here, FOF 79 and COL 16 in support of the family 
court's Order Withdrawing Petition stated, "Mother is not 
currently willing and able to provide the Child with a safe 
family home, even with the assistance of a service plan." 
FOF 79 and COL 16 track the statutory language authorizing 
termination of parental rights under HRS § 587A-33(a)(1) (2018), which provides, "At a termination of parental rights hearing, 
the court shall determine whether . . . [a] child's parent whose 
rights are subject to termination is not presently willing and 
able to provide the parent's child with a safe family home, even 
with the assistance of a service plan[.]" 
In addition, the family court in the Divorce Case 
appears to have considered DHS's Petition, which contained 
similar language, when awarding custody to Father. In turn, the 
family court in this Child Protective Act Case relied on the Custody Order in the Divorce Case and DHS Exhibit 23 in 
determining Mother was "not currently willing and able to 
8
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 provide the Child with a safe family home, even with the 
assistance of a service plan." 
In other words, the family court's findings and 
conclusions (as well as DHS's Petition) affect whether Mother 
has custody of and access to Child. See Leone, 141 Hawaiʻ i at 
89, 404 P.3d at 1278. Thus, Mother has standing to appeal the 
October 9, 2024 Order Withdrawing Petition and the December 20, 
2024 Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law. 
(2) Next, Mother contends she did not have a 
meaningful opportunity to object to or cross-examine the 
exhibits the family court accepted into evidence at the 
October 8 hearing. 
Mother relies on In re JH, 152 Hawaiʻ i 373, 
526 P.3d 350 (2023). 
In In re JH, the Hawaiʻ i Supreme Court explained that 
the "due process floor entails notice and an opportunity to be 
heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner," and that 
"[c]ontext shapes the process that is due." Id. at 380-81, 526 
P.3d at 357-58 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Here, Mother did not have a meaningful opportunity to 
be heard with regards to the Petition withdrawal. See id. The 
family court granted DHS's motion, allowing it to withdraw its Petition, closed the case, and terminated jurisdiction, all 
before
 allowing Mother an opportunity to submit objections to 
DHS Exhibit 23 and the other exhibits entered into evidence. 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   And context is important. See id. at 381, 526 P.3d at 
358. As mentioned above, the family court in the Divorce Case 
considered DHS's Petition in awarding custody to Father, and the 
family court in this Child Protective Act Case relied on the 
Custody Order in the Divorce Case and DHS Exhibit 23 in allowing 
DHS to withdraw its Petition. Upon entering its findings and 
conclusions, Mother was left with a finding that she was "not 
currently willing and able to provide the Child with a safe 
family home, even with the assistance of a service plan" and no 
custody of Child.  
Allowing Mother to submit objections after withdrawing 
the Petition and closing the case did not afford Mother "an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful 
manner." See id.
 at 380-81, 526 P.3d at 357-58. 
(3) Finally, Mother challenges the family court's 
authority to enter its December 20, 2024 Findings of Facts and 
Conclusions of Law. Mother argues the family court was divested of jurisdiction. 
Hawaiʻi
 Family Co
urt Rules Rule 52(a) instructs the 
family court to "enter its findings of fact and conclusions of law where none have been entered" upon the filing of the notice of appeal. Mother filed her notice of appeal with the family 
10   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  court on November 20, and the family court entered its findings 
and conclusions on December 20. There was no error. 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the family court's 
October 9, 2024 Order Withdrawing Petition and remand the case 
for proceedings consistent with this summary disposition order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i, April 13, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
 
Branden T. Nakahara, for Mother-Appellant. 
 
Joy S. Wills, Julio C. Herrera, Erin K.S. Torres, 
Kellie M. Kersten, 
Derek D. Peterson, Deputy Attorneys General 
Attorneys for Petitioner-
Appellee The Department of Human Services. 
 
Jamie L. Demello, Guardian Ad Litem /s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Chief Judge 
 /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
Associate Judge 
 /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen Associate Judge 
11 