NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000934
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
EDELMIRA SALAYES-ARAIZA,
Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I,
Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P.
 NO. 15-1-0007(1) (CR. NO. 14-1-0162(1)))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Edelmira Salayes-Araiza (Salayes-
Araiza) appeals from the order of the Circuit Court of the Second
 
1
Circuit (Circuit Court)  denying her petition for post-conviction
relief without a hearing. 
Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai 'i 
(State) concedes that the Circuit Court erred in denying Salayes­
Araiza's petition without a hearing. We agree with the State's concession of error, vacate the Circuit Court's order, and remand the case for an evidentiary hearing on Salayes-Araiza's petition. 
BACKGROUND

 
I.
 
Salayes-Araiza is not a citizen of the United States. 
In 2014, the State charged Salayes-Araiza with first-degree theft
 
1The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by deception of more than $20,000 in public assistance benefits,
 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-830.5(1)(a)
 
2
(2014) (Count 1); and welfare fraud, in violation of HRS § 346­
34(b) and/or (c) (2015) (Count 2). 
Salayes-Araiza, represented
 
by a Deputy Public Defender (DPD), pleaded no contest to both
 counts. On January 2, 2015, the Circuit Court sentenced 
Salayes-Araiza to concurrent terms of five years of probation on
 Count 1 and one year of probation on Count 2. Salayes-Araiza did
 not file a direct appeal from her judgment of conviction and
 sentence.
 
On April 13, 2015, after the time for a direct appeal

 
had run, Salayes-Araiza was taken into custody by Immigration and
 Customs Enforcement officials, and the United States Department
 of Homeland Security initiated proceedings to remove her from the
 United States. The United States charged, in relevant part, that
 Salayes-Araiza was subject to removal pursuant to
 
Section 237(a)(2)(A)(iii) of the Immigration and Nationality
Act (Act), as amended, in that, at any time after admission,
you have been convicted of an aggravated felony as defined
in section 101(a)(43)(M) of the Act, a law relating to an
offense that (i) involves fraud or deceit in which the loss
to the victim or victims exceeds $10,000[.]
 
2HRS § 708-830.5(a)(1) provides: 
(1) A person commits the offense of theft in the first
degree if the person commits theft:
 
(a)	 Of property or services, the value of which exceeds

$20,000[.]
 
HRS § 708-830 (2014), which defines theft, provides in relevant part:
 
A person commits theft if the person does any of the
following:
 
. . . .

 
(2) 	Property obtained or control exerted through
deception. A person obtains, or exerts control over,
the property of another by deception with intent to
deprive the other of the property. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
In Padilla v. Kentucky, 559 U.S. 356 (2010), the United
 
States Supreme Court held that where "the terms of the relevant
 
immigration statute are succinct, clear, and explicit in defining
 the removal consequence for [a defendant's] conviction," the
 defendant's counsel has the duty to give correct advice regarding
 the deportation consequence of the conviction, and counsel's
 failure to do so may entitle the defendant to post-conviction
 relief based on a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel. 
Padilla, 559 U.S. at 368-69. The Court concluded that
 "constitutionally competent counsel would have advised [Padilla]
 that his conviction for drug distribution made him subject to
 automatic deportation." Id. at 360.
 
III.
 
On May 22, 2015, Salayes-Araiza, through retained 
counsel, filed a petition for post-conviction relief pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 (2006). In her 
petition, Salayes-Araiza alleged that the DPD, her former lawyer, provided ineffective assistance by failing to properly advise her of the immigration consequences of her no-contest pleas. In particular, the petition alleged that the DPD "did not tell her that it would be near certain that she would be deported as there are no forms of immigration relief once convicted of theft in the first degree where the amount of loss is more than $10,000.00" 
Salayes-Araiza submitted a Declaration in support of
 
her petition. In her Declaration, Salayes-Araiza asserted that
 "[m]y criminal defense attorney did not advise me of any possible
 immigration consequences of [my no-contest pleas]." She stated
 that "[h]ad I been advised of the immigration consequences, I
 would not have pled no contest and would have presented my
 defenses at trial." She further stated that "I am in custody of
 Department of Homeland Security, placed in removal proceedings
 before an Immigration Judge. . . . I was never advised by my
 criminal defense attorney that [my] convictions will result in
 mandatory custody and [I] will have no relief under the
 immigration laws." 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Salayes-Araiza's HRPP Rule 40 counsel also submitted a
 
Declaration. In his Declaration, HRPP Rule 40 counsel stated
 
that he had spoken to the DPD and that the DPD told him that the
 DPD 
was not aware and did not advise [Salayes-Araiza] that theft
[of] over $10,000 constituted [an] aggravated felony under
the immigration code. [The DPD] also stated that he was not
aware that removal was certain and therefore did not explain
this to [Salayes-Araiza].
 
HRPP Rule 40 counsel represented that he would subpoena the DPD
 
if the Circuit Court held an evidentiary hearing. 
IV.
 
On November 19, 2015, the Circuit Court denied Salayes­
Araiza's petition without a hearing and issued its "Findings of
 Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Dismissing Petition to
 Vacate, Set Aside or Correct Illegal Sentence Through a Writ of
 Habeas Corpus Pursuant to H.R.P.P. Rule 40" (Order Dismissing
 Petition). In the Order Dismissing Petition, the Circuit Court
 concluded that Salayes-Araiza had waived her claim of ineffective
 assistance of counsel by failing to previously raise it,
 including at trial or on appeal. The Circuit Court further
 concluded that even if Salayes-Araiza had not waived her claim of
 ineffective assistance, she failed to state a colorable claim for
 relief. The Circuit Court's conclusion that Salayes-Araiza
 failed to state a colorable claim for relief was based on its
 assumption that neither of her convictions was an aggravated
 felony under the immigration laws. Based on this assumption, the
 Circuit Court concluded that the immigration consequences of
 Salayes-Araiza's no-contest pleas were unclear and that it seemed
 she could be eligible for cancellation of deportation at the
 discretion of the Attorney General. Because it concluded that
 Salayes-Araiza had waived her claim of ineffective assistance of
 counsel and had failed to state a colorable claim for relief, the
 Circuit Court denied Salayes-Araiza's petition without a hearing. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, Salayes-Araiza argues that the Circuit Court
 
erred in concluding that she waived her right to assert a claim
 
of ineffective assistance of counsel. She further argues: (1)
 that the Circuit Court erred in concluding that her conviction
 for first-degree theft by deception was not an aggravated felony
 under the immigration laws; and (2) that this erroneous
 conclusion led to the Circuit Court's erroneous ruling that
 Salayes-Araiza had failed to state a colorable claim of
 ineffective assistance of counsel. Salayes-Araiza requests that
 we vacate the Order Dismissing Petition and remand the case for
 an evidentiary hearing on her ineffective assistance of counsel
 claim.
 
The State concedes error on the points raised by 
Salayes-Araiza. As explained below, we agree with the State's
 concession of error.
 
I.
 
Salayes-Araiza argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
concluding that she waived her right to assert a claim of
 ineffective assistance of counsel. Salayes-Araiza contends that
 the Circuit Court based its waiver decision on Salayes-Araiza's
 mistake in labeling her petition as a petition to vacate, set
 aside, or correct an illegal sentence, rather than one to vacate
 or set aside her judgment of conviction. Although we disagree
 with Salayes-Araiza's characterization of the basis for the
 Circuit Court's waiver decision, we agree that the Circuit Court
 erred in ruling that she waived her right to assert a claim of
 ineffective assistance. 
HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) provides:
 
INAPPLICABILITY. Rule 40 proceedings shall not be available
and relief thereunder shall not be granted where the issues
sought to be raised have been previously ruled upon or were
waived. Except for a claim of illegal sentence, an issue is
waived if the petitioner knowingly and understandingly
failed to raise it and it could have been raised before the
 trial, at the trial, on appeal, in a habeas corpus
proceeding or any other proceeding actually conducted, or in
a prior proceeding actually initiated under this rule, and
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the petitioner is unable to prove the existence of
extraordinary circumstances to justify the petitioner's
failure to raise the issue. There is a rebuttable
 presumption that a failure to appeal a ruling or to raise an
issue is a knowing and understanding failure.
 
(Emphasis added.) The Circuit Court's references to the
 
mislabeling of the title of Salayes-Araiza's petition as one
 seeking relief for an illegal sentence was to make clear that the
 illegal-sentence exception to waiver in HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) did
 not apply. The Circuit Court did not conclude that Salayes-
Araiza had waived her ineffective assistance claim because she
 mislabeled her petition. Instead, the Circuit Court ruled that
 she waived her claim by failing to previously raise it.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in ruling that 
Salayes-Araiza had waived her claim of ineffective assistance by
 failing to previously raise it. The instant petition is the
 first HRPP Rule 40 petition filed by Salayes-Araiza, and it was
 filed shortly after she was taken into custody for removal
 proceedings. As the State acknowledges, Salayes-Araiza
 "essentially asserts that she did not know that [the DPD] had
 provided faulty advice" until she was taken into custody in April
 2015 for removal proceedings and discussed her situation with new
 counsel. By this time, the deadline for filing a direct appeal
 had already passed. The DPD, the person who allegedly provided
 the ineffective assistance, or other members of the Public
 Defenders Office would presumably have been the ones responsible
 for advising Salayes-Araiza about a direct appeal. Under these
 circumstances, we agree with the State that Salayes-Araiza did
 not have a realistic opportunity to file a direct appeal and
 raise the ineffective assistance of counsel claim on direct
 appeal. We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in ruling that
 Salayes-Araiza had waived the right to assert this claim. 
II.
 
The Circuit Court ruled that even if Salayes-Araiza had
 
not waived her claim of ineffective assistance, she failed to
 state a colorable claim for relief. We conclude that this ruling
 was also in error.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A.
 
The Circuit Court's ruling that Salayes-Araiza failed
 
to state a colorable claim for relief on her ineffective
 
assistance of counsel claim was based on its erroneous assumption
 that her conviction for first-degree theft by deception was not
 an aggravated felony under the immigration laws. Based on this
 erroneous assumption, the Circuit Court concluded that the
 immigration consequences of Salayes-Araiza's no-contest pleas
 were unclear and that she may be eligible for cancellation of
 deportation at the discretion of the Attorney General.
 
The Circuit Court's analysis of the immigration
 
consequences of Salayes-Araiza's conviction for first-degree
 theft by deception was wrong. Contrary to the Circuit Court's
 assumption, Salayes-Araiza's conviction for first-degree theft by
 deception in violation of HRS § 708-830.5(1)(a) is an aggravated
 felony under the immigration laws. 
For purposes of the applicable immigration laws, an
 
"aggravated felony" is defined, in pertinent part, as "an offense
 that . . . involves fraud or deceit in which the loss to the
 victim or victims exceeds $10,000[.]" 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(43)(M). 
Salayes-Araiza's conviction for first-degree theft by deception
 of more than $20,000 in public assistance benefits was clearly an
 aggravated felony under the immigration laws. Pursuant to 8
 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(A)(iii), "[a]ny alien who is convicted of an
 aggravated felony at any time after admission is deportable." In
 addition, 8 U.S.C. § 1228(c) provides that "[a]n alien convicted
 of an aggravated felony shall be conclusively presumed to be
 deportable from the United States." 
The Circuit Court referred to 8 U.S.C. § 1229b(a) in
 
support of its conclusion that the Attorney General may have the
 discretion to cancel Salayes-Araiza's removal. However, 8 U.S.C.
 § 1229b(a) does not apply to aliens convicted of an aggravated
 felony. 8 U.S.C. § 1229b(a)(3); see Lopez v. Gonzalez, 549 U.S.
 47, 50 (2006) ("[T]he Attorney General's discretion to cancel the
 removal of a person otherwise deportable does not reach a convict
 of an aggravated felony.").
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
In Padilla, the United States Supreme Court
 
acknowledged that immigration law can be complex, and it stated
 
that where "the deportation consequences of a particular plea are
 unclear or uncertain[,]" "a criminal defense attorney need do no
 more than advise a noncitizen client that pending criminal
 charges may carry a risk of adverse immigration consequences." 
Padilla, 559 U.S. at 369. However, the Supreme Court held that
 when "the terms of the relevant immigration statute are succinct,
 clear, and explicit in defining the removal consequence for [a
 defendant's conviction[,]" and "when the deportation consequence
 is truly clear," defense counsel has the duty to give correct
 advice regarding the deportation consequence the defendant's
 plea. Id. at 368-69. 
Padilla had pleaded guilty to transporting a large
 
amount of marijuana. Id. at 359. The Supreme Court concluded
 
that the deportation consequences of Padilla's plea were clearly
 and explicitly set forth in the relevant immigration statute;
 that Padilla's counsel could have easily determined the
 consequences of Padilla's plea simply from reading the text of
 the statute; and that Padilla's deportation was presumptively
 mandatory. Id. at 368. In his post-conviction proceeding,
 
Padilla alleged that his counsel not only failed to advise him of
 the deportation consequence of his plea, but told him that he did
 not have to worry about immigration status because he had been in
 the country so long. Id. at 359. Padilla also alleged that "he
 
would have insisted on going to trial if he had not received
 incorrect advice from his attorney." Id. The Court agreed with
 
Padilla that "constitutionally competent counsel would have
 advised him that his conviction for drug distribution made him
 subject to automatic deportation." Id. at 360. The Court held
 
that taking Padilla's allegations as true, it had "little
 difficulty" concluding that he had sufficiently alleged that his
 counsel was constitutionally deficient, and it remanded the case 
for a hearing to determine whether Padilla was entitled to relief
 on his claim of ineffective assistance of counsel. Id. at 374. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C.
 
Here, Salayes-Araiza asserts that "[a] straightforward
 
reading of immigration statutes show that the deportation
 
consequence was truly clear[.]" In her petition, Salayes-Araiza
 alleged that the DPD failed to properly advise her of the
 immigration consequences of her no-contest pleas; that the DPD
 "did not tell her that it would be near certain that she would be
 deported" if she pleaded no contest to the charges; and that she
 would not have entered her no-contest pleas, but would have gone
 to trial, if she had been correctly advised of the immigration
 consequences of her pleas. Salayes-Araiza's HRPP Rule 40 counsel
 also represented that the DPD had informed him that the DPD "was
 not aware that removal was certain and therefore did not explain
 this to [Salayes-Araiza]." 
We conclude that Salayes-Araiza's petition sufficiently 
stated a colorable claim for relief. See Padilla, 559 U.S. at 
374; Dan v. State, 76 Hawai
'i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994). 
("As a general rule, a hearing should be held on a Rule 40 petition for post-conviction relief where the petition states a colorable claim." (block quote format and citation omitted)). Accordingly, the Circuit Court erred in denying Salayes-Araiza's petition without a hearing. CONCLUSION 
We vacate the Order Dismissing Petition, and we remand
 
the case for an evidentiary hearing on Salayes-Araiza's HRPP Rule
 40 petition.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 28, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Benjamin E. Lowenthal 
(Law Office of
Philip H. Lowenthal)
for Petitioner-Appellant
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Peter A. Hanano

 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Maui
for Respondent-Appellee 
9
 