NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000361
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
THEODORICO ERUM, JR., Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
COUNTY OF KAUA 'I, Defendant-Appellee,
and GLENN P. BELISLE, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0216)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Theodorico Erum, Jr. (Erum) appeals 
from the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit's (Circuit Court)1 
December 18, 2013 Final Judgment in favor of Defendant-Appellee 
County of Kaua 'i (Kaua 'i County). 
Erum argues on appeal that (1) summary judgment was 
improperly granted because there were genuine issues of material fact, i.e., Kaua
'i County (a) failed to post a notice on his 4976 
La Road property, (b) failed to post a notice "in conspicuous places for the entire statutory period of 45 days," and that "the required information concerning the sale of [Erum's properties] was not visible in the notices posted;" and (2) entry of the Final Judgment was error because (a) Kaua
'i County engaged in ex 
parte communication depriving Erum of the opportunity to be heard on the entry of that judgment, and (b) entry of the judgment was 
1
 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unjust since there were still claims pending against Defendant
 
Glenn P. Belisle (Belisle).2
 
After a careful review of the points raised and
 
arguments made by the parties, the record, and the applicable
 authority, we resolve Erum's appeal as follows and affirm.
 
1. The Circuit Court did not err in granting summary 
judgment in Kaua
'i County's favor. 
(a) The posting of the notice of the foreclosure 
sale at Erum's property substantially complied with Kaua 'i County 
Code (KCC) ยง 5A-5.2. Erum failed to establish a genuine issue of material fact regarding whether the subject notice was posted "on" his property and cites no authority in support of his argument that the ordinance must be construed in such a literal fashion. Klinger v. Kepano, 64 Haw. 4, 10, 635 P.2d 938, 942 
(1981) (the adequacy of notice is judged by whether the notice was "reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances, to apprise interested parties of the pendency of the action and afford them an opportunity to present their objections" (quoting Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & Tr. Co., 339 U.S. 306, 314 (1950)). Finally, Erum admits in his Declaration that he was aware of a notice posted on La Road, which adjoins his properties and as depicted in a photo submitted with Kaua
'i County's motion 
for summary judgment, and thus has failed to show how he was harmed by the placement. 
(b) We find Erum's argument, that the forty-five
 
day posting at the three public places requirement was not met 

 
because these buildings are closed on weekends and, "therefore,
 were not conspicuous places for the entire statutory 45 days
 
3
period," to be without merit. KCC ยง 5A-5.2  does not state that
2
 It appears that Belisle is the purchaser of Erum's properties at
the foreclosure sale.
 
3
 KCC ยง 5A-5.2 (1981) provides, 
[a]ll real property on which a lien for taxes exists
may be sold by way of foreclosure without suit by the
Director, and in case any lien, or any part thereof, has
existed thereon for three (3) years, shall be sold by the
Director at public auction to the highest bidder, for cash,
to satisfy the lien, together with all interest, penalties,
costs, and expenses due or incurred on account of the tax,
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the public places must remain open on weekends, and Erum provides
 
no authority for his construction. Moreover, there is authority
 to the contrary. See, Stewart v. Stewart, 357 S.W.2d 492 (Tex.
 
App. 1962) (that last day of statutory notice period fell on a
 holiday did not make notice deficient); Graham v. Fitts, 53 Miss.
 307, 314 (1876) (that notice posted on inside of post office door
 that was closed on Sunday did not invalidate notice); see also
 Chambers v. Lee, 566 S.W.2d 69, 73 (Tex. App. 1978) ("If the
 notices are actually posted the required number of days prior to
 the sale, it is not essential that they remain intact and visible
 during every one of the intervening days." (citing 59 C.J.S.,
 Mortgages, ยง 566 at 950)).
 
(c) Erum's argument that the notices posted on 
his properties were insufficient because "the required information concerning the sale of these two properties was not visible in the notice, and thus failed to warn (Erum)" is without merit. The evidence presented by Kaua
'i County establishes, and 
Erum does not contest, that Kaua 'i County's notice as a whole 
contained the necessary information, and Erum fails to provide authority for his arguments or point to evidence in the record to support his allegations. In any event, he does not maintain that he was unable to view, or was unaware of, all the pertinent information contained in the notice. 
3(...continued)
lien, and sale, the surplus, if any, to be rendered to the
person thereto entitled. The sale shall be held at any
public place proper for sales on execution, after notice
published at least once a week for at least four (4)
successive weeks immediately prior thereto in any newspaper
with a general circulation published in the County. If the
 address of the owner is known or can be ascertained by due
diligence, including an abstract of title or title search,
the Director shall send to each owner notice of the proposed
sale by registered mail, with request for return receipt.
If the address of the owner is unknown, the Director shall
send a notice to the owner at his or her last known address
 as shown on the records of the Department of Finance. The
 notice shall be deposited in the mail at least forty-five
(45) days prior to the date set for the sale. The notice
 shall also be posted for a like period in at least three (3)
conspicuous public places within the County, and if the land
is improved one (1) of the three (3) postings shall be on
the land.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. The Circuit Court's entry of final judgment in 
favor of Kaua 'i County was proper pursuant to the Hawai 'i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(b). 
(a) No later than November 20, 2013, when Erum 
filed his Plaintiff's Objection to Proposed Judgment (Objection), 
to which he attached as an exhibit Kaua 'i County's proposed final 
judgment, Erum had been served with a copy of the proposed judgment. Based on Erum's Objection, on November 25, 2013, Kaua
'i County proffered to the Circuit Court, an alternative 
proposed judgment, which was also sent to Erum. Three weeks later, the Circuit Court adopted and entered the latter proposed judgment as the December 18, 2013 Final Judgment. Erum did not file any objections to the latter proposed judgment in the interim. On this record, we cannot conclude Kaua
'i County 
engaged in ex parte communications. 
(b) The Circuit Court's entry of the Final 
Judgment pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b) was not in error. Erum's complaint did not contain a claim against Belisle. The Final Judgment did not mention, let alone enter judgment in favor of, Belisle. The Circuit Court had completely decided all of Erum's claims against Kaua
'i County when it granted summary judgment in 
Kaua'i County's favor. Given this record, we cannot conclude the 
Circuit Court's determination that there was no just reason for delay in entering the Final Judgment under HRCP Rule 54(b) was error. 
Therefore, the December 18, 2013 Final Judgment entered 
by the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, September 6, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Theodorico Erum, Jr.,
Plaintiff-Appellant, pro se. 
Alfred B. Castillo, Jr. and
Mona W. Clark,Office of the County Attorney,County of Kaua
'i,
for Defendant-Appellee Chief Judge 
Associate Judge 
Glenn P. Belisle,
Defendant-Appellee, pro se. Associate Judge 
4

 