NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000089
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
WELLS FARGO BANK, N.A. AS TRUSTEE FOR
OPTION ONE MORTGAGE LOAN TRUST 2006-1
 
ASSET-BASED CERTIFICATES, SERIES 2006-1,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ROBERT L. HENSLEY and FRANCES C. HENSLEY
 
and JOHN and MARY DOES 1-10,
Defendants-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-0091)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Robert L. Hensley and Frances C.
 
Hensley (Hensleys) appeal from the December 2, 2011 "Judgment For
 
Ejectment," the December 2, 2011 "Writ of Possession," and
 
related orders entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 
(circuit court). The circuit court granted summary judgment and
 entered judgment for ejectment in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as Trustee for Option One Mortgage Loan
 
Trust 2006-1 Asset-Based Certificates, Series 2006-1 (Wells
 
Fargo).
 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude this
 
appeal is without merit.
 
In their opposition to Wells Fargo's Motion for Summary
 
Judgment (MSJ) and their opening brief, the Hensleys contend
 
there are genuine factual issues as to whether Wells Fargo had
 
the authority to initiate the underlying non-judicial
 
foreclosure, thus invalidating Wells Fargo's quitclaim deed and
 
its entitlement to ejectment. Specifically, the Hensleys claim
 
the assignment of the note and mortgage to Wells Fargo
 
(Assignment) was void pursuant to the terms of a Pooling and
 
Servicing Agreement (PSA). Wells Fargo received the Assignment
 
in its role as the trustee of a securitized mortgage loan trust
 
(Trust). The PSA's terms provided that the Trust ceased
 
accepting mortgages several years before the contested Assignment
 
was executed to Wells Fargo. The Hensleys argue Wells Fargo had
 
no authority to accept the mortgage on the Trust's behalf, and
 
the violation of the PSA means that Wells Fargo does not have
 
good title to the mortgage. 
However, the Hensleys have not cited precedent holding 
that an assignment is invalid simply because it conflicts with a 
PSA or is made after a trust is closed. Rather, as Wells Fargo 
asserts, recent decisions by courts have rejected identical 
arguments contesting the validity of assignments to 
securitization trusts and have concluded that noncompliance with 
a PSA is irrelevant to the assignee's standing to foreclose. 
See, e.g., Abubo v. Bank of New York Mellon, No. 11-00312 JMS­
BMK, 2011 WL 6011787, at *8 (D. Hawai' i Nov. 30, 2011) 
(discussing several cases rejecting similar arguments in part because noncompliance with the terms of a PSA is irrelevant to 
the validity of the assignment); Long v. One W. Bank, FSB, No. 11 
C 703, 2011 WL 3796887 at *4 (N.D. Ill. Aug. 24, 2011) (noting 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the absence of precedent holding an assignment invalid because of
 
a conflict with a PSA). 
Noncompliance with the PSA may be relevant if there 
were doubts regarding the chain of title. In this case, however, 
Wells Fargo produced documents showing a direct chain of title 
from the initial lender, Option One Mortgage Corporation (Option 
One), to Wells Fargo. The record shows that on October 17, 2005, 
the Hensleys executed a promissory note and a mortgage 
encumbering the subject property (Property) to Option One. The 
mortgage, which was recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of the 
State of Hawai' i (BOC) on October 25, 2005, identifies Option One 
as the mortgagee. Option One then changed its name to Sand Canyon Corporation (SCC), and SCC assigned the mortgage and the 
note to Wells Fargo via the Assignment. Wells Fargo recorded the 
Assignment on November 3, 2009. 
A party who shows a "direct chain of paper title that
 
he is the owner of land" demonstrates "prima facie evidence of
 
their contents" and that title is vested in that party. See Apana
 
v. Kapano, 20 Haw. 399, *3 (Haw. Terr. 1911). Thus, Wells Fargo
 
made a prima facie showing that it was the holder of the note and
 
the mortgage encumbering the Property and had the right to
 
foreclose. 
Wells Fargo also made a prima facie showing of the
 
validity of the foreclosure proceedings and of its entitlement to
 
ejectment. In support of its MSJ, Wells Fargo attached as
 
exhibits a "Mortgagee's Affidavit of Foreclosure Under Power of
 
Sale" and the resulting quitclaim deed to the Property issued in
 
its favor, both recorded in the BOC. The affidavit sets forth
 
facts sufficient to establish that the affiant complied with the
 
requirements of the power of sale and the statute and is evidence
 
that the power of sale was duly executed. See Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 667-8 (1993 Repl.). 
When the moving party satisfies its initial burden of
 
production, the burden shifts to the non-moving party to
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
establish that genuine issues of material fact exist. Stanford 
Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawai' i 286, 296, 141 
P.3d 459, 469 (2006). The party opposing summary judgment "must 
show more than . . . some metaphysical doubt as to the material 
facts, for the mere existence of a scintilla of evidence in 
support of his [or her] position is insufficient to survive 
summary judgment." Yoneda v. Tom, 110 Hawai' i 367, 384-85, 133 
P.3d 796, 813-14 (2006) (quoting Springwall, Inc. v. Timeless Bedding, Inc., 207 F. Supp. 2d 410, 416 (M.D.N.C. 2002)). 
The Hensleys' conclusory statements that the documents
 
Wells Fargo produced are "forged" and "fraudulent" are
 
insufficient to raise a genuine issue. Moreover, even if the
 
manner in which the mortgage was transferred did not comply with
 
the PSA, it does not follow that the mortgage was not part of the
 
Trust or that Wells Fargo does not own the mortgage and note. 
The Hensleys failed to produce sufficient evidence to survive
 
summary judgment on this issue.
 
The Hensleys also contend the Assignment to Wells Fargo
 
was defective because SCC, the assignor, lacked the legal
 
authority to execute the Assignment. The Hensleys rely on a
 
declaration from SCC's president that had been filed in an
 
unrelated United States Bankruptcy Court proceeding in Louisiana. 
In the declaration, the president stated that as of March 18,
 
2009, SCC no longer owned any real estate mortgages. The
 
Hensleys point out, SCC executed the Assignment on October 26,
 
2009. The Hensleys contend the Assignment cannot be valid
 
because the assignor, by its own admission, no longer owned the
 
asset it purported to assign.
 
In response, Wells Fargo submitted to the circuit court
 
documents demonstrating SCC's authority to execute the
 
Assignment. Specifically, it produced (1) a limited power of
 
authority from SCC to American Home Mortgage Servicing, Inc.
 
(AHMSI) and (2) an SCC corporate resolution. The documents
 
indicate AHMSI purchased SCC's mortgage loan servicing business
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
through a purchase agreement dated March 17, 2008, and SCC then
 
granted AHMSI the authority to assign mortgage loans in SCC's
 
name. The SCC corporate resolution appointed certain AHMSI
 
employees to serve as SCC officers with the authority to execute
 
mortgage assignments. The signatory on the Assignment was one of
 
the SCC officers designated in the resolution.
 
The Hensleys' argument on appeal and in their
 
supplemental opposition to the MSJ simply reiterate that the SCC
 
president's declaration creates a genuine issue. In light of the
 
documents Wells Fargo produced, however, we agree with the
 
circuit court's conclusion that the declaration fails to
 
demonstrate the existence of a material factual dispute
 
precluding summary judgment.
 
Finally, we conclude the circuit court did not abuse 
its discretion when it denied the Hensleys' Motion to Compel. 
Fisher v. Grove Farm Co. Inc.
, 123 Hawai' i 82, 94, 230 P.3d 382, 
394 (App. 2009). The record demonstrates the Hensleys had sufficient opportunity to conduct discovery. As the circuit 
court noted, the Hensleys retained counsel as early as August 30, 
2010, when Hensleys' counsel filed an answer to the ejectment 
complaint. The Hensleys failed to initiate discovery until June 
15, 2011. The Hensleys had a year's time from the filing of the 
complaint until Wells Fargo filed its MSJ. 
Furthermore, the Motion to Compel requested documents 
such as "the original 'wet ink' Note," "the original assignment 
of mortgage," and "an original of any intervening assignment of 
Mortgage." The Hawai' i statutes governing non-judicial 
foreclosure do not expressly require that the foreclosing party produce a physical copy of the original note, see HRS §§ 667-5 to 
-10, and the extent to which discovery is permitted is subject to 
considerable latitude and the discretion of the trial court. Hac 
v. Univ. of Hawai' i, 102 Hawai' i 92, 100-01, 73 P.3d 46, 54-55 
(2003). Therefore, we conclude the circuit court did not err 
when it denied the Motion to Compel. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the (1) "Order Denying
 
Defendants Robert L. Hensley's Motion to Compel Plaintiff Produce
 Documents Filed September 8, 2011"; (2) "Order Granting
 
Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and For Writ of Ejectment
 
Against Defendants Robert L. Hensley and Frances C. Hensley Filed
 
April 55, 2011"; (3) Judgment for Ejectment; and (4) Writ of
 
Possession, all entered on December 2, 2011; and (5) the January
 
31, 2012 "Order Denying Defendants Robert L. Hensley and Frances
 
C. Hensley's Motion for Reconsideration of This Court's Order
 
Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and Denying
 
Defendants' Motion to Compel Plaintiff to Produce Documents Filed
 
December 13, 2011" all entered in the Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit are all affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 28, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Gary Victor Dubin
Fred J. Arensmeyer(Dubin Law Offices)for Defendants-Appellants. Presiding Judge 
Charles R. Prather Sofia M. Hirosane Blue Kaanehe (RCO Hawaii)for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 