NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000790
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE MATTER OF
 
ALII SECURITY SYSTEMS, INC., Petitioner-Appellant, v.
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, STATE OF HAWAI 'I;
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS,
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondents-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0572-03)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this secondary appeal, Petitioner-Appellant-
Appellant Alii Security Systems, Inc. (
Alii) appeals from the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit's (Circuit Court's) August 16, 
2012 Final Judgment affirming the decision by Respondent-
Appellee-Appellee Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs, State of Hawai
'i (DCCA) in favor of Respondent-Appellee-Appellee 
Department of Transportation, State of Hawai 'i (DOT).1 
I. RELEVANT FACTS
 
"On [] July 25, 2011, the DOT issued a Request for Bids
 
for a project entitled Furnishing Security Services for
 Commercial Harbor Facilities on the Island of Oahu, Job HAR-O.D.
 2-11[.]" The RFP set a deadline of August 25, 2011 for the
 submission of sealed bids, stated that bids would be opened on
 that date, and further provided that "the award of contract, if
 it be awarded, will be made within sixty (60) calendar days after
 the opening of bids to the lowest responsive and responsible
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
bidder whose proposal complies with all the prescribed
 
requirements." 
Alii was the incumbent security service provider for
 
State property at Honolulu Harbor. In 2011, rather than
 extending Alii's contract, the DOT put the service contract out
 to bid. 
DOT had not awarded the contract as of October 24,
 
2011, which was the 60th day after the bids were opened on August
 25, 2011. On November 1, 2011, DOT awarded the contract to
 Professional Security Consultants, Inc. (PSC). On November 2,
 
2011, DOT posted notice of the award on the State Procurement
 
Office's (SPO's) website. 
On November 30, 2011, Alii reportedly learned that the
 
contract had been awarded to another bidder. That same day, Alii
 filed its procurement protest of the award to PSC with the DOT
 Director. In its protest letter, Alii raised issues of lack of
 good faith, lack of adequate notice, lack of meaningful
 opportunity to participate in the bid process, arbitrary and
 improper selection of bidder, and "other valid reasons under the
 law." 
In a letter dated January 18, 2012, the DOT Director
 
denied Alii's protest. On January 25, 2012, Alii requested
 administrative review of the DOT's denial by filing a request for
 administrative hearing with the DCCA's Office of Administrative
 Hearings. Alii moved for summary judgment, and DOT filed a
 motion to dismiss Alii's request for hearing, or alternatively,
 for summary judgment. 
On February 15, 2012, oral arguments on the motions
 
were held. The hearings officer issued a preliminary oral ruling
 granting DOT's motion and denying Alii's motion. 
On February 24, 2012, the DCCA hearings officer issued
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision (Decision)
 
that, inter alia: (1) granted DOT's motion to dismiss Alii's
 
request for hearing or alternatively for summary judgment; (2)
 denied Alii's motion for summary judgment as moot; and (3)
 affirmed DOT's denial of Alii's procurement protest. The
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hearings officer concluded that: (1) Alii's November 30, 2011
 
protest was untimely; (2) the contents of Alii's November 30,
 2011 protest were insufficient; (3) the deadline to file a
 protest was not equitably tolled; and (4) DOT's failure to award
 job HAR-O.D. 2-11 within 60 days as required by the RFP was
 excused. 
On March 2, 2012, Alii appealed to the Circuit Court
 
from the DCCA's Decision. A hearing was held on July 27, 2012. 
On August 16, 2012, the Circuit Court entered an order affirming
 the hearings officer's February 24, 2012 Decision in favor of
 DOT, as well as the Final Judgment. 
On September 14, 2012, Alii timely filed a notice of
 
appeal.
 II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
Alii raises three points of error on appeal, asserting
 
that the Circuit Court erred by: (1) affirming the hearings
 officer's decision that Alii's protest was untimely; (2)
 affirming the hearings officer's decision that DOT acted in good
 faith; and (3) affirming the hearings officer's decision that the
 contents of Alii's protest were inadequate. 
III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated: 
When reviewing decisions of an administrative hearings
officer based upon Hawai' i's Public Procurement Code, the
appellate standard of review is governed by HRS § 103D­
710(e) [(Supp. 2011)]. HRS § 103D-710(e) provides: 
Upon review of the record the court may affirm the
decision of the hearings officer issued pursuant to section
103D-709 or remand the case with instructions for further
 proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the decision and
order if substantial rights may have been prejudiced because
the administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or
orders are:
 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions;
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of
the chief procurement officer or head of the purchasing
agency;
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure;
(4) Affected by other error of law;
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative,
and substantial evidence on the whole record; or
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by abuse of
discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of
discretion.
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Furthermore, conclusions of law are reviewable under
subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions regarding
procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of fact
under subsection (5); and the Hearings Officer's exercise of
discretion under subsection (6). Accordingly, a reviewing
court will reverse a Hearings Officer's finding of fact if
it concludes that such . . . finding is clearly erroneous in
view of the reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on
the whole record. On the other hand, the Hearings Officer's
conclusions of law are freely reviewable.
 
Nihi Lewa, Inc. v. Dep't of Budget & Fiscal Servs., 103 Hawai 'i 
163, 165-66, 80 P.3d 984, 986-87 (2003) (citation omitted; format
 
altered).2
 
IV. DISCUSSION
 A. Alii's Protest Was Untimely
 Alii argues that the Circuit Court erred in affirming
 
the hearings officer's finding that DOT's posting of its award of
 the service contract began the time period within which any
 protests were to be filed, and that Alii's protest was filed more
 than five days after the award, and that Alii's protest was
 therefore untimely. Alii further maintains that the Circuit
 Court erred by not applying the doctrine of equitable tolling to
 the protest deadline. We disagree.
 
Alii's protest is untimely under Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) § 103D-701(a) (2012) and Hawaii Administrative
 
Rules (HAR) § 3-126-4(a). 
HRS § 103D-701(a) provides that an "aggrieved" bidder
 
must submit a protest in writing:
 
within five working days after the aggrieved person knows or
should have known of the facts giving rise thereto; provided
that a protest of an award or proposed award shall in any
event be submitted in writing within five working days after
the posting of award of the contract under section 103D­302[.]
 
2
 In Nihi Lewa, the Hawai' i Supreme Court relied on HRS § 103D­
710(e) (1993). 103 Hawai' i at 165, 80 P.3d at 986. HRS § 103D-710(e) (1993)
is substantively identical to HRS § 103D-710(e) (Supp. 2011). However, HRS§ 103D-710(e) (Supp. 2011) is not substantively identical to HRS § 103D­710(e)(2012), which adds that "if an application for judicial review is notresolved by the thirtieth day from the filing of the application, the courtshall lose jurisdiction and the decision of the hearings officer shall not bedisturbed." However, Alii appealed to the Circuit Court on March 2, 2012,prior to the amendments taking effect. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HAR § 3-126-4(a) further provides that "[a] protest of
 
a[n] award shall be submitted in writing . . . within five
 
working days after the posting of the notice of award for
 solicitations pursuant to section 103D-302[.]" 
Neither HRS chapter 103D nor HAR chapter 3-126 includes 
an exception to the five-working-day filing deadline. The hearings officer's Decision noted that Hawai
'i's Procurement Code 
is based on the American Bar Association's Model Procurement Code, which suggests that jurisdictions consider extending the time to file a protest "for good cause shown." However, the Hawai
'i Legislature did not adopt the Model Code's suggestion to 
extend the time to file a protest when passing Hawai 'i's 
Procurement Code. The Decision further provides that the Legislature's omission of a "good cause" exception to the filing deadline "underscores the significance of the lack of any exception[.]" 
"Where the language of a statute is plain and 
unambiguous that a specific time provision must be met, it is mandatory and not merely directory." Tataii v. Cronin, 119 
Hawai
'i 337, 339, 198 P.3d 124, 126 (2008) (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). Although "the word 'shall' is generally regarded as mandatory, in certain situations it may be given a directory meaning." Tataii, 119 Hawai
'i at 339, 198 P.3d 
at 126 (citation and some internal quotation marks omitted). 
In determining whether a statute is mandatory or
directory, the intent of the legislature must be
ascertained. The legislative intent may be determined from
a consideration of the entire act, its nature, its object,
and the consequences that would result from construing it
one way or the other. We are also mindful that our primary
duty in interpreting statutes is to ascertain and give
effect to the intention of the legislature, which, in the
absence of a clearly contrary expression is conclusively
obtained by the language of the statute itself.
 
Id. at 339, 198 P.3d at 126 (internal citations and quotation
 
marks omitted).
 
As to the time provisions of HRS § 103D-701(a) and HAR 
§ 3-126-4(a), the five-working-day requirement "is clear and must be given a mandatory reading." See Tataii, 119 Hawai
'i at 339, 
198 P.3d at 126. The statutory language clearly and 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
unambiguously states that a protest of an award must be submitted 
in writing within five working days after the posting of the notice of the award. See HRS § 103D-701(a); see also HAR § 3­
126-4(a). Moreover, legislative intent supports the five­working-day time requirement. The Hawai
'i Legislature enacted 
the Hawai 'i Procurement Code to, among other things, promote 
economy, efficiency, and effectiveness in the procurement of government goods and services. See H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. S9­
93, in 1993 House Journal, at 61; see also S. Stand. Comm. Report No. S8-93, in 1993 Senate Journal, at 39. The five-working-day provision is consistent with the Legislature's intent to ensure efficiency in the procurement process. 
Here, the award of the contract to PSC was posted on
 
the SPO's website on November 2, 2011, and Alii filed its protest
 on November 30, 2011. Alii filed its protest twenty-eight days
 after the posting of the award on the SPO's website. Thus,
 Alii's protest did not meet the unambiguous, mandatory, five­working-day time limitation set forth in HRS § 103D-701(a) and
 HAR § 3-126-4(a). 
Alii also argues that it is entitled to a tolling of
 
the time limitation for filing its protest because DOT should
 have notified Alii in writing that PSC had been awarded the
 contract. 
HRS § 103D-302(h) requires "written notice to the
 
lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the
 requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids." 
HAR § 3-122-33(e) further provides that "[t]he award shall be
 issued to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder whose bid
 meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation
 for bids and posted pursuant to section 103D-701, HRS, for five
 working days." (Emphasis added.) Accordingly, only the
 successful bidder must be notified of the award in writing while
 other bidders and the public are notified through posting of the
 award.
 
The hearings officer's Decision provides that "[t]he
 
duty of good faith does not include an obligation to do more than
 
6
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
what is required in this procurement." It further provided that
 
the duty of good faith did not require DOT to send written
 
notices to the unsuccessful bidders. Moreover, "since there was
 a way for Alii to find [out] about the award, i.e., the SPO
 website, no alleged bad faith action actually prevented Alii from
 learning about the award." 
Alii further argues that DOT had to award the contract
 
within sixty days after bid opening and that any award after the
 sixty-day period was invalid.
3 At the DCCA hearing, the hearings
 
officer stated that it would have been reasonable for Alii to
 inquire about when the sixty-day period ended, but that Alii did
 not "do anything for not just five days, but for over a month"
 after the period had ended. The hearings officer further stated
 that "if you're going to apply estoppel principles, the conduct
 of the person claiming estoppel has to be reasonable, and in this
 case, I wouldn't be able to find that." The Decision stated:
 
It was unreasonable for Alii to assume that it did not have
 
to check the postings on the State Procurement Office
website after the sixty day period expired. This would be
 true in general for all bidders. However, it was
particularly true in Alii's case because it was the present
contract holder, and its contract had been extended only
until the procurement in question in this proceeding had
been concluded. Alii, therefore, had a particularly keen
interest in knowing whether or not it would continue on its
extended contract or whether it would be replaced.
Nevertheless, at no time between October 25, 2011 and
November 30, 2011 did Alii make any inquiries to the DOT
about any award for the Project or about the status of
Alii's extended contract.
 
The hearings officer noted that if Alii wanted to argue
 
that there should be no contract available to award after the
 
sixty-day period, it had "to file a bid protest saying that
 [Alii] can't just sit on [its] hands and see how it plays out." 
A court will apply the doctrine of equitable tolling to
 
a statutory limitation period when an "extraordinary
 circumstance" precludes a plaintiff from bringing suit. Garner
 
v. State, Dept. of Educ., 122 Hawai
'i 150, 160, 223 P.3d 215, 225 
(App. 2009). "Extraordinary circumstances are circumstances that 
3
 The award was rendered on November 1, 2011, which was after the
RFP's October 24, 2011 deadline. 
7
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
are beyond the control of the complainant and make it impossible 
to file a complaint within the statute of limitations." Office 
of Hawaiian Affairs v. State, 110 Hawai 'i 338, 360, 133 P.3d 767, 
789 (2006) (citation omitted). 
Here, the hearings officer did not err in finding that
 
"there are no extraordinary circumstances that made it impossible
 for Alii to timely file a protest, and Alii's estoppel claim must
 fail." The circumstances did not make it impossible for Alii to
 file a complaint within the time limitations. If Alii had looked
 at the SPO website, it would have learned about the award to PSC.
 
Based on the foregoing, and upon careful review of the
 
record, the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the
 parties, as well as the applicable authorities, we cannot
 conclude that the DOT failed to act in good faith or that Alii
 was otherwise entitled to an equitable tolling of the deadline
 for filing its protest.
 
B.	 Alii's Protest Was Insufficient
 HAR § 3-126-3(d) provides:
 
(d) The written protest shall include at a minimum the
following:
(1) The name and address of the protestor;
(2) Appropriate identification of the procurement;
(3) A statement of reasons for the protest; and
(4) Supporting exhibits, evidence, or documents to
 
substantiate any claims unless not available within
 
the filing time in which case the expected
 availability date shall be indicated.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
We cannot conclude that the Circuit Court erred by
 
affirming the hearings officer's Decision that the contents of
 
Alii's protest were insufficient under HAR § 3-126-3(d). Alii's
 
protest listed five conclusory allegations: "(1) Lack of good
 
faith; (2) Lack of adequate notice; (3) Lack of meaningful
 opportunity to participate in the bid process; (4) Arbitrary and
 improper selection of bid winner; (5) and for other valid reasons
 under the law." Alii's one-page protest does not include
 sufficient "[s]upporting exhibits, evidence, or documents to
 substantiate [Alii's] claims[.]" HAR § 3-126-3(d)(4).
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The hearings officer did not err in concluding that
 
Alii's failure to comply with HAR § 3-126-4, which mandates
 
compliance with HAR § 3-126-3(d), was an independent ground for
 dismissal of Alii's protest. The Decision provided that "the
 
five conclusory allegations, which constitute the complete
 
protest, provide no information about the basis of the protest." 
It further provided that Alii's protest included "purely vague
 and conclusory allegations" and there was a "complete lack of any
 explanatory documentation[.]" We agree. As stated in the
 Decision, "[t]he procuring agency is not required to discover the
 meaning or content of a protest –- HAR § 3-126-4 puts the burden
 on the protestor to sufficiently notify the agency of the basis
 of the protest." Accordingly, we cannot conclude that the
 Circuit Court erred by affirming the hearings officer's Decision
 that the contents of Alii's protest was insufficient under HAR
 § 3-126-3(d). 
V.	 CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's August 16, 2012
 
Final Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 13, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Christopher A. Dias
for Petitioner-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Stella M.L. Kam Patricia T. Ohara Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Respondent-AppelleeDEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION,STATE OF HAWAI
'I Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 