NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000512
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF LR
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 15-1-0111)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
This appeal arises out of the decision by the Family
 
Court of the Second Circuit ("Family Court")1
 to deny the
Department of Human Services - Child Welfare Services' ("DHS")
 
Petition for Temporary Foster Custody ("Petition") of LR, a minor
 child. Appellees Father and Mother are the natural parents of
 LR. The Petition alleged, among other things, that LR was at
 risk of harm or the threat of harm by both parents because of
 domestic abuse.
 
Guardian Ad Litem-Appellant Renata Foster-Au appeals
 
from an Order Following Evidentiary Hearing on Jurisdiction
 issued on June 27, 2016. Foster-Au argues that the Family Court
 reversibly erred when it denied her Motion to Change Status from
 Temporary Family Supervision to Temporary Foster Custody ("Motion
 to Change Status") after wrongly concluding that Father did not
 subject LR and/or her half-sister (collectively, "the Children")
 to any sexual risk, and did not subject LR to harm or a threat of
 harm where the court apparently failed to consider Father's
 
1/
 The Honorable Keith E. Tanaka presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
alleged drug use, domestic violence, and exposure of the Children
 
to sadomasochism ("S&M"), or bondage, discipline, and
 sadomasochism ("BDSM").
2 Related to this argument is Foster-Au's
 
contention that in the November 15, 2016 Findings of Fact,
 Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Jurisdiction of the Minor
 Child to the Department of Human Services, Findings of Fact
 ("FOFs") 6-8, 10-15, and 18 are clearly erroneous, and
 Conclusions of Law ("COLs") 1 and 2 are wrong. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Foster-Au's point of error as follows.
 
The Family Court did not err in denying Foster-Au's
 
Motion to Change Status because FOFs 6-8, 10-15, and 18 were not
 clearly erroneous and did not concern matters within the province
 of the Family Court. Accordingly, COLs 1 and 2 are not wrong
 because they are based on FOFs that are supported by substantial
 evidence in the record.
 
COLs 13 and 24  are based on FOFs 85, 106, 147, and 158
,
2/
 S&M was described as a form of sex in which people enjoy
inflicting or receiving pain. BDSM was described as a form of sex with a
 
focus on controlling or dominating another person for pleasure and involved
dressing up and using various sources of restraint, or bondage. These sexual
 practices were alternatively referred to throughout the proceedings. For the
 sake of simplicity, we refer to the two together, as S&M/BDSM. 
3/
 COL 1 provides: 
Based upon a preponderance of the evidence standard, and
upon the credible evidence and totality of the circumstances,the court concludes that DHS has failed to prove, pursuant toHawai'i's Child Protective Act, [HRS] § 587A-5, that Father 
has harmed L.R.'s and/or [half-sister]'s physical or psychological health or welfare, or subjected them to threatened harm by any acts or omissions. 
4/
 COL 2 provides: "Based upon a preponderance of the evidence
standard, and upon the credible evidence and totality of the circumstances,
the court concludes that Father poses no sexual risk to [the Children]."
 
5/
 FOF 8 provides:
 
The court has viewed the videos of [half-sister]'s
purported disclosures created by [Grandmother] and considered
all of [half-sister]'s subsequent disclosures and finds that
all of [half-sister]'s disclosures of Father's alleged sexual
abuse, which began on or about July 13, 2014, are not
reliable.  The manner in which [Grandmother] created these
(continued...)
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
which we decline to review because they consist of credibility­
of-the-witness and weight-of-the-evidence determinations, and the
 Family Court's prerogative to draw reasonable inferences from the
 evidence presented to it. See In re Doe, 95 Hawai
'i 183, 190, 20 
P.3d 616, 623 (2001) ("[I]t is well-settled that an appellate
 court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of
 witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of
 the trier of fact." (quoting State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai
'i 87, 
101, 997 P.2d 13, 27 (2000))); In re Doe, 107 Hawai 'i 12, 19, 108 
P.3d 966, 973 (2005) (explaining that the appellate courts "give
 due deference to the right of the trier of fact 'to determine
 credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw reasonable inferences
 from the evidence adduced.'" (quoting State v. Lubong, 77 Hawai
'i 
429, 432, 886 P.2d 766, 769 (App. 1994))). Thus, we conclude
 that FOFs 8, 10, 14, and 15 are not clearly erroneous.
 
Additionally FOFs 10-13 9
, are not clearly erroneous
5/(...continued)
videos and other writings and/or statements of [half-sister]'s
purported disclosures is highly problematic and suggests that
[half-sister] had been coached by [Grandmother].  Moreover,
the unreliability of [half-sister]'s disclosures is
 corroborated by her recantation to her therapist, Una
 Starbuck, on October 15, 2014.
 
6/
 FOF 10 provides, in part, "The court has weighed the testimony of
Dr. Marvn [sic] Acklin, qualified as an expert in the field of clinical and
forensic psychology, observed his demeanor while testifying, and finds that he
is a credible expert witness." 
7/
 FOF 14 provides: 
The unreliability of [half-sister]'s purported
disclosures of Father's alleged sexual abuse has tainted all
of the opinions of witnesses [Grandmother]; Earan Larry-
Fiakpuyi; Leslie Armstrong; Jocelyn Chang; Santo Triolo, Ph.D;
Beverly Lundquist; Robin Winters; Chelsea Hill; [Foster-Au];
Mother; and Det. Anthony Krau. Based upon [half-sister]'s
contaminated disclosures that were disseminated to these
 witnesses, the court finds that the testimony of all of these
witnesses are similarly unreliable.
 
8/
 FOF 15 provides, "The court has weighed the testimony of Father,
observed his demeanor while testifying, and finds that he is a credible
witness." 
9/
 FOFs 10-13 provide, in relevant part: 
10. . . . . Dr. Acklin reviewed the evidence of [half­
sister]'s purported disclosures for forensic reliability and
conducted a psychosexual examination of Father.
 
(continued...)
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
based on the Family Court's finding that Dr. Marvin Acklin was
 
credible and its adoption of parts of Dr. Acklin's Report of
 Psychosexual Evaluation. As stated above, we decline to review
 the credibility-of-the-witness and weight-of-the-evidence
 determinations and, therefore, do not disturb the Family Court's
 characterization of Dr. Acklin's opinions. See Doe, 95 Hawai
'i 
at 190, 20 P.3d at 623. Furthermore, while FOFs 6 10 , 7 11
, and 1812
 
are mixed FOFs and COLs, they are not clearly erroneous. FOFs 6,
 7, and 18 are either supported by substantial evidence in the
 record, or are based on Dr. Acklin's testimony, which the Family
 Court found to be credible, and the Report of Psychosexual
 
9/(...continued)
11. The court adopts Dr. Acklin's opinion and finds
that all of [half-sister]'s purported disclosures that he
reviewed appeared to be of  "no forensic reliability
whatsoever" and the product of a "terribly flawed evidentiary
process" that contaminated all of [half-sister]'s subsequent
disclosures during the Children [sic] Justice Center's
 [("CJC's")] interviews and to other professionals and/or
witnesses.
 
12. The court adopts Dr. Acklin's opinion and finds
that the "CJC interviews are fatally flawed  by interviewer
incompetence and the presence of fantastical information which
appears to be the product of coaching of the child and
encouragement to fabricate movie-influenced fantasy
fabrication which impugn the reputation  and conduct of
 
[Father]."
 
13. The court adopts Dr. Acklin's opinion and finds
that Father poses no sexual risk to [the Children]." 
10/
 FOF 6 provides: 
Based upon a preponderance of the evidence standard, and
upon the credible evidence and totality of the circumstances,
the court finds that Father has not harmed L.R.'s and/or
[half-sister]'s physical or psychological health or welfare,
or subjected them to threatened harm by any acts or omissions.
 
11/
 FOF 7 provides: 
Based upon a preponderance of the evidence standard, and
upon the credible evidence and totality of the circumstances,
the court finds that [Grandmother] has harmed L.R.'s and/or
[half-sister]'s physical or psychological health or welfare,
or subjected them to threatened harm, by creating and
 disseminating 35 different videos and other numerous
 statements of [half-sister]'s purported disclosures of
 Father's alleged sexual abuse to others, including potential
witnesses.
 
12/
 FOF 18 provides, "Based upon a preponderance of the evidence
standard, and upon the credible evidence and totality of the circumstances,
the court finds that Father poses no sexual risk to [the Children]."
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Evaluation, parts of which the Family Court adopted. 
Accordingly, we conclude that there is substantial evidence to
 support the Family Court's FOFs. See id.
 The Family Court was not wrong to conclude in COL 1
 
and 2 that based on the preponderance of evidence, DHS failed to
 prove that Father's alleged domestic violence, drug use in the
 home, or exposure of the Children to S&M/BDSM subjected LR and/or
 half-sister to harm, threatened harm, or sexual risk. See Haw.
 
Rev. Stat. § 587A-5 (Supp. 2015) (requiring the family court to
 base its finding that a child is subject to imminent harm on the
 facts and circumstances reported to DHS); Haw. Rev. Stat. § 587A­28(f) (Supp. 2015) (requiring the court to dismiss a petition if
 it finds that a child has not been subjected to threatened harm
 by the child's family); Haw. Rev. Stat. § 587A-4 (Supp. 2015)
 (defining "harm"). 
Accordingly, the Order Following Evidentiary Hearing on
 
Jurisdiction, issued on June 27, 2016, by the Family Court of the
 Second Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 29, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Elizabeth C. Melehan 
for Guardian Ad Litem-Appellant. 
Erin Lowenthal,
Deputy Attorney General,for Petitioner-Appellee. 
Nicole Forelli 
for Mother-Appellee. 
Hayden Aluli
for Father-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
5
 