 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-19-0000142 28-MAR-2024 07:55 AM Dkt. 50 SO 
NO. CAAP-19-0000142 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I  
IN THE MATTER OF THE APPOINTMENT OF AN ARBITRATOR 
IN BLUE TILE BEACH HOUSE, LLC, Respondent-Appellee,
vs. 
NAPUAWAILUPE LP, Petitioner-Appellant, DPR CASE NO. 18-0176-A 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(S.P. NO. 18-1-0035(2)) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant Napuaowailupe LP (
Napua) appeals 
from the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit's (Circuit Court's)1 
February 8, 2019 Order Denying [Napua's] Non-Hearing Motion for 
Reconsideration and to Alter or Amend Order Denying [Napua's] Petition to Strike Proposed Arbitrator David W. Scofield [(Scofield)] and Declare He Is Not a Neutral as Required by 
Hawai<i Law [(Petition)] (Order Denying Reconsideration). Napua 
also challenges the Circuit Court's December 6, 2018 Order 
Denying [the Petition] (Order Denying Petition). 
1 The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Napua raises two related points of error on appeal, 
contending that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) failing to find 
that Scofield's failures to disclose constitute evidence partiality; and (2) requiring Napua to proceed with a full arbitration without resolving Napua's challenge to Scofield serving as an arbitrator. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Napua's points of error as follows: 
Napua owns certain Property on Maui (Property). 
Respondent-Appellee Blue Tile Beach House, LLC (
Blue Tile) is 
Napua's lessee with respect to the Property under a long-term lease (Lease) that includes an arbitration provision providing 
for a three-person arbitration panel in case of a dispute with 
each party appointing an arbitrator and the two party-appointed arbitrators appointing the third arbitrator.   
2 
2 The Lease's arbitration provision states: 
A. ARBITRATION . If at any time during the term of
this lease or after the termination thereof any dispute,
difference or question shall arise between the partieshereto touching this lease or the construction, meaning, oreffect of these presents or anything herein contained or therights or liabilities of the parties under these presents orotherwise in relation to the premises, then every suchdispute, difference or question shall at the request ofeither party be submitted to and determined by arbitratorsappointed in the following manner:
The Lessors and Lessee shall each promptly name one
such arbitrator and give written notice thereof to the otherparty, and in case either party shall fail so to do withinten (10) days after appointment of the first arbitrator,arbitrator already appointed shall name a second one, andthe two thus appointed in either manner shall appoint athird arbitrator, and in case of their failure so to dowithin then (10) days after appointment of the secondarbitrator, either party hereto may have such third 
(continued...) 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A dispute arose between the parties and Blue Tile 
demanded arbitration. Scofield was appointed by Blue Tile. 
Napua appointed Kale Feldman, and Scofield and Feldman named Douglas Codiga as the third arbitrator. Scofield filed disclosures identifying certain relationships with Blue Tile's attorney. Napua objected to Scofield serving as an arbitrator. After submitting the issue of Scofield's appointment to Dispute Prevention and Resolution, Inc. (DPR), DPR stated that it had no 
authority to strike Scofield as arbitrator. The three 
arbitrators agreed that the issue should be resolved before the arbitration proceeded, but concluded that they did not have the authority to rule on whether Scofield could serve as an arbitrator. 
Napua filed the Petition and requested, inter alia, 
that Scofield be stricken as an arbitrator due to his failure to adequately disclose his relationship with Blue Tile's attorney. 
When the Petition came on for hearing before the 
Circuit Court, the court initially questioned its authority to act before a final arbitration award was entered. Napua's attorney pointed to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 658A-8(a) 
(2016). Napua's attorney represented to the court, "although we 
2(...continued)
arbitrator appointed by any judge of the Circuit Court of
the State of Hawaii, and the three so appointed shallthereupon proceed to determine the matter in question, andthe decision of said arbitrators or a majority of them shallbe final, conclusive and binding upon both parties. Each party shall pay the expenses of their own arbitrator andattorney and shall share equally the fee and expenses of thethird arbitrator. Judgment may be entered thereon asprovided in Chapter 658, Hawaii Revised Statutes, as thesame now is or may from time to time be amended. Pendingsuch arbitration, full performance of all covenants otherthan the one in dispute shall be required. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
may suspect actual biased [sic], we've proceeded under the second 
method, which is a failure to disclose. And so this is a case having to do with a failure to disclose." 
The court then asked Napua's counsel whether there 
should be an evidentiary hearing on the matter, and Napua's counsel declined, stating that "there's no need for an evidentiary hearing to establish further facts" and Scofield would be further prejudiced against Napua if an evidentiary hearing were held. 
Ultimately, the Circuit Court concluded that pursuant 
to HRS ยง 658A-8(b)(2), the court could provide a provisional remedy only if the matter is urgent and the arbitrator is not able to act timely or the arbitrator could not provide an adequate remedy. The Circuit Court concluded that it had the authority to grant relief, but that it did not find a factual basis for doing so. 
Although Napua attached to the Petition a copy of 
Scofield's disclosures and [Napua's] Objection to Selection of 
Scofield as Arbitrator, both of which had been submitted to DPR, 
no declaration or other evidence supporting the removal of Scofield was presented to the Circuit Court other than a declaration of counsel. We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in concluding that there was no factual basis to grant the Petition. Therefore, we need not reach Napua's further arguments concerning the Order Denying Petition.
3 
3 Napua makes no argument in support of its challenge to the Order
Denying Reconsideration. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court's December 6, 2018 Order Denying 
Petition and February 8, 2019 Order Denying Reconsideration are 
affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai#i, March 28, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Acting Chief Judge
Deborah K. Wright,Keith D. Kirschbraun, /s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Douglas R. Wright, Associate Judge
(Wright & Kirschbraun),for Petitioner-Appellant. /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullenAssociate Judge
Paul Howard Peters,for Respondent-Appellee. 
5 