
 


 

 




 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
NO. CAAP-13-0006129
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
RAYMOND R. RIVERA, Claimant-Appellee,
 
v.
 
 
MAUI SODA AND ICE WORKS, LTD., Employer-Appellant,
 
and
 
 
ISLAND INSURANCE COMPANY, LTD.,
 
Insurance Carrier-Appellant
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
 
(CASE NO. AB 2013-339 (M))

(7-12-00126)
 
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this workers' compensation case, Employer-Appellant
 
 
Maui Soda & Ice Works, Ltd. and Insurance Carrier-Appellant
 
 
Island Insurance Company, Ltd. (collectively, Maui Soda) appeal
 
 
from a Decision and Order (D&O) filed by the Labor and Industrial
 
 
Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB) on November 26, 2013, in favor of
 
 
Claimant-Appellee Raymond R. Rivera (Rivera) dismissing Maui
 
 
Soda's appeal to the LIRAB under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
 
§ 386-87 (2015) because Maui Soda failed to properly appeal.1
 
 
1
 HRS § 386-87 provides in relevant part: 
(a) A decision of the director shall be final and
conclusive between the parties, except as provided in
section 386-89, unless within twenty days after a copy
(continued...)
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Maui Soda contends that the LIRAB erred by: (1) finding
 
that no written notice of appeal was mailed to the Disability
 
Compensation Division (DCD) and concluding that the "mailbox
 
rule" was inapplicable to HRS § 386-87; (2) finding no written
 
notice of appeal was filed with the DCD or the LIRAB within
 twenty days of the D&O being sent to the parties; (3) concluding
 that HRS § 386-87 requires that notices of appeal are not deemed
 filed until file stamped by the agency; (4) not construing Maui
 Soda's Motion for Partial Stay of Payment (Motion for Partial
 
Stay), filed with the LIRAB eleven days after the D&O was issued,
 
as a notice of appeal when it put both LIRAB and Rivera on notice
 
of Maui Soda's intent to appeal; (5) in concluding that Maui
 Soda's Motion for Partial Stay would not be treated as a notice
 of appeal because it was filed by an employer, which deprived
 Maui Soda of due process and was also an abuse of the LIRAB's
 discretion.
 
For the reasons set forth below, we vacate the LIRAB's
 
dismissal of Maui Soda's appeal and remand for further
 proceedings.
 
I. Background
 
On March 15, 2013, Rivera filed a workers' compensation
 
claim in the DCD of the Department of Labor and Industrial
 Relations (DLIR) for injuries he claims were sustained due to his
 
employment at Maui Soda & Ice Works, Ltd. On September 16, 2013,
 
the Director of DLIR (Director) issued a Decision determining
 
that Maui Soda was required to pay specified medical care,
 
services, and supplies for Rivera's injuries, including his right 
1(...continued)
has been sent to each party, either party appeals
 
therefrom to the appellate board by filing a written 

notice of appeal with the appellate board or the 

department. In all cases of appeal filed with the
 
department the appellate board shall be notified of 

the pendency thereof by the director. No compromise 

shall be effected in the appeal except in compliance 

with section 386-78.
 
 
(Emphasis added.)

 
2
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
knee and a subdural hematoma; temporary total disability; and
 temporary partial disability.
 
On September 18, 2013, two days after the Director's
 
Decision was issued, Maui Soda claims to have mailed a notice of
 appeal to the DCD. In this regard, Maui Soda relies on the
 declaration of Lucia Keane (Keane), a Workers' Compensation
 
Insurance Adjuster at Island Insurance Company. In her
 
declaration, Keane attests that on September 18, 2013, she
 electronically prepared the notice of appeal and she then
 "printed two copies of the Notice of Appeal, signed one copy in
 black ink which became the 'original' for filing with the
 Director, DLIR-DCD, and left the other printed copy intended for
 Claimant unsigned[.]" Keane further attests that she addressed
 envelopes correctly bearing the addresses of DLIR-DCD and
 Rivera's counsel, respectively, placed the notices of appeal into
 their proper envelopes, and then "left them in the proper place
 for pick up, posting, and depositing into the U.S. Postal Service
 Mail by Island Insurance's mail clerks[.]" Further, Keane
 attests that "[l]ater that same day, on September 18, 2013, I saw
 that the letters had been picked up by the mail clerks, after
 which time I asserted no control over them[.]"
 
It is uncontested that Rivera's attorney, Andrew A.
 
Cheng (Cheng), received the unsigned notice of appeal in the
 
mail. Cheng submitted a declaration attesting that on September
 
20, 2013, he "received a letter from Island Insurance Companies
 titled Employer/Carrier Appeal of Decision and Order of 9/16/13
 dated September 18, 2013." He further stated that "[t]he letter
 was not signed by the adjuster[,]" or "file-stamped."
 
On September 27, 2013, Maui Soda filed the Motion for
 
Partial Stay with the LIRAB. The LIRAB then obtained the
 original file in the case from DCD, which did not contain a
 notice of appeal.
 
3
 




 



 















 












 

 

 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On October 31, 2013, the LIRAB held a hearing on Maui
 
 
Soda's Motion for Partial Stay, at which time it appears that
 
 
LIRAB members raised the issue that the DCD had no record of Maui
 
 
Soda's notice of appeal.2 That same day, Rivera filed a motion
 
 
to dismiss the appeal.
 
 
On November 26, 2013, the LIRAB issued its D&O granting
 
 
Rivera's motion to dismiss the appeal. In the D&O, the LIRAB
 
 
made findings, inter alia, that:
 
 
2. On September 27, 2013, Employer's counsel filed a
Motion for Partial Stay of Payments, wherein he referenced
and attached the Director's September 16, 2013 decision, and
stated that ". . . said Decision is contrary to the law and
facts herein."
 
Employer's counsel signed the Motion for Partial Stay
of Payments.
The Board finds that the foregoing language is 

indicative of an intent to appeal the Director's decision. 
 
 
. . . .
 
4. The Board received the original administrative
file on October 30, 2013. Neither an original notice of
appeal nor a letter from the Administrator of the DCD
acknowledging an appeal was included in the file.
5. The Board contacted Employer's counsel, who
provided an unsigned and unfiled copy of a September 18,
2013 letter from Island Insurance Company, Ltd., entitled
"EMPLOYER/CARRIER APPEAL OF DECISION AND ORDER OF 9/16/13)"
("Appeal Letter").
6. Claimant's counsel confirmed that he only received
an unsigned copy of the Appeal Letter.
7. According to a Declaration of Lucia Keane, on
September 18, 2013, she electronically prepared a Notice of
Appeal, printed two copies, signed one copy in black ink,
and left another copy unsigned for Claimant's counsel. She
 addressed the envelopes to the DCD Honolulu Office and Mr.
Cheng, placed the letters into the appropriate envelopes,
and left them in the proper place for pick up, posting, and
depositing into the U.S. Postal Service by the mail clerks
of Island Insurance Company, Ltd.'s mail clerks [sic].
Later that day, she saw that the letters had been picked up
by the mail clerks.
Although Mr. Cheng received a copy of the Appeal
Letter, thus proving that it was indeed mailed to him, Ms.
Keane did not provide documentary proof or confirm that her
prepared Appeal Letter to the DCD was, in fact, mailed or
deposited with the U.S. Postal Service.
 
2
 It appears that, after being contacted by the LIRAB, Maui Soda
provided the LIRAB with an unsigned copy of its notice of appeal. The notice
 is in letter format and states in relevant part: "Please accept the foregoing
as Employer/Carrier's appeal of the Decision and Order issued on 9/18/13 [sic]
in the above-captioned claim."
 
4
 





 

 









 



 

 


 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
8. Based on this record, the Board finds that a
Notice of Appeal was not mailed to the DCD.
9. The Board finds that no written notice of appeal
was filed with either the DCD or the Board within 20 days
after the decision was sent to the parties, on September 16,
2013.
 
10. The Board further finds that while the Motion for
 
Partial Stay of Payments, filed by Employer's counsel,
indicates Employer's intent to appeal the Director's
decision within 20 days after the date the decision was sent
to the parties, the Board does not construe said motion as a
notice of appeal.
11. Employer argues that DCD made an error in filing.
While the Board is aware of DCD errors in filing and mailing
in other cases, there is no indication that such an error
has been made in this case.
 
12. The Board finds, therefore, that Employer did not
file a written Notice of Appeal from the Director's
September 16, 2013 decision.
 
In the D&O, the LIRAB concluded that the "mailbox rule"
 
 
does not apply to appeals under HRS § 386-87, and that Maui Soda
 
 
had not filed a notice of appeal. The LIRAB also concluded that:
 
 
[A]lthough the Board acknowledges that Employer's
 
Motion for Partial Stay of Payments indicate[s] Employer's
 
intent to appeal the Director's September 16, 2013 decision, 

the Board declines to accept it as such, for public policy
 
reasons. 
 
 
Motions for stay are routinely filed by employers
 
within days of an employer-initiated appeal. However,
 
claimants rarely file any motion within days of his or her
 
appeal. Therefore, to conclude that any motion may be
 
construed as an appeal would give employers, but not
 
claimants, an advantage in perfecting an appeal; the Board
 
declines to extend such an unfair advantage to only one
 
category of participants in an appeal.
 
 
On December 18, 2013, Maui Soda timely appealed to this
 
 
court.
 
 
II. 
Discussion
 
A. Mailing Notice of Appeal Under HRS § 386-87
 HRS § 386-87(a) provides that a decision by the
 
 
Director is final "unless within twenty days after a copy has
 
 
been sent to each party, either party appeals therefrom to the
 
 
appellate board by filing a written notice of appeal with the
 
 
appellate board or the department." (Emphasis added.) Maui Soda
 
 
contends that, because it mailed a notice of appeal to the DCD
 
 
5

  
 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 


 

 



 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
two (2) days after the Director's Decision in this case, it
 
 
properly effected an appeal to the LIRAB. Maui Soda thus
 
 
contests the LIRAB's finding that a notice of appeal was not
 
 
mailed to the DCD, and also argues that LIRAB erred in concluding
 
 
3

that the "mailbox rule"  does not apply to appeals under HRS § 386-87. We review the LIRAB's challenged findings of fact under the "clearly erroneous" standard, and review its conclusions of law de novo. 
Tate v. GTE Hawaiian Tel. Co. , 77 
Hawai'i 100, 102–03, 881 P.2d 1246, 1248–49 (1994); Capua v. 
Weyerhaeuser Co., 117 Hawai 'i 439, 444, 184 P.3d 191, 196 (2008). 
Given the record in this case, the LIRAB's finding that

 
Maui Soda did not mail the notice of appeal to the DCD is not
 clearly erroneous. Keane's declaration establishes that she
 prepared the notice of appeal on September 18, 2013, signed one
 copy as the "original" to be mailed to the DCD and left one copy
 unsigned to be sent to Cheng, and then she placed the notices in
 envelopes properly addressed to the DCD and Cheng, respectively. 
However, Keane does not attest that the envelopes were actually
 deposited into the mail. Rather, she attests that after sealing
 the envelopes she "left them in the proper place for pick up,
 posting, and depositing into the U.S. Postal Service Mail by
 Island Insurance's mail clerks[.]" Moreover, even though Cheng
 received his unsigned copy, this does not conclusively establish
 that the envelope addressed to the DCD was deposited in the mail. 
Maui Soda's original notice of appeal never made its way to the
 DCD file in this case, and there is no other type of record
 suggesting that the DCD received the original notice of appeal. 
In short, it is simply unknown what happened to the envelope that
 Keane addressed to the DCD. Thus, we cannot conclude on this
 
3 Maui Soda argues in favor of the "mailbox rule," which stands for the
"principle that when a pleading or other document is filed or served by mail,
filing or service is deemed to have occurred on the date of mailing." Mailbox
 
rule, Black's Law Dictionary (10th ed. 2014).
 
6
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record that the LIRAB clearly erred in finding that the notice of
 appeal was not mailed to the DCD.
 
Because there is no clear error in the LIRAB's finding
 
that Maui Soda did not mail the notice of appeal to the DCD, we
 need not decide whether the "mailbox rule" applies to notices of
 appeal filed pursuant to HRS § 386-87.
4
 
B. The Issue of File-stamping
 
Maui Soda contends that the LIRAB erred in concluding
 
that HRS § 386-87 requires notices of appeal to be deemed filed
 only after they are "file stamped" by the agency. The LIRAB,
 however, did not make a conclusion that a notice of appeal must
 be "file stamped" to be considered filed. Rather, in addressing
 Maui Soda's argument that the "mailbox rule" applied, the LIRAB
 noted that HRS § 386-87 provides that a notice of appeal be
 "filed."
 
Given the above, we do not address the issue of "file-
stamping."
 
C. Motion for Partial Stay
 
Maui Soda contends that its Motion for Partial Stay,
 
which the LIRAB acknowledged expressed an intent to appeal from
 the Director's Decision and which was filed within the deadline
 to appeal, should have been sufficient to invoke the LIRAB's
 
4 We note, however, that Maui Soda's reliance on Si-Nor, Inc. v. Dir.,
Dep't of Labor and Indus. Relations, 120 Hawai' i 135, 202 P.3d 596 (App. 2009)
appears to be misplaced in the context of this case. Si-Nor, Inc. addressed
whether a company timely challenged a citation issued by the Hawai' i 
Occupational Safety and Health Division (HIOSH) under HRS Chapter 396. There,
based on administrative rules pertaining to Occupational Safety and Health,which specifically provided that an employer could contest a citation bymailing a petition to the Director postmarked within the deadline, this courtheld that the employer's timely mailing of a notice of contest satisfied thefiling requirement for an appeal under HRS § 396-11(a). Id. at 145-46, 202
P.3d at 606-07 (relying on Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) §§ 12-51-15 and12-51-19). This court, in Si-Nor, Inc., did not adopt a per se "mailboxrule," but relied instead on applicable administrative rules. Here, withregard to workers' compensation claims, there are no similar administrativerules on point, as in Si-Nor, Inc. Rather, it appears the applicable rule
simply states that a Director's decision "shall be final unless appealedpursuant to section 386-87, HRS." HAR § 12-10-73(b). 
7
 
 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appellate jurisdiction. Maui Soda asserts there is no form
 
prescribed for a notice of appeal to be accepted by the DCD or
 LIRAB. 
We agree with Maui Soda that its Motion for Partial
 
Stay should have been construed by the LIRAB to effect an appeal,
 especially given the LIRAB's own finding and acknowledgment that
 the language in the motion "indicate[s] Employer's intent to
 appeal the Director's September 16, 2013 decision[,]" and the
 motion was filed eleven days after the Director's Decision, well
 within the twenty day deadline. As previously noted, HRS § 386­
87 provides that to appeal a decision of the Director, a party
 must, "within twenty days after a copy has been sent to each
 party," appeal to the LIRAB "by filing a written notice of appeal
 with the appellate board or the department." (Emphasis added.) 
There is no particular format required by HRS § 386-87, other
 than the notice of appeal be "written."
 
Moreover, there is no dispute that the motion met the 
requirements of HAR § 12-47-13 regarding the format for pleadings and other documents filed with the LIRAB. In particular, HAR § 12-47-13(c) provides in relevant part that "[t]he original of each document, including appeals . . . shall be signed and dated in black ink by each party or its authorized representative." Here, neither the LIRAB nor Rivera contends that the Motion for Partial Stay failed to meet these requirements. See also Cole v. 
AOAO Alii Cove, 134 Hawai
'i 103, 109-11, 332 P.3d 705, 711-13 
(App. 2014)(holding that a missing signature on a notice of appeal filed with the LIRAB did not preclude the appeal to LIRAB). 
Importantly, as expressly recognized by the LIRAB, the 
Motion for Partial Stay indicates and reflects Maui Soda's intent to appeal from the Director's Decision. We conclude that this case is similar to other circumstances in which Hawai
'i's 
appellate courts, as well as the LIRAB, have construed documents 
8
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sufficient to effect an appeal because they sufficiently set forth an intent to appeal.
5 In short, "deficiencies in the form 
of a notice of appeal 'should not result in loss of the appeal as long as the intent to appeal from a specific judgment can be fairly inferred from the notice and the appellee is not misled by the mistake.'"
6 Munoz v. Chandler, 98 Hawai 'i 80, 90, 42 P.3d 
657, 667 (App. 2002); see State v. Bohannon, 102 Hawai 'i 228, 
235, 74 P.3d 980, 987 (2003); Ek v. Boggs, 102 Hawai 'i 289, 294, 
75 P.3d 1180, 1185 (2003); City and Cty. of Honolulu v. Midkiff, 57 Haw. 273, 275, 554 P.2d 233, 235 (1976); State v. Graybeard, 93 Hawai
'i 513, 516, 6 P.3d 385, 388 (App. 2000); see also 
McLaren v. Paradise Inn Hawaii LLC, 132 Hawai 'i 320, 328-29, 321 
P.3d 671, 679-80 (2014)(construing various documents submitted to the DCD, including requests for information, as constituting an application to reopen a DCD decision under HRS § 386-89). 
Therefore, given the filing of Maui Soda's Motion for
 
Partial Stay in the LIRAB within twenty days of the Director's
 Decision, the LIRAB's finding that the motion indicates Maui
 Soda's intent to appeal from the Director's Decision, and that
 Rivera does not assert that he was misled, we conclude that the
 LIRAB erred in not construing the motion as effecting an appeal
 in this case.
 
5 Maui Soda points to other cases before the LIRAB, including a
decision in Sugano v. State of Hawai' i, Case No. AB 2004-055 (2-00-41270),
2007 HI Wrk. Comp. LEXIS 77 (Sept. 4, 2007). In Sugano, the only document
filed by a workers' compensation claimant within twenty days of a Director'sdecision was entitled a "Decision and Order," which appeared to proposefindings of fact and conclusions of law for two issues, and which stated inpart "[t]his case is before the Board on appeal by [Appellant] from the[Director's decision] denying his claim for compensation." Id. at *5. The 
LIRAB determined that this document sufficiently communicated the claimant'sintent to appeal and there was no evidence that the employer was prejudiced ormisled. Id. at *11. 
6
 We note that Rivera's attorney acknowledged receipt of an unsigned
copy of Maui Soda's notice of appeal letter and does not dispute receipt of
Maui Soda's Motion for Partial Stay. 
9
 
 


 





 

 
Presiding Judge

Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We need not reach the remaining issues raised by Maui
 
 
Soda in this appeal.
 
 
III. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the "Decision And
 
 
Order" entered by the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals
 
 
Board on November 26, 2013, which dismissed Maui Soda's appeal.
This case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with
 
 
this opinion.
 
  
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 13, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Kenneth T. Goya,
Steven L. Goto, (Ayabe, Chong, Nishimoto,
Sia & Nakamura)
for Maui Soda & Ice Works, Ltd.
and Island Insurance Company, Ltd. 
Andrew A. Cheng,
 
(Robinson Chur & Cheng)
 
and 
Lissa D. Shults,
 
for Raymond Rivera.
 
 
10
 