 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REP ORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
#I 
---o0o---
IN RE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRACTICES 
OPINION LETTER NO. F19-04 
NO. CAAP-20-0000470 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1SP191000157) 
OCTOBER 11, 2021 
LEONARD, PRESIDING JUDGE, HIRAOKA AND NAKASONE, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY HIRAOKA, J. 
The issue in this case is whether the "frustration of a 
legitimate government function" exception applies to Complainant-
Appellant 
City and County of Honolulu's obligation to disclose a 
particular public record under the Hawai# i Uniform Information 
Practices Act (Modified), Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 
92F (
UIPA).1 The record at issue is an appraisal of the value of 
1 The Hawai #i Supreme Court recently addressed the UIPA's "clearly
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy" exception in State of Hawaii
Organization of Police Officers v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, SCAP-19-0000450,2021 WL 4236732 (Haw. Sept. 17, 2021). FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
an easement the requestor desires to purchase from the City. 
After making "an individualized determination [whether] disclosure [of the easement appraisal report] would frustrate a legitimate government function," Peer News LLC v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 143 Hawai# i 472, 475, 431 P.3d 1245, 1248 (2018) (Peer 
News II),
2 we hold that the State of Hawai# i Office of 
Information Practices (OIP) correctly determined that the report 
must be disclosed. We do so, however, for reasons other than 
those stated by OIP. 
BACKGROUND 
Brad and Logan Johnasen Halas (collectively, the 
Halases
) own property in 
Kahalu# u, O# ahu. The property is 
landlocked. 
The Halases seek to purchase an access and utility 
easement over the City-owned Kahalu# u Flood Control maintenance 
road. 
The City's Department of Budget and Fiscal Services 
(BFS) requested an appraisal of the value of the proposed 
easement from the City's Department of Design and Construction 
(DDC
). The resultant appraisal reported the "suggested value 
range for the subject easement" "as a guideline for negotiation purposes." After obtaining the appraisal information, BFS made an offer to sell an easement to the Halases. 
2 Peer News LLC v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 138 Hawai #i 53, 376
P.3d 1 (2016) ( Peer News I ) dealt with Civil Beat's request to the Honolulu
Police Department for the disciplinary records of 12 police officers. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Logan 
Johnasen Halas, apparently unhappy with the 
City's price, requested a copy of the easement appraisal report. 
BFS denied Johnasen Halas's request, citing HRS § 92F-13(3). The statute provides, in relevant part: 
§ 92F-13 Government records; exceptions to general
rule . This part shall not require disclosure of: 
. . . . (3) Government records that, by their nature, must
be confidential in order for the government toavoid the frustration of a legitimate governmentfunction[.] 
HRS § 92F-13 (2012). BFS explained: 
Deliberative process privilege . Government records that, by
their nature, must be confidential in order for thegovernment to avoid the frustration of a legitimategovernment function. 
(Bold italics added.) 
Johnasen Halas appealed BFS's denial to OIP. She 
informed OIP: 
The City has appraised this area for $300,000. Is it [sic]not clear at all how they are coming up with this ridiculousamount which [is] why I have required a copy to betterunderstand the metholody [sic] they are trying to use. 
In response, the City sent a copy of the easement appraisal 
report to OIP for in-camera inspection, and explained: 
In a recent Memorandum Opinion dated March 5, 2015,
U Memo 15-8, regarding a request from the Aina Haina
Community Association to BFS, OIP confirmed that BFS is notrequired to disclose internal communications between Citydepartments when the communications contain predecisional
and deliberative material that falls within the deliberative process privilege . When the requested records contain such
internal communications, they may be withheld under theUIPA's exception to disclosure to avoid the frustration of alegitimate government function. HRS Section 92F-13(3). 
As part of the decision-making process in selling the
City's real property interests, BFS solicits an estimate of 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
value from DDC, another City agency, for use in BFS's
negotiations in reaching a purchase price. There is no Cityordinance or State statute that expressly requires publicdisclosure of such communications. In the instant case, BFSreceived the subject appraisal prior to the decision on thepurchase price for the easement. DDC's appraisal providedan estimated range of value for negotiation purposes, whichwas a direct part of the decision-making process. Such communications must be withheld from public disclosure, andespecially cannot be disclosed to the proposed purchaser,when the City has not yet completed negotiations of apurchase price. Such disclosure would have a chillingeffect upon BFS obtaining such an estimate of value fornegotiation purposes, and would thus impede BFS'snegotiation efforts. Disclosure of the appraisal at thispoint in the negotiation and decision-making process wouldfrustrate the legitimate government function of negotiatingand ultimately determining a fair purchase price for Cityassets. Therefore, BFS may withhold the appraisal frompublic disclosure under the "frustration of a legitimategovernment function" exception under HRS Section 92F-13(3).See OIP Opinion Letter Nos. 90-8 and 04-15. 
(Emphasis added.) 
This all happened in 2016. On December 21, 2018, 
before OIP issued a decision on Johnasen Halas's appeal, the 
Hawai# i Supreme Court decided Peer News II. The supreme court 
held that the deliberative process privilege,3 which shielded all 
pre-decisional, deliberative agency records from public access "without an individualized determination that disclosure would frustrate a legitimate government function," was "clearly irreconcilable with the plain language and legislative history of Hawai# i's [sic] public record laws." Peer News II, 143 Hawai# i at 
475, 431 P.3d at 1248. The supreme court vacated the City's summary judgment and remanded to the circuit court for "a redetermination of whether the records withheld pursuant to the 
3 The deliberative process privilege had been developed by OIP in a
series of eight opinion letters issued between 1989 and 2007. Peer News II,
143 Hawai #i at 475, 431 P.3d at 1248. 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
purported privilege fall within a statutory exception to the 
disclosure requirement." Id. 
By letter dated January 2, 2019, OIP notified BFS and 
Johnasen Halas of 
Peer News II. BFS was informed that "OIP will 
no longer recognize the [deliberative process privilege] under the UIPA's frustration exception to disclosure." OIP gave BFS until February 1, 2019, "to provide a new argument as to why the records subject to this appeal may be withheld from the requester under one or more subsections of section 92F-l3, HRS." 
By letter dated February 1, 2019, BFS reminded OIP that 
it had also relied upon the "frustration of a legitimate government function" exception of HRS § 92F-13(3). BFS reiterated: 
In this case, the City is denying the request under
HRS Section 92F-13(3) because the appraisal report is a
government record that by its nature must be confidential inorder for the government to avoid the frustration of alegitimate government function. The value of the easement Ms. Johnasen Halas is seeking is based on an appraisalreport that was prepared by the City Department of Designand Construction (DDC), Land Division at the request of BFS.The purpose of the appraisal report is to provide anestimated range of values for the easement so that thepurchase price could be negotiated. The appraisal report isto be used as the basis for BFS' [sic] negotiation strategyfor the purchase of the easement. As the City has not yetcompleted negotiations for a purchase price, it wouldfrustrate a legitimate government function to prematurelydisclose the appraisal report. By disclosing the appraisalreport, it would reveal the high and low range of valuesthat the City would negotiate for the easement and severelyhinder BFS' [sic] ability in achieving a fair purchase pricefor the easement. The City would lose any and all leveragein the negotiating decision[-]making process. 
On April 24, 2019, OIP issued opinion letter no. F19-04
(the OIP Opinion Letter). The OIP Opinion Letter addressed the 
question: "Whether an appraisal report prepared for the sale of  
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
an interest in county land must be disclosed to the public upon 
request under the UIPA." OIP found: 
As a general rule, even when the government agency is the
seller rather than the purchaser, OIP finds that it is stilla legitimate function of a government agency to be a prudentsteward of public assets, whether they comprise governmentfunds, public lands, or other government property. OIP also agrees with BFS that disclosure of the range of potentialvalues for the easement, and the market analysis thatproduced that range of values, will impair BFS's ability tonegotiate the highest possible purchase price. The market price for the easement, according to the appraisal report,could be anything within the range of values set out in thereport. Disclosure of this range of values would tell[Johnasen Halas] the lowest price BFS was willing to accept,and [Johnasen Halas] would presumably be unwilling to offeranything higher than that, thus eliminating any room for BFSto negotiate a higher price for the proposed easement. 
(Citation omitted.) Nevertheless, OIP concluded: 
[T]he disclosure of an appraisal report relating to the saleof an interest in City land would not frustrate a legitimategovernment function such that it may be withheld under theUIPA's frustration exception. See HRS § 92F-13(3). The 
City must therefore disclose the requested appraisal report. 
The City appealed the OIP Opinion Letter to the circuit 
court under HRS § 92F-43. The City served Johnasen Halas and OIP 
with the complaint (as required by HRS § 92F-43(b) (2012)) but neither Johnasen Halas nor OIP intervened in the proceeding (as allowed by HRS § 92F-43(b)). The circuit court granted a request by Amicus Curiae Civil Beat Law Center for the Public Interest to 
file a memorandum. 
The City's appeal was heard on June 12, 2020.  Counsel 
for Civil Beat participated in the oral argument. The following 
exchange took place between the court and the deputy corporation counsel (DCC) representing the City: 
4
4 The Honorable Jeffrey P. Crabtree presided. 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: . . . Do you have to sell the easement?
Or can you just say, nah, we're not interested, we'll just
let status quo continue? 
[DCC]: Your Honor, the -- the reason why the
purchaser wishes to purchase the easement is because this isa landlocked kuleana piece of property. So while the City-- this is at the request -- the purchaser's request that,you know, we sell them the easement. It does put -- it doesput a strain on the property owner to not have any legalaccess to her property. 
THE COURT: Right. And I mean, they obviously have
some kind of an accommodation going now. I don't know what it is, and I don't think we have to get into the extremedetails of it, but there must be some kind of arrangementgoing on now. And they want to change that, so they're -- I 
would say they're motivated to pay a price that the Citywould find acceptable . 
[DCC]: And -- and we would agree, Your Honor . 
But, again, having the City show all of its cards,
again, just eliminates the City's ability to act in a -- asa prudent steward of its -- of public property. 
. . . . 
. . . Just (indiscernible) -- just as a general fact
in this case that -- if I failed to mention it sooner, the
City had made its offer to the prospective purchaser, andwhen they got that offer, I believe they wanted to find out,and they wanted to obtain the appraisal based on that --that offer. 
THE COURT: Okay. 
[DCC]: 
So the City (indiscernible). It isn't like 
the purchaser had made an -- an offer and this is a
counteroffer. The City made the first offer. And now the purchaser is looking to obtain the appraisal report, whichwould tell them immediately, well, what's the lowest offerthat the City will accept. 
THE COURT: 
Okay. But assuming you're not required to
sell an easement to this specific person at this specifictime, you've got -- you've got leverage. You can just say,we don't want to sell unless you're willing to pay more . 
(Emphasis added.) 
The circuit court orally affirmed the OIP Opinion 
Letter. A written order was entered on June 26, 2020. The 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Final Judgment" was entered on September 30, 2020. This appeal 
by the City followed.5 
POINTS OF ERROR 
The City contends that the OIP Opinion Letter: 
(1) "contradicted [OIP's] own factual findings"; (2) "applied inappropriate statutory requirements on the City"; and (3) violated the "Home Rule" principle. 
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
When a government agency appeals from an OIP decision, 
"[t]he circuit court shall uphold [the OIP] decision . . . unless the circuit court concludes that the decision was palpably 
erroneous." HRS § 92F-43(c) (2012) (emphasis added). When an agency appeals from a circuit court's review of an OIP decision, 
we apply the same standard applied by the circuit court to determine de novo whether the circuit court's decision was right or wrong. See Hoopai v. Civ. Serv. Comm'n, 106 Hawai# i 205, 214, 
103 P.3d 365, 374 (2004) (concerning appeal under HRS Chapter 91 from an administrative agency decision). 
OIP's interpretation of the UIPA is "palpably 
erroneous" if it "is irreconcilable with the plain text and legislative intent of the statute." Peer News II, 143 Hawai# i at 
486, 431 P.3d at 1259 (citations omitted); see also id. at 478, 431 P.3d at 1251 (noting, in a direct appeal from the City's 
5 The Halases are not parties to this appeal. OIP declined to 
participate in this appeal. We granted Civil Beat's motion for leave to file
an amicus curiae brief. Civil Beat's brief was filed on February 25, 2021. 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
denial of a public records request, that "[t]he legislature has 
directed that OIP's opinions be considered as precedent in a UIPA enforcement action such as this so long as they are not 'palpably erroneous.'" (citing HRS § 92F-15(b)). 
DISCUSSION 
By enacting the UIPA, "the legislature declare[d] that 
it is the policy of this State that the formation and conduct of public policy — the discussions, deliberations, decisions, and action of government agencies — shall be conducted as openly as possible." HRS § 92F-2 (2012). By default, government records
6 
are open to public inspection. HRS § 92F-11 (2012) provides, in relevant part: 
(a) All government records are open to public inspection
unless access is restricted or closed by law. 
(b) Except as provided in section 92F-13 , each
agency upon request by any person shall make government
records available for inspection and copying during regularbusiness hours[.] 
(Emphasis added.) HRS § 92F-13 provides, in relevant part: 
Government records; exceptions to general rule . This part
shall not require disclosure of: 
. . . . 
(3) Government records that, by their nature, must
be confidential in order for the government to 
avoid the frustration of a legitimate governmentfunction [.] 
(Bold italics added.) 
6 "Government record" is defined by HRS § 92F-3 (2012) as
"information maintained by an agency in written, auditory, visual, electronic,or other physical form." 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
     
 The legislature explained the intent behind the 
"frustration of a legitimate government function" exception: 
(b) Frustration of legitimate government function. 
The following are examples of records which need not be
disclosed, if disclosure would frustrate a legitimategovernment function. 
. . . . 
(3) Information which, if disclosed, would . . . 
give a manifestly unfair advantage to any personproposing to enter into a contract or agreementwith an agency [.] 
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2580, in 1988 Senate Journal, at 1095 
(bold italics added); see Peer News II, 143 Hawai# i at 483-84, 
431 P.3d at 1256-57. 
The example given in the legislative committee report 
was taken almost verbatim from the Uniform Information Practices Code drafted by the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws (Model UIPC), upon which the UIPA was modeled. 
Model UIPC § 2-103 provides, in relevant part: 
(a) This Article does not require disclosure of: 
. . . . (5) Information which, if disclosed, would frustrate
government procurement or give an advantage to
any person proposing to enter into a contract oragreement with an agency [.] 
(Emphasis added.) Thus, the "plain text and legislative intent" 
of HRS § 92F-13(3) allows the City to withhold disclosure of a public record "which, if disclosed, would . . . give a manifestly unfair advantage to any person proposing to enter into a contract or agreement" with the City. S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2580, in 1988 Senate Journal, at 1095. 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
OIP cited HRS § 171-17(e) (Supp. 2018) and its opinion
letter, Op. Ltr. No. 91-10, 1991 WL 474707 (July 18, 1991), to 
support its conclusion. We find each authority to be distinguishable based on the facts of this case.  
HRS § 171-17 
HRS § 171-17 (2011 & Supp. 2018) pertains to appraisals
of public lands. "Public lands" are defined as State-owned lands
subject to the management and control of the Hawai
#i Department   
of Land and Natural Resources (DLNR). See
 HRS §§ 171-2 (Supp. 
2018), 171-3 (2011). HRS § 171-17(e) (Supp. 2018) does not apply to an appraisal obtained by the City in connection with the management or disposition of land — or interests therein — owned by the City that are not subject to HRS Chapter 171. See HRS 
§ 46-66.
7 
Nevertheless, the OIP Opinion Letter stated: 
OIP finds the only distinguishing feature between
appraisal reports for State and county lands to be the lack
of an explicit statutory disclosure requirement forappraisal reports for the sale or lease of an interest incounty lands. In the absence of a meaningful factualdifference between the relative standing and resources ofthe parties to the sale or lease of an interest in Stateversus county lands, OIP cannot conclude that publicdisclosure of the relevant appraisal reports regardingcounty lands would give a manifestly unfair advantage toprospective purchasers or lessees while public disclosure ofthe equivalent reports for State lands is required and isconsidered to be fair to all concerned. 
7 HRS § 46-66 (2012) implicates the City's "Home Rule" issue; it
provides, in relevant part: 
[E]ach county, subject to the approval of the council, maygrant, sell, or otherwise dispose of any easement forparticular purposes in perpetuity by direct negotiation orotherwise[.] 
11  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND P ACIFIC REPORTER 
Respectfully, OIP failed to consider that the State is 
required under HRS § 171-17 to obtain an appraisal of public land 
to determine: the upset price for sale or lease at public auction, HRS § 171-17(a) (2011); the minimum sale price or lease rent amount for land to be disposed of by drawing or by negotiation, HRS § 171-17(b) (Supp. 2018); the fair market value of former public land to be repurchased by the State, HRS § 171-17(c) (Supp. 2018); and the fair market value of land subject to lease rent renegotiation, HRS § 171-17(d) (Supp. 2018). Section 171-17 also provides: 
(e) Complete appraisal reports, including all
comparables relied upon in the appraisal reports, shall be
available for study by the public. All complete appraisalreports shall be provided to the opposing party prior to thecommencement of mediation or arbitration, if applicable, of
the valuation dispute.
[8] 
HRS § 171-17 is part of HRS Chapter 171, a 
comprehensive law dealing with the management and disposition of 
public lands subject to DLNR control.9 Disclosure of appraisal 
reports does not provide a manifestly unfair advantage to prospective lessees of interests in State lands, or to those reselling former public land back to the State, because of the 
8 Non-binding mediation and binding arbitration are required to
resolve disputes over: the "sale price or lease rental of lands to be disposed
of by drawing or by negotiation[,]" HRS § 171-17(b); the price for the Stateto repurchase land, HRS § 171-17(c); and the fair market value of land subjectto lease rent renegotiation, HRS § 171-17(d). 
9 HRS § 171-32 (2011) provides, in relevant part: 
Policy . Unless otherwise specifically authorized in this
chapter or by subsequent legislative acts, all dispositions
[of public lands] shall be by lease only, disposed of bypublic auction in accordance with the procedure set forth insections 171-14 and 171-16. 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State's mediation and arbitration remedies prescribed by HRS 
§ 171-17(b), (c), and (d). 
Nor is there an unfair advantage for 
prospective bidders at a public auction; the appraisal is used to determine the upset price, HRS § 171-17(a), and the competitive-bid auction process protects the State's interest in generating the maximum possible price. 
The City has no such procedural protections in this 
case. No party is competing with the Halases to purchase the contemplated easement. The Halases could not compel the City to mediate or arbitrate the price for an easement. HRS § 171-17 is inapposite. 
OIP Opinion Letter No. 91-10 
OIP Op. Ltr. No. 91-10, 1991 WL 474707, was written to 
a renter of a small-plane hangar at what was then known as the 
Honolulu International Airport. The renter had been notified that the Hawai# i Department of Transportation (HDOT) had revised 
its rates and charges for all State airport property, and his monthly permit fee was being increased from $134 to $240. 
The 
question answered by Op. Ltr. No. 91-10 was "Whether, under the [UIPA], statewide airport property appraisals used by [HDOT] to revise its Schedule of Rates and Charges must be made available for public inspection and copying." Id. at *1. 
OIP noted that HDOT's disposition of public lands 
(which included airport property) through negotiated leases was governed by HRS Chapter 171. 
Op. Ltr. No. 91-10, 1991 WL 474707, 
at *1. Accordingly, former HRS § 171-17(f) (1985) required that 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appraisals used by HDOT to negotiate airport lease rent amounts 
under HRS § 171-17, or to negotiate airport revocable permit rents under former HRS § 171-55 (Supp. 1990), must be made available for public inspection and duplication. Id. at *1-2. 
Op. Ltr. No. 91-10 concluded that the "frustration of a 
legitimate government function" exception in HRS § 92F-13(3) did not apply because the commentary to the Model UIPC § 2-103 stated: 
Most states, however, have legislation specifically
regulating the procurement practices of state or localgovernment[.] In that case, subsection (a)(5) does notrestrict access to any information expressly made availableto the public by that legislation. Otherwise, an agency inits discretion could use this exemption to withholdinformation, unless under the circumstances, state lawprohibits disclosure of procurement and bidding informationaltogether. Once a contract is let or a purchase is made,
the exemption generally will no longer apply. 
Id. at *6 (citations omitted). The requestor in Op. Ltr. 
No. 91-10 requested copies of the appraisal reports after HDOT unilaterally raised the monthly permit fee and notified him of the increase. In this case, Johnasen Halas requested the City's easement appraisal report while negotiations for her purchase of an easement were ongoing. Op. Ltr. No. 91-10 is inapposite. See 
also In re Acme Bus Corp. v. County of Suffolk, 26 N.Y.S.3d 159, 161 (N.Y. App. Div. 2016) (holding county "had no 'reasonable basis for denying access'" under Public Officers Law § 87(2)(c)
10 
10 The New York statute at issue provided, in relevant part: 2. Each agency shall, in accordance with its published
rules, make available for public inspection and copying all
records, except that such agency may deny access to recordsor portions thereof that: 
(continued...) 
14 10 (...continued)
. . . . 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to records relating to county's request for proposals to provide 
transportation services after county contracts had been awarded to proposers other than petitioner).
11 
Civil Beat's Positions 
Amicus Curiae Civil Beat points out, as we acknowledged 
above, that "[t]he obligation to produce government records in 
Hawai# i starts with the broad disclosure mandate in HRS § 92F-
11(a)." Civil Beat concedes that "[t]he exceptions to that presumption of public access are stated in HRS § 92F-13[,]" but contends that "the UIPA's affirmative disclosure provisions should be liberally construed, its exceptions narrowly construed, and all doubts resolved in favor of disclosure[,]" citing OIP Op. Ltr. No. 05-16 and John Doe Agency v. John Doe Corp., 493 U.S. 146, 152 (1989) (applying federal Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552). 
(c) if disclosed would impair present or imminent
contract awards[.] 
N.Y. Pub. Off. Law § 87. 
11 The commentary to Model UIPC § 2-103(a)(5) provides, in relevant
part: 
Subsection (a)(5) protects the integrity of the procurement
and competitive bidding process. A few states include this type of provision in their freedom of information statutes.Mich.Comp.Laws.Ann. § 15.243(1)(j); N.Y.Pub.Off.Law. 
§ 87(2)(c) ; Vt.Stat.Ann. tit. 1, § 317(b)(13). 
(Emphasis added.) The H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 342-88, in 1988 House Journal,expressed the legislature's intent that "the commentary to the [Model UIPC]. . . guide the interpretation of similar provisions found in the [UIPA] whereappropriate." Id. at 972. Therefore, we may look to the statutes and case
law in New York to guide our interpretation of whether the easement appraisalreport should be shielded from disclosure under HRS § 92F-13(3). Id. 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Civil Beat's position is consistent with the 
Hawai# i 
Supreme Court's holding that "HRS § 92F-13(3) calls for an 
individualized determination that disclosure of the particular record or portion thereof would frustrate a legitimate government function." Peer News II, 143 Hawai# i at 487, 431 P.3d at 1260. 
[T]o justify withholding a record under HRS § 92F-13(3), an
agency must articulate a real connection between disclosure 
of the particular record it is seeking to withhold and thelikely frustration of a specific legitimate governmentfunction . The explanation must provide sufficient detail
such that OIP or a reviewing court is capable of evaluatingthe legitimacy of the government function and the likelihoodthat the function will be frustrated in an identifiable wayif the record is disclosed. 
Id. (emphasis added) (citation omitted). 
We conclude that the record does not support the City's 
contention that disclosure of the easement appraisal report would 
give the Halases a manifestly unfair advantage in negotiating with the City. The City is holding all the cards in this case; the Halases want an easement, but the City is not obligated to provide them one. If the Halases were to counter the City's offer by offering the lowest value in the appraisal range, the City would have no obligation to change its asking price, or to even respond to the counteroffer. The Halases could not legally require that the City sell them an easement, or mediate or arbitrate the price for the easement. 
Under these circumstances, disclosure of the easement 
appraisal report would inform the Halases — and the public — whether or not the City was being a "prudent steward of public assets"; that is, whether the City's offer was within the range 
16          /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
 /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of values of the City's appraisal. Or the report could show 
whether the City was attempting to take a manifestly unfair advantage over the Halases. Or, conversely, the report could show whether the City was offering the Halases an inappropriately low price because of political favoritism or for other improper reasons. Thus, disclosure comports with both the purpose and the intent of the UIPA: "that the formation and conduct of public policy — the discussions, deliberations, decisions, and action of government agencies — shall be conducted as openly as possible." HRS § 92F-2. 
CONCLUSION 
Based upon the foregoing, we hold that OIP — although 
relying on inapposite authority — correctly concluded that the City's easement appraisal report must be disclosed to Johnasen Halas, and that the "frustration of a legitimate government function" exception of HRS § 92F-13(3) did not apply under the facts of this case. The "Final Judgment" entered by the circuit court on September 30, 2020, is affirmed. On the briefs: Ryan H. Ota, 
Deputy Corporation Counsel,City and County of Honolulu,for Petitioner-Appellant Department of Budget andFiscal Services. 
Robert Brian Black,
for Amicus Curiae Civil Beat Law Center for the Public Interest. 