NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000020
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ALBERT G. ARANETA, JR., also known as Chico,
Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 09-1-0009)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Albert G. Araneta, Jr., also known
 
as Chico, (Araneta) appeals from the judgment of conviction and
 
sentence entered on August 23, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the
 
First Circuit (circuit court).1 After a jury trial, the circuit
 
court convicted Araneta of one count of Continuous Sexual Assault
 of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen Years, in violation of
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 707-733.5 (Supp. 2006),
2
 and
1
 The Honorable Richard W. Pollack presided.
 
2
 HRS ยง 707-733.5 provides in relevant part:
 
Continuous sexual assault of a minor under the age of
fourteen years. . . . (1) Any person who:
 
(a)	 Either resides in the same home with a minor
 
under the age of fourteen years or has recurring
access to the minor; and
 
(b)	 Engages in three or more acts of sexual
penetration or sexual contact with the minor
over a period of time, but while the minor is
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sentenced him to imprisonment for a term of twenty years and the
 
payment of $800 in restitution and a crime victim compensation
 
fee.
 
On appeal, Araneta argues that the circuit court (1)
 
wrongly admitted into evidence at trial State's Exhibit 1, a
 
photo of the complainant (Complainant), where the photo was
 
irrelevant, unduly prejudicial, and unaccompanied by a limiting
 
instruction to the jury; (2) erred in permitting expert witness
 
Dr. Alexander J. Bivens (Dr. Bivens) to testify about
 
terminology, behaviors, relationship characteristics, and post-
abuse impacts in child sexual abuse cases, subjects which were
 
irrelevant to the case; and (3) erred in failing to instruct the
 
jury on how it should consider Dr. Bivens's testimony about
 
delayed disclosure, methods of initiating child sexual abuse,
 
signs indicative of abuse, and triggers to disclosure.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Araneta's points of error as follows:
 
(1) The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
admitting State's Exhibit 1 into evidence. 
(a) State's Exhibit 1 was relevant to show that
 
Araneta would have known Complainant was under the age of
 
fourteen, an element of the offense, at the time the offense
 
allegedly occurred and to show Complainant's appearance at the
 
2(...continued)
 
under the age of fourteen years,
 
is guilty of the offense of continuous sexual assault of a
minor under the age of fourteen years.
 
(2)
 To convict under this section, the trier of fact,
if a jury, need unanimously agree only that the requisite
number of acts have occurred; the jury need not agree on
which acts constitute the requisite number.
 
. . . . 
(4) Continuous sexual assault of a minor under the age
of fourteen years is a class A felony.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
time the offense began. HRS ยง 707-733.5; Hawaii Rules of
 
Evidence (HRE) Rules 401 & 402. The relevance of the evidence, a
 
typical family photo, was not outweighed by a danger of unfair
 
prejudice. HRE Rule 403.
 
(b) The circuit court did not err by failing to 
give the jury a limiting instruction with regard to the photo. 
HRE Rule 105 provides that the court shall give such an 
instruction upon request. HRE Rule 105. Araneta did not request 
a limiting instruction, and we find no authority for the notion 
that the State had the burden of requesting one or the court had 
a duty to give one sua sponte. Given the parties' closing 
arguments regarding the purpose and scope of the evidence, as 
well as the court's instruction to the jury to "not be influenced 
by pity for the defendant or by passion or prejudice against the 
defendant" and to dispassionately consider and weigh the evidence 
in the case, the parameters within which the jury was to consider 
State's Exhibit 1 should have been clear. State v. Mars, 116 
Hawai'i 125, 135, 170 P.3d 861, 871 (App. 2007). 
(2) The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in 
permitting Dr. Bivens to testify about terminology, behaviors, relationship characteristics, or post-abuse impacts in sex abuse 
cases because the testimony was relevant and not unduly 
prejudicial. HRE Rules 401, 402, & 403. See Mars, 116 Hawai' i 
at 140, 170 P.3d at 876); State v. Batangan, 71 Haw. 552, 556-57, 799 P.2d 48, 51 (1990). 
(3) The circuit court did not err in failing to give 
the jury a limiting instruction regarding Dr. Bivens's testimony 
on delayed disclosure. The testimony clearly was relevant to why 
Complainant failed to disclose the sexual abuse until she was 
older and made it less probable that she was making up the 
allegations against Araneta, HRE Rule 401 & 402, and did not 
directly address Complainant's credibility. See Mars, 116 
Hawai'i at 140-41, 170 P.3d at 876-77. 
(4) Araneta provides no argument for his point that
 
the circuit court erroneously failed to instruct the jury on how
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
it should consider Dr. Bivens's testimony about methods of 
initiating child sexual abuse, signs indicative of abuse, and 
triggers to disclosure. Consequently, this point is waived. 
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the judgment of conviction
 
and sentence entered on August 23, 2010 in the Circuit Court of
 the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 11, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Phyllis J. Hironaka,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge
 
James M. Anderson,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
4
 