NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000457
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CAN CAPITAL ASSET SERVICING, INC.,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BUDGET COLOR LITHO, INC.; ALVIN ISHIHARA, aka ALVIN ISHIHANA,
Defendants-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CIVIL NO. 1RC15-1-10600)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Budget Color Litho, Inc. (Budget 
Color) and Alvin Ishihara aka Alvin Ishihana (Ishihara)
 
(collectively, Appellants) appeal from a Judgment entered in
 
favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Can Capital Asset Servicing, Inc.
 
(Can Capital) filed on May 11, 2017, in the District Court of the
 
First Circuit (district court). Appellants challenge the
 
district court's order granting Can Capital's summary judgment
 
motion.1
 
On appeal,2 Appellants contend that the district court
 
erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Can Capital
 
1
 The Honorable Hilary B. Gangnes entered the order granting summary
judgment, and the Honorable Melanie May entered the Judgment. 
2
 Can Capital did not file an answering brief, thus the Appellants did
not file a reply brief. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
because: (1) Can Capital failed to prove it had a contract with
 
Appellants; (2) WebBank was not an agent of Can Capital; and (3)
 the district court failed to enter findings of fact and
 conclusions of law as to its summary judgment ruling.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant legal authorities, we resolve Appellants'
 points of error as follows and vacate summary judgment.
 
This matter involves an alleged breach of a loan
 
agreement between Budget Color and WebBank. On November 18,
 2015, Can Capital filed a Complaint and alleged that on August 8,
 2013, Can Capital executed a business loan agreement with Budget
 Color; that Ishihara personally guaranteed the loan; and
 Appellants failed to make timely payments on the loan agreement
 and defaulted on their obligations resulting in an unpaid balance
 of $24,224.99. Appellants filed their answer on March 23, 2016
 and asserted that Can Capital was not a real party in interest. 
On March 30, 2017, Can Capital filed a summary judgment
 
motion arguing that the record demonstrated that Appellants
 
failed to follow through on their contractual obligations and
 
there were no genuine issues of material fact. 
Can Capital's evidence in support of its summary
 
judgment motion included: (1) an Affidavit of Mark Howard
 (Howard), the Chief Financial Officer of WebBank; (2) an
 
Affidavit of Indever Lal, Director of Collections for Can
 
Capital; and (3) a Declaration by Robert S. Holland, attorney for
 Can Capital. Howard attested that Can Capital, formerly known as
 Newlogic Business Loan, Inc. (NewLogic), acted as servicer of
 
business loans made by WebBank; that on August 8, 2013, Budget
 
Color entered into a loan agreement with WebBank in which WebBank
 loaned the principal amount of $37,900.00 to Budget Color in
 exchange for a repayment amount of $54,576.00; and Can Capital
 became the successor in interest to WebBank having purchased the 
2
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
loan agreement from WebBank on August 12, 2013, pursuant to a
 
NewLogic Loan Sale Agreement dated September 14, 2012.3
 
Attached to the affidavits were the following relevant
 
documents: (1) a Bill of Sale signed on September 14, 2015, which
 indicated that in consideration of a loan program agreement
 between NewLogic and WebBank dated September 14, 2012, WebBank
 had assigned its rights in the loan account for Budget Color as
 of August 12, 2013; (2) NewLogic's Articles of Amendment with the
 Commonwealth of Massachusetts amending the corporation's name to
 Can Capital, signed on November 26, 2013; (3) the Business Loan
 Agreement between WebBank and Budget Color and a personal
 guaranty under the contract by Ishihara; (4) Can Capital's
 statement of accounts; (5) Can Capital's request for answers to
 interrogatories and for production of documents and Appellants'
 answers verified by Ishihara.
 
On May 1, 2017, the district court issued its order
 
granting Can Capital's summary judgment motion and on May 11,
 2017, entered Judgment against Appellants in the principal amount
 of $24,224.99, plus filing fees of $155.00, resulting in the
 total amount of $24,379.99.
 
We review a trial court's grant of summary judgment de 
novo. Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai' i 
92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). 
Appellants contend the district court erred in granting
 
Can Capital's summary judgment motion because there is a genuine
 issue of material fact as to whether Can Capital had a contract
 
3
 Howard attested that pursuant to the NewLogic Loan Sale Agreement
dated September 14, 2012, between WebBank and NewLogic, WebBank may sell,
transfer, assign and otherwise convey to NewLogic (currently Can Capital) loan
accounts. Under this agreement, Can Capital could purchase multiple loan
accounts and the accounts assigned by WebBank to Can Capital were effective
the date Can Capital purchased the loan accounts. Howard attested that the
"Bill of Sale that has been provided is the bill of sale evidencing the sale
and assignment of [Budget Color's] loan account." He further attested that
 "[a]lthough the format of the Bill of Sale document contains a date of
September 14, 2015, evidencing the date that I actually signed the Bill of
Sale, this is not the date that the purchase and assignment of the [Budget
Color] loan account actually occurred . . . the sale and assignment to [Can
Capital] was effective was [sic] August 12, 2013."
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with Appellants. Specifically, Appellants contend that the
 
business loan agreement was made with WebBank, not Can Capital
 and Can Capital's name was not amended until 2013.
 
In this case, the record demonstrates that on August 8,
 
2013, Budget Color entered into a loan agreement with WebBank in
 which WebBank loaned Budget Color the principal amount of
 $37,900.00 in exchange for a repayment amount of $54,576.00.
 Ishihara personally guaranteed payment for all amounts owed by
 Budget Color under the loan agreement. Thus, Appellants entered
 into a contract with WebBank. 
WebBank then appears to have assigned its rights in the
 
business loan agreement to NewLogic. The assignment to NewLogic
 is permissible under the business loan agreement. The agreement
 provides in a provision titled "Assignment" that WebBank "may
 assign, mortgage, pledge or otherwise transfer or delegate this
 [business loan agreement] or any of [WebBank's] rights or
 obligations hereunder to any party (each, an 'Assignee') without
 notifying [Budget Color] or obtaining [Budget Color's] consent." 
However, the "Assignment" provision further provides, in relevant
 part, that:
 
Upon and following receipt of written notification by an
Assignee to you, you are authorized and directed to remit
any and all amounts then or thereafter payable by you under
this Agreement directly to such Assignee.
 
(Emphasis added). Can Capital did not adduce any evidence in
 
support of its summary judgment motion that NewLogic or Can
 Capital provided written notification of the assignment to Budget
 Color. Can Capital submitted billing statements that it
 apparently sent to the Appellants with the outstanding amounts. 
However, these statements do not indicate that Can Capital (or
 its predecessor NewLogic) was an assignee under the Business Loan
 Agreement between WebBank and Budget Color.
 
In the record in the district court, Ishihara submitted
 
a declaration stating in relevant part that, "[s]ince Plaintiff
 claims to own the debt, this is surprising to me because I don't
 ever recall receiving any written or other notice from WebBank[,]
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Newlogic Business Loans, Inc. nor Plaintiff advising that the
 
assignment of my debt had been made to a new entity." Although
 Ishihara's declaration was submitted in opposition to Can
 Capital's first summary judgment motion, which was withdrawn,
 Budget Color's opposition to the second summary judgment motion
 referred to its prior opposition. 
Given the record in this case, and based on our de novo
 
review, we conclude that there is a genuine issue of material
 fact whether Can Capital or NewLogic provided written notice to
 Budget Color pursuant to the "Assignment" provision in the
 Business Loan Agreement. Thus, the district court erred in
 granting summary judgment for Can Capital. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment
 
entered on May 11, 2017, in the District Court of the First
 Circuit is vacated. The case is remanded to the district court
 for further proceedings consistent with this order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 17, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
R. Steven Geshell,
for Defendants-Appellants. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
5
 