 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000362
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JAN MICHAEL WEINBERG, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BRENDA IRENE DICKSON-WEINBERG, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D. NO. 04-1-3936)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Brenda Irene Dickson-Weinberg
 
(Wife) appeals from (1) the "Order Re Defendant's Motion for
 
Post-Decree Relief Filed September 10, 2014," (Order Re Post-
Decree Relief) filed on December 5, 2014 and (2) the "Order
 Denying Defendant's Motion for Reconsideration Filed December 15,
 2014," (Order Denying Motion for Reconsideration) filed on March
 25, 2015 in the Family Court of the First Circuit (family
 court).
1
 
On appeal, Wife contends: (1) the family court denied 
Wife's right to due process of law under Article I, section 5 of the Hawai
'i Constitution; (2) the family court erred when it 
denied Wife's "Motion and Declaration for Post-Decree Relief" (Motion for Post-Decree Relief); (3) the family court erred when 
1
 The Honorable Linda S. Martell presided except where indicated.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
it denied "Defendant's Non-Hearing Motion for Reconsideration"
 
(Motion for Reconsideration); and (4) the family court erred when
 it did not submit Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
 (FOFs/COLs) prior to Wife submitting her opening brief.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Wife's points
 of error as follows and affirm.
 
I. Background
 
This case involves a divorce proceeding that began in 
2004 and has previously been appealed to this court and the 
Supreme Court of Hawai
'i on other issues. 
On December 22, 2004, Jan Michael Weinberg (Husband)
 
filed a Complaint for Divorce against Wife. On May 18, 2006, the
 family court filed a Divorce Decree, which, inter alia, (1)
 
2
dissolved the marriage; (2) denied alimony  to either spouse; and
(3)
 divided and distributed the parties' real property, personal
 
property, and debts.
 
On June 16, 2006, Wife filed a notice of appeal from 
the Divorce Decree. This court in Weinberg v. Dickson-Weinberg, 121 Hawai
'i 401, 220 P.3d 264 (App. 2009), affirmed in part, 
reversed in part, vacated in part and remanded the case with instructions on how to proceed. Id. at 450, 220 P.3d 264, 313. 
Husband appealed this court's decision to the Supreme Court of Hawai
'i. 
On April 7, 2010, the supreme court affirmed in part, 
vacated in part, and remanded the case back to the family court. Weinberg v. Dickson Weinberg, 123 Hawai
'i 68, 80, 229 P.3d 1133, 
1145 (2010). 
On March 23, 2011, after a trial was held on remand,
 
the family court entered a Decision and Order, which, inter alia,
 (1) divided the marital real property, personal property, and
 
2
 The terms alimony and spousal support are used interchangeably.
 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
debts and (2) found that transitional alimony was appropriate for
 
a period of thirty-six months at the rate of $12,000 per month,
 beginning April 1, 2011.
3 On June 30, 2011, the family court
 
filed the Judgment. Wife did not seek reconsideration on the
 Decision and Order or appeal the Judgment. 
On December 9, 2011, Husband filed "Plaintiff's Motion
 
and Declaration for Post-Decree Relief" requesting a reduction in
 alimony payments to no more than $2,000 per month. On June 4,
 2012, the family court filed an "Order Granting in Part and
 Denying in Part Plaintiff's Motion and Declaration for Post-
Decree Relief Filed December 9, 2011" (6/4/12 Order).
4 The
 
court, inter alia, reduced Husband's alimony payment to $5,000
 per month effective January 2012. Wife did not file a motion for
 reconsideration or appeal the 6/4/12 Order.
 
On April 15, 2014, Husband filed "Plaintiff's Motion
 
for Entry of Full Satisfaction of Judgment Filed June 30, 2011
 and Order Filed June 4, 2012." On August 28, 2014, the family
 court filed an "Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Entry of
 Full Satisfaction of Judgment Filed June 30, 2011 and Order filed
 June 4, 2012, Filed April 15, 2014" (Order Re Satisfaction of
 Judgment).
5 The Order Re Satisfaction of Judgment states, inter
 
alia, (1) Husband "fully and completely satisfied the alimony
 award issued by the Judgment, as modified by the Order, and
 [Husband] does not owe [Wife] any additional sums as and for
 alimony"; (2) Wife's "oral motion for an award of immediate
 temporary alimony is denied"; and (3) "[t]he Court accepts
 [Wife's] request to reserve her rights, if any, regarding the
 alimony awarded by the Judgment and modified by the Order. The
 Court makes no findings or determination as to whether any such
 rights exist." (Emphasis added.) Wife did not appeal the Order
 
3
 The Honorable Paul T. Murakami entered the Order.
 
4 The Honorable Bode A. Uale entered the Order.
 
5
 The Honorable Christine Kuriyama entered the Order.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Re Satisfaction of Judgment.
 
A few weeks later, on September 10, 2014, Wife filed
 
her Motion for Post-Decree Relief. Wife requested that the
 
family court reinstate her alimony award of $12,000 per month
 because the court reduced the alimony based on Husband's
 disability and inability to work and the disability had resolved
 itself. On October 15, 2014, a hearing was held regarding Wife's
 Motion for Post-Decree Relief.
 
On December 5, 2014, the family court filed the Order
 
Re Post-Decree Relief, in which the court found that "no material
 change of circumstance [existed] to re-open the issue of a
 thirty-six month award of transitional alimony, which terminated
 seven months ago and was finalized by an Order Re Satisfaction of
 Judgment."
 
On December 15, 2014, Wife filed her Motion for
 
Reconsideration. On March 25, 2015, the family court filed an
 "Order Denying Defendant's Motion for Reconsideration Filed
 December 15, 2014." On April 23, 2015, Wife timely filed her
 Notice of Appeal. 
On August 28, 2015, Wife filed her opening brief. On
 
September 1, 2015, the family court filed its Findings of Fact
 and Conclusions of Law. On September 29, 2015, the family court
 filed its Amended Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
 (Amended FOFs/COLs).
II. Standard of Review
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion in
making its decisions and those decision[s] will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
we will not disturb the family court's decisions on appeal
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of
reason.
 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(citation omitted). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. Discussion
 
A. Motion for Post-Decree Relief.
 
1. The family court's jurisdiction. 
As an initial matter, in Husband's answering brief, he
 
contends that the family court did not have subject matter
 
jurisdiction over Wife's Motion for Post-Decree Relief because
 once the period for alimony has run and the fixed alimony was
 fully paid, the family court did not have authority to order
 additional alimony. Thus, Husband contends that the family court
 lost jurisdiction when the alimony was satisfied as of March 1,
 2014.
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 580-47 (2006, Supp.
 
2015) confers jurisdiction on the family court:
 
§580-47 Support orders; division of property.  (a)
Upon granting a divorce, or thereafter if, in addition to
the powers granted in subsections (c) and (d), jurisdiction
of those matters is reserved under the decree by agreement
of both parties or by order of court after finding that good
cause exists, the court may make any further orders as shall
appear just and equitable . . . .(2) compelling either party
to provide for the support and maintenance of the other
party;
. . . . 
(d)
 Upon the motion of either party supported by an
affidavit setting forth in particular a material change in
the physical or financial circumstances of either party, or
upon a showing of other good cause, the moving party, in the
discretion of the court, and upon adequate notice to the
other party, may be granted a hearing . . . . The court,
upon such hearing, for good cause shown may amend or revise
any order and shall consider all proper circumstances in
determining the amount of the allowance, if any, which shall
thereafter be ordered.
 
HRS § 580-47(a) provides the family court with
 
jurisdiction to compel either party to provide for support and
 
maintenance of the other party. In addition, HRS § 580-47(d)
 grants the court discretion to "amend or revise any order" if it
 determines that a material change in circumstances exists. This
 court concluded "the family court's spousal support order is
 always subject to the further order of the family court upon a
 material change in the relevant circumstances of either party
 even when the order explicitly states otherwise." Vorfeld v.
 
Vorfeld, 8 Haw. App. 391, 401, 804 P.2d 891, 897 (1991); see Amii
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
v. Amii, 5 Haw. App. 385, 391, 695 P.2d 1194, 1198 (1985)
 
("Spousal support, however, is always subject to revision upon a
 substantial and material change in the relevant circumstances."). 
Thus, the family court is granted broad authority under HRS
 § 580-47 in its ability to address alimony issues.
 
In its August 28, 2014 Order Re Satisfaction of
 
Judgment, the family court stated: "The Court accepts [Wife's]
 request to reserve her rights, if any, regarding the alimony
 awarded by the Judgment and modified by the Order. The Court
 makes no findings or determination as to whether any such rights
 exist." (Emphasis added.) Thus, the family court expressly
 reserved and limited its jurisdiction to the thirty-six-month
 period of the original alimony award.
 
When Wife filed her Motion for Post-Decree Relief, the
 
family court had the authority and discretion under HRS § 580­47(d) to address Wife's Motion, but only as it pertained to the
 thirty-six month time frame of the original alimony award.
2. 	The family court did not abuse its discretion
when it determined there was no material 
change in circumstances.
 
Wife contends that the family court erred when it
 
denied her Motion for Post-Decree Relief because Husband's health
 
and financial ability to pay alimony had improved. Wife contends
 that if Husband's physical and/or financial situation has
 improved, Wife is entitled to seek reinstatement of her alimony
 to the former amount of $12,000 per month. Further, in her reply
 brief, Wife clarifies that "[Wife] was not trying to add on any
 additional amounts to what was originally ordered, she was merely
 trying to reverse the reduction of those amounts."
 
In her Motion for Post-Decree relief, wife stated that
 
the previous award of alimony should be "reinstated to the amount
 of $12,000.00 per month effective immediately and until further
 order of the Court. The Court to determine if support arrearages
 are owed based on Plaintiff's representations regarding his
 financial status in the event that such representations were not
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
truthful." Wife also stated the change in alimony was
 
appropriate because the reduction in alimony was based on "1)
 [Husband's] disability and inability to work which has apparently
 resolved itself, and 2) [Wife's] financial need and alleged
 inequity of property division in divorce."
 
Wife based her Motion for Post-Decree Relief on the
 
fact that Husband's ability to pay had changed after the Order Re
 Satisfaction of Judgment was filed. For example, at the hearing
 on Wife's Motion for Post-Decree Relief, Wife argued that a
 material change in circumstances existed because Husband is no
 longer disabled and is working. 
Further, Wife stated that: 
[t]here's been a material change of circumstances, which now
is [Husband] is working again and is making income and is
putting himself out there as – you know, taking on new cases
. . . . There's been a material change in circumstances,
again, where he's back to the position where he was in the
first point. And at the very least we deserve a short trial
on that issue, because there's a lot of factual issues. 
In addition, Wife argued that it is not relevant that
 
Wife did not appeal the Order that reduced the alimony payment
 
from $12,000 per month to $5,000 per month "because the material
 change of circumstances has happened now." (Emphasis added.) 
The court also stated: "I think my only question is
 
whether there was a material change of circumstances that
 occurred between June of 2012 [when the alimony was reduced from
 $12,000 to $5,000] and March of 2014," when the thirty-six month
 time period for alimony expired. Wife responded by saying that
 if Husband "had complied with the court's scheduling order
 requiring that he file income and expense/asset and debt
 statements, you might have had the information you would need to
 make that determination." 
The scheduling order, filed September 10, 2014,
 
required Husband to submit (1) a copy of Husband's two most
 recent pay statements; (2) his last W-2 statement; (3) his last
 federal individual income tax return; and (4) his current Income
 and Expense and Asset and Debt Statements. These documents
 
7
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
further indicate that Wife was interested in receiving
 
information about Husband's current financial situation and not
 contesting Husband's financial situation during the thirty-six
 month award of alimony. 
Thus, based on Wife's Motion for Post-Decree Relief and
 
Wife's assertions at the hearing on her Motion, Wife believed
 that the change in Husband's financial status occurred after the
 thirty-six month period of the alimony award and was not
 challenging Husband's financial circumstances during the original
 thirty-six month period.
 
This court stated in Vorfeld, that "[a] material change
 
in the relevant circumstances has occurred when a party's
 relevant circumstances that are proven to exist at the time of
 the modification hearing are materially different from the
 party's relevant circumstances that were proven to exist when the
 family court entered its spousal support order." Vorfeld, 8 Haw.
 
App. at 402, 804 P.2d at 897. The standard set forth in Vorfeld
 is in reference to a spousal support award that has not yet
 terminated. For example, in Vorfeld, the alimony award in
 dispute in that case originally was to "continue until Husband
 retires or Wife remarries, whichever shall first occur." Id. at
 
394, 804 P.2d at 893. When the motion to modify the spousal
 support was filed, none of the conditions for termination of the
 spousal support had occurred. Id. at 397, 804 P.2d at 895. 
6
Thus, this court applied a three-part analysis  to determine if
6
 The three-part analysis from Vorfeld provides:
 
1. Have any of the relevant circumstances materially changed?
A material change in the relevant circumstances has
occurred when a party's relevant circumstances that are
proven to exist at the time of the modification hearing are
materially different from the party's relevant circumstances
that were proven to exist when the family court entered its
spousal support order.
As outlined in Cassiday v. Cassiday, 6 Haw. App. 207,
215-16, 716 P.2d 1145, 1151 (1985), aff'd in part, rev'd in
 
part, 68 Haw. 383, 716 P.2d 1133 (1986), the relevant
circumstances are as follows. The first relevant
 circumstance is the payee's need. What amount of money does
he or she need to maintain the standard of living
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
modification to the spousal support was appropriate. 
By contrast, in this case, Wife is not trying to modify
 
a current spousal support order. In fact Wife stated at the
 
hearing on the Motion for Post-Decree Relief that there was "no
 dispute the amounts that were supposed to be paid were paid." 
(Emphasis added.) Thus, Wife misapplies the standard for a
 material change of circumstances by contending Husband's current
 income should be used to retroactively change the spousal support
 award that was satisfied in full, as confirmed by the Order Re
 Satisfaction of Judgment entered on August 28, 2014. 
Therefore, the family court did not abuse its
 
discretion when it denied Wife's Motion for Post-Decree Relief. 
B. Due Process.
 
Wife contends that the family court denied her
 
constitutional right to due process of law when it did not:
 enforce the Scheduling Order requiring Husband to provide
 documents to Wife; require Husband to comply with Wife's
 discovery requests; and denied Wife a contested hearing. 
The Hawai
'i Constitution provides: "No person shall be 
deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of law[.]" Haw. Const. art. I, § 5. "At its core, procedural due 
established during the marriage? The second relevant
circumstance is the payee's ability to meet his or her need
without spousal support. Taking into account the payee's
income, or what it should be, including the net income
producing capability of his or her property, what is his or
her reasonable ability to meet his or her need without
spousal support? The third relevant circumstance is the
payor's need. What amount of money does he or she need to
maintain the standard of living established during the
marriage? The fourth relevant circumstance is the payor's
ability to pay spousal support. Taking into account the
payor's income, or what it should be, including the income
producing capability of his or her property, what is his or
her reasonable ability to meet his or her need and to pay
spousal support?
2. If the answer to question 1 is yes, should there be a
modification?
 3. If the answer to question 2 is yes, what should the
modification be?
 
Vorfeld v. Vorfeld, 8 Haw. App. 391, 402-03, 804 P.2d 891, 897-98 (1991)
(emphasis added)
. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
process of law requires notice and an opportunity to be heard at
 
a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner before governmental
 deprivation of a significant liberty interest." 
Doe v. Doe , 120
 
Hawai'i 149, 168, 202 P.3d 610, 629 (App. 2009) (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
[D]ue process is not a fixed concept requiring a specific
procedural course in every situation. Rather, due process
is flexible and calls for such procedural protections as the
particular situation demands. The basic elements of
 procedural due process of law require notice and an
opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a
meaningful manner.
 
Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple of Haw. v. Sullivan, 87 Hawai 'i 
217, 243, 953 P.2d 1315, 1341 (1998) (citations omitted). 
Questions of constitutional law are reviewed under the right/wrong standard. Hollaway v. Hollaway, 133 Hawai
'i 415, 
420, 329 P.3d 320, 325 (App. 2014). 
In this case, it is undisputed that Husband did not
 
timely respond to a discovery request by Wife or provide
 documents set forth in the Scheduling Order. 
HFCR Rule 37(a)(2) provides in pertinent part:
 
(a) Motion for Order Compelling Discovery. A party, upon
reasonable notice to other parties and all persons affected
thereby, may apply for an order compelling discovery as
follows:
 
(2) Motion . . . . if a party, in response to a request for
inspection submitted under Rule 34, fails to respond that
inspection will be permitted as requested or fails to permit
inspection as requested, the discovering party may move for
an order compelling . . . inspection in accordance with the
request. The motion must include a certification that the
movant has in good faith conferred or attempted to confer
with the person or party failing to make the discovery in an
effort to secure the information or material without court
 action.
 
Thus, a party that seeks a court order compelling discovery may
 
submit a motion and must include a certification that the party
 conferred with the other side before taking court action.
 
In this case, Wife contends that she submitted a motion
 
to compel discovery because her Motion for Post-Decree Relief
 included a request for "[a]n Order requiring [Husband's]
 compliance with outstanding discovery requests in the event he
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
does not timely comply." However, this request does not fulfill
 
the requirements under HFCR Rule 37(a)(2) because Wife did not
 attach a certification that she had in good faith conferred with
 Husband in an effort to secure the discovery. 
Moreover, given Wife's contention that her Motion for
 
Post-Decree Relief was based on a change in circumstance after
 the thirty-six month alimony period, the family court did not
 abuse its discretion in not requiring further discovery from
 Husband.
 
Wife also contends that her due process rights were
 
violated because the family court did not grant her request for a
 contested hearing. Although a full trial was not held regarding
 Wife's Motion for Post-Decree Relief, there was a hearing on
 October 15, 2014. At the hearing, both Husband and Wife were
 sworn in. In addition, Wife was given an opportunity to testify. 
Based on the information before the family court, the
 
court was not wrong to decide the case without a trial. 
Therefore, the family court did not violate Wife's right to due
 process when it did not grant Wife a trial regarding her Motion
 for Post-Decree Relief.
 
C. Motion for Reconsideration.
 
Wife contends the family court abused its discretion
 
when it denied her Motion for Reconsideration. Wife's appeal in
 this regard is based on HFCR Rule 60(b)(1).
 
HFCR Rule 60(b)(1) provides: 
(b) Mistakes; Inadvertence; Excusable Neglect; Newly
Discovered Evidence; Fraud. On motion and upon such terms as
are just, the court may relieve a party or a party's legal
representative from any or all of the provisions of a final
judgment, order, or proceeding for the following reasons:
(1) mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable neglect[.]
 
In the Memorandum in Support of Wife's Motion for
 
Reconsideration, Wife asserted the family court was mistaken in
 
its Order for Post-Decree Relief when it stated: "[Husband]
 testified that his disability continues." 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After a review of "Plaintiff's Memorandum in Opposition
 
to Defendant's Motion and Declaration for Post-Decree Relief
 
Filed September 10, 2014" and the transcripts from the hearing on
 Wife's Motion for Post-Decree Relief, it does not appear that
 Husband testified that his disability continues. However, to the
 extent that the family court erred in this regard, whether
 Husband's disability continues is not relevant to whether there
 was a material change in circumstances to affect the alimony
 during the thirty-six month period. As stated above, Husband's
 current financial status does not effect the thirty-six month
 time period of the alimony award. Thus, any mistake was harmless
 and did not justify relief from the family court's Order Re Post-
Decree Relief. Therefore, the family court did not abuse its
 discretion when it denied Wife's Motion for Reconsideration.
 
D. Findings of Facts and Conclusions of Law.
 
Wife contends that the family court abused its
 
discretion when it did not timely submit its FOFs/COLs.
 
HFCR Rule 52(a) provides:
 
(a) Effect. In all actions tried in the family court, the
court may find the facts and state its conclusions of law
thereon or may announce or write and file its decision and
direct the entry of the appropriate judgment; except upon
notice of appeal filed with the court, the court shall enter
its findings of fact and conclusions of law where none have
been entered, unless the written decision of the court
contains findings of fact and conclusions of law.
 
Although Wife requested that the family court submit
 
FOFs/COLs in accordance with Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
7
 (HRAP) Rule 10(f), nothing in the record indicates that prior to
7 HRAP Rule 10(f) provides:
 
(f) Request for Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law. In
all actions where the court appealed from is not required to
enter findings of fact and conclusions of law prior to the
entry of an order, judgment, or decree, but is required to
do so once a notice of appeal is filed, the appellant shall,
no later than 10 days after filing the notice of appeal,
file in the court appealed from a request for entry of
findings of fact and conclusions of law, naming the judge
who tried the action and entered the order, judgment, or
decree being appealed. The appellant shall attach a filed
copy of the notice of appeal to the request. The named judge
shall enter the requested findings of fact and conclusions
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Wife submitting her opening brief, Wife asked the family court to 
comply with HFCR Rule 52(a). See In re Doe Children, 108 Hawai 'i 
134, 141, 117 P.3d 866, 873 (App. 2005). In addition, Wife did 
8
not file a request under HRAP Rule 29  for an extension of time
to submit her opening brief. See Id.
 
Wife does not articulate how the untimely filing of the
 
FOFs/COLs prejudiced her case on appeal. Further, Wife was able
 to and did challenge certain FOFs/COLs in her reply brief. 
Therefore, we cannot conclude that Wife was prejudiced by the
 timing of the family court's FOFs/COLs.
 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order Re Defendant's
 
Motion and Declaration For Post-Decree Relief Filed September 10,
 2014" filed on December 5, 2014, and the "Order Denying
 Defendant's Motion for Reconsideration Filed December 15, 2014" 
of law within 28 days after the request has been filed. To
aid the court, the court may order the parties or either of
them to submit proposed findings of fact and conclusions of
law after the filing of the request.
 
8 HRAP Rule 29 provides:
 
(a) By the Appellate Clerk. Upon timely (1) oral request, or
(2) written motion, or (3) letter request by a party, the
appellate clerk shall grant one extension of time for no
more than 30 days for the filing of an opening or answering
brief and no more than 10 days for the filing of a reply
brief. The appellate clerk shall note on the record that the
extension was granted and the date the brief is due. The
requesting party shall notify all other parties that the
extension was granted and shall file a copy of the notice in
the record. A request is timely only if it is received by
the appellate clerk within the original time for filing of
the brief.
 (b) By the Appellate Court. Motions for further extensions
of time to file briefs will be approved by a judge or
justice only upon good cause shown.
The submission of a request or motion for extension does not
toll the time for filing a brief.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
filed on March 25, 2015, in the Family Court of the First
 
Circuit, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 31, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Leslie C. Maharaj,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Earle A. Partington,(Law Office of Earle A. Partington)Greg Ryan,(Greg Ryan and Associates),for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
14
 