NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001217
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JAMAL MCGHEE, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION

 
(1DCW-14-0002729)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.,
with Nakamura, C.J., dissenting.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jamal McGhee (McGhee) timely 

appeals from the October 13, 2014 Notice of Entry of Judgment
 
and/or Order entered by District Court of the First Circuit
 
1
Honolulu Division (District Court),  convicting him of
Terroristic Threatening in the Second Degree in violation of

 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-717(1) (2014).2
 
On appeal, McGhee argues as his sole point on appeal
 
that the District Court plainly erred when it admitted the
 Complaining Witness's (CW) statement to police into evidence
 during closing argument.
 
1
 The Honorable Linda K.C. Luke presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-717 states "(1) A person commits the offense of
terroristic threatening in the second degree if the person commits terroristic
threatening other than as provided in section 707-716. (2) terroristic
threatening in the second degree is a misdemeanor." (block format altered).
 
McGhee was also charged with Harassment in violation of HRS § 711­
1106(1)(a) (2014) but the charge was dismissed on the State's motion.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After a careful review of the issue raised and the
 
arguments made by the parties, the applicable authority, and the
 
record, we resolve McGhee's point on appeal as follows and
 affirm.
 
Taking the District Court's actions in context, we are 
not convinced that the court admitted the subject statement into evidence, or if it did so, that the error "seriously affect[ed] the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings," or that it is necessary to correct the error "to serve the ends of justice, and to prevent the denial of fundamental rights." See State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai
'i 327, 334, 
141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006) (quoting State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai 'i 
325, 330, 966 P.2d 637, 642 (1998)). 
The evidence at trial consisted of the testimony of the
 
CW for the prosecution, who testified that she felt "threatened"
 by McGhee's "screaming and swearing and cursing" directed at
 everyone present and threats directed at her personally that he
 could "kill" her and "beat [her] up." On cross-examination, the
 CW was asked whether, on the night in question, she felt
 "threatened and afraid," to which she responded, "Mn-hmm" and
 whether it was true she just testified that it was "okay for you
 to go outside and be calm and try to calm [McGhee] down," to
 which she affirmed, "I guess." McGhee, as the sole witness for
 the defense, testified that while he was present at CW's business
 on the night in question, he did not see the CW until after the
 police arrived and did not yell.
 
In closing argument, both counsel presented argument in
 
support of their respective witnesses and against the opposing
 witnesses' credibility. Relevant to the issue on appeal, defense
 counsel argued, 
And I don't think there's no risk of threatening if [CW]
feels like she can go outside and calm the situation down.
As she stated herself, she was not afraid at that time and
she could go outside.
 
In rebuttal, the State's attorney argued,
 
[Prosecutor]: Your Honor, I -- I think I just, in
candor to the Court, given what the defense argument has

been as far as to the afraid [sic], I do need to point out
although this wasn't raised as evidence in this case, out of
fairness to the defendant I believe I do need to point it
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
out. Defense did start to impeach the witness with, as she
stated previously, that she was afraid. I believe what they
were referring to was a portion of the written 252 that the
witness was not confronted with.
 
I'm not going to raise that argument that she -- that
is not part of the evidence in this case, I don't have a
problem with the Court considering that that was included in
the 252. I just put that out there in fairness to the
defense. Nonetheless, the State would still argue that the
witness be found credible.
 
THE COURT: 
So your representation in the 252 --
[Prosecutor]:  the 2 -- in the 252 there was a
 
statement that I was afraid. However, the State is urging
the Court to find that her testimony in court is credible.
I feel it just as important to point out because I know that
the defense started asking about that but didn't finish
laying the foundation for it. So just out of fairness, I
just think it's appropriate to note that for the Court.
 
THE COURT:  And the portion of the 252 is that the CW
was afraid?
 
[Prosecutor]: Correct, Your Honor, if I could just
read the portion for the Court?
 
THE COURT:  [Defense Counsel]?
 
[Defense Counsel]:  Yes, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT:  May he read it?
 
[Defense Counsel]:  Yes, Your Honor.
 
[Prosecutor]: It reads: At the time I was afraid and
 
call the police. The tense is incorrect in that.
 
The District Court immediately rendered its verdict.
 
While ill-advised, the offer by the prosecution was
not, in context, an offer to introduce evidence, as the statement
 
contradicted the testimony of the CW who testified that she felt
 threatened but went out to meet McGhee because he was threatening
 others and she felt that she could calm him down. Rather, it
 appears that the prosecutor, in an abundance of caution, wanted
 to disclose that, consistent with the defense's cross-
examination, the CW had previously made a statement that was
 arguably inconsistent with her direct examination testimony. The
 District Court did not rule that the single sentence read from
 the CW's 252 was admitted into evidence and did not mention it
 further. Thus, taking the exchange in context, it does not
 appear the statement was admitted or meant to be treated as
 evidence.
 

 
3

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Moreover, even if it was, the substance of the
 
statement was not relevant to the issues at trial. The crime of
 
Terroristic Threatening does not require proof that the victim
 was actually placed in fear by the statements of the defendant. 
State v. Chung,  75 Haw. 398, 413, 862 P.2d 1063, 1071 (1993)
 
("Actual terrorization is not a material element of the offense
 of terroristic threatening." quoting State v. Nakachi, 7 Haw.
 App. 28, 32, 742 P.2d 388, 391 (1987)). Moreover, the subject
 statement could not have contributed to the conviction as, based
 on the examination and cross-examination of the CW, the District
 Court was already aware that the CW acknowledged feeling
 threatened and afraid and she nevertheless went out to meet
 McGhee. The fact that the CW gave a statement that she called
 the police because she was afraid did not add to her credibility
 and arguably detracted from it, insofar as she vacillated between
 her stated reasons for calling the police. Therefore, any error
 committed by hearing the subject statement was harmless.
 
Therefore, the October 13, 2014 Notice of Entry of

 
Judgment and/or Order entered by District Court of the First
 Circuit Honolulu Division is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 23, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
William H. Jameson,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant.
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Brian R. Vincent,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
4
 