
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 


 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
NO. CAAP-13-0003839
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
 
JOHN CHRISTOPHER JENKINS, Defendant-Appellant
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
 
(CR. NO. 13-1-0366)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
I.
 
Defendant-Appellant John Christopher Jenkins (Jenkins)
 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence for Cruelty
 to Animals in the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) § 711-1109(1)(b) (2014), entered by the Circuit
 
1
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  on August 9, 2013.
 
 
On appeal, Jenkins argues that (1) the Circuit Court

 
erred in its instructions to the jury when it (a) failed to
 include all statutory examples of "necessary sustenance"; (b)
 failed to instruct the jury, sua sponte, on the "choice of evils"
 defense; and (c) instructed the jury to disregard the attorneys'
 arguments on the law during closing arguments; (2) the deputy 
prosecutor committed prosecutorial misconduct by misstating the
 law in closing argument; (3) the Circuit Court erred when it
 denied his motion for judgment of acquittal at the end of the
 State's case; (4) the Circuit Court abused its discretion when it
 sentenced Jenkins to a term of imprisonment based on facts not
 
1
 The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided.
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 


 

 

 

 

 


 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
established in the record; and (5) he was deprived of his right
 
to effective assistance of counsel.
 
II.
 
On March 13, 2013, the State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Jenkins by Complaint with Cruelty to Animals in the Second Degree, in violation of HRS § 711-1109(1)(b). Jury trial commenced on August 6, 2013. 
Jenkins testified that he was the owner of a
 
Pomeranian/Chihuahua mixed-breed dog (dog). One night at the end
 of April 2012, he was upstairs at home, doing laundry. His
 brother, Robert, was downstairs playing guitar with a friend when
 Jenkins heard a yelp. Jenkins went downstairs and discovered
 that Robert's friend, who weighed 320 pounds, had stepped on the
 dog's leg, snapping the leg in half.
 
Jenkins fashioned a splint using two popsicle sticks
 
and gauze and administered "Aleve" to the dog for pain relief. 
Jenkins testified that the next day, the dog "seemed fine" and
 about two days after the break, he took off the gauze and re-
wrapped it. Jenkins changed the popsicle sticks and did not
 notice any bones, flesh wounds, or discoloration.
 
A few days after re-wrapping the dog's leg, Jenkins
 
noticed that it "was just flopping, flopping around" and the dog
 was "whimpering in pain." Jenkins decided to snip the paw off
 with a pair of scissors, "to alleviate the pain and suffering." 
He ran the scissors under hot water because "that's just a normal
 common sense to sterilize a – a mechanism." After Jenkins
 snipped off the paw, the dog acted fine and stopped whimpering. 
Jenkins soaked the remaining part of the dog's leg in Hawaiian
 salt, applied antiseptic, and regauzed it.
 
After removing the dog's paw, Jenkins called around to
 
several veterinarians and "got some different quotes." One quote
 was for $1200 because the paw "was already off." Later that
 night, Jenkins's tenant, Billie Jean Silva (Silva), suggested
 that she take control of the dog because she knew of a pet
 hospital in Kahala. Jenkins gave Silva some money for gas and
 for the veterinary bill.
 
2
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Silva testified that, in late April 2012, she was 
living with her boyfriend, Muchuro Higa (Higa), as a tenant in
 the "front house" on Jenkins's property. Silva testified that
 either the day or the day after she moved in, she and Jenkins
 were talking about dogs and at some point Jenkins stated, "Well,
 you should see my other dog" and tossed Silva a foot. Silva
 testified that Jenkins told her that he had chopped his dog's leg
 off. Silva testified that the dog foot was warm.
 
One or two days later, Silva saw Jenkins's dog in the
 
yard with one leg missing and without any bandages. She then
 approached Jenkins and asked if she could take his dog to a
 veterinarian. She took the dog to a vet in Kahala, who gave her
 a number for Jenkins to call in order to pick up his dog in a few
 days.
 
Higa testified that he first saw Jenkins's dog when it
 
was going to the bathroom in the yard and limping around. The
 dog did not have its leg bandaged and the bone was showing. He
 and Silva took it to the veterinarian because its leg was chopped
 off. Silva "freaked out" after Jenkins threw a chopped-off dog
 paw at her.
 
Higa testified that he saw, from a couple feet away,
 
Jenkins throw the paw to Silva, and that he never saw Jenkins
 bandage the dog, give it pain medicine, or apply antiseptic to
 the dog. Higa admitted that he did not include the paw-throwing
 incident in his statements to the Honolulu Police Department
 (HPD) or the Hawaiian Humane Society (HHS). Higa testified that,
 in his HHS report, he wrote that he did not think Jenkins's
 removal of the dog's paw was done to be mean.
 
Kevin Martin (Martin) worked as an investigator for HHS
 
from "[a]bout March 2007 until about September" of 2012, and his
 responsibilities included animal cruelty investigations. Martin
 testified that on May 8, 2012, he went to the Kahala veterinary
 clinic with Keoni Vaughn (Vaughn), the director of operations for
 HHS. They met Jenkins, who stated that (1) Jenkins's brother's
 friend had stepped on the dog; (2) Jenkins had splinted the dog's
 foot; (3) approximately four days later, he noticed the dog had
 
3
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 











 

 

 

 

 
 




 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
chewed through the bandage and at that point the paw was hanging
 
by a few ligaments; and (4) Jenkins snipped the foot off.
 
On May 10, 2012, Martin interviewed Jenkins who was
 
cooperative. Jenkins told Martin that the dog's leg was broken
 on April 28, 2012. Jenkins had attempted to make a homemade cast
 for the dog's leg using popsicle sticks and gauze, that the dog
 had chewed through the homemade splint, that he had attempted to
 rebandage it, that he had soaked the foot, and that he had
 administered Tylenol or Advil to the dog. Jenkins also told
 Martin that he knew the leg would not be able to be reattached
 and so he snipped it off with scissors.
 
Martin testified that he also interviewed Silva and
 
Higa and Silva told him that, when she saw the dog running around
 outside, he did not appear to be in pain.
 
Dr. Erik Pegg (Dr. Pegg) testified that on or about
 
May 8, 2012, he treated the dog on an emergency basis for a
 missing right front forearm. The dog exhibited visible signs of
 pain because he did not like to be touched on the injured arm. 
Upon Dr. Pegg's examination, the dog
 
was missing the . . . distal portion of the forearm.
Basically about halfway from the radius and ulna down there
was exposed bone, both the radius and ulna . . . The flesh,
skin, and muscles and tendons and so forth that normally
cover the bone were retracted up towards . . . the elbow.
And there was pus present around the wound.
[ 2

]

 
Dr. Pegg testified that the amputation was not performed
 
 
correctly because 
 
the dog would have been anesthetized . . . and given post-op
pain medication. The area would have been clipped and
surgically prepped to maintain a sterile environment.
Sterile instruments would have been used to prevent
infection. . . . [T]he end of . . . the leg would have been
closed and sutured over again to prevent an open wound.
 
In Dr. Pegg's opinion, leaving such a wound open is inviting
 
infection.
 
2
 The dog also required further amputation above the exposed end of
the leg "to . . . get rid of the infection that had already set in." In Dr.
 
Pegg's opinion, the dog's pain would not have subsided at that point because
 
he had exposed bone. Now, granted some of the nerve endings
were probably desiccated, drying out and dying, but the
tissue that had contracted up the bone that -- when I
palpated was definitely sore. And he had infection that was
 setting in as well, and that's painful as well.
 
4
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dr. Pegg explained that when a dog chews away bandage
 
applied to an injury, the risk of infection and pain associated
 with the injury increases. Dr. Pegg testified that "a very
 common reason" a dog is chewing at his foot is because it is
 painful.
 
Dr. Pegg testified that using popsicle sticks and gauze
 
to create a splint is not proper veterinary care and was at best
 first aid stabilization en route to a veterinary facility. 
Dr. Pegg opined any bone break or fracture is a medical emergency
 and the dog's initial break would likely have been amenable to
 repair had it been splinted correctly. However, Dr. Pegg could
 not be certain to a reasonable veterinarian medicine probability
 what caused the dog's foreleg to be separated.
 
Doctor Aleisha Swartz (Dr. Swartz) was the chief
 
veterinarian at HHS and assisted in the amputation surgery on the
 dog. Upon her inspection of the dog prior to surgery, she noted
 that there was hair embedded in the wound, the wound looked old
 and dirty, the dog appeared to be in pain, and the wound appeared
 to be infected due to the presence of pus or purulent discharge.
3
 
Dr. Swartz testified an animal would be in constant
 
pain after a grievous break, that bone pain is one of the most
 severe types of pain, and that attempting to handle the wound
 without pain medication would be "excruciatingly painful."
 
Dr. Swartz testified using popsicle sticks and gauze to
 
create a splint is not proper veterinary care, and the items used
 by Jenkins were "completely inappropriate for work on any
 tissue." In her experience, it was uncommon for a small dog with
 a front leg fracture to need to have the leg amputated.
 
Dr. Swartz testified HHS would not turn someone away
 
that had an animal with an injury like Jenkins's dog. HHS
 accepts animals for treatment from owners who cannot afford
 private veterinary care "24 hours a day, every day of the
 year[,]" but that the person must surrender ownership of the
 animal because HHS is not a public veterinary clinic for owned
 pets. Pet owners who do not want to surrender their animal to
 
3
 Pictures of the dog's injured leg and severed foreleg were
admitted into evidence at trial.
 
5
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
	 


 

 

 

 

 

 
 



 

 
	 

 

 
 





 
	 

 
	 


 
	 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HHS would be told they must immediately take the animal to a
 
veterinarian and if necessary, they would be escorted to one,
 because "non-treatment is not an option. The dog is in a lot of
 pain."
 
On August 8, 2013, the jury found Jenkins guilty as
 
charged. The following day, the Circuit Court sentenced Jenkins
 to probation for one year, to imprisonment for sixty days, and
 assessed a $55 Crime Victim Compensation Fee and a $70 Probation
 Service Fee. The Circuit Court stayed mittimus pending Jenkins's
 appeal.
 
III.
 
A.
 
THE CIRCUIT COURT'S INSTRUCTIONS WERE NOT ERRONEOUS.
 
1.	 The Circuit Court's Instruction on Cruelty to
Animals in the Second Degree Was Not
Prejudicially Insufficient or Misleading.
 
Jenkins argues that the Circuit Court erred when its
 
jury instruction on Cruelty to Animals in the Second Degree
4
 
failed to include all statutory examples of "necessary
 
sustenance."5 "When jury instructions or the omission thereof
 
4
 Jenkins was charged under HRS § 711-1109(1)(b) which provides,
 
Cruelty to animals in the second degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of cruelty to animals in the second
degree if the person intentionally, knowingly or recklessly:
 
. . . .
 
(b)	 Deprives a pet animal of necessary sustenance or
causes such deprivation[.]
 
5
 HRS § 711-1100. Definitions.
 
"Necessary sustenance" means care sufficient to
preserve the health and well-being of a pet animal, except
for emergencies or circumstances beyond the reasonable
control of the owner or caretaker of the pet animal, and
includes but is not limited to the following requirements:
 
(1)	 Food of sufficient quantity and quality to allow
for normal growth or maintenance of body weight;
 
(2)	 Open or adequate access to water in sufficient
quantity and quality to satisfy the animal's
needs;
 
(3) 	Access to protection from wind, rain, or sun;
(continued...)
 
 
6
 





 

	 



 


 
	 
 
	 
 
 
	 

 


 
	 





 
	 

 
	 


 



 
	 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
are at issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when
 
 
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are
 
 
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
 
 
misleading." State v. Gonsalves,  108 Hawai 'i 289, 292, 119 P.3d 
597, 600 (2005) (internal quotation marks omitted) overruled on
 
 
other grounds by State v. Auld, 136 Hawai 'i 244, 361 P.3d 471 
(2015).
 
 
The Circuit Court's jury instruction on necessary
 
 
sustenance read,
 
 
Necessary sustenance means care sufficient to preserve the
health and well-being of a pet animal except for emergencies
or circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the owner
or the caretaker of the pet animal and includes, but is not
limited to, the following requirement: Veterinary care when
needed to prevent suffering.
 
5(...continued)
(4)	 An area of confinement that has adequate space
necessary for the health of the animal and is
kept reasonably clean and free from excess waste
or other contaminants that could affect the
 animal's health; provided that the area of
confinement in a primary pet enclosure must:
 
(A) 	Provide access to shelter;
 
(B) 	Be constructed of safe materials to
 
protect the pet animal from injury;
 
(C) 	Enable the pet animal to be clean, dry,
and free from excess waste or other
 contaminants that could affect the pet
animal's health;
 
(D) 	Provide the pet animal with a solid
surface or resting platform that is large
enough for the pet animal to lie upon in a
normal manner, or, in the case of a caged
bird a perch that is large enough for the
bird to perch upon in a normal manner;
 
(E) 	Provide sufficient space to allow the pet
animal to, at minimum, do the following:
 
(i) 	Easily stand, sit, lie, turn around,
and make all other normal body
movements in a comfortable manner
 for the pet animal, without making
physical contact with any other
animal in the enclosure; and
 
(ii) 	 	Interact safely with other animals 

within the enclosure; and
 
 
(5)
	 Veterinary care when needed to prevent
suffering.
 
HRS § 711-1100 (2014).
 
7
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 













 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The veterinary care requirement was added in 2010 in 
2010 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 147 § 1 at 341. In so doing, the
 Legislature stated, "The purpose of this Act is to revise laws
 prohibiting the cruel treatment of pet animals by specifying the
 standards of care that an owner must provide a pet animal,
 including the type of pet enclosure and under what conditions and
 when veterinary care must be provided." Id. Thus, the statutory
 
definition of necessary sustenance "includes but is not limited
 to" a list of statutorily defined, distinct standards of animal
 care, regarding food, water, shelter, hygiene, and medical care. 
HRS § 711-1100 at n.5, supra. While each is a component of
 sustenance, each does not help to define the others. The
 statutory definition of necessary sustenance therefore contains a
 non-exclusive list of standards, not a factor test.
 
The State did not charge Jenkins with failing to meet 
any other standard of necessary sustenance.
6 State v. Lee, 75 
Haw. 80, 856 P.2d 1246 (1993), upon which Jenkins relies, is distinguishable. The Supreme Court of Hawai
'i, construing the 
statute defining prohibited drug paraphernalia, held that the trial court erred when it did not provide all the statutorily enumerated factors included in the statute. Lee, 75 Haw. at 115, 
856 P.2d at 1264. The supreme court ruled that consideration of the "presence or absence of any of the fourteen specific factors" was relevant toward the "defendant's intent or the lack of it" with regard to the item alleged to be drug paraphernaila Id. 
Jenkins also argues that listing only one of the
 
statutorily defined examples of necessary sustenance, but still
 
6
 The single count of Cruelty to Animals with which Jenkins was
charged, read as follows:
 
On or about the 29th day of April, 2012, in the City
and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, JOHN CHRISTOPHER
JENKINS did intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly deprive
a pet animal of necessary sustenance or caused such
deprivation, thereby committing the offense of Cruelty to
Animals in the Second Degree, in violation of Section
711-1109( 1 )(b) of the Hawaii Revised Statutes. "Necessary
Sustenance" as defined by Section 711-1100 of the Hawaii
Revised Statutes, means care sufficient to preserve the
health and well-being of a pet animal, except for
emergencies or circumstances beyond the reasonable control
of the owner or caretaker of the pet animal, and includes
veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering.
 
8
 
 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
	 


 

 

 



 
 

 


 
	 



 
	 


 
	 


 






 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
including the "includes but is not limited to the following
 
requirement" language, "compounded the error by telling the jury
 that they were free to consider factors other than just
 'veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering.' In effect,
 the broad language allowed the jury to come up with their own
 standards."
 
Jenkins cites no authority in support of his assertion. 
Under the logic proffered by Jenkins, any statutory definition
 providing the "includes but is not limited to the following
 requirements" language, authorizes a jury to "come up with their
 own standards." To the contrary, the instruction conveys,
 although there may be other standards, the failure to provide
 veterinary care was the focus of this case. Rather than inviting
 the jury to invent its own standards, the court directed the
 jury's attention to one. This instruction was not in error.
 
2.	 The Circuit Court Did Not Plainly Err When It
Did Not Provide a Jury Instruction on the
"Choice of Evils" Defense.
 
Jenkins argues that the Circuit Court plainly erred
 
when it failed to instruct the jury, sua sponte, on the "choice
 
7
of evils" defense  because the Circuit Court was obligated to
 
7
 HRS § 703-302 (2014)
 
Choice of evils.  (1) Conduct which the actor believes to
 
be necessary to avoid an imminent harm or evil to the actor
or to another is justifiable provided that:
 
(a)	 The harm or evil sought to be avoided by such
conduct is greater than that sought to be
prevented by the law defining the offense
charged;
 
(b)	 Neither the Code nor other law defining the
offense provides exceptions or defenses dealing
with the specific situation involved; and
 
(c)	 A legislative purpose to exclude the
justification claimed does not otherwise plainly
appear.
 
(2) When the actor was reckless or negligent in
bringing about the situation requiring a choice of harms or
evils or in appraising the necessity for the actor's
conduct, the justification afforded by this section is
unavailable in a prosecution for any offense for which
(continued...)
 
9
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
give instructions on any defense having support in the evidence. 
Jenkins argues that the evidence supported a "choice of evils"
 defense because "Jenkins reasonably believed that [the dog] was
 in so much pain that he had to act immediately by cutting off the
 paw[.]" Jenkins misconstrues the choice of evils defense.
 
When a "jury instruction that is not requested at 
trial, the omission of which is later denominated as error for the first time on appeal," a "two-step, plain-error-then-harmless error review" is used in analyzing instructional error. State v. 
Taylor, 130 Hawai
'i 196, 204, 307 P.3d 1142, 1150 (2013). Under 
the two-part test, the appellate court must determine (1) whether the defendant has overcome the presumption that the instructions as given were correct and, if so, (2) whether the erroneous instruction contributed to the defendant's conviction, i.e., was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. 
Jenkins fails to satisfy the first prong. Taking
 
Jenkin's testimony regarding his intent as true, that he cut the
 dog's paw off to alleviate its pain and suffering. Jenkins does
 not attempt to explain why his conduct of cutting off the paw to
 avoid the evil of continued pain and suffering of the animal was
 necessary to avoid a greater evil sought to be prevented by the
 law defining the offense charged. In fact, by failing to provide
 "veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering" he did not
 avoid a greater evil as he does not deny a veterinarian would
 relieve the dog's pain, and he arguably caused a greater evil by
 not addressing the dog's need for painkillers and antibiotics.
 
In any event the choice of evils defense was not
 
available to Jenkins as a matter of law. HRS § 703-302 requires
 that the defendant's action "be necessary to avoid an imminent
 harm or evil to the actor or to another" (emphasis added). When
 discussing HRS § 703-302 in the context of a defendant who
 claimed the defense because he prevented greater harm to
 dolphins, this court held that
 
This argument must fail because, as the trial court noted,
 
the legislature has provided a specific definition of
 
 
7(...continued)
recklessness or negligence, as the case may be, suffices to
establish culpability.
 
10
 
 





 




 
	 
 



 

 


 





 




 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"another" that does not include dolphins. HRS § 701-118(8)
defines "another" as "any other person and includes, where
relevant, the United States, this State and any of its
political subdivisions, and any other state and any of its
political subdivisions." Person is defined as a natural
 person and when relevant a corporation or an unincorporated
association. HRS § 701-118(7). Thus, the statute makes
clear that a dolphin is not "another" under HRS
§ 701-118(8).
 
State v. LeVasseur , 1 Haw. App. 19, 25, 613 P.2d 1328, 1333
 
 
(1980). Therefore, as a matter of law, Jenkins cannot assert the
 
 
choice of evils defense to the extent that Jenkins acted to
 
 
alleviate the pain and suffering of his dog.
 
 
Jenkins attempts to distinguish  LeVasseur because the
 
 
defendant in that case was charged with theft and not cruelty to
 
 
animals. However, it is clear that the court's reasoning in
 
 
LeVasseur was not dependent upon the particular charge. 
 
The Circuit Court's failure to give a choice of evils
 
 
defense instruction was not error.
 
 
3.
	 The Circuit Court Did Not Err When It
 
Instructed the Jury That The Circuit Court
Instructions, and Not the Parties' Attorneys,
Were the Source of Law.
 
Jenkins argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
instructed the jury to disregard the attorneys' arguments on the
 
 
law during closing arguments because that instruction violated
 
 
Jenkins's right to a fair trial and effective assistance of
 
 
counsel.
 
 

 
On August 8, 2013, prior to closing arguments, the
 
 
Circuit Court instructed the jury as follows:
 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, you now have in hand the jury
instructions, which I read to you. And let me describe for
 you how you may deal with those. They're very valuable to
you because they are your miniature encyclopedia of the law
of this case. And about 99 percent of the questions that
jurors have over the course of their deliberations, when
they do, relates to something that is written. And so I'm
 not telling you not to send inquiries to me, written
inquiries, but more often than not, I usually refer you back
to a page of the instructions that answers the questions
which -- which you have. So these are very valuable.
 
. . . .
 
You are the judges of the facts of this case. You
 
 
will decide the facts -- what facts were proved by the
 
evidence. However, you must follow these instructions even
 
if you disagree with them.
 
 
11
 
 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 








 

 


 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
During Jenkins's closing argument, the following
 
exchange occurred:
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Similarly, there is nowhere in
 
this packet, the rules, the law that says if John splinted
 
an animal wrong, his pet wrong, he is guilty of a crime.
 
That would be veterinary malpractice, and that's not what
 
we're here for. This law is to prevent people from
 
torturing or being cruel to their animals -- from preventing
 
them from eating, from -- for those who don't give them
 
water, don't give them shelter, puppy mills.
 
 
[PROSECUTOR]:  
Objection. Misstatement of the law,
Your Honor.
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]:  Well, when it comes to the law, you
 
must read the jury instructions. If the attorneys make -­
if the attorneys make statements about the law, that may or
 
may not be true. The law is my domain. The facts are your
 
and their domain. So you should make reference to the jury
 
instructions when you're determining what the law is, and
 
the attorneys' arguments are not dispositive about what the
 
law is.
 
 
After closing arguments and prior to jury
 
 
deliberations, the Circuit Court conducted the following
 
 
discussion at the bench:
 
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]:  Because there are so many references
 
to what the law is, I feel obligated to issue an instruction
 
to the jury that what the law is is not determined by what
 
the attorneys argue. It is determined instead by the
 
instructions that I gave them.
 
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Okay.

 
[PROSECUTOR]:  Thank you, Your Honor.

 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I object to that instruction.

 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: I beg your pardon?

 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I object to that instruction.

 
[CIRCUIT COURT]:  Well, in the future, in the future,
 
remember in this court, if you don't remember it anywhere
 
else, I get to recite the law.
 
 
The Circuit Court then instructed the jury:
 
Ladies and gentlemen, at this point I want to harken you
back to the jury instructions that you have. There have
 been arguments made to the effect that the law is this, the
law is that. The facts and interpretations of the facts are
determined by you as a jury and may be argued by the
attorneys. The law is what the instructions say the law is.
So if you heard an argument from either side that indicates
the law says that such and such is required or such and such
is not required from the attorneys, you are to disregard
that. The law is determined by the Court. It's what I read
 to you. It's what you have in your jury instructions. Use
 that as your standard for determining -- determining the
law component of your decision.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
12
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 








 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Jenkins argues that the underscored sentence "basically
 
instructed the jury to completely disregard counsel's arguments
 
on the law" because "[t]he timing of the instruction basically
 told the jury to completely disregard all of defense counsel's
 arguments on the applicable law." Jenkins argues that it "was a
 blanket prohibition that undercut a significant part of defense
 counsel's argument."
 
Jenkins's argument is without merit. It is well 
settled that "the ultimate responsibility properly to instruct the jury lies with the court." Taylor, 130 Hawai
'i at 210, 307 
P.3d at 1156. The Circuit Court's admonition correctly apprised the jury that with regard to the law, it should follow the jury instructions rather than the argument of counsel. Further, the court's instruction was not a "blanket prohibition" as it pertained to conflicts between the arguments and jury instructions, not all legal arguments of counsel. 
Jenkins further argues that, pursuant to Herring v. New
 
York, 422 U.S. 853 (1975), "[t]he trial court could have given an
 instruction that the jury should listen to each attorney's
 arguments as to the law but that the court's instructions were
 controlling."
 
The Constitutional right of a defendant to be heard through
counsel necessarily includes his right to have his counsel
make a proper argument on the evidence and the applicable
law in his favor, however simple, clear, unimpeached, and
conclusive the evidence may seem, unless he has waived his
right to such argument, or unless the argument is not within
the issues in the case, and the trial court has no
discretion to deny the accused such right.
 
Herring, 422 U.S. at 860 (citation omitted).
 
However, Jenkins's argument misses the significant 
distinction between argument on the applicable law and a 
misstatement of that law. A trial court is obligated to take immediate curative action to correct misstatement of law made during closing arguments; indeed, failure to do so when the misstatement is made by the prosecutor results in a new trial. See State v. Basham, 132 Hawai
'i 97, 111, 319 P.3d 1105, 1119 
(2014) (holding that a "misstatement of the law for which no 
13
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 





 




 

 

 



 

 



 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
curative instruction was given was not harmless beyond a
 
reasonable doubt.").
 
When viewed in context, it is clear that the Circuit
 
Court's instruction was a proper exercise of its obligation to
 take immediate curative action to correct a misstatement of law.
 
Jenkins's third asserted point of error is without
 
merit.
 
B.
 
THE PROSECUTOR DID NOT COMMIT PROSECUTORIAL MISCONDUCT
 
WHEN HE DISCUSSED UNANIMITY DURING CLOSING ARGUMENT.
 
Jenkins argues that the State's attorney committed
 
prosecutorial misconduct because he misstated the law on
 "specific unanimity" during his closing argument.
 
"Prosecutorial misconduct warrants a new trial or the 
setting aside of a guilty verdict only where the actions of the prosecutor have caused prejudice to the defendant's right to a fair trial." State v. McGriff, 76 Hawai
'i 148, 158, 871 P.2d 
782, 792 (1994). "In order to determine whether the alleged prosecutorial misconduct reached the level of reversible error, we consider the nature of the alleged misconduct, the promptness or lack of a curative instruction, and the strength or weakness of the evidence against defendant." State v. Agrabante, 73 Haw. 
179, 198, 830 P.2d 492, 502 (1992). 
The Circuit Court gave the following jury instruction:
 
 
The law allows the introduction of evidence for the
 
purpose of showing that there is more than one act or
omission upon which proof of an element of an offense may be
based. In order for the prosecution to prove an element,
all 12 jurors must unanimously agree that the same act or
the same omission has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
During the settling of jury instructions, the following
 
 
exchange occurred:
 
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: This unanimity instruction, which is
Court's 29, 8.02, is an Arseo [sic] type of instruction.

And the State apparently wants to make an objection on this
one, so go ahead.
 
[PROSECUTOR]: 
That's correct, Your Honor. I'm
 
objecting to the instruction being given altogether. I
 think it's clear from the evidence that there's really only
one omission. And what happened, it was over a course of a
continuous conduct in which the defendant omitted -- he did
 not provide veterinary care. That was the omission. So
 throughout -- from April 28th, 2012, to May 5th, 2012, was
one continuous omission of not providing veterinary care.
And that's the basis of the objection.
 
14
 
 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: Okay. And I would note that I'm
 
 
going to read the instruction over objection by the State 

but modified so it will read at all points, act or omission,


and then, item, in line 2, and, possession of the item, in
 
the final line is eliminated.
 
 
This in no way prevents the State from arguing that
 
the act -- well, that the offense was the omission of care. 

This does not restrict you from arguing that. 
But because
 
 
there are acts including the snipping of the last vestige of
 
the arm between the distal portion of the arm and the
 
forearm, which was severed from the -- the dog, it would
 
qualify as an act, as well as the formation of the splint,
 
which would qualify as an act. And there might be other
 
things as well in the testimony.
 
 
I'm not prohibiting either side from arguing that the
 
acts or omissions were either okay or that they weren't. In
 
 
fact, this instruction specifically tells the jury that they
 
all have to agree that the same thing, either an omission or
 
an act, was what brought about the result.
 
 
So this instruction will be read over objection by the 

State to eliminate all references to, item, and it will
 
read, act or omission, in line 2, and it will read the same
 
act or the same omission in the -- those lower lines toward
 
 
the end. So this is given as modified over objection by the
 
State.
 
 
During its closing argument, the State argued the
 
 
following:
 
 
[PROSECUTOR:] Now, defendant failed to [provide
 
necessary sustenance] in this case. And he failed to do

 
 
that over the entire course of a week. 
 
 
Now, to illustrate that, I want you all to just take a 

moment and let's review the events between April 28th, 2012, 

till May 6th, 2012. 
 
 
Okay. 
So what should -- what should defendant have 
 
 
done? Okay. There's a lot -- lot of things he could have 

done. All right? The most obvious one, take [the dog] to a 

veterinarian. He did not do that. 
 
 
. . . . 
 
Okay. So there's some verbiage in there. So let's 
 
 
just start with the first element. Okay. That on or about 
 
 
April 29th, 2012, in the City and County of Honolulu, State 

of Hawaii, the defendant deprived a pet animal of necessary 

sustenance or caused such deprivation. Okay. So there's a 
 
 
couple clearly undisputed parts of this. And that's on or 
 
 
about April 29th, 2012. Okay. That's -- I told you it's a 

range of dates between the bone break and May 6. Hard to 
 
 
pinpoint an exact minute, time where the care -- where he 

needed to bring the -- the animal to the vet; right? I 
 
 
mean, Aleisha Swartz says it's from the very get-go. So
 
 
that's why it's on or about that time. But it includes that
 
whole week.
 
 
And you don't all have to agree, well, it was this
 
particular minute that it had to be done. All you had to
 
agree upon is that he didn't do it within that time period.
 
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: 
Objection. Misstatement of the
 
law.
 
15
 
 

 

 


 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 


 


 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 







 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: I'm sorry. Objection?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Misstatement of the law.
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: Overruled. I'm going to allow the
attorneys the freedom to argue.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Jenkins argues that the State misstated the law and
 
that the Circuit Court "placed its imprimatur upon the
 prosecutor's statements" when it overruled Jenkins's objection. 
However, the prosecutor's statement was part of his argument
 explaining the prosecution's theory of the case, that Jenkins had
 failed to provide veterinary care for the entire charged period,
 on or about April 29, 2012, through May 8, 2012. The prosecutor
 did not argue that unanimity was not required with regard to
 whether or not Jenkins failed to provide necessary sustenance. 
His point was that they did not have to agree on a specific
 moment when the requirement to provide veterinary care matured. 
Rather, the prosecutor stated that "[a]ll you had to agree upon
 is that he didn't do it within that time period" (emphasis
 added). Consequently, the prosecutor explained that there was a
 continuing course of conduct during which Jenkins refrained from
 providing the requisite veterinary care.
 
As we conclude the prosecutor's argument was not
 
improper, Jenkins's fourth asserted point of error is without
 merit.
 
C.
 
THE CIRCUIT COURT DID NOT ERR WHEN IT DENIED 
JENKINS'S MOTION FOR JUDGMENT OF ACQUITTAL.
 
Jenkins argues that he was entitled to a judgment of
acquittal because there was insufficient evidence to convict him.
 
 

 
The standard to be applied by the trial court in
ruling upon a motion for a judgment of acquittal is whether,
upon the evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the
prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the
trier of fact, a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt. An appellate court employs the
same standard of review.
 
State v. Hicks, 113 Hawai 'i 60, 69, 148 P.3d 493, 502 (2006) 
(citation omitted). "To deny a motion to acquit there must be 
sufficient evidence to support a prima facie case." State v. 
16
 


 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Chun, 93 Hawai 'i 389, 396, 4 P.3d 523, 530 (App. 2000) (citation 
omitted). "[T]he test on appeal when reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence is whether, when viewed in the light most favorable to the State, there is substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." Id. 
Preliminarily, when a defendant introduces "evidence in 
his own behalf after a motion for judgment of acquittal is made at the end of the state's case-in-chief and is denied and fails to renew the motion after the presentation of all evidence, he has waived review of the motion." State v. Elliston, 118 Hawai
'i 
319, 188 P.3d 833, No. 28543 2008 WL 2781017 at *1 (App. Jul. 18, 2008) (SDO); State v. Halemanu, 3 Haw. App. 300, 303, 650 P.2d 587, 591 (1982). After the Circuit Court denied his motion for judgment of acquittal following the State's case-in-chief, Jenkins introduced evidence. Therefore any allegation of error is deemed waived on appeal. 
Regardless,
 
 
where the defendant had previously moved for judgment of
acquittal at the end of the government's case and presented
evidence on his or her behalf but failed to renew the motion
 at the close of all the evidence, the grounds raised in the
motion may still be considered on appeal to avoid manifest
injustice or plain error.
 
State v. Chen, 77 Hawai 'i 329, 333, 884 P.2d 392, 396 (App. 
1994). 
On appeal, Jenkins reiterates his own view of the
 
evidence in an attempt to relitigate the case. Jenkins does not
 
deny that his dog suffered a broken leg or that he failed to
 obtain veterinary care for his dog. Rather, he appears to claim
 that there was no evidence that he was aware he should have
 obtained that care to avoid his dog's suffering. This contention
 is not supported by the record.
 
Jenkins obliquely acknowledges that his conviction
 
could be based on proof of a reckless state of mind. "A person
 acts recklessly with respect to his conduct when he consciously
 disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the person's
 conduct is of the specified nature"; "acts recklessly with regard
 to attendant circumstances when he consciously disregards a
 substantial and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances
 
17
 
 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exist," and "acts recklessly with respect to a result of his
 
conduct when he consciously disregards a substantial and
 unjustifiable risk that his conduct will cause such a result." 
HRS § 702-206(3) (2014). A risk is substantial and unjustifiable
 "if, considering the nature and purpose of the person's conduct
 and the circumstances known to him, the disregard of the risk
 involves a gross deviation from the standard of conduct that a
 law-abiding person would observe in the same situation." HRS
 § 702-206(3)(d). The definition of a reckless state of mind does
 not require Jenkins's actual knowledge of his dog's pain.
 
Nevertheless, Jenkins testified that on the day he cut
 
off the dog's lower leg, which was days after it was broken but
 still within the charged period, the dog was "whimpering in
 pain."
 
There was also substantial evidence that under the
 
circumstances, the dog was suffering pain from its injury. 
Expert witnesses, veterinarians Drs. Pegg and Swartz, testified
 that the dog would have been in obvious pain at the time its leg
 was broken, due to the visible desiccation of the tissue
 surrounding the break, and as a result of the bacterial infection
 obvious from the liquid discharge from the site of the injury. 
Therefore, there was substantial evidence to support
 
the jury's verdict.
 
D.
 
THE CIRCUIT COURT ERRED WHEN IT SENTENCED
 
JENKINS IN RELIANCE UPON UNPROVEN FACTS.
 
Jenkins argues that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion when it sentenced Jenkins to a term of imprisonment
 because at sentencing it improperly made findings and conclusions
 from the evidence.
 
Generally, "[t]he authority of a trial court to select 
and determine the severity of a penalty is normally undisturbed on review in the absence of an apparent abuse of discretion or unless applicable statutory or constitutional commands have not been observed." State v. Reis, 115 Hawai
'i 79, 83, 165 P.3d 980, 
984 (2007) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
18
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
However, in sentencing, a trial court must rely solely 
upon facts for which there is evidence. See State v. Stangel, 
No. CAAP-13-0003941, 2015 WL 836928 at *13 (App. Feb. 26, 2015) (MOP) (vacating defendant's sentence where the trial court relied upon speculation not supported by evidence in the record); see also State v. Vellina, 106 Hawai
'i 441, 450, 106 P.3d 364, 373 
(2005) (vacating consecutive sentence based on "unsubstantiated allegation"). 
The Circuit Court stated that it found Jenkins's
 
description of the amputation to be incredible and disbelieved
 Jenkins's testimony that he snipped off the lower portion of the
 dog's leg. Rather, the Circuit Court apparently was under the
 impression that the dog's leg bone was cut by Jenkins and that
 such a procedure was unlikely, using a paper scissors. However,
 throughout the entirety of the trial neither party adduced
 evidence that Jenkins used anything other than the paper scissors
 to separate the dog's leg and Jenkins did not testify that he
 severed the dog's bone. Conversely, it was uncontested that the
 dog's leg was broken when it was stepped on by Jenkins's
 brother's friend.
 
The Circuit Court also appeared to impute a similar 
finding to the jury. However, the jury was not asked to
 determine how the dog's leg came to be severed, either by the
 instructions or by special interrogatories and the jury's
 communications did not indicate it considered this issue.
 
It is clear that the Circuit Court considered its
 
unsupported belief, virtually to the exclusion of any other
 factors, when sentencing Jenkins. As the Circuit Court
 considered a fact for which no evidence was presented in imposing
 sentence, the sentence cannot stand.
 
E.
 JENKINS WAS NOT DEPRIVED OF EFFECTIVE ASSISTANCE OF COUNSEL.
 
Jenkins argues that he was deprived of his right to
 
effective assistance of counsel at trial.
 
"[Q]uestions of constitutional law [are reviewed] under 
the right/wrong standard." State v. Pratt, 127 Hawai
'i 206, 212, 
277 P.3d 300, 306 (2012) (citation and internal quotation marks 
19
 
 

 

 







 




 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
omitted). Every criminal defendant has the constitutional right
 
to the effective assistance of counsel at trial. See U.S. Const.
 
amend. VI and XIV; Haw. Const. art I, § 14.
 
"In any claim of ineffective assistance of trial
counsel, the burden is upon the defendant to demonstrate
that, in light of all the circumstances, counsel's
performance was not objectively reasonable-i.e., within the
range of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal
cases." Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 462, 848 P.2d 966,
976 (1993) (citation and quotation marks omitted). To meet
 that burden, the defendant must demonstrate: "1) that there
were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack
of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or
omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial
 impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." Domingo
v. State, 76 Hawai' i 237, 241, 873 P.2d 775, 779 (1994)
(citation and quotation marks omitted). 
State v. Reed, 77 Hawai 'i 72, 83, 881 P.2d 1218, 1229 (1994) 
overruled on other grounds by State v. Balanza, 93 Hawai 'i 279, 1 
P.3d 281 (2000). 
Jenkins alleges three specific errors or omissions: 
 
(1) "defense counsel failed to request a jury instruction on the
 
 
defense of 'choice of evils[;]'" (2) "defense counsel failed to
 
 
renew the motion for judgment of acquittal after the defense
 
 
finished presenting its evidence[;]" and (3) "competent defense
 
 
counsel would have called [his] brother to back him up."
 
 
As previously discussed, Jenkins was not entitled to
 
the "choice of evils" defense.
 
Jenkins asserts that defense counsel lacked skill,
 
judgment, or diligence when she failed to renew Jenkins's motion
 
for judgment of acquittal after the close of all evidence because
 Jenkins must now argue that point under a stricter plain error
 standard. However, as previously discussed, there was
 substantial evidence that Jenkins deprived his dog of necessary
 sustenance and so under any standard at trial or on review,
 Jenkins's renewed motion for judgment of acquittal would have
 failed.
 
Finally, Jenkins asserts that his brother's testimony 
would have corroborated his version of events. However, "[i]neffective assistance of counsel claims based on the failure to obtain witnesses must be supported by affidavits or sworn statements describing the testimony of the proffered witnesses." State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998). 
20
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Jenkins's speculation as to his brother's testimony is
 
 
insufficient to support his ineffective assistance of counsel
 
 
claim. In similar circumstances, the Supreme Court of Hawai 'i 
explained
 
 
Furthermore, it is not at all certain that the
witnesses that trial counsel failed to obtain would have 
provided the testimony asserted. In State v. Reed, 77Hawai'i 72, 881 P.2d 1218 (1994), we rejected an ineffective
assistance of counsel claim because, other than thedefendant's uncorroborated assertions, there was no evidencein the record indicating what the proffered witnesses wouldhave testified to. We held: In the absence of sworn statements from the witnesses verifying that, had they beencalled, they would have testified as defendant claims theywould, defendant's characterization of their potentialtestimony amounts to nothing more than speculation and,therefore, is insufficient to meet his burden of provingthat his trial counsel's failure to subpoena the witnessesconstituted constitutionally ineffective assistance ofcounsel. 
State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai 'i 462, 481, 946 P.2d 32, 51 (1997) 
(citations, ellipses, and brackets omitted; formatting altered). 
The Fukusaku Court concluded that if there was no reliable indication that the proffered testimony would have been helpful, "there can be no error in failing to obtain that testimony." Id. 
Similarly, there is no reliable indication of Jenkins's
 
brother's testimony. Jenkins's brother made no sworn statements
 prior to trial. This court cannot presume to know the substance
 of his putative testimony.
 
Jenkins has failed to carry his burden of showing his
 
trial counsel's assistance was ineffective.
 
IV.
 
Based upon the foregoing, we vacate the August 9, 2013
 
sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit and
 remand for resentencing.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, September 30, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Dwight C.H. Lum, 
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
 Presiding Judge
Donn Fudo,
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,
 
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
  
Associate Judge
Associate Judge

 
21
 