     
         
              
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000583 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN THE INTEREST OF GH 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-J NO. 0105711) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Minor-Appellant GH (Minor) appeals from a June 5, 2019 
"Decree Re: Law Violation Petition(s)" (Decree) and July 23, 2019 
"Order Re: [Minor's] Motion to Reconsider Adjudication of Minor 
as a Law Violator and Motion to Reconsider Commitment to the 
Executive Director of the Office of Youth Services Fld [sic] 
6/14/19" entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit (family 
court).1 The family court adjudicated Minor a law violator as to 
one count of Sexual Assault in the First Degree (Sex Assault 1), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-730(1)(b)
2, 
and two counts of Sexual Assault in the Third Degree (Sex Assault 
1 The Honorable Bode A. Uale presided. 
2 HRS § 707-730(1)(b) (2014) provides that "[a] person commits the
offense of [Sex Assault 1] if . . . [t]he person knowingly engages in sexual
penetration with another person who is less than fourteen years old[.]"  
 
 
         
              
              
      
          
          
                
           
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3), in violation of HRS § 707-732(1)(b)3, as follows: 
• Count 1, Sex Assault 1, by inserting Minor's penis
into the complaining witness's (CW) genitalopening; 
• Count 2, Sex Assault 3, by placing Minor's hand onCW's breast; and 
• Count 4, Sex Assault 3, by placing CW's hand onMinor's penis. 
Minor argues that the family court erroneously (1) 
excluded evidence at trial regarding CW's unrelated past sex 
assault allegations under the "rape shield statute," set forth in 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 412 (2016),
  because it was 
admissible extrinsic evidence of prior inconsistent statements under HRE Rule 613(b) (2016); (2) failed to make a preliminary 
determination as to the falsity of said allegations; and (3) 
adjudicated Minor a law violator based on insufficient evidence. 
We address Minor's arguments out of order for the sake of 
clarity. 4
A. Evidence of CW's alleged past sex assault allegations
was inadmissible under HRE Rule 412. 
HRE Rule 412 provides, in relevant part: 
Rule 412 Sexual offense and sexual harassment cases;
relevance of victim's past behavior.  (a) Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, in a criminal case in which a
person is accused of a sexual offense, reputation or opinionevidence of the past sexual behavior of an alleged victim ofthe sexual offense is not admissible to prove the characterof the victim to show action in conformity therewith. 
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in a
criminal case in which a person is accused of a sexualoffense, evidence of an alleged victim's past sexualbehavior other than reputation or opinion evidence is not 
3 HRS § 707-732(1)(b) (2014) provides that "[a] person commits the
offense of [Sex Assault 3] if . . . [t]he person knowingly subjects to sexual
contact another person who is less than fourteen years old or causes such a personto have sexual contact with the person[.]" 
4 For the sake of simplicity, and consistent with HRE Rule 412(h)
("'[P]ast sexual behavior' means sexual behavior other than the sexual behaviorwith respect to which a sexual offense . . . is alleged."), we refer to CW's priorsexual assault allegations against people besides Minor as CW's "past sex assaultallegations" or "past sex assault claims." 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
admissible to prove the character of the victim to show
action in conformity therewith, unless the evidence is: 
. . . 
(2) Admitted in accordance with subsection (c) andis evidence of: 
(A) Past sexual behavior with persons other
than the accused, offered by the accusedupon the issue of whether the accused wasor was not, with respect to the allegedvictim, the source of semen or injury[.] 
. . . . 
(c)(1) 
If the person accused of committing a sexual
offense intends to offer under subsection (b)evidence of specific instances of the allegedvictim's past sexual behavior, the accused shallmake a written motion to offer the evidence not later than fifteen days before the date on whichthe trial in which the evidence is to be offered is scheduled to begin, except that the court mayallow the motion to be made at a later date,including during trial, if the court determineseither that the evidence is newly discovered andcould not have been obtained earlier through theexercise of due diligence or that the issue towhich the evidence relates has newly arisen inthe case. Any motion made under this paragraphshall be served on all other parties and on thealleged victim. 
. . . . 
(h)
 For purposes of this rule, the term "past sexual
behavior" means sexual behavior other than the sexual behavior with respect to which a sexual offense . . . isalleged. 
1. The family court did not err by failing to make a
preliminary determination under HRE Rule 412(c)(1) as to the
falsity of CW's alleged past sex assault allegations. 
Minor argues that the family court erroneously failed 
to make a preliminary determination under HRE Rule 412(c)(1) as 
to the falsity of CW's past sex assault allegations because, at 
trial, Minor notified the family court that he intended to 
introduce evidence of such. However, as Minor conceded at trial, 
he did not provide written notice that he intended to introduce 
the evidence fifteen days prior to trial, as required by HRE Rule 
412(c)(1). Further, Minor has not argued that an exception to 
the written notice requirement applied. See HRE Rule 412(c)(1). 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, this point lacks merit. 
4            NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. The family court did not err by ruling that
evidence of CW's past sex assault allegations was inadmissible
under HRE Rule 412. 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has held: 
[W]here a defendant seeks to admit allegedly false
statements made by a complainant regarding an unrelatedsexual assault, the trial court must make a preliminarydetermination based on a preponderance of the evidence thatthe statements are false. Correlatively, where the trialcourt is unable to determine by a preponderance of theevidence that the statement is false, the defendant hasfailed to meet his or her burden, and the evidence may beproperly excluded. 
State v. West, 95 Hawai# i 452, 460, 24 P.3d 648, 656 (2001). 
Citing to West, Minor argues that the family court 
erroneously found that evidence of CW's past sex assault claims 
fell within the purview of HRE Rule 412 because the evidence was 
not of "sexual conduct."  However, in West, the Hawai# i Supreme 
Court recognized that 5
as some courts have explained, where the truth or falsity of
a statement regarding an unrelated sexual assault isunknown, it falls within the purview of the rape shieldstatute and must be analyzed accordingly. To permitreception of evidence which may be true or false would allowcircumvention of the rape shield statute because the jurymay be tempted to consider evidence about an allegedvictim's sexual conduct in order to determine the victim's credibility. 
95 Hawai# i at 459, 24 P.3d at 655 (citations, internal quotation 
marks, and brackets omitted). The Hawai# i Supreme Court thus 
held that when a defendant seeks to admit allegedly false 
statements by a complainant regarding past sexual assault, the 
trial court must make a preliminary determination that the 
statements are false so as to fall outside the reach of the rape 
shield statute. Id. at 459-60, 24 P.3d at 655-56. 
Here, Minor does not dispute the family court's 
conclusion that CW's "statements [did] not meet the threshold of 
5 The actual phrase used in HRE Rule 412 is "past sexual behavior." 
5            
               
            
       
      
        
       
       
          
         NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
falsity."6 As the Hawai# i Supreme Court emphasized in West, 
"fact-finding is the fundamental responsibility of the judge of 
the facts at trial" and, therefore, the appellate court is not to 
decide factual questions de novo. 95 Hawai# i at 461, 24 P.3d at 
657. We are thus bound by the family court's finding that 
falsity was not shown. 
Further, as in West, even though the family court did 
not make a preliminary determination of falsity, the court may 
affirm the Decree based on the family court's finding that 
falsity was not shown. Because Minor did not demonstrate that 
CW's alleged past sex assault claims were false, evidence 
regarding them fell within the purview of HRE Rule 412. See id. 
at 460, 24 P.3d at 656. Minor sought to introduce the evidence to prove CW's character for untruthfulness to show that her 
allegations against Minor were in conformity therewith; 
therefore, the family court properly excluded the evidence. See 
HRE Rule 412(a). 
3. The testimony was inadmissible under HRE Rule 613. 
Minor argues that the family court erred by refusing to 
admit evidence of CW's past sex assault allegations under HRE Rule 613(b).
7 However, as Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i 
(State) argues, HRE Rule 412(a) and (b) are introduced by the phrase, "Notwithstanding any other provision of law." Based on 
its plain language, HRE Rule 412 prevails over any other 
provision of law, including HRE Rule 613. 
6 In his offer of proof, Minor argued his intention in proffering the
evidence was not to show that the past sex assault claims were false but rather to
show that CW's initial report that people other than Minor had sexually assaultedher was inconsistent with her statement to police. 
7 HRE Rule 613(b) provides in relevant part: 
Extrinsic evidence of a prior inconsistent statement by a
witness is not admissible unless, on direct orcross-examination, (1) the circumstances of the statement havebeen brought to the attention of the witness, and (2) thewitness has been asked whether the witness made the statement. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Furthermore, as the State maintains, the requirements 
of HRE Rule 412 cannot be circumvented by satisfaction of a rule 
of evidence of general applicability. HRE Rule 412 is a law of 
specific application, whereas HRE Rule 613 is a law of general 
application. See HRE Rules 412, 613. "Where a plainly 
irreconcilable conflict exists between a law of general application and a law of specific application concerning the same 
subject matter, the specific authority will be favored." State 
v. Wallace, 71 Haw. 591, 594, 801 P.2d 27, 29 (1990) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting State v. Greyson, 70 Haw. 227, 
235, 768 P.2d 759, 763-64 (1989)). 
The family court did not err by excluding evidence of 
CW's past sex assault allegations notwithstanding HRE Rule 613, 
because the evidence fell within HRE Rule 412. 
B. There was sufficient evidence to support the Decree. 
Minor argues in a conclusory fashion that the family 
court erroneously adjudicated Minor a law violator based on 
insufficient evidence. We disagree. 
As to Count 1, CW testified that when she was nine 
years old, Minor put his penis inside of her vaginal area and 
moved his body back and forth, hurting the inside of her vagina. 
See HRS § 707-730(1)(b). For Count 2, CW testified that when she 
was nine years old, Minor put his hand on her breast and 
squeezed. See HRS § 707-732(1)(b). For Count 4, CW testified 
that when she was nine years old, Minor put CW's hand on Minor's penis and moved it up and down. See HRS § 707-732(1)(b). The 
family court found CW to be a credible witness, and we decline to pass upon the family court's credibility determination. See In 
re Doe
, 106 Hawai# i 530, 537 n.3, 107 P.3d 1203, 1210, n.3 (App. 
2005). 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the June 5, 2019 
"Decree Re: Law Violation Petition(s)" and the July 23, 2019 
"Order Re: [Minor's] Motion to Reconsider Adjudication of Minor 
as a Law Violator and Motion to Reconsider Commitment to the 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Executive Director of the Office of Youth Services Fld [sic] 
6/14/19," both entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit, 
are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, September 25, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Derrick H. M. Chan
Associate Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge Chad M. Kumagai,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Walter J. Rodby,for Defendant-Appellant. 
8 