NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000822
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
JOSEPH URBANSKI, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 15-1-1181)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Joseph Urbanski (Urbanski ) appeals
from the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Denying
Defendant's Motion to Withdraw Guilty Plea ( Order) entered by the
Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (Circuit Court ) on
October 20, 2016.  Urbanski contends that the Circuit Court erred
in concluding:1
1.The Court finds that there is no manifest injustice
occurred [sic] that would warrant a withdrawal of the
plea, based on an affirmative showing through on-the-
record colloquy between the Court and the defendant
which shows that defendant had a full understanding of
what his or her plea connoted and its direct
consequences.
(Citations omitted.)
For the reasons explained below, we vacate the Order
and remand for proceedings under Rule 40 of the Hawai# i Rules of
Penal Procedure (HRPP ) (2006).
1The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided over all of the proceedings
at issue in this appeal.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
I.
On July 27, 2015, Urbanski was charged by felony
information with second degree burglary in violation of Hawaii
Revised Statutes (HRS ) ยง 708-811 (2014).   He was represented by
the Office of the Public Defender ( OPD).  On September 21, 2015,
he changed his plea to guilty and moved to defer acceptance of
his plea.  During the change of plea hearing the Circuit Court
engaged Urbanski in this lengthy colloquy (which formed the basis
for the Circuit Court's subsequent denial of Urbanski's post-
sentencing motion to withdraw his guilty plea):2
QIs your mind clear today?
AAbsolutely.
QDo you understand what is going on today?
AYes.
QOkay. Have you taken any medication, alcohol, or any
illegal drugs during the last 48 hours?
ANo.
QAre you sick?
ANo.
QCan you speak, read, write, and understand the English
language?
AYes, sir.
Q I have before me a guilty plea and motion to defer
form.
Did you have the opportunity to thoroughly go through
this form?
AYes, sir, I have.
QAnd do you understand all of the terms that are
contained within this form?
AI think so.
2HRS ยง 708-811 provides, in relevant part:
(1) A person commits the offense of burglary in
the second degree if the person intentionally enters
or remains unlawfully in a building with intent to
commit therein a crime against a person or against
property rights.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
QOkay.  You had a chance to talk to your attorney
before signing this form?
AYes, sir.
QAll right.  Now, did you receive a written copy of the
original charge against you in this case?
AI don't remember that, sir.
QThe paper that accuses you of burglary in the second
degree, either the complaint, the information, or the
indictment?
AYes, sir.
QOkay.  Has that charge been explained to you?
AYes.
Q Do you understand what that charge is against you?
A Burglary in the second.
QOkay.  Have you told your lawyer all of the facts that
you know about your case?
A Yes, sir, I have.
Q Has your lawyer explained to you what evidence the
Government has against you, your possible defenses, and the
facts that the Government must prove in order to convict
you?
A Yes, sir.
. . . .
QMr. Urbanski, are you pleading guilty of your own free
will?
A Yes, sir.
Q Is anyone pressuring you, threatening you?  Is any
other person forcing you to plead guilty?
A No, sir.
Q Are you taking the blame for someone else or pleading
guilty to protect some other person from prosecution?
A No, sir.
Q You understand that you do have the right to plead not
guilty and have a speedy and public trial either by way of
jury or by the Court?
AYes, sir.
QAt trial, the Government is required to prove your
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
Do you understand this?
A Yes, sir.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Q At trial, you can see, hear, and question witnesses
who would testify against you, and you can call witnesses to
testify for you.
Do you understand this?
A Yes, sir.
Q At trial, you also have the right to take the stand
and testify on your own behalf, or you could choose not to
testify.
Do you understand this?
A Yes, sir.
Q Do you understand that by pleading guilty, you are
giving up your right to file any pretrial motions, you are
giving up your right to a trial, and you may be found guilty
and sentenced without a trial of any kind?
Do you understand this?
A Yes.
Q You also give up the right to appeal anything that has
happened in your case up to this point.
Do you understand?
A Yes, sir.
Q Do you understand that the Court can impose any of the
following penalties for the offense to which you are now
pleading guilty: The maximum term of imprisonment is up to 5
years, the maximum fine is up to $10,000?
Do you understand?
A Yes, sir.
Q In addition, the Court can also order restitution,
fees, assessments, community service, and probation with up
to one year of imprisonment and other terms and conditions.
Do you understand this?
AYes, sir.
Q Are you pleading guilty because after discussing all
of the evidence and receiving advice on the law from your
lawyer, you believe that you are guilty?
A Yes, sir.
Q Okay.  Is it correct that on July 25, 2015, on the
island of Oahu [O #ahu] -- and the Court will take judicial
notice Oahu [O #ahu] is in the state of Hawaii [Hawai #i] --
you did intentionally enter unlawfully into a building with
intent to commit therein a crime against property rights?
Is that correct?
A Yes, sir.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
. . . .
QYou are moving to defer the acceptance of your guilty
plea; is that correct?
A One more time.  I'm sorry.
Q You're moving to defer the acceptance of your guilty
plea, in other words, you're asking for an opportunity that
if you abide by -- if the Court does approve of your
deferred acceptance, if you abide by the terms and
conditions imposed upon you, that after a period of time,
this case will be dismissed with prejudice.
Do you understand this?
A Yes, sir.
Q Okay.  You also understand that if the Court rejects
or denies your motion for deferral, the Court will then find
and adjudicate you guilty upon your plea and impose an
appropriate sentence?
Do you understand this?
A Yes, sir.
Q There has been no plea agreements reached between you
and the prosecution; is that correct?
A Absolutely.
Q Okay.  So you're pleading guilty of your own free will
as charged; correct?
A Yes, sir.
Q The Court will advise you I have had conferences with
both your attorney and the prosecutor regarding your case.
One of the things we talked about was what would be a fair
and appropriate sentence if you decided to change your plea,
and I gave my inclinations, meaning my thoughts, out loud to
your attorney and the prosecutor.  Those inclinations I'm
sure have been shared to you by your attorney.  Understand
that they are not promises because much depends -- in fact,
all of it hinges on what comes out in your presentence
investigation and report.
Do you understand?
A Yes, sir.
Q Okay.  If everything comes out the way it's been
represented to me, I have no problems following through with
the Court's inclinations.  All right?
Do you understand this?
A Yes, sir.
Q Okay.  Although history is not going to be an
indicator of what I do in the future, I can tell you this
much, that [defense counsel] is currently batting 1,000
percent with the Court, all right, just to let you know,
because he's always laid things out straight before the
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Court, and there has not been any surprises from any of his
clients.
You understand this?
A Yes, sir, I do.
Q But you understand no promises are made?  It's up to
you from this point on.
Do you understand?
A Yes.
Q The Court also needs to advise you of the following,
that if you are not a citizen of the United States, whether
or not you have lawful immigration status, you have the
right to receive advice from your attorney about the
specific impact that this case will have, if any, on your
immigration status.
Do you understand?
A Yes, sir.
Q Okay.  The entry of a guilty or nolo contendere plea,
admission of guilt, or sufficient facts, or conviction,
deferred judgment, or deferred sentence may have the
consequences of immediate detention, deportation, exclusion
from admission to the United States, or denial of
naturalization pursuant to the laws of the United States.
You understand?
A Yes, sir.
Q In some cases detention and deportation from the
United States will be required.
Do you understand?
A Yes, sir.
Q Your lawyer must investigate and advise you about
these issues prior to the commencement of trial, entry of a
guilty or no contest plea, or admission of guilt or
sufficient facts to any offense punishable as a crime under
state law other than those offenses designated as
infractions.
Do you understand?
AYes, sir.
Q And you're not required to disclose your immigration
or citizenship status to the Court.
So have you been advised about these issues with
regard to if you are not a United States citizen?
A It was talked about, but I also mentioned it to him
that I am a citizen.
Q All right.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
A It was something I didn't need to concern myself with.
. . . .
QOkay.  Now, Mr. Urbanski, have you signed this guilty
plea form after going through all of it with your lawyer?
A Yes, sir.
Q You understand that you will not be allowed to
withdraw your guilty plea if you are not satisfied with the
sentence you receive?
AYes, sir.
QHave you signed this form in the presence of your
lawyer?
A Yes.
Q Do you have any complaints about the work or advice
that your lawyer has provided you?
A No.
Q Are you satisfied with the work and advice that he has
done for you?
A Yes.
QThe Court, too, is satisfied that you have been
represented by competent counsel, and that you're about to
freely and voluntarily enter a change of plea in this case.
As to the charge of burglary in the second degree in
violation of HRS 708-811, what is your plea?
A Guilty.
(Underscoring added.)
The sentencing hearing took place on November 25, 2015.
Urbanski's deputy public defender explained:
I've been dealing with Joseph [Urbanski] for the past
four months.  This is what happened.  He went to the
Kinoshitas' house and he entered their storage shed, took
the bottle of water and was drinking it.  Joseph lives
nearby.  He lives on Emers -- or lived, I should say, on
Emerson Street; I think the Kinoshitas live on Prospect.  So
he lived within walking distance, so this was where Joseph
lived.  This was his neighborhood.  And what had happened
was he was not in the right state of mind.
. . . .
But we understand when you look at the letter of the
law for Burglary in the Second Degree, I mean, that's what
we have here is a burglary, but it was never Joseph's intent
to purposely go there and harm anybody.  It was never his
intent to purposely go to Mr. Kinoshita's house and take
something or steal from them.  He was just not in the right
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
state of mind and he'll address the court on that.  But he
gets that.
(Underscoring added.)  Urbanski was asked if he wanted to say
anything, and he replied:
THE DEFENDANT: If you have any questions, sir?
THE COURT: I do have one.
THE DEFENDANT: Please.
THE COURT: Where is that Smith & Wesson that you did
not report to your probation officer?
THE DEFENDANT: I told the truth to the probation
officer.  Once I have access to telephones, I would call the
three people who I -- I know I gave it to a policeman, sir,
when I was leaving country and I don't know which policeman
I gave it to. . . .
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Judge, we know where -- we know we
can get it. It's with the police officer.
. . . .
THE COURT: Okay. Anything else?
THE DEFENDANT: No, sir.
The Circuit Court deferred acceptance of Urbanski's
guilty plea subject to special conditions which included a one-
year prison term "subject to early release to a dual-diagnosis
residential treatment facility, and remain there until clinically
discharged, with the approval of your probation officer[.]"
On January 4, 2016, OPD moved to withdraw as Urbanski's
counsel.  On January 6, 2016, the Circuit Court appointed private
counsel for Urbanski.  On March 14, 2016, Urbanski's private
counsel filed a motion to withdraw Urbanski's guilty plea.  The
motion was heard on April 25, 2016.  On October 20, 2016, the
Circuit Court entered the Order at issue in this appeal.  The
Order contains the following findings of fact:
1. The Court finds that on September 21, 2015 Defendant
changed his plea to "guilty" voluntarily, knowingly
and intelligently with the full understanding of the
plea and consequences thereof.
2. Based on the extensive colloquy of Defendant at the
time of the change of plea when this court was able to
speak to Defendant, hear his answers, observe his
demeanor, as well as physical and mental state and
evaluate the appropriateness of his responses, this
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Court finds that Defendant was responding
appropriately to Court's questions, that he fully
understood the proceedings, was engaged in an
intelligent and meaningful colloquy with this Court at
the time of the change of plea and did not exhibit any
signs of any confusion or mental deficiency or
hesitation.
3. The Court finds that [the] Deputy Public Defender
. . . who represented Defendant at the time of the
change of plea acted competently at all times in the
best interest of his client, as evidenced by
persuading this Court to grant a deferral of
Defendant's guilty plea at sentencing on November 25,
2015, thus allowing Defendant to have the criminal
case dismissed if he complied with all the conditions
of the deferral.
4. The Court further finds that Defendant's affirmative
statement on the record at the time of the change of
plea that he was satisfied with the work and advice of
his attorney and that he told his attorney everything
about the case and discussed possible defenses was
made truthfully, voluntarily and intelligently in
response to this Court's questions.
5. The Court finds that Defendant's present contention
that he was not in his right mind at the time of
change of plea is not credible, based on this Court's
both previous and subsequent observation of
Defendant's speech, behavior and demeanor that were
consistently the same through all the hearings.
II.
"Hawai#i law regarding plea withdrawals is governed by
HRPP Rule 32(d) (2012) and case law construing the rule."  State
v. Sanney, 141 Hawai #i 14, 24, 404 P.3d 280, 290 (2017).  HRPP
Rule 32(d) provides:
(d) Withdrawal of plea.  A motion to withdraw a plea
of guilty or of nolo contendere may be made before sentence
is imposed or imposition of sentence is suspended; provided
that, to correct manifest injustice the court, upon a
party's motion submitted no later than ten (10) days after
imposition of sentence, shall set aside the judgment of
conviction and permit the defendant to withdraw the plea. 
At any later time, a defendant seeking to withdraw a plea of
guilty or nolo contendere may do so only by petition
pursuant to Rule 40 of these rules and the court shall not
set aside such a plea unless doing so is necessary to
correct manifest injustice.
(Underscoring added.)  Urbanski was sentenced on November 25,
2015.  His motion to withdraw his guilty plea was filed more than
ten days later, on March 14, 2016, by Urbanski's new attorney. 
The motion should have been filed as a petition under HRPP Rule
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
40.  The motion cited both HRPP Rule 32(d) and Rule 40 (and the
Circuit Court stated it would be treated "as a hearing on a
Rule 40 motion also"), but it was not served on Urbanski's former
defense attorney as is required of a Rule 40 petition.  HRPP Rule
40(f) states, in relevant part:
Where the petition alleges the ineffective assistance
of counsel as a ground upon which the requested relief
should be granted, the petitioner shall serve written notice
of the hearing upon the counsel whose assistance is alleged
to have been ineffective and said counsel shall have an
opportunity to be heard.
Urbanski's former defense attorney is identified as a witness on
the State's memorandum in opposition to Urbanski's motion, but
the State did not call the attorney to testify at the hearing. 
There is no indication in the record that Urbanski's former
defense attorney was notified of the proceeding before the
Circuit Court.
The Circuit Court denied Urbanski's motion to withdraw
guilty plea after concluding "that there is no manifest
injustice."  It is correct that a defendant moving to withdraw a
guilty plea after the imposition of a sentence must show
"manifest injustice."  Foo v. State, 106 Hawai#i 102, 111, 102
P.3d 346, 355 (2004).  The Hawai# i Supreme Court recently
explained why the standard for allowing withdrawal of a guilty
plea differs depending on whether the motion is made before or
after sentencing:
This difference between the "fair and just" standard
(applied to a motion to withdraw a plea made before
sentencing) and the "manifest injustice" standard (applied
when the motion is made after sentencing) is based on sound
policy.  When a motion to withdraw a plea has been made
prior to sentencing, as opposed to after sentencing, there
is no opportunity for the defendant to test the severity of
sentence before finally committing himself to a guilty plea. 
In other words, in a motion to withdraw a plea made prior to
sentencing, the defendant cannot obtain a sentence and then
move to withdraw the plea if he or she deems that sentence
too severe.  The effect of allowing a defendant to withdraw
his or her plea prior to sentencing for any fair and just
reason is to allow the defendant to pursue his or her
constitutional right to trial on the original charges.
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
State v. Guity, 144 Hawai#i 557, 562, 445 P.3d 138, 143 (2019)
(cleaned up).3  "What the manifest injustice rule seeks to avoid
is an opportunity for the defendant to test the severity of
sentence before finally committing . . . to a guilty plea." 
Sanney, 141 Hawai#i at 24-25, 404 P.3d at 290-91.
"Manifest injustice occurs when a defendant makes a
plea involuntarily or without knowledge of the direct
consequences of the plea."   Foo, 106 4Hawai#i at 111, 102 P.3d at
355 (citation omitted).  "[T]here is no manifest injustice when
the trial court has made an affirmative showing by an
on-the-record colloquy between the court and the defendant
wherein the defendant is shown to have a full understanding of
what the plea of guilty connotes and its consequences."  Id. at
112, 102 P.3d at 356 (citation omitted).  Based on the extensive
on-the-record colloquy between the Circuit Court and Urbanski
during the change of plea hearing, the Circuit Court found that
Urbanski had "changed his plea to 'guilty' voluntarily, knowingly
and intelligently with the full understanding of the plea and
consequences thereof."  The Circuit Court found that Urbanski was
not a credible witness to the extent he claimed to the contrary
during the hearing on his motion to withdraw his guilty plea.
Assessing credibility is the province of the Circuit Court. 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai #i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006)
("It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon
issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight
of evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact.")
(citation omitted).  Had "manifest injustice" been the sole
standard of review applicable to this appeal, we would affirm. 
But it is not.
3The "cleaned up" parenthetical tells readers that extraneous
material (e.g. internal brackets, ellipses, quotation marks, citations, foot-
note reference numbers, and changes in capitalization) was removed from a
quotation for readability, and that none of it mattered for understanding the
quotation or evaluating its weight.  See Metzler, Jack, Cleaning Up
Quotations, 18 J. App. Prac. & Process 143 (2017).
4The Hawai #i Supreme Court has also found manifest injustice where
the State failed to uphold its end of a plea bargain.  State v. Adams, 76
Hawai#i 408, 414, 879 P.2d 513, 519 (1994).
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
III.
It is evident from the transcript of the hearing on the
motion to withdraw guilty plea that Urbanski was actually
claiming to have received ineffective assistance of counsel. 
Urbanski testified:
On the day of trial [actually the change of plea
hearing], September 21st, seven months ago, I was
approximately 20 percent of who I am today.  My attorney
believed I was an ice addict.  Your Honor, I do not do
illegal drugs.  And I believed that he was an actor
pretending to be a lawyer.  Everyone else in the courtroom
were also actors.  You, Your Honor, I did believe you were a
real judge, but acting for the day.  My answers were
automated and very short.  Yes, sir.  No, sir.  I knew I
couldn't string a sentence or a thought together and didn't
want to look like a fool on Candid Camera.  This is an
embarrassing truth.
On page 8 of the court transcript, you asked me, Your
Honor, your first six-line question -- most of the questions
were short -- in that lengthy question, you used the words
"intentionally," "building," and "commit a crime."  I
paused.  And then you said, "is that correct?"  Your
questions, they had a pace, and there was a strong "yes"
momentum.  In my mind, saying "no" would have been akin to
correcting you in your courtroom.
As a retired Honolulu police officer, the courtroom is
like my church, the church of truth.  And I was -- I was
hurting.  I was never an attorney who takes a solemn oath to
support a side.  It was a combination, not understanding
quickly enough and not wanting to break Your Honor's
cadence.
Anyway, when you asked, "is that correct?" in an
attempt to be polite and respectful, as a good police
officer, I said, "Yes, sir."  I was unaware that at that
precise moment, my life had changed, possibly forever.
And finally, right before receiving sentence on
November 25th, I was approximately 60 percent of who I am
today.  My defense attorney told me, with venom in his
voice, it is too late to change your plea, we are past that,
all you'll do is anger the judge.  And then with anger, pain
on his face, he barked, so you keep your mouth shut, and
I'll get you what you want; you're going to go home today.
And as he stormed off, I yelled towards his back, I don't
care about the DAG plea, I want to plead innocent.  I did
what the public -- I did what the public defender told me. 
And I answered "yes" and "no," and I tried to follow along
as best I could.
If the victim -- excuse me -- the complainant had not
come to my sentence hearing -- far away from the stress and
excitement, high anxiety of the day of the incident, but,
once again, he admitted critical case facts and made untrue
statements with a clear mind, this time in a court of law in
front of a judge.  That was unacceptable to me, Your Honor. 
And truly, that is why I am here today.  I am here to ask
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the Court's power of discretion in this unique case.  If the
complainant did not come to my sentencing, I would not be
fighting this.
(Underscoring added.)  Urbanski also testified:
Q.  Mr. Urbanski, were you on any medication on the
day of the change of plea?
A.  No, I was not.
Q.  Did your prior counsel ever discuss having you
evaluated with a three panel at any time during the
representation?
A.  I requested it many times.  I thought it was a
good idea. I'm not afraid of psychologists or psychiatrists. 
But he would not allow me to travel that thought pattern. 
It would be stomped and redirected.
Q.  As you sit here today, do you feel you should have
been evaluated by a three panel?
A.  Yes, absolutely, 'cause most people in my frame of
mind, it wouldn't have been from a doctor-prescribed
medication.  I was Looney Tunes.  And the prison records
will show that.  The hospital records, the first night, will
probably say something to that effect, that, you know, this
guy's not fully connected.  It took a while for it to wash
out of my system. And I'm so grateful that I'm waking up.
(Underscoring added.)  Urbanski argued that he was never advised
he had a meritorious defense because his original defense
attorney "strongly coerced" him to plead guilty as it was "the
only honorable thing to do[.]"  He claimed that his defense was
"the fact that I never entered a building, I was in a backyard,
that really should matter."  This is directly contrary to his
former defense counsel's statement during the sentencing hearing
that "He went to the Kinoshitas' house and he entered their
storage shed, took the bottle of water and was drinking it." 
(Underscoring added.)
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance of
counsel, an appellate court looks at whether defense counsel's
assistance was within the range of competence demanded of
attorneys in criminal cases.  State v. DeLeon, 131 Hawai#i 463,
478, 319 P.3d 382, 397 (2014).  The defendant has the burden of
establishing ineffective assistance of counsel and must meet the
following two-part test: (1) that there were specific errors or
omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
diligence; and (2) that such errors or omissions resulted in
either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
meritorious defense.  Id. at 478-49, 319 P.3d at 397-98.  A
successful claim for ineffective assistance of counsel can
establish "manifest injustice."  See State v. Song, No. CAAP-14-
0001116, 2016 WL 483595 (Haw. App. Feb. 5, 2016) (SDO)
(analyzing, on post-sentencing motion to withdraw no contest
plea, whether defendant's court-appointed attorney provided
ineffective assistance of counsel).
As previously stated, HRPP Rule 40(f) requires that
written notice of the petition seeking relief based on
ineffective assistance of counsel be served "upon the counsel
whose assistance is alleged to have been ineffective and said
counsel shall have an opportunity to be heard."  Because
Urbanski's motion to withdraw guilty plea was never served upon
Urbanski's former defense attorney, we vacate the Circuit Court's
Order denying the motion and remand for further proceedings under
HRPP Rule 40.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, September 17, 2019.   
On the briefs:
Shawn A. Luiz,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate JudgeLoren J. Thomas,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
14