  NOT  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAII REPORTS  OR THE  PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000326 12-FEB-2026 07:51 AM Dkt. 52 SO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000326 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
ALLAN J. ZACHARY, Appellant-Appellant, v.
EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM, STATE OF HAWAII,
Appellee-Appellee. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3CCV-22-0000098) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
In this secondary appeal, Appellant-Appellant Allan J. 
Zachary (Zachary
) appeals from the April 3, 2023 Final Judgment 
entered in favor of Appellee-Appellee Employees' Retirement 
System, State of Hawaii (ERS) in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).
1/ Zachary also challenges the Circuit 
Court's April 3, 2023 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order (Order). The Order affirmed the March 10, 2022 Final Decision of the Board of Trustees of the Employees' Retirement System of the State of Hawaii (ERS Board or Board), which, among other things, adopted the March 3, 2014 Recommended Decision of an administrative hearings officer, including the findings of fact and conclusions of law contained therein, with certain modifications. The Recommended Decision, and thus the Final 
1/ The Honorable Henry T. Nakamoto presided.     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  Decision, concluded that Zachary was not entitled to service-
connected disability retirement benefits under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 88-336 (2012), quoted infra. 
On appeal, Zachary contends that the Circuit Court: 
(1) "misstated and relied on incomplete facts" in affirming the ERS Board's determination that he failed to prove that at the time of his application, he was incapacitated for the further performance of duty (challenging the Circuit Court's conclusions of law (COLs) 21 through 25); (2) "misstated the substantial evidence" in affirming the ERS Board's determination that even if Zachary's alleged problems with mental functioning were considered, he failed to prove that at the time of his application he was incapacitated for the further performance of duty (challenging COLs 26 through 30); (3) "misstated the substantial evidence" in affirming the ERS Board's determination that Zachary failed to prove that at the time of his application, any incapacity was likely to be permanent (challenging COLs 31 through 36); and (4) erred in concluding that ERS's "intentional and unsupported delay of seven . . . years to process [Zachary's] request for service connected disability" did not violate his due process rights (challenging COLs 42 through 50).
2/ 
Our review of "decision[s] made by the circuit court 
upon its review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal." Flores v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 143 Hawai# i 114, 120, 424 P.3d 
469, 475 (2018) (quoting Paul's Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai#i 412, 416, 91 P.3d 494, 498 (2004)). We apply the 
standards set forth in HRS § 91-14(g) (2012 & Supp. 2016) to determine whether the Circuit Court's decision was right or wrong. Id. at 120-21, 424 P.3d at 475-76 (quoting Paul's Elec. 
Serv., Inc., 104 Hawai# i at 416, 91 P.3d at 498). 
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve Zachary's contentions as follows, and affirm. 
2/ Zachary's points of error have been restated and consolidated for
clarity. 
2     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
  (1) and (2) It is undisputed that Zachary was employed 
by the State Department of Human Services as a Social Worker IV, 
was a member of ERS's hybrid plan (class H), and voluntarily retired on July 31, 2008.  At the time of Zachary's July 30, 
2008 application for service-connected disability retirement, HRS § 88-336 provided, in relevant part: 3/
(a) Upon application of a class H member, . . . any class H
member who has been permanently incapacitated for duty asthe natural and proximate result of an accident occurringwhile in the actual performance of duty at some definitetime and place, or as the cumulative result of someoccupational hazard, through no wilful negligence on themember's part, may be retired by the board for service-connected disability; provided that: 
. . . . 
(4) The medical board certifies that the member is 
incapacitated for the further performance ofduty at the time of application and that themember's incapacity is likely to be permanent. 
Here, the ERS Board (through its adoption of the 
Recommended Decision) determined in conclusions of law (Board 
COLS) 8 and 9 as follows: 
8. [Zachary] has failed to prove by a preponderance of
the evidence that due to the accidents of March 2, 2004, and
August 8, 2005, he was incapacitated for the furtherperformance of his duties as a Social Worker IV at the timeof his application. 
9. This conclusion would remain the same even if 
[Zachary's] alleged problems with mental functioning wereconsidered. 
The Circuit Court, in reviewing these Board COLs on 
primary appeal, concluded as follows: 
22. The clearly erroneous standard of review applies
to [Board] COL 8 because it presents mixed questions of factand law, and the conclusion is dependant upon the facts andthe circumstances of this particular case. 
23. The Court concludes that the ERS Board's 
conclusion that [Zachary] failed to prove that at the timeof his application, he was incapacitated for the further 
3/ Zachary has not challenged any findings of fact in the hearings
officer's Recommended Decision, which were adopted in the ERS Board's FinalDecision. These findings of fact ( Board FOFs ) are therefore binding on
appeal. See Poe v. Haw. Labor Rels. Bd.
, 97 Hawai #i 528, 536, 40 P.3d 930,
938 (2002) (an agency's unchallenged findings are binding on appeal). 
3     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
performance of duty ([Board] COL 8) is supported by
reliable, probative, and substantial evidence. 
a. Dr. Chinn testified that the records relating to
the 2004 and 2005 accidents do not indicate that [Zachary]is incapacitated for further performance of duty. 
b. For both the 2004 and 2005 accidents, in
response to the question "10. Does the disability render theemployee incapable of continued employment in this presentgrade, class or position?", [Zachary's] employer answered"No." 
c. Dr. Demeter's reports and Dr. Brewer['s] reports
do not indicate that [at] the time of his application,[Zachary] was incapacitated for the further performance ofduty. 
d. Dr. Chinn testified that [Zachary] is not
incapacitated. 
24. The Court concludes that [Zachary] failed to
meet his burden of proving that at the time of hisapplication, he was incapacitated for the furtherperformance of duty. 
a. Dr. Weigel did not provide any basis for his
opinion that [Zachary] is permanently incapacit[ated] fromperforming his job. Dr. Weigel, as a chiropractor, is notqualified to make a determination on incapacity. Dr. Chinn testified that [Zachary] should have been evaluated by anorthopedic physician or orthopedic surgeon for his lumbarstrain. Dr. Chinn testified that an orthopedist can helpdetermine whether someone is permanently incapacitated, anda chiropractor cannot. 
b. Dr. Demeter and Dr. Brewer both opined that
continuing care by Dr. Weigel is not indicated. 
c. Dr. Weigel stated that he treated [Zachary] for
injuries relating to the 2003, 2004, and 2005 accidents.Dr. Weigel's opinions may also be based on the 2003accident, which is not part of [Zachary's] application.[Zachary's] application does not list any neck injury. 
d. [Zachary's] arguments about his job performance
are not supported by documentation from employment recordsor medical records. 
Dr. Chinn testified that [Zachary's] December 8, 2011
letter to the Board regarding his activities "would indicatethat he is not incapacitated; that he is able to perform hisphysical requirements of his job description." 
e. [Zachary's] ex-wife, Heather Gudmundson, who
testified about [Zachary's] physical and mental condition,is not a medical professional. 
25. The Court concludes that [Board] COL 8 is not
clearly erroneous. 
The ERS Board's conclusion that at the 
time of his application, [Zachary] was not incapacitated forfurther performance of duty is supported by reliable,probative, and substantial evidence. The ERS Board considered and weighed conflicting medical evidence butultimately concluded that the evidence was insufficient to 
4     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 prove that as of the time of his application, [Zachary] was
incapacitated for performance of duty. 
[Zachary] failed to
meet his burden of proving that at the time of hisapplication, he was incapacitated for the furtherperformance of duty. 
. . . . 
27. The clearly erroneous standard applies to
[Board] COL 9 because it presents mixed questions of fact
and law, and the conclusion is dependent upon the facts andcircumstances of this particular case. 
28. The Court concludes that the ERS Board's 
conclusion that even if [Zachary's] alleged problems withmental functioning were considered, [Zachary] failed toprove that at the time of his application, he wasincapacitated for the further performance of duty ([Board]COL 9) is supported by reliable, probative, and substantialevidence. 
a. [Zachary's] medical records do not indicate that
he has suffered a head injury in the 2004 claimed accidentor that he had problems with mental functioning at the timeof his application. Dr. Chinn testified that if Appellanthad a mental condition that would have interfered with his ability to function, the doctor would have made note of thatin their records; and that none of the examining doctorsmade any comments about his mental incapacity. 
b. The medical records and [Zachary's] testimony
reflect a 45-year history of alcohol use and abuse. A social worker's note, dated 2/24/03, states that [Zachary's]"emotional and physical well-being have been effected [sic]by his service in Vietnam" and that he "continue [sic] touse alcohol to avoid emotional issues related to his service, or other significant experiences in his life." 
c. [Zachary] admitted that he had an alcohol
problem. He said that when he retired, Dr. Morrisonidentified the problem as excessive alcohol use. [Zachary]testified that after he retired in 2008, his alcohol "habit"got more intense and he was drinking six to ten drinks perday. 
d. Dr. Chinn testified that [Zachary] had "almost
45 years of ethanol abuse to the point where his liverfunction tests were elevated." Dr. Chinn testified that if there was a significant problem with [Zachary's] ability tofunction mentally or physically, it would be related toalcohol abuse. It was documented in his medical records that he drank to fall asleep and that he self-medicates withfour to six beers per day. Dr. Chinn testified that that would interfere with his ability to mentally and physicallyfunction. As to [Zachary's] complaints of memory loss, Dr.Chinn said: "When you have 45 years of alcohol use andabuse, . . . it is very common to have mental changes aswell." 
29. The Court concludes that [Zachary] failed to
meet his burden of proving that, even if his allegedproblems with mental functioning were considered, he wasincapacitated for the further performance of duty at thetime of his application. 
5     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
a. [Zachary] did not present any medical testimony
or evidence that he suffered a head injury in the 2004
accident or that he had problems with mental functioning atthe time of his application. 
b. [Zachary's] ex-wife Ms. Gudmundson, merely
testified about her observations as a lay person. 
c. Dr. Weigel did not opine about any problems with
[Zachary's] mental capacity, and as a chiropractor, he isnot qualified to do so. 
30. The Court concludes that [Board] COL 9 is not
clearly erroneous. The ERS Board's conclusion that even if [Zachary's] alleged problems with mental functioning wereconsidered, [Zachary] failed to prove that at the time ofhis application, he was incapacitated for the furtherperformance of duty, is supported by reliable, probative,and substantial evidence. The ERS Board considered and weighed conflicting medical evidence but ultimatelyconcluded that . . . even if [Zachary's] alleged problemswith mental functioning were considered, the evidence wasinsufficient to prove that as of the time of hisapplication, [Zachary] was incapacitated for performance ofduty. [Zachary] failed to prove that at the time of hisapplication, he was incapacitated for the furtherperformance of duty. 
(Case and record citations omitted; some brackets in original.) 
Zachary challenges COLs 21 through 25, COLS 26 through 
30, and the related determinations that he failed to prove that 
at the time of his application, he was incapacitated for the further performance of duty. By implication, Zachary also challenges Board COLs 8 and 9. 
We agree with the Circuit Court that the challenged 
Board COLs present mixed issues of fact and law and, as such, are reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard. Zachary presents no specific argument as to why Board COL 8 or 9 is clearly erroneous. Nor does he contest any of the supporting Board FOFs, which are therefore binding on appeal. See supra note 3; Poe
, 97 
Hawai#i at 536, 40 P.3d at 938. He merely quotes testimony from 
his chiropractor, Dr. Weigel, relating to his condition, presumably to show some conflict with the evidence relied on by the ERS Board. "[C]ourts decline to consider the weight of the evidence to ascertain whether it weighs in favor of the administrative findings, or to review the agency's findings of fact by passing upon the credibility of witnesses or conflicts in testimony . . . ." 
In re Hawaiian Elec. Co.
, 81 Hawai#i 459, 
465, 918 P.2d 561, 567 (1996) (citing 
In re Hawaii Elec. Light 
6     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Co., 60 Haw. 625, 629, 594 P.2d 612, 617 (1979)). Based on our 
own review of the pertinent record, which the Circuit Court summarized in its COLs 23, 24, 28, and 29, we conclude that substantial evidence supported Board COLs 8 and 9 and they were not clearly erroneous. The Circuit Court was not wrong in so concluding. 
(3) Zachary challenges COLs 31 through 36 and the 
related determination that he failed to prove that at the time of his application, any incapacity was likely to be permanent. Because Board COLs 8 and 9 were not clearly erroneous (see supra), the ERS Board did not err in determining that Zachary was not entitled to service-connected disability retirement under HRS § 88-336. We therefore need not reach the issue of whether any incapacity was likely to be permanent. 
(4) Zachary contends that the Circuit Court erred in 
concluding that delays by ERS in processing his application for service-connected disability retirement did not violate his due process rights. 
"[W]hen a statute is silent as to an express time 
frame, [the supreme] court has imported a 'reasonable time' standard." Trivectra v. Ushijima, 112 Hawai# i 90, 108, 144 P.3d 
1, 19 (2006) (citing Paul's Elec. Serv., Inc., 104 Hawai# i at 
420, 91 P.3d at 502). 
In Trivectra
, the court concluded that a 
final agency order issued nine months after oral argument was not unreasonable where "there [was] no indication . . ., in contrast to Paul's Elec. Serv., that the delay was caused by an unjustified agency decision to postpone resolution of the matter or was so outside the bounds of the workings of a large and complex bureaucracy as to be deemed unreasonable per se." Id. at 
109, 144 P.3d at 20. 
Here, Zachary argues that there were two periods of 
unreasonable delay, as follows: (1) a roughly three-year, two-month delay from July 30, 2008, when Zachary applied for disability retirement, through October 17, 2011, when the ERS submitted his application to the Medical Board (first delay); and (2) a roughly four-year delay from October 12, 2015, when Zachary asked to postpone the scheduled oral argument on his appeal 
7
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
  before the ERS Board, through October 21, 2019, when the ERS 
wrote to Zachary and asked him whether he still wanted to pursue his appeal (second delay). 
Regarding the first delay, Zachary does not point to 
where in the administrative record he raised this issue. Indeed, it does not appear to have been raised before the hearings officer or the ERS Board, and was thus not addressed in the Final Decision.
4/ Although an administrative agency generally lacks 
power to pass upon the constitutionality of a statute, see HOH Corp. v. Motor Vehicle Indus. Licensing Bd., 69 Haw. 135, 141, 736 P.2d 1271, 1275 (1987), here, Zachary is claiming that an unexplained processing delay in submitting his application to the Medical Board, i.e., the first delay, violated his due process rights. This mixed issue of fact and law should have been raised in the first instance before the ERS Board. See Perry v. Bd. of 
Trs. of Emps. Ret. Sys., CAAP-11-0000052, 2012 WL 1382476, at *11 (Haw App. Apr. 20, 2012) (SDO) (because appellant failed to raise an alleged Contract Clause claim before the ERS, the circuit court correctly found that he had waived that argument on appeal (citing Waikiki Resort Hotel, Inc. v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 63 Haw. 222, 250, 624 P.2d 1353, 1372 (1981)); Sato v. Dep't of Human Servs., No. CAAP-16-0000320, 2019 WL 1872931, at *2 (Haw. App. Apr. 26, 2019) (SDO) ("Waiver of an issue not raised at the administrative level applies even to constitutional issues when appellant is not challenging the constitutionality of a statute or other rule." (citing Perry)); see also HOH Corp., 69 Haw. at 143, 736 P.2d at 1276 ("When determination of the constitutional issue depends on factual determinations, they should be made first by the administrative officials who are especially equipped to inquire, in the first instance, into the facts." (quoting B. 
4/ The Final Decision states in footnote 1: "During the oral
arguments on [Zachary's] Exceptions, [Zachary's] counsel alleged for the first
time that ERS took too long to schedule and hear the exceptions hearing,claiming that [Zachary] had been prejudiced by unreasonable delay, justifyingreversal of the Proposed Decision . . . ." This describes Zachary's argumentregarding the alleged second delay, which the ERS Board addressed in detail inthe Final Decision. There is no indication in the record that Zachary raisedthe alleged first delay prior to his primary appeal. 
8     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Schwartz, Administrative Law § 8.37, at 519 (2d ed. 1984))). 
In any event, Zachary has not shown that he suffered 
any prejudice as a result of the first delay, particularly in 
light of his own later actions to delay oral argument before the ERS Board (see infra) and the Board's ultimate determination, which we have affirmed, that he was not entitled to service-connected disability retirement. See S. Foods Grp., L.P. v. 
State, Dep't of Educ., 89 Hawai# i 443, 453, 974 P.2d 1033, 1043 
(1999) (to reverse or modify an agency decision under HRS § 91–14(g), "the appellate court must conclude that an appellant's substantial rights were prejudiced by the agency." (citing In re Hawaiian Elec. Co., 81 Hawai# i at 465, 918 P.2d at 
567)). 
Regarding the second delay, the ERS Board determined 
that: the oral argument originally scheduled for November 9, 2015 was cancelled at Zachary's request and continued at his request until such time as he would let the Board know he was available; Zachary cancelled the oral argument to obtain counsel, who eventually filed a notice of appearance on July 2, 2021; the ERS Board then scheduled and conducted the oral argument on Zachary's exceptions on January 10, 2022; and there was no unreasonable delay in scheduling the argument. The ERS Board detailed the relevant communications between Zachary and the ERS – none of which Zachary disputes – which support the Board's determinations. See Poe, 97 
Hawai#i at 536, 40 P.3d at 938. 
In reviewing these communications and the ERS Board's 
determinations, the Circuit Court concluded that "the second delay was primarily at [Zachary's] request for [him] to obtain counsel[,]" "[his] action and inaction essentially waived the time of the second delay[,]" and there was no violation of Zachary's due process rights. 
Based on our own review of the 
pertinent record, we also conclude that there was no violation of Zachary's due process rights in these circumstances. The Circuit Court was not wrong. 
9
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
For the reasons discussed above, the Final Judgment 
entered on April 3, 2023, in the Circuit Court of the Third 
Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai#i, February 12, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
Ted S. Hong 
for Appellant-Appellant. 
Patricia Ohara and 
Diane W. Wong, Deputy Attorneys General,for Appellee-Appellee. /s/ Karen T. NakasoneChief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
10
 