NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001299
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CARMELITA ELENA TAGORDA, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
ORLANDO ARCE TAGORDA, Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 7558)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Carmelita Elena Tagorda, pro se,
 
(Wife) appeals from the Family Court of the Second Circuit's1
 
(Family Court) (1) June 25, 2014 Order on Plaintiff's Motion for
 
Post-Decree Relief filed May 19, 2014 (Order Denying Post-Decree
 Relief)
2
 and the (2) October 13, 2014 "Order On Plaintiff's
Motion to Vacate June 25th, 2014 Order on Plaintiff's Motion for
 Post Decree Relief Filed May 19, 2014 Pursuant to Rule 60(B)(6)
 of Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure [sic]" (Rule 60(b) Order).
 
On appeal, Wife argues that the Family Court erred when
 
it ruled (1) there was no conflict of interest nor any appearance
 of impartiality and (2) that Wife should have brought her concern
 
1
 The Honorable Lloyd A. Poelman presided.
 
2
 Wife's appeal from the Order Denying Post-Decree Relief is
untimely as her notice of appeal was filed more than thirty days after the
Order was filed without a timely tolling motion or extension of time. Hawai' i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 4(a). 
Wife acknowledges in her opening brief that this court "is not
ruling on the alleged 'errors' made" by the Family Court in its Order Denying
Post-Decree Relief.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to the Court's attention during the June 24, 20143
 hearing.
After due consideration of the issues raised and
 
arguments made by Wife,4
 and a careful review of the record and
applicable authority, we resolve Wife's points on appeal as
 
follows and affirm.
 
A trial court's denial of a motion under Hawai 'i Family 
Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 60(b) is reviewed for abuse of
 discretion. 
De Mello v. De Mello , 3 Haw. App. 165, 169, 646 P.2d
 
409, 412 (1982). 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
we will not disturb the family court's decisions on appeal
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of
reason.
 
In re Jane Doe , 95 Hawai 'i 183, 189-90, 20 P.3d 616, 622-23 
(2001) (citations, internal quotation marks, brackets, and
 
ellipsis omitted).
 
Disqualification of or recusal by a judge is governed
 
by Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 601-7 (2016)5
 and the Hawai 'i 
3 Wife's identification of the hearing date in her opening brief
appears to be a typographical error.
 
4 Defendant-Appellee Orlando Arce Tagorda (Husband) did not file an
answering brief.
 
HRS § 601-7 Disqualification of judge; relationship, pecuniary
interest, previous judgment, bias or prejudice, provides:
 
(a) No person shall sit as a judge in any case in
which:
 
(1)	 The judge's relative by affinity or
consanguinity within the third degree is
counsel, or interested either as a plaintiff or
defendant, or in the issue of which the judge
has, either directly or through such relative, a
more than de minimis pecuniary interest; or
 
(2) 	 The judge has been of counsel or on an appeal
from any decision or judgment rendered by the
judge;
 
provided that no interests held by mutual or common funds,
the investment or divestment of which are not subject to the
direction of the judge, shall be considered pecuniary
interests for purposes of this section; and after full
disclosure on the record, parties may waive disqualification
due to any pecuniary interest.
 5 
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Revised Code of Judicial Conduct (HRCJC) Rule 2.11.6
 
Wife contends that Judge Poelman should have recused
 
himself because when he was an attorney, he sued Wife for "non­
payment of rent" in 2009. Judge Poelman stated that he did not
 recall filing such collection lawsuits against Wife. Assuming,
 arguendo, that Judge Poelman was the lawyer in these lawsuits,
 Wife does not claim that Judge Poelman held a pecuniary interest
 in these suits for collection of rent or that he participated as
 a lawyer in this divorce action requiring recusal under HRS
 § 601-7(a) and/or HRCJC Rule 2.11(6). Nor does Wife explain why
 
5(...continued)
(b) Whenever a party to any suit, action, or
proceeding, civil or criminal, makes and files an affidavit
that the judge before whom the action or proceeding is to be
tried or heard has a personal bias or prejudice either
against the party or in favor of any opposite party to the
suit, the judge shall be disqualified from proceeding
therein. Every such affidavit shall state the facts and the
reasons for the belief that bias or prejudice exists and
shall be filed before the trial or hearing of the action or
proceeding, or good cause shall be shown for the failure to
file it within such time. No party shall be entitled in any
case to file more than one affidavit; and no affidavit shall
be filed unless accompanied by a certificate of counsel of
record that the affidavit is made in good faith. Any judge
may disqualify oneself by filing with the clerk of the court
of which the judge is a judge a certificate that the judge
deems oneself unable for any reason to preside with absolute
impartiality in the pending suit or action.
 
6 HRCJC Rule 2.11 provides, in pertinent part, 
(a) Subject to the rule of necessity, a judge shall
disqualify or recuse himself or herself in any proceeding in
which the judge's impartiality might reasonably be
questioned, including but not limited to the following
circumstances:
 
(1) The judge has a personal bias or prejudice for
or against a party or a party's lawyer, or personal
knowledge of facts that are in dispute in the proceeding.
 
. . . .
 
(6) The judge:
 
(A) served as a lawyer in the matter in controversy,
or was associated with a lawyer who participated
substantially as a lawyer in the matter during such
association[.]
 
For the purposes of the HRCJC, "impartiality" means "absence of
bias or prejudice in favor of, or against, particular parties or classes of
parties, as well as maintenance of an open mind in considering issues that
come or may come before a judge," and "knowledge" means "actual knowledge of
the fact in question." 
See HRCJC Terminology.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
mere participation as the lawyer for an adverse party in a
 
different matter, without more, is evidence of bias. Rather,
 Wife's sole argument seems to be that Judge Poelman was biased
 against her because the judge's decision to deny her motion for
 post-decree relief "was so clearly erroneous and disconnected
 from the factual reality" that Wife could only conclude that it
 was the result of bias.
 
However, adverse rulings standing alone are 
insufficient to establish bias. Kumar v. Kumar, 133 Hawai
'i 451, 
330 P.3d 389, CAAP-12-0000691 2014 WL 1632111 at *8 (App. Apr. 23, 2014) (mem.) citing State v. Ross, 89 Hawai
'i 371, 379, 
974 P.2d 11, 19 (1998). Wife does not present a convincing argument that Judge Poelman's decision to deny her requested post-decree relief was unsupported by the facts or the law. We therefore reject Wife's claim of bias as without merit and consequently need not reach her remaining argument. 
Based on the foregoing, the October 13, 2014 "Order on
 
Plaintiff's Motion to Vacate June 25th, 2014 Order on Plaintiff's
 Motion for Post Decree Relief Failed May 19, 2014 Pursuant to
 Rule 60(b)(6) of Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure [sic]" entered
 by the Family Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 12, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Carmelita E. Tagorda,
Plaintiff-Appellant, pro se.
 
Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 
4
 