NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-12-0000612
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DAVID HARRAWAY, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-0133)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant David Harraway (Harraway) with Promoting a 
Dangerous Drug in the Second Degree (Count 1); Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia (Count 2); Possession of a Prohibited Firearm (Counts 3-5); Unauthorized Control of a Propelled Vehicle (Count 6); Promoting a Detrimental Drug in the Third Degree (Count 7); and Ownership, etc., of Prohibited Detachable Ammunition Magazine (Counts 8-13). Harraway moved to suppress evidence seized by the police and statements he made during the execution of a search warrant on his residence. The Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
1
 (Circuit Court) denied Harraway's motion to suppress.  Harraway
 
then entered a conditional plea of guilty to the charges,

 
reserving the right to appeal the Circuit Court's denial of his
 
1The Honorable Michael D. Wilson presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
motion to suppress evidence. The Circuit Court sentenced
 
Harraway to concurrent terms of imprisonment totaling ten years.
 
On appeal, Harraway argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
in denying his motion to suppress evidence because he contends
 that the police failed to comply with "knock and announce"
 requirements in executing the warrant. In particular, Harraway
 asserts that the police were required to knock and announce at a
 locked gate attached to a chain link fence on the perimeter of
 the property, instead of at the front door to the house. As
 explained below, we affirm the Circuit Court. 
BACKGROUND
 
The police obtained a warrant to search Harraway's
 
residence for methamphetamine. The warrant authorized the police
 to execute the warrant between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. The
 police arrived at the residence at about 6:30 a.m. To gain
 access to the front door of the house, the police cut the lock on
 a gate attached to a chain link fence on the perimeter of the
 property, without performing a knock and announce. The police
 then proceeded through a yard to the front door of the house
 where they performed the knock and announce four times, pausing
 in between each knock and announce. When no one responded, the
 police breached the front door. During the execution of the
 warrant, the police recovered drugs, numerous firearms,
 ammunition, ammunition magazines, drug paraphernalia, and stolen
 motor vehicles.
 
Harraway moved to suppress the evidence seized and
 
statements he made during the execution of the search warrant. 
The Circuit Court held a hearing on Harraway's suppression
 motion. At the close of the evidence, Harraway argued that (1)
 it was improper for the police to breach the gate attached to the
 chain link fence on the perimeter of the property without first
 conducting a knock and announce; and (2) the knock and announce
 at the house was improper because it was not loud enough or long
 enough. The Circuit Court orally denied Harraway's suppression
 motion. With respect to Harraway's argument that the police were
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
required to knock and announce at the gate on the perimeter of
 
the property, the Circuit Court found:
 
Regarding the issue of the perimeter, under the
circumstances that the officers discovered pursuant to the
execution of the search warrant, I don't find it
unreasonable that they did enter the perimeter, and to do so
had to cut the lock. The purpose of the search warrant of
course was to enter the home, and I think the
knock-and-announce procedures were intended to give the
occupants a reasonable opportunity to respond and [f]or the
officers to use their discretion to perform the
knock-and-announce procedures at the door rather than at the
perimeter fence, I do find to be a lawful exercise of their
authority pursuant to the search warrant.
 
The Circuit Court subsequently issued its "Findings of
 
Fact and Conclusions of Law and Order Denying Defendant's Motion
 
to Suppress Evidence and Statements" (Suppression Order), which
 provides in relevant part as follows:
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
1. On January 27, 2011 the Honolulu Police
Department's Special Services Division (hereinafter "SSD")
was sent to assist in the execution of a search warrant for
 the residence of [**-***] Amio Street. The search warrant
 also extended to the defendant, David Allen Harraway. The
 Honolulu Police Department SSD had the responsibility of
initiating entry onto the premises specified in the search
warrant, securing the interior of the location and
preserving the scene.
 
2. The residence at [**-***] Amio Street was a
single story wooden structure. SSD determined the primary
entry point to be a wooden door on the Amio Street side of
the residence. SSD arrived at the target location at 6:30
a.m. on Thursday, January 27, 2011. SSD officers consisted
 of Officers Shane Wright, Paul Vargas, John Otto, Dudley
Munar, and several other SSD officers. The team was
 coordinated by Sergeant Greg [Obara]. The SSD Team
 approached the front door of the residence and began the
required "knock and announce" process.
 
3. The residence had a fence surrounding its
perimeter and the police cut the lock at the entrance of the
gate before advancing to the front door. The police
officers performed the knock and announce requirement at the
front door.
 
4. Officer Wright initiated the knock and
announcement process at approximately 6:35 a.m. Officer
 Wright gave four loud knocks on either the door itself or
the wall just to the right of the front entrance of the
residence. In a loud and clear voice, Officer Wright
announced "Police, we have a search warrant, open the door
now." Officer Wright repeated this process four times, each
time waiting approximately 2 seconds before repeating the
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
process. The total elapsed time was approximately twenty
five to thirty seconds. After the completion of the third
or fourth announcement Sergeant Obara instructed Officer
Munar to check if the door was locked. After confirmation
 that the door was locked, Officer Obara instructed Officers
Munar and Vargas to check and breach the door respectively.
 
5. While the breaching team approached the front
door and throughout the breach, Officer Wright announced
twice more that he represented the police office and that
they were there to execute a search warrant upon the
premises. SSD officers then entered the residence and
 secured the interior.
 
6. During the execution of the search warrant David
Harraway and his girlfriend Christine Engcabo were located.
Harraway was detained out in the living room and later asked
a question by Detective Modest Ramos of the HPD Narcotics
Vice Division inquiring whether vehicles located in the
garage of the home were stolen. Harraway was not given his
Miranda rights prior to the question. However, Harraway did
not make a statement or respond in any way to the question.
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
1. Three steps are required before an officer may
physically break into the place to be searched; the officer
must state his or her office, must state his or her
business, and must demand entrance. State v. Garcia, 77
Hawaii 461, 466, 887 P.2d 671, 676 (1995). The SSD Team
 performed the knock and announce requirement in accordance
with [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §] 803-37 and within the
guidelines set forth in State v. Garcia. Officer Wright
knocked and announced, "Police, we have a search warrant,
open the door now," on four separate occasions making their
presence and purpose known in a loud and distinctive voice
and tempo so that the occupants of the residence were
reasonably alerted of the police presence.
 
2. Police officers executing a search warrant must
afford the occupants of the premises a reasonable timeperiod to respond to announcement before making forcedentry. State v. Quesnel, 79 Hawai' i 185, 188, 900 P.2d 182,
191 (1995). The SSD Team waited approximately twenty-fiveto thirty seconds before beginning the breaching procedures.This is a reasonable time period under the circumstances.This case differs from previous Hawaii cases where the courthas found the police in violation of the knock and announcerule because the previous cases involved significantlyshorter waiting periods and less repetitions of the knockand announce requirement. In State v. Garcia, 77[] Hawaii461, 468, 887 P.2d 671, 679 (1995), the Supreme Court ofHawaii found that the police did not give a suspect aconstitutionally reasonable period to respond when theyknocked and announced themselves and forced open the doorafter waiting less than ten seconds. In State v. Quesnel,79 Hawai' i 185, 191, 900 P.2d 182, 188 (1995), the Supreme
Court of Hawaii found that the suspect's constitutionalrights were violated when the police failed to announcethemselves with their initial knock and the evidence indicated that only zero to five seconds elapsed between theannouncement of office and forced entry into the premises 
4
 Anderson,NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(under a police claim there was exigent circumstances).
This case differs dramatically from the above cases, because
the officers gave between four to six knock and
announcements and waited between twenty-five to thirty
seconds (and possibly longer) before breaching the door.
 
3. Under the circumstances of the particular
search, HPD SSD officers' decision to enter the property by
cutting the lock on the perimeter gate was also reasonable.
The officers were not required to knock and announce their
presence at the fence gate and it was reasonable to use
force to breach the fence. The front door of the residence
 was a reasonable location to perform the knock and announce.
 
4. The Court finds that there was a question from
Detective Ramos to David Harraway during the execution of
the search warrant in violation of Harraway's Fifth
Amendment right to be informed that statements could be used
against him at trial. However, Harraway did not respond to
Detective Ramos' question and therefore no statements are
suppressed.
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Defendant David
 
Harraway's Motion to Suppress Evidence and Statements
be denied.
 
The Circuit Court entered its Judgment on June 6, 2012,
 
and this appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, Harraway contends that the failure of the
 
police to knock and announce at the gate to the chain link fence

 
on the perimeter of the property rendered the search illegal and
 
therefore the Circuit Court erred in denying his motion to
 suppress evidence. We disagree.
2
 
In a case like this one, the proponent of a motion to
 
suppress evidence has the burden of establishing that the
 evidence sought to be excluded was unlawfully secured. State v.
 
 84 Hawai 'i 462, 467, 935 P.2d 1007, 1012 (1997). We 
review a trial court's findings of fact on a motion to suppress
 evidence under the clearly erroneous standard and its conclusions
 of law de novo. 
Id.
 
2Because we reject Harraway's contention that the Circuit Court erred in
denying his motion to suppress, we need not address his argument that without
the evidence seized during the search, there was insufficient evidence to
support his convictions.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 803-37 (2014) sets
 
forth the knock and announce requirements that the police must
 
follow in executing a search warrant.3 HRS § 803-37 provides:
 
The officer charged with the warrant, if a house,
store, or other building is designated as the place to be
searched, may enter it without demanding permission if the
officer finds it open. If the doors are shut the officer
 must declare the officer's office and the officer's
 business, and demand entrance. If the doors, gates, or
other bars to the entrance are not immediately opened, the
officer may break them. When entered, the officer may
demand that any other part of the house, or any closet, or
other closed place in which the officer has reason to
believe the property is concealed, may be opened for the
officer's inspection, and if refused the officer may break
them.
 
(Emphasis added.)4
 
Based on the plain language of HRS § 803-37, we
conclude that the location where the police were required to
 
conduct their knock and announce in this case was at the door to 
Harraway's house, and not at the gate on the perimeter of the
 property. The statute provides that "if a house . . . is
 designated as the place to be searched" and "the doors are
 shut[,]" then the police "must declare the officer's office and
 the officer's business and demand entrance." HRS § 803-37. When
 read together, the statutory language establishes that the
 location where the police are required to perform the knock and
 announce is at the door of the house to be searched.
 
 
Our reading of HRS § 803-37 is supported by the
 
purposes of the knock and announce rule, which are to (1) reduce

 
3
HRS § 803-37 is Hawai' i's statutory codification of the common law
knock and announce rule. See State v. Opupele, 88 Hawai' i 433, 435 n.3, 967
P.2d 265, 267 n.3 (1998). 
4
We note that in State v. Garcia, 77 Hawai' i 461, 887 P.2d 671 (1995),
this court held that the portion of HRS § 803–37 that authorized the police to
force entry into the place to be searched if "bars" to their entrance were not"immediately opened" violated the Hawai' i Constitution. Garcia, 77 Hawai' i at 
467, 887 P.2d at 677. This court held that "under HRS § 803-37, occupants ofthe premises to be searched must be given a reasonable time to respond to thepolice's demand for entry to serve a search warrant." Id. at 468, 77 Hawai' i 
at 678. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the potential violence to both occupants and police resulting 
from an unannounced entry; (2) prevent unnecessary property damage; and (3) protect an occupant's right to privacy. State v. 
Eleneki, 92 Hawai
'i 562, 566, 993 P.2d 1191, 1195 (2000). 
Requiring the police to knock and announce at a gate on the perimeter of the property would significantly increase the risk of danger to the police and the potential for violence. The knock and announce rule draws a delicate balance between the interest of the police in protecting their safety and preventing the destruction of evidence on the one hand, and an occupant's privacy interests and interest in avoiding property damage on the other. Significant delays in the ability of the police to secure entry into the residence skews this balance by giving occupants time to arm themselves, to prepare to respond with violence to the police entry, and to destroy evidence. That is why courts have held that fifteen to twenty seconds was a reasonable time for the police to wait after its knock and announce before forcing entry. See United States v. Banks, 540 U.S. 31, 39 
(2003); United States v. Jones, 133 F.3d 358, 361-62 (5th Cir. 1998). The delay imposed by requiring the police to knock and announce at gates on the perimeter of properties would expose them to grave danger. 
The facts of this case underscore this point. The
 
police were executing a warrant to search for drugs at the
 residence of a suspected drug dealer. The record shows that in
 addition to methamphetamine and drug paraphernalia, the police
 recovered firearms (some of which were loaded), including 
machine guns, semi-automatic pistols, revolvers, rifles, and an
 illegal shotgun, and high-capacity magazines containing
 ammunition. The delay caused by having to knock and announce at
 the outside gate would have markedly increased the potential
 danger to the police.
 
In addition, under the circumstances presented by this
 
case, requiring the police to knock and announce at an outside
 gate, rather than at the door to the residence, would undermine
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the effectiveness and fair application of the knock and announce
 
rule. It would increase the uncertainty over whether the
 occupants of the residence could actually hear the knock and
 announce and thus secure the benefits of a cooperative response.
 It would also restrict the ability of the police to assess the
 reaction to their knock and announce and thus determine whether
 the occupants were likely to cooperate or present a danger to the
 police, or were attempting to destroy evidence.
 
Courts from other jurisdictions have concluded that
 
given the purposes of the knock and announce rule, the police,
 who were executing a search or arrest warrant at a residence,
 were not required to knock and announce at an outside fence gate. 
See State v. Sanchez, 627 P.2d 676, 679-81 (Ariz. 1981); State v.
 Schimpf, 914 P.2d 1206, 1207-09 (Wash. Ct. App. 1996). 
In this case, after cutting the lock to the gate on the
 
perimeter of the property, the police knocked and announced at
 the door to Harraway's residence before entering the residence. 
As the Circuit Court found, Officer Wright, "[i]n a loud and
 clear voice," knocked on the front door of the residence or the
 wall next to it and announced "Police, we have a search warrant,
 open the door now." Officer Wright repeated this process four
 times, pausing in between, until twenty five to thirty seconds
 had elapsed. Thereafter, the police breached the front door as
 Officer Wright twice more announced that they were the police and
 were there to execute a search warrant. 
We conclude that the Circuit Court properly denied
 
Harraway's suppression motion. The police were not required to
 knock and announce at the outside gate, and they acted reasonably
 and in compliance with HRS § 803-37 when they knocked and
 announced at the front door of the house before entering.
5
 
5We note that Harraway contends that the Circuit Court's findings of
fact were clearly erroneous because the Circuit Court failed to find that
there was a doorbell at the perimeter gate. Harraway refused to "approve as
to form" the Circuit Court's Suppression Order on this basis. However, the
only person Harraway cites as testifying to the existence of a doorbell was
(continued...)
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
We reject Harraway's contention that the police were
 
required to knock and announce at the perimeter gate because the
 
gate was in the curtilage of his residence. Although the
 protection of the Fourth Amendment extends to the curtilage of a
 residence and a warrantless search by the police in the curtilage
 is presumptively unreasonable, the police here had a search
 warrant, which authorized it to search Harraway's residence and
 its curtilage. Harraway cites no case holding that the police
 who have a valid search warrant are required to knock and
 announce before entering the curtilage of a residence. As noted,
 HRS § 803-37 requires that the knock and announce be conducted at
 the door to the residence, not at the curtilage. 
We also reject Harraway's claim that the failure of the 
police to knock and announce at the perimeter gate violated his constitutional rights. In evaluating Harraway's constitutional claim, "we consider whether the police behavior was reasonable under the circumstances and whether the purposes behind the knock and announce rule were furthered." State v. Diaz, 100 Hawai
'i 
210, 221, 58 P.3d 1257, 1267 (2002). For the reasons previously discussed, we conclude that under the circumstances of this case, it was reasonable for the police to knock and announce at the door to Harraway's residence, rather than at the perimeter gate. Performing the knock and announce at the gate would have significantly increased the risk of danger to the police and the potential for violence. In contrast, performing the knock and announce at the front door provided the occupants of the residence with a better opportunity to learn of the police's 
5(...continued)
himself, and it is the province of Circuit Court as the trier of fact to
determine the credibility of the witnesses. In any event, the existence of a
doorbell at the perimeter gate would not affect our analysis. Harraway
contends that the Circuit Court's findings of fact were clearly erroneous for
failing to include other matters he claims were supported by the evidence.
The failure to make certain findings, however, does not make the findings that
were made erroneous, and we conclude that the Circuit Court's findings were
not clearly erroneous for failing to include the other matters Harraway
contends were improperly omitted.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
presence and purpose, to avoid a forced entry, and to protect
 
their privacy. It also gave the police a better opportunity to
 evaluate the occupants' reaction to their knock and announce and
 to determine what steps needed to be taken to protect the
 officers' safety and prevent the destruction of evidence.
6
 
CONCLUSION
 
We affirm the Circuit Court Suppression Order and its

 
Judgment.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 17, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Jon N. Ikenaga
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
James M. Anderson Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6The State asserts that even if the police were required to knock and
announce at the perimeter gate, the evidence recovered would not be subject to
suppression. The State argues that because the police had a valid search
warrant and recovered the evidence after they performed a proper knock and
announce at the front door, the evidence recovered was not the fruit of any
alleged illegality in the police's failure to knock and announce at the
perimeter gate. In light of our holding that the police were not required to
knock and announce at the perimeter gate, we do not address this argument by
the State.
 
10
 