
 

 

 

 

 


 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000917
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
 
WHISTON KAWAINUE KAWAA, JR., Defendant-Appellant.
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 12-1-1573)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Whiston Kawainue Kawaa, Jr., (Kawaa) with 
being a felon in possession of a firearm and place to keep pistol or revolver. During trial, the Circuit Court of the First 
1/

Circuit (Circuit Court),  in response to a motion by Kawaa,
 
 
declared a mistrial. After the Circuit Court set the case for
 
 
retrial, Kawaa moved to dismiss the case with prejudice on double
 
 
jeopardy grounds. The Circuit Court denied the motion and filed
 
 
its "Order Denying Defendant's Motion to Dismiss with Prejudice"
 
 
(Order Denying Dismissal). 
 
Kawaa appeals from the Order Denying Dismissal. 
On
 
appeal, Kawaa contends that the Circuit Court erred in denying
 his motion to dismiss. We affirm. 
1/ The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 
 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The charges against Kawaa stemmed from a shooting
 
incident in the early morning hours at Yokohama Bay Beach Park.
 There was an argument or altercation in the parking lot that
 resulted in multiple gunshots being fired. Kelii Mitchell
 (Mitchell), who was not involved in the argument, was shot in the
 back of the leg in the area of his left knee.
 
According to police reports, prior to being shot,
 
Mitchell saw a person holding a small silver handgun and shooting
 at a truck that was fleeing the area. As Mitchell was walking
 away from the gunshots, he heard two more gunshots and instantly
 felt a severe pain in the back of his leg. He fell to the ground
 and realized he had been shot. Mitchell did not actually see who
 shot him. While at the hospital, Mitchell provided a physical
 description of the person he saw shooting the gun, and Mitchell
 told the police he could identify the shooter if he saw him. The
 police showed Mitchell a six-person photographic lineup that
 included Kawaa's picture, and Mitchell informed the police that
 the photograph of Kawaa "resembles" the person he saw holding or
 shooting the gun. Mitchell told the police that he "[chose] not
 to prosecute," but would be willing to testify as a witness.
 
Tyrell Silva (Silva), Mitchell's cousin, informed the
 
police that while hanging out at Yokohama Bay Beach Park, she
 heard a commotion and then gunshots. From a distance of 15 to 20
 feet, she saw a heavyset male who was wearing a gray shirt and a
 gold chain shooting a small handgun in the direction of a crowd
 of people and also into the air. She then saw Mitchell on the
 ground, holding his leg and screaming that he had been shot.
 Silva called the police. The person Silva saw shooting the gun 
came up to Mitchell and said "oh, my God, oh, my God," and Silva
 said, "fuck you, you shot him." When the police arrived, Silva
 pointed out a 2010 Dodge Charger, which the person shooting the
 gun had entered, that was being driven away from the scene. The
 police stopped the Charger, which contained six occupants,
 
2
 
 

 


 

 

 

 



 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
including Kawaa. Kawaa was sitting in the front passenger seat
 and matched Silva's description of the person she saw shooting
 the gun -- a heavyset male, wearing a gray shirt and gold chain. 
Silva was taken to the Charger and identified Kawaa as the person
 she saw shooting the gun. The police recovered a small handgun
 from under the front passenger seat that Kawaa had been
 occupying.
 
K.K., one of the back-seat passengers in the Charger, 
later told the police that Kawaa had been shooting the gun. 
T.K., the driver of the Charger, after initially denying any
 knowledge of a gun, subsequently informed the police that K.K.
 had told him that K.K. was putting a gun under the front
 passenger seat. 
II.
 
On the day the trial began, the Circuit Court
 
apparently granted Kawaa's oral motion in limine to exclude any
 evidence that Mitchell had been shot in the knee by Kawaa during
 the incident at Yokohama Bay Beach Park. Kawaa did not order the
 transcript concerning this apparent ruling, and therefore, the
 details of the discussion surrounding this ruling and the precise
 ruling itself are not part of the record on appeal. 
At trial, on direct examination by the Deputy
 
Prosecuting Attorney (DPA), Mitchell testified that he heard
 gunshots, and when he turned towards the sound, he saw Kawaa
 firing a gun. Mitchell identified Kawaa in open court as the
 person he saw shooting the gun. Mitchell stated that as a truck
 sped off, Kawaa fired a couple more rounds, at which point
 Mitchell fell to the ground. Mitchell testified that Kawaa came
 over to him, that Kawaa had the gun in his hand, and that Kawaa
 was waiving his hand "telling me for get up."
 
When asked by the DPA what happened after that,
 
Mitchell stated that "my cousin them came; she tied a tourniquet
 around my leg." Kawaa objected and moved to strike the answer. 
The Circuit Court struck the answer and instructed the jury to
 disregard it. Kawaa moved for a mistrial, and at a bench
 
3
 
 

 

 

 


 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 

 

 




 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conference, Kawaa's counsel stated that Mitchell's answer
 violated the Circuit Court's in limine ruling. During the bench
 conference, the DPA opposed the grating of a mistrial, noted that
 the Circuit Court had stricken the answer, and stated that he had
 "advise[d] the witness not to testify to being shot in the knee." 
The Circuit Court denied Kawaa's mistrial motion, and after the
 bench conference, the Circuit Court again advised the jury that
 it was striking Mitchell's answer and instructed the jury to
 disregard it.
 
As Mitchell continued his testimony, the DPA asked if
 
someone talked to him after he left the scene of the incident. 
Mitchell responded, "Yeah, an officer at the hospital." Kawaa
 objected and moved to strike the answer. The Circuit Court
 struck the answer and instructed the jury to disregard it. Kawaa
 then asked to "renew [his] other motion," presumably a reference
 to his motion for mistrial, but the Circuit Court did not respond
 to this request.
 
The DPA subsequently showed Mitchell a picture marked
 
as State's Exhibit 8 and asked, "Is the person who shot you
 depicted in this picture?" Mitchell answered, "Yes." The
 following then ensued:
 
[DPA:] And where? Where is that on Exhibit 8?
 
[KAWAA'S COUNSEL]: 
Objection, Your Honor. I move 
to -­

May we approach, Your Honor?
 
(A bench conference was had on the record as follows:)
 [KAWAA'S COUNSEL]: 
The question was, Is the person
who shot you in that picture?
 
[DPA]: 
I'll withdraw the question. He didn't answer.
 
THE COURT: 
He said "yes." Then you asked, Where?
Where on Exhibit 8?

 
I hate to try this case again.
 [KAWAA'S COUNSEL]: 
It's all right. I'll make a
 
motion for dismissal.
 
[DPA]: 
Your Honor, the point of the questioning was
to have him -- have the jury view who he's already
identified on the -- as he appeared on that night, and
that's where I was going with that.
 
4
 
 

 

 






 





 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT:  I'm sorry. Say that again.
 
[DPA]: The point -- the purpose of the question was
 
to have -- have the witness view persons on exhibits that -­
as they viewed on that night.
 
 
[KAWAA'S COUNSEL]: 
Well, Your Honor -­
THE COURT:  Well, it's -- the question shouldn't have
 
been the person who shot.
 
 
[DPA]: Yeah, I realize the -- I was instructed to
 
lead to -­
THE COURT: Not to say the person who shot you.
 
Okay. I don't see how I cannot grant the motion. I
 
 
mean, would the jury consider that maybe Mr. Kawaa actually
 
did shoot this man? It's not part of the case. Is that
 
 
sufficiently prejudicial to his rights to be tried in felony
 
possession and place to keep? If the jury considered that,
 
I think it would be. It's a bad act. And it's uncharged.
 
And I've already ruled that I think there's substantial
 
prejudice to that that outweighs any probative value,
 
especially since it's unclear exactly how that bullet got
 
into this man's leg. It could have been just a ricochet or
 
he could have shot him directly. But -- and that becomes a
 
 
little mini trial in and of itself.
 
 
. . . . 
 
THE COURT:  I'm going to grant the motion. We're
 
 
done.[2/]
 
 
After the bench conference was concluded, the Circuit
 
 
Court advised the jury that it had declared a mistrial and
 
 
excused the jury.
 
 
III.

 
The Circuit Court set the case for retrial. Kawaa then 
 
filed a motion to dismiss the charges with prejudice. Kawaa
 
 
asserted that while the Circuit Court found that the DPA's
 
 
violation of the motion in limine was unintentional and the
 
 
result of inexperience, that did not excuse the violation.3/
 
  
2/ Although the motion made by Kawaa's counsel when he asked to approach
the bench was not specifically described as a motion for mistrial, Kawaa, in
both his post-trial motion to dismiss and in his opening brief on appeal,
identifies the motion that he made and that was granted by the Circuit Court
as a motion for a mistrial. We adopt this characterization in addressing his
appeal.
 
3/ We note that although Kawaa stated in his motion to dismiss that
"[t]he court made a finding that the prosecutor's error was not intentional
but the result of inexperience[,]" our review of the transcript of the Circuit
Court's mistrial ruling does not reveal such a finding. The transcript
(continued...)
 
5
 
 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Citing State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai 'i 405, 984 P.2d 1231 (1999), 
Kawaa argued that the DPA had engaged in egregious misconduct which barred retrial under the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Hawai
'i Constitution, Article I, Section 10. 
The State opposed the motion. The State asserted that
 
the DPA's error was unintentional and that the DPA meant to ask,
 "Is the person who was shooting depicted in this picture?" but
 instead, the question came out, "Is the person who shot you
 depicted in this picture?" While acknowledging that the DPA's
 question was improper, the State argued that the DPA's error was
 not so egregious that a retrial was barred by double jeopardy. 
At a hearing held on Kawaa's motion to dismiss, the
 
Circuit Court stated that after reviewing the motion, the State's
 response, and the case law, it did not believe the law supported
 Kawaa's position. The Circuit Court subsequently filed its
 written Order Denying Dismissal on June 25, 2014, and this appeal
 followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, Kawaa argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
denying his motion to dismiss the case with prejudice. Relying
 on Rogan, Kawaa contends that the DPA's misconduct was so
 egregious that his retrial was barred by double jeopardy
 principles. We disagree.
 
I.
 A.
 
In Rogan, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that 
"reprosecution of a defendant after a mistrial or reversal on appeal as a result of prosecutorial misconduct is barred where the prosecutorial misconduct is so egregious that, from an objective standpoint, it clearly denied a defendant his or her right to a fair trial." Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i at 423, 984 P.2d at 
1249. The supreme court "limited application of this rule, 
3/(...continued)
 
indicates that a discussion was held off the record after the Circuit Court
 
declared a mistrial and excused the jury, but that discussion was not
transcribed.
 
6
 
 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
however, to only the most 'exceptional circumstances' of 
egregious prosecutorial misconduct." State v. Pacheco, 96 
Hawai'i 83, 98, 26 P.3d 572, 587 (2001) (citing Rogan, 91 Hawai 'i 
at 423 n.11, 984 P.2d at 1249 n.11). 
The prosecutor in Rogan appealed to racial prejudice by 
asserting in his closing argument that it was "every mother's nightmare [to find] . . . some black, military guy on top of your daughter." Rogan 91 Hawai
'i at 412, 424, 984 P.2d at 1238, 1250. 
The supreme court noted that "arguments by the prosecution contrived to stimulate racial prejudice represent a brazen attempt to subvert a criminal defendant's right to trial by an impartial jury[.]" Id. at 414, 984 P.2d at 1240. It further 
concluded that the prosecutor's closing argument statement in Rogan was "a particularly egregious form of prosecutorial misconduct." Id. at 424, 984 P.2d at 1250. Because "racial 
fairness of the trial is an indispensable ingredient of due process and racial equality a hallmark of justice," the supreme court held that "the egregiousness of the deputy prosecutor's remark rose to such a level" that Rogan's reprosecution was barred by the double jeopardy clause of the Hawai
'i Constitution. 
Id. (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). 
B.
 
In Pacheco, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court, applying the 
double jeopardy rule it announced in Rogan, held that the prosecutor's misconduct did not rise to the level of egregiousness necessary to bar retrial. In Pacheco, the supreme court held that the prosecutor had engaged in two separate types of misconduct, each of which independently necessitated the overturning of Pacheco's convictions. First, the prosecutor engaged in harmful misconduct by repeatedly referring to Pacheco as an "asshole," which strongly conveyed the prosecutor's personal opinion to the jury in a manner calculated to inflame the jury. Pacheco, 96 Hawai
'i at 95, 26 P.3d at 584. Second, 
the prosecutor engaged in harmful misconduct by wilfully violating the trial court's in limine ruling by asserting that 
7
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 














 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 






 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the jury should not believe Pacheco because he was a convicted
 
thief, during the prosecutor's cross-examination of Pacheco and
 in the prosecutor's closing argument. Id. at 97-98, 26 P.3d at
 
586-87.
 
Although the supreme court concluded that the
 
prosecutor's misconduct required vacating Pacheco's second-degree
 escape conviction, it further concluded that such misconduct did
 not rise to the level of "the most exceptional circumstances of
 egregious prosecutorial misconduct" necessary to bar retrial
 under double jeopardy principles. Id. at 98, 26 P.3d at 587
 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). The supreme
 court held:
 
As deplorable as we regard the [prosecutor's] flagrant
defiance of the circuit court's in limine ruling and
personal and vulgar denigration of the defendant, we do not
believe that the [prosecutor's] misconduct rose to such a
level as to be comparable to the misconduct present in
Rogan, in which the prosecutor infected the defendant's
trial with an overt appeal to racial prejudice. Simply
said, the circumstances present here are not the sort of
"exceptional circumstances" that, under Rogan, preclude
reprosecution after a defendant's conviction has been
vacated on appeal due to prosecutorial misconduct.
Accordingly, reprosecution of Pacheco for the offense of
escape in the second degree is not barred by principles of
double jeopardy.
 
Id.
 
II.
 
Kawaa relies on the DPA's apparent violation of the
 
Circuit Court's in limine ruling to support his claim that the
 
DPA's misconduct was so egregious that Kawaa's retrial should be
 barred by double jeopardy.
4/ We certainly do not condone a
 
prosecutor's violation of a trial court's in limine ruling,
 regardless of whether it was an unintended mistake or not. 
However, as in Pacheco, "we do not believe that the
 [prosecutor's] misconduct rose to such a level as to be
 
4/ As noted, while the available record indicates that the Circuit Court
granted Kawaa's oral motion in limine to exclude evidence that Mitchell had
been shot by Kawaa, Kawaa did not make the transcript of the Circuit Court's
actual ruling and the discussion leading up to the ruling part of the record
on appeal. 
8
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 






 





 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
comparable to the misconduct present in Rogan," and we conclude 
that the "circumstances present here are not the sort of 'exceptional circumstances' that, under Rogan, preclude [retrial]. . . ." See Pacheco, 96 Hawai
'i at 98, 26 P.3d at 587; 
see also State v. Espiritu, 117 Hawai 'i 127, 144, 176 P.3d 885, 
902 (2008) (holding that the prosecutor's misstatement of the law during closing argument was not sufficiently egregious from an objective standpoint to bar retrial); State v. Shabazz, 98 Hawai
'i 358, 377, 382–83, 48 P.3d 605, 624, 629–30 (App. 2002) 
(holding that the prosecutor's references to race without a legitimate purpose was misconduct, but was not so egregious as to bar reprosecution).
5/ 
Kawaa also contends that the DPA engaged in other
 
misconduct, which the Circuit Court did not rely upon in
 declaring a mistrial, that supports barring his retrial. For
 example, Kawaa contends that because Mitchell only told the
 police that Kawaa "resembles" the person he saw holding or
 shooting the gun when Mitchell selected Kawaa's picture from the
 photographic lineup, the DPA engaged in misconduct by asking
 Mitchell at trial whether he had "recongize[d] anybody" when he
 was shown the photographic lineup.
6/ We disagree. Mitchell
 
informed the police that he could identify the person he saw
 shooting the gun if he saw that person again. He also told the
 police that Kawaa's photograph in the photographic lineup
 resembled the person he saw shooting the gun. Given these
 circumstances, we conclude that the DPA did not engage in
 misconduct in asking Mitchell at trial if he had recognized
 
5/ The only question asked by the DPA that violated the Circuit Court's
apparent in limine ruling was the question "Is the person who shot you
depicted in this picture?" While Mitchell may have provided answers to prior
questions asked by the DPA that violated the Circuit Court's in limine ruling,
the prior questions asked by the DPA do not indicate an attempt by the DPA to
elicit answers that would violate the in limine ruling.
 
6/ Mitchell, without objection, had previously identified Kawaa in court
as the person he saw shooting the gun. In response to the DPA's question
about whether Mitchell had recognized anybody in the photographic lineup,
Mitchell said "Yes" and then proceeded to identify Kawaa as the person he
recognized in the photographic lineup.
 
9
 
 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
anybody in the photographic lineup. Kawaa was free to explore
 any alleged inconsistency between Mitchell's pre-trial statements
 and his trial testimony during Kawaa's cross-examination of
 Mitchell. 
Kawaa's suggestion that the State brought the felon in
 
possession of a firearm and place to keep pistol or revolver
 charges against him in bad faith because it lacked sufficient
 evidence to charge him with more serious first-degree assault or
 attempted murder offenses is without merit. The evidence of the
 police investigation contained in the record shows that the State
 had sufficient evidence to prosecute Kawaa on the felon in
 possession and place to keep charges. The State's failure to
 pursue additional charges does not demonstrate that it acted in
 bad faith in pursuing the charges it chose to prosecute.
 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Order Denying 
Dismissal. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 28, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Walter R. Schoettle 
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
10
 