NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001178
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JM, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
YM, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 13-1-0236)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant YM (Mother) appeals from the
 
"Decree Granting Absolute Divorce and Awarding Child Custody,"
 
filed September 16, 2014, in the Family Court of the First
 Circuit (family court).
1 Related to this appeal, on February 24,
 
2015, the family court filed a "Supplemental Record on Appeal
 [Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law]" (FOFs/COLs).
 
Mother contends the family court erred when it ordered
 
that the two minor children of Mother and Plaintiff-Appellee JM
 (Father) shall relocate to Georgia and that Father shall have
 sole physical custody of children unless Mother also moves to
 Georgia within ninety days of a Decision and Order filed on
 August 14, 2014. Mother argues that the family court erred: (1)
 in numerous Findings of Fact (FOFs) and Conclusions of Law
 
1
 The Honorable Kevin A. Souza presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(COLs) 2
; and (2) in ultimately determining that relocation was in
the best interests of the children.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Mother's
 point of error as follows and affirm the family court.
I. Standard of Review
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
we will not disturb the family court's decisions on appeal
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of
reason.
 
Fisher v. Fisher , 111 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(citation and block format omitted).
 
The family court's FOFs are reviewed on appeal under
the clearly erroneous standard. A FOF is clearly erroneous
when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support
the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support
of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with
a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. 
Substantial evidence . . . is credible evidence which is of
 sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
reasonable caution to support a conclusion.
On the other hand, the family court's COLs are reviewed on
appeal de novo, under the right/wrong standard. COLs,
consequently, are not binding upon an appellate court and are
freely reviewable for their correctness. 
In re Doe, 95 Hawai 'i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001) (internal 
citations, quotation marks and brackets omitted).
II. Discussion
 
Mother contends that the family court erred when it
 
found that it was in the best interests of the children to
 
relocate to Georgia.
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-46 (Supp. 2012)
 
provides the criteria for awarding child custody. HRS § 571-46
 
2 Mother challenges FOFs: 22-48, 56-63, 81-82, 84, 86-88, 93-94, 96-99,
and 104. Mother challenges COLs: 8-9, 12-14, 20-21. Many of the FOFs and COLs
address similar matters and thus we address them generally as appropriate
groups.
 
2
  
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
provides in pertinent part:
 
§ 571-46 Criteria and procedure in awarding custody and
visitation; best interest of child.
(a)In actions for divorce . . . where there is at issue a
dispute as to the custody of a minor child . . . . the court
shall be guided by the following standards, considerations,
and procedures:
(1) Custody should be awarded to either parent or to
both parents according to the best interests of
the child . . . ;
 . . . . 
(4) Whenever good cause appears therefor, the court
may require an investigation and report concerning
the care, welfare, and custody of any minor child
of the parties. . . .
. . . .
 
(9) In every proceeding where there is at issue a
dispute as to the custody of a child, a
determination by the court that family violence
has been committed by a parent raises a
rebuttable presumption that it is detrimental to
the child and not in the best interest of the 
child to be placed in sole custody, joint legal
custody, or joint physical custody with the
perpetrator of family violence.
 
The "best interests of the child standard [is]
 
paramount when considering the issue of custody" and "the family
 
court is granted broad discretion to weigh the various factors
 involved, with no single factor being given presumptive paramount
 weight, in determining whether the standard has been met." 
Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i at 50, 137 P.3d at 364. 
A. Reliance on the custody evaluator's report.
 
Mother contends that numerous FOFs were erroneous
 
because the family court relied too heavily on the Custody
 Evaluator's Report (CE's Report). Mother cites in particular to
 FOFs 22-23 and 25-30, which rely on the CE's Report and the CE's
 testimony. Mother also challenges FOF 88 asserting that the
 family court relied too heavily on the CE's Report to make a
 finding about Father's parenting skills. Further, Mother
 challenges FOF 94 asserting that the family court incorrectly
 relied on the CE's Report in determining Mother would face
 financial pressure because she would have to work relatively low
 paying jobs while attending school full time.
 
"[T]he family court is given much leeway in its
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
examination of the reports concerning a child's care, custody, 
and welfare, and its conclusions in this regard, if supported by the record and not clearly erroneous, must stand on appeal." In 
re Doe, 95 Hawai
'i at 190, 20 P.3d at 623 (citation, internal 
quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
In this case, there is substantial evidence for the
 
family court to rely on the CE's Report for its FOFs. In
 preparing her report, the CE interviewed and/or met with Father,
 Mother, both minor children, paternal grandparents, maternal
 grandparents, a mentor to Mother, and school officials at the
 children's schools. The CE also reviewed documents including
 emails, criminal history records, medical records, and the
 children's school records. At trial, the family court heard
 testimony from Mother, Father, the CE, paternal grandparents,
 maternal grandparents, Dr. Phillip Stahl (Dr. Stahl), and Raylani
 Lupton (Lupton), a visitation supervisor hired by Father. 
Substantial evidence supports the family court's
 
finding that Father is capable of providing competent and
 effective parenting. The CE testified that Father is "a very
 engaged father" and that "he has very good parenting skills." 
The CE also testified that the children "are very engaged with
 him when they're together" and Father is "very affectionate; he
 watches out for their safety; he communicates with them." In
 addition, when Lupton was asked how she would describe Father's
 sensitivity to the needs of his children, Lupton responded: "I
 believe he was very sensitive to them. You know, each day was
 something different for him. And I think he was pretty quick to
 catch on to how the girls were feeling and -- and what they
 needed." The children's paternal grandfather testified that
 Father "was definitely being a good father."
 
Finally, the family court's finding that Mother would 
experience financial pressure as a single parent if she remained in Hawai
'i is supported by substantial evidence. Mother 
testified that she works part time and makes $464.50 per month. Mother also receives $169.38 in child support and $605 in 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
foodstamps. She also testified that she planned to go to school 
full time. Finally, Mother testified that her rent was $1300 per month. Although there is some evidence that Mother might receive further financial assistance from maternal grandparents, the extent of such assistance is unclear. The evidence provides substantial evidence to support the family court's finding that Mother would experience financial pressure if she remained in Hawai
'i as a single parent.
B. Dr. Stahl's Testimony.
 
Mother challenges the family court's FOFs regarding Dr.
 
Stahl's testimony. Mother hired Dr. Stahl to give his opinion of
 the CE's Report. 
"It is well-settled that an appellate court will not 
pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Fisher, 111 Hawai
'i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360 (citation and 
quotation marks omitted). 
The family court determined that less weight would be
 
afforded to Dr. Stahl's testimony than the CE's testimony
 because, unlike the CE, Dr. Stahl never interviewed the parties
 or their children or saw the children's interactions with the
 parents. Thus, Dr. Stahl was less familiar with the parties
 themselves and his scope was "a limited universe of documentation
 concerning the case." Therefore, it is not clearly erroneous for
 the family court to give less weight to Dr. Stahl's testimony.
C. The family's connection with Georgia.
 
Mother challenges the family court's findings regarding 
the children's connection to Georgia because Mother contends that the evidence shows that the children also have significant ties to Hawai
'i. 
The family court found that the children have 
significant ties to Georgia because, inter alia, the children were born and resided in Georgia until the family moved to Hawai
'i in 2012, they have family in Georgia, one of the children 
went to school there, the children had a physician and dentist 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
there, and Father owns a home in Tyrone, Georgia. Father,
 
paternal grandparents, Mother, and the CE testified to the
 findings above. Therefore, there was substantial evidence to
 support the family court's FOFs 31-48.
D. Inherent risks of raising the children in Hawai
'i. 
In FOF 93, the family court found that "there are 
inherent risks associated with Mother raising the minor children as a single parent in Hawai
'i with relatively few resources at 
her disposal." Mother contends that "there is no expert or other testimony or evidence to support a finding of any such 'inherent risks' or what their impact may be." 
However, the evidence indicates that Mother's parents,
 
who provide emotional support to Mother, live in Mexico. In
 addition, Mother can only work part-time while in school, Mother
 plans on attending school full time, and Mother partially relies
 on student loans. Mother will have to obtain day care for the
 children while she is in school or working. Mother's employment
 history has consisted of minimum wage jobs. Maternal
 grandparents have loaned Mother significant amounts of money,
 approximately $150,000. Maternal grandmother also testified that
 at the time maternal grandparents spoke with the CE they stated
 they could provide $1,000 per month of support for Mother,
 however, maternal grandparents had not actually provided this
 support at the time of trial.
 
Therefore, substantial evidence supports the family 
court's FOF that there are inherent risks associated with Mother raising the minor children as a single parent in Hawai
'i. 
E. Physical custody. 
Mother contends that relocation is not in the best
 
interests of the children because relocation contradicts prior
 decisions granting physical custody to Mother. In addition,
 Mother contends that because she was the primary care giver, she
 should have physical custody of the children.
 
On February 22, 2013, the family court awarded
 
temporary sole physical and legal custody of both minor children
 to Mother "pending a hearing on [Mother's] Motion and Declaration
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
for Pre-Decree Relief, filed concurrently herewith, and set for
 
March 20, 2013[.]"3 On May 8, 2013, the family court entered an
 
order that found, inter alia: "on March 20, 2013, the parties
 reached an oral agreement regarding Defendant's Motion and
 Affidavit for Pre-Decree Relief, filed February 22, 2013. The
 oral agreement consisted of the following terms: 1) The parties
 shall share legal and physical of their children . . . ."
4 Thus,
 
prior to the final divorce decree, Mother and Father shared joint
 legal and physical custody.
 
The Divorce Decree does not contradict the pre-decree
 
order. The Divorce Decree grants joint physical custody to
 Mother and Father so long as Mother relocates to Georgia. Thus,
 the family court continued to recognize that joint physical
 custody is in the best interests of the children.
 
The family court never determined that Mother was the
 
primary care giver. FOF 23(e) and (f), based on the testimony of
 the CE, states that "Father is an engaged Father with good
 parenting skills" and "Mother is also a good parent[.]" Based on
 the CE's Report, FOF 22(d) found that "Father appears to have a
 strong relationship with both minor children." The CE's Report
 also stated that "[b]oth parents appear to be equally involved in
 the children's lives."
 
Thus, the family court had to make a determination of
 
how to split custody between what it determined to be two equally
 competent parents. The family court found that Georgia offered a
 better quality of life and would provide stability for the minor
 children. In addition, the children would be returning to a
 familiar place and would have the support of paternal
 grandparents in Georgia. Thus, because relocation was in the
 best interests of the children, joint physical custody was only
 possible if Mother also moved to Georgia.
 
3
 The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided.
 
4
 The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio entered this order. 
7
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mother also contends that she is entitled prima facie
 
to an award of custody because she has had de facto custody of
 
the children.5 In this case, there was no determination that
 
Mother had de facto custody and Mother did not argue below that
 she had de facto custody.
 
Therefore, substantial evidence supports the family
 
court's determinations and the family court did not abuse its
 discretion regarding the physical custody award.
F. Alleged abuse.
 
Mother contends that relocation to Georgia is not in
 
the best interests of the children because Father has a history
 of abuse towards Mother and one incident of abuse towards one of
 the children.
 
In this case, both Father and Mother have a history of
 
alleged family violence directed at each other. Mother also
 testified to one incident of alleged family violence by Father
 that was directed at one of their children. 
Mother does not contend under HRS § 571(a)(9) that
 
there should have been a rebuttable presumption that it would be
 detrimental for the children to be placed in Father's custody due
 to his alleged abuse. Indeed, as noted, there is evidence of
 alleged physical altercations by both Father and Mother. Rather,
 Mother contends under HRS § 571-46(b) that the family court erred
 in its determination that it was in the best interests of the
 children to relocate with Father.
 
HRS § 571-46(b) provides a non-exhaustive list of
 
factors for the court to consider when determining the best
 interests of the child. The issue of family violence was
 presented in testimony by both Mother and Father and also 
5
 HRS § 571-46(2) provides:
 
Custody may be awarded to persons other than the father or
mother whenever the award serves the best interest of the
 child. Any person who has had de facto custody of the child
in a stable and wholesome home and is fit and proper person
shall be entitled prima facie to an award of custody. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
considered by the CE. For example, one stated focus of the CE's
 
Report was to evaluate alleged child abuse by Father. The CE's
 Report stated that "[o]bservations and collaterals did not
 indicate any concerns about the children in Father's care." The
 CE's Report also noted that Mother "describes Father as a 'fun
 dad' and that before he would ask the girls to be quiet and lose
 patience, but now he is doing more things with them and they have
 a good time with him." In addition, as noted above, substantial
 evidence supports the family court's finding that Father is
 capable of providing competent and effective parenting. 
Therefore, given all of the evidence presented in this
 
case and because it was the province of the family court to weigh
 the evidence presented, the family court did not abuse its
 discretion when it determined it was in the best interests of the
 children to relocate to Georgia.
G. Georgia as the family's permanent home.
 
Mother contends that the family court erred when it 
found that Georgia was the family's permanent home as a basis for determining it was in the best interests of the children to relocate to Georgia. Mother also challenges the family court's findings that travel to Hawai
'i was a temporary move. 
Mother and Father dispute whether the move to Hawai 'i 
was meant to be a temporary move, however, neither party disputes that Georgia was their permanent home before moving to Hawai
'i. 
Father testified that the family moved to Hawai 'i after 
he accepted a temporary job and the move was meant to be an extended honeymoon because he and Mother never went on a honeymoon after they were married. Father also testified that because the move was always meant to be temporary, he declined to accept several offers of permanent job positions located in Hawai
'i. Finally, Father testified that during a visit to 
Georgia with the children, it felt like the children were at home. 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
By contrast, Mother testified that when she and Father 
were discussing the move to Hawai 'i, they discussed it in terms 
of the fact that the move would be permanent. 
Thus, the family court weighed the evidence presented 
and assessed the credibility of both Mother and Father's 
testimony and made a determination that Georgia was the family's permanent home and the move to Hawai
'i was temporary. This court 
will not disturb the family court's finding because it is not clearly erroneous.
III. Conclusion
 
Given all of the evidence presented in this case, the
 
family court did not abuse its discretion in determining that it
 
was in the best interests of the children to relocate to Georgia.
 
We therefore affirm the "Decree Granting Absolute
 
Divorce and Awarding Child Custody," filed September 16, 2014, in
 the Family Court of the First Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 25, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Rebecca A. Copeland,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Steven J. Kim,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
10
 