NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0001077
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
LAULANI TEALE, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(Honolulu Division)

(CASE NO. 1P1120005320)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawaii (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Laulani Teale (Teale) with disorderly conduct
 
as a petty misdemeanor, for persisting in disorderly conduct
 after reasonable warning or request to desist, in violation of
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 711-1101(1)(a) and (3) (2014).
1
  '
1HRS § 711-1101 provides, in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct if,
with intent to cause physical inconvenience or alarm by a member
or members of the public, or recklessly creating a risk thereof,
the person:
 
(a)	 Engages in fighting or threatening, or in violent or
tumultuous behavior[.]
 
. . . . 
(3) Disorderly conduct is a petty misdemeanor . . . if the
defendant persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable warning
or request to desist. Otherwise disorderly conduct is a
violation. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After a bench trial, the District Court of the First Circuit
 
2
(District Court)  found Teale guilty as charged.  The District
 
Court sentenced Teale to six months of probation and ordered her
 
to perform seventy-five hours of community service and to pay
 $105 in fees and assessments. The District Court entered its
 Judgment on November 15, 2012. 
On appeal, Teale contends that: (1) there was

 
insufficient evidence to support her conviction; (2) the District
 Court erred in finding the State's witnesses credible; (3) her
 conduct was protected by the First Amendment; (4) her right to
 due process was violated; and (5) the District Court erred in not
 allowing Teale to present video-recorded evidence relating to her
 state of mind and to assert other defenses. We affirm.
 
I.
 
The charge against Teale stemmed from an incident that
 
occurred during the 2012 May Day festivities, an annual event
 held at the Kapiolani Park Bandstand. Teale had gone to the
 event to protest what she claimed was the illegal confiscation by
 government officials of a banner, the painting of which she had
 facilitated, as well as other property and to discuss the matter
 with Honolulu Mayor Peter Carlisle, who would be in attendance. 
Police officers had been assigned to protect the Mayor after
 receiving information that Teale and members of her group planned
 approach him at the May Day event. 
The State presented the following evidence at trial. 
Over a thousand people were in the area of the Kapiolani Park
 Bandstand to watch the May Day program, which included
 performances by children and adults. Teale and members of her
 group walked slowly in front of the stage more than once. Their
 actions interrupted and delayed the progress of the program. 
During a speech given by the Mayor, Teale blew a conch
 
shell several times. After his speech, the Mayor went to sit on 
2The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a bench in the front row facing the stage. Teale attempted to
 
approach the Mayor multiple times, and on each occasion her
 approach was blocked by police officers. The officers testified
 that Teale was carrying a conch shell, which could potentially be
 used as weapon. This caused the officers some concern as they
 were unsure of Teale's intentions. The officers repeatedly
 informed Teale that the May Day event was not the proper time or
 place to confront the Mayor and urged her to find an alternative
 time to discuss her issues with the Mayor. Teale, however,
 argued with the officers and insisted that she be allowed to talk
 to the Mayor. 
Teale's interactions with the officers in the midst of
 
the audience created a disturbance. A person from the audience
 talked to Teale in an apparent attempt to dissuade Teale from
 persisting in her actions. Another person from the audience
 said, "Go away." Teale attempted to evade the officers and take
 a different path toward the Mayor. When Teale was again
 intercepted by the police, she sat down and refused the officers'
 request that she leave the area. Teale's actions "affronted many
 people," and several people told the officers to remove Teale. 
Someone from the audience said, "Shame on you." Eventually, the
 officers lifted Teale from the ground and carried her from the
 scene. Members of the audience expressed approval of the
 police's action by clapping and saying, "Get her out of here,"
 "Good," and "Go home. Go home."
 
A member of Teale's group made video recordings
 
(consisting of three files) of the group's activities that day,
 which Teale produced to the State in discovery. At trial, the
 State introduced one of the video recordings (file 3). The video
 recording admitted in evidence, excerpts of which were played at
 trial, showed events shortly before and after Teale's arrest,
 including interactions between Teale and police officers that
 preceded her arrest.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
We resolve the arguments raised by Teale on appeal as
 
follows:
 
1. Teale argues that there was insufficient evidence
 
to support her conviction because the State failed to prove: (1)
 
that she acted "with intent to cause physical inconvenience or
 alarm by a member or members of the public, or recklessly
 creating a risk thereof;" and (2) that she engaged in "fighting
 or threatening, or in violent or tumultuous behavior[.]" See HRS
 
§ 711-1101(1)(a). We disagree.
 
When viewed in the light most favorable to the State, 
see State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 
(1998), there was sufficient evidence to support Teale's conviction. The evidence showed that Teale's actions caused a disruption in the midst of the May Day program and interfered with the audience's enjoyment of the program, causing members of the audience to voice their disapproval and tell the police to remove her. We conclude that the State presented sufficient evidence to show that Teale recklessly created a risk that her conduct would cause physical inconvenience or alarm by a member or members of the public. 
We also conclude that the State presented sufficient
 
evidence to show that Teale engaged in "tumultuous behavior." 
The term "tumultuous" is defined to mean (1) "full of tumult or
 riotousness; marked by disturbance and uproar"; (2) "raising a
 great clatter and commotion; disorderly or noisy"; (3) "highly
 agitated, as the mind or emotions; distraught; turbulent." 
Dictionary.com, http://www.dictionary.com/browse/tumltuous
 (defining "tumultuous) (last accessed June 28, 2016). The term
 "disorderly," in turn, is defined to mean (1) "characterized by
 disorder; irregular; untidy; confused"; (2) "unruly; turbulent;
 tumultuous"; (3) "contrary to public order or morality." 
Dictionary.com, http://www.dictionary.com/browse/disorderly
 (defining "disorderly") (last accessed June 28, 2016). 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The context of Teale's actions was a confrontation with
 
the police in the midst of a well-attended May Day program, near
 
the front of the stage area, which affected the enjoyment of the
 program by, and interfered with the view of, members of the
 audience. Viewed in this context, we conclude that the State
 presented substantial evidence to show that Teale engaged in
 "tumultuous behavior" within the meaning of HRS § 711-1101(1)(a). 
Among other things, the State presented evidence that during the
 program, Teale repeatedly attempted to approach the Mayor despite
 being told by the police that she could not meet with him at that
 time; argued with the police and insisted on meeting with the
 Mayor; attempted to evade the police and continue toward the
 Mayor; persistently refused to comply with police warnings and
 requests; and disturbed members of the audience watching the
 program. 
2. In support of her claim that there was
 
insufficient evidence to support her conviction, Teale argues
 that the District Court erred finding the State's witnesses
 credible. However, it is well settled that:
 
Matters related to the credibility of witnesses and the
weight to be given to the evidence are generally left to the
factfinder. The appellate court will neither reconcile
conflicting evidence nor interfere with the decision of the
trier of fact based on the witnesses' credibility or the
weight of the evidence.
 
State v. Mitchell, 94 Hawai 'i 388, 393, 15 P.3d 314, 319 (App. 
2000) (citation omitted). We decline to overturn the District 
Court's credibility determinations. 
3. Teale provides no basis to believe that the actions
 
of the police infringed upon her rights protected by the First
 Amendment. The actions taken by the police were in response to
 Teale engaging in disruptive behavior and were not related to or
 affected by the content of any speech by Teale or her exercise of
 First Amendment rights. 
5

  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
4. We reject Teale's claim that her due process
 
rights were violated. The State provided Teale with due process
 
by permitting her to defend against her prosecution for
 disorderly conduct at a trial.
 
5. Teale argues that the District Court erred in not
 
allowing Teale to present video-recorded evidence relating to her
 state of mind and to assert other defenses. We conclude that
 Teale is not entitled to relief on these claims. 
In addition to the video recording of events in close
 
proximity to her arrest that was admitted in evidence, Teale
 sought to introduce video recordings of events that took place
 earlier that day. Teale argues that these proffered recordings,
 which the District Court did not allow her to introduce, were
 relevant to show that she "began the day by meeting with others
 and telling them to be [respectful],
[3] and that she did not
 
possess a criminal state of mind[.]" However, the probative
 value of evidence related to Teale's state of mind earlier that
 day is questionable and only marginal at best. The relevant
 question was Teale's state of mind at the time she allegedly
 committed the offense, not her state of mind earlier that day. 
In addition, Teale was permitted to present her own testimony as
 well as the testimony of other witnesses regarding her state of
 mind, and the proffered video recordings were therefore
 cumulative of evidence admitted at trial. We conclude that the
 District Court did not abuse its discretion in not permitting
 Teale to introduce the proffered video recordings at trial, and,
 even assuming arguendo that the District Court did err, such
 error was harmless.
4
 
3The quoted portion of Teale's brief uses the word "disrespectful," but
this appears to be a mistake.
 
4We note that the State was not required to prove Teale's actual intent
"to cause physical inconvenience or alarm by a member or members of the
public," but that it was sufficient for the State to prove that she
"recklessly creat[ed] a risk thereof[.]" See HRS § 711-1101(1)(a); State v.
Jendrusch, 58 Haw. 279, 281-82, 567 P.2d 1242, 1244 (1977). 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Teale argues that the District Court erred in not
 
allowing her to present purported defenses based on international
 
law and K anawai Mamalahoe, The Law of the Splintered Paddle.5
 
Teale, however, does not explain how or why these cited
 
matters served to provide her with a defense to her disorderly
 conduct prosecution. She therefore has not demonstrated her
 entitlement to relief based on these arguments.
 
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the District Court's
 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 30, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Walter J. Rodby
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
5
Article IX, Section 10 of the Hawai' i Constitution provides: 
The law of the splintered paddle, mamala-hoe kanawai,
decreed by Kamehameha I--Let every elderly person, woman and child
lie by the roadside in safety--shall be a unique and living symbol
of the State's concern for public safety.
 
The State shall have the power to provide for the safety of
the people from crimes against persons and property.
 
7
 