 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0001050
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
THE ESTATE OF CHESTER V. SCUPHOLM,
aka CHESTER VERNON SCUPHOLM, Deceased.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(P. NO. 08-1-0053 GWBC)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
In this contested probate matter, the Circuit Court of
 
1
the First Circuit (Circuit Court),  after a jury-waived trial,
found that the January 22, 2007, Last Will and Testament of
 
Chester V. Scupholm (Will) was valid and unrevoked. The Circuit
 Court also appointed Interested Party-Appellee Karen L. Meredith
 (Meredith), in her capacity as the personal representative of the
 Estate of Ruth Scupholm, to be the personal representative of the
 Estate of Chester V. Scupholm. At the time of his death, Chester
 V. Scupholm (Chester) was married to Ruth C. Scupholm (Ruth);
 Ruth died approximately a year after Chester. 
Party-In-Interest/Appellant Kathleen M.S. Mikatich

 
(Mikatich) appeals from the Circuit Court's Final Judgment, which 
1The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was entered on October 30, 2012, pursuant to the Circuit Court's
 
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law and Order. On appeal,
 
Mikatich argues that the Circuit Court erred in finding that the
 
Will was valid and unrevoked and in appointing Meredith as the
 personal representative of Chester's estate. In particular,
 Mikatich contends that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) crediting
 the testimony of the military lawyer who prepared the Will and
 failing to take judicial notice of federal law imposing
 restrictions on clients the lawyer could serve, which Mikatich
 claims would have served to impeach the lawyer's testimony; (2)
 finding that the Will was valid; (3) failing to apply the
 doctrines of judicial admission and judicial estoppel against
 Meredith; and (4) appointing Meredith, in her capacity as
 personal representative of Ruth's estate, to be the personal
 representative of Chester's estate. We affirm.
 
I.
 
Chester and Ruth were married in 1969. Mikatich and 
Dianne M.S. Frazier (Frazier) are Chester's daughters from a
 prior marriage. Chester had apparently become estranged from
 Meredith and Frazier and, at the time of his death, had not seen
 them for approximately forty years. Chester and Ruth did not
 have any children together. Meredith and Jeffrey Moreira
 (Moreira) are, respectively, Ruth's niece and nephew. Chester
 died on April 21, 2007, and Ruth died on March 14, 2008. Barbara
 J. Rapisora (Rapisora) met Ruth and Chester in April or May of
 2005 and served as their housekeeper and caregiver until their
 deaths.
 
On January 22, 2007, Chester signed the Will which
 
expressly disinherited Mikatich and Frazier as well as Meredith
 and Moreira, named Rapisora as the sole beneficiary of his
 estate, and appointed Rapisora to be his personal representative. 
The Will cited the lack of a relationship between Chester and his
 daughters for a period of forty years as the reason for his
 disinheriting them. The Will was drafted by Navy Staff Judge
 Advocate Lieutenant Erin Baxter (Baxter). Extensive litigation
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ensued after Chester's death, including two appeals decided by 
this court. See Meredith v. Rapisora, No. 29148, 2012 WL 1951329 
(Hawai 'i App. May 31, 2012) (SDO), cert. denied, No. SCWC-29148, 
2012 WL 5186657 (Oct. 18, 2012); In re Conservatorship and Guardianship of Ruth C. Scupholm, No. 30201, 2013 WL 3156097 (Hawai
'i App. June 21, 2013) (SDO). 
In this case, Mikatich challenged the validity of the
 
Will and petitioned for adjudication that Chester died intestate. 
Meredith opposed Mikatich's challenge to the Will, and Mikatich
 and Meredith filed competing petitions to be appointed personal
 representative of Chester's estate. The probate court assigned
 the determination of the validity of the Will and the appointment
 of a personal representative to the Circuit Court, which held a
 jury-waived trial.
 
After the trial, the Circuit Court ruled that the Will
 
was valid and unrevoked, and it appointed Meredith, in her
 capacity as personal representative of Ruth's estate, as the
 personal representative of Chester's estate. The Circuit Court
 found and concluded that:
 
The credible evidence proves that Chester possessed
the requisite testamentary capacity before and during the
time he executed his Will. Chester was of sound mind and
 had the requisite testamentary capacity to articulate a
clear and specific plan for the disposition of his assets.
Chester was fully aware of the contents of his Will, and had
the requisite testamentary capacity at the time he executed
it.
 
The Circuit Court also specifically rejected Mikatich's
 
claim that the Will was the product of undue influence,
 
explaining that:
 
where the evidence shows that Chester did not have a
 
meaningful relationship for over 40 years with his two
children from his first marriage, had little to no contact
(either in person or over the telephone) with his children,
was not prevented from contacting or otherwise meaningfully
communicating with them during his lifetime, was not
dominated and controlled by Rapisora at the time he executed
his will, and that Rapisora was kind and caring toward
Chester and Ruth, Chester's desire to leave his estate to
Rapisora was clearly understandable and not the result of
undue influence.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In rendering its decision, the Circuit Court relied on
 
the deposition testimony of Baxter, who prepared the Will, and
 
Dr. Christopher Brace (Dr. Brace), a physician who treated both
 Ruth and Chester before Chester's death. Baxter testified that
 in preparing Chester's Will, she took steps to ensure that he had
 the mental capacity and competency to proceed with the formation
 and execution of a will; that based on her interactions with
 Chester, she determined that Chester had the requisite
 testamentary capacity to articulate and execute an estate plan;
 that Chester explained his reasons for disinheriting his
 daughters and wanting to leave his assets to Rapisora; that
 Baxter discussed with Chester his desires regarding his will
 without Rapisora being present; that Chester understood and
 intended the results effected under his Will; and that Chester
 signed the Will in the presence of two witnesses, Dora Seu and
 Hazel Fantz, who signed acknowledgments verifying that they had
 witnessed Chester sign the Will. 
Dr. Brace testified that he was a board certified
 
geriatric specialist; that he had been treating both Chester and
 Ruth as patients since 2005; that he had interacted with and
 observed Chester while treating Chester and also when Chester
 accompanied Ruth, who had Alzheimer's disease, during her visits;
 that in January 2007, Chester asked Dr. Brace to prepare a letter
 that specifically addressed Chester's ability to make decisions;
 that based on his medical expertise and opinion, Dr. Brace
 prepared a letter dated January 15, 2007, which stated that
 Chester was "competent to made decisions, medically or otherwise. 
He is able to make decisions, for his wife, Ruth Scupholm, who
 lacks competency"; and that Dr. Brace did not have any concerns
 about Chester's mental capacity, Chester's ability to make
 medical, legal, or financial decisions, or to take care of his
 finances and logistical issues.
 
The Circuit Court also found that Meredith was 
qualified and ready, willing, and able to serve as the personal
 representative of Chester's estate. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
We resolve the issues raised by Mikatich on appeal as
 
follows:
 
1. Mikatich contends that because Chester had not
 
retired from the military, he did not qualify for Baxter's
 
services pursuant to a federal statute, 10 U.S.C. ยง 1044, that
 authorizes Navy Staff Judge Advocates to provide legal services
 only to certain military members. Mikatich then contends that
 the Circuit Court erred in failing to take judicial notice of
 this statute because the statute would help her impeach Baxter
 and show that Baxter's testimony was not credible. Mikatich's
 contentions are without merit.
 
The Circuit Court was aware of Mikatich's claim that
 
Baxter was not authorized to provide legal services to Chester. 
The Circuit Court was not required to take judicial notice of the
 statute in order for Mikatich to use the statute to impeach
 Baxter. Moreover, whether Baxter was authorized to provide
 services to Chester had no bearing on whether Chester was
 competent to execute the Will and whether the Will was valid. 
The validity of the Will and Chester's competency were not
 affected by whether Baxter was authorized to provide services to
 Chester. In addition, whether Baxter was authorized under the
 statute to provide services to Chester did not turn on whether
 the Will was valid or Chester was competent. Thus, the issue
 regarding Baxter's authority to provide legal services was
 irrelevant and inconsequential to her testimony regarding the
 validity of the Will and Chester's testamentary capacity.
 
2. We reject Mikatich's claim that the Circuit Court
 
erred in finding that the Will was valid. The Circuit Court's
 findings were supported by substantial evidence and were not
 clearly erroneous. Contrary to Mikatich's claim, the evidence
 shows that the Will satisfied the requirements of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) ยง 560:2-502(a) (2006). Mikatich's arguments are
 based on her version of the facts. But, the Circuit Court did
 not accept Mikatich's version and instead relied on the testimony
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Baxter and Dr. Brace in determining that the Will was valid. 
It was within the province of the Circuit Court, as the trier of fact, to evaluate and weigh the evidence. See In re Estate of 
Herbert, 90 Hawai
'i 443, 454, 979 P.2d 39, 50 (1999). In 
addition, as previously noted, whether Baxter was authorized to provide legal services to Chester had no effect on the validity of the Will. 
3. Mikatich contends that the Circuit Court erred in
 
failing to invalidate the Will by applying the doctrines of
 judicial admission and judicial estoppel to pleadings submitted
 by Meredith in her lawsuit against Rapisora. We disagree. 
The allegations made by Meredith in the Rapisora 
lawsuit were not statements of fact within her knowledge, but are more correctly described as legal positions. The Rapisora lawsuit was settled and therefore Meredith did not succeed in persuading the trial court to accept or act upon Meredith's allegations. Moreover, aside from Meredith and Mikatich, the Circuit Court was required to consider Chester's interest and intent in determining the validity of the Will. Under these circumstances, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in not applying the doctrines of judicial admission and judicial estoppel against Meredith. See Lee v. 
Puamana Cmty. Ass'n, 109 Hawai
'i 561, 574, 576, 128 P.3d 874, 
887, 889 (2006); Langer v. Rice, No. 29636, 2013 WL 5788676, at *4 (Hawai
'i App. Oct. 28, 2013) (mem.) (concluding that a trial 
court has discretion on whether to invoke the doctrine of judicial estoppel). 
4. Mikatich argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
appointing Meredith, in her capacity as personal representative
 of Ruth's estate, rather than Mikatich, to be the personal
 representative of Chester's estate. We disagree.
 
Mikatich was expressly disinherited by Chester's Will,
 
which the Circuit Court found was a valid will, a finding we have
 affirmed. Ruth was Chester's surviving spouse and Meredith was
 the personal representative of Ruth's estate. Under the
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circumstances of this case, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 
did not err in appointing Meredith, in her capacity as the
 personal representative of Ruth's estate, to serve as the
 personal representative of Chester's estate.
 
III.

 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit
 
Court's Final Judgment.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, October 29, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Gary Y. Shigemura
Randall N. Harakal
 Joyce M. Brown (Law Offices of Gary Y. Shigemura)
Stuart M. Cowan
 for Party-in-Interest/Appellant
KATHLEEN M.S. MIKATICH, aka KATHLEEN SCUPHOLM MIKATICH
 Chief Judge

Associate Judge
Lyle S. Hosoda
Kevin T. Morikone Raina P.B. Gushiken
 Addison D. Bonner
 for Interested Party-Appellee
KAREN L. MEREDITH, Individually
 Associate Judge

Mitzi A. Lee
 for Interested Party-Appellee
KAREN L. MEREDITH, as Personal
Representative of the Estate of
RUTH SCUPHOLM
 
7

 