NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000715
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
NEDRIC ROBINSON KAPIKA, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 86-142; S.P.P. NO. 07-1-0002)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Nedric Robinson Kapika (Kapika) 
appeals from the Order Denying Petitioner's Hawai 'i Rules of 
Penal Procedure Rule 40 Petition for Post Conviction Relief Filed 
July 3, 2007, which was entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court) on July 11, 2012 (Order Denying Post-
Conviction Relief).
1 
On September 10, 1986, in Criminal No. 86-142, after a
 
jury trial, Kapika was convicted of and sentenced for two counts
 
of Rape in the First Degree to two twenty-year terms of
 imprisonment, for one count of Sodomy in the First Degree to a
 twenty-year term of imprisonment, and for one count of Kidnapping
 to a ten-year term of imprisonment. On October 2, 1986, the
 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
State of Hawai 'i (State) filed a motion seeking to impose 
consecutive and extended sentences. After a December 1, 1986 
hearing on the State's motion, on December 17, 1986, the trial court entered its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Partially Granting State's Motion for Extended Term and Consecutive Sentencing (Sentencing Order). In the Sentencing 
Order, the trial court denied the State's request for extended 
terms, but granted the State's request for Kapika's sentences all to be served consecutively. 
On July 3, 2007, Kapika filed pro se a petition for
 
post-conviction relief. Counsel was appointed and a hearing was
 held on Kapika's petition. Thereafter, the Order Denying Post-
Conviction Relief was entered and an appeal was timely filed.
 
On appeal, Kapika raises a single point of error, 
arguing that the Circuit Court erred in denying his petition for post-conviction relief because the imposition of consecutive sentences totaling seventy years constituted cruel and unusual punishment in violation of both the U.S. and Hawai
'i 
Constitutions. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced, applicable authorities, and the issues
 raised by the parties, we resolve Kapika's arguments on appeal as
 follows:
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held: 
The standard by which punishment is to be judged under
the 'cruel and unusual' punishment provisions of both the
United States and Hawaii Constitutions is whether in light
of developing concepts of decency and fairness, the
prescribed punishment is so disproportionate to the conduct
proscribed and is of such duration as to shock the
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
conscience of reasonable persons or to outrage the moral
sense of the community.
 
State v. Kumukau, 71 Haw. 218, 226-27, 787 P.2d 682, 687 (1990) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted); see also, generally, State v. Kong, 131 Hawai
'i 94, 315 P.3d 720 (2013) 
(discussing consecutive sentences). 
We reject Kapika's arguments that, for example, because
 
no weapons were used in conjunction with his multiple felonies
 and/or because his youthful victim smoked marijuana and drank
 beer at his house before he raped and sodomized her, his sentence
 is so disproportionate as to shock the conscience of reasonable
 persons or to outrage the moral sense of the community, in light
 of developing concepts of decency and fairness. We also reject
 Kapika's argument that his sentence is comparable to the sentence
 found to be excessive in Kumukau. Kumukau's eight life sentences
 plus 200 years were not found to be excessive; rather, the
 consecutive mandatory minimum sentences totaling 136 years prior
 to eligibility for parole were determined to be excessive. 
Kumukau, 71 Haw. at 226, 228, 787 P.3d at 687, 688. The trial
 court did not set any mandatory minimum terms for Kapika and
 there is no information in the record or argument made concerning
 when he might be eligible for parole. In light of Kapika's
 history of prior convictions, the age of the victim, and the
 nature and circumstances of the multiple felonies, the trial
 court's exercise of its discretion to run Kapika's terms
 consecutively, while denying the State's request for extended
 terms, was not a plain and manifest abuse of its discretion.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's July 11, 2012
 
Order Denying Post-Conviction Relief is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 19, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Venetia K. Carpenter-Asui
for Petitioner-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Shannon M. KagawaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Respondent-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 