  
        
  
       
           
         
          
     NOT  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST'S  HAWAI I  REPORTS  AND  P ACIFIC  REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000007 05-MAR-2026 08:07 AM Dkt. 45 SO 
NO.  CAAP-24-0000007 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE   COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
TBC  KOLOA  TOWN,  LLC,  Plaintiff-Appellee,  v. 
PIZZETTA,  INC.;  JOHN  HALTER,  Defendants-Appellees,  and 
CATHERINE  M.  SHYNE,  Defendant-Appellant,  and 
DOE  DEFENDANTS  1-10,  Defendants 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  CIRCUIT  COURT  OF  THE  FIFTH  CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL  NO.  5CCV-21-0000032) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:
 Leonard, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant  Catherine  M.  Shyne  (Shyne)  appeals 
from  the  December  4,  2023  Order  Granting  Plaintiff  TBC  Koloa  Town 
LLC's  [TBC's]  Motion  for  Order  of  Contempt,  Issuance  of  Bench 
Warrant,  and  Contempt  Sanctions  Against  Defendants  John  Halter 
and  Catherine  M.  Shyne  Filed  on  October  6,  2023  (Contempt  Order) 
filed  by  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  Fifth  Circuit  (Circuit  Court) 
in  favor  of  TBC.  1
Shyne
 raises five points of error on appeal, contending 
that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) granting TBC's motion for 
order of contempt; (2) not applying the rules regarding oral 
examination of a non-resident witness in the order to appear for 
1 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  
      
         
         
    
        
          
        
         
         
         
          
         
         
         
         
                   
          
   a  debtor's  examination  issued  against  a  non-resident  judgment 
debtor;  (3)  not  applying  the  rules  regarding  the  deposition  of  a 
non-resident  witness  in  the  order  to  appear  for  a  debtor's 
examination  issued  against  a  non-resident  judgment  debtor;  (4) 
compelling  a  non-resident  defendant  to  personally  appear  before 
the  Circuit  Court  in  Hawai i;  and  (5)  exercising  jurisdiction 
outside  Hawai i  by  compelling  a  resident  of  Washington  State  to 
appear  before  the  court  for  a  judgment  debtor's  examination. 
Upon careful
 review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Shyne's 
points of error as follows: 
First,
 we note that Shyne's Opening Brief – in 
particular, the Statement of Points of Error — is woefully non-
compliant with Hawai i Rules  of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 
28(b). Although represented by counsel, Shyne has wholly failed 
to identify where in the record the Circuit Court's alleged 
errors occurred and where in the record the Circuit Court's 
alleged errors were objected to or the manner in which the 
alleged errors were brought to the Circuit Court's attention. 
See HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). The arguments contained in Shyne's 
Opening Brief are untethered to the points of error raised, 
provide scant and incomplete references to the parts of the 
record relied upon, and for the most part, do not identify the 
ruling or order professed to constitute reversible error. 
See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). We nevertheless attempt to address the 
merits of Shyne's appeal. 
2
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
           
        
         
        
         
           
         
        
           
           
      
       
         
         
          
         
         
         
         
         
        
        
          
          
            
              
              
              
            
              
            We begin with points of error 2, 3, and 5, which raise 
various arguments that appear to challenge (on appeal) the 
Circuit Court's August 8, 2022 Order Granting [TBC's] Ex Parte 
Motion for Examination of Judgment Debtor (Order for Judgment 
Debtor Exam), which ordered Shyne to appear before the Circuit 
Court and to be orally examined on September 13, 2022. A 
certificate of service filed by TBC and an electronic notice 
filed in the Judiciary Electronic Filing System (JEFS) indicate 
that the Order for Judgment Debtor Exam was served on counsel of 
record for Shyne through JEFS. Shyne took no action prior to 
September 13, 2022, and did not appear. 
Pointing to Hawai i Rules of Civil  Procedure (HRCP) 
Rule 69, Shyne argues, inter alia, that "the judgment creditor 
may obtain discovery from the judgment debtor in the manner 
provided in the rules for taking deposition" and that the Order 
for Judgment Debtor Exam was flawed because it ordered her 
examination in Hawai i, not Washington State.  However, as argued 
in TBC's Answering Brief, HRCP Rule 32(e)(1) provides that "[a]ll 
errors and irregularities in the notice for taking a deposition 
are waived unless written objection is promptly served upon the 
party giving notice." Here, notwithstanding a series of 
additional filings and proceedings related to the Order for 
Judgment Debtor Exam, Shyne did not raise any objection based on 
the location of the examination until well over a year later.2 
2 On September 20, 2023, Shyne filed a motion to quash the Order for 
Judgment Debtor Exam, as well as to quash an order to show cause why she 
should not be held in contempt of court (Motion to Quash). The Motion to 
Quash came on for hearing on October 25, 2023. The motion was denied, Shyne's 
judgment debtor exam was continued to November 2, 2023, and Shyne was allowed 
to appear remotely by Zoom, but did not appear. A written order denying the 
Motion to Quash was entered on November 2, 2023 (Order Denying Motion to 
(continued...) 
3          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
        
        
         
           
         
         
          
           
          
         
           
         
            
       
            
           
           
            
           
         
        
         
         Shyne makes no argument on appeal that she timely 
raised written objections to the location noticed for her 
judgment debtor exam. We conclude that such arguments were 
waived. 
We turn to point of error 4, in which Shyne argues that 
the Circuit Court erred in compelling a non-resident defendant to 
personally appear before the court in Hawai i. As discussed 
above, Shyne
 fails to identify the order or orders challenged in 
this point of error or where in the record she raised an 
objection or brought the issue to the Circuit Court's attention. 
Shyne appears to argue that the Circuit Court lacked jurisdiction 
to require her to appear before the Circuit Court for a judgment 
debtor's exam, and cites Hawai i Revised Statutes (HRS) §  603-
21.9(3) (2016). As a party to this action, the Circuit Court has 
personal jurisdiction over Shyne and subject matter jurisdiction 
to issue orders in aid of its jurisdiction, and to take steps as 
may be necessary to carry into full effect the powers given to 
the court or for the promotion of justice in pending matters. 
See HRS §§ 603-21.9(1) & (6) (2016). The Circuit Court has each 
of these powers, and it would be an absurd result to conclude 
that the Circuit Court has no jurisdiction to make post-judgment, 
enforcement-related orders under HRS §§ 603-21.9(1) or (6). 
Indeed, the Circuit Court later ordered Shyne to appear for 
examination by Zoom, rather than by personal attendance. Shyne 
2(...continued) 
Quash).   On  this  appeal,  Shyne  does  not  mention,  let  alone  challenge,  the 
November  2,  2023  Order  Denying  Motion  to  Quash,  and  does  not  provide  a 
transcript  for  the  November  2,  2023  hearing.   Any  challenge  to  the  Order 
Denying  Motion  to  Quash  is  waived.   See  HRAP  Rule  28(b)(4)  &  (7). 
4          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
         
          
          
      
         
         
  
         
         
        
        
          
         
          
        
          
           
           
           
         
          
           
         
          
         
    
      
      makes no argument that the Circuit Court lacked jurisdiction to 
proceed in this manner. We cannot conclude that the Circuit 
Court erred in compelling Shyne to appear for a judgment debtor 
examination based on a lack of jurisdiction. 
Finally, we address point of error 1, in which Shyne 
argues that the Circuit Court erred in entering the Contempt 
Order. 
Shyne first argues that she should not be held liable 
for contempt because TBC failed to follow proper procedures in 
noticing the judgment debtor exam in Hawai i, rather than  
Washington State. As discussed above, Shyne waived her 
objections to the Order for Judgment Debtor Exam based on the 
location specified in the order. Accordingly, we conclude that 
this basis for setting aside the Contempt Order is without merit. 
Shyne also argues that TBC is not entitled to 
attorneys' fees and costs under HRCP Rule 37(d), as ordered in 
the Contempt Order. Shyne submits that the general rule is that 
it is presumed that a deposition will take place at the location 
of the residence of the person to be deposed or examined, and 
therefore, TBC did not follow proper procedure and is not 
entitled to attorneys' fees stemming from her failure to appear. 
This is simply another facet of the same argument. As discussed 
above, Shyne waived her objections to the Order for Judgment 
Debtor Exam based on the location specified in the order. 
Accordingly, we conclude that this basis for setting aside the 
Contempt Order is without merit. 
Shyne presents no other discernible argument warranting 
the set aside of the Contempt Order. 
5
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
   
   For  these  reasons,  the  Circuit  Court's  December  4,  2023 
Contempt  Order  is  affirmed. 
DATED:
 Honolulu, Hawai i, March  5, 2026. 
On  the  briefs: 
David  R.  Squeri, 
Carlo  Reyes, 
(Greater  Pacific  Law  Office, 
LLLC) 
for  Defendant-Appellant. 
Calvert  G.  Chipchase, 
Michael  R.  Soon  Fah, 
(Cades  Schutte) 
for  Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Presiding  Judge 
/s/  Clyde  J.  Wadsworth 
Associate  Judge 
/s/  Sonja  M.P.  McCullen 
Associate  Judge 
6
 