NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000681 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
REGINALD PETTWAY, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS PRISIONER NO. 11-1-0006)

(CRIMINAL NO. 08-1-0643)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant pro se Reginald Pettway (Pettway)
 
appeals from the "Order Denying Petition To Vacate, Set Aside, Or
 
Correct Judgment Or To Release Petitioner From Custody," filed on
 April 4, 2013, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
1
 
(circuit court).
 
On appeal, Pettway contends that circuit court erred in 
denying his a February 2, 2011 "Petition for Post-Conviction Relief (Petition To Vacate, Set Aside, Or Correct Judgment Or To Release Petitioner From Custody)" pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of 
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 (Rule 40 Petition) because the 
Hawai'i Paroling Authority (HPA) of Respondent-Appellee State of 
Hawai'i, (1) deviated from its guidelines when setting Pettway's 
minimum terms of imprisonment and (2) violated Pettway's due 
process rights by not granting him access to all information that HPA considered. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
1
 The Honorable Steven S. Alm presided.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
 Pettway's appeal is without merit.
 
I. 
	Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b) Non-
Compliance 
Pettway's opening brief fails to comply with the
 
requirements of HRAP Rule 28(b). The opening brief does not
 
include a standard of review section or a statement of points on
 appeal.
2 Non-compliance with HRAP Rule 28 is sufficient grounds
 
to dismiss Pettway's appeal. See HRAP Rule 30 ("When the brief
 
of an appellant is otherwise not in conformity with these rules,
 the appeal may be dismissed . . . ."); see also Bettencourt v.
 Bettencourt, 80 Hawai
'i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995). 
However, in light of an appellant's pro se status, we will
 address the merits where possible. See Wagner v. World Botanical
 
Gardens, Inc., 126 Hawai
'i 190, 193, 268 P.3d 443, 446 (App. 
2011); see also Bettencourt, 80 Hawai 'i at 230, 909 P.2d at 558 
("[T]his court has consistently adhered to the policy of
 
2
 HRAP Rule 28 provides in relevant part:
 
Rule 28. BRIEFS.
 
. . . . 
(b) Opening Brief. Within 40 days after the filing of
the record on appeal, the appellant shall file an opening
brief, containing the following sections in the order here
indicated:
 
. . . .
 
(4) A concise statement of the points of error set
forth in separately numbered paragraphs. Each point shall
state: (i) the alleged error committed by the court or
agency; (ii) where in the record the alleged error occurred;
and (iii) where in the record the alleged error was objected
to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought to
the attention of the court or agency.
 
. . . .
 
(5) A brief, separate section, entitled "Standard of
Review," setting forth the standard or standards to be
applied in reviewing the respective judgments, decrees,
orders or decisions of the court or agency alleged to be
erroneous and identifying the point of error to which it
applies.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
affording litigants the opportunity to have their cases heard on
 
the merits, where possible." (citation and internal quotation
 marks omitted)).
 
II. Minimum Terms of Imprisonment
 
"A petition filed pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 is an 
appropriate means for a prisoner to challenge a minimum term of 
imprisonment set by the HPA." Nichols v. State, 134 Hawai
'i 390, 
395, 341 P.3d 1190, 1195 (App. 2014) (citing Coulter v. State, 116 Hawai
'i 181, 184, 172 P.3d 493, 496 (2007)). With respect to 
HPA decisions establishing a minimum term of imprisonment, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated that "judicial intervention is 
appropriate where the HPA has failed to exercise any discretion at all, acted arbitrarily and capriciously so as to give rise to a due process violation, or otherwise violated the prisoner's constitutional rights." Fagaragan v. State, 132 Hawai
'i 224, 
234, 320 P.3d 889, 899 (2014) (quoting Coulter, 116 Hawai 'i at 
184, 172 P.3d at 496). "Under its Guidelines [For Establishing Minimum Terms of Imprisonment], the HPA focuses on three primary criteria to determine the appropriate level of punishment and the minimum term: (1) Nature of the Offense; (2) Degree of Injury/Loss to Person or Property; and (3) Offender's Criminal History." Nichols, 134 Hawai
'i at 399, 341 P.3d at 1199. There 
are three levels of punishment: Level I, II, and III. 
In its "Notice and Order of Fixing Minimum Term(s) of
 
Imprisonment", HPA set Pettway's minimum term of punishment at a 
Level III classification. HPA cited the "Nature of Offense" as
 the significant factor in determining that level of
 classification. To satisfy the "Nature of Offense" factor for a
 Level III classification, the offender must meet one of the
 following criteria:
 
a. The offense was against a person(s) and the offender
displayed a callous and/or cruel disregard for the safety
and welfare of others; or
 
b. The offense involved the manufacture, importation,
distribution, or cultivation of substantial quantities of
drugs. Paragraph 4, subparagraph (a) or (b) of this section
may be used to substantiate the level of involvement of the
person in the offense(s);
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
c. The offense was committed against the elderly, a
handicapped person, or a minor, and the conviction was for
murder, sexual assault, robbery, assault, or kidnapping[.]
 
Fagaragan, 132 Hawai 'i at 239, 320 P.3d at 904 (emphasis 
omitted). HPA did not indicate which criteria Pettway met, but 
it can be presumed that the HPA applied the first criteria for situations when "[t]he offense was against a person(s) and the offender displayed a callous and/or cruel disregard for the safety and welfare of others[,]" as the other criteria do not apply to the facts of this case. See id. 
HPA Guidelines provide that the "purpose of minimum 
sentencing guidelines is to provide a degree of uniformity and consistency in the setting of minimum terms while providing the community-at-large, public policy makers and planners, the criminal justice system, and victims and offenders with information as to the criteria used in establishing minimum terms of imprisonment." The guidelines recognize that the criteria used to determine an offender's punishment level are, "in some instances, a matter of individual interpretation and perception and cannot be completely objective; however, given the complexity of each person's case, certain amounts of subjectivity remain necessary and appropriate." Furthermore, more detailed explanations are only required "[w]here the absence of a more detailed explanation would prevent our meaningful review of, or leave us in doubt about, whether HPA acted arbitrarily or capriciously in applying its Guidelines[.]" Nichols, 134 Hawai
'i 
at 399, 341 P.3d at 1199. 
In this instance, the record sufficiently shows that
 
Pettway committed offenses against a person and "displayed a
 callous and/or cruel disregard for the safety and welfare of
 others[.]" Pettway was a knowing participant in the violent
 kidnapping and robbery of Benjamin Grajeda (Grajeda) that led to
 
Grajeda's murder. Pettway's own testimony at the trial of co-
defendant Jerrico Lindsey (Lindsey) indicates that Pettway acted
 
as more than a passive observer of the crimes that unfolded, but
 
instead was an active participant--choking Grajeda when Grajeda
 was fighting with co-defendant William Freeman (Freeman) and
 
Lindsey, encouraging Grajeda to get into the trunk of Freeman's
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
car, and throwing Freeman's gun out the window of the car when
 
the police began chasing the co-defendants. The fact that
 Pettway pled down to robbery in the second degree and kidnapping
 is of little consequence. The record sufficiently indicates that
 HPA did not act arbitrarily or capriciously in setting Pettway's
 minimum terms of imprisonment pursuant to a Level III
 classification.
 
III. Due Process
 
Pettway contends that he "has never had the opportunity
 
to review any materials including his [Presentence Investigation

 
and Report (PSI Report)] to be sure it is based on accurate
 
information, which is a violation to petitioner's Due-Process."
 
In support of his argument, Pettway cites to Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) ยง 706-669 (2) and (3) (2014 Repl.).
3
  
3
 HRS ยง 706-669 provides, in relevant part:
 
ยง706-669 Procedure for determining minimum term of
imprisonment.
 
. . . .
 
(2) Before holding the hearing, the authority shall
obtain a complete report regarding the prisoner's life
before entering the institution and a full report of the
prisoner's progress in the institution. The report shall be
a complete personality evaluation for the purpose of
determining the prisoner's degree of propensity toward
criminal activity.
 
(3) The prisoner shall be given reasonable notice of
the hearing under subsection (1) and shall be permitted to
be heard by the authority on the issue of the minimum term
to be served before the prisoner becomes eligible for
parole. In addition, the prisoner shall:
 
(a)	 Be permitted to consult with any persons the
prisoner reasonably desires, including the
prisoner's own legal counsel, in preparing for
the hearing;
 
(b)	 Be permitted to be represented and assisted by
counsel at the hearing;
 
(c)	 Have counsel appointed to represent and assist
the prisoner if the prisoner so requests and
cannot afford to retain counsel; and
 
(d)	 Be informed of the prisoner's rights under
[paragraphs] (a), (b), and (c).
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held that 
In light of the critical nature of the HPA's
determination of the prisoner's minimum term of
imprisonment, due process under [a]rticle I, section 5 of
the Hawai' i Constitution requires that the prisoner have
timely access to all of the adverse information contained in
the HPA file. The HPA must disclose such information "soon
 enough in advance" that the inmate has a "reasonable
opportunity to prepare responses and rebuttal of
inaccuracies." [
Labrum v. Utah State Bd. Of Pardons,  870
P.2d 902, 909 (Utah 1993)]. In the event that the HPA file
 of the inmate includes sensitive, or confidential personal
information, the inmate is entitled to disclosure of a
reasonable summary thereof.
 
De La Garza v. State, 129 Hawai 'i 429, 442, 302 P.3d 697, 710 
(2013) (remanding case for HRPP Rule 40 evidentiary hearing where
 
"[The] facts suggest[ed] that [p]etitioner may not have been
 provided all the information in his HPA file.").
 
The record on appeal indicates that Pettway received a
 
copy of his PSI Report. On October 26, 2009 at Pettway's
 sentencing hearing, Pettway "stated [that he was] in receipt" of
 his PSI Report and that he "had no additions/corrections to
 make." Pettway fails to cite to any facts that would indicate
 that he did not receive his PSI Report.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the April 4, 2013 "Order
 
Denying Petition To Vacate, Set Aside, Or Correct Judgment Or To
 Release Petitioner From Custody," entered in the Circuit Court of
 the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 22, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Reginald Pettway

Petitioner-Appellant pro se. Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Richard W. Stacey

Diane K. Taira
 
Deputy Attorneys General
for Respondent-Appellee. 
6
 