NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000768 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
JOSEPH B. BERNABE, Appellant-Appellant,
v. 
EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM, STATE OF HAWAI# I,
Appellee-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO.  16-1-0314) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
In this secondary appeal, Appellant-Petitioner Joseph 
B. Bernabe (Bernabe
) appeals from the (1) August 4, 2017 
"Decision and Order" affirming the Final Decision by Appellee-
Respondent Employees' Retirement System, State of Hawai# i (ERS) 
(ERS Final Decision),  denying Bernabe's application for service-
connected disability retirement, and (2) October 5, 2017 Final Judgment, both filed and entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).
2 1
Bernabe raises a single point of error on appeal, that 
the Circuit Court erred by making the following "finding as a matter of law" in its Decision and Order: 
1 The ERS Final Decision adopted the "Hearings Officer's Findings of
Fact [( FOFs )], Conclusions of Law [( COLs )] and Recommended Decision" filed
October 28, 2015. 
2 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The application of the analysis set forth
in the Akamine[] 3case to the issue of service 
connected disability retirement would
necessarily reverse the burden of proof byimposing upon the ERS the burden of proving thata cardiac condition was not the result of an accident occurring while [in] the actualperformance of duty. As seen in the evidence inthis case, a cardiac condition can have a myriadof causes, including work. Once the employeeproduces any evidence that a cardiac conditionwas caused to any degree by employment which 
will nearly always be the case, then the ERSwould then be forced to prove that the cardiaccondition was not caused to any degree byemployment in order to avoid the grant of theservice-connected disability retirement. Thatwill almost never occur. The consequence is thatany employee who is permanently incapacitatedbecause of a cardiac condition will automatically be entitled [to] service-connecteddisability retirement. This is certainly not aconsequence contemplated by the Hawai'i State
Legislature. Thus, the analysis in Akamine 
should not be applied to the issue of service-
connected disability retirement. 
(Bolding and emphases in original) (footnote added).4 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Bernabe's point of error as follows, and affirm. 
The following background is from the unchallenged 
portions of the Circuit Court's Order.  
5 
Bernabe sought benefits under Hawaii Revised Statutes 
(HRS) § 88-79(a) (2012), which provides: 
3 In Akamine v. Hawaiian Packing & Crating Co., 53 Haw. 406, 408,
495 P.2d 1164, 1166 (1972), the supreme court held, in the context of a
workers' compensation case, that if doubt exists as to whether an injury iswork-related, the doubt will be resolved in favor of the claimant, and that"the employer [has] the burden of going forward with the evidence and theburden of persuasion." 
4 Bernabe challenges an aspect of the Circuit Court's analysis in
the Decision and Order affirming its review of the ERS Final Decision, anddoes not challenge any FOFs or COLs in the Circuit Court's Decision and Order,or the Hearings Officer's FOFs and COLs adopted in the ERS Final Decision.See Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP ) Rule 28(b)(4) (requiring that
the point of error include a quotation of the challenged FOF or COL orreference to appended FOFs and COLs). 
5 Unchallenged FOFs and COLs are binding. See Kelly v. 1250
Oceanside Partners, 111 Hawai #i 205, 227, 140 P.3d 985, 1007 (2006) (citations
omitted); Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 125, 839P.2d 10, 31 (1992). 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Service-connected disability retirement. (a) Upon
application of a member, or the person appointed by the
family court as guardian of an incapacitated member, anymember who has been permanently incapacitated for duty asthe natural and proximate result of an accident occurringwhile in the actual performance of duty at some definitetime and place, or as the cumulative result of someoccupational hazard, through no wilful negligence on themember's part, may be retired by the board for service-connected disability[.] 
(Ellipses omitted). Bernabe argued that he suffered from two 
conditions that resulted in permanent incapacity qualifying for service-connected disability retirement under HRS § 88-79(a): a psychiatric condition and a cardiac condition.   With regard to 
the psychiatric condition, the Circuit Court concluded: "the Hearings Officer's mixed [FOF and COL] that Bernabe was not permanently incapacitated because of his psychiatric condition was not clearly erroneous."  With regard to the cardiac 
condition,  the Circuit Court concluded that the Hearings 
Officer's mixed finding and conclusion that: Bernabe was "likely 
to be 'permanently incapacitated by his cardiac condition'" but that such "permanent incapacity resulting from his cardiac condition was 'not the natural and proximate result of an accident'" -- was not clearly erroneous.   Accordingly, the 
Circuit Court affirmed the ERS Final Decision denying Bernabe's application for service-connected disability benefits.  Bernabe 
timely appealed. 6
On secondary review of a circuit court's review of an 
agency's decision, 
6 With regard to the cardiac condition, the Hearings Officer found
and concluded that: 
The evidence presented showed that [Bernabe]'s heart attack
occurred while he was on sick leave, and at home at 6:00p.m. reading documents related to a complaint he filed withthe Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC").[Bernabe]'s heart attack did not occur on the employer'spremises and [Bernabe] was not doing what the employerrequired at a time and place he was required to do it.Accordingly, the Hearings Officer finds that [ ] [Bernabe]'sheart attack did not occur "while in the actual performanceof duty". . . . 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 [t]he standard of review is one in which [the appellate]
court must determine whether the circuit court was right orwrong in its decision, applying the standards set forth inHRS § 91-14(g) (1993) to the agency's decision. 
HRS § 91-14, entitled "Judicial review of contested
cases," provides in relevant part: 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm
the decision of the agency or remand the case withinstructions for further proceedings; or it mayreverse or modify the decision and order if thesubstantial rights of the petitioners may have beenprejudiced because the administrative findings,conclusions, decisions, or orders are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or 
(4) Affected by other error of law; or (5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the
whole record; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized
by abuse of discretion or clearlyunwarranted exercise of discretion. 
Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law arereviewable under subsections (1), (2), and (4);questions regarding procedural defects undersubsection (3); findings of fact under subsection (5);and an agency's exercise of discretion undersubsection (6). 
United Pub. Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO v. Hanneman, 
106 Hawai# i 359, 363, 105 P.3d 236, 240 (2005) (brackets omitted) 
(quoting Paul's Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai# i 412, 
416, 91 P.3d 494, 498 (2004)). 
Bernabe's point of error challenges the Circuit Court's 
conclusion that it was inappropriate to apply the workers' compensation analysis in Akamine to service-connected disability retirement and to the cardiac condition in this case.  Bernabe 
asserts that the Circuit Court "raised this issue sua sponte," 
and that Bernabe "did not suggest or argue that the Circuit Court adopt or use the workers compensation presumption for workplace injuries under Sec. §386-3(a), HRS, to [Bernabe]'s request for 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 
 
 service connected disability."  Bernabe's contention of error 
lacks merit. 
Bernabe's claim that the Circuit Court raised the 
applicability of the workers' compensation analysis to Bernabe's 
case sua sponte, is erroneous. The record reflects that Bernabe himself raised this issue before the ERS Hearings Officer, and the Circuit Court incorporated the Hearings Officer's rejection of Bernabe's argument into the Decision and Order, as follows: 
Although [Bernabe] cited cases which found that heart
attacks occurring after work hours and not in the work placewere considered to be "accidents" for purposes of workers'compensation, the Hearing Officer declines to follow thosecases as "a workers' compensation decision is not binding in
the disability retirement arena, in part because there is nopresumption of compensability in disability retirement asthere is in workers' compensation." 
(Internal brackets omitted).  Thus, Bernabe's contention that the 
Circuit Court erroneously "raised this issue sua sponte" is 
incorrect. 
Bernabe also argues that the Circuit Court's ruling 
that "disabilities which are aggravated outside work hours and the workplace, cannot qualify as a service connected disability" under HRS § 88-79, erroneously "imposed an absolute prohibition on cases involving injuries occurring outside of the workplace," created a "higher standard of proof," and is "contrary to the 
purpose and intent" of HRS § 88-79 and supreme court decisions. 
Bernabe cites various cases and points to evidence in the record to argue that injuries occurring outside of the workplace can be work-related and that his cardiac condition was work-related. 
Bernabe's argument misstates and mischaracterizes the 
Circuit Court's ruling. The Circuit Court simply concluded that workers' compensation cases such as Akamine do not apply to the issue of service-connected disability retirement cases because they require different standards of burdens of proof; not because injuries that occur outside of work hours and the workplace can never be work-related.  The Circuit Court, quoting Panado v. Bd. 
of Trs. Emps.' Retirement Sys., 134 Hawai# i 1, 11, 332 P.3d 144, 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
154 (2014) (citing Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 6-23-31),7 
accurately explained that in disability retirement benefit cases, 
"[t]he party initiating the ERS proceeding 'shall have the burden of proof, including the burden of producing evidence and the burden of persuasion. . . . The degree or quantum of proof shall be a preponderance of the evidence.'" See also Hua v. Bd. of 
Trs. of the Emps.' Retirement Sys., State of Haw., 112 Hawai# i 
292, 300-01, 145 P.3d 835, 843-44 (App. 2006) ("[T]he two systems are entirely separate, and [] a workers' compensation decision is not binding in the disability arena, in part because there is no presumption of compensability in disability retirement as there is in workers' compensation[.]"). 
The Hearings Officer found, in unchallenged FOFs 22, 
25, 29, 37, and 40, and in its mixed finding and conclusion, that: when Bernabe's cardiac condition occurred, Bernabe had not been at work for several months prior to the cardiac condition; that at the time of the cardiac condition, Bernabe was not performing janitorial services or at a place required of him by his employer; that Bernabe had a medical history of "hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes and obesity[;]" and that Bernabe had not shown by a preponderance of evidence that the cardiac condition occurred "while in the actual performance of duty." 
The Circuit Court was not wrong in affirming the ERS 
Final Decision and finding that the cardiac condition was not work-related. See United Pub. Workers, 106 Hawai# i at 363, 
105 P.3d at 240. 
7 HAR § 6-23-31 (2009) states: 
Except as otherwise provided by law, the party initiating
the proceeding shall have the burden of proof, including theburden of producing evidence and the burden of persuasion.The party having the burden of proof shall proceed first inthe presentation of opening statements, evidence, witnesses,and arguments, followed by the other party. The degree orquantum of proof shall be a preponderance of the evidence. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the August 4, 2017 
Decision and Order and the October 5, 2017 Final Judgment filed 
and entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 17, 2023. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge Ted H.S. Hong,for Appellant-Appellant. 
Jodi L.K. Yi,
Deputy Attorney General,for Appellee-Appellee. 
7 