NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
NO. CAAP-24-0000366 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
 
 
U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, A NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, AS 
TRUSTEE FOR J.P. MORGAN MORTGAGE ACQUISITION TRUST 2006-RM1, 
ASSET BACKED PASS-THROUGH CERTIFICATES, SERIES 2006-RM1, 
Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
DIONISIO P. PASION; DIONISIO PALACIO PASION, TRUSTEE OF THE 
DIONISIO AND ANGELITA PASION TRUST, AN UNRECORDED REVOCABLE 
TRUST DATED AUGUST 9, 2006; ANGELITA M. PASION; ANGELITA MIGUEL 
PASION, TRUSTEE OF THE DIONISIO AND ANGELITA PASION TRUST, AN 
UNRECORDED REVOCABLE TRUST DATED AUGUST 9, 2006, Defendants-
Appellants; UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Defendant-Appellee,  
and  
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;  
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50; and  
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50, Defendants 
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 1CC121003044) 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Nakasone, Chief Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
 
This is a judicial foreclosure case.  Self-represented 
Defendants-Appellants Dionisio P. Pasion and Angelita M. Pasion 
(the Pasions), Dionisio Palacio Pasion, Trustee of the Dionisio 
and Angelita Pasion Trust, an Unrecorded Revocable Trust Dated Electronically Filed
Intermediate Court of Appeals
CAAP-24-0000366
05-JUN-2026
08:07 AM
Dkt. 78 SONOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
2 
 August 9, 2006, and Angelita Miguel Pasion, Trustee of the 
Dionisio and Angelita Pasion Trust, an Unrecorded Revocable 
Trust Dated August 9, 2006 (collectively, the Appellants),1 
appeal from
 the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's (circuit 
court)2: (1) April 5, 2024 "Findings of Fact; Conclusions of Law; 
Order Granting [Plaintiff-Appellee U.S. Bank National Association, a National Association, as Trustee for J.P. Morgan 
Mortgage Acquisition Trust 2006-RM1, Asset Backed Pass-Through Certificates, Series 2006-RM1's (U.S. Bank)] Motion for Summary 
Judgment, and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure Against 
All Parties, Filed December 7, 2022" (Foreclosure Order); and 
(2) April 5, 2024 Judgment.  
The
 summary judgment record reflects that Appellants 
owned real estate in Honolulu (the Property).  In May 2006, the 
Pasions executed a $500,000 promissory note (Note) in favor of 
ResMAE Mortgage Corporation.  The Note was secured with a 
mortgage on the Property (the Mortgage), and endorsed in blank.  U.S. Bank subsequently acquired the Note. 
The Pasions defaulted on the Note in February 2011, 
failed to timely cure the default, and U.S. Bank filed a 
Complaint for Foreclosure (the Complaint) on December 4, 2012.  
 
1  Appellants were represented by counsel below, and are self-
represented on appeal. 
 
2  The Honorable Kevin T. Morikone presided.   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
3 
 U.S. Bank filed its operative third Motion for Summary Judgment 
on December 7, 2022.  The circuit court granted U.S. Bank's 
Motion for Summary Judgment, and entered Judgment. 
On appeal, Appellants raise three points of error, 
contending that the circuit court erred in granting summary 
judgment in favor of U.S. Bank because U.S. Bank: (1) "lacked 
standing to foreclose"; (2) "failed to submit a clear, readable 
and reliable loan general ledger" such that "genuine issues of material fact remain[] unresolved as to whether payment of the 
subject mortgage loan was in default when suit was first filed 
on December 4, 2012"; and (3) "failed to submit admissible 
default notices mailed to each of the Pasions."  
We review the circuit court's grant of summary 
judgment de novo, applying the following standard, 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non- moving party. In other words, we must 
view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion.  
 
Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawaiʻi 46, 55-56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285-86 
(2013) (citation omitted).   
Upon careful review of the record and relevant legal 
authorities, and having given due consideration to the arguments NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
4 
 advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve 
Appellants' contentions as follows.3 
(1) U.S. Bank, as the foreclosing party, "must [inter 
alia] prove its entitlement to enforce the note and mortgage."  
Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawaiʻ i 361, 367, 390 P.3d 
1248, 1254 (2017) (cleaned up).  In Reyes-Toledo, the 
Hawaiʻi 
Supreme Court held that, 
A foreclosing plaintiff's burden to prove entitlement to 
enforce the note overlaps with the requirements of standing in foreclosure actions as standing is concerned with 
whether the parties have the right to bring suit. 
Typically, a plaintiff does not have standing to invoke the 
jurisdiction of the court unless the plaintiff has suffered an injury in fact.  A mortgage is a conveyance of an 
interest in real property that is given as security for the 
payment of the note.  A foreclosure action is a legal 
proceeding to gain title or force a sale of the property for satisfaction of a note that is in default and secured 
by a lien on the subject property.  Thus, the underlying 
"injury in fact" to a foreclosing plaintiff is the 
mortgagee's failure to satisfy its obligation to pay the 
debt obligation to the note holder.  Accordingly, in 
establishing standing, a foreclosing plaintiff must necessarily prove its entitlement to enforce the note as it is the default on the note that gives rise to the action.  
 
Id. at 367-68, 390 P.3d at 1254-55 (cleaned up). 
Here, the summary judgment record reflects that U.S. 
Bank provided the circuit court with the following: (1) the 
May 1, 2023 Affidavit of Note Possession, in which Sherry 
Stafford (Stafford), in her capacity as Vice President of 
JPMorgan Chase Custody Services, Inc. (JPMCCSI) and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. (Chase), represented under oath that, 
1.   . . .  I have access to and am familiar with the 
business records and record keeping system of Chase and 
 
3  We reorder Appellants' points of error herein.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
5 
 [JPMCCSI, ] a subsidiary of Chase, concerning the loan.  
Chase was the servicing agent for [U.S. Bank].  I make 
this affidavit based upon my review of those records 
and from my knowledge of how they are kept and 
maintained.  These records are maintained by Chase and 
JPMCCSI in the course of each of their regularly conducted business activities and are made at or near 
the time of the event, by or from information 
transmitted by a person with knowledge.  It is Chase's 
and JPMCCSI's regular practice to keep such records in 
the ordinary course of its regularly conducted business activity.   
 2.   Chase's regular business practice is to store notes 
secured by mortgages and deeds of trust in collateral 
files maintained by Chase's agent, JPMCCSI, in a secure vault facility in Monroe, Louisiana.   
 3.   [The Pasions] executed [the Note] dated 5/9/2006 in the 
original principal amount of $500,000.00, with an 
original interest rate of 6.650% per annum, for the [Property].  The Note is secured by [the Mortgage] 
dated 5/9/2006.  Attached hereto as Attachments 1 and 2 are true and correct copies of the original Note and 
recorded Mortgage, respectively. 
 
4.   According to the document activity on the Chase 
Collateral Report, Chase had possession of the original 
Note, including the affixed endorsement at the time of 
filing the Complaint on December 4, 2012.  Attached 
hereto as Attachment 3 is a true and correct copy of Chase's Collateral Report, which supports the Note, 
including the affixed endorsement possession at the 
time of the filing of the Complaint.   
 5.   Chase's Collateral Report tracks each instance the 
collateral file, including the original Note with the 
affixed endorsement, is released or returned to 
JPMCCSI.  It is part of Chase's responsibility to keep 
track of the collateral file. 
 
6.   Chase's Collateral Report reflects Chase maintained 
possession of the Note, including the affixed 
endorsement, at its storage facility located [in 
Monroe, Louisiana], from January 12, 2012 until June 4, 
2013, when on that date it forwarded the original Note, including the affixed endorsement, to Bank of New York 
Mellon [( BONYM)] located [in Dallas, Texas].  The 
original Note, including the affixed endorsement, was returned to Chase on August 29, 2013.  Chase maintained 
possession of the Note, including the affixed 
endorsement, at its storage facility, located [in 
Monroe, Louisiana], from August 29, 2013 until September 3, 2013, when on that date it forwarded the 
original Note, including the affixed endorsement, to 
[BONYM] located [in Dallas, Texas].  On April 18, 2022, 
the Chase collateral tracking system was updated to NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
6 
 reflect the collateral file released to [BONYM] as a 
result of a servicing transfer.   
 7.   Therefore, because there is no other record that the 
Note, including the affixed endorsement, moved between 
1/12/2012 through 6/4/2013, I can conclude that the original Note, including the affixed endorsement, 
remained in Chase's possession on December 4, 2012, at 
the time of filing [U.S. Bank's] Complaint. 
 
(emphasis added); (2) the Chase Collateral Report, authenticated 
by Stafford; (3) the Note and Mortgage, authenticated by 
Stafford; and (4) the "Assignment of Mortgage" to U.S. Bank, 
authenticated by Select Portfolio Servicing, Inc. (SPS)4 Document 
Control Officer Cynthia May (May).   
On this record, we conclude that U.S. Bank satisfied 
its initial burden on summary judgment.  See U.S. Bank Tr., 
N.A. v. Verhagen, 149  Hawaiʻi 315, 328, 489 P.3d 419, 432 (2021) 
("Collectively, the evidence presented by U.S. Bank . . . 
establishes the bank's possession of the Note on the day the 
complaint was filed." (footnote omitted)). 
The burden then shifted to Appellants, and Appellants 
did not meet their burden of establishing that there is a genuine question of material fact for trial.  See id. ("[A] 
defendant may counter this inference of possession at the time of filing with evidence setting forth 'specific facts showing 
that there is a genuine issue' as to whether the plaintiff 
 
4  SPS is U.S. Bank's current loan servicer, and took over servicing 
of the Pasions' loan from the prior servicer, Chase, after the Complaint was 
filed. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
7 
 actually possessed the subject note at the time it filed suit."  
(quoting Hawaiʻ i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 56(e))).  
Appellants have offered no evidence that U.S. Bank, through its 
prior loan servicer Chase, did not possess the Note at the time 
the Complaint was filed.   
(2) Appellants contend that there exists a genuine 
issue of material fact as to whether U.S. Bank served the 
Pasions with the default notice prior to commencement of the 
underlying foreclosure action.  Appellants' contention lacks 
merit. 
U.S. Bank established, through May's July 20, 2022 
"Declaration of [U.S. Bank] in Support of Motion," that Chase mailed the "Acceleration Warning (Notice of Intent to 
Foreclose)" letters, dated April 2, 2011, to the Pasions via 
first class mail.
5  Appellants have not produced evidence to 
rebut this evidence. 
 
5  May represented in her declaration that she is "familiar with the 
practices and procedures of SPS" and with "the systems of record that SPS 
uses to create and record information related to residential mortgage loans 
that it services, including the process by which information is entered into 
those systems and how those records are maintained."  She further represented 
that, 
 
5. To the extent that the business records of the loan in 
this matter were created by a prior servicer, the prior 
servicer's records for the loan were incorporated and 
boarded into SPS's systems, such that the prior servicer's 
records concerning the loan are now part of SPS's business 
records.  SPS conducts quality control and verification of the information received from the prior servicer as part of 
the boarding process to ensure the accuracy of the boarded 
records.  It is the regular practice of SPS to incorporate 
 
(continued . . .)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
8 
 (3) We decline to address Appellants' remaining 
contentions and arguments because they are waived.  Appellants 
contend, for the first time on appeal, that U.S. Bank "failed to 
submit a clear, readable and reliable loan general ledger," and, 
therefore, "genuine issues of material fact remain[] unresolved 
as to whether payment of the subject mortgage loan was in 
default when suit was first filed on December 4, 2012."  The 
record reflects that Appellants did not make this argument in the underlying proceeding, nor did they dispute that they were 
in default of the Note.  See Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea 
 
 5(. . . continued)  
prior servicers' records into SPS's business records, and 
SPS routinely relies upon the accuracy of those boarded 
records in providing its loan servicing functions.  These 
prior servicer records are incorporated and relied upon by 
SPS as part of SPS's business records.  As part of its 
boarding process, meetings are established with prior servicer's key personnel and systems, method of delivery of 
the records, and the timing of the delivery of the records 
are identified.  Further, SPS employs a proprietary system 
to board the prior servicer records.  This system validates 
the prior servicer records using over 600 logical and financial checks.  In the event that any prior servicer 
records are identified as being illogical or incorrect, SPS 
will work with the prior servicer and review loan 
documentation to resolve the record. 
 
6.  Based upon my experience in the mortgage servicing industry, I know that the prior servicer(s) on this loan 
("Prior Servicers") followed an industry- wide standard in 
keeping and maintaining business records related to mortgage loans. 
 
7.  This loan was serviced by another entity.  SPS currently services the loan as attorney- in
-fact for [U.S. 
Bank].  SPS acquired the servicing rights for this loan from [Chase][.]  The business records from the prior servicer(s) have been verified and incorporated into SPS's 
business records. 
 
(Emphasis added.) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
9 
 Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100  97, 107, 58 P.3d 608, 618 Hawaiʻi
(2002) ("Legal issues not raised in the trial court are 
ordinarily deemed waived on appeal" (citations omitted)). 
Moreover, to the extent Appellants contend that this 
case should be dismissed pursuant to the doctrine of "estoppel by laches," this argument is also raised for the first time on 
appeal and therefore waived.  See id. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the circuit 
court's Foreclosure Order and Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu,  Hawaiʻi, June 5, 2026.  
On the briefs: Angelita M. Pasion, 
Dionisio P. Pasion, Self-represented  
Defendants-Appellants. 
 Lisa K. Swartzfager, 
for Plainitff-Appellee. 
 /s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Chief Judge 
 /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth Associate Judge 
 
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry Associate Judge 
 