NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0005151
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
TIMOTHY WILLIAM BIELER, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(Kona Division)
(CASE NO. 3DTA-13-01388)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
The State of Hawai# i (State) charged Defendant-
Appellant Timothy William Bieler (Bieler) with operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII) (Count 1);
operating a vehicle after license and privilege to drive have
been suspended or revoked for OVUII (Count 2); refusal to submit
to breath, blood, or urine test (Refusal to Submit to Testing)
(Count 3); and tampering with an ignition interlock device (Count
4).  After a bench trial, the District Court of the Third Circuit
(District Court)1 found Bieler guilty as charged on all counts.  
Bieler appeals from the District Court's Judgment
entered on October 11, 2013.  On appeal, Bieler contends that:
1The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo, Jr. presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(1) there was insufficient evidence to support his OVUII
conviction; (2) the District Court erred in granting the State's
unobjected-to motion to amend Counts 2 and 4 of the Complaint;
and (3) the District Court erred in failing to suppress evidence
of his refusal to submit to testing to determine the alcohol
concentration in his breath or blood.  As explained below, we
reverse Bieler's conviction for Refusal to Submit to Testing, and
we affirm his remaining convictions.
I.
We resolve Bieler's arguments on appeal as follows.
A.
Bieler was charged with OVUII, in violation of Hawaii
Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 291E-61(a) (2007).2  Bieler contends
that there was insufficient evidence to support his OVUII
conviction.  In particular, Bieler contends that "the State
failed to adduce sufficient evidence that Bieler was under the
influence of alcohol in an amount that impaired his ability to
operate a vehicle in a careful and prudent manner."  We disagree.
When viewed in the light most favorable to the State,
see State v. Richie , 88 Hawai #i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241
(1988), there was sufficient evidence to support Bieler's OVUII
conviction.  Officer Eric Reyes effected a traffic stop of
Bieler's car after observing it weaving -- "crossing over the
solid yellow line" then "weaving back and crossing the solid
white line."  Bieler took an unusually long time to respond to
Officer Reyes' request for documents, Bieler's eyes were red,
2HRS ยง 291E-61(a) provides in relevant part:
(a)  A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the
person operates or assumes actual physical control of a
vehicle:
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an
amount sufficient to impair the person's
normal mental faculties or ability to care
for the person and guard against casualty[.]
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
glassy, and watery, and the odor of alcohol emanated from
Bieler's vehicle.  Bieler performed poorly on field sobriety
tests.  Among other things, on the walk-and-turn test, Bieler
started too soon, could not keep his balance in the instructional
position, missed some heel to toe steps, stopped walking during
the test and had to be told to keep walking, did not take the
appropriate number of steps, performed the turn improperly,
stepped off the line, and raised his arms.  On the one-leg-stand
test, Bieler swayed from side to side, put his foot down a few
times, and raised his arms.  We conclude that there was
substantial evidence to support Bieler's OVUII conviction.
B.
Bieler contends that the District Court erred in
granting the State's motion to amend the Complaint and allowing
the State to amend the mens rea for Counts 2 and 4.  Bieler did
not object to the State's motion.  We conclude that Bieler's
contention is without merit.  State v. Kam , 134 Hawai# i 280, 286-
87, 339 P.3d 1081, 1087-88 (App. 2014) (holding that the trial
court did not err in permitting the State before trial to amend
the mens rea alleged for the charged offenses).3
C.
Bieler contends that the District Court erred in
failing to suppress evidence of his refusal to submit to testing
to determine the alcohol concentration in his breath or blood. 
Bieler argues that evidence of his refusal to submit to testing
should have been suppressed because he was not properly warned of
the consequences of his refusal.  We need not address this
argument because we conclude that based on the analysis in the
Hawai#i Supreme Court's decision in State v. Won , 137 Hawai# i 330,
372 P.3d 1065 (2015), the State was precluded from prosecuting
Bieler for Refusal to Submit to Testing.  State v. Wilson, No.
3Because we conclude that the District Court did not err in
permitting the State to amend Counts 2 and 4 of the original
Complaint, we do not address Bieler's claim that Counts 2 and 4
of the original Complaint were defective.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
CAAP-15-0000682, 2018 WL 564771, at *1, 3-8 (Hawai #i App. Jan.
26, 2018). 
II.
Based on the foregoing, we reverse the District Court's
Judgment with respect to Count 3.  We affirm the District Court's
Judgment with respect to Counts 1, 2, and 4. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 31, 2018.
On the briefs:
Ryan A. Ha
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge
Linda L. Walton
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Hawai #i
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge
Associate Judge
   
4