NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0005699
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MARCELL PORTER, Defendant-Appellee, v.
EXODUS BAIL BOND, Real Party in Interest-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 12-1-0143)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
The instant appeal arises from the denial of a motion
 
to set aside a bail forfeiture. Real Party in Interest-
Appellant, Exodus Bail Bond (Exodus), appeals from the October
 
28, 2013 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying
 
Exodus Bail Bonds' Motion for [sic] to Set-Aside Bail Forfeiture"
 
1
entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit
 
court).
 
Exodus contends the circuit court erred in:

 
(1) finding that Exodus' "Motion to Set-Aside Bail
 
Forfeiture" was untimely;
 
(2) considering the representations made via
 
teleconference by bail agent Angela Levy from U.S. Bail in New
 York; and
 
1
 The Honorable Randall K.O. Lee presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) finding that Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i 
(State) was not obligated to extradite Defendant-Appellee Marcell
 
Porter (Porter) from New York to Hawai 'i. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that
 Exodus' appeal is without merit.
 
Exodus failed to establish good cause as to why the
 
circuit court should set aside its May 2, 2013 "Judgment and
 Order of Forfeiture of Bail Bond."
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 804-51 (Supp. 2013)
 
provides, in pertinent part:
 
Whenever the court, in any criminal cause, forfeits any bond
or recognizance given in a criminal cause, the court shall
immediately enter up judgment in favor of the State and
against the principal or principals and surety or sureties
on the bond, jointly and severally, for the full amount of
the penalty thereof, and shall cause execution to issue
thereon immediately after the expiration of thirty days from
the date that notice is given via personal service or
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the surety or
sureties on the bond, of the entry of the judgment in favor
of the State, unless before the expiration of thirty days
from the date that notice is given to the surety or sureties
on the bond of the entry of the judgment in favor of the
State, a motion or application of the principal or
principals, surety or sureties, or any of them, showing good
cause why execution should not issue upon the judgment, is
filed with the court. If the motion or application, after a
hearing held thereon, is sustained, the court shall vacate
the judgment of forfeiture and, if the principal surrenders
or is surrendered pursuant to section 804-14 or section
804-41, return the bond or recognizance to the principal or
surety, whoever shall have given it, less the amount of any
cost, as established at the hearing, incurred by the State
as a result of the nonappearance of the principal or other
event on the basis of which the court forfeited the bond or
 recognizance. If the motion or application, after a hearing
held thereon, is overruled, execution shall forthwith issue
and shall not be stayed unless the order overruling the
motion or application is appealed from as in the case of a
final judgment.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
"[A]bsent good cause a surety's failure to surrender
 
the defendant within the thirty-day search period provided by HRS
 
§ 804–51 mandates forfeiture of the bond." State v. Vaimili,  131
 
Hawai'i 9, 17, 313 P.3d 698, 706 (2013). Good cause exists when 
a surety shows that it was "unable, through no fault of [its] own
 
2

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or of the principal, to perform the conditions of the bond[.]" 
State v. Camara, 81 Hawai 'i 324, 330, 916 P.2d 1225, 1231 (1996). 
The circuit court did not err in denying Exodus' June
 
20, 2013 "Motion to Set-Aside Bail Forfeiture" because Exodus
 failed to surrender Porter and did not present any evidence of
 good cause in support of its motion.
 
The State had no obligation to extradite Porter. State
 
v. Flores, 88 Hawai
'i 126, 962 P.2d 1008 (App. 1998). Exodus' 
failure to demonstrate good cause makes its first and second points of error moot. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the October 28, 2013
 
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Exodus
 Bail Bonds' Motion for [sic] to Set-Aside Bail Forfeiture"
 entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 17, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Anthony T. Fujii
for Real Party in Interest-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Brian R. Vincent for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
3
 