  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0006028
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF U CHILDREN
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 10-00049)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Father/Appellant/Cross-Appellee (Father) and
 
Mother/Appellee/Cross-Appellant (Mother) appeal from the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights, filed December 2, 2013 in the Family
 
1
Court of the First Circuit  (family court), which terminated
 
Father's and Mother's parental rights to their two children.

 
On appeal, Father contends there was not clear and

 
convincing evidence that he could not provide a safe family home
 
within a reasonably foreseeable future, even with the assistance
 of a service plan, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 587A-33(a)(2); and that there was not clear and convincing
 
evidence the proposed permanent plan was in the best interest of
 the children, pursuant to HRS § 587A-33(a)(3).
 
On cross-appeal, Mother contends she was not afforded
 
an adequate opportunity to reunite with her children because she
 was not allowed to participate in Parent Child Interactive
 
1
 The Honorable Sherri L. Iha presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therapy (PCIT), was not provided with separate child visitation,
 
and was not provided in-home visits.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Father's and Mother's points of error as follows:
 
There was clear and convincing evidence that Father
 
could not provide a safe family home within a reasonable period
 of time, not exceeding two years from the children's entry into
 foster care, even with the assistance of a service plan.
 
The children entered foster care on April 29, 2010. 
Father was first provided a service plan on July 20, 2010. Hearings on Petitioner-Appellee State of Hawai
'i, Department of 
Human Services' (DHS) first Motion to Terminate Parental Rights 
were heard July 18, August 1, and September 11, 2012 and denied 
September 24, 2012. The hearing on DHS's second Motion to Terminate Parental Rights was held December 2, 2013. The parties stipulated that all evidence presented during the hearing on the first Motion to Terminate Parental Rights would be incorporated in the hearing on the second Motion to Terminate Parental Rights. 
Father indicated Mother would be the primary caregiver
 
when he was at work if the children were returned. However,
 Tracy Ober (Ober), a DHS social worker, stated Mother had not
 
addressed a DHS safety concern by failing to obtain psychiatric
 
services. Ober also stated Father failed to understand Mother's
 limitations. The family court, in Finding of Fact No. 121, did
 not credit Father's testimony that he would obtain a babysitter
 when he was at work. Ober opined that Father did not demonstrate
 he could compensate for Mother's deficiencies. Father also
 stated he had no problem letting Mother take a leadership role
 during visits. Thus, DHS had concerns that Father would not take
 control because when he got into disagreements with Mother he
 would walk away. There was clear and convincing evidence that
 Father, alone or in conjunction with Mother, could not provide a
 safe family home within a reasonable period of time, not
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exceeding two years from the children's entry into foster care,
 
even with the assistance of a service plan.
 
Additionally, there was clear and convincing evidence
 
the proposed permanent plan was in the best interest of the
 children. The permanent plan stated adoption of the children was
 the goal. A permanent plan shall state whether adoption, legal
 guardianship, or permanent custody is the goal. HRS § 587A­32(a)(1) (Supp. 2013). The family court shall "[p]resume that it
 is in the best interests of the child[ren] to be promptly and
 permanently placed with responsible and competent substitute
 parents and family in a safe and secure home[.]" HRS § 587A­33(a)(3)(A). Father presented no evidence to rebut the
 presumption that adoption was in the best interest of the
 children. DHS stated there were no paternal or maternal
 relatives that wished to care for the children. Michelle
 Birdsall (Birdsall), a licensed social worker, testified the
 
children needed permanency. One child had expressed anxiety about
 
being moved and not knowing where she would be going. Birdsall
 testified the children would benefit from having a stable home. 
Prospective adoptive parents had previously adopted an older
 half-sibling of the children and did express interest in caring
 for the younger children. Father stated that if he could not
 have the children at home with him then he would want them to be
 in a good place and that the prospective adoptive parents had
 already adopted their older half-sibling. The permanent plan was
 in the best interest of the children.
 
The record shows that Mother has long-standing mental
 
health problems for which she refused to seek treatment; that the
 children were removed from Mother and Father's custody after one
 of the children, who was then three and a half years old, was
 twice found wandering, unsupervised outside the child's
 residence; the children had not received adequate medical and
 dental care while in Mother and Father's custody; and Mother's 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parental rights regarding an older half-sibling of the children
 
had previously been terminated.
 
Contrary to Mother's claim, she was afforded an
 
adequate opportunity to reunite with the children. The family
 court specifically stated it was not ordering Mother to
 participate in PCIT. Rather, the family court requested DHS
 "look into" PCIT. DHS stated Mother should receive PCIT in order
 to reunite with the children but only after Mother completed
 hands-on parenting. Raylani Lupton (Lupton), a DHS social
 
worker, testified Mother was not referred to PCIT because Mother
 
had not completed hands-on parenting. 
Mother argues that separate visits would allow DHS to
 
observe how she interacts individually with the children. Lupton
 testified Mother was not given separate visits because of
 scheduling issues. Ober testified Mother did not request any
 separate visits when she was on the case. Regardless, Mother's
 interaction with the children during combined visits with Father
 indicated she acted inappropriately such as whispering to the
 children despite being warned the service provider should be able
 to hear all communication. Mother also did not apply the
 curriculum taught during outreach or counseling during visits. 
In fact, Mother was affecting Father's progress. She would cut
 him off or wouldn't allow him to interact with the children the
 way he wanted to and "[s]he would disagree[,] or she would do her
 own thing." It does not appear Father's presence or absence
 during visits affected Mother's interaction with the children and
 separate visits were not necessary to provide Mother with an
 adequate opportunity for reunification.
 
Although it was recommended Mother have in-home visits,
 
Lupton testified Mother did not make sufficient progress to
 warrant it. Mother had also made accusations toward DHS staff
 resulting in Lupton not allowing the DHS staff into the home for
 the staff's own safety.
 
Therefore,
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order Terminating
 
Parental Rights, filed December 2, 2013 in the Family Court of
 
the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, September 19, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Leslie C. Maharaj
for Father/Appellant/Cross-
Appellee.
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Herbert Y. Hamada

 
for Mother/Appellee/Cross-
Appellant.
 
Patrick A. Pascual Mary Anne Magnier

Deputy Attorneys General
for Petitioner/Appellee
Department of Human Services.
 
5
 