 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000416 02-JUL-2026 07:53 AM Dkt. 71 SO 
NOS. CAAP-24-0000416, CAAP-24-0000418 and CAAP-24-0000441  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I  
CAAP-24-0000416  
CROWE COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE, LLC, WILLIAM R. CROWE, and  
RICHARD M. KRYSTOFF, Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants-
Appellants, and CBI, INC., dba NEWMARK GRUBB CBI,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee, 
 
v.  
PAN PACIFIC INTERNATIONAL HOLDINGS CORPORATION, fka DON QUIJOTE
HOLDINGS CO., LTD., Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellee, and  
DON QUIJOTE (USA) CO., LTD., Defendant-Appellee  
 
CAAP-24-0000418  
CROWE COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE, LLC, WILLIAM R. CROWE, and  
RICHARD M. KRYSTOFF, Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants-
Appellants, and CBI, INC., dba NEWMARK GRUBB CBI,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee,  
v.  
PAN PACIFIC INTERNATIONAL HOLDINGS CORPORATION, fka DON QUIJOTE
HOLDINGS CO., LTD., Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellee, and  
DON QUIJOTE (USA) CO., LTD., Defendant-Appellee  
 
and  
 
CAAP-24-0000441  
CROWE COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE, LLC, WILLIAM R. CROWE, and  
RICHARD M. KRYSTOFF, Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants-
Appellants, and CBI, INC., dba NEWMARK GRUBB CBI,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee,  
v.    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
 PAN PACIFIC INTERNATIONAL HOLDINGS CORPORATION, fka DON QUIJOTE
HOLDINGS CO., LTD., Defendant/Counterclaimant-Appellee, and  
DON QUIJOTE (USA) CO., LTD., Defendant-Appellee  
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 1CC181002031)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Wadsworth, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.) 
Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants-Appellants Crowe  
Commercial Real Estate, LLC (  Crowe Commercial), William R. Crowe  
(
Crowe), and Richard M. Krystoff (Krystoff) (collectively,  
Brokers) appeal from the "Final Judgment Entered Against     
[Brokers] and [Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee] CBI, 
Inc. DBA Newmark Grubb CBI [(  CBI)]" (Final Judgment), entered on 
May 13, 2024, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit     (circuit  
court).   The Final Judgment was entered in favor of Defendant-
Appellee Don Quijote (USA) Co., Ltd. and Defendant/  
Counterclaimant-Appellee Pan Pacific International Holdings 
Corporation, formerly known as Don Quijote Holdings Co., Ltd   .  
(collectively,  DQ).      21
1 The Honorable John M. Tonaki presided. 
2 The Final Judgment incorporated the circuit court's: (1) 
April 28, 2023 "Order Granting [DQ's] Motion f or Summary Judgment as to 
[Brokers'] Contract Claims a nd All Claims i n First Amended Counterclaim, 
Filed July 18, 2022 [Dkt. 253]" (Order Granting MSJ on Contract Claims); (2) 
September 14, 2023 "Order Granting [DQ's] Renewed Motion f or Summary Judgment 
on Procuring Cause a nd Other Equitable Claims, Filed June 16, 2023 [Dkt. 
382]" (Order Granting MSJ on Equitable Claims); and (3) March 22, 2024 "Order 
Granting [DQ's] Motion f or Award o f Attorneys' Fees a nd Costs a s Prevailing 
Parties, Filed September 28, 2023 [Dkt. 432]" (Order Granting Fees a nd 
Costs). 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  In the underlying case, Brokers alleged that they are 
owed a commission for real estate brokerage services related to 
DQ's acquisition of the Pan Am Building (PAB
) located in 
Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i. Brokers raised claims based on contract and 
in equity. 
The parties filed cross-motions for summary 
judgment. The circuit court granted summary judgment in favor of DQ, granted DQ's request for attorneys' fees and costs, and 
entered the Final Judgment. 
In June 2024, the Brokers filed three notices of 
appeal. Crowe Commercial and Crowe appealed from the Final 
Judgment, creating case no. CAAP-24-0000416.  Krystoff filed two 
separate notices of appeal, the first through counsel creating case no. CAAP-24-0000418, and the second as a self-represented 
litigant creating case no. CAAP-24-0000441.  This court 
consolidated the appeals under case no. CAAP-24-0000416. 
Brokers assert three points of error on appeal, 
contending that the circuit court erred by: (1) "granting 
summary judgment on procuring cause and equitable claims when 
there were clearly genuine issues of material fact"; (2) "granting summary judgment on contract claims when there were 
clearly genuine issues of material fact"; and (3) "awarding 
attorneys' fees and costs against [Brokers] jointly and 
severally without properly apportioning the award or properly 
scrutinizing [DQ's] claimed fees." 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration 
to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we resolve Brokers' points of error as follows   :  3
(1) Brokers contend that the circuit court erred in  
granting summary judgment in favor of DQ on the breach of  
contract claims.  Brokers point to the Letter of Intent (  LOI), 
and the related correspondence between Brokers and DQ, as  
evidence of an implied contract between the parties.     
We review the circuit court's grant of summary 
judgment de novo, applying the following standard, 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non- moving party. In other words, we must 
view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawaiʻ i 46, 55-56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285-86 
(2013) (citation omitted). 
  
Brokerage agreements are governed by the statute of 
frauds, and must generally be in writing. See  Hawaii Revised 
3 We reorder Brokers' points of error herein. 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
     
   
 
  
  
   
    
      
  
  
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Statutes (HRS) § 656-1(6) (2016).4 Brokers contend that "[a] 
binding and enforceable contract was formed in 2015 when DQ's 
principal executed the LOI which expressly guaranteed [Brokers] 
a commission and confirmed that DQ would ensure that the Seller 
paid this commission in any completed transaction." The LOI is 
not a contract between Brokers and DQ.  It is a letter, signed 
by Naoki Yoshida (Yoshida), Don Quijote Holdings Co., Ltd.'s 
Senior Managing Director, which expressed DQ's offer -- made through Brokers to the prospective seller, i.e., Pacific Office 
Properties, Trust, Inc. (POP) -- to negotiate a Purchase 
Agreement for the PAB. 
For there to be an enforceable agreement, there must 
be a meeting of the minds between the parties on all essential 
terms. Moloaa Farms LLC v. Green Energy Team LLC, 157 Hawaiʻ i 
175, 190-91, 575 P.3d 808, 823-24 (2025) (quoting United Pub. 
4 HRS § 656-1 states, in pertinent part, 
No action shall be brought and maintained in any of the 
following cases: 
 . . . . 
(6) To charge any person upon any agreement 
authorizing or employing an agent or broker to 
purchase or sell real estate for compensation or commission; 
 . . . . 
unless the promise, contract, or agreement, upon which the action is brought, or some memorandum or note thereof, is 
in writing, and is signed by the party to be charged 
therewith, or by some person thereunto by the party in 
writing lawfully authorized. 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
  
 
 
 
 Workers, AFSCME, Local 646 v. Dawson Int'l, Inc.  , 113 Hawaiʻ i 
127, 141, 149 P.3d 495, 509 (2006)).  The following provisions 
of the LOI make clear that the parties did not intend the LOI to memorialize an enforceable agreement between DQ and POP, or to  
establish an implied contract between DQ and Brokers:  
8. Exclusive Dealings. Seller shall not solicit other 
offers or negotiate with any third party concerning the 
acquisition of the [PAB] or any portion thereof until 
this LOI is terminated. 
. . . . 
13. Brokers
. [DQ] and Seller acknowledge that [Brokers] 
represent [DQ] and shall be paid a commission by Seller 
equal to two percent (2%) of the Purchase Price or any consideration for the property including assumption of debt 
in whole or part plus GET tax thereon, at the Closing. Seller is not represented by a broker or real estate agent 
but by an attorney of choice. The parties agree that no 
other brokers or finders are entitled to a fee by reason of 
this transaction. 
. . . . 
15. Non
-Binding. Except for the provisions of Sections 6 
(Due Diligence Documents), 8 (Exclusive Dealings) and 14 
(Confidentiality), this LOI is intended by Seller and [DQ] 
to be a non- binding letter that expresses the parties' 
current intention. Except for the provisions of Sections 6 (Due Diligence Documents), 8 (Exclusive Dealings) and 14 
(Confidentiality), neither Seller nor [DQ] shall be legally 
bound or obligated to perform with respect to the subject matter of this LOI, under any legal theory, prior to the 
execution and mutual delivery of the Definitive Agreement. 
Such document alone shall govern the respective rights and 
obligations of the parties. Without limitation of the 
foregoing, neither Seller nor [DQ] shall make a claim under this LOI or a claim against the other based on "part 
performance", [sic] "detrimental reliance", [sic] "good 
faith", [sic] or any other similar claim. Either party may 
withdraw from negotiations of the Definitive Agreement at 
any time in such party's sole discretion without any liability. 
. . . . 
17. Duration of Offer
. This LOI shall remain open for
Seller's acceptance until May 29, 2015 at 5:00 p.m. (Hawaii 
Standard Time), or such later time as determined by [DQ].  
If a signed acceptance is not returned by the date and hour 
6   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 . . .  While the parties intend to proceed promptly to 
complete and execute the Purchase Agreement, it is 
expressly understood that this is a [LOI] only, and no 
liability or obligation of any nature, including the 
obligation to negotiate in good faith, is intended to be 
created between the parties hereto.   Either party may 
terminate negotiations at any time in their sole 
discretion.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  specified above or a later date as determined by [DQ], this LOI shall be deemed null and void unless extended in 
writing by [DQ]. 
Should the above general terms and conditions be acceptable 
to you, please acknowledge your approval and acceptance 
below. [DQ's] offer shall remain open for Seller's 
acceptance up to [5:]00 p.m. (HST) on May 29, 2015. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The LOI, by its express terms, was a non-binding 
letter of intent to engage in negotiations for DQ's purchase of 
PAB, with the understanding that the LOI would be "null and 
void" unless accepted by May 29, 2015 at 5:00 p.m., and that 
"[e]ither party may terminate negotiations at any time in their  
sole discretion."  
The evidence introduced by Brokers also shows that the   
parties understood the LOI to be non-binding.  In a May 24, 2015 
email, Yoshida asked Brokers to confirm the following:  
1. [DQ] is not obligated to pay any broker fee for this 
transaction. 
2. The price will not be stated in this LOI. 
3. This LOI is non binding what so ever [ sic]. 
Krystoff responded by reassuring Yoshida that the LOI 
was non-binding and did not obligate DQ to pay any brokerage 
fees: 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
    Regarding your comments on the LOI, please see below: 
[Yoshida's] Q1
: Buyer is not obligated to pay any broker 
fee for this transaction. 
[Krystoff's response:] The LOI specifically states that the 
brokerage fee is to be paid by the Seller (as would any Definitive Agreement). Should this be disputed by the 
seller, we would look to DQ to protect our brokerage 
position by making it clear to the Seller that the 
transaction can only be closed, with the brokerage fee 
being paid out of the Seller side of the transaction. 
. . . . 
[Yoshida's] Q3: This LOI is non binding what so ever  [sic].  
[Krystoff's response:] Paragraph 15 of the LOI states that the LOI is non
-binding.  There is no binding contract 
unless and until the definitive agreement is fully executed by the parties.  
Yoshida signed the LOI upon receiving Krystoff's 
reassurances. Krystoff emailed the signed LOI to Lawrence Taff  
(Taff),  POP's then-Chief Financial Officer, on May 26, 2015.    
Taff summarily rejected the unsolicited LOI on behalf of POP,  
informing Krystoff: "[W]e believe that the value of our holdings  
is maximized by looking at all of our buildings together. 
Selling/disposing of the Pan Am asset individually would be very 
disadvantageous from a tax perspective as well."   By its own 
terms, the LOI expired upon POP's rejection of the LOI.  5
The record reflects that there was no enforceable 
brokerage agreement between Brokers and DQ. We therefore affirm 
the Order Granting MSJ on Contract Claims. 
5 Taff testified in a deposition that PAB had been purchased in 
2003 by five individuals: Jay Shidler, Jim Reynolds, Matthew Root, Jim 
Ingebritsen, and Taff. These five individuals created POP, contributed their 
interests in the PAB to POP, and held interests in POP. 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  
   
     
 
 
 
 
   
   
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
  (2) Having concluded that the circuit court did not 
err by entering summary judgment on Brokers' contract claims, we 
turn to Brokers' "equitable claims." They identify only one 
such claim. Brokers contend that the record reflects a genuine 
issue of material fact as to whether Brokers were the "procuring 
cause" of the real estate transaction and are therefore entitled 
in equity to a brokerage commission. DQ contends that summary 
judgment was appropriate because "[Brokers] failed to raise a triable issue on their equitable claims, as their own evidence 
does not establish Brokers as the procuring cause." (Formatting 
altered.) 
In Trent Trust Co. v. MacFarlane, the Supreme Court of 
the Territory of Hawaiʻ i explained that a broker could be 
entitled to a commission as the "procuring cause" of the real estate transaction.  21 Haw. 435, 439 (Haw. Terr. 1913) ("[I]f 
the broker procures a prospective purchaser he cannot be 
deprived of his commissions by the termination of his agency by 
the principal even though the sale is not consummated until 
afterwards, provided he was the procuring cause of the sale[.]"); see also Lundburg v. Stinson, 5 Haw. App. 394, 402, 
695 P.2d 328, 335 (App. 1985) ("[P]rocuring cause" requires more 
than initial contact, and "there can be only one 'procuring 
cause'" for a transaction. (citations omitted)).  
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
   
 
  
 
 
 
     
 
 As discussed in section (1), supra, where a broker 
brings an action to recover compensation or commission relating 
to a real estate transaction, the statute of frauds requires 
that the agreement "authorizing or employing [the] agent or 
broker to purchase or sell real estate for compensation or 
commission" is in writing. HRS § 656-1(6).  
We acknowledge that Hawaiʻ i case law provides an 
exception to the general rule requiring that brokerage 
agreements be in writing. 
In Hamilton v. Funk, the Hawaiʻ i 
Supreme Court recognized an exception where a purchaser "should 
have reasonably expected that the oral agreement" to pay an 
agreed-upon commission "if [the broker] produced a ready, 
willing and able buyer would induce and did induce [the 
broker's] actions in bringing the property to the purchaser[ ']s 
attention and in steering them to it," such that "injustice can 
be avoided only by enforcement of the promise." 66 Haw. 451, 
453, 666 P.2d 582, 583 (1983) (citation omitted).  In Hamilton, 
the court thus directed that, where necessary to avoid 
injustice, courts could exercise their discretion to enforce a 
promise to pay an agreed-upon compensation in exchange for real 
estate brokerage services, even if the agreement had not been 
committed to writing. Id. 
The record reflects no agreement -- even one that was 
oral and/or implied -- between the Brokers and DQ. The LOI, 
10   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 which was a letter expressing DQ's interest in negotiating the 
purchase of the PAB from POP, is not and does not provide 
evidence of an agreement between Brokers and DQ. We therefore 
conclude that the statute of frauds was not satisfied, and that 
the narrow exception set forth in Hamilton does not apply here. 
We affirm the circuit court's Order Granting MSJ on 
Equitable Claims. 
(3) Brokers contend that the circuit court erred in 
awarding DQ attorneys' fees pursuant to HRS § 607-14 (2016), which permits a prevailing party to recover such fees "in all 
actions in the nature of assumpsit." We review a circuit 
court's award of attorneys' fees under the abuse of discretion 
standard. Maui Tomorrow v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 110 Hawaiʻ i 
234, 242, 131 P.3d 517, 525 (2006). 
HRS § 607-14 allows for the recovery of attorneys' 
fees, in an amount not to exceed twenty-five percent of the 
judgment, by a prevailing party in actions in the nature of 
assumpsit. In determining if an action is in the nature of 
assumpsit, the court should look to the "facts and issues raised in the complaint, the nature of the entire grievance, and the 
relief sought." Leslie v. Est. of Tavares, 93 Hawaiʻ i 1, 6, 
994 P.2d 1047, 1052 (2000) (citation omitted). 
Here, the 
circuit court did not err in determining that Brokers' claims 
were in the nature of assumpsit because Crowe Commercial, Crowe, 
11   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
    
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
  and Krystoff all specifically requested monetary damages in the 
form of a commission.6 
Moreover, the circuit court did not err by not 
apportioning the fees award. In awarding fees in a case 
involving assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims, a court must, if 
practicable, apportion fees between the assumpsit and non-
assumpsit claims. Blair v. Ing, 96 Hawaiʻ i 327, 332, 31 P.3d 
184, 189 (2001). 
However, if the assumpsit and non-assumpsit 
claims are "inextricably linked" -- i.e., if it would be 
"impracticable or impossible to apportion fees" -- the court may 
decline to make an apportionment. Au v. Funding Grp., Inc., 
933 F. Supp. 2d 1264, 1272 (D. Haw. 2013) (quoting 
Blair, 96 
Hawaiʻi at 333, 31 P.3d at 190).  
Brokers' breach of contract and "procuring cause" 
claims were in the nature of assumpsit, as discussed supra, and in any event, were "inextricably linked" as both claims 
requested damages based on an alleged contractual or quasi-
contractual obligation.  On this record, we conclude that the 
circuit court did not abuse its discretion by declining to 
apportion the fees. 
6 Crowe contends that he assigned his rights to a commission to 
Crowe Commercial, and should therefore not be held liable for fees and costs 
in his individual capacity.  Crowe's contention lacks merit. The record 
reflects that Crowe requested that the circuit court award damages to him if 
it found that the assignment was not valid. 
12   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Order 
Granting MSJ on Contract Claims, the Order Granting MSJ on 
Equitable Claims, the Order Granting Fees and Costs, and the 
Final Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i, July 2, 2026. 
On the briefs:  
Peter Knapman,  
for Plaintiffs/Counterclaim 
Defendants-Appellants Crowe  
Commercial Real Estate, LLC 
and William R. Crowe.  
 John S. Edmunds,  
for Plaintiff/Counterclaim  
Defendant-Appellant   
Richard M. Krystoff  
in CAAP-24-0000418.  
 
William M. Harstad,  
for Defendant-Appellee and  
Defendant/Counterclaimant-
Appellee.  
 Richard M. Krystoff,  
Self-represented 
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellant  in CAAP-24-0000441.  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth  
Presiding Judge  
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
Associate Judge  
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge  
13 