NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000284
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CAROL L. McKENNA, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF ELIMA LANI,
a Hawai'i nonprofit corporation; CERTIFIED MANAGEMENT, INC., 
dba Certified Hawai' i; WELLS FARGO BANK, N.A.; and ROSS ANDALORO,
Defendants/Cross-Claim Defendants/Cross-Claimants-Appellees, 
and 
GEOFFREY S. KIM and HAWAIIAN ISLES ADJUSTING CO., LLC,
a Hawai'i limited liability company;
Defendants/Cross-Claimants/Cross-Claim Defendants,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS,
PARTNERSHIPS, GOVERNMENTAL and OTHER ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-627K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Ginoza, C.J., and Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
 
This appeal arises from the enforcement of a purported
 
settlement of a case in which Plaintiff-Appellant Carol L.
 
McKenna challenged the handling of mold in her residential unit
 by Defendants/Cross-Claim Defendants/Cross-Claimants-Appellees
 Association of Apartment Owners of Elima Lani; Certified
 Management, Inc.; Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.; and Ross Andaloro
 (collectively "Appellees"); and Defendants/Cross-Claimants/Cross-
Claim Defendants Geoffrey S. Kim and Hawaiian Isles Adjusting
 Co., LLC. Specifically, McKenna appeals, pro se, from the
 March 10, 2016 Final Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Third Circuit ("Circuit Court").1/
 
On October 21, 2014, a settlement conference took place
 
("Settlement Conference") between McKenna and Appellees to
 
address the remaining claims in McKenna's Second Amended
 Complaint, filed January 28, 2014, against Appellees.
2/ At the
 
close of the conference, the Circuit Court and the parties went
 on the record and acknowledged that the parties had reached a
 settlement and identified and placed on the record the essential
 terms of the agreement, which the Circuit Court clarified with
 McKenna, who was present with her then-counsel, Kenneth Ross, and
 which McKenna expressly agreed to. One of the essential terms
 was the subsequent creation and execution of "a settlement
 agreement with mutual releases and standard settlement terms and
 a dismissal of the case."
 
While on the record, the Circuit Court asked Ross if
 
all essential terms of the settlement had been placed on the
 record, to which Ross affirmatively responded. McKenna never
 expressed any apprehension or objection over, or asked questions
 regarding, the terms of the proposed settlement agreement.
 
On October 27, 2014, Ross filed a motion to withdraw as
 
counsel for McKenna, citing McKenna's refusal to sign settlement
 documents.
3/ The Circuit Court granted the motion. 
On November 5, 2014, Appellees filed a motion to
 
enforce the settlement agreement ("Motion to Enforce"),
 requesting that the Circuit Court require McKenna to sign the
 settlement agreement and stipulation and/or otherwise permit the
 
1/
 The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided over entry of the
judgment. The Honorable Elizabeth Strance presided over all other proceedings
in the case.
 
2/
 The dismissal of Kim and Hawaiian Isles Adjusting from the case
was reflected in the March 24, 2014 Final Judgment in favor of Defendants
Geoffrey S. Kim and Hawaiian Isles Adjusting Co., LLC. The dismissal of Kim
 and Hawaiian Isles Adjusting is not challenged in this appeal.
 
3/
 In his supporting declaration, Ross stated that the morning after
the Settlement Conference, on October 22, 2014, McKenna informed him via e­mail and telephone that she had changed her mind and wanted to rescind her
agreement to the terms of settlement; that McKenna instructed Ross not to sign
any settlement documents; that Ross told McKenna because they had put the
settlement agreement on the record, "she could not now 'take it back'"; and
that after McKenna still insisted that Ross not sign any settlement documents
and Ross repeated he could not do so, McKenna discharged him.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
court clerk to execute the document in light of McKenna's refusal
 
to do so, and order a dismissal of the case with prejudice. 
Attached to the motion was a declaration from counsel for the
 AOAO and Certified Management, Danielle Degele-Matthews ("Degele-
Matthews Declaration"), which attested to, among other things,
 Appellees' Settlement and Release Agreement draft ("SRA Draft")
 that was sent to McKenna's counsel. McKenna opposed the motion. 
After hearing the motion, the Circuit Court entered an
 
order granting the Motion to Enforce ("February 6, 2015 Order to
 Enforce"). The Circuit Court found that the parties entered into
 a binding settlement agreement at the Settlement Conference but
 found also that the SRA Draft contained terms beyond those
 material to the settlement, and therefore, struck those terms.
 The Circuit Court additionally made several findings regarding
 McKenna's refusal to proceed with the settlement and directed
 that the clerk of court sign the revised SRA Draft and the
 stipulation upon its submission by the parties. On March 16,
 2015, the Circuit Court entered the "Stipulation for Dismissal
 With Prejudice of All Claims and All Parties" in which the Chief
 Clerk of the Third Circuit, Lester D. Oshiro, signed on behalf of
 McKenna. 
On March 10, 2016, the Circuit Court entered the Final
 
Judgment, which dismissed with prejudice all of McKenna's claims
 in her First Amended Complaint against Kim and Hawaiian Isles
 Adjusting and all of McKenna's claims in her Second Amended
 Complaint against Appellees, and which dismissed with prejudice
 all cross-claims of all defendants against all other defendants. 
McKenna timely appealed.
 
On appeal, McKenna alleges that the Circuit Court erred
 
when it enforced the settlement agreement and entered final
 judgment because (1) the Appellees submitted inadmissible
 evidence in their Motion to Enforce; (2) there was no meeting of
 the minds between the parties as to the material terms of the
 settlement and release agreement;
4/ (3) McKenna's and Appellees'
 
4/
 McKenna's second, third, and fourth points of error have been
consolidated under this second point of error as they all pertain to how the
parties reached the settlement and the drafting of the final settlement
agreement.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel lacked authority under Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS")
 
section 605-7 to settle the case on behalf of their respective
 clients; and (4) there were four claims of attorney misconduct
 raised by McKenna at the February 6, 2015 hearing on McKenna's
 Motion to Order Evidentiary Hearing.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we affirm.
 
(1) In her first point of error, McKenna alleges that 
the Circuit Court considered inadmissible evidence in the form of the Degele-Matthews Declaration and referenced exhibits in deciding the Motion to Enforce. However, McKenna failed to raise any objection in her opposition to the Motion to Enforce as to the admissibility of the Degele-Matthews Declaration or the referenced exhibits, and, therefore, waived any objection on this issue and, subsequently, her first point.  See Hawaii Ventures, 
LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 114 Hawai' i 438, 500, 164 P.3d 696, 758 
(2007) ("As a general rule, if a party does not raise an argument at the circuit court level, that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal[.]" (quoting Kemp v. State of Hawai' i Child 
Support Enf't Agency, 111 Hawai' i 367, 391, 141 P.3d 1014, 1038 
(2006)) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted)) . 
(2) In her second point of error, McKenna alleges that
 
there was no meeting of the minds and, thus, no binding
 settlement agreement. McKenna advances three main arguments in
 support: the final settlement agreement and resulting dismissal
 with prejudice were not entered into voluntarily and with
 informed consent, evidenced partially by the fact that the court
 clerk signed on McKenna's behalf and partially by the Circuit
 Court's removal of joint drafting provision "#12(c)"; the Circuit
 Court rewrote the settlement agreement where material terms were
 in dispute; and the final settlement agreement was materially
 different than the SRA Draft.
 
As a species of contract, settlement agreements are
 
governed by principles of contract law, Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc.
 v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co., 116 Hawai' i 277, 288, 172 P.3d 
4
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
1021, 1032 (2007), and require mutual assent or a meeting of the 
minds as to all material or essential terms of the agreement. 
See Honolulu Rapid Transit Co. v. Paschoal, 51 Haw. 19, 26, 449 P.2d 123, 127 (1968) ("It is a fundamental principle of law that there must be mutual assent or a meeting of the minds on all essential elements or terms in order to form a binding contract." (citing Richardson v. Greesboro Warehouse & Storage Co., 26 S.E.2d 897 (1943)).
5/ Because this analysis is conducted under 
an objective standard, determined either explicitly by the parties' language or implicitly from other circumstances, "the purely subjective, or secret, intent of a party in assenting is irrelevant in an inquiry into the contractual intent of the parties." Standard Mgmt., Inc. v. Kekona, 99 Hawai' i 125, 134, 
53 P.3d 264, 273 (App. 2001). 
An agreement "cannot be set aside except on the grounds 
that would justify rescission." Assocs. Fin. Servs. Co. of 
Hawai'i, Inc. v. Mijo, 87 Hawai' i 19, 28–29, 950 P.2d 1219, 
1228–29 (1998) (emphasis omitted) (quoting Miller v. Manuel, 9 Haw. App. 56, 63, 828 P.2d 286, 291 (1991)). "Generally, in the absence of bad faith or fraud, when parties enter into an agreement settling and adjusting a dispute, neither party is permitted to repudiate it." Id. at 29, 950 P.2d at 1229 (quoting 
Miller, 9 Haw. App. at 63, 828 P.2d at 291). On the other hand, "a motion to enforce a settlement agreement may not be decided summarily if there is any question of fact as to whether a mutual, valid, and enforceable settlement agreement exists between the parties." Moran v. Guerreiro, 97 Hawai' i 354, 371, 
37 P.3d 603, 620 (App. 2001). 
The bulk of McKenna's second point focuses on the
 
events following the Settlement Conference. However, the proper
 analysis as to whether there was a meeting of the minds looks to
 when the parties placed the essential terms of settlement on the
 
5/
 See also Envy Hawaii LLC v. Cirbin Inc. , Civil No. 16-00551
ACK-RLP, 2017 WL 5354198, at *2 (D. Haw. Oct. 17, 2017)("A complete settlement
agreement requires agreement on all ' material  terms' and 'the intent of the
 
parties to bind themselves.'" (emphasis in original) (quoting Callie v. Near ,
829 F.2D 888, 891 (9th Cir. 1987)), report and recommendation adopted , Civil
No. 16-00551 ACK-RLP, 2017 WL 5327451 (D. Haw. Nov. 13, 2017).
 
5
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
record. See e.g., Goran Pleho, LLC v. Lacy, No. CAAP-12-0000025,
 
2016 WL 4082346, at *16-17 (Haw. Ct. App. July 29, 2016).
 
In her opposition to the Motion to Enforce, McKenna 
conceded that she "does not dispute that the October 21, 2014 
Settlement Offer was orally accepted by [her] at that proceeding." The record supports this concession.
6/ At this 
point, under an objective standard, there was no indication that McKenna did not intend to be bound to the resulting judgment or dismissal with prejudice. Therefore the agreement was entered into voluntarily and there was a meeting of the minds, and a binding settlement agreement was formed.  See Goran Pleho, 2016 WL 4082346, at *16-17 (holding that a binding settlement agreement was formed when all the essential terms were placed on the record, the parties indicated that they heard and agreed to all terms, and no essential terms were left to be determined at a later date); Kekona, 99 Hawai' i at 134, 53 P.3d at 273 ("[T]he 
purely subjective, or secret, intent of a party in assenting is irrelevant in an inquiry into the contractual intent of the parties. 'Unexpressed intentions are nugatory when the problem is to ascertain the legal relations, if any, between two parties.'" (quoting Earl M. Jorgensen Co. v. Mark Constr., Inc., 56 Haw. 
6/
 The transcript from the Settlement Conference provides, in
relevant part: 
THE COURT:  Okay.  And my understanding is that the
parties have reached a settlement  agreement in this case. 
That  the terms of the settlement include –- the essential
 
terms of the settlement agreement are that the  [Appellees]
shall pay [McKenna] $60,000 in cash.  The  Association of
 
Apartment Owners of Elima Lani will also release any lien and
outstanding amounts owed by Ms. McKenna to the association.
 
That there be –- it's a general-damages-only release,
and that the partes will execute a settlement agreement with
mutual releases and standard settlement terms and a dismissal
 of the case. 
Have I accurately stated the settlement agreement from
the perspective of the plaintiff, Mr. Ross? 
MR. ROSS: Yes, your Honor. 
THE COURT: And Ms. McKenna, do you agree to the terms
of the settlement? 
MS. MCKENNA: Yes. 
The dismissal was later clarified as a dismissal with prejudice. 
6
  
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
466, 470-71, 540 P.2d 978, 982 (1975))).
 
The final settlement agreement, which the Circuit Court 
attached to the February 6, 2015 Order to Enforce, did not 
materially change the essential terms agreed to at the Settlement Conference, and in fact, included several edits to assure that the agreement was not outside the scope of what was discussed. Therefore, McKenna's remaining arguments are without merit.
7/ 
Furthermore, McKenna fails to show that the settlement agreement was obtained through bad faith, fraud, or other misconduct which would justify rescission of the agreement. See Mijo, 87 Hawai' i 
at 29, 950 P.2d at 1229 (citation omitted). McKenna's second point is therefore without merit. 
(3) In her third point of error, McKenna alleges that
 
the Circuit Court erred in enforcing the settlement agreement
 because Ross and Appellees' counsel, who appeared without
 Appellees at the Settlement Conference and who insufficiently
 asserted through oral representation that they had authority to
 settle on behalf of their clients, lacked authority to settle the
 case pursuant to HRS section 605-7.
8/
 
Even if express written consent is absent, settlements
 
are binding where the client ratifies the settlement, either
 
7/
 McKenna's arguments pertaining to provision #12(c) and all other
non-essential terms of the agreement and terms that were not contemplated at
the time the agreement was placed on the record, like remediation, are without
merit. See Mijo , 87 Hawai 'i at 32, 950 P.2d at 1232 ("A settlement agreement
is not invalid because certain details are not worked out, where such details
are not essential to the proposal and do not change its terms or purpose.").McKenna's contention that the final settlement agreement and stipulation fordismissal with prejudice were not executed voluntarily because the courtclerk, rather than she, provided the signature on the subject documents, isalso without merit. This court has upheld an HRCP Rule 41(a)(1)(B)stipulation for dismissal with prejudice and settlement agreement in which thecircuit court ordered the clerk of the court to sign the stipulation on behalfof the party who would not sign it and ordered execution of the agreement.
See e.g., Wright v. Miyake Concrete Accessories, Inc. , No. CAAP-13-0003274,
2016 WL 6997650, at *10-11, 12 (Haw. Ct. App. Nov. 30, 2016), reconsideration 
denied, 2016 WL 7387378 (Dec. 21, 2016). 
8/
 HRS section 605-7 provides: 
The practitioners licensed by the supreme court shall have
control to judgment and execution, of all suits and defenses
confided to them; provided that no practitioner shall have
power to compromise, arbitrate, or settle such matters
 confided to the practitioner, unless upon special authority in
writing from the practitioner's client.
 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 605-7 (1993).
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
expressly or implicitly. Cook v. Sur. Life Ins., Co., 79 Hawai' i 
403, 411, 903 P.2d 708, 716 (App. 1995) (citing Scott v. Pilipo, 
25 Haw. 386, 390 (1920)). With regard to the latter, "[a]ny failure on the part of the client to object to an unauthorized act within a reasonable time after becoming aware of it will be construed as a ratification of it." Id. (citing Scott, 25 Haw. 
at 390). 
Here, none of the Appellees ever objected to the terms
 
of the settlement or asserted that their respective attorneys
 were not authorized to enter into the settlement. Similarly,
 Ross' representation to the Circuit Court at the Settlement
 Conference that he was appearing on behalf of McKenna and
 McKenna's express approval of the settlement agreement when
 questioned by the Circuit Court, coupled with her silence
 following Ross' express approval of the clarified essential terms
 of the agreement, constitute McKenna's ratification of Ross'
 authority to settle on her behalf. See Cobb v. Willis, 7
 
Haw.App. 238, 245, 752 P.2d 106, 111 (1988) (determining that
 because the client appeared with her counsel at the settlement
 conference and because at the conference the client did not raise
 any objections, it was presumed that the client's counsel had
 authority to bind the client). It therefore follows that
 McKenna's argument pertaining to fraud on the basis that Ross and
 Appellees' counsel lacked authority to settle is unsubstantiated,
 and her third point is without merit. 
(4) In her final point of error, McKenna essentially
 
reargues her previous points as a basis for finding fraud, undue
 influence, and duress.
9/ To the extent that this point addresses
 
issues implicating settlement authority and the drafting of the
 final settlement agreement, it is without merit as previously
 
9/
 More specifically, McKenna alleges that the Circuit Court erred in
enforcing the settlement agreement when Appellees' counsel committed fraud in
representing to the Circuit Court that they had full authority to settle the
case and Appellees were not present at the Settlement Conference; when
Appellees falsely represented to the Circuit Court that the agreement reached
on October 21, 2014 was materially the same as the SRA Draft submitted with
the Motion to Enforce, that the agreement had been jointly drafted, and that
the final settlement agreement was executed without any undue duress placed on
McKenna; and when the settlement agreement was not certified or executed
within three weeks of the settlement conference.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
explained under McKenna's second and third points of error. See
 
supra. As to McKenna's claims implicating duress or undue
 influence, McKenna fails to provide citations to the record or
 explain how she was subjected to such pressures; rather she
 baldly asserts that the provision of the settlement agreement
 stating that the agreement was entered into and executed
 voluntarily by each party is false. McKenna has therefore failed
 to demonstrate that Appellees or their counsel committed fraud or
 other acts of attorney misconduct, and her fourth point of error
 is without merit.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the March 10, 2016
 
Final Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 29, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Carol L. McKenna,
Pro Se Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Michael W. Moore
 
(Law Offices of Yeh & Moore)for Defendant/Cross-Claim
Defendant/Cross-Claimant-
Appellee Ross Andaloro.
 
Danielle N. Degele-Mathews
(Tom Chee Watts
Degele-Mathews & Yoshida, LLP)
for Defendant/Cross-Claim
Defendant/Cross-Claimant-
Appellee Association of
Apartment Owners of Elima Lani
and Certified Management, Inc.
 
J. Blaine Rogers
(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)
for Defendant/Cross-Claim
Defendant/Cross-Claimant-
Appellee Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
9
 