 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000389
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
LEONARDO L. FRANCISCO, Claimant-Appellant,
v.
 
MARRIOTT HOTEL SERVICES, INC.
dba: WAIKOLOA BEACH MARRIOTT, Employer-Appellee,
and
 
MARRIOTT CLAIMS SERVICES, Insurance Carrier-Appellee
and
 
SPECIAL COMPENSATION FUND, Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2009-500(WH) (9-06-00349))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
In this workers compensation case, Claimant-Appellant
 
Leonardo L. Francisco (Francisco) appeals from the "Decision and
 
Order" filed on January 31, 2012, by the Labor and Industrial
 Relations Appeals Board (LIRAB) and the LIRAB's "Order Denying
 [Francisco's] Motion for Reconsideration" filed on March 15,
 2012. 
The LIRAB determined in relevant part that Francisco was
 
"not permanently and totally disabled, either on a medical basis
 or on an odd-lot basis," and that he sustained an "8% permanent
 partial disability of the whole person" as a result of his work
 accident.
 
On appeal, Francisco argues that the LIRAB erred: (1)
 
when if found in its Finding of Fact 36 that "[n]o physician has
 credibly verified that [Francisco] is unable to return to any
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
gainful employment"; and (2) when it concluded in its Conclusion
 
of Law 3 that "[Francisco] did not sustain permanent total
 disability as a result of the March 6, 2006 work injury" and that
 "[Francisco] is not permanently and totally disabled, either on a
 medical basis or on an odd-lot basis." Francisco alternatively
 argues that if he is not permanently totally disabled, then the
 LIRAB erred when it concluded in its Conclusion of Law 4 that
 "the extent of permanent partial disability as a result of the
 March 6, 2006 work injury is 8% permanent partial disability of
 the whole person for [Francisco's] low back condition." In his
 alternative argument, Francisco contends that his permanent
 partial disability should be rated at 23%, rather than 8%, of the
 whole person.
 
As explained below, we affirm the LIRAB's Decision and
 
Order and its "Order Denying [Francisco's] Motion for
 Reconsideration." 
I.
 
Francisco was employed by Marriott Hotel Services, Inc.
 
dba: Waikoloa Beach Marriott (Marriott) as a steward. His job
 duties involved washing dishes, pots, and pans, and throwing away
 rubbish. On March 6, 2006, Francisco sustained a work injury to
 his low back while pushing a cart of trash up a concrete ramp. 
Francisco sought treatment from his physician, Dr. Patrick Siu,
 who diagnosed Francisco's condition as a low back strain and
 initially anticipated treatment for one to two months. 
In a report dated July 18, 2006, Dr. Deborah A. Agles,
 
an occupational medicine physician who conducted an independent
 medical examination of Francisco at Marriott's request,
 determined that Francisco could return to work full-time on a
 light-duty basis. Dr. Sui also determined that Francisco could
 return to full-time light-duty work as of July 31, 2006, with no
 lifting over twenty pounds and no prolonged standing. Marriott
 planned to have Francisco preform the light-duty tasks of folding
 napkins and polishing silverware, plates, bowls, and serving
 items. When Francisco returned to work, he was given the task of
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
polishing platters and punchbowls that weighted less than twenty
 
pounds and had been placed on a table. He was provided with a
 chair, so he could either sit or stand. After working less than
 two hours, Francisco complained of pain and was allowed to go
 home. He did not thereafter return to work. Miles Togikawa,
 Francisco's supervisor, testified that light-duty work would
 always have been available to Francisco if he had come back to
 work. 
Francisco was sixty years old on the day he sustained 
his work injury. Francisco had immigrated to Hawai' i from the 
Philippines in 1984 and had only attended school through the third grade. 
II.
 
We resolve the arguments raised by Francisco on appeal
 
as follows:
 
A.
 
We conclude that the LIRAB did not err in finding that 
"[n]o physician has credibly verified that [Francisco] is unable
 to return to any gainful employment." Francisco argues that Dr.
 Julia D. Crawford, one of his treating physicians, "credibly
 verified that [Francisco] was unable to return to gainful
 employment as a result of his work injury." However, Marriott
 presented the opinions of physicians and other evidence that
 conflicted with Dr. Crawford's opinion, and the LIRAB
 specifically found that it "does not credit Dr. Crawford's
 unsubstantiated statement that [Francisco] was anticipated to
 never return to work." 
"[W]e give deference to the LIRAB's assessment of the 
credibility of witnesses and the weight the LIRAB gives to the evidence." Moi v. State, Dept. of Public Safety, 118 Hawai' i 
239, 242, 188 P.3d 753, 756 (App. 2008). 
It is well established that courts decline to consider
 
the weight of the evidence to ascertain whether it weighs in
favor of the administrative findings, or to review the
agency's findings of fact by passing upon the credibility of
witnesses or conflicts in testimony, especially the findings
of an expert agency dealing with a specialized field.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nakamura v. State, 98 Hawai' i 263, 268, 47 P.3d 730, 735 (2002) 
(format altered) (quoting Igawa v. Koa House Restaurant, 97 
Hawaii 402, 409–410, 38 P.3d 570, 577–578 (2001). We decline to overturn the LIRAB's determination of the credibility of, and the weight to give to, Dr. Crawford's opinion on the issue of Francisco's ability to return to gainful employment. 
B.
 
Francisco argues that the LIRAB erred in concluding
 
that he did not sustain permanent total disability as the result
 of his March 6, 2006, work injury. Specifically, Francisco
 contends that the LIRAB erred in concluding that he did not
 sustain permanent total disability on an odd-lot basis. We
 disagree.
 
Under the odd-lot doctrine, "where an employee receives
 
a work-related permanent partial disability which combined with
 other factors such as age, education, experience, etc., renders
 him, in fact, unable to obtain employment, he is entitled to be
 treated as being permanently totally disabled." Tsuchiyama v.
 
Kahului Trucking and Storage, Inc., 2 Haw. App. 659, 660-61, 638
 P.2d 1381, 1382 (1982). The employee bears the burden of
 establishing a prima facie case that he or she falls within the
 odd-lot category. Id. at 661, 638 P.2d at 1382. The burden then
 
shifts to the employer "to show that some kind of suitable work
 is regularly and continuously available to the claimant." 
Yarnell v. City Roofing Inc., 72 Haw. 272, 275, 813 P.2d 1386,
 1388 (1991) (block quote format and citation omitted).
 
Even assuming that Francisco met his burden of
 
establishing a prima facie case that he fell within the odd-lot
 category, the LIRAB's findings establish that Marriott met its
 burden of showing the availability of suitable work for
 Francisco. The LIRAB found that although light-duty "work
 folding napkins and polishing silver was available to [Francisco]
 on a permanent basis," he "declined to avail himself of the
 opportunity." The LIRAB also rejected Francisco's claim that he
 was unable to perform this light-duty work because sitting hurt
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his back. The LIRAB rejected Francisco's claim based on its 
findings that Francisco had been able to travel to the Philippines, that he could sit long periods of time while watching television and carving ' opihi shells, and that the work 
offered was within Francisco's light-duty restrictions. We conclude that there was substantial evidence to support the LIRAB's findings and that based on these findings, the LIRAB did not err in concluding that Francisco was not permanently totally disabled on an odd-lot basis. 
C.
 
In the alternative, Francisco argues that if he is not
 
permanently totally disabled, then the LIRAB erred in concluding
 that the extent of his permanent partial disability from his work
 injury was only 8% of the whole person. Francisco contends that
 his permanent partial disability should instead be rated at 23%,
 of the whole person. We disagree with Francisco's claim that the
 LIRAB erred.
 
On the issue of permanent partial disability, the LIRAB
 
affirmed the decision of the Director of the Department of Labor
 and Industrial Relations (Director). The Director had credited
 the opinions of Dr. Agles and Dr. Peter B. Lum that Francisco had
 suffered a 5% permanent partial disability of the whole person as
 the result of the work injury to his lumbar spine. The Director
 further found that Francisco was "entitled to an additional 3%
 for his subjective residual complaints for a total of 8%
 [permanent partial disability] of the low back." The LIRAB
 likewise found that Francisco had sustained an 8% permanent
 partial disability of the whole person as the result of his work
 accident.
 
On appeal, Francisco contends that he should be awarded
 
permanent partial disability of 23%. He arrives at this number
 by combining Dr. Robert Sloan's opinion that Francisco suffered a
 work-related permanent partial disability of 20% of the whole
 person with the additional 3% awarded by the Director based on
 Francisco's "subjective residual complaints." 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The crux of Francisco's argument on appeal is that in 
the face of conflicting medical opinions, the LIRAB erred in 
accepting the opinions of Dr. Agles and Dr. Lum instead of the opinion of Dr. Sloan. However, as noted above, we give deference to the LIRAB's evaluation of the credibility and weight of the evidence. Moi, 118 Hawai' i at 242, 188 P.3d at 756; Nakamura, 98 
Hawai'i at 268, 47 P.3d at 735. We conclude that the LIRAB did 
not err in determining that Francisco sustained an 8% permanent partial disability of the whole person as a result of his work accident. 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the LIRAB's
 
"Decision and Order" filed on January 31, 2012, and its "Order
 Denying [Francisco's] Motion for Reconsideration" filed on March
 15, 2012. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 30, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Alex M. Sonson
 
for Claimant-Appellant 
Chief Judge
 
Robert A. Chong
J. Thomas Weber
 (Ayabe, Chong, Nishimoto, 
Sia & Nakamura)
for Employer-Appellee and
Insurance Carrier-Appellee
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Frances E.H. Lum
 Nelson T. Higa
Staci I. Teruya
Deputy Attorneys General
State of Hawaii
 for Appellee-Appellee
 
6
 