___________________ NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000968 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
In the Matter of the Application of
 JOHN II ESTATE, LIMITED
to register land Situate at Mililani, District of Ewa,
City and County of Honolulu, Hawai 'i
 
MATTHEW AUGUST HARRELL and VALENTINE SATAKO HARRELL,
Petitioners-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE LAND COURT OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
(CASE NO. 1LD13-1-1828) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioners-Appellants Matthew August Harrell and 
Valentine Satako Harrell (together, the Harrells) appeal from a 
July 28, 2014 "Findings of Fact; Conclusions of Law; and Order 
Granting in Part and Denying in Part Respondents' Motion for Sanctions," entered in the Land Court of the State of Hawai
'i1 
(land court). 
The Harrells' sole point on appeal is that the land
 
court erred in imposing sanctions on their counsel Robert Stone2
 
1
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 
2
 The Harrells' opening brief fails to comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) regarding points of error by not
(continued...) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Stone).
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude this
 appeal is without merit.
 
The Findings of Fact of the land court are as follows:
3
 
1. On February 28, 2014, Respondents filed their
Motion for Summary Judgment Re: Petition to Remove Cloud on 
Transfer Certificate of Title No. 490,279, filed on May 21, 2013 ("MSJ"). The Court set the hearing for the MSJ for
March 17, 2014. Pursuant to Rule 7(b) of the Rules of theCircuit Courts of the State of Hawai' i, the opposition to
the MSJ was therefore due no later than March 9, 2014. No opposition was filed before or by this date. 
2.
 On March 10, 2014, [the Harrells] filed an ex parte
 
motion to extend time to oppose the MSJ. The Court denied
 
the ex parte motion that same day.
 
3. On March 10, 2014, [the Harrells'] counsel [Stone]
telephoned Respondents' counsel with a proposal to dismiss
this action. [Stone] proposed dismissing the "quiet title"
claim with prejudice and all other claims without prejudice.
[Stone] indicated during this call that he did not want to
do anything to negatively impact [the Harrells'] claims
and/or defenses to a foreclosure action. Respondents'
counsel informed [Stone] that he would consult with his
clients regarding the proposal.
 
4. On March 12, 2014, Respondents' counsel informed
[Stone] that his offer was rejected and that Respondents
would accept nothing less than a full dismissal with
prejudice of all claims and allegations in this action. In
 response, [Stone] indicated that Petitioners were amenable
to a dismissal with prejudice so long as the dismissal was
limited to this action only. Respondents' counsel informed
[Stone] that he would not speculate as to the legal effect
of a dismissal with prejudice on any future action. [Stone]
thereafter stated that Petitioners agreed to a dismissal
with prejudice of this action. Later that day, Respondents'
counsel confirmed via voicemail to [Stone] that Respondents
were amenable to a dismissal with prejudice and that their
 
2(...continued)
stating where in the record the alleged error occurred and where in the record

the alleged error was objected to or the manner in which the alleged error was
brought to the attention of the court. Counsel for the Harrells is warned
 that future noncompliance with HRAP Rule 28 may result in sanctions against
him. 
3
 None of these Findings of Fact are challenged in the Harrells'
points of error on appeal, and appear to be undisputed and supported by therecord in this case. Findings of Fact not challenged on appeal are binding onthe appellate court. Kawamata Farms, Inc., v. United Agri Products, 86 
Hawai'i 214, 252, 948 P.2d 1055, 1093 (1997). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
counsel would draft the stipulation to dismiss.
 
5. On March 13, 2014 at 9:42 a.m., Respondents'
counsel emailed [Stone] the stipulation to dismiss with
prejudice in the form of an Adobe PDF. Later that day,
Respondents' counsel received from [Stone] a signed copy of
a stipulation to dismiss with prejudice.
 
6. Having received no further communication from
[Stone] regarding the form of stipulation, Respondents'
counsel presumed that [Stone] had signed the PDF version of
the stipulatio n sent to him via email earlier that day. As
a result, Respondents' counsel immediately signed the
stipulation.
 
7. Upon further review of the stipulation sent by
[Stone], however, Respondents' counsel realized that the
document had been converted to writeable form and then
 altered. Specifically, [Stone] had added the following
underlined text to the title of the document: "Stipulation
for Dismissal with Prejudice, as to Land Court, of All
Claims and Parties". [Stone] made a similar undisclosed
addition in the text of the document, adding the following
underlined text to paragraph 1 of the stipulation
Respondents' counsel had sent him:
 
All claims and allegations brought in this
action by Petitioners VALENTINE SATAKO HARRELL
and MATTHEW AUGUST HARRELL against Respondents
MORTGAGE ELECTRONIC REGISTRATION SYSTEMS,
INC., ONEWEST BANK, FSB (also erroneously sued
as IndyMac Mortgage Services), and DEUTSCHE
BANK NATIONAL TRUST COMPANY, AS TRUSTEE OF
THE RESIDENTIAL ASSET SECURITIZATION TRUST
 2006-A9CB (erroneously sued as "Deutsche Bank
National Trust Company"), are dismissed with
 prejudice as to Land Court.
 
(Bold in original).
 
8. At 2:47 p.m. on March 13, 2014, Respondents'
counsel emailed [Stone] and informed him that he would not
sign the altered stipulation. Respondents' counsel again
requested that [Stone] execute the version of the
stipulation he had previously sent him.
 
9. After that email, [Stone] telephoned Respondents'
counsel and stated that he had revised the stipulation to
more accurately "comport" with the nature of the parties'
agreement. Respondents' counsel informed [Stone] that his
understanding of the agreement was inaccurate and that
Respondents would move forward with the hearing on the MSJ.
 
10. On March 17, 2014, Respondents' counsel appeared
at the hearing on the MSJ. [Stone] did not appear.
Following presentation of Respondents' oral argument as to
the MSJ, the Court inquired of Respondents' counsel whether
he was aware of the Notice of Bankruptcy Filing (the "BK
Notice"), filed by Petitioners in this action on March 14,
2014. When Respondents' counsel indicated that he was aware
of no such document, the Court presented him with a copy.
 
11. [Stone] never informed Respondents' counsel prior
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to the hearing that Petitioners intended to file for
bankruptcy. The BK Notice was served on Respondents'
counsel by mail. [Stone] did not call or email Respondents'
counsel on March 14, 2014 or at any time prior to the MSJ
hearing to indicate that Petitioners had filed for
bankruptcy and were taking the position that this matter was
stayed.
 
12. At the hearing, the Court asked for Respondents'
position on the BK Notice and whether this action was stayed
as a result. Having no notice or knowledge of [the
Harrells'] bankruptcy or any effect thereof, Respondents'
counsel informed the Court that it was his understanding
that filing for bankruptcy effectuated an automatic stay of
all pending actions. Thereafter, the Court found that this
action was stayed as a result of [the Harrells'] filing for
bankruptcy on March 14, 2014.
 
13. Respondents' counsel later learned that,
pursuant to established case law, the automatic
bankruptcy stay under 11 U.S.C.A, ยง 362(a) was
inapplicable to post-petition defensive actions in a
pre-petition lawsuit brought by a debtor.
 
14. Based on this, on March 18, 2014, Respondents'
counsel sent a letter to [Stone] demanding withdrawal of the
BK Notice and enclosing the original, unaltered stipulation.
 
15. On March 19, 2014, [Stone] communicated to
Respondents' counsel that he had received the letter and
"renew[ed]" his offer to "dismiss the [Harrells'] case in
land court with prejudice as to land court, but not with
prejudice as to all courts."
 
16. There was a misunderstanding between the lawyers
for the parties in this case regarding the scope of
dismissal and language of the stipulation.
 
17. [Stone's] conduct after receiving the stipulation
in PDF form from Respondents' counsel, however, was
inappropriate. Specifically, [Stone] failed to properly
communicate to Respondents' counsel that he had made
revisions to the stipulation before signing and returning it
with the original attorney identification information
unchanged. [Stone's] actions had the effect of lulling
Respondents' counsel into wrongly believing that the signed
stipulation sent by [Stone] was the same document that had
been sent to him.
 
18. At minimum, [Stone] was required under these
circumstances to communicate to Respondents' counsel that
he had made revisions to the stipulation.
 
(Emphases in original).
 
The land court made specific findings of bad faith
 
prior to imposing sanctions on Stone. Enos v. Pac. Transfer &
  
Warehouse, Inc. , 79 Hawai 'i 452, 459, 903 P.2d 1273, 1280 (1995) 
("[A] necessary [condition] precedent to any sanction of
 
attorneys' fees under the court's inherent powers was the finding
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the attorney's conduct 'constituted or was tantamount to bad
 
faith' (citation omitted)".) Specific findings are important
 because they allow for meaningful appellate review as to whether
 the trial court exercised its discretion in a reasoned and
 principled fashion, were the product of thoughtful deliberation,
 and enhance the deterrent effect. Id. 
The land court satisfied this standard in imposing
 
sanctions on Stone in making specific findings that on March 13,
 2014, Respondents' counsel emailed Stone the stipulation to
 dismiss with prejudice in the form of an Adobe PDF; later that
 day, Stone returned to Respondents' counsel's office an executed
 copy of a stipulation; Stone did not communicate with
 Respondents' counsel at any point between his receipt of the
 stipulation and its return; Stone made material alterations to
 the stipulation before he returned it to Respondents' counsel;
 and
 
17. [Stone's] conduct after receiving the stipulation
in PDF form from Respondents' counsel, however, was
inappropriate. Specifically, [Stone] failed to properly
communicate to Respondents' counsel that he had made
revisions to the stipulation before signing and returning it
with the original attorney identification information
unchanged. [Stone's] actions had the effect of lulling
Respondents' counsel into wrongly believing that the signed
stipulation sent by [Stone] was the same document that had
been sent to him.
 
On the basis of these findings, the land court
 
concluded that Stone "acted in bad faith in his communications
 
regarding the stipulation to dismiss and, as a result, the
 imposition of sanctions in the form of attorneys' fees is
 appropriate pursuant to this Court's inherent power to curb
 abusive litigation practices."
 
We conclude the land court did not abuse its discretion 
in imposing sanctions on Stone. Gap v. Puna Geothermal Venture, 
106 Hawai
'i 325, 331, 104 P.3d 912, 918 (2004). The land court 
did not base its ruling on an erroneous view of the law or a clearly erroneous assessment of the evidence. Id. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the July 28, 2014 "Findings
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of Fact; Conclusions of Law; and Order Granting in Part and
 
Denying in Part Respondents' Motion for Sanctions," entered in
 the Land Court of the State of Hawai
'i is affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 31, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Robert L. Stone
 
(Property Rights Law of Hawaii)
for Petitioners-AppellantsMatthew August Harrell and
Valentine Satako Harrell.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Judy A. Tanaka
J. Blaine Rogers(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ng)
for Respondents-Appellees
Mortgage Electronic
Registration Systems, Inc.,
Onewest Bank N.A., fka OnewestBank, FSB, and Deutsche Bank
National Trust Company, As
Trustee of the Residential
 Asset Securitization Trust
 2006-A9CB.
 
6

 