NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001332
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
LPP MORTGAGE LTD.,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
JESSE NIERVA DOCTOLERO; JOAN BARENG DOCTOLERO,
Defendants-Appellants,
and
CITIFINANCIAL, INC.; JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50;
DOE ENTITIES 1-50; and DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50,
Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(Civil NO. 13-1-0954)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Fujise, Acting Chief Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
Defendants-Appellants Jesse Doctolero (Jesse) and Joan
Doctolero (Joan)(collectively Appellants) appeal from the
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Order Granting Plaintiff's
Motion for Summary Judgment Against All Parties and for
Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure Filed November 14, 2013"
(Order Granting Summary Judgment) and the "Judgment" both entered
on October 31, 2014, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
(circuit court).1  The Order Granting Summary Judgment and
1The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Judgment were entered in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee LPP Mortgage
Ltd. (LPP).
On appeal, Appellants contend that the circuit court
erred in granting summary judgment in favor of LPP because (1)
LPP was not entitled to foreclose on Joan's interest in the
subject property as she had no obligations under the promissory
note (Note) that the subject mortgage secured, (2) LPP did not
prove that it was in possession of the original Note, and (3)
Appellants' loan modification application was pending at the time
the circuit court granted summary judgment.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve
Appellants points on appeal as follows and affirm.
(1) Appellants contend that the circuit court erred in
granting LPP's motion for summary judgment, allowing LPP to
foreclose on Joan's interest in the property.  Appellants argue
that LPP cannot enforce Jessie's obligation under the Note as to
Joan's interest in the property because Joan did not sign the
Note.  Appellants reason that because there is no underlying debt
supporting Joan's grant of a mortgage lien as to her interest in
the property, the mortgage is a nullity.  This argument is
without merit.
On May 29, 2007, Jessie made, executed, and delivered
to Accredited Home Lenders, Inc., a Note in the amount of
$393,000.00.  For purposes of securing payment on the Note,
Jessie and Joan, as husband and wife and joint tenants, executed
a mortgage (Mortgage) dated May 29, 2007, encumbering their
property to Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. (MERS)
as nominee for Accredited Home Lenders, Inc.
It is well established that promissory notes and
mortgages are contracts.  Beneficial Hawaii, Inc. v. Kida , 96
Hawai#i 289, 312, 30 P.3d 895, 918 (2001).  "Contract terms are
interpreted according to their plain, ordinary, and accepted
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
sense in common speech.  The court's objective is to ascertain
and effectuate the intention of the parties as manifested by the
contract in its entirety."  Hawaiian Ass'n of Seventh-Day
Adventists v. Wong, 130 Hawai #i 36, 45, 305 P.3d 452, 461 (2013)
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
Paragraph 13 of the mortgage specifically states, that:
13. Joint and Several Liability; Co-signers;
Successors and Assigns Bound.  Borrower covenants and agrees
that Borrower's obligations and liability shall be joint and
several.  However, any Borrower who co-signs this Security
Instrument but does not execute the Note (a "co-signer"):
(a) is co-signing this Security Instrument only to mortgage,
grant and convey the co-signer's interest in the property
under the terms of this Security Instrument; (b) is not
personally obligated to pay the sums secured by this
Security Instrument; and (c) agrees that Lender and any
other Borrower can agree to extend, modify, forbear or make
any accommodations with regard to the terms of this Security
Instrument or the Note without the co-signer's consent.
The Mortgage defines "Borrower" as "JESSE NIERVA
DOCTOLERO AND JOAN BARENG DOCTOLERO, HUSBAND AND WIFE, AS JOINT
TENANTS," thus, explicitly designating Joan as "Borrower" under
the terms of the mortgage.  Further, the Mortgage provides that
by signing the mortgage, "Borrower" accepts and agrees to the
terms and covenants contained in the mortgage.  Here, Joan
initialed each page of the mortgage and signed her name above the
signature line for "Borrower."  The Appellants do not dispute
that Joan is a "Borrower" under the terms of the mortgage or that
she is not a signatory to the Note.  As such, Joan is a "co-
signer" pursuant to Paragraph 13 of the Mortgage, making it
indisputable that Joan, while not personally liable for the sums
under the Note, pledges her interest in the property to secure
payment of the Note.  The language in the mortgage between the
Lender and both Jesse and Joan, unambiguously evidences the
parties' intent to subject Joan's interest in the property to the
terms of the mortgage.  Joan signed the mortgage, knew the amount
owed under the Note, and consented to creating a lien on the
property to secure the Note.
Accordingly, we conclude that LPP is entitled to
foreclose Joan's interest in the property.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
(2)  Appellants contend that LPP was not entitled to
enforce the subject Note because it did not adequately prove that
it was in possession of the original Note nor did it present the
original Note throughout the foreclosure proceeding.
In order to establish a right to foreclose, the
foreclosing plaintiff must establish standing, or entitlement to
enforce the subject Note, at the time the action was commenced.
Bank of America, N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai# i 361,367-70,
390 P.3d 1248, 1254-57 (2017).
In order to prove entitlement to foreclose, the foreclosing
party must demonstrate that all conditions precedent to
foreclosure under the note and mortgage are satisfied and
that all steps required by statute have been strictly
complied with.  See 55 Am. Jur. 2d Mortgages § 575  (Nov.
2016 Update).  This typically requires the plaintiff to
prove the existence of an agreement, the terms of the
agreement, a default by the mortgagor under the terms of the
agreement, and giving of the cancellation notice.  See Bank
of Honolulu, N.A. v. Anderson, 3 Haw. App. 545, 551,654 P.2d
1370, 1375 (1982) (citing 55 Am. Jur. 2d 
Mortgages § 554
(1971)).  A foreclosing plaintiff must also prove its
entitlement to enforce the note and mortgage.
Id., 139 Hawai #i 361, 367, 390 P.3d 1248, 1254 (2017) (further
citations omitted).
In this case, LPP presented sufficient evidence to
establish that it was entitled to enforce the Note at the
commencement of the proceeding.  On April 1, 2013, LPP filed its
Verified Complaint for Foreclosure (Complaint), stating that LPP
is the record assignee of the Mortgage and is entitled to enforce
the Note.  In support of its complaint, LPP attached a
Verification of Complaint For Foreclosure (Verification) by Keith
Manson (Manson), authorized signer of LPP to which several
exhibits were attached, demonstrating its entitlement to enforce
the Note: (1) the Note dated May 29, 2007, (2) the Mortgage
executed on May 29, 2007, naming both Jesse and Joan as Borrower
and Accredited Home Lenders, Inc. as Lender, (3) the Assignment
of Mortgage, assigning Accredited Home Lenders, Inc.'s interest
in the Mortgage to LPP, (4) the business record evidencing the
loan payment history and amounts due and owning, and (5) written
notice of default indicating LPP's intention to accelerate the
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
loan and to foreclose the Mortgage if the default was not cured.
The Note, which was attached to the Verification as
Exhibit A, included an "Allonge to Note" containing an undated
blank indorsement from Accredited Home Lenders, Inc.  "When
indorsed in blank, an instrument becomes payable to bearer and
may be negotiated by transfer of possession alone until specially
indorsed."  Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 490:3-205 (2008). 
Thus, because the Note was negotiated in blank, LLP becomes the
holder of the Note, entitling it to enforce the Note, by
establishing that it is in possession of the Note.  See  HRS §§
490:1-201 and 490:3-301 (2008).
The sworn Verification executed by Manson established
that LPP had possession of the original Note, indorsed in blank,
at the commencement of the foreclosure proceedings.  Manson's
declaration attests, in relevant part, that he is the duly
authorized signer for LPP, is trained to use and understand the
record keeping system utilized for the subject loan, that by
Assignment of Mortgage filed on March 17, 2009, in the Land
Court, MERS, as nominee for Accredited Home Lenders, Inc.,
assigned the mortgagee's interest in the Mortgage to LPP, that
LPP is in possession of the Note, and that a true and accurate
copy of the indorsed Note is attached as Exhibit A.
The evidence submitted in support of LPP's Complaint
and motion for summary judgment demonstrates that LPP was in
possession of the Note and allonge at the commencement of the
foreclosure proceeding in this case.  Therefore, there is no
genuine issue of material fact that LPP established its
entitlement and standing to foreclose.
(3) Finally, Appellants contend that the circuit court
erred in granting summary judgment and an interlocutory decree of
foreclosure while their loan modification application was still
pending.
[A] plaintiff-movant is not required to disprove affirmative
defenses asserted by a defendant in order to prevail on a
motion for summary judgment.  The plaintiff is only
obligated to disprove an affirmative defense on a motion for
summary judgment when the defense produces material in
support of an affirmative defense.  Generally, the defendant
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
has the burden of proof on all affirmative defenses, which
includes the burden of proving facts which are essential to
the asserted defense.
U.S. Bank Nat'l Ass'n v. Castro, 131 Hawai# i 28, 41, 313 P.3d
717, 730 (2013) (citations, quotation marks, and footnote
omitted).
In this case, Appellants attached a Declaration of
Patricia Arthur (Arthur), a loan modification assistant for
Hawaiian Homeowner Solutions, Inc., to their Memorandum in
Opposition to Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment Against All
Parties and for Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure, filed
February 11, 2014.  Arthur attested that: (1) she had been
assisting the Appellants in modifying their loan with the
servicer MGC Mortgage, Inc. (servicer), (2) the first loan
modification application that she had prepared was rejected, (3)
she submitted a revised application to servicer, and (4) the
servicer had received the revised application, which is under
consideration, evidenced by letter from servicer dated January
17, 2014.  In support of Appellants' memorandum in opposition to
LPP's summary judgment motion, Appellants attached the letter
dated January 17, 2014 from the servicer and other supporting
documentation.
On February 19, 2014, at the hearing on LPP's motion
for summary judgment, the circuit court continued the matter to
April 30, 2014.
On April 28, 2014, Appellants filed a supplemental
Declaration of Patricia Arthur in which she attested that the
servicer had denied the Appellants' revised application for loan
modification on March 5, 2014.  Arthur further attested that
after reviewing the objections of the servicer, she had appealed
the denial of Appellants' application on April 11, 2014.
At the continued hearing on LPP's motion for summary
judgment on April 30, 2014, LPP's counsel pointed out that the
servicer's denial of Appellants' application dated March 5, 2014,
included a fourteen day appeal period, which was not met by the
Appellants' April 11, 2014 appeal.  In direct response,
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Appellants argued that summary judgment should not be granted
because their loan modification is pending, however, did not
dispute the fourteen day appeal period nor did they dispute that
their appeal to the servicer's denial was not timely submitted.
Appellants did not present any evidence or
documentation as to the servicer's March 5, 2014 denial,
indicating that the Appellants' loan modification application was
still pending.2  Further, Appellants did not provide any evidence
or argument as to their untimely appeal from the servicer's
denial to their application.  Based on the evidence presented,
Appellants did not provide sufficient evidence as to whether
their loan modification was still pending.  As such, the circuit
court did not err in granting summary judgment in favor of LPP.
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Findings of
Fact, Conclusions of Law, Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for
Summary Judgment Against All Parties and for Interlocutory Decree
of Foreclosure Filed November 14, 2013" and the "Judgment," both
entered on October 31, 2014, by the Circuit Court of the First
Circuit are affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 20, 2018.
On the briefs:
Hannah S. Miyamoto,
for Defendants-Appellants.
Charles R. Prather,
and Steven Idemoto,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Acting Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
2  At the hearing it appears Appellants' counsel handed the court a
document, however it is unclear what document was presented, the contents of
the document, or whether the document is part of the record on appeal.  
7