NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000415
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF DT
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 13-00013)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Father-Appellant (Father) appeals from the Family Court
 
of the First Circuit's (Family Court's) May 6, 2016 Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights. The Family Court granted the
 Department of Human Services' (DHS) Motion to Terminate Parental
 Rights, in which DHS moved to terminate Father's parental rights
 to his child, DT.
1
 
Father argues that the Family Court erred in
 
terminating his parental rights (1) based on clearly erroneous
 findings that (a) he is unable and unwilling to provide a safe
 home for DT and will not become able or willing to do so within a
 reasonable period of time, (b) DHS provided him with a reasonable
 opportunity to reunify with DT, and (c) his November and
 December, 2015 relapses from sobriety posed a risk of harm to DT;
 and (2) after the court erroneously (a) denied his motion to
 continue trial and (b) prevented him from asking Dr. Aimee
 Franson (Dr. Franson) if his psychological issues prevented him
 from providing DT with a safe home. Related to these arguments
 
1
 The Honorable Karen M. Radius issued the Order Terminating
Parental Rights.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is Father's contention that in the court's Findings of Fact and
 
Conclusions of Law, Findings of Fact (FOF) 81, 96, 100, 111, 112,
 114-18, 129, and 137 are clearly erroneous.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Father's points of error as follows:
 
1a. 2
 FOF 96, 114, 115, 117, and 118 are not clearly
erroneous. Substantial evidence in the record on appeal shows
 that although Father completed some services and made progress,
 he did not participate in services consistently, apply what he
 learned in his domestic violence program, or maintain sobriety;
 and his pattern of relapsing and aggressive behaviors posed a
 risk of harm to DT. At the time of trial, there remained
 additional safety concerns, including Father's lack of a bond
 
2	 FOF 96, 114, 115, 117, and 118 provide:
 
96.	 At trial, Father admitted to his November 2015 and
December 2015 relapses. However, he did not
acknowledge that he has a substance abuse problem,
i.e. alcohol. Instead, Father testified that he can
stop drinking unlike people who have a problem.
Drawing all reasonable inferences from the credible
evidence, Father's testimony shows that Father has
little insight into his problems with consuming
alcoholic beverages.
 
. . . . 
114.	 Despite his participation in services, Father has not
developed any insight into his problems that placed
[DT] at risk for threatened harm, and that prevents
him from providing a safe home for [DT].
 
115.	 Even though Father participated in services, he has
not demonstrated that he has addressed his problems
that prevent him from providing a safe home for [DT].
 
. . . . 
117.	 Father is not presently willing and able to provide
[DT] with a safe family home, even with the assistance
of a service plan.
 
118.	 It is not reasonably foreseeable that Father will
become willing and able to provide [DT] with a safe
family home, even with the assistance of a service
plan because even if Father were to suddenly change
his long standing pattern of behavior, there is no
likelihood that he would sufficiently resolve his
problems at any identifiable point in the future.
 
(Format altered.)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with and inability to redirect DT, failure to obtain housing,
 
arrests for assault, unresolved mental health issues, and poor
 judgment in his relationship with DT's mother. There were also
 concerns about Father's failure to develop insight into his
 mental health problems, meaning an awareness of his level of
 functioning that would enable him to improve. In short, Father
 did not progress sufficiently in the three years since DHS had
 assumed foster custody of DT to demonstrate that he could provide
 DT with a safe family home. See HRS ยง 587A-33(a)(2) (Supp. 2015)
 
(providing for a maximum of two years from the date the child
 enters foster care in which a parent may demonstrate a
 willingness and ability to provide a safe home).
 
This court declines to review the Family Court's 
determination that some of Dr. Franson's testimony regarding Father's ability to provide a safe home was not credible in light of Father's history. See Child Support Enforcement Agency v. 
Doe, 98 Hawai
'i 58, 65, 41 P.3d 720, 727 (App. 2001) ("it is the 
right of the trier of fact to determine credibility and to weigh evidence") (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
1b. 
3 4
 FOF 116  and 129 are not clearly erroneous. 
Although DHS failed to increase Father's visitation time with DT
 from three to six hours per week -- which Dr. Franson recommended
 to improve Father's bond with DT -- substantial evidence showed
 that even with his existing visitation schedule, Father did not
 consistently interact with, redirect, or establish a routine for
 DT. Father's hands-on parenting services ended when he
 threatened the worker supervising him. His failure to adequately
 address his alcohol-use disorder and aggressive behavior
 prevented him from progressing to unsupervised visits. Based on
 this evidence, it does not appear that Father was prejudiced by
 DHS's failure to increase his visitation time.
 
3
 FOF 116 provides that "[u]nder the circumstances presented by the
case, Father was given every reasonable opportunity to effect positive changes
to provide a safe family home and to reunify with [DT]."
 
4
 FOF 129 provides in relevant part, "[u]nder the circumstances
presented by this case, DHS has exerted reasonable efforts to reunify [DT]
with . . . Father by identifying necessary, appropriate and reasonable
services to address the identified safety issues (problems), and making
referrals for these services."
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although Dr. Hay did not recommend services to address
 
Father's domestic violence and anger management issues
 
specifically, despite her opinion that these problems posed a
 safety concern, the substantial evidence shows that DHS
 recommended anger management and domestic violence services,
 which Father participated in; but Father did not demonstrate an
 ability to apply what he had learned.
 
Moreover, the family court's termination of Father's
 
parental rights primarily was based on Father's alcohol-use
 disorder which in turn created safety issues for parenting DT. 
To the extent the court took into consideration Father's domestic
 violence and anger management problems, it was as a symptom of
 his alcohol-use disorder.
 
Father maintains that DHS failed to provide a 2013
 
multi-disciplinary team (MDT) report to the court, as required by
 
5
HRS ยง 587A-18(c) (Supp. 2015),  and Father's medical records from
Queen's Medical Center to the MDT at an MDT meeting on August 18,
 2015. However, Father does not argue that he was prejudiced by
 these omissions, and considering the record as a whole, it does
 not appear that any prejudice resulted; therefore, any error was
 harmless.
 
1c. The Family Court did not err in finding that
Father's November and December, 2015 relapses from alcohol
 sobriety posed a risk of harm to DT, and FOF 100, 111, 112, and
 
6
137 are not clearly erroneous.  Substantial evidence at trial 

 
5 HRS ยง 587A-18(c) provides, "[t]he department or other authorized
agencies shall submit to the court each report, in its entirety, pertaining to
the child or the child's family that has been prepared by a child protective
services multidisciplinary team or consultant."
 
6	 FOF 100, 111, 112, and 137 provide:
 
100.	 Dr. Franson's [sic] testified that she had no concerns
for Fathers [sic] parenting ability if he remains
sober. However her testimony that Father's November
2015 and December 2015 relapses do not place [DT] at
risk because an occasional drink is not harmful is not
 credible or consistent with Father's long history with
alcohol use, his housing situation and lack of family
or other support to care for [DT] at [DT's] young age
should Father have alcohol, drug or other mental
health relapses.
 
. . . .

 
(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
showed that Father was unable to sustain remission from his
 
alcohol-use disorder, with his latest relapses occurring once
 within each of the two months preceding trial; he had not
 demonstrated that he could circumvent "triggers" for his alcohol
 use; alcohol caused him to become aggressive; and his
 aggressiveness posed safety concerns for DT.
 
We decline to review the Family Court's determinations 
regarding Dr. Franson's credibility regarding the risk posed by Father's relapses. See Child Support Enforcement Agency v. Doe, 
98 Hawai
'i at 65, 41 P.3d at 727. 
2a. 
The Family Court did not err in denying Father's
 
motion to continue after he was arrested on the first day of
 trial. There is no indication that Father's arrest prevented him
 from assisting in his defense, substantially impaired his ability
 to defend himself, or rendered him unfit to proceed with trial.
 
2b. 
Father does not explain why the Family Court was
 
wrong or demonstrate how he was prejudiced by the Family Court's
 decision to sustain DHS's objection to questions posed to
 Dr. Franson as to whether Father's mental health problems
 presented a safety concern related to Father caring for DT. As
 the State notes, it appears Dr. Franson does not have expertise
 
6(...continued)
111.	 Due to Father's inability to refrain from the use of
alcoholic beverages, that is triggered by stress and
that has resulted in Father's unhealthy behavior,
based on the credible evidence and drawing all
reasonable inferences, it is reasonable to conclude
that ordinary parenting stressors will trigger
Father's consumption of alcoholic beverages, thereby
placing [DT] at risk for harm.
 
112.	 Even if Father were given more visits, and had
participated in a hands-on parenting education
program, it would not make any difference because of
Father's continued use of alcoholic beverages, and his
failure to recognize his problems.
 
. . . .
 
137.	 [Dr. Franson] is a credible witness as to certain
matters. However the Court places less weight to her
testimony regarding Father's failure to abstain from
alcohol and concommitmant [sic] ability to provide a
safe home given his history and actions throughout
[DT's] life.
 
(Format altered.)
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in the area of child protection or child custody. Moreover,
 
considering the record, it does not appear that any prejudice
 resulted from the ruling in light of the substantial evidence
 showing that Father's mental health problems, particularly his
 inability to maintain sobriety, created a safety concern. 
Therefore, any error on the part of the court was harmless.
 
3. Father contests FOF 81, which provides that "Father 
returned to Oahu in an attempt to reunite with Mother in March, 2013." However, he does not actually argue this point, and it is thus waived. See Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 
28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Family Court
 
of the First Circuit's May 6, 2016 Order Terminating Parental
 Rights is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 14, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Herbert Y. Hamada,
for Father-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Robert T. Nakatsuji,Julio C. Herrera,Jay K. Goss, andPatrick A. Pascual,Deputy Attorneys General,for Petitioner-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6

 