NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000731
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
PROBATE NO. 6664
 
IN THE MATTER OF THE ESTATE OF 
SAMUEL M. DAMON, Deceased.
 
EQUITY NO. 2816-A
 
TRUST CREATED UNDER THE WILL OF
 
SAMUEL M. DAMON, Deceased.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Respondent/Appellant Myrna B. Murdoch (Murdoch) and
 
Respondent/Cross-Appellant Christopher Damon Haig (Haig)
 
(collectively Appellants) both appeal from the Judgment, filed on
 August 2, 2012 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (probate
 court).
1
 
Appellants' combined points of error contend that the
 
probate court erred when it: (1) did not compel trustees David M.
 Haig, Paul Mullin Ganley, and Walter A. Dods, Jr. (Trustees) to
 respond to requests for information or make documents available
 to Appellants; (2) adopted the "Petition for Approval of 1999,
 
1
 The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided.
   
  
  
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2000, 2001, 2002 and 2003 Income and Principal Accounts" (1999­
2003 Accounts Petition) without an independent review; (3)
 approved the Trustees' 1999-2003 Accounts Petition despite
 evidence of spoliation; (4) did not assign the case to the trial
 court docket; (5) denied Haig's conflict of interest objections
 to the sale of BancWest Corporation (BancWest) stock; and (6)
 denied Haig's objections to the sale of real estate assets.
2
 
I. Background
 
The Damon Trust was created by the Last Will and
 
Testament of Samuel M. Damon dated November 10, 1914.3 At its
 
inception in 1924, the value of the Trust was estimated to be $3
 million. In November 2004, when the Trust terminated, it was
 valued at approximately $836 million.
4
 
Upon termination of the Trust, the Trustees filed
 
various petitions seeking approval of post-termination
 distributions of principal, annual accounts, and other
 termination-related actions. The probate court has approved all
 accounts from 1924 through 2007, including the 1999-2003 accounts
 disputed in this appeal. Haig and Murdoch are the only
 beneficiaries that are challenging the 1999-2003 Accounts
 Petition.
 
2
 Several points of error do not comply with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4)(D) because they do not quote the objection to
the Master's Report. While noncompliance with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) is
sufficient cause to deny a point of error, we will address the issues to the
extent discernible, adhering to the policy of "affording litigants the
opportunity to have their cases heard on the merits, where possible[.]" In re 
Estate of Damon, 119 Hawai' i 500, 505, 199 P.3d 89, 94 (2008)(citation
omitted). 
3 Many of the facts in this background section are taken from the
undisputed facts contained in the "Master's Report Re: Petition for Approval
of 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 Income and Principal Accounts."
4
 The Supreme Court of Hawai' i held that the Trust was to terminate 
upon the death of the last measuring life. In re Estate of Damon, 76 Hawai' i 
120, 124, 869 P.2d 1339, 1343 (1994). The last measuring life was Damon'sgranddaughter, Joan Damon Haig, who died on November 9, 2004. The first distribution was made on December 17, 2004, less than two months after 
termination. Other relevant background regarding the formation of the Damon
Estate has been set forth in prior appellate decisions. See In re Estate of 
Damon, 109 Hawai' i 502, 504-06, 128 P.3d 815, 817-19 (2006); In re Estate of 
Damon, 119 Hawai' i at 501-02, 199 P.3d at 90-91. 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
During the 1999-2003 accounting period, the Trust sold 
its entire 13% interest in BancWest common stock, its prime 
industrial and commercial land in Honolulu, two walnut ranches, and a significant portion of real estate on Hawai
'i Island. In 
re Estate of Damon, 119 Hawai 'i 500, 502, 199 P.3d 89, 91 (2008) 
(Damon I). Appellants received annual accountings from the Trustees throughout the period of 1999-2003. 
The Trustees filed the 1999-2003 Accounts Petition on 
April 30, 2004. Based on a conflict of interest involving the appointed master, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court vacated the probate 
court's original judgment filed on January 12, 2005, which had granted the 1999-2003 Accounts Petition. The case was remanded to the probate court. Damon I, 119 Hawai
'i at 512, 199 P.3d at 
101.
 
Upon remand, on June 2, 2009, the Trustees filed a
 
"Petition for Appointment of Master." On February 10, 2010, Haig
 filed an "Objection to Trustees' Petition for Appointment of
 Master, Filed June 2, 2009." 
On February 11, 2010, Haig filed his first "Petition
 
for Assignment to Civil Trials Calendar of the First Circuit
 Court" (Petition to Transfer) contending that the issues
 surrounding the 1999-2003 Accounts Petition were complex and time
 consuming thus requiring discovery and an evidentiary hearing. 
On February 12, 2010, Trustees filed "Trustees'
 
Response to Christopher James Damon Haig's Objection to Trustees'
 Petition for Appointment of Master." On February 18, 2010, the
 probate court held a hearing on the petition to appoint a master. 
On April 1, 2010, in a hearing on the Petition to
 
Transfer, the probate court orally ruled that it would continue
 Haig's Petition to Transfer until the court reviewed the new
 master's report. 
On April 16, 2010, the probate court filed an "Order
 
Granting Petition for Appointment of Master." The probate court
 appointed the Honorable Gail Nakatani (retired) as the new master
 (Master) to "examine and report on [the] Estate's income and
 principal accounts for the period January 1, 1999 through
 
3
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
December 31, 2003[.]"
 
Over one year later, in a letter sent to the Master
 
dated August 5, 2011, Murdoch requested that the Damon Estate
 
produce a wide range of documents for inspection and copying. In
 a letter to the Master dated August 10, 2011, Haig made
 substantially similar requests. In addition, in a letter to the
 Trustees dated September 2, 2011, Appellants made a combined
 request for documents in a number of areas. In each of the
 letters, Appellants' reasoning for the requested documents was to
 understand and track the transactions that occurred between 1999­2003. 
Finally, in a letter to the Master dated September 29,
 
2011, Appellants requested that the Master compel the Trustees to
 provide the requested documents from the previous letters. In
 response, the Master stated: "Since I was not appointed discovery
 master, I do not believe that it is within my appointed powers
 and authority to compel the Trustees to provide discovery. As
 such, if Ms. Murdoch and Mr. Haig wish to compel discovery, they
 must address their respective discovery requests to the Court." 
On October 10, 2011, Appellants each filed a petition 
for assignment of this case to the circuit court pursuant to Hawai
'i Probate Rules (HPR) Rule 20, or, in the alternative, for 
an order compelling discovery and appointing a discovery master. On November 7, 2011, the Trustees filed an objection to the petitions. The probate court held a hearing on December 1, 2011, and subsequently entered orders denying both petitions. 
On March 9, 2012, the Master filed "Master's Report Re:
 
Petition for Approval of 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 Income and
 Principal Accounts" (Master's Report). 
On April 18, 2012, Haig filed "Beneficiary Christopher
 
Damon Haig's Petition to Compel Production of Documents and
 Continue Deadline to Respond to Master's Report" (Petition to
 Compel), seeking production of the documents he had previously
 requested, including all documents reviewed by the Master.
 
On April 25, 2012, Haig submitted his objections to the
 
Master's Report. On April 26, 2012, Murdoch submitted her
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
objections to the Master's Report. 
On May 10, 2012, Murdoch filed a Joinder in Haig's
 
Petition to Compel. 
On May 25, 2012, the Master filed "Master's Response to
 
Objections to Master's Report Re: 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003
 
Income and Principal Accounts" (Master's Response), in which the
 Master briefed and replied to several objections raised by
 Appellants.
 
On May 31, 2012, the probate court held a hearing on
 
the Petition to Compel. On June 19, 2012, the probate court
 issued a minute order denying the Petition to Compel stating:
 "The Court finds that there is no basis to compel the Trustees to
 produce all the documents reviewed by the Master. The Court also
 denies the Petitioner's request to transfer the matter to the
 civil trials calendar."
 
On June 21, 2012, the probate court held a hearing on
 
the 1999-2003 Accounts Petition. On July 3, 2012, the probate
 court issued a minute order, which adopted the Master's
 recommendations, and approved the 1999-2003 Accounts Petition. 
On August 2, 2012, the probate court filed an "Order Granting
 Petition for Approval of 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002 and 2003 Income
 and Principle Accounts" which, inter alia, (1) granted the 1999­2003 Accounts Petition; and (2) settled, allowed, and approved
 the income and principal accounts and inventory of the estate for
 the calendar years 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, and 2003. On August
 2, 2012, the probate court also filed the Judgment, which entered
 final judgment on, inter alia, the following orders: (1) Order
 Granting Petition for Approval of 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002 and 2003
 Income and Principal Accounts; (2) Orders Denying Appellants'
 Petitions to Renew Request for Assignment of Case to Circuit
 Court Pursuant to Probate Rule 20 or in the Alternative, for
 Appointment of Discovery Master; and (3) Order Denying Haig's
 Petition to Compel. 
On August 22, 2012, Murdoch filed her notice of appeal. 
On August 31, 2012, Haig filed a notice of cross-appeal. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.	 Standard of Review
 
We start with the well-settled principle that trustees 
benefit from a presumption of regularity and good faith. In re 
Estate of Campbell, 42 Haw. 586, 607 (Haw. Terr. 1958). 
Specifically, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court long ago adopted 
a rule which accords to the trustee the benefit of the
 
presumption of regularity and good faith and imposes upon
the person questioning the trustee's action the burden of
overcoming the presumption, but which requires the trustee
ultimately to justify his action if sufficient evidence is
produced to overcome the presumption.
Id. 
To the extent that a court adopts the findings of a 
master, the findings are considered the findings of the court. 
Hawaii Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 114 Hawai 'i 438, 456, 164 
P.3d 696, 714 (2007) (quoting Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 52(a)). A master's factual findings are reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard, with deference to the "superior position" of the master "to consider credibility and to draw inferences from the testimonial evidence." Id. (citation 
omitted); see also In re Estate of Chuck, 33 Haw. 445, 453 (Haw. Terr. 1935) (stating "the master's findings of fact should not be disturbed without clear proof of error or mistake on his part"). A master's "conclusions of law, however, are not entitled to any special weight." Id. at 457, 164 P.3d at 715. The master's 
conclusions of law that are adopted by the circuit court are treated as the conclusions of the circuit court and are freely reviewed for their correctness under the right/wrong standard. Id. 
III. Discussion
 
A.	 The probate court did not err when it did not
compel Trustees to provide Appellants with the
requested documents and did not appoint a
discovery master.
 
Appellants contend that the Trustees had a duty to keep
 
the beneficiaries reasonably informed about the administration of
 
the trust and therefore the probate court erred when it did not
 compel the Trustees to provide the documents that were requested
 in several letters to the Master and the Trustees themselves.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellants also contend that Appellants needed the information
 
they requested to fully articulate any objections to the 1999­2003 Accounts Petition. 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 560:7-303 (2006)
 
provides: 
§560:7-303 Duty to inform and account to
beneficiaries. The trustee shall keep the beneficiaries of
the trust  reasonably informed of the trust and its
administration . . . . In addition:
 
. . . . 
(2) Upon reasonable request, the trustee shall
provide the beneficiary with a copy of the termsof the trust which describe or affect the beneficiary's interest and with informationabout the assets of the trust and the 
(3) particulars relating to the administration.Upon reasonable request, a beneficiary isentitled to a statement of the accounts of the trust annually and on termination of the trustor change of the trustee. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The Master's Report concluded:
 
[T]he Beneficiaries, including [Appellants], were provided
with notices and relevant documentation of the Trust's
 operation, administration, management, and termination
planning as follows:
1. For each of the years in the 1999 - 2003 Accounting
Period, the Trust sent to all Beneficiaries copies of the
annual accounts and audited financial.
 
2. For each of the years in the 1999 -2003 [sic]
Accounting Period, the Trust sent Beneficiaries copies of
the minutes of the Trustees' weekly meetings. The Trustees
designated one Trustees' meeting per quarter for
Beneficiaries to meet with the Trustees to ask questions
regarding the minutes of the Trustees' meetings or to
discuss matters regarding the administration of the Trust.
3. Beginning in January 1995, the Damon Trust held
annual Beneficiaries' Briefings (except for 2000 and 2001)
to discuss and request input regarding performance of the
Trust, termination options and planning, and any other
related issues. Initially, the only persons invited to the
Beneficiaries' Briefings were first generation of contingent
remaindermen, i.e., the great-grandchildren of Samuel Damon
and his then living grandchildren; however, upon her
request, Ms. Murdoch was allowed to attend the 1999
Beneficiaries' Briefing and, following a policy change, she
was invited to attend the 2002 and 2003 Beneficiaries'
 Briefings.
4. [Appellants] attended several Beneficiaries'
Briefings and Quarterly Meetings.
5. The Damon Trust provided Beneficiaries written
updates regarding the Trust administration and
termination-planning issues, and invited the Beneficiaries'
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
input.
6. The Trust's records and documents confirmed that
 
the Trustees had an "open door" policy where Beneficiaries
could meet with Trustees and Estate staff, review Estate
records and documents, and ask questions on trust-related
matters. There is no evidence that the Trustees refused any
reasonable request of any Beneficiary.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
On appeal, Appellants do not dispute the Trustees'
 
contention and the Master's findings that at the conclusion of
 
each year in the 1999-2003 accounting period, the Estate provided
 all beneficiaries, including Appellants, with the annual accounts
 and audited financial statements. Each of the Financial
 Statements and Schedules for the 1999-2003 accounting period
 provided a detailed list of, inter alia, assets and liabilities
 and undistributed income and principal. The Financial Statements
 and Schedules included, inter alia: (1) Summary of Significant
 Accounting Policies; (2) Investments; (3) Property, Improvements,
 and Equipment; (4) Note Payable and Line of Credit; (5) Fiduciary
 Income Taxes; (6) Sales of Land; (7) Pension Plan; and (8) Lease
 Commitments. Trustees also provided to the beneficiaries an
 account for each of the years 1999-2003, which included, inter
 alia: receipts; all payments made; administrative expenses;
 expenses from the properties; Trustees' commissions; and
 inventory of land, corporate stocks, livestock, and other assets.
 
Appellants do not contend that they objected to any of
 
the detailed Financial Statements and Accounts from the Trustees
 at the time they received them. Rather, Appellants contend that
 despite receiving the annual Financial Statements and Accounts,
 they should have had access to additional records at the time the
 Trustees' filed the 1999-2003 Accounts Petition.
 
The Financial Statements and Accounts provided to
 
Appellants annually contained a detailed accounting of the
 transactions of the Trust. Despite this fact, Appellants sent
 multiple letters to the Master and the Trustees requesting a wide
 range of documents that covered a large swath of information. 
However, Appellants do not point to a specific reason for the
 requested documents other than a generalized assertion that they
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
need to understand and track the Trustees' transactions. Thus,
 
it is not clear what Appellants would gain from the documents and
 Appellants fail to meet their burden of overcoming the
 presumption of regularity and good faith of the Trustees. 
Therefore, the Master's conclusion that the
 
beneficiaries were reasonably informed of the trust and its
 administration was not clearly erroneous. In addition, given the
 above, the probate court did not err when it denied Appellants'
 request to appoint a discovery master while the appointed Master
 was conducting her review. 
Haig asserts that his procedural due process rights
 
were violated because he "could not respond to the analysis of
 the Master in a meaningful manner, without being provided with an
 opportunity to review the same information that was made
 available for the Master's analysis." Haig also contends that
 the Master had multiple private communications with the Trustees,
 and Haig himself did not have the same access to the Master. 
The Constitution of the State of Hawai
'i provides: "No 
person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of law[.]" Haw. Const. art. I, § 5. "The basic elements of procedural due process are notice and an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner." Hou v. 
Bd. of Land and Nat. Res., 136 Hawai
'i 376, 389, 363 P.3d 224, 
237 (2015) (citation omitted). 
Appellants point to Hou, a recent Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
decision discussing due process, to support their contention that their due process rights were violated. Hou involved an appeal 
from an agency decision. The supreme court stated: "In an adjudicatory proceeding before an administrative agency, due process of law generally prohibits decisionmakers from being biased, and more specifically, prohibits decisionmakers from prejudging matters and the appearance of having prejudged matters." Id. 
In Hou, the Hawai
'i Board of Land and Natural Resources 
(BLNR) approved a permit for a proposed astronomy observatory, ancillary facilities, and an access road on the upper slopes of 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mauna Kea. Id. at 381, 383, 363 P.3d at 229, 231. The issue in
 
Hou was "whether Appellants were given an opportunity to be heard
 
at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner when -- despite
 their pending requests for a contested case hearing and specific
 requests to not issue a permit before such hearing -- BLNR issued
 the permit before resolving those requests and conducting a
 contested case hearing." Id. at 390, 363 P.3d at 238. 
The supreme court concluded that the process of
 
approving the permit prior to holding a contested case hearing
 created the "appearance of impropriety," which did not "warrant
 judgment in favor of BLNR." Id. at 399, 363 P.3d at 247. 
Therefore, the supreme court held that "BLNR acted improperly
 when it issued the permit prior to holding a contested case
 hearing." Id.
 
This case is fully distinguishable from Hou. Here, the
 
probate court did not provide any preliminary approval of
 contested matters before making its final decision. Rather,
 during the April 1, 2010 hearing regarding the petition for
 assignment to the civil trials calendar, the court asked
 Appellants whether the Master's Report would address their
 concerns and if there would be any prejudice to the Appellants if
 the court waited to assign the matter until after an opportunity
 to review the Master's Report. The court thus deferred the
 question of transferring the case to the civil trials calendar
 until it had a chance to see the Master's Report.
 
At the December 1, 2011 hearing regarding the
 
assignment of the case to the civil trials calendar, the court
 stated that the parties could use the Master's Report to "focus
 or hone in on the issues." The court also asked "why don't we
 wait to see what the Master's report shows[?]" The court
 concluded:
 
I know you have major concerns. I know there are -- your
clients have matters that they want the Court to focus on.
But at this point in time, there's nothing to -- to make me
want to deviate from the normal process. Like I said, you'll
have an opportunity to respond to the Master's report. Your
issues are preserved. There's nothing before me now that
says, If we don't do it now, Judge, we're never going to be
able to address these issues. So what you're telling me to
 
10
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
do is to allow discovery at this juncture, at this point in
time, which is totally extraordinary, and there's nothing to
motivate me to grant that extraordinary relief, that I can
see.
 
Based on the probate court's statements, it is clear
 
that it had not made any preliminary determination before the
 
Master's Report was issued and the court's final decision was
 made. Thus, Hou is inapplicable.
 
Haig also contends his due process rights were violated
 
because he did not have access to the Master. However, this
 contention is without merit. The Master's Report lists both
 Appellants as individuals with whom the Master conferred and had
 contact. Further, the Master's Timesheet attached to the
 "Declaration of Master Re: Fees and Costs" filed on June 15,
 2012, indicates that the Master met with or spoke over the phone
 with Appellants and/or their attorneys on several occasions. The
 Master also responded to Appellants' letters addressed to the
 Master requesting documents. Finally, the Master's Report
 specifically addresses Appellants' objections that were submitted
 to the Master. 
Therefore, Appellants' due process rights were not
 
violated.
 
B.	 The probate court did not err when it retained the
matter on the probate calendar.
 
Appellants contend the probate court erred when it did
 
not transfer the matter to the civil trials calendar or, in the
 
alternative, provide for an opportunity for discovery and an
 evidentiary hearing.
 
The probate court is statutorily empowered, inter alia, 
to make orders and judgments in trust proceedings, and, furthermore, to use discretion in its exercise of power. HRS § 560:1-302(a)(3), (b) (2006). Hawai
'i Probate Rules (HPR) Rule 
20(a) provides: "The court by written order may retain a contested matter on the regular probate calendar or may assign the contested matter to the civil trials calendar of the circuit court." The commentary to HPR Rule 20(a) provides in pertinent 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
part:
 
It is anticipated that the court will assign to civil trials
the more complex and time consuming cases, although the
court may retain such a case if it involves technical issues
that are within the experience and expertise of the probate
court (and therefore involve less time and effort to educate
a trial judge). 
HPR Rule 20(b) provides in pertinent part:
 
The court may use as a guideline on whether to assign a
contested matter to the civil trials calendar the expected
length of the hearing and whether it will take more than
one-half day. The court may also assign other matters to the
civil trials calendar, with or without the stipulation of
the parties, and the court, at the request of all parties,
may retain on the probate calendar a contested matter that
would otherwise be assigned to the civil trials calendar, if
the court determines the matter can be handled more
 efficiently and effectively.
 
The commentary to HPR Rule 20(b) provides in pertinent part: 
"This rule provides standards for assigning contested matters to
 either the probate calendar or the civil trials calendar, with a
 great deal of flexibility built in." Thus, under HPR Rule 20(a)
 and (b), it is within the discretion of the probate judge whether
 to transfer the case to the civil trials calendar and the rules
 are meant to give the probate court flexibility in making the
 decision.
 
In the alternative, Appellants contend that if the
 
probate court did not err by retaining the matter, the probate
 court should have granted Appellants' request for discovery. 
In contested matters retained by the probate court,
 
however, discovery is not automatically permitted. HPR Rule
 20(d) gives the probate court discretion to "designate and order
 that any one or more of the Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure 
and/or Rules of the Circuit Courts shall be applicable in such
 matter." The commentary to HPR Rule 20(d) provides: 
This rule allows the court to adopt any of the Rules of
Civil Procedure or Rules of the Circuit Court to govern the
conduct of the contested matter. It is anticipated that
most, if not all, of the rules regarding discovery, summary
judgment, trial testimony, and pretrial practices will be
adopted. Currently, contested matters in probate do not
clearly give rise to the right to discovery, and it is rare
for the court to specifically address the issue. 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although the rule allows the probate court to adopt the
 
Rules of Civil Procedure, including as to discovery, it is
 
clearly a matter of discretion on the part of the probate court. 
Here, the record shows that the Estate provided beneficiaries
 with annual accounts and audited financial statements and that
 the Trustees kept the beneficiaries reasonably informed of the
 trust and its administration. The probate court appointed an
 independent Master who conducted a thorough investigation of the
 accounts, prepared a comprehensive report, and responded to
 Appellants' objections. Moreover, Appellants requested a wide
 range of documents without providing specific or clear bases
 warranting the extensive reach of their requests. Under these
 circumstances, we cannot say that the probate court abused its
 discretion when it denied discovery. The probate court's denial
 of Appellants' discovery requests was consistent with one of the
 principal purposes and policies of Hawaii's Uniform Probate Code:
 To "[p]romote a speedy and efficient system for liquidating the
 estate of the decedent and making distribution to the decedent's
 successors[.]" HRS § 560:1-102(b)(3) (2006).
 
Further, for the reasons stated above, given the wide
 
discretion granted to the probate court in the HPR and that one
 of Appellants' main reasons for requesting the case be
 transferred to the civil trials calendar was so that they could
 conduct discovery, the probate court did not abuse its discretion
 when it retained the matter on the probate calendar.
C. Appellants' spoliation claims
 
Appellants contend that the Trustees committed
 
spoliation because the Trustees either destroyed or lost the
 1999-2002 receipts and invoices. Appellants argue that this
 destruction of evidence necessitates the presumption that the
 1999-2003 Accounts Petition cannot be approved. 
Spoliation is defined as the "intentional destruction,
 
mutilation, alteration, or concealment of evidence[.]" 
Spoliation, Black's Law Dictionary (9th ed. 2009) (emphasis
 added). 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellants' spoliation argument stems from a statement
 
in the Master's Report that "[t]he 1999-2002 receipts and
 
invoices were unlocatable and, according to Controller Mizuno,
 were probably destroyed as part of the Trust's regular document
 culling process." This statement is taken out of context in the
 sense that the Master fully addressed the issue of the missing
 receipts and invoices with the full cooperation of the Trustees. 
The full paragraph from which the sentence was taken reads:
 
Your Master verified the accuracy and reliability of
the Trust's financial accounts by examining the statements
of assets and liabilities, income and expenses, and random
examination of the 2003 receipts and invoices. The 1999-2002
receipts and invoices were unlocatable and, according to
Controller Mizuno, were probably destroyed as part of the
Trust's regular document culling process. Controller Mizuno
assured the Master that he has seen and audited most of the
 1999-2002 receipts and invoices when he was part of the KPMG
LLP (hereinafter KPMG) audit team and approved some of the
2002 receipts and invoices when he was hired as the Estate's
Controller in October 2002. The 1999-2003 annual statements,
which were mailed annually to all Beneficiaries, were
created from the receipts and invoices. He also confirmed
that the Trust's internal controls requiring at least three
levels of approval, including those of the Trustees, were
uniformly followed in all of the years in the 1999-2003
Accounts Period.
 
In response to the Appellants' assertion, the Master's
 
Response states: 
Due to the seriousness of the situation and the claim of
 spoliation, your Master further investigated this matter to
ascertain what happened to the 1999-2002 documents and to
determine whether there are other documents that provide the
same information as the missing documents. Your Master
requested that the Trust and its attorneys conduct a
thorough examination and search of the Trust's financial
records and to report their findings to the Master. The
Master conducted independent spot checks of the financial
records and the record keeping procedures, the results of
which are described in this Response. This additional
examination was limited to the Estate's 1999-2002 financial
 records. The Master is informed that financial records for
 2003 are all available.
 
Thus, the Master, in her own independent investigation, conducted
 
spot checks of the financial records and the record-keeping
 procedures and requested that the Trust conduct a thorough
 examination. The Master also included a detailed list of the
 financial documents she reviewed and the names of individuals
 
14

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contacted who were involved with the trust administration and
 
accounting over the period of 1999-2002.
 
The Master's Response also clarifies that the Trust had
 
"no document retention or destruction policy [,]" and that,
 
rather, the "Trust went through a major transition in 2007 when
 it closed its office and packed its documents for storage. 
However, no one could recall or state with any degree of
 certainty that the documents were discarded in this process."
 (Emphasis added.) Although the 1999-2002 check vouchers were not
 located, the Trust was able to locate records that provided the
 same information.
 
The Master summarized her extensive investigation
 
regarding Appellants' spoliation claims as follows:
 
Although the Master's Report indicated that the
missing documents were "destroyed," the Master did not mean
to infer that Trust and/or its employees and/or the Trustees
intentionally or negligently destroyed evidence. As we know
 now, the documents are inexplicably missing.
While it is not known when or how the records went
 
missing, a lot is known about the Trust's financial
statements, including but not limited to how the financial
records were regularly prepared in the ordinary course of
the Trust's business, how several employees were responsible
for the preparation and reconciliation of all records, how
invoices were checked for accuracy and required multi-layers
of approval prior to payment, how check payments required
dual signatures, how checks were meticulously posted by
payor name and amount on the deposit slips, how bank
deposits were made daily, how First Hawaiian Bank affixed a
validation stamp to each deposit slip, how a check register
was diligently prepared and kept, how all of the Trust's
financial information was posted and maintained in the most
important financial record, the general ledger, how bank
statements were regularly reconciled with the check
register, how all relevant underlying source documents were
available when KPMG conducted its annual audits, how KPMG
spot-checked source documents, how KPMG issued unqualified
opinions on the financial statements for each year, 1999­2002, how there were no discrepancies with the Master's
examination and testing of the Trust's records, and how the
Annual Accounts were prepared contemporaneously with all of
the Trust's other financial records. More importantly, we
know that other financial documents are available to provide
the same information as the missing documents and that the
Trust's Annual Accounts and financial records can be checked
 and reconciled for accuracy and fairness. 
Based on all that
 
the Master has learned and knows of the Trust's financial
 records, its regular record keeping procedures and controls,the Master is reasonably assured that the Trust did not
intentionally destroy or discard the missing records and
that the Annual Accounts are fair, reliable, and accurate. 

15
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(Emphasis added.) Importantly, the Master further concluded that
 
"[i]f the Beneficiaries are concerned that there may have been
 internal tampering, the Master is also reasonably assured that
 such a situation could not have occurred, in part, because many
 individuals were regularly involved in creating, posting,
 maintaining, reconciling, and reviewing different parts of the
 Trust's financial records." 
In light of the Master's conclusions, the Appellants
 
fail to present any evidence to overcome the "presumption of
 regularity and good faith" favoring the Trustees. Campbell, 42
 
Haw. at 607. Appellants do not challenge any specific findings
 of the Master, but vaguely assert that the missing documents were
 necessary to pursue their claims. Appellants do not explain how
 the missing documents would aid them in proving any alleged
 breaches of fiduciary duties or the duty of loyalty, any self-
dealing, or any failure to comply with the prudent investor rule,
 and why different, but readily available, documents are not
 acceptable. 
Given the presumption of good faith and regularity in
 
favor of the Trustees, and Appellants' failure to overcome this
 presumption, we disagree with Appellants that given their claim
 of spoilation the probate court erred in approving the 1999-2003
 Accounts Petition. 
D.	 The probate court did not err in approving the
transactions associated with the sale of the
 
BancWest stock and the real estate transactions.
 
Haig contends that the probate court erred when it
 
determined that Haig waived his objections to the sale of the
 
BancWest stock and in turn approved the sale of the BancWest
 stock. Haig also contends the probate court erred when it
 approved certain real estate transactions.
5
 
In terms of the sale of BancWest stock, the Master
 
found that Haig's objection to the sale of BancWest stock was
 
5
 In her appeal, Murdoch does not challenge the sale of BancWest stock
or the approval of certain real estate transactions.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
barred by waiver, estoppel, and laches because he failed to
 
timely object at the time of the transaction or in the original
 proceedings, and he was "also estopped from objecting because he
 expressly approved of the transaction." The Master found that
 "during the seven months, from May 10, 2001, when Beneficiaries
 were first notified of the transaction, to December 20, 2001, the
 date the transaction closed, neither Mr. Haig nor Ms. Murdoch
 made any objections." The Master's Report found that Haig
 expressly approved of the transaction: 
Mr. Haig is estopped from objecting to the transaction
because he sought an order requiring the Trustees to
[diversify] the Estate's investments and expressly approved
of the transaction, which closed upon the material terms as
he knew and understood them to be.
 
. . . .
 
Mr. Haig and his advisors reviewed the transaction
documents and on September 10, 2011, Mr. Haig wrote to the
Trustees, stating, "We support the proposed sale of BWE
stock." The next day, Mr. Haig and his attorney attended
the Trustees' meeting and confirmed his support for the
BancWest/BNP Paribas transaction. The merger closed upon the
material terms as Mr. Haig knew and understood them to be
and the success of the merger between BancWest and BNP
Paribas was essential to the ability of the Trust to
diversify its investment portfolio as Mr. Haig had long
sought.
 
(Emphasis added.) Because Haig does not attempt to controvert the
 
Master's statements with any evidence suggesting that he did not
 approve the transaction, we affirm the probate court's adoption
 of the Master's conclusion that Haig's objection to the sale was
 barred.
 
Next, Haig argues that the Master erred in summarily
 
dismissing his objections relating to the sale of real estate
 without allowing him the opportunity to review records pertinent
 to those objections, and that the probate court erred in
 affirming the Master's determination.
 
Here, the Master determined that Haig's objections 
regarding the sale of O
'ahu properties were barred under the 
doctrine of laches as follows: 
17
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
As discussed in this Report, beginning in 1995 the
Trustees had numerous meetings with the Beneficiaries
concerning termination planning options leading up to the
Trustees' decision in 2002 to retain a real estate advisor
 when the Beneficiaries were unable to reach a consensus on
 any post-termination plan. The Trustees provided the
Beneficiaries with information and documents regarding the
exhaustive process that resulted in the Trustees' decisions
to hire Eastdil and to sell the real estate portfolio in
2003. Mr. Haig hired consultants to evaluate the real
estate transaction and both he and Ms. Murdoch attended
 meetings with the Trustees and reviewed Estate documents.
Mr. Haig and Ms. Murdoch never objected to the Oahu real
estate transactions at that time and first raised objections
in this remanded proceeding more than 7 years after the sale
closed. They had two opportunities to object to the sale,
prior to the closing of the sale and then in the original
proceedings in this case, but remained silent each time. As
 such, the Master finds that under the doctrine of laches
their lack of diligence bars the untimely objections now
raised by them. Poka v. Holi, 44 Hawaii 464, 357 P.2d 100
(1960) (citing to Houghtailing v. De La Nux, 25 Haw. 438,
affirmed 9 Cir., 269 F. 751; Bertelmann v. Lucas, 35 Haw.
335, 345).
 
(Emphasis added.)6
 
Two conditions must be present for the doctrine of
laches to apply:
 
 
6
 Although the Master found that these claims were barred, she
nevertheless responded to the merits of Haig's objections. The Master
 rejected Haig's complaints about selling individual parcels both because they
were inconsistent and because they were impossible to evaluate in that "he
does not identify the specialty buyers or strategic packaging he believes were
affected by the sales." Haig also complained about every aspect of the sale,
but the Master emphasized that "[t]hese criticisms, for the most part, are not
supported by competent evidence and amount to second guessing the decisions of
the Trustees who, with expert advise and guidance, exercised their reasonable
judgment to sell the Oahu real estate portfolio." Although Haig attempted to
introduce the opinions of his own experts suggesting otherwise, the Master
highlighted that under Hawaii's Uniform Trustees' Powers Act, the Trustees
have the right to rely on the recommendation of professional consultants,
including investment and real estate advisors, in exercising their collective
business judgment. See HRS § 554A-3(c)(23)(2006). Accordingly, the Master
concluded that "[o]n balance, it cannot be said that Mr. Haig's experts'
credentials are superior to that of the Trust's experts" or that he could show
that the Trust's experts' recommendations were inadequate.
The Master did not conclude that Haig's objections to the sale of
Wheatland Ranch were barred by the doctrine of laches. However, the Master's
Report points to the fact that Haig's expert in the original proceeding
actually supported the sale of Wheatland Ranch, whereas in the remanded
proceeding Haig obtained a new expert that questioned the sale for the first
time. The Master emphasized that Haig's new expert's criticisms were "lacking
in evidentiary sufficiency to overcome the presumption of regularity and good
faith favoring the Trustees." Haig does not point to anything specific in the
record that overcomes the presumption of regularity and good faith favoring
the Trustees with regard to Wheatland Ranch. 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
First, there must have been a delay by the plaintiff in
bringing his claim, and that delay must have been
unreasonable under the circumstances. Delay is reasonable if
the claim was brought without undue delay after plaintiff
knew of the wrong or knew of facts and circumstances
sufficient to impute such knowledge to him. Second, that
delay must have resulted in prejudice to defendant. Common
but by no means exclusive examples of such prejudice are
loss of evidence with which to contest plaintiff's claims,
including the fading memories or deaths of material
witnesses, changes in the value of the subject matter,
changes in defendant's position, and intervening rights of
third parties.
 
Adair v. Hustace, 64 Haw. 314, 321, 640 P.2d 294, 300 (1982)
 
(citations omitted).
 
In this case, Haig did not raise any objection until
 
more than seven (7) years after the sale had been closed and does
 not present any evidence excusing his failure to raise objections
 in a timely manner. In addition, Haig's delay in objecting to
 the sale of real estate certainly results in prejudice to the
 Trustees. Thus, Haig's objections are barred by the doctrine of laches. 
Therefore, the probate court did not err in affirming 
the Master's determination that Haig's objections to the sale of
 BancWest stock and the sale of real estate were barred.
 
E.	 Appellants' contention that the probate court did
not conduct a meaningful review of the Master's
Report is without merit.
 
Appellants contend that the probate court adopted the
 
Master's Report without a meaningful review of the report. 
A master "serves as the eyes and ears of the court." 
Damon I, 119 Hawai
'i at 506, 199 P.3d at 95 (citation omitted). 
Further, the court gives a master "particular deference" because 
the master sits in a superior position "to consider credibility and to draw inferences from the testimonial evidence." Hawaii 
Ventures, 114 Hawai
'i at 456, 164 P.3d at 714 (citation omitted). 
The probate court appointed a master and, as stated
 
above, the Master conducted a thorough review of the case. The
 probate court thereafter heard Appellants' arguments on and
 considered their objections to the Master's Report. Appellants
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
do not point to any specific finding of the Master that was
 
clearly erroneous. Therefore, the probate court did not err when
 it approved and adopted the recommendations of the Master.
IV. Conclusion
 
The Judgment filed on August 2, 2012, in the Circuit
 
Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 2, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Michael C. Carroll,
Adrian L. Lavarias,(Bays, Lung, Rose & Holma),Frederick G. Riecker,for Cross-Appellant. 
Thomas R. Sylvester,
Stephanie L. Marn,(Bickerton, Lee, Dang & Sullivan),for Appellant. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
J. Thomas Van Winkle,
Duane R. Miyashiro,Melissa H. Lambert,(Carlsmith, Ball, LLP),
for Petitioners/Appellees/Cross-Appellees.
 
George W. Van Buren,

for Beneficiaries.
 
20
 