NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000396
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BLADESIN-ISAIAH BAILEY, Defendant-Appellant,
and ANDREW JOSIAH RODRIGUEZ, Defendant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-0819)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Bladesin-Isaiah Bailey (Bailey)
 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment)
 
filed on March 19, 2012, in the Circuit Court of the First
 
1
Circuit  (circuit court).  Judgment was entered against Bailey
 
for Kidnapping, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
2
§ 707-720(1)(e) (Supp. 2012),  and Assault in the Third Degree,
in violation of HRS § 707-712 (1993 Repl.).3
 
1
 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-720(1)(e) provides that "[a] person commits the offense of
kidnapping if the person intentionally or knowingly restrains another person
with intent to . . . [t]errorize that person or a third person[.]"
3
 HRS § 707-712(1) provides that "[a] person commits the offense of
assault in the third degree if the person: (a) Intentionally, knowingly, or
recklessly causes bodily injury to another person; or (b) Negligently causes
bodily injury to another person with a dangerous instrument."
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Bailey contends that the circuit court erred 
in denying his oral motion for judgment of acquittal and his 
renewed motion for judgment of acquittal because Plaintiff-
Appellee State of Hawai' i (the State) failed to establish venue. 
Bailey also contends that the circuit court erred in denying his motion for judgment of acquittal because the Class A felony 
Kidnapping verdict was inconsistent with the Assault in the Third 
Degree verdict. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Bailey's
 
points of error as set forth below.
 
I. Venue
 
Bailey contends that venue was not proven because no
 
witness testified that the events occurred in the "City and
 
County of Honolulu" and only one witness mentioned the island of
 
Oahu. We conclude that venue was properly established.
 
4
HRS § 701-114(1)(d) (1993 Repl.)  provides that, in a
criminal case, venue must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 18 provides that: 
"[e]xcept as otherwise permitted by statute or by these rules, the prosecution shall be had in the circuit in which the offense 
or any part of it was committed." HRS § 603-1 (Supp. 2012) 
describes the State of Hawaii's judicial circuits: 
§603-1 Judicial circuits.  The State is divided into
 
four judicial circuits, as follows:
 (1)	 The first judicial circuit is the island of Oahu
and all other islands belonging to the State not
hereinafter mentioned;
 
4
 HRS § 701-114(1)(d) states, in relevant part:
 
[N]o person may be convicted of an offense unless the following
are proved beyond a reasonable doubt: . . . (d) Facts establishing
venue[.] 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 (2) The second judicial circuit includes the islands
of Maui, Molokai, Lanai, Kahoolawe, andMolokini;
 (3) The third judicial circuit is the island ofHawaii;
 (4) The fifth judicial circuit includes the islandsof Kauai and Niihau. 
(Emphasis added.) Additionally, the Revised Charter of the City
 
5
and County of Honolulu (RCCCH) § 1-102 (2000)  sets out that the
City and County of Honolulu encompasses the island of Oahu.
 
Bailey fails to point to any legal authority to support
 
the contention that the phrase "City and County of Honolulu" must
 
be used when establishing venue in the first judicial circuit,
 
and that venue is not established by using the phrase "island of
 
Oahu." 
Moreover, a review of the testimony at trial reveals
 
there was evidence establishing that the events took place on the
 island of Oahu. 
Additionally, the circuit court properly took judicial 
notice of venue when it noted that the geographic areas described 
in various testimony were all on the island of Oahu, and 
commented that there was no testimony that any of the parties or 
witnesses traveled in any conveyance other than a car, rendering 
it impossible for the events to have occurred in another venue. 
See State v. Puaoi, 78 Hawai' i 185, 190, 891 P.2d 272, 277 
(1995). 
Viewing the evidence in the strongest light for the 
prosecution, sufficient evidence was adduced to establish that the offense took place on the island of Oahu, thus establishing 
venue beyond a reasonable doubt. See State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 
19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998). 
5
 RCCCH § 1-102 provides, as follows:
 
Section 1-102. Geographical Limits -­
The island of Oahu and all other islands in the State of
 
Hawaii, not included in any other county and waters adjacent
thereto, shall constitute the City and County of Honolulu.
 
3
    
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. Inconsistent Verdict
 
Bailey asserts that the guilty verdict as to the Class
 
A felony Kidnapping charge is inconsistent with the guilty
 
verdict of Assault in the Third Degree and therefore, the Class A
 
felony Kidnapping verdict should be reduced to a Class B felony
 
Kidnapping verdict. We disagree.
 
HRS § 707-720 (2) and (3) (1993 Repl.) provide, in
 
relevant part: 
(2) Except as provided in subsection (3), kidnapping
is a class A felony.
(3) In a prosecution for kidnapping, it is a defense
which reduces the offense to a class B felony that the
defendant voluntarily released the victim, alive and not
suffering from serious or substantial bodily injury, in a
safe place prior to trial.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Bailey was charged with Assault in the Second Degree
 
for intentionally, knowingly or recklessly causing "substantial
 
bodily injury" to complaining witness Ezra Kualaau (Kualaau)
 
pursuant to HRS § 707-711(1)(a) and (b) (Supp. 2012), which
 
provides: 
§707-711 Assault in the second degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the second degree if:
 
(a)	 The person intentionally or knowingly causes
substantial bodily injury to another;
 
(b) 	The person recklessly causes serious or
substantial bodily injury to another[.]
 
(Emphasis added.) "Substantial bodily injury" means bodily
 
injury which causes, among other things, a bone fracture. 
HRS § 707-700 (Supp. 2012). 
The jury returned a guilty verdict for the lesser
 
included offense of Assault in the Third Degree, pursuant to
 
HRS § 707-712, which provides:
 
§707-712 Assault in the third degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the third degree if the
person:
 
(a)	 Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causes
bodily injury to another person; or
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(b)	 Negligently causes bodily injury to another
person with a dangerous instrument.
 
(Emphasis added.) "'Bodily injury'" means physical pain,
 
illness, or any impairment of physical condition." HRS § 707­
700.
 
Bailey argues that when the jury found him guilty of
 
the lesser included offense of Assault in the Third Degree, the
 
verdict indicated that "it is indisputable that [Kualaau] was
 
released from the trunk . . . without serious or substantial
 
injury[,]" thus validating Bailey's argument that he is guilty
 
only of a class B Kidnapping felony. 
The circuit court disagreed, pointing out that there
 
was a distinction between finding an alleged victim was suffering
 
from substantial bodily injury as opposed to determining who
 
caused substantial bodily injury to that alleged victim. In
 
other words, a jury could find that a person suffered
 
"substantial bodily injury," even though the jury could not
 
determine who caused that "substantial bodily injury." The
 
circuit court thus noted in this case that the jury could have
 
concluded that: Kualaau had suffered "substantial bodily injury"
 
(i.e. a broken nose); the State had not met its burden of proof
 
as to who caused the broken nose; but that Bailey caused lesser
 
"bodily injury" for purposes of the offense of Assault in the
 
Third Degree. We agree with the circuit court.
 
Based on the record, there was sufficient evidence for
 
the jury to conclude that Kualaau's nose was broken and thus, he
 
suffered "substantial bodily injury." However, because Kualaau
 
testified that a plastic bag and cloth covered his head and face
 
when he was being punched in the face, there is no testimony as
 
to which co-defendant was responsible for punching his face. 
There was sufficient evidence though for the jury to conclude
 
that Bailey caused Kualaau to suffer "bodily injury." 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Moreover and importantly, the jury clearly rejected
 
Bailey's argument asserted on appeal that the offense should be
 
reduced to a Class B felony Kidnapping offense when the jury
 
answered each of the following special interrogatories in the
 
affirmative:
 
1. Has the prosecution proven beyond a reasonable
doubt that prior to trial [Bailey] did not release [Kualaau]
voluntarily?
 
2. Has the prosecution proven beyond a reasonable
doubt that prior to trial [Bailey] did not release [Kualaau]
alive and not suffering from serious or substantial bodily
injury?
 
3. Has the prosecution proven beyond a reasonable
doubt that prior to trial [Bailey] did not release [Kualaau]
in a safe place?
 
Given the evidence and the specific findings by the
 
jury, the verdicts against Bailey are not inconsistent.6
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence filed on March 19, 2012, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 10, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Shawn A. Luiz 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Sonja P. McCullenDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
6 In light of our conclusion that the verdicts against Bailey are not
inconsistent, we need not decide whether inconsistent verdicts would provide a
basis for invalidating the jury's guilty verdict on the Class A felony
Kidnapping charge. 
See United States v. Powell,  469 U.S. 57, 64-67 (1984);
State v. Liuafi,  1 Haw. App. 625, 643, 623 P.2d 1271, 1282 (1981).
 
6
 