 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
    
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000736 28-FEB-2025 08:22 AM Dkt. 56 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000736  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
WELLS FARGO BANK, N.A., AS TRUSTEE FOR  THE  
CERTIFICATEHOLDERS OF  SOUNDVIEW HOME LOAN TRUST 2007-OPT1, 
ASSET-BACKED CERTIFICATES, SERIES 2007-OPT1, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.  
NICOLE K. FLORES, Defendant-Appellant,  
DELTON R. PRIDGEN; WOODRIDGE ASSOCIATION, Defendants-Appellees,
and  
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;  
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50;  
and  DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50, Defendants   
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO.  1CC131002278)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION  ORDER  
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendant -Appellant Nicole K. Flores1 (Flores) appeals 
from the "Findings of Fact [FOF], Conclusions of Law [COL], and 
1 The parties' briefs refer to Flores as Nicole K. Hosaka, but her 
name is listed as Nicole K. Flores on the caption and Judiciary Information 
Management System docket for this case.   
  
 
  
   
  
    
     
  
 
     
   
   
    
 
   
  
  
 
  
 
 
    
 
     
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Order Granting Plaintiff[ -Appellee] 's2 Renewed Motion for Summary 
Judgment and Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure, Filed 
August 18, 2022 " (Foreclosure Order ), filed November 10, 2022 , 
and the "Judgment ," filed November 15 , 2022, by the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit ( circuit court ). 3 
This appeal arises out of a Complaint for Foreclosure 
(Complaint ), filed by Wells Fargo on August 20, 2013 against 
Flores and Defendants -Appellees , Delton R. Pridgen (Pridgen) and 
Woodridge Association . The Complaint alleged that Flores and 
Pridgen had defaulted on a promissory note ( Note) held by Wells 
Fargo. The Note was secured by the Mortgage (Mortgage ) that 
encumbered the subject property ( Property ). In August 2022 , 
Wells Fargo filed its "Renewed [(third)] Motion for Summary 
Judgment and Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure. "4 The circuit 
court granted Wells Fargo's motion and entered the Foreclosure 
Order and Judgment from which Flores presently appeals. 
On appeal, Flores contends that the circuit court 
erred in granting summary judgment in Wells Fargo's favor 
"because Wells Fargo failed to prove standing . . . through 
2 Plaintiff -Appellee is Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. , as Trustee for the 
Certificateholders of Soundview Home Loan Trust 2007 -OPT1, Asset -Backed 
Certificates, Series 2007 -OPT1, herein referred to as Wells Fargo . 
3 The Honorable Lisa W. Cataldo presided. 
4 Wells Fargo's first and second motions for summary judgment w ere 
denied without prejudice. 
2   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
documentary evidence, that it had possession of the Note on the 
date it filed the Complaint, Aug. 20, 2013."  
Flores contends that, in reaching this ruling, the 
circuit court erred in making the following FOF s: 
13. According to the declarations of Charles Brehm 
and Exhibit "S", [Wells Fargo] was in physical possession 
of the original blank -indorsed Note when the Complaint was 
filed and was entitled to enforce the Note under Haw. Rev. 
Stat. § 490:3 -301. 
14. [Wells Fargo] was in possession of the original 
blank-indorsed Note when the Motion was filed and continues 
to be in possession of the original blank -indorsed Note. 
Flores contends that the circuit court erred in making the 
following COL: 
3. The Court concludes that [Wells Fargo] has 
established its standing to enforce the Note and prosecute 
this foreclosure action. 
Upon careful review of the record and relevant legal 
authorities, and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve  
Flores'  contentions  as follows.  
We review the circuit court's grant of summary 
judgment de novo, applying the following standard, 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to jud gment as a matter of law. A 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non -moving party. In other words, we must 
view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in 
the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion. 
3   
  
 
 
  
 
   
   
 
   
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawaiʻi  46, 55-56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285-86 
(2013) (cleaned up).   We review challenged FOFs under the 
clearly erroneous standard and challenged COLs  de novo  under the 
right/wrong standard. Noel Madamba Contracting LLC v. Romero, 
137 Hawaiʻ i 1, 8, 364 P.3d 518, 525 (2015).  
In Bank of Am ., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, the Hawaiʻi 
Supreme Court held that, 
A foreclosing plaintiff's burden to prove entitlement to 
enforce the note overlaps with the requirements of standing 
in foreclosure actions as standing is concerned with 
whether the parties have the right to bring suit. 
Typically, a plaintiff does not hav e standing to invoke the 
jurisdiction of the court unless the plaintiff has suffered 
an injury in fact. A mortgage is a conveyance of an 
interest in real property that is given as security for the 
payment of the note. A foreclosure action is a legal 
proceeding to gain title or force a sale of the property 
for satisfaction of a note that is in default and secured 
by a lien on the subject property. Thus, the underlying 
"injury in fact" to a foreclosing plaintiff is the 
mortgagee's failure to satisfy its ob ligation to pay the 
debt obligation to the note holder. Accordingly, in 
establishing standing, a foreclosing plaintiff must 
necessarily prove its entitlement to enforce the note as it 
is the default on the note that gives rise to the action. 
139 Hawaiʻi 361, 367 -68, 390 P.3d 1248, 1254 -55 (2017) (cleaned 
up). 
We conclude the three declarations of Charles Brehm 
(Brehm), 5 that Wells Fargo filed in support of its third and 
5 Brehm served as a Special Accounts Consultant for Computershare 
Ltd. (Computershare ) and as a member of Computershare's corporate trust 
department. Prior to his employment with Computershare, Brehm was an Officer 
of Wells Fargo, and a member of Wells Fargo's corporate trust department. 
Brehm provided an initial declaration ( first declaration ) which was attached 
to the August 2022 motion for summary judgment. Brehm subsequently provided 
a supplement al declaration and a second supplemental declaration, both filed 
on October 4, 2022. In all three declarations, Brehm represented that 
Computershare is the current Custodian of the original loan documents at 
(continued . . .) 
4   
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
operative motion for summary judgment,  were sufficient to 
establish Wells Fargo's  possession of the original Note  at the 
time the Complaint was filed on August 20, 2013. Brehm's 
Declaration authenticated  copies  of the original indorsed in 
blank Note and Mortgage  that were attached to the motion for 
summary judgment as Exhibits "A" and "B."  
In both supplemental declarations, Brehm  explained 
that he had reviewed the Activity Report  on Flores' loan. He 
represented that the Activity Report "is an internal, 
confidential log with proprietary information, terms and codes 
used by Wells Fargo and Computershare regarding the Note 
history," and that the Activity Report  confirmed  Wells Fargo's 
5(. . . continued) 
issue.   In his first declaration  Brehm represented that  Computershare 
acquired the assets of Wells Fargo Corporate Trust Services effective as of 
November 1, 2021, and that "Computershare's records include and incorporate 
records for the Loan obtained from Wells Fargo[.]" Brehm further stated in 
his first declaration that,  
I have personal knowledge of Computershare's record -keeping 
practices and procedures. I have personal knowledge of the 
computer systems used by Computershare to maintain its 
books and records, including the computer systems used by Computershare to maintain and track original loan documents 
while in Computershare's possession. These records are: 
(a) made at or near the time of occurrence of the matter 
recorded by persons with personal knowledge of the 
information in the business record; (b) kept in the regular course of Computershare's regularly conducted business 
activities; and (c) it was and is Computershare's regular 
practice to make such records. Such records are made, 
kept, and maintained by Computershare in the regular course 
of its business, and Computershare relies on such records 
in the ordinary course of its business. I have continuing 
access to these records and am familiar with how they are 
retrieved and compiled.  
5   
  
 
   
 
   
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
physical possession of the Note from February 14, 2007 until 
August 8, 2014. This included the date, August 20, 2013, on 
which the Complaint was filed. 
We conclude that Wells Fargo satisfied its initial 
burden on summary judgmen t. 
The burden then shifted to Flores, and Flores  did not 
meet her  burden of establishing that there is a genuine issue of 
material fact  as to Wells Fargo's physical possession of the 
Note on August 20, 2013. See  U.S. Bank Tr., N.A. v. Verhagen, 
149 Hawaiʻi 315, 328, 489 P.3d 419, 432 (2021)  ("[A] defendant 
may counter this inference of possession at the time of filing 
with evidence setting forth 'specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue' as to whether the plaintiff actually 
possessed the subject note at the time it filed suit." (quoting  
Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 56(e))).  
Flores contends that Wells Fargo's Activity Report 
indicates a "Location Move" on February 9, 2012 and August 7, 
2014, and that the Note was therefore not in Wells Fargo's 
possession during the period of time between the two "Location 
Move[s]." However, as explained by Brehm in his second 
supplemental declaration, the term "Location Move" references "a 
change in the physical storage location within Wells Fargo's or 
Computershare's control." Flores does not provide any specific 
facts to counter the inference , based on Brehm's sworn 
6   
  
 
  
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statements, that the Note was within Wells Fargo's possession on 
August 20, 2013. 
We conclude that Wells Fargo established standing to 
bring its foreclosure action , and that the circuit court did not 
err in making FOFs 13 and 14 , and COL 3. We therefore affirm 
the circuit court's Foreclosure Order and Judgment . 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, February 28,  2025. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka  
 Presiding Judge  
Keith M. Kiuchi,   
for Defendant-Appellant.  /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
 Associate Judge  
David A. Nakashima,   
for Plaintiff-Appellee.  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
 Associate Judge  
7 