      
  
        
         
        
           
           
           
     NOT  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST'S  HAWAI I  REPORTS  AND  P ACIFIC  REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000723 31-DEC-2025 07:47 AM Dkt. 49 SO 
NO.  CAAP-23-0000723 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE   COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
NANCY  LACUESTA,   Petitioner-Appellant,  v. 
STATE  OF  HAWAI I,  Respondent-Appellee 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  CIRCUIT  COURT  OF  THE  SECOND  CIRCUIT 
(CASE  NO.  2CPN-23-0000009) 
SUMMARY  DISPOSITION  ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge,
 Hiraoka and Guidry, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant  Nancy   Lacuesta  (Lacuesta )  appeals 
from  the  November  9,  2023  Findings  of  Fact,  Conclusions  of  Law, 
and  Order  Denying  Petition  to  Vacate  and  Set  Aside  Judgment  Under 
Rule  40,  Hawaii  Rules  of  Penal  Procedure  [(HRPP)]  (Order  Denying 
Petition )  entered  against  her  by  the  Circuit  Court  of  the  Second 
Circuit  (Circuit  Court). 1 
The Statement of Points of Error section of Lacuesta's 
Opening Brief does not comply with Hawaii Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4), including the failure to state 
where in the record the alleged error was objected to or the 
manner in which the alleged error was brought to the attention of 
the Circuit Court. Accordingly, we review for plain error. In 
1 The Honorable Michelle L. Drewyer Presided.          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
   
       
        
          
       
          
         
          
           
        
       
       
          
     
         
        
      
          
          
         
 
         
         
        
        
        
        
        
         
        
         
       
         
         
        
         
        
       
         
      
  sum,  Lacuesta  contends  that  the  Circuit  Court  erred  in  denying 
Lacuesta's  July  17,  2023  Petition  to  Vacate  and  Set  Aside 
Judgment  Under  Rule  40,  [HRPP]  (Rule  40  Petition ).   Lacuesta  does 
not  challenge  any  of  the  Circuit  Court's  Findings  of  Fact  (FOFs), 
which  are  therefore  binding  on  the  court,  but  points  to 
Conclusions  of  Law  (COLs)  7,  and  10-14  as  erroneous.   2 
2 The challenged COLs state: 
7. During the change-of-plea colloquy in the 
underlying case, the Court did advise Petitioner that by 
pleading no contest, she may be sentenced inter alia to pay 
"a fee and/or assessment," Petitioner confirmed that this 
was explained to her, and she did not have any questions 
about it. The Court finds sufficient advisement was given 
that in addition to the authorized fine for the offense set 
by HRS § 706-640, Petitioner might have to pay a fee and/or 
assessment such as the Probation Services Fee, Crime Victim 
Compensation Fee, and DNA Assessment, whereby the Court 
concludes that the Petition is patently frivolous and 
without trace of support either in the record or in the 
other evidence submitted by the petitioner. 
   . . . . 
10
. At sentencing, Petitioner did not object to the 
imposition of the Probation Services Fee, Crime Victim 
Compensation Fee, and DNA Assessment; Petitioner informed 
the Court she could afford it; and the subject fees were 
paid in full in 2009, whereby the Court concludes that her 
allegation of invalid plea is not credible and not a 
colorable claim. 
11. Petitioner did not file a direct appeal to 
challenge her sentence or move to withdraw her plea before 
the Judgment became final in 2009, whereby the Court 
concludes that her allegation of invalid plea was waived, 
and Petitioner has not proven the existence of extraordinary 
circumstances to justify her failure to raise the issue. 
12. Under the liberal pre-sentence standard of "fair 
and just reason," the court weighs whether the State relied 
upon the plea to its substantial prejudice; therefore, it 
follows that this factor should also be considered under the 
more stringent "manifest injustice" standard. See State v. 
Jim, 58 Haw. 574, 575-76, 574 P.2d 521, 522-23 (1978). 
13. After the Judgment in the underlying case became 
final, a compact disc containing evidence for the underlying 
case was purged by Maui County Police Department on April 
21, 2014, whereby the·Court concludes that the State relied 
on Petitioner's no contest plea to its substantial 
prejudice. 
14. Based on the foregoing, the Court concludes that 
Petitioner failed to establish manifest injustice to 
withdraw her plea. 
2          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
   
      
         
        
            
          
         
          
         
          
         
          
        
       
        
             
    
        
         
         
          
       
         Upon  careful  review  of  the  record  and  the  briefs 
submitted  by  the  parties,  and  having  given  due  consideration  to 
the  arguments  advanced  and  the  issues  raised,  we  resolve 
Lacuesta's  points  of  error  as  follows:   
In the Rule 40 Petition, Lacuesta sought to vacate and 
set aside the June 24, 2009 Judgment; Conviction and Probation 
Sentence; Notice of Entry (2009 Judgment ) entered against her 
after a no contest plea on a charge of Theft in the Second 
Degree. In the 2009 Judgment, Lacuesta was sentenced to five 
years probation, with a Criminal Victim Compensation fee of $105, 
a Probation Services fee of $150, and a monetary assessment of 
$500 or the actual cost of the DNA analysis (collectively, 
Monetary Assessments ), as well as a fine of $500. 
In the Rule 40 Petition, Lacuesta argued that her no 
contest plea was invalid because the trial court failed to advise 
her that she could be sentenced to additional monetary 
assessments, and therefore, her plea was not knowing, 
intelligent, and voluntary.3 After further briefing, on October 
19, 2023, a hearing was held on the Rule 40 Petition. The Order 
Denying Petition was entered thereafter. 
With respect to Lacuesta's arguments on appeal, as a 
preliminary matter, it does not appear that Lacuesta raised or 
properly preserved a hearsay objection in the proceedings below. 
Thus, Lacuesta's challenge to COL 13 based on the argument that 
the Circuit Court improperly considered inadmissible hearsay is 
3 Lacuesta was represented by counsel through the HRPP Rule 40 
proceedings. 
3          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
      
 
        
         
          
      
     
        
          
       
           
         
          
        
         
      
      
     
         
        
      
        
  
         
        
          waived;  plain  error  review  of  this  issue  is  not  warranted.   See, 
e.g.,  State  v.  Crisostomo,  94  Hawai i  282,  290,   12  P.3d   873,  881 
(2000);  State  v.  Metcalfe,  129  Hawai i  206,  225,  297  P.3d  1062, 
1081  (2013).  
Lacuesta's overarching argument is that
 the sentencing 
court failed to strictly comply with HRPP Rule 11(c)(2)4 because 
the court incorrectly advised Lacuesta of the maximum fine that 
could be imposed, and thus, Lacuesta's no contest plea was not 
knowing, intelligent, and voluntary; and accordingly, the 
colloquy was constitutionally invalid. 
Lacuesta relies heavily on Warner v. State, 151 Hawai i 
433, 438, 517
 P.3d 716, 721 (2022), wherein the Hawai i Supreme 
Court held
 that the petitioner-appellant's (Warner's ) HRPP Rule 
40 claim that the trial court's failure to inform Warner of any 
of the monetary assessments before accepting a change of plea 
stated a colorable Rule 40 claim for relief from the monetary 
assessments. 
Warner filed an HRPP Rule 40 petition that raised 
various issues and requested, inter alia, that his sentence be 
4 HRPP Rule 11(c)(2) provides: 
Rule 11. PLEAS. 
   . . . . 
(c
) Ad
vice to defendant. The court shall not accept a 
plea of guilty or no contest without first addressing the 
defendant personally in open court, or by video conference 
with defendant's consent and affirmation of defendant's 
identity on the record, and determining that the defendant 
understands the following: 
   . . . . 
(2
) t
he maximum penalty provided by law, and the 
maximum sentence of extended term of imprisonment, which may 
be imposed for the offense to which the plea is offered[.] 
4          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
             
           
            
         
        
         
           
          
          
       
          
             
         
         
          
    
        
         
    
         
        
          
          
          
         
     
  
          
            
     
          ended and that all fines and fees be waived. Id. at 436, 517 
P.3d at 719. Warner's petition was denied without a hearing and 
this court affirmed. Id. at 436-37, 517 P.3d at 719-20. The 
supreme court held that Warner stated a colorable claim regarding 
monetary assessments, noting that "[t]he sentencing court did not 
inform Warner of any of the monetary assessments it imposed 
before accepting Warner's change of plea." Id. at 438, 517 P.3d 
at 721 (emphasis added). Therefore, the supreme court held that 
Warner's Rule 40 petition "stated a colorable claim as to his 
request that the monetary assessments, which constitutes fines, 
be set aside based on the sentencing court's failure to advise 
him of them before accepting his plea." Id. Thus, and based on 
the sentencing court's failure to address whether Warner had the 
ability to pay the monetary assessments,5 the case was remanded 
to the trial court for further proceedings, i.e., a hearing on 
Warner's colorable Rule 40 claims.6 
Unlike in Warner, where the defendant was not informed 
of any monetary assessments before accepting the change of plea, 
Lacuesta was advised, inter alia: 
THE COURT: All right. Item six reads, I understand 
that the Court may impose any of the following 
penalties for the offense to which I now plead. The 
maximum term of imprisonment. If you look at the top 
of the page, for theft in the second degree, the 
maximum term is five years jail and a $10,000.00 
fine. Has that been explained to you? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes. 
5 Here, the Circuit Court inquired as to Lacuesta's ability to pay 
the Monetary Assessments, the answer was yes, and Lacuesta does not raise any 
issues regarding her ability to pay. 
6 Other relief, not pertinent to this case, was also granted to 
Warner. 
5          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
          
       
        
       
      
        
   
      
      
     
     
 
          
            
           
             
    THE COURT: All right. It appears that extended terms 
and mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment do not 
apply, nor do consecutive terms of imprisonment. You 
may also be sentenced, however, to restitution, a 
fine, a fee and/or assessment, community service, 
probation, with up to one year of imprisonment, and 
other terms and conditions. 
Has that all been explained to you? 
THE DEFENDANT : Yes, your Honor. 
THE COURT: Again, any questions? 
7THE DEFENDANT: No, your Honor. 
Also,  unlike  in  Warner,  a  hearing  was  held  on 
Lacuesta's  Rule  40  Petition.   Fourteen  years  after  her  plea  and 
sentence,  Lacuesta  sought  to  withdraw  her  no  contest  plea  and 
enter  a  plea  of  not  guilty.   Hawai i  law  regarding   plea  
withdrawals  is  governed  by  HRPP  Rule  32(d),  which  provides  in 
relevant  part: 
(d)   Withdrawal  of  Plea.   A  motion  to  withdraw  a  plea 
of  guilty  or  of  nolo  contendere  may  be  made  before  sentence 
is  imposed  or  imposition  of  sentence  is  suspended;  provided 
that,  to  correct  manifest  injustice  the  court,  upon  a 
party's  motion  submitted  no  later  than  ten  (10)  days  after 
imposition  of  sentence,  shall  set  aside  the  judgment  of 
conviction  and  permit  the  defendant  to  withdraw  the  plea.  
At  any  later  time,  a  defendant  seeking  to  withdraw  a  plea  of 
guilty  or  nolo  contendere  may  do  so  only  by  petition 
pursuant  to  Rule  40  of  these  rules  and  the  court  shall  not 
set  aside  such  a  plea  unless  doing  so  is  necessary  to 
correct  manifest  injustice.  
(Emphasis added). 
Thus,  the   issue  before  the  Circuit  Court  was  whether 
setting  aside  Lacuesta's  plea  was  necessary  to  correct  manifest 
injustice.   "Manifest  injustice  occurs  when  a  defendant  makes  a 
plea  involuntarily  or  without  knowledge  of  the  direct 
consequences  of  the  plea."   State  v.  Kealoha,  142  Hawai i  46,  59,  
7 No objections were made to the Monetary Assessments at sentencing. 
Lacuesta did not file a post-sentence motion to withdraw plea within 10 days 
of sentencing and she did not appeal the sentence. The Monetary Assessments 
were paid in full in 2009, probation was completed in 2014, and she was 
discharged on July 29, 2014. 
6          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
          
             
       
           
         
           
          
         
        
           
            
          
        
             
           
         
       
          
    
        
            
          
            
          
            
         
          
   414 P.3d 98, 111 (cleaned up). The manifest injustice standard 
also seeks to avoid the risk of prejudice to the State and to the 
efficient administration of criminal justice. See generally 
State v. Jim, 58 Haw. 574, 575-76, 574 P.2d 521, 522-23 (1978). 
In COL 7, which contains mixed findings of fact and 
conclusions of law, the Circuit Court did not plainly err when it 
found that the 2009 court taking Lacuesta's change of plea did 
advise Lacuesta that by pleading no contest she might be 
sentenced to pay a fee and/or assessment, that Lacuesta 
acknowledged that this had been explained to her, and she had no 
questions. In COL 10, the Circuit Court did not plainly err when 
it stated that Lacuesta had no objections at sentencing to the 
Monetary Assessments; Lacuesta had informed the court that she 
could afford the fines; and they were in fact paid in 2009. In 
addition, in COL 13, the Circuit Court did not plainly err when 
it found and concluded, inter alia, that the State was 
substantially prejudiced by the extensive delay in Lacuesta's 
request to withdraw her plea, as the evidence for the underlying 
case was purged in 2014. 
We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in concluding 
that the Rule 40 Petition – based on an allegation of an invalid 
plea – was waived, patently frivolous, and/or without a trace of 
support. See Warner, 151 Hawai i at 438,  515 P.3d at 721. 
However, we conclude that such errors are harmless in light of 
the record, including that a full hearing was held on the Rule 40 
Petition and Lacuesta failed to establish that a withdrawal of 
her 2009 no contest plea was necessary to avoid a manifest 
injustice in this case. 
7          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
    
  For  these  reasons,  the  Circuit  Court's  November  9,  2023 
Order  Denying  Petition  is  affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai i, December 31,  2025. 
On  the  briefs: 
Hayden  Aluli, 
for  Petitioner-Appellant. 
Renee  Ishikawa  Delizo, 
Deputy  Prosecuting  Attorney, 
County  of  Maui, 
for  Respondent-Appellee. /s/  Katherine   G.  Leonard 
Presiding  Judge 
/s/  Keith  K.  Hiraoka 
Associate  Judge 
/s/  Kimberly  T.  Guidry 
Associate  Judge 
8 