FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
---o0o---
STATE OF 
HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KEONI I. ROSA, JR., Defendant-Appellant 
NO. CAAP-18-0000592 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CRIMINAL NO. 1PC141000180) 
AUGUST 31, 2020 
GINOZA, CHIEF JUDGE, LEONARD AND HIRAOKA, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J. 
The principal issue in this case concerns whether the 
warrantless seizure of the defendant's cellular phone, incident 
to his warrantless arrest, was a violation of his constitutional protection against unreasonable searches and seizures because his warrantless arrest was illegal under Hawai# i law. Based on the 
applicable statutes and case law, we hold that: 
(1) the 
defendant's warrantless arrest was unlawful where probable cause FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for his arrest was established nineteen days earlier, the police 
knew his identity and the location of his residence and even served him with a subpoena to appear in court, and the police had no obstacles preventing them from making an arrest or obtaining an arrest warrant, but delayed in making the arrest because the lead officer was busy with other cases and for strategic reasons; (2) the fact that probable cause was established by way of evidence other than a police officer's personal observations did not negate the immediacy element of a lawful warrantless arrest; (3) because the defendant's arrest was illegal, the seizure of his cellular phone was not incident to a lawful arrest; and (4) as the trial court did not reach the issue of whether the evidence obtained from the defendant's cellular phone would have been inevitably discovered, it is necessary to remand this case for further proceedings to determine whether that evidence should have been suppressed. We also conclude, for the reasons stated herein, that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying the defendant's request for a new trial. 
Defendant-Appellant Keoni I. Rosa, Jr. (Rosa) appeals 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) entered 
against him and in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee the State of 
Hawai# i (State) on January 2, 2018, in the Circuit Court of the 
First Circuit (
Circuit Court).1 Following a jury trial, Rosa was 
1 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
found guilty of one count of Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor
under the Age of Fourteen Years, in violation of Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 707-733.6 (2014),  and one count of Sexual 
Assault in the First Degree, in violation of HRS § 707-730 
(2014).  Rosa was sentenced to two twenty-year terms of 32 
2 HRS § 707-733.6 provides: 
§ 707-733.6 Continuous sexual assault of a minor 
under the age of fourteen years. (1) A person commits the
offense of continuous sexual assault of a minor under the 
age of fourteen years if the person:
(a) Either resides in the same home with a minor under the age of fourteen years or has recurringaccess to the minor; and
(b) Engages in three or more acts of sexualpenetration or sexual contact with the minorover a period of time, while the minor is underthe age of fourteen years.
(2) To convict under this section, the trier of fact,
if a jury, need unanimously agree only that the requisitenumber of acts have occurred; the jury need not agree onwhich acts constitute the requisite number.
(3) No other felony sex offense involving the same
victim may be charged in the same proceeding with a chargeunder this section, unless the other charged offenseoccurred outside the period of the offense charged underthis section, or the other offense is charged in thealternative. A defendant may be charged with only one countunder this section, unless more than one victim is involved,in which case a separate count may be charged for eachvictim. 
(4) Continuous sexual assault of a minor under the 
age of fourteen years is a class A felony. 
3 HRS § 707-730 provides: 
§ 707-730 Sexual assault in the first degree. (1) A 
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the firstdegree if:
(a) The person knowingly subjects another person toan act of sexual penetration by strongcompulsion;
(b) The person knowingly engages in sexualpenetration with another person who is less thanfourteen years old;
(c) The person knowingly engages in sexualpenetration with a person who is at least
(continued...) 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3(...continued) imprisonment, to run concurrently, with credit for time served. 
I. BACKGROUND 
On January 6, 2014, the mother (Mother
) of a minor 
complaining witness (CW) called the Honolulu Police Department 
(HPD) to report an alleged sexual assault. HPD dispatched Officer Darren Ozaki (Officer Ozaki) to investigate the report, meeting Mother first, and then CW, at their residence.  CW was 
fourteen years old when he met with Officer Ozaki on January 6, 
2014; CW was about thirteen years old at the time of the alleged incidents. 
Mother and CW reported a history of multiple sexual 
assault incidents that occurred over the prior year at various locations, identified Rosa as the alleged assaulter, and providedinformation regarding communications between CW and Rosa via CW's  
fourteen years old but less than sixteen years
old; provided that:(i) The person is not less than five yearsolder than the minor; and
(ii) The person is not legally married to the
minor;
(d) The person knowingly subjects to sexualpenetration another person who is mentallydefective; or
(e) The person knowingly subjects to sexualpenetration another person who is mentallyincapacitated or physically helpless as a resultof the influence of a substance that the actor knowingly caused to be administered to the otherperson without the other person's consent.
Paragraphs (b) and (c) shall not be construed to prohibitpractitioners licensed under chapter 453 or 455 fromperforming any act within their respective practices.
(2) Sexual assault in the first degree is a class A
felony. 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
cellular phone and Rosa's cellular phone (
Rosa's Phone). CW also 
told Officer Ozaki that he and Rosa exchanged naked photos and 
explicit text messages using their cellular phones. Officer Ozaki learned from Mother that CW had erased all of the naked photos and text messages from CW's phone. At the time of the incidents, CW reportedly used an iPhone from Verizon, but the phone number was no longer in service when he made the police report. 
Officer Ozaki documented the information that he 
received from Mother and CW, and Officer Ozaki prepared an HPD report in the case. 
On January 7, 2014, Detective Sergeant Beth Rockett 
(Detective Rockett), a detective with HPD's sex crimes detail, 
was assigned to investigate CW's allegations against Rosa. 
Officer Ozaki communicated his information to Detective Rockett. At the time she was assigned to investigate the case, Detective Rockett worked Saturdays through Wednesdays, with Thursdays and Fridays off. 
An HPD "lockup arrest" (Lockup Case) is a case in which 
a suspect has already been arrested. On the weekends, Detective Rockett was one of four or five detectives assigned to cover Lockup Cases for the island of O# ahu, and her Lockup Cases were 
not limited to sexual assault cases. Because suspects in Lockup 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Cases are already in custody, such cases are given priority by 
HPD detectives, including Detective Rockett. 
Detective Rockett was scheduled off from work on 
January 9 and January 10, 2014. 
On January 9, 2014, Mother 
provided HPD Officer Aaron Takeuchi with additional information regarding photographs and videos of her son and other boys on Rosa's Phone. Mother also provided Rosa's phone number and cellular service provider. 
When back at work on January 11, 2014, Detective 
Rockett contacted CW to arrange an interview the next day. On January 12, 2014, Detective Rockett conducted a video- and audio-recorded interview with CW. CW alleged that Rosa's assaults began around the time CW was a sixth-grader in elementary school. CW alleged multiple assaults at multiple public locations. CW also alleged that Rosa showed CW pornographic images on Rosa's Phone, and that Rosa requested CW take explicit photos on his phone and send them to Rosa's Phone. Detective Rockett presented CW with a photographic lineup; the photographic lineup consisted of six photographs, including a photograph of Rosa. CW positively identified Rosa as the individual who sexually assaulted him. Detective Rockett later testified that, following the interview with CW, she "knew that [she] had to eventually get a search warrant, do admin subpoenas, locate the scenes, take pictures of those scenes, that kind of stuff." Detective Rockett 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 testified that she did not feel ready to locate and arrest Rosa 
after the interview with CW on January 12, 2014. However, Detective Rockett also testified that she had probable cause to arrest Rosa following her interview with CW on January 12, 2014. After the January 12, 2014 interview, Detective Rockett printed out a record of a vehicle registered to Rosa, which included Rosa's Wai# anae residential address. 
On January 14 and 15, 2014, Detective Rockett received 
and prioritized working on a Lockup Case in which the suspect was 
in custody and needed to be charged within forty-eight hours. 
Detective Rockett was scheduled off from work on January 16 and 
17, 2014.  On January 18 and 19, 2014, Detective Rockett received 
two additional Lockup Cases that took priority over her other 
cases and required her attention until January 20, 2014. 
On January 21, 2014, Detective Rockett made 
arrangements to visit and photograph locations of alleged assaults on the following day. 
On January 22, 2014, Detective 
Rockett visited scenes of the alleged offenses and photographed various bathrooms and business establishments. Detective Rockett was scheduled off from work on January 23 and January 24, 2014. 
On Saturday, January 25, 2014, along with HPD Detective 
Michelle Phillips (Detective Phillips), Detective Rockett 
attempted to locate Rosa at his residence to arrest him. When 
7   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
they arrived, a vehicle was parked on the premises, but the gate 
was locked. Detective Rockett called out, but there was no answer and Rosa did not appear to be present. On January 26, 2014, Detective Rockett served two administrative subpoenas, one on Verizon (the cellular phone service provider for CW), and the other on AT&T (the cellular phone service provider for Rosa). The subpoenas requested phone call and text message logs for each phone number. On January 27, 2014, Detective Rockett located and photographed Rosa's car, which was parked in the driveway of Rosa's house. Detective Rockett emailed the photograph of the vehicle to CW, and CW identified Rosa's car as the vehicle CW rode in with Rosa. 
Detective Rockett learned at some point that on Friday, 
January 31, 2014, Rosa was scheduled to appear at a Temporary 
Restraining Order (TRO) hearing in Honolulu District Court.
4 
Since Rosa was likely to appear for the TRO hearing, Detective 
4 When specifically questioned on this timing at a March 3, 2015
hearing, discussed infra , Sergeant Rockett testified: 
[By Rosa's counsel] Q. . . . You testified that 
[Mother] told you there was a TRO hearing on the 31st.
When did you learn of that? When did [Mother] tell you
there was a TRO hearing on the 31st? 
A. I'm not sure when she told me. 
Q. All right. Was it a week before -- more than a 
week before? 
A. I can't even guess. I'm sorry. I don't want to 
be wrong. 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rockett decided to make the arrest on that date. 
On January 31, 
2014, at about 8:50 a.m., Detective Rockett located and arrested 
a male at the Honolulu District Court building, who identified himself as Rosa. After arresting Rosa, Detective Rockett conducted a search incident to arrest and recovered a white Apple iPhone from Rosa's waist area. Detective Rockett submitted the phone into evidence, pending the approval and issuance of a search warrant. Rosa was then transported to the Central Receiving Division of the Main Police Station for booking and processing. 
Detective Rockett also prepared a post-arrest Affidavit 
in Support of Warrantless Arrest, which was signed and notarized on January 31, 2014, and later submitted into evidence at a March 3, 2015 pre-trial hearing on a motion to suppress. The affidavit stated that Detective Rockett believed that she had probable cause for Rosa's arrest and probable cause to support the extended restraint of Rosa's liberty. The facts and circumstances described in Detective Rockett's probable cause affidavit were all known to Detective Rockett on or before January 12, 2014.
 Later in the afternoon of January 31, 2014, the 
Honorable Paul B. Wong reviewed and approved a search warrant for Rosa's residence. 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On February 5, 2014, the State presented the case to an 
O#ahu Grand Jury. Rosa was indicted on one count of Continuous 
Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen Years and one 
count of Sexual Assault in the First Degree, for the incidents involving CW. 
On February 10, 2014, Rosa was arraigned on the 
instant charges and entered a plea of not guilty. 
Also on February 5, 2014, the Honorable Shirley M. 
Kawamura (Judge Kawamura
) approved a search warrant (Search 
Warrant) for Rosa's Phone.  The Search Warrant included an 
expiration date of February 15, 2014, and approved a search of 
the phone that was seized by the police when Rosa was arrested at the courthouse. 
On August 29, 2014, Rosa filed a Motion to Suppress 
Evidence (August Motion to Suppress). The August Motion to 
Suppress argued that because Rosa's Phone was searched after the 
Search Warrant expired, it was searched without a valid search warrant in violation of Rosa's rights under article I, sections 6 and 7, of the Hawai# i State Constitution and the Fourth and 
Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution.
5 On 
September 9, 2014, the State filed an opposition to the motion, 
5 Rosa's argument at that time did not include that Rosa's Phone was
unconstitutionally seized as a result of an illegal arrest. 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
arguing that a warrant had been obtained to search the phone on 
February 5, 2014.    6
The August Motion to Suppress was initially set for 
hearing on September 23, 2014, but was continued until October 28, 2014, because Rosa was not transported to the court. On October 28, 2014, the Circuit Court orally ruled that the State did not have to obtain an additional search warrant for Rosa's Phone beyond the ten-day period set forth in the Search Warrant. Rosa's counsel informed the court that he intended to file another motion to suppress on the grounds that Rosa's Phone was seized without a warrant incident to an illegal arrest, citing State v. Keawe, 107 Hawai# i 1, 108 P.3d 304 (2005). Rosa also 
requested an extension of the pretrial hearing date and continuance of the trial, which was granted. 
On December 1, 2014, Rosa filed a Second Motion to 
Suppress Evidence (December Motion to Suppress). In the December 
Motion to Suppress, Rosa argued that the seizure of Rosa's Phone, 
incident to his arrest, was in violation of his constitutional rights because his January 31, 2014 arrest was illegal, in violation of HRS § 803-1 (2014). Rosa argued, citing Keawe, that 
6 HPD attempted to search Rosa's Phone shortly after the Search
Warrant was issued, but the phone was passcode-locked, and HPD was unable to
get past the passcode until May. The State argued in opposition to the AugustMotion to Suppress that the search had started within the time authorized bythe Search Warrant, and that they were allowed to continue their efforts insearching to retrieve data after the warrant had expired. 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rosa's Phone must therefore be suppressed. 
On December 18, 2014, 
the State filed a memorandum in opposition. 
As noted above, at the March 3, 2015 hearing on the 
December Motion to Suppress, Detective Rockett testified that, on 
January 12, 2014, she did not feel "ready to locate and arrest" Rosa, as well as that on January 12, 2014, she did have probable cause to arrest Rosa. Detective Rockett testified about her work schedule, other case assignments, and her steps, after January 12, 2014, in investigating CW's allegations, as described above. 
Rosa testified that, about a week before the January 
31, 2014 TRO hearing, he was served to appear at the hearing by an HPD officer other than Detective Rockett. Rosa testified that he was living at the Wai# anae address shown on his vehicle 
registration during the entire month of January of 2014. 
Counsel 
for Rosa argued that the State had probable cause, had identified Rosa, and had Rosa's location. Counsel argued that there was nothing preventing Detective Rockett from arresting, or sending somebody to arrest Rosa, starting on January 12th, or even before then, but certainly by the 12th. Counsel further argued that: the State was able to have a police officer serve Rosa with the TRO; Detective Rockett had been to Rosa's address multiple times; and, once Detective Rockett suspected that Rosa would be at the TRO hearing, she could have obtained an arrest warrant prior to arresting Rosa at the January 31, 2014 TRO hearing. 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court questioned Rosa's counsel on how the 
facts of this instant matter compared and contrasted to the facts 
in 
Keawe, as well as on the State's explanation of the delay 
caused by Detective Rockett's continuing investigation efforts. The court also questioned the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney on why HPD had not obtained an arrest warrant by January 31, 2014, when they intended to attempt an arrest of Rosa at the TRO hearing. In a final argument, Rosa's counsel cited State v. Line, 121 Hawai# i 74, 214 P.3d 613 (2009), for the proposition that "63 
hours between the inception of probable cause and the July 15th, 2005, attempted arrest afforded the police ample time to obtain an arrest warrant[.]" 
The court then took a short recess to 
review Line
 and otherwise consider its ruling. 
At the conclusion of the March 3, 2015 hearing, the 
Circuit Court orally denied the December Motion to Suppress. The court explained that it did not find Line to be controlling in this case. The court distinguished the facts in Keawe from the facts in this case, particularly that the police in Keawe had themselves witnessed the acts giving rise to probable cause but then "did absolutely nothing" during the time period that followed, while here the police had only received a report of the acts, and Sergeant Rockett then used the time period thereafter to further her investigation. 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On March 25, 2015, the Circuit Court filed written 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Denying [Rosa's 
December Motion to Suppress] (
FOFs/COLs/Order on Motion to 
Suppress). 
Before Rosa's jury trial began, on October 20, 2016, 
both the State and Rosa received a jury packet, which consisted 
of a list of potential jurors and redacted juror cards. On Juror Card 45, under item 13 asking for present or last employer and 
occupation, Juror Number 45 (Juror 45) wrote "OTS Handi-Van" 
(Handi-Van). On October 24, 2016, Rosa's jury trial commenced in 
the Circuit Court. Rosa was represented at trial by Deputy 
Public Defender Henry Ting (DPD Ting). During jury selection, 
Juror 45 was first seated as Alternate Juror No. 1. Both the 
State and Rosa had an opportunity to voir dire Juror 45. Neither the State nor the defense challenged Juror 45 for cause, or 
elected to exercise a peremptory challenge on the juror. After the jury was impaneled and sworn in, a juror was dismissed and Juror 45 was called to sit on the jury. 
On November 2, 2016, Rosa took the stand and testified. 
Rosa provided his background information, including his employment history. 
One of Rosa's prior places of employment was
with Handi-Van. Rosa did not provide specific information on  
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dates of employment, the nature of his work, or position(s) with 
Handi-Van. 
During the recess following Rosa's testimony, Juror 45 
asked to address the Circuit Court. 
After the other jurors 
cleared the room, Juror 45 notified the court that he was currently employed with Handi-Van. The court engaged in a colloquy with Juror 45 to find out more information. Juror 45 explained that while he and Rosa may have been employed by Handi-Van at the same time, Juror 45 did not know and had not worked with Rosa. Juror 45 assured the Circuit Court that, despite this common employment, he could remain fair and impartial. After Juror 45 addressed the court, the court asked both the State and Rosa if either party had any questions for this juror. Both the State and defense declined to ask Juror 45 any further questions. After Juror 45 left the courtroom, neither the State nor Rosa objected to Juror 45 remaining on the panel. 
On the afternoon of November 2, 2016, the jury began 
deliberations. In the morning of November 3, 2016, the jury sent the following communication to the court: 
How do we read the phone call record?
1 Definition of tab's 
-call direction -seizure duration 
2 How do you tell if it's a phone call vs text message. 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 Later on November 3, 2016, the jury returned verdicts of guilty 
on each count. 
Juror 45 was the jury foreperson. 
On November 14, 2016, DPD Ting filed a Motion for New 
Trial (Motion for New Trial) on the grounds that Juror 45 falsely 
represented to the Court that he did not know Rosa and did not 
remember ever working with Rosa. On November 28, 2016, the State filed a memorandum in opposition. At a December 6, 2016 hearing on the motion, DPD Ting moved to withdraw, which motion was 
granted. On December 15, 2016, Rosa's present counsel (Mr. Goo) 
was appointed. On March 25, 2017, Mr. Goo filed a Supplemental 
Memorandum in Support of Motion for New Trial. The State filed a further memorandum in opposition. 
On July 11, 2017, a hearing was held on Rosa's Motion 
for New Trial. Rosa testified, and DPD Ting was called to testify by the State. Because an employment record document from Handi-Van required a subpoena, the Circuit Court granted Rosa's request to continue the hearing, and it was continued. 
On October 24, 2017, after further argument, the 
Circuit Court announced that Rosa's Motion for New Trial would be 
denied.  On November 13, 2017, the Circuit Court filed its 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Denying 
Defendant's Motion for New Trial (FOFs/COLs/Order on New Trial). 
16 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Rosa raises two points of error on appeal, contending 
that the Circuit Court erred in: 
(1) denying Rosa's motions to 
suppress Rosa's phone as evidence; and (2) denying Rosa's 
November 14, 2016 Motion for New Trial in its FOFs/COLs/Order on New Trial. III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
We review questions of constitutional law de novo, under the
right/wrong standard. State v. Hauge, 103 Hawai #i 38, 47, 79
P.3d 131, 140 (2003). "Accordingly, '[w]e review the circuitcourt's ruling on a motion to suppress de novo . . .'" Id.(quoting State v. Locquiao, 100 Hawai #i 195, 203, 58 P.3d
1242, 1250 (2002)). 
State v. Phillips, 138 Hawai# i 321, 357, 382 P.3d 133, 169 
(2016). 
"[T]he right/wrong standard . . . allows the appellate 
court to examine the facts and answer the question without being 
required to give any weight to the trial court's answer to it." State v. Russo, 141 Hawai# i 181, 189, 407 P.3d 137, 145 (2017) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
"A conclusion 
of law that is supported by the trial court's findings of fact and that reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be overturned." Dan v. State, 76 Hawai# i 423, 428, 879 P.2d 
528, 533 (1994) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Appellate courts review a circuit court's pretrial
findings of fact under the clearly erroneous standard. A 
finding of fact is clearly erroneous when (1) the recordlacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2)despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, theappellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firmconviction that a mistake has been made. Substantial evidence is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution
to support a conclusion.
Pretrial conclusions of law are reviewed under the de 
novo standard. 
State v. Ramos-Saunders, 135 Hawai# i 299, 302, 349 P.3d 406, 409 
(App. 2015) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
As a general matter, the granting or denial of a
motion for new trial is within the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be disturbed absent a clear abuse of discretion. The same principle is applied in the contextof a motion for new trial premised on juror misconduct. The trial court abuses its discretion when it clearly exceedsthe bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles oflaw or practice to the substantial detriment of a partylitigant. 
State v. Yamada, 108 Hawai# i 474, 478, 122 P.3d 254, 258 (2005) 
(citation omitted). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. Rosa's Motion to Suppress 
Rosa contends that the Circuit Court erred in denying 
the December Motion to Suppress because the warrantless seizure  
of Rosa's Phone, incident to Rosa's arrest, was a violation of Rosa's constitutional protection against unreasonable searches and seizures because Rosa's warrantless arrest was illegal.  
Rosa argues that his arrest was illegal because there was neither a warrant for his arrest nor an applicable exception to the warrant requirement. 
7 
The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution 
and article I, section 7 of the Hawai# i State Constitution 
7 On appeal, Rosa makes no argument that the August Motion to
Suppress was wrongly decided. 
18 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
protect the rights of citizens to be free from unreasonable 
searches and seizures. 
These constitutional provisions "mandate 
that government agents generally 'obtain search warrants based on probable cause before effecting a search and seizure of persons or places connected to criminal activity.'" State v. Eleneki, 
106 Hawai# i 177, 189, 102 P.3d 1075, 1087 (2004) (citing State v. 
Barrett, 67 Haw. 650, 653, 701 P.2d 1277, 1280 (1985)). "The well-established rule in this jurisdiction is that warrantless searches are presumptively unreasonable unless they fall within one of the carefully defined exceptions." State v. Wiley, 69 
Haw. 589, 591, 752 P.2d 102, 103 (1988) (citing State v. Jenkins, 62 Haw. 660, 619 P.2d 108 (1980)); State v. Ortiz, 67 Haw. 181, 184, 683 P.2d 822, 825 (1984). 
Hawai# i law recognizes exceptions to the search warrant 
requirement, including for a search incident to a lawful arrest. "A contemporaneous search incidental to a lawful arrest may be made for the fruits of the crime, implements used to commit the crime and for weapons." State v. Park, 50 Haw. 275, 276, 439 
P.2d 212, 213 (1968) (emphasis added) (citations omitted). It is undisputed that Rosa's Phone was seized without a warrant and that the Circuit Court relied on the search-incident-to-lawful-arrest exception to conclude that the seizure of Rosa's Phone was lawful. 
19 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 It is also undisputed that no warrant was issued for 
Rosa's arrest. However, the Circuit Court concluded that, 
pursuant to HRS § 803-5 (2014), Detective Rockett was authorized to make a warrantless arrest under the circumstances of this case. 
In Keawe, 107 Hawai# i 1, 108 P.3d 304, the Hawai# i  
Supreme Court examined the scope of the exception in HRS § 803-5 to the general rule stated in HRS § 803-1, which requires a police officer to obtain an arrest warrant prior to making an arrest, except where otherwise provided by law. These statutes provide as follows: 
§ 803-1 Arrest; by warrant. No arrest of any person
shall be made without first obtaining a warrant or other
process therefor from some magistrate, except in the casesprovided in this chapter or otherwise provided by law. 
§ 803-5 By police officer without warrant. (a) A 
police officer or other officer of justice, may, withoutwarrant, arrest and detain for examination any person whenthe officer has probable cause to believe that such personhas committed any offense, whether in the officer's presenceor otherwise.
 (b) For purposes of this section, a police officer has
probable cause to make an arrest when the facts andcircumstances within the officer's knowledge and of whichthe officer has reasonably trustworthy information aresufficient in themselves to warrant a person of reasonablecaution in the belief that a crime has been or is beingcommitted. 
In Keawe, for the reasons explained therein, the 
supreme court concluded that these statutes must be interpreted 
to place a temporal restriction – an element of immediacy - on the power of the police to make a warrantless arrest pursuant to 
HRS § 803-5. Keawe, 107 Hawai# i at 5-6, 108 P.3d at 308-09. The 
supreme court stated, 
inter alia: 
20 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We believe that this element of immediacy is present in HRS
§ 803–5 as well [as the other exceptions to HRS § 803-1],allowing a warrantless arrest where the police observe acrime in progress or develop probable cause to believe acrime has just occurred. This interpretation avoids theimplied repeal of either HRS §§ 803–1 or 803–5 and, webelieve, effectuates the legislature's actual intention inenacting HRS § 803–5. 
Keawe, 107 Hawai# i at 6, 108 P.3d at 309. 
The supreme court further clarified: 
We limit our holding to those cases, like the instant
case, in which the police have probable cause to arrest,have no obstacle preventing them from making the arrest, andwait a significant amount of time before making the arrest.We reiterate the long-standing rule that a police officermay make a warrantless arrest based on probable cause;however, if the police wish to delay the arrest for tacticalreasons, the police may not rely upon HRS § 803–5 to proceedwithout a warrant. 
Pursuant to HRS § 803–5, Officer Lewis [(the officer
who arrested Keawe)] could have arrested Keawe on July 25,2002 either during or immediately after Keawe's dances. If Officer Lewis believed that he needed assistance in makingthe arrest, HRS § 803–5 certainly allowed Officer Lewis areasonable amount of time to call other officers to assist him. Other types of delays may be proper: for example, ifthe delay between the development of probable cause and thearrest occurs because the police are attempting to identify,locate, or apprehend a defendant, the arrest will satisfyHRS § 803–5. However, if the police believe that waitingdays or weeks to arrest a defendant is the most appropriateaction under the circumstances, as occurred in instant case,then the police cannot rely upon HRS § 803–5 and must obtaina warrant pursuant to HRS § 803–1. 
Keawe, 107 Hawai# i at 7, 108 P.3d at 310 (citations omitted). 
In Line, 121 Hawai# i 74, 214 P.3d 613, the supreme 
court revisited the issue of immediacy as it relates to whether a 
warrantless arrest is lawful. 
In Line, the supreme court 
explained: 
[The] police discovered Dean with a pipe that
contained crystal methamphetamine on July 12, 2005, 63 hours
before officers located and pursued Dean into his home onJuly 15, 2005. Under those facts, it does not appear that 
21 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exigent circumstances existed such that the officers were
prevented from obtaining a warrant prior to arresting Dean.
Thus, manifestly, a warrant should have been obtained.  See 
State v. Keawe, 107 Hawai #i 1, 5–7, 108 P.3d 304, 308–10
(2005) (holding that there is a "temporal restriction on thepolice's [ ] power to make a warrantless arrest" and " if the 
police believe that waiting days or weeks to arrest a
defendant is the most appropriate action under thecircumstances, . . . then the police . . . must obtain awarrant "). 
Id. at 83 n.19, 214 P.3d at 622 n.19 (emphasis added). 
The supreme court in Line commented disapprovingly on 
the trial court's reliance on Keawe for the trial court's holding
that "unlike Keawe, Dean's actions caused the initial delay in his arrest, and the police did not wait a 'significant amount of 
time' from the inception of probable cause to arrest Dean."  Id. at 84, 214 P.3d at 623. The supreme court explained:  
The [trial] court in effect attempted to establish a new
exception to the warrant requirement, by concluding thatpolice do not need a warrant to enter a home as long as theydo not delay "significantly" in effectuating the arrest. To the contrary, the 63 hours between the inception of probablecause and the July 15, 2005 attempted arrest afforded policeample time to obtain an arrest warrant and they were plainlyrequired to do so[.] See Keawe, 107 Hawai #i at 7, 108 P.3d
at 310. 
Id. at 84-85, 214 P.3d at 623-24 (original brackets omitted). 
While there were other issues at play in Line, the 
supreme court clearly rejected the trial court's attempt to water 
down the immediacy requirement for a warrantless arrest pursuant to HRS § 803-5 by casting a 63-hour delay between the inception of probable cause and the attempt to carry out a warrantless arrest as an insignificant delay in effectuating the arrest. The supreme court essentially characterized the trial court's ruling 
22 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as an attempt to establish a new exception – a the-police-did
-
not-wait-a-significant-amount-of-time exception – to the warrant 
requirement and concluded that the trial court erred in this regard. 
In the case now before us, like the trial court in 
Line, the Circuit Court attempted to replace the immediacy requirement for the HRS § 803-5 exception with a much broader exception. Here, the Circuit Court's ruling might be described as including a reasonable-efforts-to-do-a-thorough-investigation exception, rather than any sort of temporal element tied to the establishment of probable cause. The Circuit Court's FOFs 
include, inter alia: 
8. On January 7, 2014, [Detective Rockett] was
assigned to further investigate the instant case. 
. . . . 
14.
 On January 12, 2014, at the Kapolei Police
Station, Detective Rockett conducted a video and audio
recorded interview with [CW]. . . . 
15. [CW] said the oral sex happened several times a
week, and he distinctly recalled the following incidents:[multiple alleged incidents at specific locations] 
. . . . 
19.
 [CW] reported multiple Sexual Assault in the First
Degree incidents involving a minor. 
20. On January 12, 2014, Detective Rockett presented
[CW] with a photographic lineup. The photographic lineupconsisted of six photographs, including a photograph of[Rosa]. [CW] positively identified [Rosa] as the individualwho sexually assaulted him. 
. . . . 
23  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
24. On January 21, 2014, Detective Rockett made
arrangements to visit and photograph the scenes the
following day. 
25. On January 22, 2014, Detective Rockett visited the
scenes of the alleged offenses and photographed thebathrooms and business establishments. 
. . . . 
27. On Saturday, January 25, 2014, along with HPD
Detective Michelle Phillips, Detective Rockett attempted to
locate [Rosa] at his residence to effectuate the arrest.
When they arrived, a vehicle was parked on the premises, but
the gate was locked. Detective Rockett called out, but therewas no answer and [Rosa] did not appear to be present. 
28.
 On January 26, 2014, Detective Rockett served two
administrative subpoenas, one on Verizon (the cellular phoneservice provider for [CW]), and the other on AT&T (thecellular phone service provider for [Rosa]). The subpoenasrequested phone call and text message logs for each phonenumber. 
29. In addition to obtaining the administrative
subpoenas, because [CW] reported that some of the offensesoccurred in [Rosa]'s vehicle, Detective Rockett looked intovehicles registered to [Rosa].
[] 8
30. Detective Rockett conducted computer checks and
learned about a 1999 white Toyota four-door sedan, bearingHawaii State license plate number GXG875, registered to[Rosa]. 
31. On January 27, 2014, Detective Rockett located and
photographed the white Toyota sedan parked in the driveway
of Defendant's house. 
32. Detective Rockett emailed the photograph of the
vehicle to [CW]. [CW] identified the white Toyota sedan asthe vehicle he rode in with [Rosa). 
33. Detective Rockett learned that on January 31,
2014, [Rosa] had a scheduled TRO hearing in Honolulu
District Court. Since [Rosa] was likely to appear for thehearing, Detective Rockett decided to make the arrest onthat date. 
8 At the March 3, 2015 hearing on the December Motion to Suppress,
in describing her investigative actions on January 12, 2014, Detective Rockettstated that she printed out Rosa's vehicle registration, which included hishome address. Detective Rockett's print-out, which was entered into evidenceat the hearing, had a date/time footer with 1/12/2014 and 1:23:56 PM. 
24 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
34. On January 31, 2014, at about 8:50 A.M.,
Detective Rockett located and arrested a male at 1111 Alakea 
Street. The male identified himself as [Rosa]. 
. . . . 
41.
 The Court found [Rosa]'s warrantless arrest on
January 31, 2014 valid. 
42. The Court found HPD did everything they were
required to do considering the nature of the allegationsdated as far back as 2009. 
43. The Court factually distinguished the instant case
from [Keawe]. 
44. The Court noted that Keawe is fairly clear in
establishing that police cannot skirt obligations to obtainan arrest warrant. 
45. In Keawe, the police had probable cause when they
directly observed a violation of the law but chose, fortactical reasons, not to arrest. 
46. In Keawe, the police did not do anything for
twenty (20) days to further their investigation afterobserving the offense. 
47. The Court held that in the instant case, HPD
obtained a search warrant, thereby suggesting that they
could have obtained an arrest warrant but elected not to. 
48. The Court held that while Detective Rockett had 
probable cause on January 12, 2014, her investigativeefforts until the time of the arrest were not unreasonable. 
49. The Court further found that public policy
supports police doing a thorough job when conducting aninvestigation. 
50. In the instant case, the Court found that
Detective Rockett furthered her investigation by visiting
the scenes, taking photographs, and attempting to locateDefendant and his vehicle to effectuate an arrest. 
51. Unlike in Keawe, where the officer observed the
[offense], in the instant case, responding officers did not
witness the [offense]. Because of the numerous incidentsreported, Detective Rockett wanted to ensure she had"reasonably trustworthy information" and that she verifiedthat information before making an arrest. HRS § 803-5. Shewanted to visit and photograph the scenes, review thereports, prepare appropriate search warrants, and obtain andpreserve evidence. 
25 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
52. The Court held [Rosa]'s arrest did not require a
formal warrant by HPD because Detective Rockett engaged in
good faith diligent efforts to further her investigation. 
53. Detective Rockett's efforts were reasonable, and
she did not delay the arrest for tactical or strategicreasons, especially considering she was juggling a number ofother assignments at the same time.
[9] 
Thus, the Circuit Court found and concluded that 
Detective Rockett had probable cause to arrest Rosa on January 
12, 2014, after Detective Rockett personally interviewed CW and CW again recounted numerous, very specific, incidents of sexual assault by Rosa, and CW positively identified Rosa as the individual who sexually assaulted him. While there are many findings and/or conclusions concerning the reasonableness of Detective Rockett's further investigative efforts after that 
date, the Circuit Court erred in ruling that a warrantless  arrest 
nineteen days after probable cause was established was lawful pursuant to HRS § 803-5 based on the reasonableness of Detective 
Rockett's further investigative action.  This ruling disregards 
the supreme court's fundamental rulings in Keawe, to wit: 
Keawe, on the other hand, argues that a warrantless
arrest is unlawful unless, after finding probable cause, the
police make the arrest "immediately or soon thereafter.". . . Keawe argues that . . . the power to arrest anindividual without a warrant (provided by HRS § 803–5) islimited and should be construed narrowly. We agree. 
. . . . 
Keawe advocates an interpretation of HRS §§ 803–1 and
803–5 that would place a temporal restriction on the 
9 The Circuit Court's COLs stemmed from and were consistent with 
these FOFs. 
26 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
police's HRS § 803–5 power to make a warrantless arrest. We 
agree. 
Keawe, 107 Hawai# i at 5-6, 108 P.3d at 308-09 (footnote omitted). 
The supreme court's limitation of its holding to cases 
in which "the police have probable cause to arrest, have no 
obstacle preventing them from making the arrest, and wait a significant amount of time before making the arrest" does not change the result in this case. See id. at 6-7, 108 P.3d at 309-10. Nothing in Detective Rockett's testimony or the Circuit Court's findings constituted an "obstacle" preventing Detective Rockett from making the arrest.  The police knew Rosa's 
identity and the location of his residence for nineteen days after probable cause was established and before his arrest. It 
10
10 Detective Rockett's one attempt to arrest Rosa, when she went to
his house on January 25, 2014, was not a sufficient obstacle to make Rosa's
warrantless arrest - nineteen days after probable cause was established -lawful under HRS § 803-5. See Line, 121 Hawai #i at 84-85, 214 P.3d at 623-24;
see also State v. Parras, CAAP-15-0000532, CAAP-15-0000534 (consol.) 2016 WL7324120 (Haw. App. Dec. 16, 2016) (SDO). In Parras, this court rejected theState's argument concerning the need for a detective's testimony that he mademultiple attempts to serve the defendant during the twenty-five days periodbetween the establishment of probable cause and the defendant's arrest. 2016 WL 7324120 at *4. This court concluded: 
On this record [(which included offers of proof as to thedetective's testimony)], the circuit court did not abuse itsdiscretion when it decided it did not need to have Detective Phromsiri testify. Probable cause was established on October 3, 2013, and Parras was arrested without a warranttwenty-five days later, on October 28, 2013. Even if Detective Phromsiri testified to his attempts to locateParras during those twenty-five days, and even though thedelay in locating Parras was an obstacle to arresting him,we cannot say that a warrantless arrest twenty-five dayslater is appropriate under HRS § 803-5. Rather, under Keaweand Line, the police were required to obtain a warrant bythe time Parras was arrested in this case. 
Id. 
27 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is undisputed that HPD officers were able to serve Rosa to appear 
at the TRO hearing at Honolulu District Court. 
His car was 
observed by the police at his residence. Detective Rockett's efforts to build a strong case were certainly permissible, even commendable as the Circuit Court suggests, but they were in fact strategic and carefully planned to aid in Rosa's eventual prosecution, rather than constituting barriers to making an arrest or obtaining an arrest warrant. As the Circuit Court found, on the day Rosa was arrested (a Friday), HPD obtained a search warrant for his home and could have obtained an arrest warrant, but elected not to. Indeed, Dectective Rockett's post-arrest warrantless arrest affidavit relied entirely on facts gathered on or before January 12, 2014, to support probable cause for Rosa's arrest and extended restraint. 
Here, the police simply decided that waiting days, if 
not weeks, until January 31, 2014, to arrest Rosa was appropriate because they believed he would be at a court hearing and, presumably, they thought that would be a convenient way to pick him up. At the March 3, 2015 hearing, Detective Rockett was asked about her understanding of the circumstances where she would need to get a warrant before arresting an individual. She responded: 
It's my understanding that I would need an arrest warrant if
a suspect has been identified and he hasn't been located inmany months, maybe like six months. The other times I've 
28 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
seen an arrest warrant is when a suspect is injured, is
confined in the hospital, and is going to be there for aprolonged period of time. Those are the only two occasionsI'm familiar with, I personally am familiar with. 
Detective Rockett's understanding is inconsistent with 
the immediacy requirement for a warrantless arrest under Hawai# i 
law. 
Finally, we note that the Circuit Court appeared to 
give significant weight to the fact that HPD officers did not 
personally witness the events that established probable cause to arrest Rosa. This reliance was misplaced. We recognize that in many instances where a warrantless arrest is authorized under HRS § 803-5, the probable cause for the arrest will stem from a police officer's observations. However, that does not support a conclusion that if probable cause is otherwise established, the immediacy element for a warrantless arrest pursuant to HRS § 803-5 need no longer be satisfied. 
We conclude that Rosa's warrantless arrest was unlawful 
and the Circuit Court erred in concluding that, pursuant to HRS §§ 803-1 and 803-5, HPD did not violate Rosa's constitutional rights by not obtaining a warrant of arrest. 
As the supreme court explained in Keawe: 
Ordinarily, when a defendant is arrested unlawfully, the
proper remedy is to suppress the evidence collected as aresult of the arrest. As we have stated: 
"Closing the courtroom door to evidence . . . [flowingfrom] official lawlessness" is the customary remedyfor violations of fourth amendment rights, and thepublic interest would be better served by suppressing 
29 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the evidence obtained as a consequence of the unlawful
arrests. For the exclusionary "rule is calculated toprevent, not to repair. Its purpose is to deter -- tocompel respect for the constitutional guaranty in theonly effectively available way -- by removing theincentive to disregard it." 
Keawe, 107 Hawai# i at 7, 108 P.3d at 310 (quoting State v. 
Furuyama, 64 Haw. 109, 122-23, 637 P.2d 1095, 1104 (1981)) 
(further citations and some brackets omitted). 
Rosa argues that since his arrest on January 31, 2014 
was illegal, the seizure of Rosa's Phone in connection with that arrest was a violation of his constitutional rights to be secure from unreasonable searches and seizures; and therefore Rosa's Phone and evidence obtained therefrom should have been suppressed. The State argues that Rosa's Phone would have ultimately been seized because Rosa would inevitably have been arrested and his cell phone would have been seized at that time subject to a lawful arrest. Alternatively, the State argues that if Rosa had not had Rosa's Phone in his possession at the time of his arrest, a search warrant would inevitably have been obtained to seize the phone because a lawful search warrant was obtained to search the contents of Rosa's Phone. Thusly, the State submits that it has demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that any evidence from Rosa's Phone that was used at trial would have been discovered by lawful means, even if Rosa's arrest was illegal. 
30 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai
#i courts have recognized the inevitable discovery 
doctrine. Under the inevitable discovery doctrine, the State has 
the burden "to present clear and convincing evidence that any evidence obtained in violation of article I, section 7, would inevitably have been discovered by lawful means before such evidence may be admitted under the inevitable discovery exception to the exclusionary rule." State v. Lopez, 78 Hawai# i 433, 451, 
896 P.2d 889, 907 (1995). 
In this case, however, the Circuit 
Court ruled that Rosa's arrest was lawful, and therefore the seizure of Rosa's Phone incident to his arrest was lawful. Accordingly, the Circuit Court never reached the issue of inevitable discovery and made no ruling on, for example, whether the data content of Rosa's Phone "would have still been there" if Rosa's Phone was recovered at some other time after Rosa's illegal arrest. See id. at 452, 896 P.2d at 908. 
In 
Lopez, although the trial court had not ruled on 
whether the evidence in question would have been inevitably discovered, the supreme court nevertheless reviewed the entire record and concluded that the record was devoid of evidence necessary to show that the fruits of the illegal search would have been inevitably discovered. Id. The supreme court has 
since clarified that it is error for this court to make rulings that require determination of questions of fact and that the proper course of action is for this court to remand a case to a 
31 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
finder-of-fact for such determinations. See
, e.g., State v. 
Pitolo, 144 Hawai# i 100, 108-09, 436 P.3d 1183, 1191-92 (2019) 
(holding that the Intermediate Court of Appeals erred in ruling 
based on its own review of the record on appeal, rather than remanding the case). 
Here, we conclude that factual findings are 
necessary to determine whether the prosecution met its burden to establish that there was clear and convincing evidence that the data retrieved from Rosa's Phone would have been inevitably discovered. Thus, this case must be remanded for further proceedings to determine whether the evidence obtained from Rosa's Phone should have be suppressed. 
B. Rosa's Motion for A New Trial 
Rosa contends that the Circuit Court erred in denying 
the Motion for New Trial on two grounds, which are addressed below. 
HRS § 635-56 (2016) provides: 
§ 635-56 Grounds for new trial. In any civil case or
in any criminal case wherein a verdict of guilty has been
rendered, the court may set aside the verdict when itappears to be so manifestly against the weight of theevidence as to indicate bias, prejudice, passion, ormisunderstanding of the charge of the court on the part ofthe jury; or the court may in any civil or criminal casegrant a new trial for any legal cause. 
Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) provide: 
Rule 33. NEW TRIAL. 
The court on motion of a defendant may grant a new
trial to the defendant if required in the interest ofjustice. If trial was by the court without a jury, the courton motion of a defendant for a new trial may vacate thejudgment if entered, take additional testimony and direct 
32 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the entry of a new judgment. A motion for a new trial shall
be made within 10 days after verdict or finding of guilty orwithin such further time as the court may fix during the10-day period. The finding of guilty may be entered inwriting or orally on the record. 
HRPP Rule 33. 
1. Impartial Jury 
Rosa argues that the Circuit Court erred in denying his
motion for a new trial because it appeared that Juror 45, who  
became the jury foreperson, may not have been fair and impartial 
towards Rosa because Juror 45 may have been untruthful about whether he worked at Handi-Van during the same time as Rosa.  
A motion for a new trial based on juror misconduct can
be based upon (1) failure of one or more jurors to respond
truthfully to questions posed during voir dire , or (2)
misconduct by one or more jurors during the course of the
trial. In either event, the ultimate inquiry is whether themisconduct deprived the defendant of the fundamental rightto a trial by twelve impartial jurors. If any member ormembers of the jury was shown not to be impartial, the trialcourt's failure to grant a new trial is an abuse ofdiscretion. 
State v. Adams, 10 Haw. App. 593, 599, 880 P.2d 226, 231 (1994) 
(citations omitted). The supreme court has further provided that: 
[W]hen a defendant in a criminal case claims a deprivation
of the right to a fair trial by an impartial jury, 
the initial step for the trial court to take . . . isto determine whether the nature of the [allegeddeprivation] rises to the level of being substantiallyprejudicial. If it does not rise to such a level, thetrial court is under no duty to interrogate the jury .. . . And whether it does rise to the level of substantial prejudice . . . is ordinarily a questioncommitted to the trial court's discretion. . . . 
Where the trial court does determine that such
[alleged deprivation] is of a nature which couldsubstantially prejudice the defendant's right to a  
33 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 Further, Rosa points to no instance of misconduct by 
Juror 45 but argues that "it appears the foreperson may not have 
been fair and impartial[.]" (Emphasis added). fair trial, a rebuttable presumption of prejudice is
raised. The trial judge is then duty bound to furtherinvestigate the totality of circumstances surroundingthe [alleged deprivation] to determine its impact onjury impartiality. The standard to be applied inovercoming such a presumption is that the [allegeddeprivation] must be proved harmless beyond areasonable doubt. 
State v Furutani, 76 Hawai# i 172, 180-81, 873 P.2d 51, 59-60 
(1994) (citations omitted). 
Here, Rosa does not point to where in the record the 
Circuit Court failed to act on any concern over Juror 45 that 
Rosa raised; rather, Rosa now argues that: 
[Rosa] was never consulted by prior counsel [DPD Ting]
as to [Juror 45]'s employment with Handi-Vans. Prior 
counsel should have known the relevance and possibleprejudice since he knew of [Rosa]'s prior employment historywith the same company. [Rosa] was not consulted in anymeaningful context about the questioning of juror 45 out ofthe presence of the jury. When juror 45 said that he neverknew [Rosa] or worked with him, prior counsel should haveconsulted [Rosa]. 
The Circuit Court issued the following FOFs: 
1. On October 20, 2016, both the State and defense
received the jury packet for the instant case. The packetconsisted of the jury list and redacted juror cards. 
2. On Juror Card 45, under item 13 asking for present
or last employer and occupation, Juror No. 45 wrote "OTSHandi-Van." 
3. On October 24, 2016, a jury trial commenced 
before this Honorable Court. Defendant was representedby [Mr. Ting]. 
4. During jury selection, Juror No. 45 was first
seated as Alternate Juror No. 1. 
34 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5. Both the State and defense had an opportunity to
voir dire Juror No. 45. 
6. Neither the State nor the defense challenged Juror
No. 45 for cause, or elected to exercise a peremptory
challenge on this juror. 
7. After the jury was impaneled and sworn in, a juror
was dismissed and Juror No. 45 was called to fill Chair 6. 
8. On November 2, 2016, Defendant testified.
Defendant provided his background information, includingemployment history. One of Defendant's prior places ofemployment was with Handi-Van. 
9. Defendant did not provide specific information on
dates of employment, the nature of his work, or position(s)with the Handi-Van. 
10. During the recess following Defendant's testimony,
Juror No. 45 asked to address the Court. 
11. After the other jurors cleared the room, Juror No.
45 notified the Court that he is currently employed with theHandi-Van. 
12. The Court engaged in a colloquy with Juror No. 45
to find out more information. Juror No. 45 explained thatwhile he and Defendant may have been employed by thehandi-Van at the same time, Juror No. 45 did not know andhad not worked with Defendant. 
13. Juror No. 45 assured the Court that despite this
common employment, he could remain fair and impartial. 
14. After Juror No. 45 addressed the Court, the Court
asked both the State and defense if either party had anyquestions for this juror. 
15. Both the State and defense declined to ask Juror 
No. 45 any further questions. 
16. Juror No. 45 was released from the courtroom. 
17. After Juror No. 45 left the courtroom, neither the
State nor the defense objected to Juror No. 45 remaining on
the panel in Chair 6. 
The record shows that it was Juror 45 that first raised 
the issue that he might have worked at Handi-Van at the same time 
as Rosa - after Rosa's testimony, which included Rosa's having worked with Handi-Van. The Circuit Court engaged in a colloquy 
35 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with Juror 45 and was satisfied that Juror 45 did not know Rosa. 
Rosa's defense was given an opportunity to ask questions or to object to Juror 45, but did not do so. 
The Circuit Court's November 13, 2017 FOFs/COLs/Order 
on New Trial provided that there was no evidence of a history between Juror 45 and Rosa, and that Rosa's arguments on Juror 45 not being impartial were "speculation" where there was no evidence that Juror 45 held any bias and/or manipulated the other jurors. 
Rather, the court found that the record showed that 
Juror 45 "assured the Court that he could remain fair and impartial" and that when the jury was polled all twelve responded that the verdict "accurately represented and reflected their respective votes." 
The Circuit Court's decision to deny Rosa's Motion for 
New Trial based on his concerns about Juror 45 did not clearly exceed the bounds of reason or disregard rules or principles of law or practice to Rosa's substantial detriment. See Furutani, 
76 Hawai# i at 179, 873 P.2d at 58. Accordingly, we conclude that 
the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Rosa's Motion for New Trial on this ground. 
2. Compulsory Process 
Rosa contends that the Circuit Court erred in denying 
his Motion for New Trial on grounds of denial of compulsory process. Rosa argues that this failure occurred when DPD Ting 
36 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
did not subpoena witnesses that Rosa requested and that were 
listed in his witness list, resulting in Rosa being deprived of his constitutional right to present witnesses in his own defense, and that the Circuit Court's failure was when it did not engage in any colloquy with Rosa on the witnesses that he did or did not want called. 
"The due process guarantee of the Federal and Hawai# i 
constitutions serves to protect the right of an accused in a criminal case to a fundamentally fair trial." State v. Acker, 
133 Hawai# i 253, 281, 327 P.3d 931, 959 (2014) (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
"[A] fundamental element of 
due process of law is the right of compulsory process. The right to compulsory process affords a defendant in all criminal prosecutions, not only the power to compel attendance of witnesses, but also the right to have those witnesses heard." Id. (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
"However, 
this right is subject to limitations, the most important of which, is that the defendant may only obtain witnesses who can give 'relevant and beneficial testimony for the defense.'" State 
v. Diaz, 100 Hawai# i 210, 226, 58 P.3d 1257, 1273 (2002) (citing 
State v. Savitz, 67 Haw. 59, 60-61, 677 P.2d 465, 466-67 (1984)). 
In Savitz, the defense made two offers of proof to establish
that the witness would provide relevant and beneficialtestimony. First, the witness would testify that thedefendant was not at the scene of the burglary for which hewas being tried. Second, the witness had a conversation withthe prosecution's witness (prior to trial), which would help 
37 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
impeach the prosecution witness. [The Hawai #i Supreme Court]
ruled that the defense's offer of proof was "purely
conjectural and without any foundation nor supported by anybasis in fact." 
Id. (citation and footnote omitted). 
Rosa now argues that his witnesses were not called 
because DPD Ting "simply exercised his own discretion in deciding 
that the defense would not present any witnesses to corroborate [Rosa] at trial." Rosa further argues that, given the witness list and the trial continuances (to locate defense witnesses), the court should have known to colloquy Rosa. 
In denying Rosa's Motion for New Trial on grounds of 
denial of compulsory process, the Circuit Court stated that: 
[Rosa] failed to support his assertion with any proof
that the named witnesses would have benefitted his defense,
and he points to no evidence that [DPD] Ting neglected tocontact these witnesses. The record reflects that [DPD] Tingmoved for multiple continuances, at [Rosa]'s request, tosecure defense witnesses. [Rosa] presented nothing tosuggest these witnesses . . . would have even testified in amanner helpful to his case. Without a showing that thesewitnesses were relevant and beneficial, [Rosa]'s right toCompulsory Process was not denied. 
The Circuit Court considered and addressed Rosa's 
arguments. The Circuit Court cited the requirement for a movant 
to show ineffective assistance of counsel "based on the failure to obtain witnesses" which "must be supported by affidavits or sworn statements describing the testimony of the proffered witnesses." See State v. Richie, 88 Hawai# i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 
1227, 1247 (1998) (citations omitted). The Circuit Court also noted that "the calling of witnesses is generally a strategic 
38 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
decision for defense counsel" and that "matters presumably within 
the judgment of counsel, like 
trial strategy, 'will rarely be 
second-guessed by judicial hindsight.'" See id. The Circuit 
Court based its ruling on the fact that Rosa failed to support 
his claim with affidavits or sworn statements of the testimonies of the named witnesses. Thus, as the Circuit Court observed, it is entirely speculative that there would be a different outcome had DPD Ting called those witnesses. 
Lastly, Rosa provides no authority, and we find none, 
requiring a trial court to colloquy a defendant regarding whether the defense has presented all of the witnesses that the defendant wants. 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not clearly 
exceed the bounds of reason or disregard rules or principles of law or practice to Rosa's substantial detriment in denying the Motion for a New Trial on these grounds. See State v. Austin, 
143 Hawai# i 18, 29, 422 P.3d 18, 29 (2018). Accordingly, the 
Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Rosa's Motion for New Trial. V. CONCLUSION 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's March 25, 2015 
FOFs/COLs/Order on Motion to Suppress is vacated, and this case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this Opinion. If, on remand, the State fails to meet its burden on the issue of 
39 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
inevitable discovery, then Rosa is entitled to relief from the 
January 2, 2018 Judgment and a new trial. On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge Nelson W.S. Goo, for Defendant-Appellant. 
Brian R. Vincent, Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu, for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
40 