NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000473 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
TED'S WIRING SERVICE, LTD., Plaintiff-Counterclaim
Defendant/Appellee, v. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION,
STATE OF HAWAI I #, Defendant-Counterclaimant/Appellant,
JOHN DOES 1-50 and DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-1910-07) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Counterclaimant/Appellant Department of 
Transportation, State of Hawai
#i (DOT) appeals from a May 20, 
2016 Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)1 Judgment 
(Judgment) awarding Plaintiff-Counterclaim Defendant/Appellee 
Ted's Wiring Service, Ltd. (TWS) $112,151.47. 
In this action brought by TWS for contract amounts 
retained and unpaid for goods provided and services rendered to DOT, the Circuit Court granted TWS's motion for summary judgment. On appeal, DOT contends the Circuit Court erred by 
(1)  finding as a matter of law that:  
(A)  DOT accepted the Automated Vehicle Identification 
system (AVI) proffered by TWS where no final acceptance letter had been issued by the State as required by their contract; 
(B)  DOT accepted the AVI where TWS admitted under oath 
that the system had not been accepted; 
1 The Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(C)  TWS's Concept of Operations (COP) changed the 
requirements of the contract despite contract provisions that 
limited modifications to change orders; 
(D)  TWS had complied with its COP where DOT's expert's 
report demonstrated failures to comply; 
(E)  DOT had changed the time of performance of the 
contract in the absence of a change order; and 
(2)  disregarding the contract's non-waiver provision.2 
After careful review of the record on appeal and the 
relevant legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments made by the parties, we vacate the Circuit Court's Judgment and remand for further proceedings. 
DOT's arguments boil down to this:  The COP did not 
change the terms of the contract and even if it did, TWS did not comply with the terms as changed; and DOT did not accept TWS's performance and even if it did, under the contract, acceptance did not waive DOT's claims for damages for failure to fully perform.
1. The contract documents governing the project. 
The parties' agreement consists of three multi-part 
components:  
(1)  The Contract, consisting of the "State of Hawaii 
Agreement for Goods or Services Based Upon Competitive Sealed 
Proposals," to which the "Scope of Services," "Time of Performance," "Compensation and Payment Schedule," "Surety Performance Bond," "Surety Labor and Material Bond," and "General Conditions" were attached;2 
(2)  The RFP, consisting of the Request for Proposals for a 
certain project entitled "Design/Build Proposal Documents For Automatic Vehicle Identification System For Honolulu International 
Airport Project No. AOl112-23"  which included General 
Conditions, Special Provisions, Supplemental Special Provisions, Airports Division Supplement,  State Wage Rate Schedule, Article 10, Plan Sheets, Requirements of Chapter 104, HRS, Bid Price Proposal and various appendices; and 
2 The DOT's Points of Error have been modified for clarity. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3)  The Proposal, consisting of the "Proposal for 
Furnishing Labor and Materials Required for Automatic Vehicle 
Identification System Honolulu International Airport Project No. A01112-23 Honolulu, Oahu, Hawaii For the State of Hawaii Department of Transportation Airports Division" (June 1, 2000 Proposal) and the "Article 10 Requirements for Proposal for Automatic Vehicle Identification System for Honolulu International Airport Project No AO1112-23" (Article 10 Proposal).
3 
The Contract specifically incorporates the RFP, the 
Proposal, and the General Conditions.  The RFP made the General Provisions applicable to the Project.  The General Provisions were also incorporated by reference in the Special Provisions, were modified by the Supplemental Special Provisions, and the Airport Division Supplement to Special Provisions.  Moreover, the Contract stated, 
The General Conditions and any Special Conditions are
attached hereto and made a part of this Agreement.  In the event of a conflict between the General Conditions and the Special Conditions, the Special Conditions shall control. In the event of a conflict among the documents, the order ofprecedence shall be as follows:  (1) [Contract], includingall attachments and addenda; (2) [RFP], including allattachments and addenda; and (3) Proposal. 
In addition, the Scope of Services attached to the Contract 
provided that, if there was a conflict between the Scope of Services and the General Conditions, the General Conditions would govern, unless otherwise specified.
2. The operative law. 
This court reviews "the circuit court's grant or denial 
of summary judgment de novo."  Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai i #
48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) (citing Hawai# i Cmty. Fed. 
Credit Union v. Keka, 94 Hawai# i 213, 221, 11 P.3d 1, 9 (2000)). 
Accordingly, 
3 TWS attached to its June 2, 2015 motion for summary judgment (June
2015 MSJ) only the June 1, 2000 Proposal.  However, the Scope of Services
explicitly identifies the Article 10 Proposal as the proposal TWS submitted inresponse to the RFP.  The State maintained in its opposition to TWS's June2015 MSJ that the June 1, 2000 Proposal, and the Article 10 Proposal formedTWS's bid.  The Article 10 Proposal bears TWS's letterhead, consists ofapproximately fifty-eight pages, but appears to be undated. 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[o]n appeal, an order of summary judgment is reviewed under
the same standard applied by the circuit courts.  Summaryjudgment is proper where the moving party demonstrates thatthere are no genuine issues of material fact and it isentitled to a judgment as a matter of law.  In other words,summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions onfile, together with the affidavits, if any, show that thereis no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party isentitled to a judgment as a matter of law. 
Iddings v. Mee-Lee , 82 Hawai# i 1, 5, 919 P.2d 263, 267 (1996); 
see also
 Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(c).4 
On a motion for summary judgment, "[a] fact is material 
if proof of that fact would have the effect of establishing or 
refuting one of the essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties."  Crichfield v. Grand Wailea Co.
, 93 Hawai# i 477, 482-83, 6 P.3d 349, 354-55 (2000) (internal 
quotation marks omitted) (quoting 
Hulsman v. Hemmeter Dev. Corp., 
65 Haw. 58, 61, 647 P.2d 713, 716 (1982)).  "[A] 'genuine issue as to any material fact' . . . under a conflict in the affidavits as to a particular matter must be of such a nature that it would affect the result."  Richards v. Midkiff, 48 Haw. 32, 39, 396 P.2d 49, 54 (1964). 
In reviewing a trial court's grant or denial of a 
motion for summary judgment, the appellate court "must view all of the evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion."  Crichfield
, 93 
Hawai# i at 483, 6 P.3d at 355 (quoting 
Taylor v. Gov't Emps. Ins. 
Co
, 90 Hawai# i 302, 306, 978 P.2d 740,744 (1999) (internal 
quotation marks, and brackets omitted).  "[A]ny doubt concerning the propriety of granting the motion should be resolved in favor 
4 HRCP Rule 56(c) provides, in relevant part: 
Rule 56. SUMMARY JUDGMENT . 
. . . . (c) Motion and proceedings thereon . . . . The 
judgment sought shall be rendered forthwith if the
pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, andadmissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any,show that there is no genuine issue as to any material factand that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as amatter of law.  A summary judgment, interlocutory incharacter, may be rendered on the issue of liability alonealthough there is a genuine issue as to the amount ofdamages. 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the non-moving party."  GECC Fin. Corp. v. Jaffarian, 79 
Hawai# i 516, 521, 904 P.2d 530, 535 (App. 1995). 
Similarly, 
[c]ourts will treat the documents submitted in support of a
motion for summary judgment differently from those inopposition.  Although they carefully scrutinize thematerials submitted by the moving party to ensure compliancewith the requirements of Rule 56(e), HRCP (1990), the courtsare more indulgent towards the materials submitted by thenon-moving party.  This is because of the drastic nature of summary judgment proceedings, which should not become asubstitute for existing methods of determining factualissues. 
Affidavits in support of a summary judgment motion are
scrutinized to determine whether the facts they aver areadmissible at trial and are made on the personal knowledgeof the affiant.  Also, ultimate or conclusory facts orconclusions of law are not to be utilized in a summaryjudgment affidavit. 
Miller v. Manuel, 9 Haw. App. 56, 66, 828 P.2d 286, 292 (1991) 
(citations omitted).  "Once the movant has satisfied the initial burden of showing that there is no genuine issue of material fact, the opposing party must come forward, through affidavit or other evidence, with specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue of material fact."  Id. at 65, 828 P.2d at 292.  If the non-moving party fails to meet this burden, the moving party is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law.  Hall v. State, 7 Haw. App. 274, 284, 756 P.2d 1048, 1055 (1988); see also HRCP Rule 56(e).
5 
In deciding a motion for summary judgment, a circuit 
court must keep in mind an important distinction: 
A judge ruling on a motion for summary judgment cannot
summarily try the facts; his [or her] role is limited toapplying the law to the facts that have been established by 
5 HRCP Rule 56(e) provides, in relevant part: 
Rule 56. SUMMARY JUDGMENT . 
. . . . (e) Form of affidavits; further testimony; defense
required . . . . When a motion for summary judgment is made
and supported as provided in this rule, an adverse party may
not rest upon the mere allegations or denials of the adverseparty's pleading, but the adverse party's response, byaffidavits or as otherwise provided in this rule, must setforth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issuefor trial.  If the adverse party does not so respond,summary judgment, if appropriate, shall be entered againstthe adverse party. 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the litigants' papers.  Therefore, a party moving for
summary judgment is not entitled to a judgment merelybecause the facts he offers appear more plausible than thosetendered in opposition or because it appears that theadversary is unlikely to prevail at trial.  This is true even though both parties move for summary judgment. Therefore, if the evidence presented on the motion issubject to conflicting interpretations, or reasonable[persons] might differ as to its significance, summaryjudgment is improper. 
Kajiya v. Dep't of Water Supply, 2 Haw. App. 221, 224, 629 P.2d 
635, 638-39 (1981) (quoting 10 Charles Alan Wright and Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure: Civil ยง 2725 (1973)). 
In general, "summary judgment must be used with due 
regard for its purpose and should be cautiously invoked so that no person will be improperly deprived of a trial of disputed factual issues."  Miller, 9 Haw. App. at 65-66, 828 P.2d at 292 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Here, TWS moved for summary judgment, asserting that it 
had satisfactorily performed its contractual obligations and was entitled to full payment therefor.
6 
As a general rule, the construction and legal effect
to be given a contract is a question of law freely
reviewable by an appellate court.  The determination whether a contract is ambiguous is likewise a question of law thatis freely reviewable on appeal.  These principles applyequally to appellate review of the construction and legaleffect to be given a contractual agreement to arbitrate. 
Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai# i 226, 239, 921 P.2d 146, 
159 (1996) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).
3. Analysis of the contentions on appeal. 
DOT argues that the Circuit Court erred when it 
determined, as a matter of law, that the COP changed the 
requirements of the contract.  This was error, DOT maintains, because the Contract could only be modified by a "change order."
7 
6 TWS also argued that it was entitled to judgment as to DOT's
counterclaim for damages under the contract.  DOT has not challenged the
Circuit Court's entry of judgment against it on its counterclaim on appeal. 
7 A "change order" is defined, in Article 1.8 of the General
Provisions, as 
A written order issued by the Director to the Contractor,covering changes in the plans, quantities or both, withinthe scope of the contract, establishing the basis of paymentand time adjustments for the work affected by the changes. A change order is also a written order concerning the
(continued...) 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This position is without merit. 
DOT cites to no provision in any of the contractual 
documents which says changes to the contract must be done by 
change order.  To the contrary, the General Conditions provide for Modifications of Agreement
8 as well as Change Orders.  DOT 
7(...continued)
performance of work and/or the furnishing of materials
involving extra work.  Such extra work may be performed atagreed prices or on a force account basis as providedelsewhere in these specifications.  A change order signed byall the parties to the contract is a supplemental agreement. 
8 Paragraph 19 of the General Conditions (Paragraph 19) provides, in
pertinent part: 
a. In writing.  Any modification, alteration, amendment,charge, or extension of any term, provision, orcondition of this Agreement permitted by thisAgreement shall be made by written amendment to thisAgreement, signed by the CONTRACTOR and the STATE,provided that change order shall be made in accordancewith paragraph 20 herein. 
. . . . 
c. Agency procurement officer.  By a written order, at
any time, and without notice to any surety, the Agencyprocurement officer, subject to mutual agreement ofthe parties to this Agreement and all appropriate adjustments, may make modifications within the generalscope of this Agreement to include any one or more ofthe following: 
(A) Drawings, designs, or specifications; 
(B) Method or place of delivery; 
(C) Description of services to be performed; 
(D) Time of performance (i.e., hours of the day,
days of the week, etc.); 
(E) Place of performance of the services; or 
(F) Other provisions of the Agreement accomplishedby mutual action of the parties to theAgreement. 
. . . . 
g. CPO approval.  If a modification, alteration,
amendment, change or extension of any term, provisionor condition of this Agreement increases the amountpayable to the CONTRACTOR by at least $25,000.00 orten per cent (10%) of the initial Agreement price,whichever increase is higher, the prior approval ofthe CPO is required. 
The "CPO" is referenced in the Contract as the "appropriate" Chief ProcurementOfficer. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argues, and TWS does not dispute, that there was only one Change 
Order issued with regard to this Contract.  Thus, if a valid modification of the Contract's terms occurred, it needed to comply with Paragraph 19.  As the Circuit Court did not rule that the COP so complied, it was error to conclude that the COP "as a matter of law" changed the terms of the Contract. 
a. Evidence that the Contract was changed. 
The genesis of the COP appears to stem from "Section 4 
AVI Central Software" attached to the Article 10 Proposal, which 
states:  "The first step in the proposed approach is to work with the Airport to confirm the AVI system concept and operations . . . this step is expected to . . . and result in the production of a system concept report, which will guide the Prime Contractor's team(s) through the rest of the design and implementation process."  The quoted language does not suggest a "modification" of the contract terms was being proposed, and the initial version of the COP--not included in the record on appeal--was rejected for not meeting all the Article 10 specifications by the procurement officer.  In a May 17, 2002 letter to TWS discussing the COP, DOT specifically stated, "[a]s you know, we are concerned about the Concept of Operations not fully addressing the project specifications of the RFP."  After citing an example, the letter goes on to state, 
[A]t minimum, all RFP specifications should be included in
the Concept of Operations.  Additionally, please note thatany changes and/or adjustments to the RFP requires that anAmendment or Change Order to the Contract.  (Thisinformation may be referenced in the General Conditions-Modifications of Agreement pages 12-14).  Therefore, ifthere are any specifications that presently cannot beexecuted per the RFP; it is imperative that you inform us inwriting with justification. 
Subsequently, in a letter dated May 19, 2003, the new 
Manager of Oahu District Airports, Benjamin R. Schlapak, informed 
TWS that the COP dated April 11, 2003, "is approved as stated in concept."  Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to DOT, we cannot conclude, as a matter of law, that the act of accepting the COP superseded or modified the RFP specifications. We also cannot conclude that this evidence establishes that the COP constitutes a modification or amendment that meets the requirements of Paragraph 19 of the General Conditions. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
TWS did not argue that the COP was a modification under 
the terms of Paragraph 19.  TWS relies on the May 19, 2003 letter 
from DOT to TWS as evidence that the COP was approved by DOT.  However, Paragraph 19 requires that a modification "be made by written amendment to this Agreement, signed by the contractor and the State."  (Capitalization modified.)  The COP was not signed by DOT.  Moreover, the May 19, 2003 letter states that the April 11, 2003 COP was "approved as stated in concept", casting doubt about whether the details contained in the COP were also approved.  Thus, there was a genuine issue of material fact as to whether the parties modified the terms of the Contract in the manner argued by TWS. 
Finally, TWS submitted an October 19, 2009 email from 
Benton Ho, Facilities Engineer of the Airports Division for DOT, to Mike Kamaka of Bowers and Kubota Consulting, hired by DOT to manage the project after the death of Mr. Schlapak stating, 
It is apparent that the new system being installed by TWS is
a vastly different system from the previously approvedproposal.  It would appear that we will need to have aformal submittal review process established.  Although Iconcur on the differences of this new system, myexpectations of the performance remains the same as providedby the original system (i.e. monitoring capabilities, andreport generation). 
This evidence also casts doubt upon whether the original 
specifications were modified. 
Thus, we conclude there was a genuine issue of material 
fact regarding the validity of the COP as a modification of the Contract. 
b. Evidence that TWS complied with either the original or
changed terms of the Contract. 
DOT disputed whether TWS complied with the COP.  DOT 
argues the Circuit Court erred by finding TWS performed in 
compliance with the COP when its expert report demonstrated a failure to comply.  The Circuit Court found the DOT expert report was based on the RFP, but that the COP modified those specifications.  Having concluded that there is a genuine issue of material fact that the COP modified the Contract, we need not further address this point of error. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
c. Change to the time for performance of the contract. 
DOT argues that similar to project specifications, the 
time of performance can only be amended by Change Order.  The 
Circuit Court found that DOT granted multiple extensions for TWS to perform. 
As discussed above, changes to the Contract were not 
limited to Change Orders, and Attachment 2 to the Contract, Time of Performance, setting out the initial deadlines for the project, also provides that to the extent the General Conditions conflict with the Time of Performance, the former governs.  Paragraph 19 specifically provides for adjustments of time for performance, stating, "If any modification increases or decreases the CONTRACTOR's cost of, or the time required for performance of any part of the work under this Agreement, an adjustment shall be made and this Agreement modified in writing accordingly." 
The record contains numerous written statements that 
TWS had until a certain deadline to perform or Mr. Schlapak would refer the matter to the Director to declare TWS in default.  These letters operated as written adjustments extending the time for performance.  Further, on June 23, 2009, the DOT made good on the threats to declare TWS in default and notified both TWS and Travelers.  Thereafter, on October 13, 2009, DOT and Travelers executed the Takeover Agreement.  The Takeover Agreement explicitly extended the time for performance stating "[DOT] agrees to extend the time for completion of said work to and including forty-five (45) calendar days from Notice to Proceed, which shall be issued after execution of this Takeover Agreement by both parties."  Looked at in the light most favorable to DOT, this evidence demonstrates there is no genuine issue of material fact as to the written agreement to extend the time for performance. 
Thus, the Circuit Court did not err in finding the DOT 
extended the time for performance as a matter of law. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
d. Evidence that the AVI System was "finally" accepted by
DOT. 
The General Provisions provide:
1.23  NOTICE OF FINAL ACCEPTANCE --Written notice from the 
Director to the Contractor that the entire contract which 
has been completed in all respects in accordance with theplans, specifications, and any changes thereof previouslyauthorized is accepted. 
. . . . 5.12 ACCEPTANCE . . . . B. FINAL ACCEPTANCE --Upon notice from the Contractor of
completion of the entire project, the Director will
make an inspection.  If the contract is found completed to the Director's satisfaction, suchinspection shall constitute the final inspection andthe Director will notify the Contractor in writing ofhis acceptance. 
The Circuit Court held and TWS claims both on appeal and below 
that the February 17, 2010 letter constitutes final acceptance.  On February 17, 2010, a letter was sent to Travelers in the name of the Director, Brennon T. Morioka, signed by Deputy Director Francis Paul Keeno (the February 17, 2010 letter), stating: 
Subject: Automatic Vehicle Identification System for
Honolulu International Airport, Project No. AO1112-23,Contract No. 46910 ("Project") 
Dear [Travelers's Bond Claim Counsel]: The software for the Automatic Vehicle Identification 
("AVI") system developed by the completion contractor wasinstalled, on February 2, 2010.  The software has been evaluated and was found to be functional, in accordance withthe previously approved "Concept of Operations" datedMay 19, 2003 [sic].  Comments regarding the system softwarehave been submitted to the completion contractor for aresponse and appropriate action. 
It is anticipated that more comments and clarifications will
arise with regard to the software as we begin to implementand utilize the AVI system.  The operations manual providedby the completion contractor, although informative to anextent, does not provide enough detail to explain all of thecapabilities and limitations of the software.  It is expected that the completion contractor shall fully supportthe Hawaii Department of Transportation ("HDOT") with thesoftware during the operation and maintenance period. 
As a result of the implemented software, the AVI System is
accepted and HDOT shall assume use of the system.  The operation and maintenance phase of the project shallcommence on February 15, 2010.  The completion contractorshall perform operation and maintenance as required bycontract. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As set forth in Article 10, B.1.m. the completion contractor
shall provide training.  Please have the completioncontractor coordinate training for HDOT through our projectmanaging consultant, Bowers + Kubota Consulting, Inc. 
As part of the contract, the completion contractor is
required to furnish and install a total of 3,655transponders (3,170 initial transponders + 485 additionaltransponders by change order) on selected groundtransportation vehicles.  It is requested that thecompletion contractor coordinate this task with the HDOTAirport Operations. 
If you have any questions, please call Mr. Benton Ho, HDOT
Contracts Officer at (808) 587-2130. 
The General Provisions unambiguously define what 
constitutes "final acceptance" under the contract.  Interpreting 
the definition of final acceptance within the plain, ordinary, and accepted sense in common speech, the February 17, 2010 letter does not meet the definition of final acceptance, as provided in Article 1.23 of the General Provisions because it does not state "the entire contract [] has been completed in all respects[.]"  To the contrary, the letter indicates that comments regarding the AVI had already been submitted for "appropriate action[,]" more comments and clarifications were anticipated, TWS was still expected to provide training, and TWS was still required to furnish and install an additional 3,655 transponders. 
TWS argues on appeal that the February 17, 2010 letter 
qualifies as acceptance, citing to numerous DOT employee and agent depositions, including HRCP Rule 30(b)(6) witnesses.  For example, TWS cites to the deposition of a Bowers and Kubota consultant charged with interpreting the contract documents and ensuring compliance that the "software worked as intended" and "met the requirements of the concept of operations."  However, the consultant's interpretations of the contract terms are legal conclusions, based on their experience and expertise, not matters of fact.  See AstenJohnson, Inc. v. Columbia Cas. Co., 562 F.3d 213, 229 n.9 (3d Cir. 2009) (it is not clear that this issue should be resolved without a jury because the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP) 30(b)(6) witness's testimony did not contain factual admissions or the intentions of the parties when forming the contract) (citing R & B Appliance Parts, Inc., v. Amana Co., 258 F.3d 783, 787 (8th Cir. 2001) (distinguishing 
12  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
between matters of fact and conclusions of law in regard to FRCP 
Rule 30(b)(6) depositions)); see also Ellis v. Crockett, 51 Haw. 45, 60, 451 P.2d 814, 824 (1969) (because the HRCP are patterned after the FRCP, interpretation of the FRCP is highly persuasive with respect to the HRCP).  Moreover, none of the deposition witnesses were present at the time of the formation of the Contract and could not testify to the parties' intentions in forming the contract.  In any event, at best, their testimony contradicts the February 17, 2010 letter, leaving in dispute whether TWS satisfied the terms of the Contract. 
Finally, DOT argues that the Circuit Court erred by 
finding as a matter of law that TWS did not judicially admit that the AVI system had not been accepted.  This determination was based on an answer to an interrogatory that TWS did not turn over username and password information for the AVI server to DOT in part, because the system had not been accepted.
9 Again, like the 
other evidence regarding final acceptance, this answer presented the position of TWS and did not establish the final acceptance as a matter of undisputed fact.  Furthermore, it is nonspecific as to date and provides more than one reason for withholding the login information.  We therefore conclude that the Circuit Court 
9 In TWS's responses to DOT's interrogatories filed with the Circuit
Court on May 28, 2014, the pertinent interrogatory and answer read, 
10. What is the username and password for the Automated
Vehicle Identification Server you provided in theperformance of the Contract? 
Answer: Ted's Wiring objects to this request on the grounds that it
is vague and ambiguous. Subject to the foregoing objectionand the Objections, Ted's Wiring responds as follows: 
Ted's Wiring previously offered to provide the DOT with the
username and password for the server subject to threeconditions, including the condition that the DOT provideassurance that Ted's Wiring would not be held liable for anysubsequent problems. Ted's Wiring explained that, in thepast, a DOT employee had entered the server and caused it tofail. 
Because neither this offer nor the system have been
accepted, Ted's Wiring continues to hold the username andpassword in escrow as provided for in the Contract,including but not limited to, the Request for Proposals,Article 10 ยง B(1)(e). 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
did not err when it refused to determine that TWS made a binding 
admission as to the issue of final acceptance. 
Taking all the evidence in the light most favorable to 
the non-moving party, the Circuit Court erred in deciding the February 17, 2010 letter constituted final acceptance. 
e. Effect of the non-waiver provision of the contract. 
DOT contends the Circuit Court erred by not giving 
effect to the non-waiver provisions of the Contract.  
Specifically, that the non-waiver provision would permit DOT to recover even if there was final acceptance.  Given that there is a genuine issue of material fact whether DOT finally accepted the AVI System under the terms of the Contract, we decline to address this issue. 
Based on the foregoing, the May 20, 2016 Judgment 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is vacated and this case is remanded for proceedings not inconsistent with this memorandum opinion. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 26, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
John H. Price and 
Glenn I. Kimura,Deputy Attorneys General,for Defendant-Counterclaimant/Appellant. 
Keith Y. Yamada,
Kelly G. LaPorte, andChristopher T. Goodin,(Cades Schutte)for Plaintiff-Counterclaim Defendant/Appellee Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
14 