  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-11-0000490
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JAMES ZITTNAN, Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
JERROME FIGUEROA, Defendant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR NO. 09-1-1413)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant James Zittnan (Zittnan) by indictment with 
second-degree methamphetamine trafficking, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 712-1240.8 (Supp. 2012). After a jury trial, Zittnan was found guilty as charged. The Circuit Court of 
1
the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  sentenced Zittnan to 10 years
of incarceration, subject to a mandatory minimum term of one
 year. Zittnan appeals from the "Judgment of Conviction and
 Sentence" (Judgment) entered on May 25, 2011. We affirm.
 
I. 
The charges against Zittnan were based on his alleged
 
sale of methamphetamine to an undercover police officer, Honolulu
 
1/
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Police Department Officer Kahn Le (Officer Le). The day after
 
his undercover purchase, Officer Le selected Zittnan's photograph
 (photograph number 2) from a six-picture photographic lineup as
 the person who had sold him crystal methamphetamine. Officer Le
 also filled out a photographic lineup instruction form, in which
 he confirmed that he had selected photograph number 2 and
 handwrote that this person "is known to me as 'J' whom I
 purchased narcotic from [the previous day]." Over Zittnan's
 hearsay objection, the Circuit Court admitted the photographic
 lineup instruction form (Exhibit 2) in evidence. The Circuit
 Court also admitted in evidence the photographic lineup
 containing Zittnan's photograph (Exhibit 1). In addition,
 Officer Le made an in-court identification of Zittnan at trial
 and testified that Zittnan had supplied the crystal
 methamphetamine purchased by Officer Le. 
Zittnan's defense was false or mistaken identification. 
Zittnan testified that he was not the person who delivered
 crystal methamphetamine to Officer Le. Zittnan also called his
 co-defendant, Jerome Figueroa (Figueroa), as a witness. Officer
 Le had identified Figueroa as the person who acted as the
 middleman in setting up Officer Le's purchase of the crystal
 methamphetamine. Figueroa testified that he had pleaded no
 contest to his role in the crystal methamphetamine transaction
 with Officer Le. Figueroa further testified that Zittnan was not
 involved in the transaction, but that another male, who Figueroa
 refused to identify but referred to as "D-Boy," had supplied the
 crystal methamphetamine.
 
II.
 
On appeal, Zittnan argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
in overruling his hearsay objection and in admitting Exhibit 2,
 which contained Officer Le's handwritten statement identifying
 Zittnan as the person who provided the crystal methamphetamine. 
Zittnan contends that "although State's Exhibit 2 related to
 Officer Le's prior identification of [Zittnan], it should not be
 construed as a prior identification within the meaning of
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Hawai'i Rules of Evidence (HRE)] Rule 802.1(3) because it was a 
'writing' that was intended to attack [Zittnan's] credibility." 
We conclude that Zittnan's argument is without merit. 
Zittnan objected to the admission of Exhibit 2 on the
 
ground of hearsay. HRE Rule 802.1(3) (1993), however, provides
 that a statement of prior identification that satisfies the
 requirements of HRE Rule 802.1(3) is not excluded by the hearsay
 rule. HRE Rule 802.1(3) provides:
 
The following statements previously made by
witnesses who testify at the trial or hearing are
not excluded by the hearsay rule:
 
.  .  .
 
(3)	 Prior identification. The declarant is
 
subject to cross-examination concerning the
subject matter of the declarant's statement,
and the statement is one of identification of
 a person made after perceiving that person[.]
 
Officer Ke was subject to cross-examination concerning
 
his written statement identifying Zittnan as the person involved
 
in the drug transaction, and Officer Ke's statement was "one of
 identification of a person made after perceiving that person." 
See id. Therefore, Officer Ke's prior identification statement
 
set forth in Exhibit 2 satisfied the requirements of HRE Rule
 802.1(3) and was not subject to exclusion on the ground of
 hearsay. See State v. Motta, 66 Haw. 254, 262, 659 P.2d 745,
 
750-51 (1983) (admitting witness's composite sketch of suspect
 under HRE Rule 802.1(3)). 
Zittnan cites no authority to support the proposition
 
that a written statement is ineligible for admission as a
 statement of prior identification under HRE Rule 802.1(3). 
Indeed, HRE Rule 801 (Supp. 2012) defines "[s]tatement" to
 include "an assertion in a writing" for purposes of the hearsay
 rules. Moreover, Zittnan did not object to the admission of
 Exhibit 2 on the ground he now raises on appeal -- that it "was
 intended to attack [Zittnan's] credibility" -- and his argument
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
on that basis was therefore waived. See State v. Matias, 57 Haw.
 
96, 101, 550 P.2d 900, 904 (1976) ("[T]he making of an objection
 
upon a specific ground is a waiver of all other objections."
 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)). We conclude
 that the Circuit Court did not err in overruling Zittnan's
 hearsay objection and admitting Officer Ke's statement of prior
 identification contained in Exhibit 2.
 
III. 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 24, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
William H. Jameson, Jr.
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
James M. Anderson Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 