FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
–––o0o–––
 CAAP-14-0000991 
SHARON LAPETER, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ALFRED LAPETER, Defendant-Appellee
and 
JOY MADEMBA-SY YANAGIDA, Real Party in Interest-Appellant
(FC-D NO. 12-1-0364) 
and 
CAAP-14-0000992 
SHARON LAPETER, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ALFRED LAPETER, Defendant-Appellant
(FC-D NO. 12-1-0364) 
NOS. CAAP-14-0000991 and CAAP-14-0000992 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
MARCH 29, 2019 
REIFURTH, PRESIDING JUDGE, CHAN AND HIRAOKA, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY CHAN, J. 
These consolidated appeals arise out of divorce 
proceedings between Sharon LaPeter (Wife) and Alfred LaPeter 
(Husband) that involved the division of real property assets acquired during the marriage. Among the parties' significant  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assets was Centennial Square shopping center (Centennial) located 
in Idaho, which Wife and Husband jointly owned through a limited liability company, Centennial Square, LLC (the LLC or Centennial LLC). The Family Court of the Second Circuit (Family Court)
1 
entered a Divorce Decree (Decree), and subsequently an Amended Divorce Decree (Amended Decree), that awarded Husband all of the parties' interest in Centennial LLC. Wife filed motions for post-decree relief and the Family Court issued Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and an Order memorializing its rulings on Wife's post-decree motions (Post-Decree FOF/COL/Order). 
Husband and Husband's counsel each appealed from the 
Post-Decree FOF/COL/Order, and we ordered the consolidation of their respective appeals. On appeal, Husband contends that: (1) the Family Court erred in granting Wife's requests for post-decree relief because the Family Court was not permitted to reopen the valuation of Centennial from the date of the conclusion of the evidentiary part of trial (DOCOEPOT or end of trial) and modify the Decree based on evidence of post-trial changes in value; (2) the Family Court abused its discretion in imposing sanctions against Husband because the sanctions were based on an erroneous premise, there was insufficient evidence to support the sanctions, and it failed to notify Husband of the legal basis for the sanctions; and (3) the Family Court abused its discretion in awarding Wife her attorney's fees and costs. On appeal, Husband's counsel contends that the Family Court erred in reopening the DOCOEPOT valuation of Centennial and in concluding that she had engaged in acts of professional misconduct, ruling that she may be jointly and severally liable with Husband for a total of $424,959 in sanctions and fees, and referring her conduct to the Hawai# i Office of Disciplinary 
Counsel (ODC) for investigation. 
As explained below, we: (1) affirm the Family Court's 
reopening and revising of its valuation of Centennial pursuant to 
1 The Honorable Barclay E. MacDonald presided over the proceedings
relevant to this appeal. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai# i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 60(b)(2) based on the 
post-trial, pre-decree evidence of the agreements to sell 
Centennial and the LLC; (2) affirm the orders for immediate payment of the $278,387 equalization payment awarded in the Amended Decree and one-half of the Centennial escrow impound account of $63,659.50; (3) reverse the sanctions imposed on Husband’s counsel and her referral to ODC; (4) vacate the sanctions imposed on Husband; (5) vacate the award of attorney's fees to Wife; and (6) remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this Opinion.
I. BACKGROUND 
A. Pre-Decree Events 
Prior to Wife filing for divorce in August 2012, Wife 
and Husband had been married for 36 years. Both were real estate professionals. During their marriage, they acquired significant real estate assets, including their residence on Maui (Maui Residence) and four shopping centers on the mainland, including Centennial.
2 Centennial was owned by Centennial LLC, which in 
turn was jointly owned by Wife and Husband. Centennial LLC's primary asset was Centennial, and the LLC was formed for the sole purpose of managing Centennial. 
The divorce trial was held on March 21, 22, and 25, 
2013. The DOCOEPOT was March 25, 2013. During the trial, the parties presented conflicting evidence regarding the value of Centennial, with Husband's appraiser valuing the property at $3,050,000 and Wife's appraiser valuing the property at $4,400,000.
3 The Family Court also received evidence that the 
tax assessed value of Centennial was $4,039,675. 
On August 22, 2013, after the end of trial but before 
the Family Court issued the Decree dividing the marital estate, 
2 The four shopping centers were the Centennial and the Park Plaza
shopping center in Idaho, the Roy West shopping center in Utah, and the
Ontario Town Square shopping center in Oregon. 
3 Wife proposed that Centennial be awarded to Husband. Husband was in 
favor of the Family Court awarding Centennial to him if the court accepted hisappraiser's valuation, but argued that Centennial should be awarded to Wife ifthe Family Court accepted her appraiser's valuation. 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Husband received an unsolicited offer of $4,400,000 from Teton 
Village, LLC (Teton) for the purchase of Centennial. Teton was owned by Travis J. Johnson (Johnson) and K. Darby Smith (Smith). 
Husband asserted and Wife did not dispute that Teton's 
offer, if accepted, may have triggered approximately $400,000 in prepayment penalties under a Promissory Note (Note) and Deed of Trust encumbering Centennial.
4 The Deed of Trust and Note 
contained a due on sale clause and prepayment penalties that imposed restrictions on the sale of Centennial or payment of the Note before its July 1, 2015 maturity date. 
On August 26, 2013, Husband submitted a counteroffer to 
Teton, offering to sell Centennial for $4,500,000, with Teton to assume the existing Note and pay the lender a one percent loan assumption fee. The counteroffer was structured to avoid the prepayment penalties under the Note and Deed of Trust.
5 The 
counteroffer was contingent on Husband being awarded Centennial in his divorce proceedings, and it provided for a closing date of November 15, 2013. On August 29, 2013, Teton accepted Husband's counteroffer and an agreement (Centennial Agreement) was formed.
B. Divorce Decree 
On September 4, 2013, the Family Court issued the 
Decree and corresponding Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law 
(FOF/COL). The Family Court ordered the parties to sell the Maui Residence and split the net proceeds; awarded Roy West Center, LLC, which owned the Roy West shopping center, to Wife; and awarded the Ontario Town Square shopping center, the Parkway Plaza shopping center, and Centennial LLC to Husband. The shopping center assets were awarded to Wife and Husband subject to all indebtedness secured by the assets awarded. 
In determining the fair market value of Centennial, the 
4 In 2005, Centennial LLC had executed the $4,080,000 Note, which was
secured by the Deed of Trust encumbering Centennial, to obtain a loan to
purchase Centennial. 
5 The Deed of Trust permitted a one time transfer of Centennial without
incurring prepayment penalties upon the assumption of the Note and Deed ofTrust by a buyer approved by the lender and the payment of a loan assumptionfee of one percent of the Note's outstanding balance. 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Family Court made numerous findings detailing the conflicting 
evidence presented on Centennial's valuation by the parties at the divorce trial. The Family Court did not adopt the valuation offered by either Wife or Husband,
6 but instead found that 
"[b]ased on all of the credible evidence, it is reasonable and just to conclude the fair market value of Centennial Square is the Tax Assessed Value of $4,039,675." 
Based on its valuation and distribution of the marital 
assets and liabilities, the Family Court concluded that Husband would owe Wife a "property division (equalization) payment" of $556,754.00. The Family Court ordered that the equalization payment be made from Husband's share of the proceeds from the sale of the Maui Residence or the net proceeds from the sale of any of the shopping centers awarded to Husband. The Family Court also ordered Husband to pay Wife $150,000 from his share of the proceeds from the sale of the Maui Residence "as and for contribution to Wife's legal fees and costs and for committed waste and as and for equitable deviation."
7 
C. Amended Divorce Decree 
On September 16, 2013, Husband and Wife both filed 
motions to correct or reconsider the Decree and the corresponding FOF/COL. Among other things, Husband's motion sought to correct a mathematical error in the computation of the equalization payment, namely, the Family Court had awarded the full difference 
6 The Family Court found that an accurate appraisal of Centennial by
either Wife's or Husband's appraiser "was particularly difficult due to lack
of suitable 'comparables', necessitating the consideration of listings and ofproperty sales in other geographical areas and states"; that the incomecapitalization method used by the appraisers was not convincing; and that theconclusions and deposition testimony of both appraisers were "mutuallyunpersuasive." 
7 The Family Court's determination that Husband's conduct warranted an
equitable deviation and that he had committed waste arose out of Husband'sinvolvement with Sondra Kantor (Kantor), whom Husband described as hisgirlfriend/significant other. Kantor had recently gone through a divorce, andthe gross marital estate of Kantor and her former husband was over $96million. Husband and Kantor had entered into a Cohabitation Agreement whichthe Family Court construed as providing evidence that Husband had violated itspretrial financial restraining, financial disclosure, and other orders. The Family Court also found that money Husband spent on Kantor, includingexpenditures when they traveled together, constituted waste. 
5  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
($556,754)8 between the allocations to Husband and Wife instead 
of one-half of the difference ($278,378) necessary to equalize 
the allocations. Neither Wife nor Husband challenged the Family Court's valuation of Centennial. 
On October 23, 2013, the Family Court issued the 
Amended Decree and corresponding Amended Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (Amended FOF/COL). Among other things, the Family Court corrected the mathematical error in computing the equalization payment owed by Husband and reduced the payment from $556,754 to $278,378. The Family Court also modified the division of shopping center escrow impound accounts
9 to provide 
that "in the unlikely event a shopping center is sold and the sale closes in 2013," the escrow impound account associated with that shopping center shall be divided equally between Husband and Wife.
10 Neither party appealed from the Amended Decree.
D. Cancellation of the Centennial Agreement and Entering of the
LLC Agreement 
While the parties' motions to correct or reconsider the 
Decree and the corresponding FOF/COL were still pending, Teton cancelled the Centennial Agreement.
11 On October 9, 2013, 
Johnson and Husband signed a document terminating the Centennial 
8 The actual full difference was $556,756, but the Family Court awarded
$556,754. 
9 Escrow impound accounts were accounts reserved for the payment of
certain accruing shopping center expenses. Centennial, Roy West shopping
center, and Parkway Plaza shopping center had existing escrow impoundaccounts. 
10 The Decree had previously awarded the escrow impound account
associated with a particular shopping center to the party awarded the shoppingcenter. 
11 Johnson, one of Teton's owners, testified in his deposition that
within a couple of weeks of the August 29, 2013 signed counteroffer fromHusband, he received a loan assumption package from the lender, Wells Fargo.Johnson explained that he immediately decided to cancel the CentennialAgreement because the loan assumption package required him and his businesspartner, Smith, to "[b]asically divulge every piece of financial information"for the eighteen commercial properties they owned, which they were unwillingto do. Johnson stated that he informed Husband by a phone call or an emailthat he was not going to complete the loan assumption package. 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Agreement and releasing Teton's earnest money deposit to Teton.12 
With an effective date of October 23, 2013, Husband as 
seller and Johnson and Smith as buyers entered into an agreement 
for the purchase of Husband's interest in Centennial LLC (LLC Agreement). The LLC Agreement was signed by the buyers on October 7, 2013 and by Husband on October 8, 2013. The LLC Agreement provided for the transfer of Husband's 100 percent interest in Centennial LLC in two phases -- (1) the transfer of a 9 percent interest to buyers on October 23, 2013 (Effective Date) and (2) the automatic transfer of the remaining 91 percent interest to buyers on the maturity date of the Note
13 or July 31, 
2015, whichever came first (Final Transfer Date). The LLC Agreement stated that the purchase price for Centennial LLC was based on a total value of Centennial of $4,500,000 and would be paid as follows: (1) a payment of $948,387.91 to Husband on or before the Effective Date; (2) assumption through the LLC of the obligation to pay the Note in the current amount of $3,541,612.09; (3) release to Husband of the $10,000 earnest money submitted for the Centennial Agreement; and (4) payment to Husband on the Final Transfer Date of amounts held by the lender in the escrow impound account as of the Effective Date (anticipated to be $127,319). Although Husband retained a 91 percent interest in the LLC until the Final Transfer Date, all financial responsibility, both benefit and burden, regarding the LLC's interests were transferred to buyers as of the Effective Date, and Husband's 91 percent interest generally had no voting rights after the Effective Date. 
The LLC Agreement explained that the sale of Husband's 
interests in the LLC was structured to avoid triggering the due on sale provisions and prepayment penalties in the Note and Deed of Trust. The LLC Agreement stated: 
12 Husband testified that the buyers notified him sometime around
October 1, 2013 that they were not going to go forward on the Centennial
Agreement and it took a few days to draw up the document terminating theagreement and releasing the earnest money. 
13 The maturity date of the Note was July 1, 2015. 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Note  and Deed of Trust  have extensive restrictions and 
provisions designed to assure that the Note  is timely and
fully paid, but not prepaid, including due on sale
provisions and prepayment penalties. But for these restrictions, [Husband] would at this time sell his entireinterest in [Centennial LLC] or directly in [Centennial] to
the Buyers  who have made arrangements to pay the Note  in 
full. However, none of the parties want to trigger the
prepayment penalties and therefore desire to transitionownership in a manner they believe to be in material
compliance with the Note  and Deed of Trust . Therefore,
pursuant to this Agreement , the complete ownership and
control of [Centennial LLC] and [Centennial] shall over timebe transferred to the Buyers  with the full purchase price
paid at this time but under terms calculated to be inmaterial compliance with the Note  and Deed of Trust . This 
Agreement  shall be interpreted and construed consistent with
these objectives.
E. Wife's Post-Decree Motions for Relief and the Family Court's
Post-Decree FOF/COL/Order 
As of the Family Court's issuance of its Amended Decree 
and Amended FOF/COL on October 23, 2013, Husband had not 
disclosed the offer and counteroffer regarding Centennial, the Centennial Agreement, or the LLC Agreement to the Family Court or Wife. Beginning on November 15, 2013, Wife filed a series of motions seeking post-decree relief based on allegations that Husband (and Husband's counsel) had fraudulently concealed the sale of Centennial and the LLC. 
On November 15, 2013, Wife filed a motion for post-
decree relief which, among other things, alleged that Husband had sold his interest in Centennial and sought enforcement of Husband's obligation under the Amended Decree to make the equalization payment out of the proceeds of the sale. On that same date, Wife filed, and the Family Court granted, an ex parte motion for temporary restraining order (TRO). The TRO restrained Husband from: (1) concealing or failing to disclose to the Family Court or Wife the sale, transfer, or assignment of Centennial or the LLC; (2) structuring or characterizing any transaction regarding Centennial or the LLC in any manner which avoids the equalization payment owed to Wife under the Amended Decree; and (3) transferring, encumbering, or otherwise disposing of any proceeds from the sale or transfer of Centennial or the assets owned by the LLC. On December 20, 2013, the Family Court issued an order striking the TRO, but freezing up to $470,000 in 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Husband's personal account at US Bank until further order. Based 
on information she had obtained in discovery regarding transactions involving Centennial and the LLC, Wife filed an amended motion for post-decree relief on December 12, 2013, seeking relief under HFCR Rule 60(b), and a second amended motion for post-decree relief on December 13, 2013. Through these post-decree motions, Wife sought relief that included: (1) reopening the valuation of Centennial and increasing it from $4,039,675 to $4,500,000 pursuant to HFCR Rule 60(b)(2) (newly discovered evidence) and HFCR Rule 60(b)(3) (fraud or other misconduct); (2) reopening the amount of the equalization payment due to Wife and increasing it by $230,162.50 to reflect the increased valuation of Centennial pursuant to HFCR Rules 60(b)(2) and (b)(3); (3) the Family Court's determination that Husband's LLC Agreement constituted a sale of Centennial within the meaning of the Amended Decree that triggered Husband's obligation to make the $278,378 equalization payment and enforcement of Husband's obligation to make such payment; (4) the award to Wife of one-half of the escrow impound account held for Centennial; (5) the imposition of additional sanctions against Husband for his "continuing and flagrant violations of court orders and his fraud upon the [Family] Court and [Wife]"; (6) the imposition of sanctions against Husband's counsel, to the extent it is demonstrated that she participated in or countenanced Husband's misconduct; (7) the disqualification of Husband's counsel from representing Husband if a conflict in their interests is shown; and (8) the award to Wife of her attorney's fees and costs incurred in seeking post-decree relief. 
On February 6, 2014, the Family Court held an 
evidentiary hearing on Wife's motions for post-decree relief. In explaining why he did not disclose the post-trial arrangements to sell Centennial or the LLC before the issuance of the Decree or the Amended Decree, Husband testified that it was his understanding that the DOCOEPOT "was the time when all the evidence was presented, the trial was held, and everybody tried to show what they felt everything was worth. And after that 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
date, no more evidence could be submitted." Husband testified 
that he did not believe he was under any obligation to disclose to the Family Court the increase or decrease in the value of marital assets after the DOCOEPOT. 
Husband further testified that during a phone call with 
Wife in November or early December 2013, he told Wife that he had not sold Centennial, but had "an agreement on it" and had "asked [his] attorney to turn those documents over to [Wife's] attorney."  Husband was not certain when he instructed 
Husband's counsel to release the documents to Wife's attorney, but noted that he "did see an E-mail that [he] sent [Husband's counsel] on November 20th, instructing her to release the documents on the 25th of November."  The record indicates that 
on December 3, 2013, Husband, through Husband's counsel, emailed to Wife's attorneys the LLC Agreement, which provided for a cash payment to Husband of $948,387.91 on or before October 23, 2013, other documents related to the LLC Agreement, and the Centennial Agreement.
16 1514
14 The record shows that on November 13, 2013, Wife forwarded to Husband
an email she had received on October 29, 2013 from the Assumptions Group at
Wells Fargo Commercial Mortgage -- Servicing regarding a "Non-PermittedTransfer Request" on Centennial LLC's loan. Husband responded, "This is whenI tried to sell Centennial and the buyer tried to assume the loan and decidedhe did not want to do that and that sale was cancelled. You can ignore thisemail." 
15 Husband also testified that in response to a letter dated October 21,
2013 from Wife's attorney to Husband's counsel stating that it appears thatHusband has sold Centennial and attaching an invoice from a Centennial tenantstating that the LLC was under new ownership, he "immediately sent all thedocuments" to Husband's counsel and instructed her to turn them over because he had "nothing to hide[.]" Husband testified that Husband's counsel advised him that he should not turn over the documents because Wife had no right tothem, and Husband indicated that he deferred to Husband's counsel's advice. 
16 In its Post-Decree FOF/COL/Order, discussed infra, the Family Court
found that "[n]either [Husband] nor [Husband's] counsel provided anydisclosures regarding the terms, nature and/or extent of any sale or transferof Centennial, or any documentation pertaining to any such sale or transfer,until December 18, 2013." (Emphasis added). After the Post-Decree FOF/COL/Order was filed, Husband's counsel filed a motion for reconsiderationarguing that this finding and related findings were incorrect becauseHusband's counsel had emailed documents concerning the LLC Agreement and the
Centennial Agreement to Wife's counsel on December 3, 2013. On May 5, 2014,
prior to filing her motion for reconsideration, Husband's counsel hadwithdrawn from representing Husband and therefore filed the reconsiderationmotion on her own behalf. Husband's counsel attached an email transmittal and 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On June 23, 2014, the Family Court ruled on Wife's 
post-decree motions for relief and filed its Post-Decree 
FOF/COL/Order. In its Post-Decree FOF/COL/Order, the Family Court: (1) pursuant to HFCR Rule 60(b)(2) and (b)(3), reopened and revised its valuation of Centennial from $4,039,675 to $4,500,000 and awarded Wife an additional equalization payment of $230,162.50 based on its revised valuation of Centennial; (2) ruled that the LLC Agreement constituted a sale of Centennial within the meaning of the Amended Decree, thereby triggering Husband's obligation to make the $278,387 equalization payment required under the Amended Decree, which the Family Court ordered Husband to pay forthwith; (3) ruled that the sale of Centennial closed in 2013 within the meaning of the Amended Decree, thereby triggering Wife's right under the Amended Decree to one-half of Centennial's escrow impound account, or $63,659.50; (4) awarded $300,000 in sanctions against Husband to be paid to Wife, in addition to the $150,000 in sanctions and attorney's fees previously awarded to Wife in the Amended Decree; and (5) awarded $124,959.17 to Wife for attorney's fees she incurred in seeking post-decree relief. The Family Court further ruled that Husband and Husband's counsel would be jointly and severally liable for the $300,000 in additional sanctions and the $124,959.17 in attorney's fees awarded to Wife;
17 referred Husband's counsel to 
the documents she asserted she had emailed to Wife's counsel, which included
the LLC Agreement, wire instructions to Husband's US Bank account, and theCentennial Agreement. In response to Husband's counsel's reconsiderationmotion, Wife acknowledged that Husband's counsel had emailed these documentson December 3, 2013, but stated that Wife's counsel "had already received the
same  documents from the buyer about 10 days earlier." Wife asserted that 
Husband and Husband's counsel did not disclose what happened to the
$948,387.91 Husband received from the LLC Agreement until Husband's counselsent Wife's counsel an email on December 18, 2013 containing redacted bankstatements of Husband's US Bank account. 
17 The Family Court's ruling on this point states: 
Although the Court is unable to determine the precise level
and share of misconduct, fraud and concealment attributable toHusband and his counsel, respectively, it may be fair andequitable that Husband and his counsel be jointly and severallyliable for the payment of all attorney's fees and sanctions owingto Wife arising from nondisclosure of Husband[']s sale andtransfer of Centennial from and after August 22, 2013. The matter of the allocation of their respective liability for such award may 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ODC for investigation with respect to whether she violated 
Hawai# i Rules of Professional Conduct (HRPC) Rule 3.3; and 
disqualified Husband's counsel from any further representation of Husband.
18 
Husband and Husband's counsel separately appealed from 
the Post-Decree FOF/COL/Order, and we granted the parties' joint motion to consolidate the appeals.
19 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. HFCR Rule 60(b) Motions for Relief 
The standard of review for the grant or denial of a 
HFCR Rule 60(b) motion is whether there has been an abuse of discretion. De Mello v. De Mello, 3 Haw. App. 165, 169, 646 P.2d 409, 412 (1982). 
Under the abuse of discretion standard of review, the
appellate court is not authorized to disturb the familycourt's decision unless (1) the family court disregardedrules or principles of law or practice to the substantialdetriment of a party litigant; (2) the family court failedto exercise its equitable discretion; or (3) the familycourt's decision clearly exceeds the bounds of reason. 
Wong v. Wong, 87 Hawai# i 475, 486, 960 P.2d 145, 156 (App. 1998) 
(brackets omitted) (quoting Bennett v. Bennett, 8 Haw. App. 415, 
be determined by them, or by a court of competent jurisdiction orother satisfactory and fair process. 
18 Of note, Husband's counsel withdrew from representing Husband on
May 5, 2014, before the Family Court issued its Post-Decree FOF/COL/Order. 
19 On March 27, 2014, Husband had filed a Chapter 11 bankruptcy petition
in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of Arizona. Husband subsequently filed a notice that the Bankruptcy Court had filed an orderlifting the bankruptcy stay for the limited purpose of permitting Husband toprosecute an appeal from the Post-Decree FOF/COL/Order. This court consolidated Husband's appeal and Husband's counsel's appeal from the Post-Decree FOF/COL/Order in response to a joint motion filed by all parties toconsolidate the appeals. Thereafter, because the Post-Decree FOF/COL/Orderruled that Husband and Husband's counsel were jointly and severally liable forsanctions, and because the order lifting the bankruptcy stay to permitHusband's appeal did not address Husband's counsel's appeal, this court askedthe parties to address whether there was a bankruptcy stay in effect withrespect to Husband's counsel's appeal. In response, Husband submitted a"Stipulated Order Confirming Plan of Reorganization," approved by theBankruptcy Court on October 7, 2016, which states, in relevant part, that"nothing hereto, should prevent the Hawaii Court of Appeals from proceedingforward with the Debtor's appeal, including any potential action related to[Husband's counsel] and her inclusion in the Reorganized Debtor's Hawaii CourtAppeal." Therefore, it appears that there is no bankruptcy stay in effectthat would prevent this court from deciding this consolidated appeal. 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
426, 807 P.2d 597, 603 (1991)).
B. Sanctions 
"Regardless of whether sanctions are imposed pursuant 
to statute, circuit court rule, or the trial court's inherent 
powers, such awards are reviewed for an abuse of discretion." Kaina v. Gellman, 119 Hawai# i 324, 329, 197 P.3d 776, 781 (App. 
2008) (citation omitted).
C. Attorney's Fees
 "The trial court's grant or denial of attorney's fees 
and costs is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard." 
Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp., 120 Hawai# i 181, 197, 202 P.3d 
1226, 1242 (2009) (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION 
A. Revised Valuation of Centennial 
The Family Court reopened and increased the valuation 
of Centennial and increased the equalization payment owed to Wife pursuant to HFCR Rules 60(b)(2) and (b)(3).
20 The Family Court 
determined that Husband's post-trial agreements to sell Centennial and the LLC constituted newly discovered evidence which Husband had a duty to disclose and which he fraudulently failed to disclose. 
Husband and Husband's counsel argue that the Family 
Court erred in granting such relief under HFCR 60(b)(2) and 
20 HFCR Rules 60(b)(2) and (b)(3) provide: 
On motion and upon such terms as are just, the court may
relieve a party or a party's legal representative from any or all
of the provisions of a final judgment, order, or proceeding forthe following reasons: 
. . . 
(2) newly discovered evidence which by due diligence could
not have been discovered in time to move for a new trial under Rule 59(b) of these rules or toreconsider, alter, or amend under Rule 59(e); 
(3) fraud (whether heretofore denominated intrinsic orextrinsic), misrepresentation, or other misconduct ofan adverse party[.] 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(b)(3) because: (1) the Family Court had no power to reopen the 
valuation of Centennial based on post-trial evidence; and (2) Husband did not have a duty to disclose the post-trial agreements to sell Centennial and the LLC and thus did not engage in fraud in failing to disclose the agreements.
i. The Family Court's Power to Reopen Valuation of Marital
Estate Property Based on Post-Trial Evidence 
This case presents the discrete question of whether the 
Family Court had the power to reopen the valuation of Centennial 
based on new post-trial, pre-decree evidence. If the Family Court had no power to reopen the valuation of Centennial based on post-trial evidence, then the requirements for relief under HFCR Rule 60(b)(2) (that the newly discovered evidence must be admissible and would probably have changed the outcome of the proceedings) would not be satisfied. 
See Omerod v. Heirs of 
Kaheananui, 116 Hawai# i 239, 277, 172 P.3d 983, 1021 (2007) 
(discussing the requirements for Hawai
#i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 60(b)(2)). In addition, if the Family Court had no power to reopen the valuation of Centennial based on post-trial evidence, there clearly would be no duty on Husband's part to disclose the post-trial evidence of his agreements to sell Centennial and the LLC and therefore no fraud for failing to disclose such evidence and no relief available under HFCR Rule 60(b)(3). 
We begin our analysis by providing an overview of 
Hawai# i's marital property division scheme. In Hawai# i
 , "there is 
no fixed rule for determining the amount of property to be awarded each spouse in a divorce action other than as set forth in [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] § 580–47." Tougas v. Tougas, 76 Hawai# i 19, 26, 868 P.2d 437, 444 (1994) (block quote format, 
brackets, ellipsis points, and citation omitted). Pursuant to HRS § 580-47,  the family court is granted broad discretion to 
21
21 HRS § 580-47(a) (2018) provides in relevant part: 
(a) Upon granting a divorce, or thereafter if, in addition
to the powers granted in subsections (c) and (d),jurisdiction of those matters is reserved under the decree 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
divide the marital estate according to what is "just and 
equitable" under the facts and circumstances of each case. Id. at 26, 868 P.2d at 444; Collins v. Wassell, 133 Hawai# i
 34, 42, 
323 P.3d 1216, 1224 (2014); Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 Hawai# i 
126, 137, 276 P.3d 695, 706 (2012). 
The HRS § 580-47(a) directive to the family court to do 
what is just and equitable under the circumstances requires that each case be decided upon its own facts and circumstances. Tougas, 76 Hawai
#i at 26, 868 P.2d at 444. The discretion to 
divide property of the marital estate based on what is just and equitable "does not mean that the court may do whatever pleases it," but instead means that "the court has a range of choice, and that its decision will not be disturbed as long as it stays within that range and is not influenced by any mistake of law." Id. (block quote format, brackets, ellipsis points, and citation omitted). 
In the context of marital property division, the 
Hawai# i Supreme Court has observed that 
"discretion" denotes the absence of a hard and fast rule. 
When involved as a guide to judicial action it means a sounddiscretion, that is to say, a discretion exercised notarbitrarily or wilfully, but with regard to what is rightand equitable under the circumstances and the law, anddirected by the reason and conscience of the judge to a justresult. 
Id. (block quote format altered; brackets and citation omitted). 
In addition to HRS § 580-47, Hawai# i case law has 
created a framework based on the "partnership model of marriage" 
to guide the family court in its exercise of discretion in 
by agreement of both parties or by order of court after
finding that good cause exists, the court may make anyfurther orders as shall appear just and equitable . . . (3)finally dividing and distributing the estate of the parties,real, personal, or mixed, whether community, joint, orseparate . . . . In making these further orders, the courtshall take into consideration: the respective merits of theparties, the relative abilities of the parties, thecondition in which each party will be left by the divorce,the burdens imposed upon either party for the benefit of thechildren of the parties, the concealment of or failure todisclose income or an asset, or violation of a restrainingorder issued under section 580-10(a) or (b), if any, byeither party, and all other circumstances of the case. 
15  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dividing property of the marital estate. Kakinami, 127 Hawai# i 
at 137, 276 P.3d at 706. While recognizing that "there is no 
fixed rule regarding property division other than what is provided in HRS § 580-47," the Hawai# i Supreme Court, pursuant to 
the partnership model, has endorsed and permitted the use of the following five categories of net market values (NMVs) as guidance in dividing property in divorce cases: 
Category 1. The . . . (NMV), plus or minus, of all property
separately owned by one spouse on the date of marriage (DOM)but excluding the NMV attributable to property that issubsequently legally gifted by the owner to the otherspouse, to both spouses, or to a third party. 
Category 2. The increase in the NMV of all property whose
NMV on the DOM is included in category 1 and that the owner
separately owns continuously from the DOM to the DOCOEPOT. . . . 
Category 3. The date-of-acquisition NMV, plus or minus, of
property separately acquired by gift or inheritance duringthe marriage but excluding the NMV attributable to propertythat is subsequently legally gifted by the owner to theother spouse, to both spouses, or to a third party. 
Category 4. The increase in the NMV of all property whose
NMV on the date of acquisition during the marriage is
included in category 3 and that the owner separately ownscontinuously from the date of acquisition to the DOCOEPOT. 
Category 5. The difference between the NMVs, plus or minus,
of all property owned by one or both of the spouses on the
DOCOEPOT minus the NMVs, plus or minus, includable incategories 1, 2, 3, and 4. 
Id. at 137-38, 276 P.3d at 706-07 (block quote format altered; 
internal quotation marks, certain brackets, and citations omitted). 
The NMVs in Categories 1 and 3 are the parties' capital
contributions to the marital partnership. The NMVs in Categories 2 and 4 are the during-the-marriage increase inthe NMVs of the Categories 1 and 3 properties owned atDOCOEPOT. Category 5 is the DOCOEPOT NMV in excess of theCategories 1, 2, 3, and 4 NMVs. In other words, Category 5is the net profit or loss of the marital partnership afterdeducting the partners' capital contributions and theduring-the-marriage increase in the NMV of property that wasa capital contribution to the partnership and is still ownedat DOCOEPOT. 
Tougas, 76 Hawai# i at 27, 868 P.2d at 445 (quoting Gardner v. 
Gardner, 8 Haw. App. 461, 467, 810 P.2d 239, 240 (1991)). 
Under the partnership-model framework endorsed by 
Hawai# i case law to divide property of the marital estate, the 
16  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
DOCOEPOT is used in determining the value of property. Here, 
Husband and Husband's counsel argue that because Hawai# i case law 
has endorsed a property division framework that ties the valuation of property to the DOCOEPOT, it must be that the family court lacks the power to modify the value of property in the marital estate based on post-trial evidence. Hawai# i case law, 
however, has not specifically addressed the issue of whether the family court can consider post-trial evidence of valuation that arises before the effective date of a decree granting the divorce and dividing the marital estate. 
Although Husband and Husband's counsel's claim is a 
plausible interpretation of the existing Hawai# i case law, we do 
not believe it is correct. 
Instead, viewed in the context of HRS 
§ 580-47, we conclude that the Hawai# i case law establishes a 
general rule that adopts the DOCOEPOT as the date to use in valuing property in the marital estate, rather than a complete bar to the family court ever considering post-trial, pre-decree evidence of valuation. We further conclude that this general rule is subject to exceptions that permit the family court, in unusual cases, to consider post-trial, pre-decree evidence of valuation when such consideration is necessary to make a just and equitable distribution of the marital estate.
22 
22 There are sound and practical reasons for a general rule which uses
the close of the evidentiary part of trial as the date for valuing marital
assets, instead of the issuance of the divorce decree that divides theproperty. The trial is the proceeding at which the family court receives andconsiders evidence of valuation, and in gathering and marshaling evidence ofvaluation, the parties need a set time on which to focus. The end of trial provides a concrete date on which the parties can focus their evidence, incontrast to the issuance of the divorce decree, which involves a future datethat may be unknown and difficult to predict. The general rule which uses theend of trial as the appropriate day for valuing the marital estate has thebenefit of avoiding the uncertainty, the litigation costs, and theadministrative expenses of having to update and litigate valuation evidenceuntil the divorce decree is issued. In the typical case, where the divorcedecree is issued shortly after the conclusion of trial or where the value ofproperty in the marital estate is relatively stable, the difference betweenthe valuation of the estate at the end of trial and when the divorce decree is issued will not be significant. Given these considerations, we conclude thatordinarily, applying the general rule and valuing the marital estate as of theDOCOEPOT will result in the just and equitable division of the marital estate. 
We recognize, however, that there may be exceptional circumstances where
application of the general rule will not result in a just and equitabledivision of the marital estate. For example, where there is a drastic change 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Our conclusion is consistent with the language of HRS § 
580-47. As noted, HRS § 580-47 grants the family court broad 
discretion to divide marital property according to what is "just and equitable" under the facts and circumstances of each case. This grant of broad discretion denotes the absence of fixed rules that would preclude the family court from considering evidence necessary to make a just and equitable property division. In addition, HRS § 580-47 authorizes the family court to make orders dividing the marital estate "[u]pon granting a divorce" and requires the family court in making such orders to consider various factors, including "the condition in which each party will be left by the divorce." These provisions indicate that events that occur up until the divorce is granted may be considered when necessary to achieve a just and equitable property division.
 2 3
in the valuation of a marital asset after trial but before the decree 
distributing the asset is issued, the failure to consider post-trial, pre-decree evidence of valuation may result in an unjust and inequitabledistribution of the marital estate. We conclude that the family court has thepower and discretion, in exceptional cases, to consider post-trial, pre-decreeevidence when necessary to make a just and equitable division of the maritalestate. Cases from other jurisdictions support this conclusion. See Grinaker v. Grinaker, 553 N.W.2d 204, 208-09 (N.D. 1996) (recognizing that although"[c]ommon sense dictates that marital property be valued as of the date oftrial, rather than the date of distribution," "relief may be justified inextraordinary cases when a substantial, unanticipated change in valuation ofan asset occurs after trial but before distribution"); Murphy v. Murphy, 46A.3d 1093, 1096-99 (D.C. Ct. App. 2012); see also, Brett R. Turner, EquitableDistribution of Property § 7:5-7:6 (4th ed. 2019) (noting an increasingwillingness of appellate courts to require revaluation of marital propertybased on post-trial, pre-decision evidence, particularly in situations wherethere was a long delay between the trial and the decision, specific post-trialevents changed the value of marital property, or a significant marital assethas an unusually volatile value). 
23 In Myers v. Myers, 70 Haw. 143, 153, 764 P.2d 1237, 1243 (1988), the
Hawai #i Supreme Court considered a partnership-model framework for property
division that included a category 6, which, in effect, established "apresumption that a legal-owner spouse is entitled to the appreciation inmarital assets between the DOFSICOD [(date of final separation incontemplation of divorce)] and the conclusion of the evidentiary part of thetrial[.]" The supreme court held that this presumption was inconsistent withHRS § 580-47 and rejected it. In explaining its decision, the supreme courtstated: 
Our divorce and separation laws do "not contemplate anyfinal division of property other than where the person is
divorced a vinculo matrimonii ." This is consistent with the 
notion that "marriage is a partnership to which both parties
bring their financial resources as well as their individual 
18 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ii. Duty to Disclose Post-Trial Evidence of Valuation 
We now turn to the question of whether Husband had a 
duty to disclose the post-trial agreements to sell Centennial and 
the LLC. The Family Court concluded that Husband had a duty to disclose these agreements and that his failure to disclose the agreements constituted fraud. The Family Court relied on these conclusions in granting Wife relief under HFCR Rule 60(b)(3). 
As both Husband and Husband's counsel argue, under the 
partnership-model framework for property division adopted by Hawai# i case law, the DOCOEPOT has long been identified and used 
as the appropriate date for valuing the marital estate. See Malek v. Malek, 7 Haw. App. 377, 380-81, 380 n.1, 768 P.2d 243, 246-47, 246 n.1 (1989); Hamilton v. Hamilton, 138 
Hawai# i 185, 
201, 378 P.3d 901, 917 (2016). As explained above, we have construed the case law as establishing a general rule that the DOCOEPOT is the appropriate date to value the marital estate, but as permitting post-trial evidence of valuation to be considered in exceptional circumstances. We also acknowledged, however, that the case law could plausibly have been interpreted as barring consideration of post-trial evidence. Certainly, there was no Hawai# i case law holding that post-trial evidence of 
valuation could be considered by the family court or imposing a duty on a party to disclose post-trial evidence of valuation. 
Moreover, in this case, there was no discovery or other 
order requiring Husband to disclose evidence of valuation arising after the divorce trial and before the issuance of the Decree or Amended Decree. In this regard, the parties' stipulated pre-trial order required exchange of account statements "up until the 
energies and efforts. That one partner brings to the
marriage substantially greater resources than the other doesnot make this any less the case." A presumption that thenon-owning spouse is not entitled to any part of theappreciation in property legally owned by the other after adeclaration by either that the marriage has ended isinconsistent with the partnership model of marriage we haveaccepted and the rule that a final division of maritalproperty can be decreed only when the partnership isdissolved. 
Id. at 154, 764 P.2d at 1244 (citation and brackets omitted). 
19 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial[.]" Both the Decree and the Amended Decree contained a 
provision requiring Husband to make an equalization payment to Wife if Husband sold Centennial, but this provision did not impose a disclosure obligation on Husband. 
Under the circumstances of this case, we conclude that 
Husband had no affirmative duty to disclose the post-trial agreements for the sale of Centennial or the LLC before the entry of the Decree or the Amended Decree.
24 
iii. Relief Under HFCR Rules 60(b)(2) and (b)(3) 
HFCR Rule 60(b)(3) provides relief for "fraud . . . , 
misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an adverse party." Here, the Family Court determined that Husband had a duty to disclose the post-trial agreements to sell Centennial and the LLC, and that Husband fraudulently failed to disclose such information. As explained above, we have concluded that Husband had no duty to disclose. Therefore, the Family Court erred in concluding that Husband's failure to disclose the agreements constituted fraud and abused its discretion in granting Wife relief under HFCR Rule 60(b)(3). 
The Family Court may grant relief under HFCR Rule 
60(b)(2) for newly discovered evidence 
provided the evidence meets the following requirements: (1)
it must be previously undiscovered even though due diligencewas exercised; (2) it must be admissible and credible; and(3) it must be of such material and controlling nature aswill probably change the outcome and not merely cumulativeor ending only to impeach or contradict a witness. 
Omerod, 116 Hawai# i at 277, 172 P.3d at 1021 (emphasis and 
citation omitted) (stating test under HRCP Rule 60(b)). 
The record shows that the parties' trial evidence 
regarding Centennial's valuation was conflicting and included 
competing appraisals, both of which the Family Court found were unpersuasive and unconvincing, that were $1.35 million apart. In contrast, the post-trial agreements provided direct, concrete, 
24 We note that disclosure duties were imposed only after the issuance
of the Amended Decree, when the Family Court issued a TRO which restrained
Husband from concealing or failing to disclose to the Family Court or Wife thesale, transfer, or assignment of Centennial or the LLC. 
20 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and credible evidence of Centennial's valuation. The post-trial 
agreements were based on a purchase price or valuation of Centennial of $4,500,000, which was about $460,000 more than the Family Court's valuation in the Decree and Amended Decree. In its Post-Decree FOF/COL/Order, the Family Court found that the "actual sales price of Centennial" agreed to post-trial by Husband "would have been a highly reliable and persuasive fact" for the Court's determination of Centennial's fair market value and that, had it known about the post-trial agreements, it "could and would have" factored in Centennial's actual sales price in calculating the equalization payment owed to Wife. 
Given these circumstances, we conclude that although 
the Family Court erred in granting relief under HFCR Rule 60(b)(3), this error did not affect its decision to grant relief under HFCR Rule 60(b)(2). We further conclude that the post-trial agreements to sell Centennial and the LLC constituted newly discovered evidence and that the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in granting relief under HFCR Rule 60(b)(2). Accordingly, we affirm the Family Court's decision to reopen and increase the valuation of Centennial from $4,039,675 to $4,500,000 based on the post-trial agreements and to increase the equalization payment owed to Wife by $230,162.50 based on its revised valuation of Centennial. 
B. Sanctions Against Husband 
Husband challenges the Family Court's imposition of 
$300,000 in additional sanctions against him. He argues that the 
sanctions were based on an erroneous premise, there was insufficient evidence to support the sanctions, and the Family Court failed to notify him of the legal basis for the sanctions. 
Hawai# i
 courts have the inherent power and authority to 
control the litigation process before them and to impose sanctions for abusive litigation practices. Kaina, 119 Hawai# i 
at 330, 197 P.3d at 782. However, a trial court must exercise its inherent power to impose sanctions "with restraint and discretion." Bank of Hawaii v. Kunimoto, 91 Hawai# i 372, 387, 
984 P.2d 1198, 1213 (1999) (citation omitted). A court may not 
21 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
invoke its inherent power to sanction a represented party or an 
attorney "without a specific finding of bad faith." Id. at 389-90, 984 P.2d at 1215-16; Kaina, 119 
Hawai# i at 331, 197 P.3d at 
783. Moreover, the court's finding of bad faith must be based on clear and convincing evidence. 
Kunimoto, 91 Hawai# i at 390-93, 
984 P.2d at 1216-19 (applying clear and convincing evidence standard to imposition of sanctions based on finding of bad faith); Tauese v. State, Dep't of Labor & Indus. Relations, 113 Hawai# i 1, 36, 147 P.3d 785, 820 (2006) (noting that the clear 
and convincing evidence standard is typically used in civil cases involving allegations of fraud or other quasi-criminal wrongdoing to reduce the risk that a party may have his or her reputation tarnished erroneously); Office of Disciplinary Counsel v. Rapp, 70 Haw. 539, 777 P.2d 710 (1989) (utilizing a clear and convincing standard of proof in attorney discipline proceedings). The court's sanction order must inform the person sanctioned of the authority pursuant to which the sanction was imposed. Kaina, 119 Hawai# i at 331, 197 P.3d at 783. 
The Family Court's principal basis for imposing 
sanctions against Husband was its finding that Husband had engaged in fraud and misrepresentation in failing to disclose the post-trial Centennial and LLC Agreements. We have already concluded that under the circumstances of this case, Husband did not have a duty to disclose the post-trial Centennial and LLC Agreements during the period from the DOCOEPOT to the issuance of the Amended Decree on October 23, 2013. Furthermore, it does not appear that the Family Court found that Husband breached a duty to disclose arising out of the TRO issued after the Amended Decree in imposing sanctions against him.
25 Accordingly, we 
25 The TRO was issued on November 15, 2013. The record indicates that 
on December 3, 2013, approximately two weeks after the TRO was issued,
Husband, through Husband's counsel, emailed records pertaining to the sale ofthe LLC to Wife's counsel. See footnote 16, supra. This included the LLC Agreement showing that a cash payment of $948,387.91 was due to Husband byOctober 23, 2013. Wife does not dispute that Husband's counsel emailed therecords to her counsel on December 3, 2013, but asserts that by this time, shehad already obtained the records from the buyers. On December 18, 2013,
Husband filed bank records showing his receipt of funds from the LLC Agreement
on October 23, 2013. The Family Court found that "but for" the November 15, 
22 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclude that the Family Court erred in relying on Husband's 
purported fraud and misrepresentation in failing to disclose the post-trial agreements in imposing sanctions against him. 
The Family Court also appears to have relied upon 
Husband's purported failure to comply with his obligation to make the equalization payment under the Amended Decree in imposing sanctions against Husband. 
We first address whether the LLC Agreement triggered 
Husband's obligation to make the equalization payment under the Amended Decree. Paragraph 3.O. of the Amended Decree required Husband to make a $276,387 equalization payment to Wife if he "sold" Centennial before the Maui Residence. Paragraph 3.O. provided: 
Property Division Payment. Husband is obligated to
make payment as and for property division to Wife from
Husband's share of the proceeds from the sale of the [MauiResidence]. If Husband sells one or more of the shoppingcenters he is awarded before the [Maui Residence] is sold,Husband shall make payment toward his required "maritalpartnership principle" property division payment to Wifefrom the net proceeds of the sale of the involved shoppingcenter(s), said payment not to exceed one half of thoseproceeds. 
(
Emphasis added.) 
Wife argued in the Family Court that Husband's 
agreement to sell the LLC constituted the "sale" of Centennial 
within the meaning of the Amended Decree which triggered Husband's obligation to make the $276,387 equalization payment to her. In her post-decree motions for relief, Wife sought immediate enforcement of Husband's obligation to make the equalization payment out of the proceeds of the LLC Agreement. She also argued that Husband's attempt to avoid his payment obligation by concealing the transaction warranted sanctions against Husband. 
Husband responded that his agreement to sell the LLC in 
2013 TRO, Husband would not have disclosed his receipt of the $948,387.91 on
October 23, 2013 from the sale of Centennial or made the $278,387 equalizationpayment to Wife. This indicates that the Family Court believed that the TROhad induced Husband's disclosures and that it did not find that Husband breached a disclosure duty arising out of the TRO. 
23 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
two phases, 9 percent on October 23, 2013, and the remaining 91 
percent in July 2015, did not constitute a sale of Centennial that was concluded in October 2013. Husband argued that the LLC Agreement had been specifically structured to avoid constituting or being characterized as the sale of Centennial on October 23, 2013, so as not to trigger the due on sales clause and a $400,000 prepayment penalty under the Note and Deed of Trust. Husband argued that because the LLC Agreement did not constitute a sale of Centennial on October 23, 2013, and because the transfer in his interest in the LLC would not be completed until July 2015, he was not obligated to make the equalization payment. 
The Family Court concluded that, regardless of how the 
LLC Agreement would be characterized by the lender under the Note and Deed of Trust, the LLC Agreement constituted a sale of Centennial as that term was used and intended by the Family Court in the Amended Decree. The Family Court therefore ordered Husband to make immediate payment of the $278,387 equalization payment owed to Wife under the Amended Decree. 
We conclude that the Family Court did not err in 
construing the LLC Agreement as a sale of Centennial for purposes of the Amended Decree. The Family Court had conditioned Husband's obligation to make the equalization payment on either the sale of the Maui Residence or a shopping center awarded to Husband because Husband lacked the funds necessary to make the equalization payment immediately. Under the LLC Agreement, the buyers were obligated to pay Husband $958,387.91 on or before October 23, 2013. The $958,387.91 was described in the LLC Agreement as "the entire purchase price" and was paid to Husband on or before October 23, 2013.
26 Thus, as of October 23, 2013, 
through the LLC Agreement, Husband had obtained liquid funds 
26 Although the transfer of Husband's remaining 91 percent interest in
the LLC would not be completed until July 2015, the LLC Agreement provided
that this transfer would be automatic and the parties described the buyers'rights to the remaining interest as "irrevocable." The LLC Agreement alsoprovided that between October 23, 2013 and the transfer of Husband's remaining91 percent interest in July 2015, the buyers would have all of the financialresponsibility, both benefits and burdens, for the LLC. 
24 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
enabling him to make the equalization payment. The LLC Agreement 
satisfied the Amended Decree's purpose for conditioning Husband's obligation to make the equalization payment on the sale of Centennial -- to enable Husband to secure funds necessary to make the payment. 
Therefore, it was reasonable for the Family Court 
to construe the LLC Agreement as a sale of Centennial effective on October 23, 2013 for purposes of Paragraph 3.O. of the Amended Decree. We conclude that the Family Court did not err in construing the LLC Agreement in this fashion, in concluding that the LLC Agreement triggered Husband's obligation to make the $276,387 equalization payment imposed by the Amended Decree, and in ordering Husband to make immediate payment of this equalization payment.
27 
Because the Family Court's principal basis for imposing 
sanctions against Husband in the Post-Decree FOF/COL/Order was improper, we vacate the award of sanctions against Husband in the Post-Decree FOF/COL/Order and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. We express no view on whether, absent a disclosure duty, Husband's failure to expeditiously make his equalization payment post-Amended Decree is sufficient to justify the imposition of sanctions. If the Family Court on 
27 Although Husband argues on appeal that the Family Court erred in
relying on its determination that the sale of Centennial had "closed" in
imposing sanctions on him, Husband does not separately challenge the FamilyCourt's order requiring him to make immediate payment of the $276,387equalization payment. Because Husband does not challenge this order and inlight of our analysis, we affirm the Family Court's order requiring Husband toimmediately pay the $276,387 equalization payment. 
In granting Wife post-decree relief, the Family Court also ordered
Husband to immediately pay Wife one half of Centennial's escrow impoundaccount ($63,659.50) existing on October 23, 2013, pursuant to the provisionof the Amended Decree requiring the equal division of the escrow impoundaccount in the event "a shopping center is sold and the sale closes in2013[.]" Husband asserts in his points of error that the Family Court erredin awarding Wife a one-half share of Centennial's escrow impound account, butdoes not specifically present argument on this point, and he only raises theargument that the sale of Centennial would not close under the LLC Agreementuntil July 2015 in opposing the imposition of sanctions against him. In anyevent, given the terms of the LLC Agreement, we conclude that the Family Courtdid not err in construing the LLC Agreement as the sale of Centennial whichclosed in 2013 for purposes of the Amended Decree, thereby requiring Husbandto split Centennial's escrow impound account with Wife. We therefore affirm the Family Court's order requiring Husband to immediately pay Wife one half ofthe Centennial escrow impound account. 
25   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
remand seeks to impose sanctions against Husband arising out of 
his failure to expeditiously make his equalization payment, it shall make specific findings identifying the basis for imposing sanctions, including the authority pursuant to which sanctions are being imposed, and showing why there is clear and convincing evidence to support the imposition of sanctions.
C. Sanctions Against Husband's Counsel 
The Family Court sanctioned Husband's counsel by ruling 
that she was jointly and severally liable with Husband for the 
$300,000 in sanctions and $124,959.17 in attorney's fees "owing to Wife arising from nondisclosure of Husbands sale and transfer of Centennial from and after August 22, 2013." In sanctioning Husband's counsel, the Family Court relied upon her alleged complicity with Husband in violating a duty to disclose the post-trial Centennial and LLC Agreements and her purported violation of HRPC Rule 3.3.
28 Our analysis and conclusion that the Family 
Court erred in relying on Husband's purported violation of a duty to disclose the post-trial agreements in sanctioning Husband applies equally to Husband's counsel. We further conclude that 
28 HRPC Rule 3.3, Candor Toward the Tribunal, provides, in part, as
follows: 
(a) A lawyer shall not knowingly: 
(1) make a false statement of material fact or law to a
tribunal; 
(2) fail to disclose a material fact to a tribunal when
disclosure is necessary to avoid assisting a criminal or
fraudulent act by the client; 
(3) fail to disclose to the tribunal legal authority in the
controlling jurisdiction known to the lawyer to be directlyadverse to the position of the client and not disclosed byopposing counsel; or 
(4) offer evidence that the lawyer knows to be false. If a 
lawyer has offered material evidence and comes to know of itsfalsity, the lawyer shall take remedial measures to the extentreasonably necessary to rectify the consequences. 
(b) The duties stated in paragraphs (a) and (d) continue to
the conclusion of the proceeding, and apply even if compliancerequires disclosure of information otherwise protected by Rule1.6(a) of these Rules [relating to protection of confidentialclient information]. 
26 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Family Court erred in sanctioning Husband's counsel based on 
her purported violation of HRPC Rule 3.3. 
As previously discussed, a trial court cannot invoke 
its inherent power to impose sanctions against an attorney without a specific finding of bad faith based on clear and convincing evidence. 
Kunimoto, 91 Hawai# i at 387, 389-90, 984 
P.2d at 1213, 1215-16; Kaina, 119 
Hawai# i at 331, 197 P.3d at 
783. Here, the Family Court relied on speculative inferences drawn from Husband's counsel's "professionalism" and applied a reasonable cause standard in imposing sanctions against her. The Family Court also misapplied HRPC Rule 3.3 in imposing sanctions against Husband's counsel. 
In support of its imposition of sanctions against 
Husband's counsel, the Family Court noted that its "experience with [Husband's counsel] as an attorney over many years is nothing less than highly professional." The Family Court took judicial notice that Husband's counsel, 
in her representation of Husband has been consistently
timely and knowledgeable as to Husband's case and position,both as to detail, importance and weight of facts.[Husband's counsel] has further demonstrated the sameprofessionalism as to the knowledge of applicable law. In her representation of Husband, she has been thorough,aggressive, indeed zealous. Therefore, the Court can onlyconclude that regarding the sale or transfer of Centennialduring the period from and after August 22, 2013, there isreasonable cause to believe that Husband's counsel was well aware of the Centennial transactions and has violated [HRPCRule 3.3]. 
The record shows that Husband was represented by a law 
firm from Idaho, and not Husband's counsel, in negotiating the 
sale of Centennial and the LLC. The Family Court acknowledged that "[i]t is possible" that Husband did not inform Husband's counsel of the sale or transfer of Centennial until after the Family Court issued its TRO on November 15, 2013, but found it "quite unlikely" that she lacked prior knowledge of the post-trial Centennial and LLC Agreements in light of her aggressive actions on behalf of her client. The Family Court concluded that Husband's counsel violated HRPC Rule 3.3 by failing to correct the "false" evidence of Centennial's valuation Husband offered at 
27 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial and in citing a Hawai# i case in her pleadings. 
There are a number of problems with the Family Court's 
analysis. First, even assuming arguendo that Husband had a duty 
to disclose the post-trial Centennial and LLC Agreements before the issuance of the TRO (which we have concluded he did not), the Family Court's basis for determining that Husband's counsel had knowledge of the post-trial agreements in time to make a meaningful disclosure, especially before the Decree or Amended Decree, is speculative. The Family Court inferred such knowledge based on Husband's counsel's professionalism and zealous representation of Husband, but those traits are insufficient to support an inference of knowledge in this case. 
Second, the Family Court erred in applying a reasonable 
cause standard of proof, rather than the required clear and convincing evidence standard. 
Third, the Family Court misapplied HRPC Rule 3.3 in 
concluding that Husband's counsel had violated the rule. In its analysis, the Family Court cited HRPC Rule 3.3(a)(4), which provides: 
(a) A lawyer shall not knowingly : 
. . .  
(4) offer evidence that the lawyer knows to be false.
If a lawyer has offered material evidence and comes to know
of its falsity, the lawyer shall take remedial measures tothe extent reasonably necessary to rectify the consequences. 
In invoking HRPC Rule 3.3(a)(4), the Family Court 
apparently reasoned that the appraisal evidence offered by 
Husband at trial was rendered false by the post-trial agreements to sell Centennial for a higher price. The appraised value of property, however, is an opinion. The opinion evidence regarding Centennial's value contained in the appraisal offered by Husband at trial did not become false by virtue of the post-trial agreements. Moreover, under the existing case law, Husband's counsel had a plausible, good faith argument that the parties' marital estate was to be valued as of the DOCOEPOT and therefore, that post-trial events could not be considered and were not relevant to the Family Court's valuation of Centennial. Under 
28 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
this plausible reading of the case law, the post-trial agreements 
did not affect the validity of the appraisal evidence Husband presented at trial. See Enos v. Pac. Transfer & Warehouse, Inc., 79 
Hawai# i 452, 458, 903 P.2d 1273, 1279 (1995) (indicating that 
an award of sanctions against an attorney pursuant to a court's inherent power should not be upheld absent "clear evidence that the challenged actions are entirely without color" (quoting United States v. Int’l Bhd. of Teamsters, 948 F.2d 1338, 1345 (2d Cir. 1991))). 
The Family Court also concluded that Husband's counsel 
violated HRPC Rule 3.3 by citing and quoting Cvitanovich-Dubie v. Dubie, 125 Hawai# i 128, 254 P.3d 439 (2011), in arguing that 
Husband did not commit fraud upon the court that would justify Wife's requests for post-decree relief after the Amended Decree was filed. The Family Court's analysis in support of this conclusion was wrong. 
Wife alleged that Husband had committed fraud upon the 
court in support of her requests for post-decree relief. In response, Husband's counsel filed an opposing brief in which she quoted the following language from Cvitanovich-Dubie: 
This court has noted that, "[s]ince the remedy for
fraud on the court is far reaching, it only applies to very
unusual cases involving 'far more than an injury to a singlelitigant[,]' but rather, a 'corruption of the judicialprocess itself.'" Schefke v. Reliable Collection Agency,Ltd., 96 
Hawai #i 408, 431 n. 42, 32 P.3d 52, 75 n. 42 (2001)
(citation omitted) (some brackets in original); see alsoMatsuura v. E.I. Du Pont de Nemours & Co., 102 Hawai #i 149,
171, 73 P.3d 687, 709 (2003) (Acoba, J., concurring anddissenting) ("fraud on the court is not fraud on a party").It is generally accepted that fraudulent conduct such asperjury or non-disclosure by a party, standing alone, isinsufficient to make out a claim for fraud on the court. 
. . . . 
Not any fraud connected with the presentation of a
case amounts to fraud on the court. 
It must be a "direct 
assault on the integrity of the judicial process." Courts 
have required more than nondisclosure by a party or theparty's attorney to find fraud on the court. Examples ofsuch fraud include "bribery of a judge," and "the employmentof counsel in order to bring an improper influence on thecourt." 
Id. at 144-45, 254 P.3d at 455-56 (format altered; some citations 
omitted). 
29 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Cvitanovich-Dubie, the petitioner sought post-decree 
relief based on her claims of "fraud on the court" and "undue 
influence." Id. at 144, 254 P.3d at 455. 
The Hawai# i Supreme 
Court: (1) addressed the requirements for a claim of "fraud on the court"; (2) determined that petitioner's allegations did not rise to the level of fraud on the court and therefore were properly evaluated as "fraud . . . , misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an adverse party" under HFCR Rule 60(b)(3); (3) determined that petitioner's undue influence claim also fell within HFCR Rule 60(b)(3); (4) concluded that because petitioner's claims fell within HFCR Rule 60(b)(3), they could not be brought under HFCR Rule 60(b)(6) and were subject to the one-year limitation period for HFCR Rule 60(b)(3), and not the potentially longer "within a reasonable time" limitation period for HFCR Rule 60(b)(6); and (5) held that petitioner's claims were untimely under HFCR Rule 60(b)(3) and therefore properly denied. Id. at 144-50, 254 P.3d 455-61. 
It is not clear what provision of HRPC Rule 3.3 the 
Family Court had in mind in concluding that Husband's counsel's citation of Cvitanovich-Dubie violated HRPC Rule 3.3. 
The Family 
Court asserted that Husband's counsel acted improperly in citing Cvitanovich-Dubie because: (1) that case was "decided under Rule 60(b)(6)"; and (2) the supreme court stated in Cvitanovich-Dubie that HFCR Rule 60(b)(3) was inapplicable because petitioner's claims were untimely and "therefor[e] the issue of fraud alleged in that case is only applicable under Rule 60(b)(6)." The Family Court then reasoned that Husband's counsel's citation of Cvitanovich-Dubie appears to have violated HRPC Rule 3.3 because "[Husband's counsel] is only disclosing authority which does not specifically apply to the 60(b)(3) . . . violations that apply in this case." 
The Family Court's reasoning is significantly flawed 
and is based on a misreading of Cvitanovich-Dubie. In Cvitanovich-Dubie, the supreme court specifically addressed the doctrine of "fraud on the court" that Wife had raised in her post-decree requests for relief. Id. at 144-46, 254 P.3d at 455-
30 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
57. In addition, contrary to the Family Court's assertions, the 
supreme court in Cvitanovich-Dubie did not decide the case under HFCR Rule 60(b)(6) and did not rule that HFCR Rule 60(b)(3) was inapplicable. Id. Instead, the supreme court decided the case under HFCR Rule 60(b)(3) and held that because petitioner's claims fell within HFCR Rule 60(b)(3), they were barred by the limitation period for HFCR Rule 60(b)(3). Id. The requirements for the doctrine of "fraud on the court" and applicability of HFCR 60(b)(3) were integral to the supreme court's analysis in Cvitanovich-Dubie. 
Thus, contrary to the Family Court's underlying 
premise, Cvitanovich-Dubie provided authority that was directly relevant to Wife's claims of fraud on the court and which addressed the applicability of HFCR Rule 60(b)(3). Husband's counsel accurately quoted Cvitanovich-Dubie and the portions she quoted were a correct statement of the law. We fail to see how Husband's counsel's accurate and direct quotation of language from Cvitanovich-Dubie in her argument, which was a correct statement of law and was responsive to Wife's claims of fraud on the court, could possibly form the basis for the Family Court's conclusion that Husband's counsel violated HRPC Rule 3.3. 
Moreover and in any event, attorneys are not limited to 
only citing case authority that is directly on point, and it is not an ethical violation to cite a case that is not directly applicable. Thus, even if the Family Court were correct that Cvitanovich-Dubie can be distinguished, citing a case that can be distinguished is not a violation of HRPC Rule 3.3. 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the Family 
Court's imposition of monetary sanctions against Husband's counsel was based on flawed reasoning and that there was insufficient evidence to support the imposition of monetary sanctions against Husband's counsel. We also conclude that the Family Court did not have a valid basis for referring Husband's counsel to ODC for investigation. We therefore reverse the Family Court's imposition of monetary sanctions against Husband's 
31 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel and its referral of Husband's counsel to ODC.29 
D. Attorney's Fees 
Husband challenges the Family Court's award of 
$124,959.17 in attorney's fees to Wife in connection with her 
requests for relief after the Amended Decree was filed. In awarding these fees, it appears that the Family Court was influenced by its erroneous conclusion that Husband had breached a duty to disclose the post-trial agreements. We therefore vacate the attorney's fees award and remand the case to permit the Family Court to reconsider its award of attorney's fees to Wife in light of our decision.
IV. CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm in part, vacate in 
part, and reverse in part the Family Court's Post-Decree FOF/COL/Order, and we remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this Opinion. 
On the briefs: 
Calvin E. Young
and Brandon H. Ito (Ayabe, Chong, Nishimoto, Sia& Nakamura, LLLP)for Real Party in Interest-Appellant 
Paul A. Tomar 
Lynne Jenkins McGivernJill M. Hasegawa andGemma-Rose Poland Soon (Ashford & Wriston)for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Rebecca A. Copeland
for Defendant-Appellant 
29 Husband's counsel withdrew from representing Husband before the
Family Court issued its Post-Decree FOF/COL/Order, and she did not challengethe Family Court's order disqualifying her from representing Husband onappeal. We therefore do not address the Family Court's disqualificationorder. 
32 