NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-14-0000427
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
EUGENE PARIS, JR., also known as
EUGENE J.E. RIVERA, JR., Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-0191)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Eugene Paris, Jr. (Paris) with second-degree
 
escape, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 710-1021
 (2014).
1 The charge stemmed from Paris's failure, while he was
 
on extended furlough, to return to the Laumaka Work Furlough
 Center (Laumaka) as directed by the Laumaka staff and after his
 furlough pass expired. After a jury trial, Paris was found
 guilty as charged. The Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
2
(Circuit Court)  sentenced Paris to five years of imprisonment to 
1HRS ยง 710-1021 provides in relevant part: "(1) A person
commits the offense of escape in the second degree if the person
intentionally escapes from a correctional or detention facility
or from custody."
 
2The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
run concurrently with other terms being served and entered its
 
Judgment on January 14, 2014.
 
On appeal, Paris contends that: (1) the felony
 
information charging him with second-degree escape was "fatally
 insufficient"; (2) there was insufficient evidence to support his
 conviction; (3) the Circuit Court erred in denying his motion for
 mistrial which was based on the prosecutor's closing argument;
 (4) the Circuit Court erred in instructing the jury; and (5) the
 Circuit Court erred by failing to apply the doctrine of judicial
 estoppel. We affirm.
 
BACKGROUND
 
Paris was convicted of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in
 
the Second Degree. He was sentenced in 2006 to ten years of
 imprisonment and was committed to the custody of the Department
 of Public Safety for incarceration. Paris was incarcerated at
 the Oahu Community Correctional Center (OCCC) and his maximum
 term of imprisonment was scheduled to expire on August 11, 2015. 
Paris was granted furlough privileges before his
 
maximum term of imprisonment expired. On June 14, 2011, Paris
 entered into a "Furlough Agreement" with the State. Noel
 Villanueva (Villanueva), Paris's case manager at Laumaka, which
 was part of OCCC, reviewed the terms and conditions of the
 Furlough Agreement with Paris. Paris acknowledged his
 understanding of the Furlough Agreement by placing his initials
 after each term and condition and by signing the Furlough
 Agreement.
 
As part of the Furlough Agreement, Paris agreed as
 
follows:
 
1.	 I understand that I remain under the jurisdiction of
the Department of Public Safety, Oahu Community
Correctional Center (OCCC), Community Based Section,
and will comply with all R & R, Policies and
Procedures governing said agency. . . .
 
. . . . 
9.	 I understand and agree that I shall be processed as an
escapee if I fall into one or more of the following
stipulations:
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a.	 Fail to return to the Laumaka Work Furlough
Center (LWFC) or OCCC at the designated day and
time as stated in this Agreement or on my pass
and/or fail to seek permission for an extension
of the designated return time.
 
b.	 Fail to return to LWFC or OCCC in a timely
manner when I am directed to do so regardless of
the expiration time stated on the pass. 
I further understand that should I be listed, as an
escapee under any of the aforementioned conditions, my
pass will be deemed null and void. 
(Formatting altered).
 
With respect to the above term and condition 9.b.,
 
Villanueva explained that if Paris was working and Villanueva
 
told him to come back to Laumaka right away, that Paris had to
 come back. Paris acknowledged understanding that he would be
 considered an escapee if he failed to return in a timely manner
 after Villanueva directed him to do so.
 
In November 2011, Paris was granted extended furlough
 
privileges, which permitted him to live with his parents rather
 than at Laumaka. As part of the extended furlough, Paris was
 given weekly passes and was required to meet with Villanueva at
 Laumaka once a week -- every Wednesday at 6:00 a.m. On November
 30, 2011, Paris entered into an "Extended Furlough Contract" with
 the State. Villanueva reviewed the Extended Furlough Contract
 with Paris and explained it to Paris, and Villanueva specifically
 advised Paris that the Furlough Agreement was still in full
 effect.
 
Pursuant to the Extended Furlough Contract, Paris
 
agreed: 
1.	 To adhere to all the rules, regulations, and as stated
in the Furlough Agreement, Work Furlough Contract, and
set by the Corrections Division.
 
. . . .
 
4.	 To report in person every week to the CM/UM for
feedback.
 
5.	 To report in person once a week to obtain a new weekly
pass.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On Wednesday, January 4, 2012, at 6:00 a.m., Paris
 
appeared at Villanueva's office and met with Villanueva. The
 
procedure used for these meetings was that when Paris reported
 for his weekly meeting, Villanueva would take the old pass from
 Paris and give him a new pass that was good for one week. At the
 January 4, 2012, meeting, Villanueva gave Paris a new pass that
 expired on January 11, 2012 at 6:00 a.m. and told Paris to come
 back at that date and time.
 
On January 11, 2012, Paris did not appear at Laumaka as
 
required for the 6:00 a.m. meeting. Later that day, Paris called
 Villanueva at Laumaka. Villanueva informed Paris that Paris
 needed to return to Laumaka by 6:00 p.m. on January 11, 2012. 
At some point on January 11, 2012, Paris also spoke with Moses
 Fonoimoana (Fonoimoana), a sergeant at Laumaka. Fonoimoana also
 told Paris that he had to be back at Laumaka by 6:00 p.m. 
Although Villanueva waited until 9:00 p.m. that day for Paris,
 Paris did not return to Laumaka.
 
Paris remained at large from January 11, 2012, through
 
February 2, 2012. On February 2, 2012, at about 1:30 a.m.,
 Honolulu Police Department Officer Waldron Chung (Officer Chung)
 stopped a car for "[u]nsafe lane changing." The driver told
 Officer Chung that he did not have any identification but that
 his name was "John J. Rivera." The driver also gave Officer
 Chung a birth date. Officer Chung ran a check of the name
 provided by the driver but was unable to find a matching person. 
A passenger in the car informed Officer Chung that the driver was
 Paris, and Paris then admitted his identity to Officer Chung. 
Officer Chung ran Paris's name through dispatch, learned that
 Paris was an "outstanding escapee," and arrested Paris.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Paris contends that the amended felony information
 
charging him with second-degree escape was "fatally insufficient" 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
because it failed to allege the definitions of the terms
 
"custody" and "detention facility." We conclude that the charge
 was sufficient.
 
The charge against Paris stated in relevant part:
 
On or about the 11th day of January, 2012, to and
including, February 2, 2012, in the City and County of
Honolulu, State of Hawaii, EUGENE PARIS, Jr. also known as
Eugene J.E. Rivera, Jr., did intentionally escape from a
correctional or detention facility or from custody, thereby
committing the offense of Escape in the Second Degree, in
violation of Section 710-1021 of the Hawaii Revised
 Statutes.
 
During closing argument, the State informed the jury
 
that it was proceeding only on the theory that Paris had escaped
 
from custody. We therefore confine our discussion to whether the
 failure to allege the definition of "custody" rendered the charge
 insufficient. 
HRS ยง 710-1000 (2014) defines "custody" to mean 
"restraint by a public servant pursuant to arrest, detention, or order of a court." In addition, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has 
held that because the Legislature did not define the term "custody" to mean only actual custody, the term does not require that the defendant be "in actual physical custody or under immediate control and supervision of a guard." State v. Smith, 
59 Haw. 456, 462, 583 P.2d 337, 342 (1978). The definition of the term "custody" as set forth in the statute and construed by the supreme court does not create an additional essential element. The definition of custody applicable to the escape offense is also consistent with the commonly understood meaning of "custody," which is broad enough to encompass the restrictions and conditions imposed on an inmate on extended furlough. The dictionary and thesaurus definitions of "custody" include: "keeping; guardianship; care"; "the keeping or charge of officers of the law"; "legal restraint"; "[t]he function of watching, guarding, or overseeing." Dictionary.com, http://dictionary. 
reference.com/browse/custody (last visited Jul. 29, 2015); The Free Dictionary, http://www.thefreedictionary.com/custody (citing 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The American Heritage Roget's Thesaurus (2014)) (last visited 
Jul. 29, 2015). Accordingly, we conclude that the failure to allege the definition of "custody" did not render the charge insufficient and that the charge gave Paris fair notice of the accusation against him. See State v. Mita, 124 Hawai
'i 385, 392, 
245 P.3d 458, 465 (2010) ("[T]he State need only allege the statutory definition of a term when it creates an additional essential element of the offense, and the term itself does not provide a person of common understanding with fair notice of that element."). 
II.
 
Paris argues that there was insufficient evidence to
 
support his conviction because the State failed to prove that
 Paris escaped from custody. We disagree.
 
In Smith, the supreme court affirmed the second-decree
 
escape conviction of Smith who had failed to return to the Hawaii
 Youth Correctional facility by the required time after being
 released on a day pass. Smith, 59 Haw. at 457-58, 583 P.2d at
 
339-40. The supreme court held that under these circumstances,
 Smith had escaped from custody. The supreme court stated: "While
 the facility did not have actual physical control over the
 appellant at the time he is alleged to have escaped, it had
 control and custody in the sense that appellant was released on
 furlough not as a free person but as one legally bound by
 restrictions." Id. at 463-64, 583 P.2d at 343. 
In support of its decision, the supreme court quoted a
 
federal appeals case in which the federal court stated that "'[a]
 person may still be in custody, even though not under constant
 supervision of guards, so long as there is some restraint upon
 his complete freedom.'" Id. at 463, 583 P.2d at 342 (quoting
 
United States v. Rudinsky, 439 F.2d 1074, 1076 (6th Cir. 1971)). 
The supreme court also cited with approval a Delaware case in
 which the Delaware court held that the failure to return from 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
furlough constituted escape from custody because a "furlough
 
merely extends the limits of custody according to its terms. 
. . . [A] prisoner [released on furlough] is clearly not free
 from restraint; 'he is deemed to be aware that his movements are
 restricted according to the limitation of time, place, and
 purpose imposed by the terms of the furlough.'" Id. (citing
 
Smith v. State, 361 A.2d 237, 239 (Del. 1976)); see also State v.
 Kealoha, 71 Haw. 251, 253, 787 P.2d 690, 691 (1990) (holding that
 a prisoner who failed to return at the expiration of her
 furlough, without a legitimate excuse, was guilty of escape).
 
Here, the evidence showed that Paris understood that in
 
being granted furlough privileges, he remained under the
 jurisdiction of the Department of Public Safety; that he would be
 processed as an escapee if he failed to return to Laumaka as
 required by his furlough pass or as directed by Laumaka
 officials; and that he was required to report to Laumaka every
 week to obtain a new furlough pass. At his weekly meeting on
 January 4, 2012, Paris was instructed to return to Laumaka on
 January 11, 2012, and he was issued a new furlough pass that
 expired on January 11, 2012, at 6:00 a.m. Paris failed to appear
 as required on January 11, 2012. He was directed that day by
 Laumaka officials to return to Laumaka by 6:00 p.m., but remained
 at large. When Paris was encountered by Officer Chung on
 February 2, 2012, he gave Officer Chung a false name before
 ultimately being arrested. We conclude that there was sufficient
 evidence to support Paris's conviction.
 
III.
 
Paris argues that the Circuit Court erred in denying
 
his motion for mistrial which was based on the prosecutor's
 closing argument. Paris contends that the prosecutor engaged in
 misconduct by misstating the intentional mental state required
 for the charged escape during closing argument by referring to
 what Paris knew and understood. Paris's argument is without
 merit.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court instructed the jury that the State
 
was required to prove that Paris acted intentionally. In
 
addition, at the beginning of his closing argument, the
 prosecutor directed the jury's attention to the Circuit Court's
 instruction on the offense elements, including the requirement
 that the State prove that Paris acted intentionally. The
 prosecutor also used the terms "intentionally" and "intended" to
 describe Paris's state of mind. The prosecutor's reference to
 what Paris knew and understood did not misstate the required
 mental state or constitute misconduct. Evidence that Paris knew
 and understood the condition of his furlough, including knowing
 and understanding that he would be processed as an escapee if he
 failed to return to Laumaka as required by his furlough pass or
 as directed by Laumaka officials, was relevant to proving that he
 acted intentionally in escaping from custody. 
IV. 
Paris argues that the Circuit Court erred in giving the
 
jury the following instruction:
 
An escape can be perpetrated by a person even though
he is not in actual physical custody or under immediate
control and supervision of a guard. A person may be deemed
to be in custody when released from a correctional or
detention facility on furlough and legally bound by
restrictions.
 
The instruction is based on the Hawai 'i Supreme Court's decision 
in Smith, 59 Haw. at 462-64, 583 P.2d at 342-43, and is a correct 
statement of the law. We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in giving the challenged instruction. 
V.
 
Paris argues that the Circuit Court erred by failing to
 
apply the doctrine of judicial estoppel to preclude the State
 from arguing at trial that the furlough agreements were
 contracts. We disagree.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Paris moved pretrial to dismiss the escape charge,
 
contending that the Department of Public Safety (DPS) should have
 
followed administrative polices and sought administrative
 remedies that would have precluded the DPS from pursuing
 prosecution of Paris for escape. In its written opposition to
 Paris's motion, the State argued that the administrative policies
 cited by Paris were discretionary and did not preclude the DPS
 from pursing prosecution of Paris. The State did not contend in
 its written opposition that the furlough agreements were not
 contracts. However, at the hearing on the motion, in addition to
 largely submitting on the State's memorandum in opposition, the
 prosecutor somewhat curiously asserted that: "the State would
 argue that there was no contract, no legal consideration that was
 given or made by the defendant in this case, it was simply just
 notice of terms and conditions whether or not he wanted to abide
 by them or not." The Circuit Court denied Paris's motion without
 stating any specific reasons. Thereafter, Paris moved in limine
 to preclude the State from referring to the furlough agreements
 as contracts. The Circuit Court denied the motion before the
 opening statements at trial.
 
A trial court has discretion on whether to invoke the 
doctrine of judicial estoppel. Langer v. Rice, No. 29636, 2013 
WL 5788676, at *4 (Hawai
'i App. Oct. 28, 2013) (MOP). The record 
does not show that the Circuit Court actually accepted or relied upon the prosecutor's curious assertion that the furlough agreements were not contracts in denying Paris's pretrial motion to dismiss. See id. at *5 (referring to the elements for 
judicial estoppel). In addition, the State's proof at trial did not depend on a finding that the furlough agreements were contracts; instead, the State relied upon the furlough agreements to show that Paris had notice and knowledge that he was required to appear at Laumaka on January 11, 2012, and intentionally failed to appear. Under these circumstances, we conclude that 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in failing to
 
apply the doctrine of judicial estoppel.
 
CONCLUSION 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment. DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 31, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Marcus Landsberg, IV
(Landsberg Law Office)for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10

 