NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000826 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IES RESIDENTIAL, INC.,
Appellant-Appellant
v. 
DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, 
Appellee-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 16-1-0385) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Nakasone, JJ.) 
In this secondary agency appeal, Appellant-Appellant 
IES Residential, Inc. (
IES) appeals from the November 7, 2016 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit1 (circuit court) Final 
Judgment in favor of Appellee-Appellee Director, Department of 
Labor and Industrial Relations (Director), and against IES, 
pursuant to the circuit court's Order Affirming Hawaii Labor 
Relations Board's Decision Dated February 3, 2016 (Order), and 
the Hawaii Labor Relations Board's (Board) Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law and Decision and Order Dated February 3, 2016 
(Board Decision). 
On appeal, IES contends that the circuit court erred in 
affirming the Board Decision to uphold a Hawaii Occupational Safety and Health Division (HIOSH) citation against IES for 
violating Fall Protection requirements, by (1) failing to define 
"supervisor," (2) deferring to the Board's determination that IES 
1 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided .  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
employee Peter Lee (Lee) acted in a supervisory capacity and 
imputing Lee's knowledge to IES without an evidentiary basis, (3) 
failing to address and relying on the Board's "numerous misstatements of the record,"
2 (4) deferring to the Board's 
"misapplication" of the employee misconduct defense, and (5) holding IES "strictly liable" for the "unforeseeable misconduct of rogue employees." 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm. 
I. Background 
On December 14, 2012, HIOSH inspectors observed four 
IES employees
3 installing a photovoltaic system on a roof 18 feet 
above ground without being properly secured in a personal fall arrest system. HIOSH inspectors conducted an inspection with Lee, who presented himself as the "foreman."
4 
IES's fall protection policy, also called the 100% tie 
off rule, requires that employees tie off to a fall arrest system every time they are on a roof more than six feet above ground. IES's policy states that violations "will result in immediate suspension or termination of employment." IES did not suspend or terminate the four employees, contrary to its written disciplinary policy. 
As a result of the violation, on April 3, 2013, HIOSH 
issued a citation for a "serious" violation of 29 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 1926.501(b)(13),
5 and a penalty of $825.00. 
2 IES's third point of error does not set forth the "numerous
misstatements of the record" that IES complains of, as required by Hawai #i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP ) Rule 28(b)(4). 
Rule 28(b)(4)(ii) and
(iii) require that a point of error identify where in the record the alleged
error occurred, where it was objected to, or the manner in which the allegederror was brought to the attention of the lower court. 
Accordingly, we will
not address this point of error. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)("Points not presented
in accordance with this section will be disregarded[.]"). 
3 The four IES employees at the job site were Joshua Like ( Like ),
Nicholas Kam ( Kam), Christian Bernard ( Bernard ), and Lee. 
4 At the December 5, 2013 Board hearing, HIOSH inspector Timothy
Scalzone testified that Lee identified himself as the "foreman." 
5 29 CFR § 1926.501(b)(13) provides, 
(continued...) 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5IES contested the citation, and the Board conducted an
evidentiary hearing on December 5 and 12, 2013. The following 
witnesses testified at the Board hearing: (1) HIOSH compliance officer Timothy Scalzone (Scalzone), (2) IES's Hawai# i division 
manager Daniel Marsh (Marsh 
), (3) IES's Hawai# i division 
assistant manager Christopher Woytus (Woytus), (4) Occupational 
Safety and Health Act (OSHA) employer outreach trainer James 
Johnson (Johnson), and (5) IES's Vice President of Safety and 
Operations James Allen (Allen).  Following the evidentiary 
hearing, the Board affirmed the citation and the penalty in the 
Board Decision issued on February 3, 2016. IES appealed to the circuit court, which affirmed the Board's Decision, following a hearing.  
II. Standard of Review 
Appellate court review of a circuit court's review of an
administrative decision is a secondary appeal. The standard of review is one in which this court must determine whether the circuit court was right or wrong in its decision,applying the standards set forth in HRS § 91-14(g) (1993) tothe agency's decision. 
Kilakila # O Haleakalâ v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 138 Hawai# i 383,
395-96, 382 P.3d 195, 207-08 (2016) (internal quotation marks and
citations omitted). Hawai
#i Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 
91-14(g)(2012) provides:  
 
Upon review of the record the court may affirm the
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify thedecision and order if the substantial rights of thepetitioners may have been prejudiced because theadministrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or ordersare: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutoryprovisions; or
(2) In excess of the statutory authority orjurisdiction of the agency; or 
(...continued)
Residential construction. Each employee engaged inresidential construction activities 6 feet (1.8m) or moreabove lower levels shall be protected by guardrail systems,safety net system, or personal fall arrest system unlessanother provision in paragraph (b) of this section providesfor an alternative fall protection measure . . . . 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  
 
 (3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or
(4) Affected by other error of law; or
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the wholerecord; or
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized byabuse of discretion or clearly unwarrantedexercise of discretion. 
"Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are 
reviewable under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions 
regarding procedural defects are reviewable under subsection (3); findings of fact are reviewable under subsection (5); and an agency's exercise of discretion is reviewable under subsection (6)." Kilakila, 138 Hawai# i at 396, 382 P.3d at 208 (internal 
quotation marks and citations omitted). 
Under the clearly 
erroneous standard, the appellate court must sustain the findings of fact "unless the court is left with a firm and definite conviction that a mistake has been made." Bumanglag v. Oahu 
Sugar Co., Ltd., 78 Hawai# i 275, 279, 892 P.2d 468, 472 (1995) 
(block format and citation omitted). 
"Pursuant to HRS § 91-14(g) an agency's conclusions of 
law are reviewed de novo
. A conclusion of law that presents 
mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because the conclusion is dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case." Kilakila, 138 
Hawai# i at 396, 382 P.3d at 208 (internal quotation marks and 
citations omitted). 
"Where both mixed questions of fact and law 
are presented, deference will be given to the agency's expertise and experience in the particular field and the court should not substitute its own judgment for that of the agency." Dole Hawaii 
Div.-Castle & Cooke, Inc. v. Ramil, 71 Haw. 
419, 424, 794 P.2d 
1115, 1118 (1990) (citation omitted). 
III. Discussion 
In the first and second points of error, IES contends 
that the circuit court erred in failing to define the term "supervisor," in deferring to the Board Decision that Lee acted 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in a supervisory capacity, and by imputing Lee's knowledge to IES
without an evidentiary basis.  
To establish an occupational safety violation, there 
are four elements that the Director must prove by a preponderance of the evidence: 
"(1) the cited standard applies, (2) there was 
a failure to comply with the cited standard, (3) an employee had access to the violative condition, and (4) the employer knew or should have known of the condition with the exercise of due diligence." Dir. Dep't of Labor & Indus. Relations v. Permasteelisa Cladding Technologies, Ltd., 125 Hawai# i 223, 227, 
257 P.3d 236, 240 (App. 2011)(quoting Dir. Dep't Labor & Indus. Relations v. Maryl Pac. Constructors, Inc., OSAB 2001-18, 2002 WL 31757252, at *6 (June 13, 2002)). 
IES challenges the fourth 
element, claiming that while Lee was a "lead man," Lee was not a "supervisor" for purposes of imputing his knowledge to IES. 
The Board Decision stated in pertinent part, 
4. The employer knew or should have known of the
condition with the exercise of due diligence. 
Lee, the project "lead" at the Alewa Work Site,
admitted to [HIOSH compliance officer] S[c]alzone that thefour men should have been tied-off. This Board has appliedthe well-settled federal OSHA precedent that the actualknowledge of a supervisory or management person can beimputed to the employer. 
Director v. Dorvin D. Leis Co.,
Inc., Board Case No. OSH 2013-28, Order No. 582 (2014)
(citing  A.P. O'Horo Company, Inc., 14 BNA OSHC 2004, 2007
(No. 85-369 1991) (A.P. O'Horo); Dover Elevator Company,
Inc., 16 BNA OSHC 1281 (No. 91-862 1993). In addition, allfour men on the roof on December 14, 2012 (Kam, Bernard,Like and Lee) admitted to Woytus that they knew they wereviolating [IES]'s Fall Protection Policy which included a100% tie-off rule applicable to the conditions (18 feetabove the ground) at the Alewa Work Site. It is clear that [IES] and its workers knew of the dangers of working on aroof that was 18 feet above the ground. 
Thus, the Board finds that the Director has met its
burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that[IES] knew or should have known of the hazardous conditionwith the exercise of due diligence . . . . 
5   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Footnote omitted)6 (Emphasis and italics in original.) In its 
review of the Board Decision, the circuit court ruled, "With 
regard to the knowledge element the court accepts the Labor Board's determination that Lee acted in a supervisory capacity and his knowledge could be imputed to [IES] to establish the knowledge element of [Director's] prima facie case." 
The Board's determination as to this issue is a mixed 
question of fact and law. Where mixed questions of fact and law are presented, "deference will be given to the agency's expertise and experience in the particular field[.]" Dole Hawaii, 71 Haw. 
at 424, 794 P.2d at 1118 (citation omitted). IES managers Woytus and Marsh testified before the Board that Lee, as the "lead man," was responsible for ensuring that the workers followed safety procedures at the work site. The Board Decision noted that Lee's position as "lead man" at the work site was not disputed by IES, and that Johnson, the fall protection trainer, testified that IES designated a "lead man" for every installation job "whose responsibility was to identify safety concerns and to monitor safety compliance." HIOSH inspector Scalzone testified that Lee informed him that he had the authority to "order a worker to tie off if [the worker] was not tied off." IES Vice President Allen 
testified that Lee's resume indicated that Lee received training 
as a competent person in fall protection and "the competent person on the project has the ability to stop work at any time." 
Allen also testified that as the lead man, Lee was responsible 
for safety at the job site and could stop an individual from working if that individual was in violation of the fall protection rule. IES assistant manager Woytus testified that Lee was responsible for understanding that the employees had to properly wear and connect all fall protection equipment, and that every employee had to comply with the fall protection requirements. IES manager Marsh testified that the lead man has 
6 In the footnote, the Board explained that because the state
structure is modeled after the federal OSHA, citing Permasteelisa, 125 Hawai #i 
at 228, 257 P.3d at 241, it looked to interpretation of the parallel federal
law for guidance. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  
  the "ultimate responsibility to make sure that everyone stays 
compliant on the job site." 
Regardless of IES's characterization of Lee as a "lead 
man," rather than a "supervisor," the record contains substantial evidence to support the Board's determination that Lee acted in a supervisory capacity and to impute Lee's knowledge to IES. See 
HRS § 91-14(g)(5). IES's argument that a definition of "supervisor," was required, is without merit. The circuit court was correct in affirming the Board's determination that Lee acted in a supervisory capacity and his knowledge could be imputed to IES to establish that IES knew or should have known of the hazardous condition with the exercise of due diligence. See 
Kilakila, 138 Hawai# i at 395, 382 P.3d at 207. 
In the fourth point of error, IES contends that the 
circuit court erred in deferring to the Board's "misapplication" of the employee misconduct defense. IES claims that it was entitled to the affirmative defense of employee misconduct, which requires that the employer establish that, 
(1) the employer has established work rules designed to
prevent the violation; (2) it has adequately communicatedthese rules to its employees; (3) it has taken steps todetect and correct violations, especially if there wereincidents of prior non-compliance; and (4) it haseffectively enforced the rules when violations have been
discovered. 
Dir. Dep't of Labor & Indus. Relations v. Kiewit Pac. Co., Case 
No. OSAB-94-009 (OSHCO ID C6595), 1996 WL 33347449, at *3 (citation omitted). The Board found that IES failed to meet Element 3 and Element 4 of this defense. In its review of the Board Decision, the circuit court ruled, "With regard to the third element of [IES's] affirmative defense of employee misconduct the Court accepts the Labor Board's determination that [IES] did not conduct adequate field inspections of its work sites." 
Element 3 required that IES show that it has "taken 
steps to detect and correct violations[.]" Id. As to Element 3, 
the Board Decision stated, 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Board finds that [IES] failed to meet the
requirement in Element 3 because of its failure to conduct
adequate field inspections of the work being performed byits workers. While the testimony presented by Johnson,Woytus, and Marsh all described field inspection workperformed after December 14, 2012, there is no clearevidence of a systematic field inspection program in effectprior to December 14, 2012, the date of the violationsdiscovered by HIOSH at the Alewa Work Site. It is apparentthat [IES's] realization of the need to perform frequent on-site inspections came after the occurrence on December 14,2012 at the Alewa Work Site. 
The Board specifically evaluated and weighed the testimonies of 
Woytus, Marsh, and Johnson, in rendering its finding that there was insufficient evidence regarding inspections prior to the December 14, 2012 violations. The Board also noted the testimony of Allen, regarding inspections in June, August and November 2012, in finding that "Allen's work site inspections [of] three in six months were clearly infrequent events." 
The Board's determination that Element 3 of the 
employee misconduct defense was not established, is a mixed question of fact and law. The record contains substantial evidence to support the Board's determination that IES failed to conduct "adequate" or "systematic" field inspections to detect violations of its fall protection program prior to December 14, 2012. The circuit court was correct in affirming the Board's determination that IES failed to take adequate steps to detect and correct violations. See Kiewit, id. at *3; Kilakila, 138 
Hawai# i at 395, 382 P.3d at 207. 
Element 4 of the employee misconduct defense required 
that IES establish that it has "effectively enforced the rules when violations have been discovered." Kiewit, id. As to this 
element, the Board Decision stated, 
The Board finds that [IES] failed to enforce its Fall
Protection Policy for fall protection violations that
occurred on December 14, 2012. There is no dispute that theFall Protection Policy was violated, but [IES] neverthelesschose not to enforce the disciplinary aspects of the policy,and Kam, Bernard, Like, and Lee were all retained by [IES].Although Kam, Bernard, Like, and Lee were given correctivecounseling for their failure to comply with the 100% tie-offrule, none of them were suspended or terminated as required 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by the Fall Protection Policy. The disciplinary aspect of
the Fall Protection Policy states in "bold" print: 
VIOLATION: Working outside the warning area without anappropriate fall protection device for any length oftime will  result in immediate  suspension or
termination of employment.  (Emphasis in italics) 
. . . . 
The reasons cited by [IES] for its decision not to
enforce the disciplinary aspect of the Fall ProtectionPolicy (i.e., suspension or termination of the four workers)are inadequate and questionable . . . . 
. . . In this case, [IES's] Fall Protection Policy was
disregarded and violated at all three levels of the company:(i) at the worker level where all four workers violated the100% tie-off rule, (ii) at the field-supervisory level whenLee violated the tie-down rules and allowed other workers to violate the same, and (iii) at the top-management level whenthe [IES's] executive office allowed the four workers toviolate its Fall Protection Policy and avoid the policy-mandated discipline. 
. . . . 
Therefore, the Board finds and concludes that [IES]
has not met the requirement of Element #4 and cannotsuccessfully assert the "employee misconduct" defensebecause Respondent failed to enforce its Fall ProtectionPolicy for the violations that occurred on December 14,2012, at the Alewa Work Site. 
(bolding and italics in original).  In its review of the Board
Decision, the circuit court ruled,  
With regard to the fourth element of [IES's] affirmativedefense of employee misconduct the Court accepts the LaborBoard's determination that [IES] did not enforce itsdisciplinary policy. The Court defers to the Labor Board's interpretation and finding that [IES's] disciplinary policyfor fall protection violations is unequivocal and [IES] hasnot produced any evidence or case law to show that it hadthe discretion to deviate from it. 
IES argues that post-violation disciplinary actions are 
irrelevant to the employee misconduct defense because they could 
not have contributed to the workers' violative conduct on the day of the HIOSH inspection. Because the Hawaii Occupational Safety and Health Law is patterned after the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act, the Board and the courts have looked to interpretations of the analogous federal laws by the federal 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 courts and the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
(Review Commission) for guidance. See Permasteelisa, 125 Hawai# i 
at 228, 257 P.3d at 241 (citing French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai# i 462, 467, 99 P.3d 1046, 1051 (2004)); Kiewit, id. at 
*3. Review Commission precedent "allows consideration of both pre- and post-inspection discipline." Sec'y of Labor v. Sunland 
Construction, Inc., 24 O.S.H. Cas. (BNA) 1831, 2013 WL 4732427, at *9 (July 16, 2013); Sec'y of Labor v. Quinlan Enterprises, 24 O.S.H. Cas. (BNA) 1154, 2013 WL 5505283, at *11 (July 22, 2013). The Board rejected IES's argument below, stating, "For [IES] to argue that all post-violation acts are irrelevant is bad policy and not in the interest of the promotion of proper worker safety." See Dir. Dep't of Labor & Indus. Relations v. Buck 
Roofing Co., Inc., Case No. OSAB 95-069 (OSHCO No. C8955) (Rep. No. 103896007), 1998 WL 2026978, at *2 (1998) (considering only post-violation disciplinary action and finding "that Respondent's 'disciplinary' actions had no punitive effect because the employees were allowed to finish the project."). 
IES also argues that as the employer, it "has the 
discretion to enforce its own policies as it determines to be appropriate under the circumstances," and that there were no legal requirements under the HIOSH statute and regulations to suspend or terminate employees who violate its safety rules.  "To 
prove that its disciplinary system is more than a 'paper 
program,' an employer must present evidence of having actually administered the discipline outlined in its policy and procedures." Sec'y of Labor v. Precast Serv., Inc., 17 O.S.H. 
Cas. (BNA) 1454, 1995 WL 693954, at *2 (Nov. 14, 1995) (emphasis added). "Adequate enforcement is a critical element of the [employee misconduct] defense." Id. IES's strict disciplinary 
policy called for immediate suspension or termination upon violation of its fall protection policy. IES failed to do either after the December 14, 2012 violation. IES's decision to not follow its policy and exercise discretion instead, foreclosed it from establishing the employee misconduct defense. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Board's determination that Element 4 of the 
employee misconduct defense was not established, is a mixed 
question of fact and law. The record contains substantial evidence to support the Board's determination that IES did not enforce its own policies as required for the defense to apply. The circuit court was correct in affirming the Board's determination that IES did not effectively enforce its rules when violations were discovered. See Kiewit, 1996 WL 33347449 at *3; 
Kilakila, 138 Hawai# i at 395, 382 P.3d at 207. 
Finally, in the fifth point of error, IES contends that 
the circuit court erred in holding IES "strictly liable" for the "unforeseeable misconduct of rogue employees." Because the circuit court was correct in affirming the Board's determination that Lee's knowledge of the violation was imputed to IES, IES is not being held "strictly liable," and this argument is without merit. 
IV. Conclusion 
Based on the foregoing, the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit's November 7, 2016 Final Judgment and Order Affirming Hawaii Labor Relations Board's Decision, and the Hawaii Labor Relations Board's February 3, 2016 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Decision and Order, are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 6, 2021. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge
11 Mark G. Valencia,Michael R. Marsh,(Case Lombardi & Pettit)for Appellant-Appellant. 
Herbert B.K. Lau,
Deputy Attorney General,for Appellee-Appellee. 