NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000994
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
EDWARD CABISON SISON, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-1724)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Edward Cabison Sison (Sison)
 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence for one
 
count of Unauthorized Entry in a Dwelling in the First Degree in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 708-812.55(1)(a)
 
1
(Supp. 2013)  entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit,
(Circuit Court) on April 24, 2013.2
 
On appeal, Sison argues that: (1) the Circuit Court
 
erred in precluding him from proceeding with a "line of
 questioning [] crucial to determining" whether all of the
 elements of the charged offense had been met; and (2) the Circuit
 
1
 HRS ยง 708-812.55 provides, in pertinent part:
 
Unauthorized entry in a dwelling in the first degree.
  
(1) A person commits the offense of unauthorized entry in a
dwelling in the first degree if the person intentionally or
knowingly enters unlawfully into a dwelling and another
person was, at the time of the entry, lawfully present in
the dwelling who:
 
(a) Was sixty-two years of age or older[.]
 
2
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court erred in "failing to instruct the jury on the included
 
offense of Criminal Trespass" in the First Degree.
 
After a careful review of the points raised and
 
arguments made by the parties, the record and the relevant
 authority, we resolve Sison's points as follows:
 
1. The Circuit Court did not err in precluding
 
defense counsel from asking questions regarding the complaining
 witness's (CW) son's use of the main residence. The Circuit
 Court called for a bench conference in response to defense
 counsel's questions regarding the CW's son's occupation and use
 of the main residence. The Circuit Court's concerns were based
 on the relevance of this line of questioning.
3
 
Sison disputed whether the CW "was present" in the
 
dwelling at the time Sison entered CW's dwelling. At the point
 of this bench conference, the prosecution had already established
 that CW and her husband owned the property and lived and slept in
 a bedroom separate from the "main residence" as depicted in
 State's Exhibit 17 and at the time of the incident she was
 outside in a covered patio doing laundry. Defense counsel had
 elicited that CW and her husband had "given" their son the "big
 house" where he lived.
 
To the Circuit Court's question, "what is the relevance
 
of the other parts of the house, that there's no evidence to show
 that the defendant entered?" defense counsel stated, "To show
 that that's not her dwelling. To show that the dwelling was a
 room he was in, but she was not inside of her dwelling." When
 the Circuit Court stated it understood that CW was not in the
 separate bedroom and asked, "But what does the son have to do
 with this?" defense counsel responded, "I'm trying to establish
 the whole property is not one dwelling." The Circuit Court told
 defense counsel, "You can ask that question to establish that she
 wasn't in the dwelling. But your questions are irrelevant as to
 
3
 Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 401 provides: 
Rule 401 Definition of "relevant evidence". 
"Relevant evidence" means evidence having any tendency to
make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the
determination of the action more probable or less probable
than it would be without the evidence.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the son's use of the house and where the son uses and what the
 
kids use."
 
As this exchange shows, the Circuit Court did not
 
prevent defense counsel from asking questions to establish that
 there were separate dwellings on the property. Defense counsel
 thereafter continued his cross-examination of CW, who then
 testified that she lived in the separate bedroom but was not
 inside it or inside the main house while Sison was also present. 
Rather, she testified that she was doing laundry in a "patio
 covered area" with a "roof" that was "within the property."
 
Sison argues that "[t]he separate use and occupation of
 
the main residence by [CW's] son and his family went to the very
 heart of the issue of whether [CW] was present in the dwelling at
 the time that Sison allegedly entered the garage bedroom" and
 points to subsequent testimony that CW was seen in the main
 residence by the police. Sison further contends that the
 "[e]vidence tending to show that the main residence and the
 garage were separately occupied was probative of the fact that
 [CW] was not present in the garage dwelling at the time that [he]
 entered it," however does not explain how this is true. That
 CW's other family members lived in the main residence does not
 make it more or less likely that CW was present in the main
 residence when Sison entered her dwelling. The Circuit Court did
 not err in foreclosing the defense from asking questions about
 use of the main residence by CW's son and son's children. HRE
 Rules 402 and 403.
 
2. Sison argues that the Circuit Court erred by not
 
instructing the jury on the included offense of Criminal Trespass
 in the First Degree in violation of HRS ยง 708-813(1)(a)(i)
 (Supp. 2013) (CT1).
4 The parties agree, as do we, that CT1 is a
 
4
 HRS ยง 708-813(1) provides in pertinent part:
 
Criminal trespass in the first degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of criminal trespass in the first degree
if:
 
(a) That person knowingly enters or remains
unlawfully:
 
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
lesser included offense to Unauthorized Entry in a Dwelling in 
the First Degree. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has recently 
reaffirmed that "providing instructions on all lesser-included offenses with a rational basis in the evidence is essential to the performance of the jury's function" but overruled the holding in State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai
'i 405, 413, 16 P.3d 246, 254 (2001) 
that the failure to instruct on a lesser-included offense is harmless whenever the jury convicts of a greater offense. State 
v. Flores, 131 Hawai
'i 43, 51, 57, 314 P.3d 120, 128, 134 (2013) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Sison's defense relied heavily on the argument that CW
 
was not present in the dwelling where the Honolulu Police
 Department officer testified that Sison was discovered. The CW
 testified that she was doing laundry outside the separate bedroom
 and had not seen Sison. If the jury believed CW was not
 "present," it could have acquitted Sison of Unauthorized Entry in
 a Dwelling in the First Degree and returned a conviction for CT1. 
Based on this record, we cannot conclude that the failure to
 instruct on this lesser-included offense was harmless.
 
Therefore, we vacate the April 24, 2013 Judgment of the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit and remand for a new trial. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 25, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Craig W. Jerome,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
 
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
4(...continued)
 
(i) 	In a dwelling; or
 
(ii) 	In or upon the premises of a hotel or
apartment building[.]
 
4
 