NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000388
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
BUCKY K. INENAGA, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
HONOLULU DIVISION
(CASE NO. 1DTA-15-04090)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Bucky K. Inenaga (Inenaga ) appeals
from the "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
Plea/Judgment" (Judgment ) entered on April 12, 2016 in the
District Court of the First Circuit (District Court).  After a
bench trial, the District Court found Inenaga guilty of operatin
a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant ( OVUII), in
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) ยง 291E-61(a)(1)
(2007).1 g
On appeal, Inenaga contends that: (1) the OVUII charge
was defective for failing to define the term "alcohol" as set
1  HRS ยง 291E-61(a)(1) provides:
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates or
assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount
sufficient to impair the person's normal mental faculties or
ability to care for the person and guard against casualty[.]NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
forth in the applicable statutory definition; (2) there was
insufficient evidence that he was impaired by "alcohol" according
to his reading of the term's statutory definition; and (3) the
District Court erred in denying his motion to suppress statements
he made to Officer Joshua Wong (Officer Wong ) upon being stopped
and his answers to the "medical rule-out questions" asked before
he performed field sobriety tests because no prior Miranda
warnings were given.2
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Inenaga's points of error as follows and affirm.
On August 29, 2015, at about 12:43 a.m., Officer Wong
effected a traffic stop of a car being driven by Inenaga. 
Inenaga's car was headed in the wrong direction on Pensacola
Street, which is a one-way street, and was traveling in the same
lane as Officer Wong's vehicle, coming head-on towards Officer
Wong, when Officer Wong stopped Inenaga's car.  After activating
the blue lights and siren of his patrol car, Officer Wong
directed Inenaga to turn into a side street and pull over, and
Inenaga complied.  Officer Wong approached Inenaga and explained
that Inenaga had been pulled over for driving the wrong way on a
one-way street.  Inenaga expressed surprise that Pensacola was a
one-way street. 
While conversing with Inenaga, Officer Wong noticed a
strong odor of alcohol coming from Inenaga's breath, that
Inenaga's eyes were red and bloodshot, and that his speech was
slurred.  Officer Wong informed Inenaga of his observations and
asked Inenaga if Inenaga would participate in a field sobriety
test.  In response, Inenaga said that he had come from a
nightclub and had been drinking, but that he was "not that
wasted," and Inenaga agreed to participate in the field sobriety
tests. 
2  The Honorable Lono J. Lee presided over Inenaga's motions to dismiss
for defective charge and to suppress evidence.  The Honorable James H. Ashford
presided over Inenaga's trial and sentencing.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Prior to administering the field sobriety test, Officer
Wong asked Inenaga "medical rule-out questions" to determine if
Inenaga had any medical conditions that would affect his ability
to perform the tests.  Officer Wong asked Inenaga whether "he was
sick, if he was injured, he was taking any prescribed
medications, if he was diabetic, epileptic, if he had any
physical defects, any type of speech impediments, if he had a
glass or artificial eye, and if he was under the care of a
doctor, a dentist, or an eye doctor."  Inenaga answered "no" to
all of these questions. 
During the walk-and-turn test, Inenaga was unable to
keep his balance in the instructional position, started too soon,
missed heel to toe on every step, made an improper turn, stepped
off the line seven times, and raised his arms.  During the one-
leg stand test, Inenaga raised his arms to maintain his balance
and swayed from side to side throughout the test.  After
completing the field sobriety tests and a preliminary alcohol
screening, Inenaga was placed under arrest. 
(1)  Sufficiency of the Charge .  On appeal, Inenaga
contends that his OVUII charge was defective for failing to
define the term "alcohol" as set forth in the statutory
definition, HRS ยง 291E-1 (2007), that was in effect at the time
of the alleged offense.  This contention is without merit.  State
v. Tsujimura, 140 Hawai #i 299, 307-09, 400 P.3d 500, 508-10
(2017) (holding that an OVUII charge was not defective for
failing to allege the statutory definition of "alcohol.") .3 
(2) Sufficiency of the Evidence .  We similarly reject
Inenaga's claim that there was insufficient evidence to support
his conviction.  Inenaga's claim is based on his reading of the
statutory definition of "alcohol" applicable to this case as
3  Inenaga's claim that applying the OVUII statute to driving under the
influence of alcoholic beverages such as beer and wine would render the
statute unconstitutionally vague is likewise without merit.  State v.
Karamatsu
, No. CAAP-16-0000246, 2017 WL 2839545, at *6 n.5 (Hawai #i App. Jun.
30, 2017), cert. denied, SCWC-16-0000246, 2017 WL 6524751 (Haw. Dec. 21,
2017).
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
being restricted only to alcohol that is the product of
distillation.  Inenaga's reading of the statutory definition,
however, was held to be erroneous by this court and the Hawai #i
Supreme Court in Tsujimura , 140 Hawai #i at 307-08, 400 P.3d at
508-09.  Based on Tsujimura, Inenaga's insufficiency of evidence
argument fails. 
(3) Miranda .  Inenaga contends he was in custody when
he told Officer Wong, during their initial encounter, that he had
come from a nightclub and had been drinking, but was not that
wasted, and when he answered the medical rule-out questions
before performing the field sobriety tests.  Inenaga therefore
argues that these statements and his answers to the medical rule-
out questions should have been suppressed on the ground that he
did not receive prior  Miranda warnings.  We disagree.
Inenaga's statements about having come from a nightclub
and drinking were made during his initial encounter with Officer
Wong after a valid traffic stop.  Officer Wong asked the medical
rule-out questions after Inenaga agreed to participate in the
field sobriety tests and for the purpose of ensuring the validity
of the tests.  Under the totality of the circumstances, we
conclude that Inenaga was not in custody for Miranda purposes
when he made the challenged statements and answered the medical
rule-out questions.  See Berkemer v. McCarty , 468 U.S. 420, 437-
39 (1984) (holding that persons temporarily detained pursuant to
ordinary traffic stops are not in custody for purposes of
Miranda); State v. Wyatt, 67 Haw. 293, 300-01, 687 P.2d 544, 549-
50 (1984) (concluding that a motorist who was subjected to on-
the-scene questioning by a police officer after a traffic stop
was not in custody for Miranda  purposes); State v. Kahana, No.
CAAP-17-0000359, 2018 WL 2316511, *1-2 (Hawai #i App. May 22,
2018) (concluding that the defendant was not in custody when she
answered the medical rule-out questions or while performing the
field sobriety tests); State v. Uchima, No. CAAP-17-0000081, 2018
WL 898225, *1-2 (Hawai# i App. Feb. 15, 2018) (concluding that the
defendant was not in custody when the officer asked him the
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
medical rule-out questions).  Given that Inenaga was not in
custody, no prior Miranda  warnings were required, and the
District Court properly denied Inenaga's suppression motion.
Therefore, based on the foregoing, we affirm the
District Court of the First Circuit's "Notice of Entry of
Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment" filed on April 12, 2016.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 27, 2018.
On the briefs:
Alen M. Kaneshiro, 
for Defendant-Appellant . Chief Judge
Brian R. Vincent,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
5