 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000022 15-OCT-2024 08:05 AM Dkt. 99 SO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000022  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
STATE OF 
HAWAI‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
MYRON POSOA FILIPE, Defendant-Appellant  
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 1FFC-20-0001120)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By:   Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendant -Appellant Myron Posoa Filipe ( Filipe) 
appealed from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment ) 
entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit ( family court ) 
on November 15, 2022.1 On December 4, 2020, Filipe was indicted 
on one count of Sexual Assault in the First Degree2 in violation 
1   The Honorable Kevin T. Morikone presided.   
2   The indictment stated, in relevant part,  
(continued . . .)   
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 707-730(1)(b) (2014).3 Filipe 
pleaded not guilty, and the matter proceeded to a jury -waived 
trial. On June 30, 2022, the family court found Filipe guilty 
as charged. Filipe was sentenced to a term of twenty years 
imprisonment. 
Filipe raise d five points of error on appeal, 
contending that the family court erred: (1) "where it denied 
[Filipe's] motion to allow evidence of sexual activity of the 
[CW] and where it denied [Filipe's] motion to suppress 
evidence"; (2) "when it relied on the DVD police interview 
footage to determine whether [Filipe] invoked his right to 
counsel rather than relying on the official transcripts of said 
interview"; (3) "where i t stated it would discern admissibility 
and inadmissibility within the transcripts /dvd of the interview 
of [Filipe] at police headquarters rather than specifically 
2(. . .continued) 
On or about June 1, 2016, to and including June 30, 2016, 
in the City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawai ʻi, MYRON 
POSOA FILIPE, being the parent or guardian or any other 
person having legal or physical custody of [complaining witness ( CW)], did knowingly engage in sexual penetration 
with [CW], who was less than fourteen years old, by 
inserting his finger into her genital opening, thereby 
committing the offense of Sexual Assault in the First 
Degree, in violation of Section 707 -730(1)(b) of  the Hawai ʻi 
Revised Statutes.  
3 HRS § 707 -730(1)(b) (2014) provides, in pertinent part, "A person 
commits the offense of sexual assault in the first degree if . . . (b) The 
person k nowingly engages in sexual penetration with a nother person who is 
less than fourteen years old[.]" 
2   
 
 
   
  
   
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
detailing which statements it was relying on and which were not 
relied upon due to inadmissibility"; (4) "where it overruled 
[Filipe's] objection to [the State] attempting to rehab bad 
answers by the [CW] even though the [CW] had already answered 
the very same questions asked of her (asked and answered)"; and 
(5) "by denying [Filipe's] various motions for judgment of 
acquittal, and by sustaining [Filipe's] conviction despite 
insufficient evidence supporting the requisite state of mind."  
On February 1 4, 2024, this court entered a summary 
disposition order, in which we concluded that the evidence 
adduced by the State at trial did not support that Filipe had 
the requisite state of mind to be convicted of Sexual Assault in 
the First Degree. Consistent with our conclusion, we reversed 
the family court's Judgment , and declined to consider the 
remaining four points of error on appeal. Judgment on appeal 
was entered on March 12, 2024, and the Hawaiʻi Supreme Court 
accepted the State's Applicatio n for Writ of Certiorari. In a 
memorandum opinion filed on August 1 3, 2024, the Hawaiʻi Supreme 
Court vacated our judgment on appeal, and remanded this case for 
our consideration of the remaining four points of error raised 
by Filipe. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
3   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the arguments advanced and the issue s raised by the parties, we 
conclude that Filipe's remaining four points of error lack 
merit. We thus affirm the family court's Judgment, as follows: 
(1) Filipe contends that the family court erred by 
denying his motions to introduce evidence of CW's sexual history 
and to suppress evidence of statements he had made to police 
detectives Keneth (" Kenny") Toriki ( Detective Toriki) and Linda 
Robertson ( Detective Robertson ) during police interviews . 
With regard to the family court's denial of Filipe's 
motion to introduce evidence, 
Different standards of review must be applied to trial 
court decisions regarding the admissibility of evidence depending on the requirements of the particular rule of 
evidence at issue. When application of a particular 
evidentiary rule can yield only one correct result, the 
proper standard for appellate review is the right/wrong 
standard. However, the traditional abuse of discretion 
standard should be applied in the case of those rules of 
evidence that require a "judgment call" on the part of the 
trial court.  
State v. Williams , 149 Hawaiʻi 381, 391 -92, 491 P.3d 592, 602 -03 
(2021). 
The record reflects that Filipe failed to offer any 
evidence supporting his allegation that the "passage of twenty 
months from the date of the alleged offense to said examination 
[of CW] may suggest sexual activity of [the CW] with other 
persons." We thus conclude that the family court did not err in 
finding that Filipe failed to make a sufficient offer of proof , 
and in denying Filipe's motion to introduce evidence of the CW's 
4   
 
 
  
      
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sexual history  on that basis.   State v. Pulse, 83 Hawai ʻi 229, 
248, 925  P.2d 797, 816 (1996) (the purpose of an offer of proof 
"is to provide an adequate record for appellate review and to  4
4 The family court (the Honorable James S. Kawashima presided ) 
denied, without prejudice, Filipe's motion to introduce evidence as lacking a 
sufficient offer of proof, explaining: 
I'm prepared to deny the motion based solely on the offer 
of proof in the current motion as insufficient, so if this 
20-month delay, in conjunction with other evidence then 
becomes relevant, or evidence of actual past sexual 
behavior, then you can renew th e motion with that. But as 
itself, I do not find it sufficient. Motion will be 
denied. 
 . . . . 
I draw the following five conclusions of law: 
1. Defendant's motion satisfies notice to [CW] as 
required by [Hawaii Rules of Evidence] HRE 412(c)(1). 
2. Pursuant to standard jury instructions, quote, "a 
doubt which has no basis in the evidence presented, or the 
lack of evidence, or reasonable inferences therefrom, or a 
doubt which is based upon imagination, suspicion or mere 
speculation or guesswork is not a reasonable doubt." 
And from that I draw Conclusion 3. Absent mere 
speculation or guesswork, [Filipe's] offer of proof, the 
20-month delay between offense and examination is not and 
cannot be considered or presented as evidence of, quote, 
"Past sexual behavior with persons other than the accused," 
end quote, as a source of [CW]'s physical trauma.  
4. A defendant's offer of proof does not constitute 
or contain evidence described by HRE 412( [b])(2)(A); and, 
finally 
5. Lacking evidence described by HRE 412(b)(2)(A), 
defendant's motion does not require any further hearing 
under HRE 412(c)(1). 
On those grounds, the motion is denied. 
And, again, this is solely on the basis of the offer 
of proof contained in the current iteration of the motion. 
Filipe did not file a renewed motion to introduce evidence . 
5   
 
 
  
  
  
    
  
 
 
  
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assist the trial court in ruling on the admissibility of 
evidence") (cleaned up). 
(2) We next review Filipe's contention that the 
family court erred in denying his motion to suppress the 
statements that he made to Detectives Toriki and Rob ertson 
during their respective interviews of Filipe on February 6 and 
7, 2018. State v. Hewitt , 153 Hawaiʻi 33, 40, 526 P.3d 558, 565 
(2023) ("An appellate court reviews a ruling on a motion to 
suppress de novo to determine whether the ruling was right or 
wrong.") (cleaned up). Filipe contends that , due to severe 
physical pain caused by gout, and because he asserted his right 
to an attorney, he did not knowingly, voluntarily, or 
intelligently waive his Miranda rights during the interview and 
polygraph examination conducted by Detective Toriki, or the 
interview conducted by Detective Robertson. 
The record reflects that both Detective s Toriki and 
Robertson informed Filipe, prior to questioning Filipe on 
February 6 and 7, 2018, of his constitutional right to counsel. 
Both detectives testified, at the hearing on the motion to 
suppress, that they informed Filipe of his right to have an 
attorney present , and that Filipe knowingly and intelligently 
waived that right . Multiple HPD-81 forms, signed by Filipe and 
admitted into evidence as State's Exhibits 1, 3 and 5, 
6   
 
 
  
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
     
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
demonstrate  Filipe's understanding of  the nature of his 
constitutional right  to counsel, and that Filipe acknowledged  
that he did not want an attorney present during the interview.  
The  audio-visual recordings  of the detectives' 
interviews  of Filipe, and  the written transcripts of those  
interviews,   further demonstrate that Filipe knowingly and 
intelligently waived his right to counsel.   5
5 The State's Exhibit 4 reflects the following exchange between 
Detective Toriki and Filipe on February 7, 2018, 
[DETECTIVE TORIKI ] Q 
Before I ask you any questions you must 
understand your rights. You have the right to 
remain silent. You don't have to say anything 
to me or answer any of my questions. Anything 
you say may be used against you at your trial. 
You have the right to have an attorney present 
while I talk to you. If you cannot afford an 
attorney, the court will appoint one for you, 
prior to any questioning. If you decide to 
have--if you decide to answer my questions 
without an attorn ey being present, you still 
have the right to stop answering at any time. 
'Kay Myron, do you understand what I have told 
you? 
[FILIPE] A Yes. 
Q Okay. Go ahead initial by your response. 
'Kay. Myron, do you want an attorney now? 
A Hmm, no. 
Q Okay. Go ahead initial by no. 'Kay. Would 
you like to tell me what happened? 
A Yes. 
The State's Exhibit 2 reflects the following exchange between 
Detective Robertson and Filipe on February 6, 2018, 
[DETECTIVE ROBERTSON ] Q 
(continued . . .) 
7   
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5(. . .continued) 
Before I ask you any questions you must 
understand your rights. You have a right to remain silent. You don’t have to say anything 
to me  or--or answer any of my questions. 
Anything you say may be used against you at your trial. You have the right to have an 
attorney present while I talk to you. If you cannot afford an attorney the court will 
appoint one for you prior to any questioning. 
If you decide to answer my questions without an 
attorney being present you still have the right to stop answering at any time. Do you understand everything that I just read to you?  
[FILIPE] A Yes, ma'am. 
Q Do you have any questions about any of it? 
Okay. 
A No, ma'am. 
Q If you can initial right there that you 
understand what I have told you. If you can 
put your initials next to the yes, please? And 
would you like an attorney now? 
A Um, what does that mean? 
Q Do you want to speak with an attorney before 
you talk to me? 
A No. 
Q You don't want an attorney right now? 
A (No audible response.) 
Q Do you want someone to represent you? 
A I'm not sure. 
Q Okay. Would you like to consult with an 
attorney or a public defender? 
A No, ma'am. 
Q You don't want to talk to them first? 
A Do I have to? 
(continued . . .) 
8   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The record also reflects that Detectives Toriki and 
Robertson questioned Filipe about his level of physica l gout 
pain, and his capacity, given that pain, to continue with the 
5(. . .continued) 
Q  No, you don't have to. I'm asking you if you 
want to. It's your right to have a lawyer present here while I talk to you.  
 
A  No, ma'am.  
 
Q  Okay, and are you waiving that right to have a 
lawyer while you're talking with me right now?  
 A  I'm not sure.  
 Q  Okay.  
 
A  You know, I guess--I guess.  
 
Q  Okay. Are you or aren't you? I mean 'cause if 
you want one I can take you downstairs and we can get that telephone call to the public 
defender's if you don’t-- 
 A  Um-hmm (Affirmative).  
 
Q  --have your own lawyer.  
 A  No, (unintelligible) no, ma'am.  
 Q  Okay. Are you sure you don't want a lawyer 
present right now?  
 
A  (No audible response.)  
 Q  And the only reason I'm asking you again is because you said you were unsure before.  
 
A  No, ma'am.  
 
Q  No, you don't want a lawyer, okay. If you can initial next to the (unintelligible) or next to 
the no, please. And would you like to tell me 
what happened?  
 A  Yes, ma'am.  
9   
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
    
   
  
 
 
    
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interview. Filipe affirmatively represented to Detectives 
Toriki and Robertson that he was able to continue with the 
interview and answer their questions. 
We conclude , on this record, that the family court did 
not err in denying Filipe's motion to introduce evidence, and 
his motion to suppress evidence. 
(3) Filipe contends that the family court erred by 
considering both the audio-visual recording s of the police 
interviews , and written transcript s of those interviews , rather 
than confining its consideration to the transcript s only. 
Filipe specifically contends on appeal that "any ambiguity 
between the video and the transcripts should have been resolved 
in favor of [Filipe] and should have been resolved in favor of 
the official transcript." 
The audio-visual recording s of the detectives' 
interview s of Filipe , and the written transcript s of those 
interview s, were admitted into evidence as the State's Exhibits 
2, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9. The record reflects that the family court 
reviewed, inter alia , both the audio -visual recording and 
written transcript of Detective Robertson's interview, to 
clarify that Filipe affirmatively waived his right to counsel: 
6. At hearing herein, particular focus was given to 
an utterance by [Filipe] memorialized in Exhibit 2 (the 
transcript), page 14, line 4, that reads: "Um -hmm 
(Affirmative)." It is undisputed that [Filipe] did not 
actually say, "Affirmative." 
10   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
7. What Exhibit 2 identifies as "Um -hmm" was 
inserted into Detective Robertson's otherwise unbroken 
explanation that can be found on Exhibit 7 during an 11 -
second interval from timestamp 18:41:03 to timestamp 18:41:14. In Exhibit 7, that explanation, with bracketed clarifications and insertions to show [Filipe's] input, 
presents as follows:  
Okay. Are you or aren't you [waiving your right to 
an attorney ]? I mean 'cause if you want one I can 
take you downstairs and we can get that telephone 
call to the public defender's [Defendant shakes his 
head and says, "no"] if you don't [here Exhibit 2 
inserts Defendant's "um -hmm," but no such utterance 
is evident in Exhibit 7] have your own lawyer. 
8. Immediately after this 11 -second interval, the 
very next words from [Filipe's] mouth are, "nah, no ma'am." 
9. Exhibit 2's insertion of "Um -hmm (Affirmative)," 
is deemed factually inaccurate because: 
a. Exhibit 2 is an unofficial transcript prepared 
from Exhibit 7; 
b. Exhibit 2 inserts "Um -hmm (Affirmative)," at a 
point where, during actual video playback, 
Defendant audibly said, "no," and visibly shook 
his head side to side; 
c. Exhibit 2's insertion, "Um -hmm (Affirmative)," 
cannot actually be seen or heard during actual 
video playback; and 
d. Defendant's demeanor, actions and utterances 
during the entirety of Exhibit 7 confirm a 
considered, initially tentative but ultimately 
unambiguous intention to waive his right to 
counsel. 
The family court's order denying Filipe's motion to suppress  
states that the transcript was "an unofficial transcript 
prepared from Exhibit 7 [the video]."  
We conclude that the family court had discretion to 
weigh and consider the evidence presented. The family court, as 
fact finder, utilized the audio-visual recordings  to "make 
11   
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evaluations of clarity and the extent to which [Filipe] appeared 
to be affected by pain."6 The family court noted, with regard to 
the transcript s and audio -visual recording s, that "both have 
weight." We conclude that the family court did not err by 
considering the audio -visual recording s in evidence. 
(3) Filipe contends that the family court erred by 
stating it "believes it is competent in discerning what would be 
admissible or inadmissible evidence, even within the transcript 
themselves" and "if the [family court] does come across that, 
the [family court's] going to make its decision based upon the 
credible and reliable evidence that the [family court] believes 
is proper for the [family court] to consider." Filipe contends 
that this "amounted to the [family court] finding that all 
statements in this v ein by police were properly admittable at 
trial." 
Filipe's contention that the family court could not 
properly determine the credibility of witness statements lacks 
merit. "[W]here a case is tried without a jury, it is presumed 
that the presiding judge will have disregarded the incompetent 
evidence and relied upon that which was competent." State v. 
6 As discussed supra, the family court reviewed the audio -visual 
recording s of the Detectives, Toriki and Robertson , interviewing Filipe in 
order to discern whether Filipe made a valid waiver of his right to counsel. 
The family court informed counsel that, in the absence of evidence that 
Filipe "unequivocally demanded a lawyer or asked for a lawyer," it would 
consider the audio -visual recording s in evidence . 
12   
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 355, 615 P.2d 101, 108 (1980) (citation s 
omitted). 
(4) Filipe contends that the family court "erred where 
it overruled [Filipe's] objection to [the State] attempting to 
rehab bad answers by the [CW] even though the [CW] had already 
answered the very same question asked of her (asked and 
answered)." Filipe specifically challenges the following 
exchange between the State and the CW: 
[DPA]  Q   Now when you were twelve years old, were you 
bigger or smaller than your mom?  
 
[CW]  A  I don't recall.  
 
Q  Were you bigger or smaller than you are now?  
 
A  I was bigger.  
 
Q  Okay. You're 18 years old now?  
 
A  Yes.  
 
Q  When you were twelve were you bigger or smaller 
than you are now?  
 
[Defense counsel]:  Objection. Asked and 
answered.  
 
THE COURT:   Overruled.  
 
[CW]:  Smaller.  
On this record, we conclude that the family court did not abuse 
its discretion in overruling Filipe's "asked and answered" 
objection. State v. Kassebeer , 118 Hawaiʻi 493, 504, 193 P.3d 
409, 420 (2008) ("[Appellate courts] generally review[] the 
circuit court's evidentiary rulings for an abuse of discretion, 
13   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unless there can be but one correct answer to the question of 
admissibility, in which case [the] court's review is de novo."). 
Moreover, the record reflects that Filipe's witness, 
Loralei Evans, testified on cross -examination that CW was 
smaller at age twelve than at age eighteen. We thus conclude 
that the family court's overruling of Filipe's "asked and 
answered" objection , which led to the admission of evidence that 
the CW was "smaller" when the alleged assault occurred, was, in 
any event, harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See State v. 
Haili, 103 Hawaiʻi 89, 100, 79 P.3d 1263, 1274 (2003) (citation 
omitted) ("Even if the tria l court erred in admitting evidence, 
a defendant's conviction will not be overturned if the error was 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt."). 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence entered by the family court on 
November 15, 2022 . 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘i, October  15, 2024.  
On the briefs: 
 /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka  
Kai Lawrence,  Presiding Judge  
for Defendant-Appellant.   
 /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth  
Stephen K. Tsushima,  Associate Judge  
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,   
City and County of Honolulu  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
14 