 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I  RE PORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed  
Intermediate Court of Appeals 
CAAP-23-0000575 23-APR-2026 11:07 AM Dkt. 149 AMORD 
NO. CAAP-23-0000575 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI‘I 
ANDREW KINGMAN, Individually, Plaintiff-Appellant, 
v. 
ATLANTIS SUBMARINES HAWAII, LLC, a Delaware 
Limited Liability Company, Defendant-Appellee,
and 
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-10, Defendants  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CCV-20-0001561) 
AMENDED SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant Andrew Kingman (
Kingman) appeals 
from the Final Judgment entered on September 18, 2023 by the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit1 (circuit court). The Final 
Judgment was entered in favor of Defendant-Appellee Atlantis Submarines Hawaii, LLC (Atlantis). 
1 The Honorable John M. Tonaki presided.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
    
 
     
   
 
  
 
   In the underlying case, Kingman filed his operative 
First Amended Complaint (Amended Complaint) in May 2021, which 
asserted various claims related to injuries that Kingman 
allegedly sustained while performing repair work on an Atlantis 
ocean vessel. 
A discovery dispute arose over conducting Kingman's 
deposition. The discovery deadline was March 23, 2023. 
Atlantis represented that, between December 6, 2022 
and January 12, 2023, it attempted to schedule Kingman's deposition. On January 17, 2023, Atlantis noticed Kingman's 
deposition for January 26, 2023. On January 20, 2023 Kingman 
notified Atlantis that he would not appear. Atlantis attempted 
to secure an alternative date, but Kingman did not respond. 
Atlantis filed "[Atlantis' Motion to Compel Deposition of 
[Kingman]" (Motion to Compel) on February 2, 2023.
2 
The circuit court sanctioned Kingman for his non-
cooperation with Atlantis' requests to depose him. In March 
2 We note that "[Kingman's] M emorandum in O pposition to [ Atlantis'] 
Motion to C ompel Deposition of [Kingman] Filed February 2, 2023 [Dkt 147]" 
made representations indicating Kingman resided in Texas: "Plaintiff's 
inability to travel to Hawaiʻ i in the past five weeks"; "planning travel from 
Texas to Hawai
ʻi takes time"; "Plaintiff was not available to travel to 
Hawaiʻi on the date unilaterally noticed"; "Plaintiff and counsel's inability 
to immediately travel to Hawaiʻ i are not grounds for expenses under HRCP"; 
"Defendant has refused to reasonably accommodate Plaintiff who resides 
thousands of miles from the noticed law office in Honolulu"; and "Plaintiff 
only requests reasonable time to plan a trip to Hawaiʻ i." 
During the hearing on the M otion to 
Compel, Atlantis asked for 
confirmation that Kingman lives in Texas. Kingman's counsel represented that 
Kingman still lives in Hawai‘ i, and it is counsel that must travel. 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
   2023, the circuit court entered its "Order Granting [Atlantis'] 
Motion to Compel Deposition of [Kingman] Filed February 2, 2023 
[Dkt. No. 147]" (Order Compelling Deposition), which ordered 
Kingman "to appear for his oral deposition, in person, at the 
Honolulu, Hawaii offices of [Atlantis'] counsel." The circuit 
court extended the March 23, 2023 discovery deadline "for the 
sole purpose of allowing [Kingman's] oral deposition . . . to be 
completed by [Atlantis]," and awarded Atlantis "reasonable expenses incurred in making the [Motion to Compel]." 
It appears uncontested that the parties agreed to 
conduct Kingman's deposition on April 7, 2023, at 10:00 a.m. in 
Honolulu. At 6:27 p.m. on the evening prior, Kingman's counsel 
emailed Atlantis stating that the deposition had to be 
rescheduled "due to unforeseen circumstances." When Atlantis 
asked for an explanation, Kingman's counsel stated that Kingman 
"was not able to make it to the depo, as explained." 
On April 10, 2023, Atlantis filed "[Atlantis' Motion 
for Terminating Sanctions for [Kingman's] Failure to Appear for Deposition as Ordered by the [circuit court]" (Motion to 
Terminate). At the May 2, 2023 hearing on the Motion to 
Terminate, Kingman's counsel represented that they were unable 
to contact Kingman the day before the scheduled deposition, 
i.e., "[w]e simply could not get ahold of him" and "[w]e just 
didn't know what the circumstances were." The circuit court 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  noted that Kingman's counsel sent a letter to the circuit court 
saying "this nonappearance was due to a conflict." 
In June 2023, the circuit court entered its "Order 
Granting in Part and Denying in Part [Atlantis'] Motion for 
Terminating Sanctions for [Kingman's] Failure to Appear for 
Deposition as Ordered by the [circuit court] Filed April 10, 
2023 [Dkt. No. 243]" (Sanctions Order), which sanctioned Kingman 
as follows, 
1. The [circuit court] finds that pursuant to the [Order 
Compelling Deposition], [Kingman] and his counsel should 
have known that [Kingman] was required to appear for his 
deposition unless his appearance was impossible due to 
grave circumstances. Based on the record, there were no 
circumstances that would have prevented [Kingman's] appearance for his deposition. 
2. The Motion [to Terminate] is granted and pursuant to 
Rule 37(b)(2)(B) of the Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure 
[(HRCP)], the [circuit court] prohibits [Kingman] from 
introducing any evidence originating with him, including: 
a. Testimony from [Kingman]. 
b. Any expert opinion based on statements by 
[Kingman]. 
c. Any exhibit which requires foundation to be 
laid by [Kingman]. 
d. Any exhibit which otherwise originates from 
[Kingman]. 
3.  The Motion  [to Terminate]  is denied as to [Atlantis']  
request for terminating sanctions.  
(Emphasis added.) 
Other discovery disputes between the parties led to 
the entry of additional orders. In April 2023, the circuit 
court partially granted "[Atlantis'] Motion to Exclude Witnesses 
Identified in [Kingman's] Final Naming of Witnesses Filed 
January 21, 2023 [Dkt. No. 127] and All Expert Witnesses 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 Identified in [Kingman's] Disclosure of Expert Witnesses Made on 
February 6, 2023 [Dkt No. 149] Filed March 1, 2023 [Dkt. No. 
155]," excluding four of the five expert witnesses that Kingman 
had identified for the first time in his February 2023 expert 
witness disclosures, and who had not produced expert reports. 
In July 2023, the circuit court granted "[Atlantis'] Motion for 
Leave to Identify Additional Non-Expert Witnesses Filed May 23, 
2023 [Dkt. No. 338]" (Motion to Add Witnesses) whose identity Atlantis had previously declined to disclose on the basis of 
attorney work product privilege. 
The circuit court granted summary judgment in favor of 
Atlantis on all of Kingman's claims. In its June 9, 2023 "Order 
Granting in Part and Denying in Part [Atlantis'] Motion for 
Partial Summary Judgment or Alternatively, to Preclude Evidence 
Not Disclosed by the Discovery Deadline Filed March 30, 2023 
[Dkt. No. 227]," the circuit court granted partial summary 
judgment in favor of Atlantis on Kingman's claims for maintenance and cure, and for punitive damages as to the Jones 
Act, unseaworthiness, and maintenance and cure claims. In its 
August 14, 2023 "Order Granting [Atlantis'] Motion for Summary 
Judgment Filed June 25, 2023 [Dkt. No. 513]," the circuit court 
disposed of Kingman's remaining claims. 
Kingman asserts three points of error on appeal, 
contending that the circuit court abused its discretion by 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 granting Atlantis' motions: (1) "for terminating sanctions after 
[Kingman] failed to appear at a deposition because of an 
inadvertent scheduling error"; (2) "to untimely designate five 
surveillance witnesses, whom it had long known about, based on 
'work-product privilege'"; and (3) "to exclude [Kingman's] four 
damages experts based on his purported failure to provide expert 
reports, which—although not required—resulted from Atlantis'[] 
wrongfully withholding of discovery." 
Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we resolve Kingman's points of error as follows: 
(1) Kingman challenges the circuit court's Sanctions 
Order. We review the circuit court's imposition of sanctions 
for abuse of discretion. Aloha Unlimited, Inc. v. Coughlin
, 
79 Hawaiʻi 527, 532, 904 P.2d 541, 546 (App. 1995) ("The circuit 
court is given broad discretion in determining the sanctions to 
be imposed pursuant to HRCP Rule 37(b)(2)." (cleaned up)). 
Kingman contends that the sanctions on Kingman 
"amounted to default sanctions," because they precluded Kingman from introducing evidence necessary to establish the cause of 
his alleged injuries and, in so doing, "directly led to [the 
circuit court's] . . . erroneous grant of summary judgment 
against [Kingman] on all claims." 
6   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 HRCP Rule 37(b)(2)(C) grants the circuit court 
authority to impose default or terminating sanctions -- i.e., by 
entering an order "dismissing the action or proceeding or any 
part thereof, or rendering a judgment by default against the 
disobedient party." That provision is not applicable here. The 
Sanctions Order expressly stated that the circuit court was 
imposing sanctions pursuant to HRCP Rule 37(b)(2)(B), which 
authorizes the circuit court to issue "[a]n order refusing to allow the disobedient party to support or oppose designated 
claims or defenses, or prohibiting the disobedient party from 
introducing designated matters in evidence." 
The Sanctions Order also expressly denied "[Atlantis'] 
request for terminating sanctions." As the circuit court 
explained at the May 2, 2023 hearing on the Motion to Terminate, 
it was not dismissing Kingman's case but, rather, was imposing a 
limitation on Kingman's introduction of evidence: 
[T]he [circuit court] has spent an excessive amount of time 
on discovery motions and disputes in this case. The fact 
that the deposition of [Kingman] was ordered pursuant to 
the [circuit court's Order Compelling Deposition], 
[Kingman] and counsel should have known, by the [circuit court's Order Compelling Deposition], that he needed to 
appear for the deposition unless appearance was impossible 
due to grave circumstances. And, obviously, that doesn't 
appear on the record, any circumstances that would have 
prevented his appearance. 
So the [circuit court] is going to -- [circuit court] 
will not dismiss the case, but will, pursuant to Rule 
37(b)(2)(A)--(b)(2)(B), will issue an order prohibiting 
[Kingman] from introducing certain designated matters into 
evidence. 
And this is -- these designated matters are: Will 
prohibit [Kingman] from introducing any evidence 
originating with him. So that includes testimony from him. 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 It includes any expert opinions based on statements by 
[Kingman], exhibits which require foundation to be laid by 
[Kingman], and exhibits which otherwise originate from him. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The parties continued to vigorously litigate the case 
after the Sanctions Order was issued. Kingman asserted, in 
"[Kingman's] Memorandum in Opposition to [Atlantis'] Motion for 
Summary Judgment Filed June 25, 2023 [Dkt. No. 511]," that "even 
without [Kingman's] testimony, . . . multiple witnesses, 
documents and records establish" Kingman's claims. Kingman represented that he "is not the only source of evidence for the 
November 11, 2019 incident." Kingman further represented that 
he "is not the only source of evidence that the incident caused 
his injuries." It was therefore Kingman's position on summary 
judgment that, notwithstanding the bar on evidence "originating 
with him," he could nevertheless prove his case at trial. 
Kingman cannot retreat from this position in order to re-
characterize the Sanctions Order as "directly [leading] to . . . 
summary judgment." 
We therefore conclude that the circuit court did not 
abuse its discretion by entering the Sanctions Order. 
(2) Kingman contends that the circuit court abused its 
discretion by allowing Atlantis' untimely designation of five surveillance witnesses, on the basis of Atlantis' assertion of 
work product privilege. We review Kingman's contention for 
abuse of discretion. Anastasi v. Fidelity Nat. Title Ins. Co., 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 137 Hawaiʻi 104, 111, 366 P.3d 160, 167 (2016) ("[T]he extent to 
which discovery is permitted under [HRCP] Rule 26 is subject to 
considerable latitude and the discretion of the trial court. Thus, the exercise of such discretion will not be disturbed in 
the absence of a clear abuse of discretion that results in 
substantial prejudice to a party." (citation omitted)). 
The record reflects that Kingman requested the 
production of documents relating to evidence of surveillance on 
Kingman in November 2021. 
Atlantis responded to Kingman's 
request in July 2022 by not disclosing the requested information on the basis of attorney work product privilege. Six weeks 
prior to the assigned trial date of July 3, 2023, Atlantis produced the surveillance videos on Kingman, and filed its 
Motion to Add Witnesses. 
The record does not support the circuit court's 
finding that Atlantis' late-produced surveillance evidence was 
privileged pursuant to the attorney work product doctrine. 
There is no declaration from Atlantis' counsel or other evidence 
to establish that the surveillance evidence, which was ultimately disclosed to Kingman, was prepared in anticipation of 
trial and would not have been created in substantially similar 
form but for the prospect of litigation. Anastasi
, 137 Hawaiʻi 
at 113-14, 366 P.3d at 169-70. 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
 Nevertheless, it was within the discretion of the 
circuit court to permit the late identification of the 
surveillance witnesses, and Kingman fails to demonstrate an 
abuse of discretion. The HRCP "reflect a basic philosophy that 
a party to a civil action should be entitled to the disclosure 
of all information in the possession of another person prior to 
trial, unless the information is privileged." Haw. Police
Dep't. v. Kubota, 155 Hawaiʻ i 136, 154, 557 P.3d 865, 883 (2024) 
(citation omitted). "[A] trial court has broad discretionary 
powers to balance discovery interests and protect confidential 
information." 
Id.
The circuit court has broad discretion over the timing 
of evidence production pursuant to HRCP Rule 26(d) (2015).3 
Here, Atlantis represented to the circuit court that, in order 
to preserve the impeachment value of the surveillance evidence, 
it moved to introduce the surveillance evidence only after the 
Sanctions Order eliminated the need to depose Kingman. It 
appears that Atlantis produced the surveillance evidence on 
May 23, 2023, approximately six weeks prior to the calendared 
3 HRCP Rule 26 was amended effective January 1, 2022. Because 
Kingman's Complaint was filed prior to January 1, 2022, the pre- January 1, 
2022 version of HRCP Rule 26 applies. The pre- January 1, 2022 version of 
HRCP Rule 26(d), Sequence and Timing of Discovery, provided that: "Unless the 
court upon motion, for the convenience of parties and witnesses and in the 
interests of justice, orders otherwise, methods of discovery may be used in 
any sequence, and the fact that a party is conducting discovery, whether by 
deposition or otherwise, shall not operate to delay any other party's 
discovery." 
10   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 trial date, which gave Kingman sufficient time to review the 
evidence in preparation for trial. Kingman does not identify 
any prejudice that resulted to him by the late disclosure of the 
surveillance evidence and naming of the witnesses. On this 
basis, we conclude that the circuit court did not abuse its 
discretion in allowing Atlantis to designate the five 
surveillance witnesses. 
(3) Kingman contends that the circuit court abused its 
discretion by excluding his four damages experts4 based on his 
failure to produce expert reports, which HRCP Rule 26(b)(5) 
(Trial Preparation: Experts) does not require. Kingman further 
contends that he was unable to provide the reports because 
Atlantis wrongfully withheld discovery. 
Kingman's contentions lack merit. Kingman was 
obligated to provide written reports from his experts pursuant 
to the express requirements of the circuit court's trial setting 
conference orders, and the parties' stipulation. The circuit court's October 14, 2021 and April 28, 2022 trial setting 
conference orders set a deadline for the parties' exchange of 
expert reports. The parties' December 20, 2022 "Stipulation to 
4 Atlantis moved for the exclusion of five expert witnesses 
identified in Kingman's February 6, 2023 expert witness disclosures: four 
experts who would purportedly testify as to damages (Harold Asher, Jeffrey E. 
Meyers, Todd Cowen, M.D., and William L. Davenport), and a fifth expert who 
would purportedly testify as to liability (Michael Lesb ack).  The circuit 
court excluded the damages experts, but ordered that Kingman's liability 
expert would be allowed to testify, conditioned upon submission of Mr. 
Lesback's report within ten days of the entry of the court's order. 
11   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 Extend Expert Report Disclosure Deadlines" provided "that the 
respective expert report disclosure deadlines in the above-
captioned matter are extended to February 6, 2023 for [Kingman] 
and to March 8, 2023 for [Atlantis]." 
Moreover, Atlantis' alleged withholding of discovery 
did not interfere with Kingman's ability to produce the damages 
experts' reports. As the circuit court correctly determined, 
"the issue of damages or the factual background for the damages experts would have been solely in the knowledge and possession 
of [Kingman] himself." 
We conclude that the circuit court did not abuse its 
discretion by excluding Kingman's four damages experts. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the circuit 
court's Final Judgment. 
Pursuant to Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate 
Procedure Rule 34(c), Kingman's February 6, 2026 Motion for Retention of Oral Argument is denied. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i, April 23, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
Randall C. Whattoff, 
for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
 
Normand R. Lezy, for Defendant-Appellee. /s/ Katherine G. Leonard Presiding Judge
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen Associate Judge
 
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry Associate Judge 
12 