NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0003145
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
BARBARA POLUMBO, Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant/
Cross-Claim Defendant/Appellant,
v.
THEODORE GOMES and GWENDOLYN GOMES,
Defendants/Counterclaimants/Third-Party Plaintiffs/Appellees,
and
JEFF ANDERSON,
Third-Party Defendant/Cross-Claimant/Appellee,
and
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE CORPORATIONS,
LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANIES OR OTHER ENTITIES 1-50,
Defendants.
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-217K)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
This appeal involves disputes between neighbors
regarding the scope, use, and maintenance of an easement.
Plaintiff-Appellant Barbara Polumbo (Polumbo) holds a fifty-foot
wide easement for road and utility purposes running through
property owned by Defendants-Appellees Theodore Gomes (Mr. Gomes)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and Gwendolyn Gomes (Mrs. Gomes) (collectively, the Gomes).1  In
a jury-waived bench trial, the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
(Circuit Court)2 ruled that the Gomes were entitled to use their
property in a manner that imposed certain restrictions on
Polumbo's use of the easement.  The Circuit Court, in particular,
ruled that the Gomes could keep in place and continue to use
gates that run across the easement.  In making this ruling, the
Circuit Court relied on a "Stipulated Settlement" between the
Gomes and Polumbo's predecessor in interest, which was the
genesis of the easement.  The Circuit Court also ruled that
Polumbo, by her conduct, had given up her right to maintain the
easement, and it permanently enjoined Polumbo from performing any
further clearing, grubbing, or grading of the easement.
On appeal, Polumbo contends that the Circuit Court
erred in: (1) imposing limitations on the easement when no
conditions or restrictions were contained in the warranty deed;
(2) considering evidence that contradicted facts that had been
conclusively established under Hawai #i Rules of Civil Procedure
(HRCP) Rule 36(b) by Mr. Gomes' pretrial admissions; (3)
concluding that Polumbo had actual or inquiry notice of easement
limitations not present in her chain of title; (4) restricting
Polumbo's access to her property and depriving her of her right
to maintain the easement; and (5) awarding costs against Polumbo.
As explained in greater detail below, we conclude that
because the terms of the warranty deed granting the easement were
ambiguous with respect to the scope of the easement, the Circuit
Court was entitled to consider the Stipulated Settlement to
determine the intent of the parties who created the easement. 
The Circuit Court was also entitled to permit the Gomes to make
reasonable use of their property so long as the Gomes' use did
not unreasonably interfere with Polumbo's use of the easement. 
1Mr. Gomes passed away while this appeal was pending.
2The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided. 
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Based on these principles, we conclude that the Circuit Court did
not err in permitting the Gomes to maintain gates across the
easement, subject to conditions it imposed that were designed to
ensure Polumbo's continued access to her property over the
easement.  Based on our analysis, we need not reach the questions
of whether the Circuit Court erred in considering evidence
contradicting Mr. Gomes' pretrial admissions and whether the
Circuit Court erred by concluding that Polumbo had actual or
inquiry notice of the Stipulated Settlement.  We also conclude
that the Circuit Court erred in concluding that Polumbo had given
up her right to maintain the easement and in permanently
enjoining Polumbo from performing any further clearing, grubbing,
or grading of the easement.  We vacate the Circuit Court's award
of costs and remand for further consideration of the cost award
in light of our decision in this appeal.
BACKGROUND
I.
A.
By warranty deed dated June 13, 1974, the Gomes
acquired an undivided 67.158/190.059 interest in property owned
by Neola Younker.  The warranty deed contained a written
agreement calling for Neola and Earl Younker (the Younkers) to
subdivide the property to create separate lots for the Gomes and
Ms. Younker.  In 1979, the Gomes sued the Yonukers to compel the
subdivision.  The lawsuit resulted in a "Stipulated Settlement"
that was approved and ordered by the Circuit Court and was filed
in the Circuit Court on January 19, 1980 (Stipulated Settlement). 
The Stipulated Settlement provided for the creation of separate
lots for the Gomes and the Younkers.  The Stipulated Settlement
also provided for access to the Younkers property by a fifty-foot
wide easement running along the westerly/makai and southerly/Ka# u
sides of the Gomes property.  With respect to the easement, the
Stipulated Settlement provided:
Plaintiffs [(the Gomes)] shall have the right to use
the above referred to fifty (50) foot wide strip of land
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
prior to and after granting an easement thereon to
Defendants [(the Younkers)] for such purposes as [the Gomes]
may have been using this land prior to the execution of this
Stipulation, i.e., such purposes as grazing livestock,
growing taro, access to adjoining property as well as [the
Gomes'] property, and the like, and any other past, present
or future reasonable use so long as [the Younkers] may also
use the easement for the utility and access purposes for
which the easement is granted.
Although the Stipulated Settlement was filed in the
Circuit Court on January 19, 1980, it was not recorded in the 
Bureau of Conveyances of the State of Hawai# i until March 12,
2010, after Polumbo acquired her property.
On September 2, 1982, the County of Hawai #i granted a
variance to the Younkers in their subdivision application,
enabling them to create a twenty-foot wide dirt road in lieu of
the standard agricultural pavement requirement.  The Younkers
installed the approximately twenty-foot wide unpaved road in
1982.  On February 2, 1983, the Younkers and the Gomes signed
mutual deeds conveying to one another the respective lots created
by the subdivision.  The deeds were recorded with the Bureau of
Conveyances on July 5, 1983.  
The 1983 Deed to the Younkers contains the following
language describing the easement:
Together with a 50 Foot Wide Road Easement from the
Government Road for road and utility purposes in favor
of the above described Lot 2 [(the Younkers lot)]
running along the Westerly and Southerly boundaries of
Lot 1 [(the Gomes lot)]. 
The 1983 Deed to the Younkers also provides:
AND the said Grantor, in consideration of the
premises, does hereby for himself and his heirs,
administrators and executors, covenant and agree to and with
said Grantee, that he is lawfully seized in fee simple of
the premises hereby conveyed; that he has good right to sell
and convey the said premises; that the same are free and
clear of and from all encumbrances EXCEPT as aforesaid, and
EXCEPTING, ALSO, current real property taxes and assessments
chargeable against the property, and that he will and his
heirs, administrators and executors shall WARRANT AND DEFEND
the same unto the said Grantee and the Grantee's heirs,
administrators, executors and assigns against the lawful
claims and demands of all person EXCEPT as aforesaid.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
When the Younkers created the bulldozed unpaved roadway
on the easement, they breached several paddock walls on the Gomes
property.  The breached paddocks were used by the Gomes for the
grazing of cattle and horses.  The Gomes installed three gates
across the easement: Gate 1 was a locked gate installed where the
easement intersected Papa Homestead Road.  Gates 2 and 3 were
installed in the area of the breached paddock walls and were
unlocked.  Mr. Gomes installed Gate 4 in 1977 by Papa Farms,
before the easement road was constructed.  Mr. Gomes moved Gate 4
in 1999 to where the easement leads into the Polumbo property to
separate his property from the Polumbo property.3
B.
Polumbo first visited the Younkers property in 1986 or
1987, after responding to an advertisement in an Arizona
newspaper.  To access the Younkers property, she had to pass
through the locked Gate 1 and the unlocked Gates 2 and 3. 
Polumbo's initial offer to acquire the Younkers property was
rejected.  Several months later, Polumbo drafted and signed a
"Purchase Contract and Receipt" dated July 2, 1987.  The document
was silent as to the removal of the gates or the use of the
easement.
Prior to opening escrow on the Younkers property,
Polumbo met Mr. Gomes on his property in July 1987.  Polumbo
learned that another person, Rudy Hirota (Hirota), was interested
in buying the Younkers property.  Mr. Gomes told Polumbo that he
did not like Hirota accessing the Younkers property to remove
trees, and Mr. Gomes explained that this was why he had placed a
log across the easement blocking access to the Younkers property. 
On that same day, Polumbo gave the Gomes a written statement,
which she claims Mrs. Gomes dictated to her.  The statement read:
3The Circuit Court erroneously found that Gate 4 was
installed "at the end of the easement accessing the Polumbo
[property]" in 1977.  Although the gate was built in 1977, it was
moved to that location in 1999.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
You are hereby authorized to keep the gate locked
leading to the property I am buying from Mr. and Mrs.
Younker.  I understand this easement is for our mutual
benefit and no one will be allowed to enter my
property without my authorization.
On September 11, 1987, Hawai# i Escrow & Title, Inc.
recorded a warranty deed (1987 Deed) conveying the Younkers
property to Polumbo.  The 1987 Deed conveyed the Younkers
property to Polumbo: "Together with a 50 foot wide road easement
from the Government Road for road and utility purposes in favor
of the above described Lot [2] [(the property conveyed to
Polumbo)] running along the Westerly and Southerly boundaries of
Lot 1 [(the Gomes property)]."  On September 23, 1987, Polumbo
and the Younkers entered into an indemnity agreement, in which
the Younkers agreed to indemnify Polumbo from claims raised by
Hirota and others regarding their failed attempt to buy the
Younkers property.
C.
After purchasing the property, Polumbo continued to
live in Arizona, visiting her property in Hawai
#i occasionally.
Prior to visiting, she would inform the Gomes that she was
coming, and Mr. Gomes would ensure the easement was clear enough
for Polumbo to access her property.  Polumbo was also a frequent
guest at the Gomes' home, and Polumbo claims that she discussed
her problems with the gates with the Gomes at these times.
The Gomes raised cattle and horses on their property
for many years and at various times used the paddocks in which
the easement is located to hold cattle and horses.  Gates 2, 3,
and 4 were used to control the areas the animals had access to
and to prevent them from entering the Polumbo property.  The
Gomes have not owned their own horses for many years, but their
daughter, Moana Johansen (Johansen), has occasionally used the
paddocks for her horses since 2000.  The Gomes have not kept
cattle in the paddocks since 2000. 
From the time Polumbo purchased the property in 1987
until 1999, the relationship between Polumbo and the Gomes was 
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
relatively amicable.  In 1999, Johansen called Polumbo and asked
her position on installing a chain across Papa Homestead Road,
before the easement began.  On October 25, 1999, Polumbo's
attorney, Mark Van Pernis (Van Pernis), sent a letter to the
Gomes stating that Polumbo was entitled to unrestricted access
through the easement and that the Gomes needed to remove all the
gates.  The Gomes' attorney, Kevin Seiter, responded on November
2, 1999, that the Stipulated Settlement allowed the Gomes to use
the easement exactly as they had done prior to the Stipulated
Settlement.  Van Pernis acknowledged the Stipulated Settlement
(his former firm had represented the Gomes in the prior
litigation) and suggested alternatives such as automatic gates
across the easement.  These alternatives were not adopted.
D. 
In 2004, Polumbo decided that she wanted to sell her 
property and contacted Francis B. McClelland (McClelland), a
realtor in Hawai# i, to sell it.  Polumbo did not mention any
conflict with the Gomes in her 2004 emails to McClelland. 
McClelland did not find a potential buyer until 2007, when Jeff
Raup (Raup) offered $1.2 million for the property, subject to
Raup's final approval after inspection and other contingencies. 
Polumbo accepted the offer.  During McClelland's investigation,
as part of his due diligence as the dual agent of Raup and
Polumbo, McClelland discovered the Stipulated Settlement in the
County's files.  Raup was looking to grow coffee on the Polumbo
property, and he wanted to clear the entire 50-foot easement and
to remove the four gates.  
Raup later decided to cancel the contract.  On July 16,
2007, Van Pernis sent a letter to the Gomes referencing the
Stipulated Settlement and stating that the "several gates, locks
and chains, is unreasonable interference with [Polumbo's] right
to access."
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
E.
On July 29, 2008, Polumbo filed her Complaint in the
Circuit Court.  Polumbo and the Gomes entered into mediation and
were able to reach a "Draft Agreement" signed by both parties on
January 21, 2010.  In June 2010, Polumbo hired Third-Party
Defendant Jeff Anderson (Anderson) to do work on her property. 
On June 7, 2010, Mr. Gomes and Johansen met with Anderson on the
easement and advised him not to do any work along the easement
until the court case was over.  On June 14, 2010, Alan Tuhy,
Polumbo's new attorney, sent a letter to Anderson advising him
that the Draft Agreement was a final agreement, which permitted
Polumbo "to trim back bushes and trees overhanging the roadway
and clear the shoulders of the easement."  On July 7, 2010,
Polumbo agreed to indemnify and hold Anderson harmless from any
claims by the Gomes for clearing the easement, and Anderson began
clearing the easement.
Anderson did not obtain a grading or grubbing permit
from the County before beginning work on the easement, and Mr.
Gomes informed the County of Anderson's activities. 
 On July 19,
2010, Richard Omija, an employee of the County of Hawai #i
Department of Public Works, went to the site and instructed
Anderson to stop work.  Polumbo subsequently obtained a permit
and Anderson resumed work on the easement in October 2010.
On October 30, 2010, Mr. Gomes posted a notice on the
easement advising Anderson that he objected to the work being
done and that if the Draft Agreement were in effect, Anderson and
Polumbo were violating its terms.  Mr. Gomes then informed the
State Historic Preservation Division (SHPD) of damage to the
historic rock walls along the easement caused by Anderson's work.
On November 4, 2010, at SHPD's request, the Department of Public
Works issued a stop work order to Anderson.  During his work on
the easement, Anderson disturbed a historic rock wall.  He also
pushed rubbish to the side of the road and covered it with dirt. 
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
II.
Prior to trial, Polumbo served requests for admission
pursuant to HRCP Rule 36 on Mr. Gomes.  Mr. Gomes admitted the
following:
No.1. That you did not deliver a copy of the Stipulated 
Settlement (See Definition) to [Polumbo] prior to her
purchase of the Polumbo Parcel.
No.2. That you did not inform [Polumbo] in writing of the
contents of the Stipulated Settlement prior to her
purchase of the Polumbo Parcel.
. . . .
No.5. You did not inform [Polumbo] orally of the contents of
the Stipulated Judgment prior to her purchase of the
Polumbo Parcel.
Mr. Gomes testified at trial that he told Polumbo about
the terms of the Stipulated Settlement before she purchased her
property.  Mr. Gomes indicated that he was confused about the use
of the terms "Stipulated Settlement" and "Stipulated Judgment" in
Polumbo's request for admissions.  He was also unsure of when
Polumbo had purchased the property. 
After hearing the evidence at trial, the Circuit Court
filed its "Amended Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and
Order" (Order).  The Circuit Court found and concluded that: (1)
the easement granted to the Younkers in the court-approved
Stipulated Settlement was not an exclusive easement, but
permitted the Gomes to use their land for such purposes as it had
previously been used, and for any other reasonable use, as long
as the Younkers may also use the easement for utility and access
purposes; (2) whether the owner of land over which an easement
exists may erect and maintain fences or gates depends on the
intent of the parties when the easement was originally created,
and if an easement is ambiguous, the rules of construction call
for an examination of the situation of the parties and
surrounding circumstances; (3) the servient owner of an easement
is entitled to impose reasonable restraints on the right of way
to avoid a greater burden on the servient estate than originally
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
contemplated, so long as such restraints do not interfere with
the dominant owner's use; (4) Polumbo received notice from Mr.
Gomes before she purchased her property that he had been given
rights to use the easement by the Stipulated Settlement; (5) the
gates in question were in existence before Polumbo purchased her
property, and Polumbo was aware of the gates and the condition of
the easement before she purchased the property; (6) because
Polumbo had actual notice of the conditions of the easement, she
was not entitled to the protections provided to a bona fide
purchaser under HRS § 502-83, and she was bound by the Stipulated
Settlement, even though the Stipulated Settlement had not been
recorded before she purchased her property; and (7) by
acquiescing in the Gomes' maintenance of the easement, Polumbo
gave up her right to maintain it.  
Based on its findings and conclusions, the Circuit
Court ordered that the following reasonable conditions would
apply to the parties' use of the easement: 
Gate 1 may stay in place, for security reasons for
both parcels.  Gates 2 and 3 may stay in place but must
remain open except when either of the paddocks contains
cattle or horses.  Gate 4 may stay in place, both for
security for Polumbo and to keep livestock from entering
Polumbo's property.  When cattle or horses are not being
kept in the affected paddock, it shall be Polumbo's choice
whether or not to close or lock Gate 4.  The Gomes may
determine whether and when cattle and horses, either their
own or another's, are placed in the paddocks.  All gates
shall be fitted with automatic openers that can be operated
either from a remote control or a keypad adjacent to the
gates.  The parties are to agree on the appropriate
automatic entry system and to divide the costs equally. 
Routine maintenance of the easement will be the
responsibility of the Gomes.  The easement must be cleared
of brush and debris so that it is regularly navigable by a
vehicle without four-wheel drive.  The Gomes may request
reimbursement from Polumbo of one half of the costs
reasonably required for maintenance of the easement.
The Circuit Court also issued a permanent injunction,
enjoining Polumbo and Anderson from performing any further
clearing, grubbing, or grading of the easement, except that
Polumbo and Anderson shall repair the historic rock wall in
conformity with SHPD requirements, and they shall jointly bear
the costs of repair.  The Circuit Court awarded costs in favor of
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the Gomes and against Polumbo and Anderson because the Gomes were
the prevailing parties regarding the use of the gates within the
easement and the repair of the historic rock wall.  In accordance
with its Order, the Circuit Court entered its Judgment on August
1, 2013, and this appeal followed. 
DISCUSSION
I.
Polumbo contests the Gomes' placement and use of gates
across the easement.  In this case, Polumbo is the owner of the
property that is benefitted by the easement and thus is the
holder of the dominant estate.  The Gomes are owners of property
that is burdened with the easement and thus are the holders of
the servient estate.  Unless otherwise specified in the
instrument creating the easement, both the holders of the
dominant estate and the servient estate are obligated to act
reasonably in exercising their rights and obligations pertaining
to the easement.  The holder of the servient estate is entitled
to make any use of the servient estate that does not unreasonably
interfere with the dominant estate holder's enjoyment of the
easement.  Restatement (Third) of Property (Servitudes)
(hereinafter "Restatement") § 4.9 (2000).  The holder of the
dominant estate is entitled to use the easement for its intended
purpose in a manner that is reasonably necessary for its
convenient enjoyment, but is not entitled to cause unreasonable
damage to the servient estate or interfere unreasonably with its
enjoyment.  Id.  at § 4.10.
Here, the 1983 Deed to the Younkers, which created the
easement, provides for a 50-foot wide road easement for road and
utility purposes.  This language is also contained in the 1987
Deed from Younkers to Polumbo.  The instrument creating the
easement does not contain language which would serve to modify
the general rule that the holders of both the dominant estate and
the servient estate must act reasonably and must consider each
other's rights with regard to the easement.   
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
While the total width of the easement and its use for
road and utility purposes is clear, the scope of the easement is
ambiguous.  See Dethlefsen v. Weddle , 284 P.3d 452, 459-6O (N.M.
Ct. App. 2012) (holding that the scope of an easement, described
as a fifty-foot wide road easement to and across said property as
shown on a specified plat, was ambiguous).  The language creating
the easement provides no specific guidance on what kind of road
and what level of access is permitted, and it provides no
criteria or standards for resolving the question raised in this
case: Whether the owners of the servient estate may place gates
over the easement that would enhance their security and
beneficial use of their property, but would also serve to impede
unrestricted access by the owner of dominant estate to her
property.  See id.
Where the scope of an easement is ambiguous, as we
conclude it is in this case, courts look to the intent of the
parties creating the easement.  An easement should be interpreted
to give effect to the intention of the parties who created it to
carry out the purpose for which it was created, as ascertained
from the language of instrument and the circumstances surrounding
its creation.  Restatement, at § 4.1.  Where the language of the
instrument creating the easement is ambiguous, extrinsic evidence
may be considered to discern the parties' intent in creating the
easement.  Dethlefsen , 284 P.3d at 458-59, 464.
Here, the Stipulated Settlement, which was the genesis
for the creation of the easement, is clear and definitive
evidence of the parties' intent in creating the easement.  The
Stipulated Settlement provides that the Gomes shall have the
right to use their property in the manner in which they had used
it prior to the Stipulated Settlement, including for grazing of
livestock, and for other reasonable uses so long as the Younkers
may use the easement for utility and access purposes for which
the easement was created.  Because the language of the 1983 Deed,
which created the easement, is ambiguous as to the scope of the
easement, the Circuit Court did not err in considering the
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Stipulated Settlement as extrinsic evidence of the intent of the
parties creating the easement and in relying on the Stipulated
Settlement in deciding the case.  Moreover, the terms of the
Stipulated Settlement are consistent with the general rule that
permits the holder of the servient estate to make any use of the
servient estate that does not unreasonably interfere with the
dominant estate holder's enjoyment of the easement.  Restatement,
at § 4.9.
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
relying on the Stipulated Settlement and in balancing the
interests of the parties in ruling that the Gomes could keep the
existing four gates in place.  As the Circuit Court determined,
the gates were justified by security concerns and served to
enable the Gomes to use their property to keep livestock, a prior
use recognized by the Stipulated Settlement.  The gates were
necessary to enable the Gomes to keep livestock because the
construction of the access road on the easement breached paddock
walls that had previously been used to contain livestock on the
Gomes property.  The Circuit Court's Order also imposes
conditions to prevent the gates from unreasonably interfering
with Polumbo's access.  The Circuit Court's Order requires Gates
2 and 3 to remain open, except when the paddocks contain cattle
or horses, and it gives Polumbo the right to choose whether Gate
4 will be open or closed when the Gomes are not keeping cattle or
horses in the affected paddock.  The Circuit Court's Order
further requires that all gates be fitted with automatic openers.
Because the Circuit Court was entitled to rely on the
Stipulated Settlement to construe the ambiguous deed language
creating the easement regardless of whether Polumbo was a bona
fide purchaser or Mr. Gomes was entitled to contradict his
pretrial admissions, we need not decide Polumbo's claims of error
regarding these matters.
II.
We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in ruling that
Polumbo had given up her right to maintain the easement by
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
acquiescing in the Gomes' prior maintenance of the easement.  The 
the holder of an easement has the right to maintain the easement. 
See Levy v. Kimball , 50 Haw. 497, 498, 443 P.2d 142, 144 (1968). 
The owner of the dominant estate also has the duty to repair and
maintain the easement to the extent necessary to prevent
unreasonable interference with the enjoyment of the servient
estate, or to avoid liability of the servient estate owner to
third parties.  Restatement, at § 4.13.  
Here, there is no indication that Polumbo's prior
failure to maintain the easement interfered with the Gomes'
enjoyment of the servient estate or created liability of the
Gomes to third parties.  Thus, Polumbo's prior failure to
maintain the easement did not provide a basis for the Circuit
Court to strip Polumbo of her right to maintain the easement. 
The Gomes provide no authority for the proposition that the
dominant estate owner's acquiescence in the servient estate
owners' maintenance of the easement justifies terminating the
dominant estate owner's right to maintain the easement.  
The Circuit Court's reliance on Rose v. Peters , 139
P.2d 983 (Cal. Dist. Ct. App. 1943) is misplaced.  In Rose, the
servient estate owner entered into a contract with the dominant
estate owner that obligated the servient estate owner to "join in
keeping the easement in repair."  Rose, 139 P.2d at 984.  The
court held that the servient estate owner had an obligation to
assist in keeping the easement in repair by virtue of his
contract.  Id.  Here, there is no contract requiring the Gomes to
maintain the easement, and it is the dominant estate owner that
is being stopped from maintaining the easement.  Thus, Rose in
inapposite.
The Circuit Court appears to have relied on its ruling
that Polumbo had given up her right to maintain the easement in
issuing its injunction enjoining Polumbo and Anderson from 
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
performing any further clearing, grubbing, or grading of the
easement.  We therefore vacate the injunction.4
III.
Because our decision in this appeal may affect the
Circuit Court's determination regarding the award of costs, we
vacate the Circuit Court's costs award.
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we affirm in part and vacate in
part the Circuit Court's Judgment, and we remand the case for
further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii, February 28, 2018. #
On the briefs:
Robert H. Thomas
Mark M. Murakami
Tred R. Eyerly
(Damon Key Leong Kupchak Hastert)
for Plaintiff/Counterclaim 
Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/
AppellantChief Judge
Lisa Strandtman
for Defendants/Counterclaimants/
Third-Party Plaintiffs/AppelleesAssociate Judge
Associate Judge
4The Circuit Court may determine on remand the extent of
Polumbo's right to maintain the easement in light of the scope of
the easement and other relevant circumstances.
15