FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
---o0o---
MJ, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
CR, Defendant-Appellant
and 
CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT AGENCY,
S
TATE OF HAWAI# I, Defendant. 
NO. CAAP-17-0000696 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-P NO. 16-1-6470) 
June 30, 2021  
GINOZA, CHIEF JUDGE, LEONARD AND HIRAOKA, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, CHIEF JUDGE 
Defendant-Appellant CR (Father) appeals from (1) the 
"Order" (
Temporary Order), filed on January 26, 2017, in favor of 
Plaintiff-Appellee MJ (Mother); and (2) the "Decision and Order" 
(Decision) filed September 1, 2017, by the Family Court of the 
First Circuit (Family Court).  1 
1 The Honorable R. Mark Browning entered the Temporary Order. The 
Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided over the trial held on June 14, 2017,
and entered the Decision.  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Father contends the Family Court erred in 
its Temporary Order and its Decision because: (1) it lacked 
subject matter jurisdiction with respect to the "Petition for Paternity" (
Petition) filed by Mother in this matter;2 and (2) it 
lacked personal jurisdiction over Father for purposes of determining parentage or ordering child support and monetary obligations with respect to Father and Mother's minor child (Child). Father asserts the Family Court violated his rights to 
due process by not allowing him to argue the issue of personal 
jurisdiction at trial. Father also challenges many of the Family Court's conclusions of law (COLs) and findings of fact (FOFs).
3 
We conclude the Family Court had jurisdiction to decide 
custody in this case, but lacked personal jurisdiction over Father to decide Father's paternity and Father's obligations for child support and other monetary expenses related to Child. Therefore, we affirm in part and vacate in part the Temporary Order and Decision entered by the Family Court.
I. Background 
Mother and Father met in Texas in September 2014 and 
began dating. At the time, Mother was obtaining a divorce from her then-husband, HF (HF).
4 Mother became pregnant in January 
2016. In April 2016, Mother moved into Father's home with her two minor children from her marriage with HF. After an argument, Mother and Father separated approximately June 2, 2016, when Father told Mother she needed to leave his residence. Mother moved out of Father's home. 
On June 27, 2016, Mother visited her parents in 
Mililani, Hawai# i, and asked if she could move in with them. 
2 In the Petition, Mother sought, inter alia , to establish that Father
was Child's natural father, sole legal and physical custody of Child, and to
have Father pay child support and other expenses related to Child. 
3 Specifically, Father challenges COLs 2, 4-13 entered by Judge
Browning, as well as FOFs 8, 10-16, 18-21, 23-26, 28, 31, 34, 37, 42, 45, 74-90, and COLs 1, 7, 11, 12, 15, 16, 18, 19-27 entered by Judge Remigio. Father does not address each challenged COL and FOF distinctly, but as part of hisbroader arguments that the Family Court lacked jurisdiction in this case. 
4 HF was named as a party below, but is not a party to this appeal. 
2  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Sometime in or around July 2016, Mother left Texas and began 
living in 
Hawai#i with her parents. After Mother moved to 
Hawai#i
, she traveled between Texas and Hawai# i for various 
reasons, including court hearings and visitation with the children she had with HF. 
Child was born in Honolulu in October 2016. In 
September 2016, Father filed a paternity action in Texas. Pursuant to an order in that Texas case, Father submitted to a paternity test in November 2016,
5 which confirmed his biological 
paternity of Child. 
On November 15, 2016, Mother filed the Petition 
initiating this action in Hawai# i and seeking to establish 
Father's paternity of Child, sole custody of Child, child support, and other payments from Father under Hawaii Revised Statutes (
HRS) Chapters 346, 571, 576D, and 584. Father was 
personally served with the Petition at his place of employment in Texas. 
On January 23, 2017, Father filed his "Special 
Appearance and Answer to Petition for Paternity" (Answer to the 
Petition
)and argued, inter alia, that the Petition should be 
dismissed because the Family Court lacked both personal and 
subject matter jurisdiction. Father declared that he had only been in Hawai# i once, on vacation as a teenager, had never lived 
in the state, did not own property in 
Hawai#i, and did not 
conduct any business in Hawai# i.  He also challenged Mother's 
residency, arguing that she was a resident of Texas, and asserted that Child was conceived in Texas. 
A. Pre-Trial Hearing in Hawai# i 
At the hearing for temporary custody on January 26, 
2017, Mother's attorney made an offer of proof that: Mother 
resided in Hawai# i since June 27, 2016; she initially lived in 
Mililani with her father, stepmother, brother, and grandmother 
5 The Family Court's findings incorrectly list several events as taking
place in 2017 instead of 2016, including the date of the paternity test as
November 2017, which the parties concede are typographical errors. 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
before renting her own apartment on December 12, 2016; Mother was 
going through a divorce in Texas and had traveled to Texas since moving to Hawai# i; Mother went back to Texas for a week, because 
the Texas court ordered Mother to appear personally for Father's paternity petition. 
Father's attorney asked Mother whether her Texas 
attorney filed papers that listed her address as being in Texas. Mother's attorney objected and the Family Court stopped the questioning, stating: 
Look, I've taken everything into consideration. The Court 
in Hawaii has jurisdiction, all right? And I had a conversation with the judge in Texas, discussed this matter,and decided based upon our conversation that if the factsthat had initially been proceeded [sic] were testified to,that Texas would agree, and it did, to Hawaii takingjurisdiction. 
Father's counsel asked that the Family Court state the basis for 
personal jurisdiction over Father for the record. The court replied: 
THE COURT: The only personal jurisdiction issue, you can
call it what you may, it -- it has to do with the issuesrelated to whether or not he wants his rights with respectto visitation. If he wants to contest any of that, thenhe'll have to submit to this court's personal jurisdiction.If he doesn't, that's up to him, but we still have subjectmatter jurisdiction over the issue of custody and over thechild, so – 
[Father's counsel]: All right. If the Court wants --
THE COURT: -- it's his call. 
[Father's counsel]: So if the Court wants to hold my client
responsible for paying child support --
THE COURT: Since the baby --
[Father's counsel]: -- it would --
THE COURT: -- lives here, yes --
[Father's counsel]: Would it not --
THE COURT: -- I can issue those orders. 
[Father's counsel]: It would not need personal jurisdiction
over the -- over the person who's supposed to pay? 
THE COURT: As I said, with respect to all issues related to
this child and the responsibilities associated with thischild's care under all the various different laws that exist, both state and federal, this court has jurisdictionto make whatever orders are necessary. 
As you know, we operate a calendar every Friday that has to do
with child support orders that are issued by states outside otherthan Hawaii, where, say, California or Texas are asking that weenforce their orders that are issued with respect to parents whomay be residing here now. We do that routinely. So, yes, the 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
answer is we can issue those orders, and I will. 
[Father's counsel]: All right. Thank you, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: And Texas will abide by those orders. 
The Temporary Order entered on January 26, 2017, states 
that "Hawaii has jurisdiction in this case because Hawaii is 
[C]hild's home state and may enter temporary orders and adjudicate the issues in this matter including child custody, visitation, child support and related matters." The Temporary Order then granted Mother temporary sole legal and physical custody of Child, and ordered Father to pay temporary child support of $1,455 per month including past due child support for half of November 2016 as well as December 2016 and January 2017 totaling $3,637.50. 
B. Trial 
Father again raised the issue of personal jurisdiction 
in his trial memo. Trial was held June 14, 2017, at which Mother 
and Father testified.
6 A certified public accountant also 
testified regarding Father's income as the president and an owner of a family-owned chain of convenience stores in Texas. 
On September 1, 2017, the Family Court entered its 
Decision, finding that Child's natural parents are Mother and Father. The court noted the Temporary Order had held that the court had jurisdiction "over Father and the subject matter sufficient to enter orders pertaining to custody, paternity, child support and any other orders in support of those orders." 
In the Decision, the Family Court further determined 
that the parties shall share legal custody and that when the parties live within 150 miles of each other, they shall share physical custody; if the parties live more than 150 miles apart, the Family Court determined it was in Child's best interest that Mother have primary physical custody, subject to visitation by Father. The Family Court awarded monthly child support of $2,784 to Mother, based on Father's gross monthly income of $45,416 and Mother's monthly income, comprised of alimony and imputed income, 
6 The Decision mistakenly states the trial date was June 17, 2017. 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of $2,643. 
The Decision also addressed other expenses related 
to, inter alia, insurance and educational expenses, and Father 
was ordered to reimburse Mother a portion of birth expenses and other reasonable child-related expenses incurred by Mother.
II. Standards of Review 
A. Jurisdiction 
"The jurisdiction of the family court is reviewed de 
novo under the right/wrong standard." Hsieh v. Sun, 137 Hawai# i 
90, 98, 365 P.3d 1019, 1027 (App. 2016) (citing Puckett v. Puckett, 94 Hawai# i 471, 477, 16 P.3d 876, 882 (App. 2000)).
B. Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law 
A family court's findings of fact are reviewed on
appeal under the "clearly erroneous" standard. A finding of
fact is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lackssubstantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despitesubstantial evidence in support of the finding, theappellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firmconviction that a mistake has been made. "Substantial evidence" is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonablecaution to support a conclusion.
The family court's conclusions of law are reviewed on
appeal de novo, under the right/wrong standard. Conclusions of law are not binding upon an appellate court and arefreely reviewable for their correctness. 
DL v. CL, 146 Hawai# i 328, 336, 463 P.3d 985, 993 (2020) 
(citations, brackets, and internal quotation marks omitted).
III. Discussion 
A. The Family Court Had Subject Matter Jurisdiction Under HRS§ 583A-201 to Make an Initial Child Custody Determination 
Father challenges the Temporary Order issued on January 
26, 2017, asserting the Family Court "lacked subject matter 
jurisdiction over this [Petition] because the court did not find, and the facts did not support, that Mother and Child lived continuously in Honolulu between Child's birth and the filing of Mother's [Petition]."
7 With regard to the Decision issued on 
September 1, 2017, Father asserts the Family Court "lacked subject matter jurisdiction" over the Petition because the order 
7 Father does not challenge the family court's personal jurisdiction
over him related to the initial child custody determination. 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
regarding jurisdiction did not contain the requisite findings for 
subject matter jurisdiction. 
We first address the Family Court's subject matter 
jurisdiction relating to custody. The Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Enforcement Act (
UCCJEA) "governs jurisdictional 
issues that arise in interstate child custody proceedings and is codified in Hawai# i in HRS chapter 583A." See NB v. GA, 133 
Hawai 
#i 436, 440, 329 P.3d 341, 345 (App. 2014). In this regard, 
HRS § 583A-201 (2006) provides the Family Court has jurisdiction to determine a child's initial custody, as specified therein, stating: 
Initial child-custody jurisdiction.  (a) Except as
otherwise provided in section 583A–204, a court of this
State has jurisdiction to make an initial child-custodydetermination only if:
(1) This State is the home state of the child on the date of the commencement of the proceeding, orwas the home state of the child within six months before the commencement of the proceedingand the child is absent from this State but a parent or person acting as a parent continues tolive in this State;
(2) A court of another state does not have jurisdictionunder paragraph (1), or a court of the home state ofthe child has declined to exercise jurisdiction on theground that this State is the more appropriate forumunder section 583A–207 or 583A–208, and:(A) The child and the child's parents, or thechild and at least one parent or a personacting as a parent, have a significantconnection with this State other than mere physical presence; and
(B) Substantial evidence is available in this State concerning the child's care, protection,training, and personal relationships;
(3) All courts having jurisdiction under paragraph(1) or (2) have declined to exercisejurisdiction on the ground that a court of thisState is the more appropriate forum to determinethe custody of the child under section 583A–207or 583A–208; or
(4) No court of any other state would havejurisdiction under the criteria specified inparagraph (1), (2), or (3).
(b) Subsection (a) shall be the exclusive jurisdictional
basis for making a child-custody determination by a court of thisState. 
(c) Physical presence of, or personal jurisdiction
over, a party or a child shall not be necessary orsufficient to make a child-custody determination. 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 583A-201. 
The UCCJEA defines "home state" as: 
the state in which a child lived with a parent or a person
acting as a parent for a period of at least six consecutivemonths immediately before the commencement of achild-custody proceeding. In the case of a child less than 
six months of age, the term means the state in which thechild lived from birth with any of the persons mentioned. A period of temporary absence of any of the mentioned personsis part of the period. 
HRS § 583A-102 (2006) (emphasis added). 
On March 14, 2018, the Family Court entered its FOFs 
and COLs related to the January 26, 2017 temporary custody 
hearing. Citing relevant provisions of the UCCJEA, the Family Court concluded: 
1. When the Petition was filed, Mother lived in Mililani[,]
Hawaii, and Hawaii was also [Child's] residence since herbirth. 
2. The State of Hawai #i has jurisdiction to determine child
custody and related orders for the support of the child in
this case pursuant to the [UCCJEA] - [HRS] § 583A. 
. . . . 
5. Hawaii has jurisdiction in this case because Hawaii isthe subject child's home state
 and may enter temporary
orders and adjudicate the issues in this matter includingchild custody, visitation, child support and relatedmatters. 
6. After speaking with a Texas judge familiar with this
case; both the Texas Judge and Judge Browning are inagreement that under the facts of this case, Hawaii hasjurisdiction over this matter. 
(emphases added). 
The Family Court found, and Father does not contest on 
appeal, that Hawai# i was Child's residence since her birth. 
Father also fails to cite to any authority in support of his 
contention that Mother's trips to Texas were not "temporary absences" under HRS § 583A-201(a)(1). 
Instead, Father asserts 
that the Family Court erred in asserting subject matter jurisdiction because the Court made no specific finding that Mother and Child's visits to Texas were "temporary absences" for purposes of determining Child's home state. However, even without findings of all the facts upon which jurisdiction rests, "the record enables us to confirm the factual foundation for acceptance of jurisdiction by the family court." Griffith v. 
Griffith, 60 Haw. 567, 571, 592 P.2d 826, 829-30 (1979). 
8  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The record shows that between June 27, 2016 and January 
26, 2017, Mother traveled to Texas on multiple occasions, where 
she was going through a divorce and where her other children still live. 
On one of those occasions, she was in Texas for 
approximately a week because a Texas court ordered her to appear for a paternity suit brought by Father. After Child's birth, Mother took Child with her on the trips to and from Texas because Child was still breastfeeding. Furthermore, Mother testified during cross-examination that she started moving her bank accounts and transferring her medical bills to Hawai# i beginning 
July 1, 2016, and that Mother told the Texas court she had been a resident of Hawai# i
 since July. 
Mother's testimony is sufficient evidence to show that 
Mother and Child's trips were temporary absences. "[T]he testimony of a single witness, if found by the trier of fact to have been credible, will suffice." In re Doe, 95 Hawai# i 183, 
196, 20 P.3d 616, 629 (2001). The finding that 
Hawai#i was 
Child's "home state" was not clearly erroneous because Child was born in Hawai# i, had lived in Hawai# i since birth, and the record 
indicates Child was only temporarily absent from the state. 
Thus, pursuant to HRS § 583A-201, the Family Court had 
jurisdiction to enter the child custody orders in this case.
B. The Family Court Did Not Have Personal Jurisdiction Over
Father Under HRS § 576B-201 
Father asserts that the Family Court lacked personal 
jurisdiction over him to determine parentage or to order him to 
pay child support and monetary obligations. In this regard, we agree with Father.
1. The basis for jurisdiction to decide paternity and
child support issues differs from the initial custodydetermination 
Under the UCCJEA, a "[c]hild-custody determination," by 
definition, "does not include an order relating to child support 
or other monetary obligation of an individual." See HRS 
§ 583A-102 (2006). 
Instead, the Uniform Interstate Family 
Support Act (UIFSA) governs jurisdictional issues related to 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
paternity or child support issues in interstate cases. See
 HRS 
Chapter 576B; HRS § 576B-201 (Supp. 2015). The Official Comment 
of the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws for the UIFSA also acknowledges this bifurcated jurisdiction and notes that "a tribunal may have jurisdiction to establish a child-support order based on personal jurisdiction over the obligor under Section 201, but lack jurisdiction over child custody, which is a matter of status adjudication usually based on the home state of the child." See UIFSA § 201 cmt. (Unif. Law 
Comm'n 2008). 
Personal jurisdiction is required before the Family 
Court can enter child support orders. See Hart v. Hart, 110 
Hawai#i 294, 296, 132 P.3d 862, 864 (App. 2006). Therefore, 
although the Family Court could exercise jurisdiction over the parties relating to the initial custody determination, that jurisdiction did not automatically entail personal jurisdiction over Father with respect to the issues of paternity and child support.
2. Personal jurisdiction over Father for purposes of
paternity and child support under the UIFSA 
The UIFSA sets forth statutory authority for a tribunal 
in Hawai# i to have personal jurisdiction over a nonresident 
individual, for purposes of child support and paternity issues, 
as follows: 
§ 576B-201. Bases for jurisdiction over nonresident . 
(a) In a proceeding to establish or enforce a support order
or to determine parentage of a child, a tribunal of thisState may exercise personal jurisdiction over a nonresidentindividual or the individual's guardian or conservator if:
(1) The individual is personally served with summonsor notice within this State;
(2) The individual submits to the jurisdiction ofthis State by consent in a record, by entering ageneral appearance, or by filing a responsivedocument having the effect of waiving anycontest to personal jurisdiction;
(3) The individual resided with the child in this State;
(4) The individual resided in this State and provided prenatal expenses or support for thechild;
(5) The child resides in this State as a result of the acts or directives of the individual;
(6) The individual engaged in sexual intercourse inthis State and the child may have been conceived 
10   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by that act of intercourse;
(7)The individual asserted parentage of the child
in the office of health status monitoringmaintained in this State by the department ofhealth; or
(8)There is any other basis consistent with theconstitutions of this State and the UnitedStates for the exercise of personaljurisdiction.
(b)The bases of personal jurisdiction set forth in
subsection (a) or in any other law of this State may not beused to acquire personal jurisdiction for a tribunal of thisState to modify a child support order of another stateunless the requirements of section 576B-611 are met, or inthe case of a foreign support order, unless the requirementsof section 576B-615 are met. 
HRS § 576B-201 (Supp. 2015). 
On March 14, 2018, the Family Court entered Findings of 
Fact and Conclusions of Law (
Findings and Conclusions)  related 
to the trial, citing portions of the UIFSA long-arm statute for 
personal jurisdiction over Father as follows: 8
9.HRS §§ 576B-201, et seq., the [UIFSA] codified, states
the requirements for the State of Hawai #i to assert
jurisdiction over a nonresident individual for actions to
establish, enforce, or modify a child support order. 
10.HRS § 576B-201(a)(5) [sic] states the circumstances
under which a tribunal of this State may exercise personal
jurisdiction over a nonresident individual or theindividual's guardian or conservator in a proceeding toestablish or enforce a support order or to determineparentage of a child, including, but not limited to:
(2)The individual submits to the jurisdiction of this
State by consent, by entering a general appearance,or by filing a responsive document having the effectof waiving any contest to personal jurisdiction;. . .(5)The child resides in this State as a result of the
acts or directives of the individual;. . .(8)There is any other basis consistent with the
constitutions of this State and the United States forthe exercise of personal jurisdiction."
(ellipses in original). 
8 In addressing the Family Court's jurisdiction, the Findings and
Conclusions refer in part to the ruling in the Temporary Order that the Family
Court had jurisdiction to address, inter alia , custody and child support.
However, neither the Temporary Order nor the Findings and Conclusions make
findings supporting the ruling as to jurisdiction in the Temporary Order,
other than that Hawai #i is Child's home state. At trial, the Family Court
relied on the Temporary Order's determination as to personal jurisdiction and 
did not make an independent assessment of jurisdiction. 
11  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Family Court then concluded that, 
11. Mother's decision to move to Hawaii to live with her 
parents occurred as a result of Defendant/Father's refusalto provide living assistance for Mother in a meaningful andsustained manner prior to [Child]'s birth. Aside from Defendant/Father, Mother had no other means to maintain aTexas residence, or family to live with in Texas, pending[Child]'s birth. 
12. Defendant/Father's belief that Mother should not have
moved to Hawaii flies in the face of the economic realities of Mother's living situation - particularly when sherepeatedly requested his assistance and informed him thathis failure to respond led her to make other livingarrangements. 
Thus, the Family Court found Father's failure to 
provide financial support for Mother, when she had repeatedly 
requested his assistance and informed him that his failure to respond led her to make other living arrangements, to be an "act or directive" that caused Child to reside in Hawai# i, and thus 
was sufficient to subject Father to personal jurisdiction under HRS § 576B-201(a)(5).
  9
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has stated that, "[p]ersonal 
jurisdiction exists when (1) the defendant's activity falls under the State's long-arm statute, and (2) the application of the statute complies with constitutional due process." Norris v. Six Flags Theme Parks, Inc., 102 Hawai# i 203, 207, 74 P.3d 26, 30 
(2003) (citation omitted). 
The Uniform Law Comment addressing the long-arm 
provisions for the UIFSA states that, "[t]he intent is to ensure that every enacting state has a long-arm statute that is as broad
 
9 The cases relied upon by Mother interpreting provisions equivalent to
subsection (5), by courts in other jurisdictions, involve allegations that the
nonresident parent abused or harassed the resident parent and/or abused thechildren. See In re the Marriage of Malwitz, 99 P.3d 56, 61 (Colo. 2004);
Sneed v. Sneed, 842 N.E.2d 1095, 1099-1100 (Ohio Ct. App. 2005); Franklin v.Commonwealth, Dept. of Soc. Services, Div. of Child Support Enf't ex rel.Franklin, 497 S.E.2d 881, 885-86 (Va. Ct. App. 1998). Accordingly, in thesecases the fleeing parent left the marital home and the nonresident spouse hada duty to support the children for whom the court ordered support. 
In this case, the Family Court did not find abuse, but rather that
Mother "felt physically threatened" by Father when she left the home in Texas.Additionally, when Mother moved to Hawai #i, Mother was still legally married
to HF, with whom she shared two minor children who resided in Texas. 
The 
cases cited by Mother are not dispositive or persuasive in our analysis ofpersonal jurisdiction over Father. 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as constitutionally permitted." 
UIFSA § 201 cmt. (Unif. Law 
Comm'n 2008). The Uniform Law Comment also notes that with 
regard to subsections (3) through (6), these sections: 
identify specific fact situations justifying the assertion
of long-arm jurisdiction over a nonresident. Each providesan appropriate affiliating nexus for such an assertion, whenjudged on a case-by-case basis with an eye on procedural andsubstantive due process. Further, each subsection doescontain a possibility that an overly literal construction ofthe terms of the statute will overreach due process. 
Id. (emphasis added). 
"A court's power to exercise jurisdiction over 
non-residents is limited by the operation of the fourteenth 
amendment's due process clause." In Interest of Doe, 83 Hawai# i
367, 373, 926 P.2d 1290, 1296 (1996).  
Due process requires that a nonresident defendant have
sufficient "minimum contacts" with the forum state "such that the maintenance of the suit does not offend 'traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.'"International Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 316, 66S.Ct. 154, 158, 90 L.Ed. 95 (1945) (citation omitted)."'[I]t is essential in each case that there be some act bywhich the defendant purposefully avails itself of theprivilege of conducting activities within the forum State,thus invoking the benefits and protections of its laws.'"Burger King Corp. v. Rudzewicz, 471 U.S. 462, 475, 105 S.Ct.2174, 2183, 85 L.Ed.2d 528 (1985) (quoting Hanson v.Denckla, 357 U.S. 235, 253, 78 S.Ct. 1228, 1239, 2 L.Ed.2d1283 (1958)). The determining inquiry is whether "'thedefendant's conduct and connection with the forum State are such that he should reasonably anticipate being haled intocourt there.'" Id. at 474, 105 S.Ct. at 2183 (quoting
World–Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286, 297,100 S.Ct. 559, 567, 62 L.Ed.2d 490 (1980)). There is no "talismanic jurisdictional formula" and the court weighseach case on its facts. Id. at 485–86, 105 S.Ct. at 2189
(citation omitted). 
Id. (quoting Shaw v. North Am. Title Co., 76 Hawai# i 323, 329-30, 
876 P.2d 1291, 1297-98 (1994). 10
a. General and specific jurisdiction 
An individual is subject to personal jurisdiction in 
either of two ways, general jurisdiction or specific 
10 Mother urges this court to ignore International Shoe and its progeny
because the jurisdictional issues in those cases arose in commercialtransactions and should not be applied to a deeply personal family matter suchas a parent-child relationship. However, Mother fails to mention ordistinguish Kulko v. Super. Ct. of California In & For City & Cty. of SanFrancisco, 436 U.S. 84 (1978), a Supreme Court case which appliesInternational Shoe and its progeny to jurisdictional issues arising out of afamily matter involving child custody and support. 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
jurisdiction. 
83 Hawai# i at 374, 926 P.2d at 1297. "First, 
general jurisdiction exists where a defendant has continuous and 
systematic contacts with the forum; the exercise of jurisdiction in such a case does not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice." Id.Here, Father had only been in 
Hawai#i once on vacation as a teenager prior to the circumstances 
related to this case, does not own property in the state, and does not conduct any business within the state. Thus, there is no question that 
Hawai#i lacks general jurisdiction over Father. 
Second, specific jurisdiction may exist even if a 
defendant's contacts with the forum are not continuous and systematic. Id.In these circumstances, due process requires 
the following three-part test: 
(1) The nonresident defendant must purposefully direct his
activities or consummate some transaction with the forum or resident thereof; or perform some act by which hepurposefully avails himself of the privilege of conductingactivities in the forum, thereby invoking the benefits andprotections of its laws; 
2) the claim must be one which arises out of or relates to
the defendant's forum-related activities; and 
(3) the exercise of jurisdiction must comport with fair play
and substantial justice, i.e. it must be reasonable. 
Id. 
The Family Court's findings suggest that in applying 
the UIFSA's long-arm statute, it focused on the personal and 
economic relationship between Father and Mother including conversations between Father and Mother during July 2016, around the time Mother was relocating prior to Child's birth in Hawai# i. 
On appeal, Father disputes these findings and the court's conclusion from them: that he "refus[ed] to provide living assistance for Mother." 
The Family Court's FOFs are supported by credible 
evidence in the form of Mother's testimony, and the findings support the conclusion that Father's order that Mother leave his home without financial support caused her move to Hawai# i. 
However, "[t]he unilateral activity of those who claim some relationship with a nonresident defendant cannot satisfy the 
14   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
requirement of contact with the forum State." Kulko v. Super. 
Ct. of California In & For City & Cty. of San Francisco
, 436 U.S. 
84, 93–94 (1978). In Kulko, the U.S. Supreme Court rejected the 
California Supreme Court's rationale for affirming the exercise of personal jurisdiction in California, i.e., that the defendant father's consenting to his daughter living with her mother in California had been a purposeful act warranting the exercise of personal jurisdiction over him in California. Id. at 88-90, 94-
95. 
Here, although Father was aware that Mother's parents 
lived in Hawai# i, there is nothing in the record to suggest 
Father was aware Mother planned to move to Hawai
#i. Mother 
testified that she and Father only communicated through emails from July 5, 2016 through October 4, 2016, after Mother had already started moving her bank accounts and transferring her medical bills to Hawai# i. However, Mother does not mention her 
move to Hawai# i in the emails and only informs Father that she 
was "out of town" and that she "had to pursue other living arrangements." Instead, on July 13, 2016, while requesting financial assistance and delivery of baby items, Mother provides Father with a Texas mailing address. Additionally, in the emails, Mother and Father discuss multiple doctor's appointments which Mother invited Father to attend in Texas. Therefore, Mother does not demonstrate and the record does not reflect that Father had notice that his order that she leave his home without financial support would cause Mother to move to Hawai# i. 
We also note that, although Mother and Child moved to 
Hawai#i because of a lack of financial support in Texas, the lack 
of financial support cannot be solely attributed to Father given that Mother was married to HF and sometimes had her other two children stay with her. 
HF had previously assisted Mother with 
living arrangements by subleasing apartments to Mother. When Mother moved out of Father's home, HF refused to assist Mother in obtaining a rental agreement. 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Additionally, "[t]he inquiry whether a forum State may 
assert specific jurisdiction over a nonresident defendant 
'focuses on the relationship among the defendant, the forum, and the litigation.'" Walden v. Fiore
, 571 U.S. 277, 283–84 (2014) 
(internal quotations omitted) (quoting Keeton v. Hustler Magazine, Inc., 465 U.S. 770, 775 (1984)). That "relationship must arise out of contacts that the 'defendant himself' creates with the forum State." Id. at 283–84 (quoting Burger King Corp. 
v. Rudzewicz, 471 U.S. 462, 475 (1985) (emphasis in original omitted)). 
Here, Father's actions in Texas cannot be said to be 
"purposefully direct[ed]" at Hawai# i or a Hawai# i resident, as 
Mother was a Texas resident at the time the couple separated. Father also had no connection to 
Hawai#i prior to Mother's 
unilateral decision to move to Hawai# i to receive support from 
her family. 
Further, it cannot be said that Father availed himself 
of the resources of Hawai# i, however broadly interpreted. The 
Family Court's finding that Mother depends on state aid, although underscoring 
Hawai#i's interest in exercising jurisdiction, is 
not sufficient to establish personal jurisdiction over Father. See Kulko, 436 U.S. at 100–01 ("It cannot be disputed that California has substantial interests in protecting resident children and in facilitating child-support actions on behalf of those children. 
But these interests simply do not make 
California a 'fair forum[.]'"). 
In Kulko, the U.S. Supreme Court also rejected the 
California Supreme Court's reasoning that the father in that case received the benefit of California's police and fire protection, its school system, its hospital services, its recreational facilities, its libraries and museums because "these services provided by the State were essentially benefits to the child, not the father, and in any event were not benefits that appellant purposefully sought for himself." Id. at 94 n.7. Here, 
consistent with Kulko, the state aid provided to Mother did not 
16 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
constitute benefits that Father sought for himself and instead 
they arose out of Mother's decision to move to 
Hawai#i. 
Finally, Mother argues that under the catch-all 
provision HRS § 576B-201(a)(8) of the UIFSA, Father's refusal to support his child was sufficient to confer jurisdiction under Hawai#i's general long-arm statute, HRS § 634-35(a)(2) (1993) 
which provides:
§ 634–35 Acts submitting to jurisdiction . (a) Any
person, whether or not a citizen or resident of this State,
who in person or through an agent does any of the actshereinafter enumerated, thereby submits such person, and, ifan individual, the person's personal representative, to thejurisdiction of the courts of this State as to any cause ofaction arising from the doing of any of the acts:
. . . 
(2) The commission of a tortious act within this State[.] 
Mother, citing In re Custody of Miller, 548 P.2d 542 
(Wash. 1976) (en banc), contends that failure to support a child 
is tortious conduct. However, we need not decide whether Father's conduct fell under HRS § 634-35(a)(2) as tortious conduct, because Miller is distinguishable on due process grounds. The Court in Miller held that jurisdiction over the putative father was proper, inter alia, where the father purposely brought the children to the forum and could therefore fully anticipate that a custody proceeding could be initiated in Washington. Id. at 549. To the contrary, in this case, Father 
did not purposefully bring Child to Hawai# i and, as noted above, 
the record does not indicate Father had notice that his actions would cause Mother to move to Hawai
#i. 
Therefore, for the reasons explained above, the 
exercise of personal jurisdiction over Father under HRS § 576B-201(a)(5) or (8) was not reasonable. To hold otherwise would prescribe a construction to the UIFSA which would overreach due process, which the commentary to the UIFSA specifically cautions against. 
b. Father did not consent to personal jurisdiction 
Mother contends that Father consented to personal 
jurisdiction or waived his defense by: (1) taking advantage of 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Family Court's discovery procedures beyond what was 
reasonably related to the issue of jurisdiction; and (2) simultaneously contesting the merits of custody, visitation and child support while contesting personal jurisdiction.
(1) Discovery by Father 
Mother first argues that Father submitted to the 
jurisdiction of the State under HRS § 576B-201(a)(2) when he served her with a request for answers to interrogatories before filing his first responsive pleading. 
In this regard, Mother 
cites cases from California, including Roy v. Super. Ct., 25 Cal. Rptr. 3d 488 (Cal. Ct. App. 2005), and a Maryland case, Friedetzky v. Hsia, 117 A.3d 660 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 2015). Those cases are inapposite and Mother fails to explain how Father's discovery request went beyond issues related to jurisdiction. 
In Roy, the California Court of Appeals held that the 
trial court had properly denied the defendants' motion to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction. In that case, the defendants filed a joint answer in which they asserted lack of jurisdiction as a defense among 24 affirmative defenses. 25 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 489. However, the defendants failed to immediately act on their 
assertion that the California trial court lacked personal jurisdiction and actively participated in the case by, inter alia, filing a case management statement, attending conferences, propounding discovery, filing numerous motions to compel when satisfactory responses were not received, and filing a motion for summary judgment. Id. at 490. Given these circumstances and its 
reading of applicable California law, the California Court of Appeals held that the defendants did not have the "option to plead lack of jurisdiction as a defense and reserve determination of the issue until as late as trial." Id. at 493. Rather, the 
defendants should have immediately raised the jurisdictional defect in a motion. Id. at 493-94. 
In Friedetzky, the mother filed a petition for custody 
of child, and in response father filed an answer requesting that the court order paternity testing and initiated discovery to 
18 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
acquire information relevant to matters of paternity and child 
support. 
117 A.3d at 661. Mother then filed an amended 
complaint to include claims for paternity, child support, and counsel fees and father filed a motion to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction. Id.The court in Friedetzky stated that 
the father "invoked the court's jurisdiction by affirmatively requesting relief, particularly coupled with his requests for discovery on the issues of paternity and child support, which extend beyond the realm of custody alone." Id. at 673 (footnote 
omitted). Friedetzky further expressed that father anticipated 
receiving the benefits of the paternity testing if it was ordered by the lower court and thus availed himself of the advantages and protections of the State of Maryland. Id. at 674. Thus, the 
Friedetzky court held the trial court could exercise jurisdiction over father with regard to paternity and child support. Id.
Here, Mother filed her Petition on November 15, 2016, 
and Father was personally served with the Petition in Texas on November 21, 2016. On December 23, 2016, Father filed a certificate of service in this case indicating that he had served a "First Request for Answers to Written Interrogatories and Production of Documents to [Mother]" (Request for Answers to 
Interrogatories).
11 A month later, on January 23, 2017, Father 
filed his Answer to the Petition contesting the Family Court's 
jurisdiction over the proceedings. Unlike the defendants in Roy and Friedetzky, Father did not request affirmative relief from the Family Court and asked only for dismissal on jurisdictional grounds. See UIFSA § 201 cmt. (Unif. Law Comm'n 2008). 
("Subsection (2) expresses the principle that a nonresident party concedes personal jurisdiction by seeking affirmative relief or 
11 On March 22, 2017, Mother filed a certificate of service that her
responses to Father's Request for Answers to Interrogatories was served the
day before. Thus, Mother did not provide her answers to Father's Request forAnswers to Interrogatories until Father had already filed his Answer to thePetition and the Family Court entered its Temporary Order stating it hadjurisdiction over the proceedings. 
19 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by submitting to the jurisdiction by answering or entering an 
appearance."). 
Father's Request for Answers to Interrogatories was not 
filed below and is not part of the record on appeal. 
Father 
asserts his Request for Answers to Interrogatories focused entirely on jurisdiction and that Mother fails to explain how Father went beyond issues of jurisdiction in his request. In turn, Mother argues that Father used information obtained from this initial discovery request at trial for issues beyond the scope of jurisdiction and appears to argue that the request alone is a general appearance; however, Mother provides no authority to support this contention. 
On the question of personal jurisdiction over a 
defendant, the plaintiff bears the burden of establishing that the court has personal jurisdiction. See AlixPartners, LLP v. 
Brewington, 836 F.3d 543, 548 (6th Cir. 2016); Johnston v. Multidata Sys. Int'l Corp., 523 F.3d 602, 609 (5th Cir. 2008). 
If the [trial court] chooses not to conduct a full-blown
evidentiary hearing on a pretrial motion to dismiss for lackof personal jurisdiction, plaintiff need make only a primafacie showing of jurisdiction through its own affidavits andsupporting materials, even though plaintiff eventually mustestablish jurisdiction by a preponderance of the evidenceeither at a pretrial evidentiary hearing or at trial and,before the hearing is held, a prima facie showing sufficesnotwithstanding any controverting presentation by the movingparty to defeat the motion. 
Shaw 76 Hawai# i at 327, 876 P.2d at 1295 (emphasis added) 
(citation omitted); Morrill v. Scott Fin. Corp., 873 F.3d 1136, 
1141 (9th Cir. 2017); Grayson v. Anderson, 816 F.3d 262, 268 (4th Cir. 2016) (holding that ultimately "a plaintiff must establish facts supporting jurisdiction over the defendant by a preponderance of the evidence"). 
Here, Mother has not carried her burden to show that 
Father sought affirmative relief by serving the Request for Answers to Interrogatories on her. Thus, Father did not waive his challenge to personal jurisdiction or make a general appearance by serving the Request for Answers to Interrogatories. 
20 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) Contesting the merits as to custody,
visitation, and child support, while alsocontesting personal jurisdiction 
Mother next argues Father consented to the Family 
Court's jurisdiction and that he could not maintain his 
jurisdictional objection while simultaneously contesting the merits of custody, visitation and child support. 
Father contested jurisdiction from the outset in his 
first responsive pleading to the Petition. 
Father then raised 
the jurisdictional issue at the January 26, 2017 hearing but was unsuccessful. During the hearing, the Family Court stated that: 
The only personal jurisdiction issue, you can call it what
you may, it -- it has to do with the issues related towhether or not [Father] wants his rights with respect tovisitation. If he wants to contest any of that, then he'llhave to submit to this court's personal jurisdiction. If he doesn't, that's up to him, but we still have subject matterjurisdiction over the issue of custody and over the child[.] 
(emphasis added). 
Thus, once the Family Court asserted jurisdiction over 
Father, he was given the choice of either defaulting on the issue 
of visitation or proceeding on the merits. Moreover, based on Mother's Petition, other issues related to custody and child support were actively at issue in the case. Given these circumstances, Father proceeded on the merits as to custody, visitation and child support, but he also continued to contest the Family Court's personal jurisdiction. 
On May 17, 2017, after a pretrial conference, the 
Family Court ordered, inter alia, that the parties provide a memo regarding the application of the UIFSA to this case given the jurisdiction decisions made in the Temporary Order. On June 5, 2017, Father filed his trial memo in which he continued to contest the Family Court's personal jurisdiction over him. Father argued, inter alia, that he does not do any business in the state, has never availed himself of Hawai# i's courts or laws, 
and that Father reasonably assumed Child would be born and raised in Texas along with Mother's other children. 
Father also argued 
that the Family Court's prior determination, that Hawai# i is 
Child's home state for purposes of child custody, is not 
21   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dispositive as to whether the Family Court had personal 
jurisdiction over Father 
for purposes of child support. 
On June 14, 2017, the Family Court held trial in the 
case and noted Father's running objection to the Family Court's personal jurisdiction over him and that Father had preserved the objection for appeal. The Family Court did not make any further ruling regarding its jurisdiction before proceeding with the trial, during which Father contested the merits as to custody, visitation and child support.
12 
We first note that Mother's argument is inconsistent 
with Hawai# i Family Court Rule (HFCR) 12(b), which states in 
relevant part: "No defense or objection is waived by being joined with one or more other defenses or objections in a responsive pleading or motion." See In Interest of Doe, 83 Hawai# i at 372, 
926 P.2d at 1295; see also Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP) Rule 12(b). 
In Romero v. Star Markets, Ltd., 82 Hawai# i 405, 922 
P.2d 1018 (App. 1996), this Court interpreted Hawai
#i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(b), relying on FRCP Rule 12(b) by 
analogy,13 and noted that "Respondents did not waive their 
jurisdictional objection by actively participating in the court's 
hearing on the merits of its purported defenses[.]" Id. at 416, 
922 P.2d at 1029 (citation, brackets and quotation marks omitted). We held that "Respondents' joinder of their jurisdictional defense with their affirmative defense of accord and satisfaction did not waive their assertion of the former." Id. 
12 On June 8, 2017, Father and Mother filed a "Stipulation Regarding
Texas Law and Custody Issues" which states in part: "WHEREAS Petitioner [MJ]
(hereinafter "Mother") and Defendant [CR] (hereinafter "Father") are theparents of [Child], born in 2016[.]" Father did not contest paternity duringtrial. 
13 FRCP Rule 12(b) provides, in pertinent part: "No defense or
objection is waived by joining it with one or more other defenses orobjections in a responsive pleading or in a motion." This language issubstantially similar to HRCP Rule 12(b) and thus we can rely on legalauthorities interpreting this aspect of FRCP Rule 12(b). Romero, 82 Hawai #i 
at 414, 922 P.2d at 1027. 
22 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Moreover, FRCP Rule 12(b) has been interpreted such 
that "[a] party who has unsuccessfully raised an objection under 
Rule 12(b)(2) may proceed to trial on the merits without waiving the ability to renew the objection to the court's jurisdiction." 5B Charles Alan Wright & Arthur R. Miller, 
Federal Practice & 
Procedure § 1351 (3d ed.); see also Northern Laminate Sales, Inc. v. Davis, 403 F.3d 14, 23 (1st Cir. 2005) (quoting an earlier version of Wright & Miller); Mullins v. TestAmerica, Inc., 564 F.3d 386, 399 (5th Cir. 2009) (a prima facie showing of personal jurisdiction does not foreclose a defendant from holding plaintiff to his or her ultimate burden at trial of establishing contested jurisdictional facts by a preponderance of the evidence); Mimco Inc. v. Virginia Iron & Metal Recycling, Inc., 840 F.Supp. 1171, 1174 (S.D. Ohio 1993) (holding plaintiff met the burden for prima facie finding of jurisdiction to defeat motion to dismiss and noting the defendant could raise the issue of personal jurisdiction again at trial on the merits). 
Here, after Father's challenge to the Family Court's 
jurisdiction was rejected at the January 26, 2017 hearing, he could proceed to trial on the merits, while continuing to challenge the Family Court's jurisdiction. See Lamarche v. 
Lussier, 844 N.E.2d 1115, 1119-20 (Mass.App.Ct. 2006) (holding nonresident father did not waive his jurisdictional challenge by appearing personally for a hearing where he challenged personal jurisdiction at the outset and throughout the proceedings prior to his appearance); see also Donaldson v. Donaldson, 729 P.2d 426, 429 (Idaho Ct.App. 1986) (holding nonresident husband did not waive jurisdictional challenge by signing a stipulation on the merits of child support and attorney fees after his motion to dismiss had been denied); cf. Puckett, 94 Hawai# i at 480, 16 P.3d 
at 885 (lack of personal jurisdiction waived where defendant fails to assert the defense in their first responsive pleading). 
23 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
c. Personal service on Father at the Hawai
#i 
courthouse the day of trial did not establish
personal jurisdiction 
Mother argues that Father was personally served at the 
Family Court's Kapolei courthouse on June 14, 2017, the day of 
trial in this case, and Father failed to move to quash the service or argue that the service was improper. The record contains a proof of service indicating Father was served with the Petition on the morning of June 14, 2017. Thus, Mother contends this personal service on Father in Hawai# i results in the Family 
Court having personal jurisdiction over Father. 
HRS § 576B-201(a)(1) states, in relevant part, that:
§ 576B-201. Bases for jurisdiction over nonresident.
(a) In a proceeding to establish or enforce a support order
or to determine parentage of a child, a tribunal of thisState may exercise personal jurisdiction over a nonresidentindividual or the individual's guardian or conservator if: 
(1) The individual is personally served with summonsor notice within this State[.] 
The Uniform Law Comment for the UIFSA states that, this section 
is designed to be as broad as constitutionally permissible and "[s]ubsection (1) codifies the holding of Burnham v. Super. Ct., 495 U.S. 604 (1990), which reaffirms the constitutional validity of asserting personal jurisdiction based on personal service within a state." UIFSA § 201 cmt. (Unif. Law Comm'n 2008). Mother also cites to Burnham. We must, however, consider the context in Burnham, where the U.S. Supreme Court reiterated the proposition that "jurisdiction based on physical presence alone constitutes due process because it is one of the continuing traditions of our legal system that define the due process standard of 'traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.'" Id. at 619. In Burnham, the U.S. Supreme Court held 
that personal service in the forum state was sufficient where the nonresident defendant was served after he voluntarily traveled to the forum state on business and to visit his children. Id. at 
608, 628; see also Northern Light Tech. Inc. v. Northern Lights Club, 236 F.3d 57, 63 (1st Cir. 2001) (upholding personal 
24 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
jurisdiction where the defendant 
voluntarily entered the State to 
attend proceedings as a spectator in the same case in which he 
was served with process). 
Here, the circumstances are quite different. Unlike 
Burnham, Father was served in Hawai# i while here for trial that 
same day in this case, and after his challenge to the Family Court's personal jurisdiction had previously been rejected by the Family Court. 
Father had filed his answer contesting 
jurisdiction almost six months earlier, on January 23, 2017. Further, as previously noted, Father continued to contest personal jurisdiction in the proceeding. Indeed, on the same day that Father was served in Hawai# i, the Family Court noted 
Father's running objection based on his contention that the Family Court lacked personal jurisdiction over him. 
Burnham recognized that there are some exceptions to 
jurisdiction based on in-state service upon individuals brought into the forum by force or fraud, or who are in the forum as a party or witness in unrelated judicial proceedings. Id.
 at 613. 
Further, in Lamb v. Schmitt, 285 U.S. 222, 225 (1932), the U.S. Supreme Court stated that "[t]he general rule that witnesses, suitors, and their attorneys, while in attendance in connection with the conduct of one suit, are immune from service of process in another, is founded, not upon the convenience of the individuals, but of the court itself." The Supreme Court held that the test for immunity is "whether the immunity itself, if allowed, would so obstruct judicial administration in the very cause for the protection of which it is invoked as to justify withholding it." Id. at 228. 
Here, Father was not served process regarding a 
separate suit such that the immunity recognized in Lamb would apply. Rather, he was served in regard to the very case he was defending against –- in which he had already unsuccessfully challenged the court's personal jurisdiction –- while appearing for trial in the proceedings during which he continued to 
25 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
challenge the court's personal jurisdiction. 
Mother's argument 
in this case, that the Family Court has personal jurisdiction 
over Father based on the in-state service alone, would render Father's previous timely challenge to the Family Court's personal jurisdiction moot and would obstruct the judicial administration regarding Father's defense to personal jurisdiction. See Glynn 
v. EDO Corp., 641 F.Supp.2d 476, 486-87 (D. Md. 2009); Lester v. Lester, 637 So.2d 1374, 1375-76 (Ala. Civ. App. 1994) (holding defendant was immune from service regarding the instant suit while in the jurisdiction to attend a hearing challenging personal jurisdiction); Stewart v. Stewart, No. 110058, 2015 WL 326424 at *6 (Kan. Ct. App. Jan. 16, 2015) (unpublished) (holding personal service on nonresident father was not valid personal service under Kansas long-arm statute where he was in the state for a hearing on his motion to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction). 
In Glynn, the plaintiff served a nonresident defendant 
while he was in the forum state to file a motion to extend the time to file a motion challenging jurisdiction in the same case. Id. at 481, 486. Glynn rejected the plaintiff's theory of 
personal jurisdiction based on the in-state service because "[t]he constitutional due process protections of 'minimum contacts' and 'fair play and substantial justice' would be illusory, for as soon as the defendant entered the state to assert these protections, the defendant would lose them by being subject to in-state service of process." Id. at 487. Finally, 
Glynn notes that the plaintiff's theory of personal jurisdiction would lead to an illogical result where a defendant could lose their jurisdictional defense if they are served in-state while in the jurisdiction to raise the jurisdictional defense. Id. at 
487-88; see also, Stewart, 2015 WL 326424 at *6 (explaining that recognition of personal service over a nonresident litigant present in the state while moving to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction would "seem to make a mockery of a nonresident litigant's right to challenge personal jurisdiction."). 
26  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, Father objected to the Family Court's personal 
jurisdiction over him from the beginning, continued to contest 
jurisdiction during the proceedings, and raised his objection again at trial after being served that morning. 
Thus, we 
conclude that under these circumstances, the in-state service of the Petition on Father the morning of trial did not establish personal jurisdiction over him.
3. Mother and Child were not without remedy in this case 
In Hart, this court noted that the resident parent and 
child were not without remedy when the Family Court cannot 
maintain personal jurisdiction over the respondent. Hart, 110 
Hawai#i at 297, 132 P.3d at 865. The UIFSA provides two general 
avenues of relief: (1) file a petition "in an initiating tribunal for forwarding to a responding tribunal" or (2) file "directly in a tribunal of another state which has or can obtain personal jurisdiction over the respondent." Id. (quoting HRS 
§ 576B–301(c)).
14 Mother did not take either of these actions in 
this case. 
Thus, although the Family Court had jurisdiction to 
make the initial custody determination of Child under the UCCJEA, 
it did not have personal jurisdiction over Father required to 
determine his paternity or to order him to pay child support. "A judgment rendered in the absence of personal jurisdiction is void and must be set aside." Romero, 82 Hawai# i at 413, 922 P.2d at 
1026 (citation omitted). 
IV. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, to the extent they address 
the issue of custody, we affirm the "Order" entered on January 26, 2017, and the "Decision and Order" entered on September 1, 2017. We vacate these orders to the extent they address Father's paternity, child support, or other monetary obligations from 
14 Hart cites to HRS § 576B-301(c), but the pertinent provision is HRS
§ 576B-301(b). 
27 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Father, but without prejudice to Mother seeking to address those 
issues through appropriate proceedings in an appropriate forum. 
On the briefs: 
Peter Van Name Esser,
and 
Curtis Kam (Lynnae Lee
& Associates), forDefendant-Appellant. 
Robert H. Thomas 
Ross Uehara-Tilton (Damon Key Leong KupchakHastert), for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
28 