NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-14-0000341
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DANA BORGES RAPOZO, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR NO. 52109)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)

 
In 1978, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) 
indicted Defendant-Appellant Dana Borges Rapozo (Rapozo) for 
murder. The indictment charged that on or about October 9, 1978, Ropozo "did intentionally or knowingly cause the death of Gary Borges by shooting him," in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 707-701 (1976). Rapozo was found guilty as charged of murder after a jury trial, and he was sentenced to life imprisonment with the possibility of parole. This court affirmed his conviction on direct appeal. State v. Rapozo, 2 Haw. App. 
587, 637 P.2d 786 (1981). 
In August 2010, Rapozo filed a Petition for Post-
Conviction relief pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP) Rule 40 (2006). Rapozo asserted, among other things, that he was denied treatment as a youthful offender due to the ineffective assistance of his trial counsel. In April 2013, the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court) ruled that Rapozo's trial counsel provided ineffective assistance by failing NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to discuss with Rapozo the option of sentencing pursuant to the
 
Young Adult Defendant statute, HRS § 706-667 (1976). 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court vacated Rapozo's sentence and set
 the case for resentencing. After holding extensive hearings
 regarding Rapozo's resentencing, the Circuit Court on December 6,
 2013, resentenced Rapozo to life imprisonment with the
 possibility of parole.
 
On appeal, Rapozo contends that: (1) his sentence is
 
illegal because under the applicable statutes, the only available
 sentences should have been twenty years of incarceration or
 sentencing as a "young adult defendant"; and (2) assuming
 arguendo that life imprisonment with the possibility of parole is
 a legal sentence, the Circuit Court abused its discretion in
 failing to sentence him as a young adult defendant or to twenty
 years of imprisonment.
1 As explained below, we conclude that
 
Rapozo's arguments are without merit, and we affirm his sentence.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Rapozo was born in 1959. He had an extensive juvenile
 
record that included multiple adjudications beginning at age 14. 
In 1977, the family court waived jurisdiction over Rapozo, and on
 August 30, 1978, he was sentenced as an adult to five years of
 probation for second-degree escape, unauthorized control of a
 propelled vehicle, second-degree robbery, and second-degree
 burglary. His probation on these offenses was subsequently
 revoked, and he was sentenced to four years of imprisonment as a
 young adult defendant.
 
Based on an incident that occurred on October 5, 1978,
 
Rapozo was charged with attempted murder and with being a felon
 in possession of a firearm. He was later convicted of the
 reduced charge of second-degree assault and the charge of felon
 in possession of a firearm, and he was sentenced to an extended
 term of ten years of imprisonment for each conviction.
 
1The Honorable Michael D. Wilson presided over the proceedings relevant
to this appeal.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On October 9, 1978, four days after the incident that
 
led to his attempted murder charge, Rapozo committed the murder
 
of Gary Borges (Borges). Rapozo was a friend of Borges. 
However, the evidence presented at Rapozo's trial revealed that
 Rapozo and his brother, Allan Rapozo (Allan), decided to kill
 Borges because they believed Borges was planning to testify
 against their brother, Richard Rapozo, who had been implicated in
 the murder of Robert T.K. Lee. Rapozo, 2 Haw. App. at 588-89 &
 
n.4, 637 P.2d at 787-89 & n.4.
 
In the evening of October 9, 1978, Rapozo and Allan
 
went to Borges's home and shot Borges multiple time with a .38
 caliber handgun and a shotgun. Id. Borges was still alive when
 
the police arrived. Id. at 588, 637 P.2d at 788. As described
 
in this court's 1981 opinion: "The officer testified that Borges
 said to him, 'Help me. I can't see, I'm dying,' then, 'I'm
 dying. Dana shot me.' The officer asked, 'Dana who?' Borges
 replied, 'Dana Rapozo.'" Id. 
After a jury trial, Rapozo was found guilty as charged
 
of murder. He was sentenced to life imprisonment with the
 
2
possibility of parole,  and his conviction was affirmed on direct
appeal. Id.
 at 587, 637 P.2d at 787. 
II.
 
As noted, in 2013, based on Rapozo's HRPP Rule 40
 
petition, the Circuit Court vacated Rapozo's original sentence on
 the ground that his trial counsel had failed to discuss
 sentencing pursuant to the Young Adult Defendant statute. The
 Circuit Court set the case for resentencing.
 
An updated Presentence Diagnosis and Report was
 
prepared, and the Circuit Court held hearings regarding Rapozo's
 resentencing on November 18, 2013, November 21, 2013, and
 December 6, 2013. Rapozo, among other things, asserted that
 under the statutes applicable to his murder offense, life with
 the possibility of parole was not a sentencing option and that
 
2The Honorable Toshimi Sodetani imposed the original sentence on Rapozo.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Circuit Court could only sentence him to twenty years of
 
imprisonment, or as a young adult defendant (with a maximum four-
year term of imprisonment). The State disagreed with Rapozo's
 analysis. Rapozo argued that given the length of time (35 years)
 he had already been incarcerated and his good behavior during the
 last twelve years, he should be resentenced to twenty-years of
 imprisonment, even if life with the possibility of parole was an
 available sentencing option. The State argued that in view of
 Rapozo's criminal history and the facts underlying his murder
 conviction, Rapozo should be resentenced to life in prison with
 the possibility of parole.
 
After considering the evidence and lengthy arguments
 
presented by both parties, the Circuit Court resentenced Rapozo
 to life imprisonment with the possibility of parole. The Circuit
 Court explained the reasons for its sentence as follows:
 
I would like to thank both counsel in this case for
 
the thorough work that's been done in preparation for this
sentencing, and I note that there was an extensive and
thoughtful sentencing memorandum that was provided by Mr.
Bakke [(defense counsel)], along with a helpful report from
Dr. Acklin dated November the 7th, and as well, I received
an extensive letter from Ms. Futa [(Deputy Prosecuting
Attorney)], thank you, and I thank counsel for the argument.
 
I've reviewed the records and files in this case,
which I take judicial notice of, and also the statements
that were submitted by the family of Gary Borges, the
written statements, as well as the statements made in court,
and have considered the expressions of forgiveness that were
expressed by a member of Mr. Borges' family, and I've
considered the statements that were also made orally by Mr.
Rapozo's stepmother and the statement of his sister.
 
I also acknowledge the point that's been made by the
defense that it is necessary to consider the time that has
passed since the original sentencing. 
So I do consider the 35 years of incarceration that's
been served by Mr. Rapozo, and also recognize, I think
there's an adequate record that the last 12 years have been
years of good conduct. I think that significant episodes of
bad conduct would have been reflected in the record.
 
And it is true that this sentence must be considered
 
with the possibility of a youth offender sentence, as well
as a possibility of 20 years incarceration, and of course,
the possibility of life with the possibility of parole.
 
But based on the nature of the offense and the prior
history at the time of the sentencing, including Mr.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rapozo's prior convictions for Assault, Robbery and Felon in
Possession of Firearms, and the fact that he was on
probation at the time this murder was committed, Mr. Rapozo
does not qualify for sentencing pursuant to HRS Section 706­667 as a youthful offender. Such a sentence would not be
 adequate for Mr. Rapozo's rehabilitation and would
jeopardize the protection of the public.
 
And it is for those reasons that I do consider the
 
option of 20 years versus life imprisonment. And without
 question, the passing of time has provided additional
information about the serious impact that has taken place
with respect to the Borges family, and weighed against that
is what appears to be a record of commitment by you, Mr.
Rapozo, to getting better and trying to follow the rules and
procedures while you were incarcerated. 
As Mr. Bakke points out, the law does require
determination of whether parole is appropriate at a certain
time, and that determination has been made at this point by
the paroling authority. 
So I take those matters into consideration. But given
the nature of the offense, and I know the impact on the
family of Gary Borges as well, I cannot conclude that at
this time the sentence of life with the possibly [sic] of
parole is not an appropriate sentence, in part, because it
does provide the protection of the public, as [Prosecuting
Attorney] Mr. Kaneshiro's pointed out is a major issue,
given the nature of the facts.
 
So life with the possibility of parole provides a
lifetime of protection of the community under the
supervision of the Paroling Authority. 
So it's for that reason that the sentence will be
 
imposed pursuant to HRS Section 707-701(B) of life
imprisonment with the possibility of parole.
 
This decision is not intended to offer any
contradiction, however, to the 35-year minimum sentence that
has been set by the Hawaii Paroling Authority.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
The Circuit Court entered its Judgment on December 6,
 
2013, and this appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION

 
I.
 
Rapozo contends that his sentence of life imprisonment
 
with the possibility of parole is illegal because under the
 
applicable statutes, the maximum sentence the Circuit Court could
 impose was twenty-years of incarceration. We disagree.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A.
 
Rapozo was charged with murdering Borges, in violation
 
of HRS § 707-701. At the time that Rapozo committed the murder
 
of Borges, HRS § 707-701 (1976) and HRS § 706-606 (1976) provided
 as follows:
 
§707-701 Murder. (1) Except as provided in section
707-702,[ 3
] a person commits the offense of murder if he
intentionally or knowingly causes the death of another
person.

 
(2) Murder is a class A felony for which the defendant
shall be sentenced to imprisonment as provided in section

706-606.
 
§706-606 Sentence for offense of murder. The court
 
shall sentence a person who has been convicted of murder to
an indeterminate term of imprisonment. In such cases the
 court shall impose the maximum length of imprisonment as
follows:
 
(a)	 Life imprisonment without possibility of parole
in the murder of:
 
(i) 	A peace officer while in the performance
of his duties, or
 
(ii)	 A person known by the defendant to be a
witness in a murder prosecution, or
 
(iii) A person by a hired killer, in which event
both the person hired and the person
responsible for hiring the killer shall be
punished under this subsection, or
 
(iv) 	A person while the defendant was
imprisoned.
 
As part of such sentence the court shall order
the director of the department of social
services and housing and the Hawaii paroling
authority to prepare an application for the
governor to commute the sentence to life with
parole at the end of twenty years of
imprisonment.
 
(b)	 Life imprisonment with the possibility of parole
or twenty years as the court determines, in all
other cases. The minimum length of imprisonment
shall be determined by the Hawaii paroling
authority in accordance with section 706-669.
 
(Emphases added.) Thus, under HRS § 706-606(b), the Circuit
 
Court was authorized to sentence Rapozo to either life
 
3HRS § 707-702 (1976) defined the offense of manslaughter.
 
6
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
imprisonment with the possibility of parole or twenty years of
 
imprisonment.4
 
B. 
In arguing that the maximum sentence the Circuit Court
 
could impose on Rapozo was twenty years of imprisonment, Rapozo
 relies on HRS § 706-660 (1976), which at the time relevant to
 this case provided:
 
§706-660 Sentence of imprisonment for felony; ordinary
terms. A person who has been convicted of a felony may be
sentenced to an indeterminate term of imprisonment except as
provided for in section 706-660.1 relating to the use of
firearms in certain felony offenses. When ordering such a
sentence, the court shall impose the maximum length of
imprisonment which shall be as follows:
 
(1) For a class A felony – 20 years;
 
(2) For a class B felony – 10 years; and
 (3) For a class C felony – 5 years.
 
The minimum length of imprisonment shall be determined by
the Hawaii paroling authority in accordance with section
706-669.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Rapozo argues that because HRS § 707-701 states that
 
murder is a class A felony and because HRS § 706-660 provides
 
that the maximum length of imprisonment for a class A felony is
 twenty years, the Circuit Court could not impose a sentence on
 Rapozo that exceeded twenty years of imprisonment. In effect,
 Rapozo argues that the general sentencing provision applicable to
 all felonies, including class A felonies, trumps the specific
 sentencing provision applicable only to the offense of murder. 
C.
 
Contrary to Rapozo's argument, it is well established
 
that "'where there is a 'plainly irreconcilable' conflict between
 a general and a specific statute concerning the same subject
 matter, the specific will be favored.'" Richardson v. City and
 
4The State asserts that HRS § 706-606(b) was the applicable sentencing
provision because it did not seek life imprisonment without the possibility of
parole under HRS § 706-606(a)(ii) for Rapozo.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
County of Honolulu, 76 Hawai 'i 46, 55, 868 P.2d 1193, 1202 (1994) 
(citation omitted). Here, HRS § 706-660 is a general statute 
which pertains to the maximum length of imprisonment for all felony offenses, including class A felonies. On the other hand, HRS § 706-606 is a specific statute that pertains only to the punishment applicable to one crime -- murder. Accordingly, with respect to Rapozo's sentencing, HRS § 706-606 controls over HRS § 706-660 with respect to the applicable punishment for Rapozo's crime of murder. 
In addition, as the State notes, HRS §§ 707-701, 706­
606, and 706-660 were enacted contemporaneously, in the same basic form as applicable to this case, as part of the Hawai
'i 
Penal Code in 1972. See 1972 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 9, § 1 at 72, 
79-80, 86. It would be anomalous for the Legislature to enact HRS § 706-606, which provides separate and more severe punishment for murder, if it intended that the penalty for murder would be limited to the maximum twenty-year term for class A felonies under HRS § 706-660. Indeed, HRS § 707-701(2), which states that murder is a class A felony, also specifies that a defendant convicted of murder shall be sentenced as provided in HRS § 706­606. Rapozo's interpretation of the statutory scheme would 
render HRS § 706-606 superfluous, contrary to the standard rules of statutory construction. See Keliipuleole v. Wilson, 85 
Hawai
'i 217, 221, 941 P.2d 300, 304 (1997) ("Courts are bound to 
give effect to all parts of a statute, and that no clause, sentence, or word shall be construed as superfluous, void, or insignificant if a construction can be legitimately found which will give force to and preserve all words of the statute." (internal quotation marks, brackets, and citation omitted)). 
Moreover, murders, especially aggravated murders, are
 
typically punished more severely than other felonies. However,
 because HRS § 707-701(2) provides that all murders are class A
 felonies, Rapozo's interpretation, if accepted, would mean that
 even aggravated murders under HRS 706-606(a), such as the murder
 of a peace officer or a murder committed by a hired killer, would
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be subject to a maximum twenty-year term of incarceration under
 
the statutory scheme applicable to Rapozo's case.
 
Finally, our conclusion that HRS § 706-606 governs the 
punishment for murder, and not HRS § 706-660, is supported by decisions of the Hawai
'i Supreme Court that have referred to the 
applicable punishment for murder, under the same statutory scheme applicable to this case, as including life with the possibility of parole. See State v. Ortez, 60 Haw. 107, 111, 588 P.2d 898, 
902 (1978) ("The [Hawaii Penal Code], by HRS § 706-606, fixes the penalty for murder as an indeterminate term, the minimum length of which is to be determined by the board of paroles and pardons and the maximum length of which is, in certain cases with which we are not concerned here, life imprisonment without possibility of parole, and in all other cases life imprisonment with possibility of parole or 20 years, as the court determines." (Emphasis added.)); State v. Heard, 64 Haw. 193, 196, 638 P.2d 307, 309 (1981) ("As we read [HRS] § 706-606[(b)], it requires the sentencing judge to impose the maximum penalty of life imprisonment with possibility of parole, except that the sentencing judge is given the discretion to reduce it to twenty years if there are mitigating factors or circumstances which would warrant a lesser sentence.").
5 
For these reasons, we reject Rapozo's contention that
 
the Circuit Court's resentencing of Rapozo to life imprisonment
 with the possibility of parole was an illegal sentence.
 
II.
 
Rapozo argues that even if life imprisonment with the
 
possibility of parole is a legal sentence, the Circuit Court
 abused its discretion in failing to sentence him as a "young
 
5Rapozo also contends that under HRS § 706-606(b), the Circuit Court
could only impose a life sentence with the possibility of parole for a murder
conviction if the requirements for imposing an extended term of imprisonment
under HRS § 706-661 (1976) and HRS § 706-662 (Supp. 1978) were satisfied.
This argument is without merit. HRS § 706-606(b) does not condition the
imposition of a sentence of life imprisonment with the possibility of parole
on the satisfaction of the extended term provisions, and Rapozo does not cite
any case authority to support his contention.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adult defendant" or to twenty years of imprisonment. We
 
disagree.
 
"The authority of a trial court to select and determine 
the severity of a penalty is normally undisturbed on review in the absence of an apparent abuse of discretion or unless applicable statutory or constitutional commands have not been observed." Barnett v. State, 91 Hawai
'i 20, 26, 979 P.2d 1046, 
1052 (1999) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). "A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in imposing a sentence. The applicable standard of review for sentencing or resentencing matters is whether the court committed plain and manifest abuse of discretion in its decision." State v. Solomon, 
107 Hawai
'i 117, 126, 111 P.3d 12, 21 (2005) (block quote format, 
brackets, and citations omitted). 
At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 706-667 (1976)
 
gave a sentencing judge the discretion to impose a special term
 of imprisonment on a "young adult defendant," which was defined
 as a person convicted of a crime who was sixteen years old or
 older but less than twenty-two years old at the time of
 sentencing. HRS § 706-667 (1).
6 HRS § 706-667 provided in
 
relevant part:
 
(3) Special term. A young adult defendant convicted
of a felony may, in lieu of any other sentence of
imprisonment authorized by this chapter, be sentenced to a
special indeterminate term of imprisonment if the court is
of the opinion that such special term is adequate for his
correction and rehabilitation and will not jeopardize the
protection of the public. When ordering a special
indeterminate term of imprisonment, the court shall impose
the maximum length of imprisonment which shall be four
years, regardless of the degree of the felony involved. The
 minimum length of imprisonment shall be set by the Hawaii
paroling authority in accordance with section 706-669.
 
Thus, HRS § 706-667 authorized a special four-year term of
 
imprisonment for a young adult defendant. As noted, under HRS 
§ 706-606(b), the Circuit Court could impose a sentence of life
 
6The parties apparently assume that because Rapozo was eligible for
sentencing as a young adult defendant when he was originally sentenced, he
could be sentenced as a young adult defendant when he was resentenced. In
 light of our disposition of this case, we need not decide this issue. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
imprisonment with the possibility of parole, or twenty years of
 
imprisonment, for a defendant convicted of murder.
 
Based on our review of the record, we conclude that the
 
Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in resentencing Rapozo
 to life imprisonment with the possibility of parole. The Circuit
 Court gave both parties ample time and opportunity to present
 evidence and arguments to support their sentencing
 recommendations. The Circuit Court's ruling made clear that it
 had carefully considered the evidence and arguments presented by
 both sides. The Circuit Court explained on the record why it
 decided to impose a sentence of life imprisonment with the
 possibility of parole instead of a four-year special term under
 the Young Adult Defendant statute or a twenty-year term under HRS
 § 706-606(b). The Circuit Court cited Rapozo's prior criminal
 record, including his convictions for "Assault, Robbery and Felon
 in Possession of Firearms, and the fact that he was on probation
 at the time this murder was committed[.]" It also cited the
 nature of Rapozo's murder offense, the impact that it had on the
 victim's family, and the need to protect the public. Under this
 record, Rapozo has failed to show that the Circuit Court abused
 its broad discretion in selecting and determining the appropriate
 penalty to impose on Rapozo for his murder conviction.
 
CONCLUSION 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment. DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 30, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Jon N. Ikenaga
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
11

 