NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000074
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
NK, on behalf of VK, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
SK, on behalf of KS, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DA NO. 13-1-0132)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley and Reifurth, JJ., and
Nakamura, C.J., dissenting)
 
Petitioner-Appellant NK ("Father"), on behalf of his
 
minor son, VK, sought issuance of a protective order against
 
Respondent-Appellee SK ("Mother"), VK's mother, and KS, Mother's
 minor son and VK's half-brother. Father alleged that KS had
 sexually molested VK at Mother's home. At the time, Mother and
 Father had joint custody of VK and his siblings, KK and BK ("the
 three siblings"). At approximately the same time that he filed
 for the protective order, Father sought to modify the custody
 award in the parties' paternity case (FC-P No. 12-1-0114).
 
On March 12, 2013, the Family Court of the Second
 
Circuit ("Family Court") issued a Temporary Restraining Order
 against Mother and KS. At a show-cause hearing on March 20,
 2013, the Family Court issued an Order for Protection in which it
 granted Mother supervised visitation with the three siblings "as
 ordered by the therapist"; granted an order of protection against
 KS; and awarded temporary physical custody of the three siblings
 to Father until April 9, 2013, the date of a scheduled hearing on
   
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Father's paternity-case motion to modify custody.1
 
Father filed motions to amend the Order for Protection
 
on March 27, 2013, and April 4, 2013 ("April 4, 2013 Motion to
 
Amend"). The Family Court denied the March 27, 2013 motion
 without a hearing on the same day that it was filed.
2
 
On April 9, 2013, the Family Court held a consolidated
 
hearing on Father's April 4, 2013 Motion to Amend and on his
 motion to modify custody in the paternity case.
3 The Family
 
Court orally denied the April 4, 2013 Motion to Amend, and
 granted in part and denied in part the motion to modify custody. 
Specifically, the court granted the custody motion to the extent
 that it ordered that KS not have any communication or contact
 with the three siblings unless necessary for treatment purposes
 or otherwise ordered by the court. On April 9, 2013, the Order
 for Protection dissolved by its terms, and because the custody
 order did not further modify custody of the three siblings,
 custody reverted back to the joint custody arrangement that had
 preceded it. 
On April 19, 2013, Father filed a motion to reconsider
 
the April 9, 2013 oral order. On May 3, 2013, the Family Court
 issued its order denying Father's motion to reconsider on the
 basis that the motion did not present any new facts or
 information that were not available and considered at the
 April 9, 2013 hearing.
4
 
On July 5, 2013, the Family Court issued (1) Findings
 
of Fact and Conclusions of Law regarding the March 20, 2013 show-
cause hearing ("March FOF/COL") and (2) Findings of Fact and
 Conclusions of Law regarding the April 9, 2013 hearing on the
 April 9, 2013 Motion to Amend and the motion to modify custody
 ("April FOF/COL").
 
Father appeals from the following orders: the March 20,
 
2013 Order for Protection; the March 27, 2013 denial of the
 
1 The Honorable Douglas J. Sameshima presided. 
2 The Honorable Douglas J. Sameshima presided. 
3 The Honorable Barclay MacDonald presided. 
4 The Honorable Barclay MacDonald presided. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Motion to Amend [Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") §] 586
 
Protective Order, filed March 27, 2013; the April 9, 2013 oral
 
5
order denying the April 4, 2013 Motion to Amend;  and the May 3,
2013 Order Denying [Father's] Motion to Reconsider Order Entered
 on April 9, 2013 Filed April 19, 2013.
 
Father raises five points on appeal, asserting that the
 
Family Court erred by: (1) considering a stipulated order that
 Mother and JS, KS's father, had made in their divorce case (the
 
6
"Stipulated Order")  to be a sufficient basis for limiting the
Order for Protection to twenty days and for declining to extend
 it thereafter; (2) declining to extend the period of protection
 beyond twenty days "[b]ecause of the '[b]est [i]nterest' of a
 [j]uvenile [a]ssailant"; (3) declining to extend the period of
 protection beyond twenty days "[b]ecause the[ a]ssailant is
 [t]hirteen [y]ears [o]ld"; (4) declining to extend the period of
 protection beyond twenty days because Father had not provided
 expert testimony regarding the victims' psychological harm; and
 (5) applying a change in circumstances test to Father's motions
 to amend the Order for Protection.
 
(1) Father contends that the Family Court erred in
 
limiting the Order for Protection to twenty days and, thereafter,
 in refusing to extend the period of protection, on the basis of
 the Stipulated Order. 
We disagree.
 
First, the Family Court did not abuse its discretion by
 
considering the Stipulated Order, which separated KS from the
 three siblings, when it issued the Order for Protection with a
 twenty-day period of protection.
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. 
Thus, [an appellate court] will not disturb the family
court's decisions on appeal unless the family court
disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
substantial detriment of a party litigant and its decision
 
5
 Father attached to his notice of appeal, as one of the orders
appealed from, a copy of the minutes from the April 9, 2013 hearing reflecting
the denial of Father's April 4, 2013 motion to amend the Order for Protection.
 
6
 Mother and JS agreed to entry of the Stipulated Order in their
divorce case which awarded JS with sole physical custody of KS, prohibits
contact between KS and the three siblings unless necessary for treatment
purposes or otherwise ordered by the court, and allows Mother no visitation
with KS when she has custody of the three siblings. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
clearly exceeded the bounds of reason.
 
Schiller v. Schiller, 120 Hawai 'i 283, 287, 205 P.3d 548, 552 
(App. 2009) (citing Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 137 
P.3d 355, 360 (2006)). Here, it is true that the Family Court 
considered the Stipulated Order when it issued the Order for Protection. However, the Family Court also considered other factors when it decided to limit the period of protection to twenty days. In FOF 27 of the March FOF/COL, for instance, the court found that "[b]ecause the issue of custody of [VK], [KSK], and [BRK] was to be addressed at the April 9, 2013 hearing . . . it was only necessary that an order for protection issue until April 9, 2013." That is, because the Family Court determined that it would revisit the custody issue with the same parties involved in the Order for Protection at its scheduled April 9, 2013 hearing, it did not abuse its discretion by limiting the period of protection until that time. See Haw. Rev. Stat. 
§ 586-5.5(a) (2006) (providing that a protective order may be issued for a "fixed reasonable period as the court deems appropriate"); cf. Lite v. McClure, No. 29107, 2009 WL 1263099, at *2 (Hawai
'i App. May 8, 2009) (holding that the family court 
did not abuse its discretion by rejecting request for an indefinite protective order and setting the term for a fixed period of ten years). 
Second, although the Family Court considered
 
information gleaned from the Stipulated Order at its April 9,
 2013 hearing, the court based its decision not to extend the
 Order for Protection on considerably more than that. Among other
 things, as reflected in the April FOF/COL, the court found that:
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
. . . .
 
20. Father did not file a Motion to extend the Order
 
for Protection pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes [§] 586­
5.5.
 
21. Father did not serve the 4/4/2013 Motion to Amend
on counsel for [Mother] until April 8, 2013.
 
. . .
 
24. At the April 9, 2013[ hearing], Father presented
no new evidence that would establish a material change in
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
circumstances to warrant an extension of the Order for
 
Protection.
 
25. Moreover, by the April 9, 2013 hearing, the Order
for Protection had already expired.
 
. . . .
 
35. At the April 9, 2013 hearing[,] Father did not
proffer a declaration or testimony of a therapist which
substantiated his allegations of what the therapist would
recommend.
 
Therefore, contrary to Father's contention, the Family Court did
 
not conclude that the Stipulated Order was "sufficient to limit"
 VK to an Order of Protection for twenty days, and the court,
 therefore, did not err.
 
(2) Father next contends that the Family Court erred
 
by considering the best interests of the juvenile offender when
 it refused to extend the period of protection beyond twenty days.
 Specifically, Father points to the introductory phase of the
 April 9, 2013 hearing when the court stated that, "I don't want
 to completely disregard [KS]. I want to keep it in his best
 interest as well." Significantly, however, the court immediately
 added that, "But the weight we give to [KS] today may not be what
 we give to [KSK] and [VK]." Accordingly, we find that Father's
 argument on this point is meritless.
 
Here, Father points to nothing in the record to support
 
his contention that "[t]he best interests of the perpetrator
 militated against an order of protection for the victims[,]" or
 that the court ever entertained such a notion. Furthermore, the
 April FOF/COL makes no mention of KS's best interest. Indeed, as
 noted above, the court appeared to base its decision not to
 extend the period of protection on the fact that Father had not,
 by the April 9, 2013 hearing, offered any evidence in support of
 his contention that the status quo posed psychological danger to
 the three siblings. Notwithstanding the Family Court's
 introductory comment then, the record lacks any evidence that the
 Family Court actually considered the assailant's best interests,
 and in the face of evidence to the contrary, we hold that the
 court did not err.
 
(3) Father also contends that the Family Court "erred
 
in limiting victims of family violence to 20 days of protection
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
under chapter 586 because their assailant is 13 years old."
 
(Emphasis added.) We disagree.7
 
We identify nothing establishing that the court denied
 
Father's motion to amend because KS was thirteen at the time, nor
 does it appear that the fact had any bearing on the court's
 decision. Indeed, although the Family Court expressed discomfort
 with the fact that KS was only thirteen years old at the time of
 the offense, nothing in the April FOF/COL suggests that this
 formed the basis for the court's decision to deny Father's motion
 to amend. In fact, in denying the motion, the court appeared to
 rely primarily on Father's failure to offer any evidence in
 support of his contention that the status quo posed psychological
 danger to the three siblings at the April 9, 2013 hearing.
 Moreover, because the April 9, 2013 hearing was a consolidated
 hearing on Father's motion to amend the Order of Protection and
 Father's motion to modify custody in the paternity case, what
 might have been irrelevant to the Order of Protection could have
 born more directly on the question of custody.
8 Finally, In re
 
TC, which involved an appeal from prosecuting a minor for sexual
 assault under HRS §§ 707-730 (Supp. 2002), 707-732 (Supp. 2002),
 does not resolve the issue here. Therefore, we hold that the
 Family Court did not err.
 
7 The argument section of Father's briefing on this point of error
consists of selected excerpts from the April 9, 2013 transcript, but it does
not contain any actual argument or citations to any authority save that,
Father contends, "[t]his [c]ourt . . . has spoken to this issue" in In re TC,
121 Hawai' i 92, 107, 214 P.3d 1082, 1097 (App. 2009). As such, Father's
argument fails to comply with the Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule
28. Accordingly, it may be deemed waived. See Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7)
("Points not argued may be deemed waived.") However, "noncompliance with Rule
28 does not always result in dismissal of the claims," Marvin v. Pflueger, 127
Hawai'i 490, 496, 280 P.3d 88, 94 (2012), and our policy is to allow litigants
"to have their cases heard on the merits, where possible."  O'Connor v. 
Diocese of Honolulu, 77 Hawai' i 383, 386, 885 P.2d 361, 364 (1994). "This is 
particularly so where the remaining sections of the brief provide the
necessary information to identify the party's argument." Pflueger, 127
Hawai'i at 496, 280 P.3d at 94. 
8
 That is, the court may have made its statement about not
"completely disregard[ing]" KS's best interests at an inopportune time, and it
may have intended this statement to refer to its handling of the custodyproceeding regarding the three siblings. Indeed, "in custody proceedings, the
paramount consideration . . . is the best interests of the child." Doe v. 
Doe, 98 Hawai'  i144, 155–56, 44 P.3d 1085, 1096–97 (2002) (citing In re Doe,
52 Haw. 448, 453, 478 P.2d 844, 847 (1970)). And courts shall consider 
several factors in determining the best interests of the child—including the
child's safety. See Haw. Rev. Stat. § 571-46(b) (2013). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
(4) Father also contends that the Family Court erred
 
by declining to extend the period of protection beyond twenty
 
days because Father introduced no expert testimony on the issue
 of psychological harm to VK. Because Father failed to
 demonstrate that VK or any of the three siblings remained at
 physical or psychological risk after custody of KS had
 transferred to his father, this point of error fails.
 
At the March 20, 2013 hearing on the Order for
 
Protection, Father's counsel stated that the three siblings were
 seeing a therapist, and that they sought protection "until the
 [custody dispute between Mother and Father] is heard and until
 the therapeutic recommendations of their therapist are
 established and there is an order that [sic] be followed."
 Accordingly, the Family Court set the term of the Order for
 Protection at twenty days, or until the next hearing on the
 custody dispute.
 
At the next custody hearing, which took place at the
 
consolidated hearing on April 9, 2013, Father provided no
 recommendations from the therapist, or any evidence at all of the
 event in question or the condition of any of the alleged victims.
 The Family Court expressed frustration that Father was providing
 no evidence of a change in circumstances or about the harm that
 might occur to the three siblings if they were not kept apart
 from KS. In the absence of any evidence, the court noted that it
 was being asked to speculate. In sum, the court observed that
 "there's no evidence before the Court. . . . No affidavits from
 any therapists or experts—that this is a problem. There's no
 evidence that that's a problem[, or] that it's too soon either." 
HRS § 586-9 requires that a party requesting
 
modification of an order for protection show a "material change
 in the circumstances of the parties since the issuance or last
 modification of the order." Haw. Rev. Stat. § 586-9. By failing
 to present any therapeutic recommendations, or any evidence at
 all, Father did not establish a material change in circumstance
 warranting modification of the protective order. In response,
 Father contends that "[w]hether psychological harm was proven or
 speculative is beside the point. A rape victim is entitled to
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
more than 20 days of protection under Chapter 586." 
The Family Court considered what evidence there was and
 
found that by removing KS from the home and agreeing to the
 
Stipulated Order, "Mother took reasonable and immediate measures
 to insure the safety of all of the children and thus minimizing
 the likelihood that there would be future threats of abuse or
 future acts of abuse." In sum, the court found "Mother credible
 and that Mother has taken all necessary steps to protect all of
 her children." After the April 9, 2013 hearing, the court found
 that "Father did not proffer a declaration or testimony of a
 therapist which substantiated his allegations of what the
 therapist would recommend" and concluded that "Father's Motion to
 Amend did not allege a material change in circumstances of the
 parties since the issuance of the March 20, 2013 Protective
 Order." 
Furthermore, in determining the best interest of the
 
children for purposes of custody, the Family Court was required
 to assess the safety needs of the children. See Haw. Rev. Stat.
 
571-46(b)(8) (Supp. 2013). In the absence of proof that it was
 unsafe for the younger children to return to Mother's home when
 KS was not present, then, the court was justified in both denying
 Father's motion to modify custody and determining that Mother
 could regain joint custody. Therefore, the Family Court did not
 abuse its discretion by requiring Father to provide it with some
 evidence of the children's therapeutic condition at the
 consolidated hearing.
 
(5) Finally, Father contends that the Family Court
 
erred when it applied the above-mentioned "change in
 circumstance" test to his motion to amend the Order for
 Protection and his motion to modify custody. Father concedes
 that an extension to an order for protection requires a change in
 circumstances under HRS § 586-9, but he argues that "the statute
 as a whole certainly did not contemplate orders of protection in
 sexual assault cases to last a mere 20 days."
9 We are
 
9
 Father offers no argument relating the application of the changed-
circumstances test to the motion to modify custody, and instead only states
that "HRS § 586-4(d) contemplates that a custody order in a child custody
(continued...)
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
unconvinced, however, that the statute contemplated orders of any
 
particular duration divorced entirely from the facts of the
 individual case.
 
First, to the extent that the Order for Protection
 
expired at midnight on evening of April 8, 2013, an issue that we
 need not decide, this assessment provides context for the Family
 Court's statement to Father's counsel that counsel should "make
 an appropriate motion" or "[m]ake an appropriate TRO if you want
 to do that." Thus, we cannot hold that the Family Court abused
 its discretion in declining to amend the expired order. La Valle
 
v. La Valle, 69 A.3d 1, 11 (Md. 2013) ("An expired protective
 order no longer exists, and an untimely hearing cannot revive
 it.").
 
Second, to the extent that the Family Court considered
 
the motion to amend as a motion to modify an existing order for
 protection irrespective of its alleged termination, it was
 obliged to apply the changed circumstances test under HRS § 596­9. In FOF 35 of the April 2013 FOF/COL, the Family Court found that, "[a]t the April 9, 2013 hearing[,] Father did not proffer a declaration or testimony of a therapist which substantiated his allegations of what the therapist would recommend." Not only is this finding unchallenged and therefore binding on this court, Okada Trucking Co., 97 Hawai
'i at 458, 40 P.3d at 81, but a 
review of the record supports the finding. Because Father did not meet his burden under HRS § 586-9 to demonstrate that a material change in circumstances warranted modification of the Order for Protection, then COL 2 of the April 2013 FOF/COL is not erroneous, and the Family Court did not err in denying Father's April 4, 2013 Motion to Amend or in denying his motion to reconsider. 
Nothing prevented Father from presenting any
 
therapeutic recommendation regarding separation of KS from the
 three siblings as a changed circumstance warranting modification
 of the parties' custody order or even as a stand-alone fact
 
9(...continued)
proceeding may trump the TRO." 
This assertion, however, has no apparent
relationship to the point of error. Therefore, we do not consider the point
further.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
warranting issuance of a further order for protection at any
 
point during the period in question or between then and now. 
Whether Father ever did that is indeterminable from the record in
 this case. What this case considers is Father's contention that
 the Family Court abused its discretion in refusing to amend the
 Order for Protection or to modify the custody order after Mother
 had taken the steps outlined in the Stipulated Order, but before
 any criminal charges were filed (if any were ever filed) and
 before any therapeutic recommendation was presented (if any was
 ever offered). Furthermore, it requires the substitution of this
 court's judgment about the proper reaction to serious, but up to
 that point unfiled, criminal charges over that of the trier of
 fact. Under those circumstances, in this case, we conclude that
 the court did not err. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the March 20, 2013
 
Order for Protection; the March 27, 2013 denial of the Motion to
 Amend HRS [§] 586 Protective Order, filed March 27, 2013; the
 April 9, 2013 oral order denying the April 4, 2013 Motion to
 Amend HRS [§] 586 Protective Order; and the May 3, 2013 Order
 Denying [Father's] Motion to Reconsider Order Entered on April 9,
 2013 Filed April 19, 2013.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 21, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Joy Mademba-Sy Yanagida and
Jean-Claude Mademba-Sy
(Yanagida & Associates)
for Petitioner-Appellant.
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Elizabeth C. Melehan
 
for Respondent-Appellee.
 
10
 