 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000167 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
SHUN ZHANG, Petitioner-Appellant,
v. 
A
DMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR OF THE COURTS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I, Respondent-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
H
ONOLULU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DAA-18-00019) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant Shun Zhang (Z
hang) appeals from 
the Judgment on Appeal, filed on February 28, 2019, in the 
District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District 
Court).1 
On appeal, Zhang claims the District Court erred by 
affirming the October 29, 2018 Notice of Administrative Hearing 
Decision by Respondent-Appellee the Administrative Driver's 
License Revocation Office (ADLRO). Zhang contends the District Court erred in upholding the ADLRO's administrative revocation of 
her license because the October 9, 2018 Notice of Administrative 
Review Decision (Notice of Review) issued by Tania Kimura (Kimura) was not issued in compliance with Hawaii Revised 
1 The Honorable Kenneth J. Shimozono presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Statutes (HRS) § 291E-37 (Supp 2019).   Specifically, Zhang 
contends that Kimura was not appointed by the Administrative 
Director of the Courts Rodney Maile (Administrative Director) as required by HRS § 291E-1 (2007 Repl.).
  32
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we affirm the District Court. 
As we stated in McGrail v. Administrative Director of 
Courts, 130 Hawai# i 74, 78, 305 P.3d 490, 494 (App. 2013): 
We review the District Court's decision to affirm the 
Director's administrative revocation of McGrail's driver's license to determine if the District Court was right or wrong in its decision. Brune v. Admin.Dir. of the Courts, 110 Hawai #i 172, 176–177, 130 P.3d
1037, 1041–42 (2006). The District Court's review ofthe Director's decision is limited to the record of the administrative hearing and the issues of whetherthe Director: 
(1) Exceeded constitutional or statutoryauthority; 
(2) Erroneously interpreted the law; (3) Acted in an arbitrary or capricious manner; (4) Committed an abuse of discretion; or (5) Made a determination that was unsupported by
the evidence in the record. 
HRS § 291E–40(c) (2007). 
Zhang argues that, under HRS § 291E-1, the District 
Court was wrong to uphold the ADLRO's revocation of her license 
because the Administrative Director did not directly hire Kimura 
2 HRS § 291E-37 states, in part: 
§291E-37 Administrative review; procedures; decision. (a)
The director automatically shall review the issuance of anotice of administrative revocation and shall issue a written decision administratively revoking the license andprivilege to operate a vehicle or rescinding the notice ofadministrative revocation. 
3 HRS § 291E-1 provides: "Director means the administrative director of
the courts or any other person within the judiciary appointed by the directorto conduct administrative reviews or hearings or carry out other functionsrelating to administrative revocation under part III." 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and could not delegate his authority to another person to appoint 
Kimura. Zhang thus contends that Kimura did not have the legal authority to conduct the initial administrative review and issue the Notice of Review. 
As Zhang states in her reply brief, "[t]here are no 
disputed facts here." The District Court's "Decision and Order Affirming Administrative Revocation" states that the Administrative Director approved the position description for the position held by Kimura. Further, the Administrative Director "delegated his powers and authority to Human Resources Director Dee Wakabayashi, and to other persons involved in the hiring process, including Chief Adjudicator George Tran, for the purposes of selecting individuals to fill positions at the ADLRO." 
Contrary to Zhang's argument, we conclude that Kimura 
was properly appointed to conduct administrative revocation reviews pursuant to HRS § 291E-1 and the Administrative Director's authority to appoint others in the judiciary to carry out the functions related to administrative revocation of licenses. As previously noted, HRS § 291E-1 provides: "Director means the administrative director of the courts or any other person within the judiciary appointed by the director to conduct administrative reviews or hearings or carry out other functions relating to administrative revocation under part III." Based on the plain language of this provision, the Administrative Director was authorized to either directly appoint any other person in the judiciary to conduct the administrative reviews, or to appoint any other person in the judiciary to "carry out other functions relating to administrative revocation under part III." Other functions related to administrative revocation includes hiring the necessary staff to carry out the revocation process. 
Moreover, other relevant provisions related to the 
Administrative Director's authority are set out in HRS §§ 76-13 (2012) and 601-3(b)(7) (2016). HRS § 601-3(b) states, in pertinent part: 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 (b) The administrative director shall, subject
to the direction of the chief justice, perform the
following functions: 
. . . .
 (7) Carry out all duties and responsibilities
that are specified in title 7 as itpertains to employees of the judiciary[.] 
(Emphasis added). 
Title 7 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes includes HRS 
Chapters 76 to 90D. 
HRS § 76-11 (2012) states: 
"Director" means the head of the central personnelagency for a jurisdiction regardless of title, whetherit is the director of human resources development,director of personnel, director of personnel services,or personnel director. 
HRS § 76-13(2) states: 
§76-13 Specific duties and powers of director. The director shall direct and supervise all theadministrative and technical activities of the director's department. In addition to other duties imposed upon the director by this chapter, thedirector shall: 
. . . .
 (2) Appoint employees necessary to assist thedirector in the proper performance of thedirector's duties and for which appropriations shall have been made[.] 
(Emphasis added). 
HRS § 76-13(2) authorizes the Administrative Director 
to "[a]ppoint employees necessary to assist the [Administrative 
Director] in the proper performance of the [Administrative Director's] duties[.]" 
Here, Zhang does not dispute that: the Administrative 
Director appointed the Human Resources Director to assist him in performing his duty under HRS § 271E-37 by hiring Kimura to conduct administrative reviews; Kimura is an employee of the Judiciary; and Kimura conducted Zhang's administrative review. 
On appeal, Zhang did not challenge the administrative 
review on any other ground. Thus, the District Court did not err 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by affirming the October 29, 2018 Notice of Administrative 
Hearing Decision. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment on 
Appeal, filed on February 28, 2019, in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 19, 2021. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge Timothy I. Mac Master,for Petitioner-Appellant. 
Christopher J.I. Leong,
Deputy Attorney General,for Respondent-Appellee. 
5 