FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
PO, Petitioner-Appellee, v.
JS, Respondent-Appellant
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000048
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-P NO. 08-1-0162)

 
June 15, 2016
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Respondent-Appellant JS appeals from the the (1)

 
December 30, 2014 "Order Re: Trial" and (2) January 21, 2015
 
"Order Re: Child Support Arrears" both entered in the Family
 
1
Court of the First Circuit  (family court).
 
On appeal, JS contends the family court erred in:
 
(1)
 awarding Petitioner-Appellee PO sole legal custody
 
"based primarily on testimony that [JS] did not want to
 communicate with [PO] except for emergencies and to facilitate
 visitation with the child";
 
(2) finding JS "ha[d] not demonstrated a material
 
change in circumstances to warrant a change in the
 
1 The Honorable Jennifer L. Ching presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
visitation/time-sharing schedule set forth in the ["Stipulated
 
Order Re Paternity, Custody, Visitation, and Support" (March 2008
 
Stipulation)]";
 
(3) finding "even if [JS] demonstrated a material
 
change in circumstances to warrant a change in the
 
visitation/time-sharing schedule set forth in the March 2008
 Stipulation, the current visitation schedule is reasonable and in
 the best interests of the child";
 
(4) "allowing [Rob B. Welch, PhD. (Dr. Welch)] to
 
testify at trial as [JS] did not waive the child's psychologist-
client privilege and Dr. Welch's testimony proved to be extremely
 biased in favor of [PO]";
 
(5) "finding and concluding that [JS] failed to meet
 
his burden of proof to show that monthly child support warranted
 modification"; and
 
(6) finding "monthly child support in the amount of
 
$3,500.00 should have been paid effective February 1, 2011, thus
 concluding that [JS] owes [PO] $64,490.00 in past due child

 
support." (Emphasis omitted.)
I. BACKGROUND
 
JS and PO are the parents of JO (
Child), born in
 
October 2007. On March 19, 2008, JS and PO filed the March 2008
 Stipulation in the family court, which provided:
 
3. LEGAL CUSTODY: Legal custody of the Child is
awarded to [PO] and [JS] jointly. Legal custody includes,
but is not limited to, decision making authority regarding
major medical decisions, the decision as to where the Child
should go to school, travel outside of the United States,
and major financial decisions.
 
4. PHYSICAL CUSTODY: Physical custody of the Child is
awarded to [PO] solely, subject to [JS's] right to time­sharing as set out in this Order.
 
5. TIME-SHARING: [JS] shall have unlimited daytime
visitation with the Child when he travels to Hawaii. [PO]
shall make efforts to make Child available to spend time
with [JS]. [JS] shall give [PO] two weeks notice of travel
dates and plans for visitation.
 
All visitation should be reasonable, as mutually
agreed upon by both parties. Nothing in this agreement
shall prohibit the parties from agreeing upon additional
visits or extended time sharing.
 
On July 21, 2010, JS and PO filed in the family court a
 
"Stipulation Modifying March 19, 2008 Stipulated Order Re
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Paternity, Custody, Visitation, and Support" (July 2010
Stipulation). The July 2010 Stipulation increased child support
 
payments to $8,500 per month, provided for a college savings
 
account for the Child's benefit to which JS agreed to deposit
 $2,500 per month, and described plans for timesharing in June and
 July 2010.
 
In February 2011, JS and PO agreed to reduce the child
 
support payment to $3,500 per month (February 2011 Agreement)
 
because JS had become unemployed in October 2010. The parties
 
did not file a written agreement with the family court reflecting
 the new agreement.
 
Until July 2012, JS's visitations with the Child in 
Hawai
'i and on the mainland were worked out cooperatively between 
JS and PO. In July 2012, the Child, who was four years old at the time, was visiting JS in Florida without the accompaniment of PO. Believing he had been left alone, the Child called the police because he was scared. JS did not call PO to inform her of the incident. A few months later, in November 2012, the Child was visiting Washington for JS's wedding, again without the company of PO. JS was arrested two days before his wedding, but was not charged. JS did not call PO to inform her of his arrest. 
In December 2012, JS began making child support
 
payments in the amount of $1,500 per month. JS attributed the
 reduced payments to the depletion of his savings due to his
 wedding expenses and payment of his debts.
 
On August 19, 2013, JS filed a "Motion for Relief after
 
Judgment or Order and Declaration" requesting a recalculation of
 child support and modification of the visitation/time-sharing
 schedule. On September 18, 2013, PO filed a "Motion to Award
 [PO] Sole Legal Custody, Enforce [July 2010 Stipulation], and for
 Attorney's Fees."
 
The family court held a trial on the parties' motions
 
on June 16, 17, 25, September 8, 9, and 16, 2014. At trial, both
 parties testified about the acrimonious nature of their
 relationship that had emerged over the two years prior to trial.
 JS testified that he did not want an on-going relationship with
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
PO and that he wanted no communication from her except for email
 
contact regarding emergencies or notices of visitation.
 
On December 30, 2014, the family court entered the
 
"Order Re: Trial" awarding PO with sole legal custody, enforcing
 the March 2008 Stipulation with regard to school expenses and
 time-sharing, and determining JS's child support obligation to be
 $3,500 per month. The family court entered the "Order Re: Child
 Support Arrears" on January 21, 2015, determining that JS owed PO
 for child support arrears through January 2015 in the amount of
 $64,490. JS filed his notice of appeal on January 28, 2015. The
 family court entered its "Supplemental Record on Appeal Findings
 of Fact and Conclusions of Law" on August 18, 2015. (Brackets
 omitted.)
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A. Family Court Decisions
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
we will not disturb the family court's decision on appeal
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of
reason. 
Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 Hawai 'i 126, 136, 276 P.3d 695, 705 
(2012) (quoting Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 
355, 360 (2006)).
B. Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
 
The family court's [findings of fact (FOF)] are
reviewed on appeal under the "clearly erroneous" standard.
A FOF is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despite
substantial evidence in support of the finding, the
appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm
conviction that a mistake has been made. "Substantial
 evidence" is credible evidence which is of sufficient
 quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
caution to support a conclusion.
 
Kakinami, 127 Hawai 'i at 136, 276 P.3d at 705 (quoting Fisher, 
111 Hawai 'i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360). 
A family court's conclusions of law (COL) are reviewed 
de novo. Balogh v. Balogh, 134 Hawai 'i 29, 38, 332 P.3d 631, 640 
(2014). 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C.	 Evidentiary Rulings
 
"We apply two different standards of review in 
addressing evidentiary issues. Evidentiary rulings are reviewed 
for abuse of discretion, unless application of the rule admits of only one correct result, in which case review is under the right/wrong standard." Inoue v. Inoue, 118 Hawai
'i 86, 93, 185 
P.3d 834, 841 (App. 2008) (quoting State v. Ortiz, 91 Hawai 'i 
181, 189, 981 P.2d 1127, 1135 (1999)).
D.	 Material Change in Circumstances
 
"Whether a substantial and material change has been
 
presented is reviewed under the right/wrong standard." Hollaway
 
v. Hollaway, 133 Hawai 'i 415, 421, 329 P.3d 320, 326 (App. 2014) 
(citing Davis v. Davis, 3 Haw. App. 501, 506, 653 P.2d 1167, 1171 
(1982)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 Psychologist-Client Privilege 
JS argues that the testimony provided by the Child's
 
therapist, Dr. Welch, was admitted in violation of the
 psychologist-patient privilege. JS contends that under Hawaii
 Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 504.1(b) (Supp. 2015), a child and
 
both parents are authorized to claim the psychologist-patient
 
privilege, and the circuit court erred in allowing Dr. Welch's
 testimony over JS's objection.
 
HRE Rule 504.1 provides in relevant part:
 
Rule 504.1 Psychologist-client privilege.
 
. . . . 
(b) General rule of privilege. A client has a
 
privilege to refuse to disclose and to prevent any other
person from disclosing confidential communications made for
the purpose of diagnosis or treatment of the client's mental
or emotional condition, including substance addiction or
abuse, among the client, the client's psychologist, and
persons who are participating in the diagnosis or treatment
under the direction of the psychologist, including members
of the client's family.
 
. . . .
 
(d) Exceptions.
 . . . .
 (3) 	Condition an element of claim or defense. There
 
is no privilege under this rule as to a
communication relevant to the physical, mental,
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or emotional condition of the client in any
proceeding in which the client relies upon the
condition as an element of the client's claim or
 defense or, after the client's death, in any
proceeding in which any party relies upon the
condition as an element of the party's claim or
defense.
 
JS objected at trial to Dr. Welch's testimony regarding 
the discussions he had with the Child at the Child's therapy 
sessions under the psychologist-patient privilege. The family court overruled the objection, presumably based on PO's position that Dr. Welch's testimony regarding how JS's inconsistent contact with the Child had affected the Child was "central to the paramount issue" and therefore subject to the HRE Rule 504.1(d)(3) exception. JS relies on Sussman v. Sussman, 112 Hawai
'i 437, 146 P.3d 597 (App. 2006) to argue that "seeking 
custody of one's children is not tantamount to relying on one's mental or emotional condition as an element o[f] a claim or defense, and accordingly, does not trigger the rule 504.1(d)(3) exception." 
In response to JS's argument, PO cites Hollaway, in 
which this court held, "where joint custodial parents are deadlocked regarding an important decision implicating their child's future or welfare, such an impasse qualifies as a material change in circumstances sufficient to warrant the [family court's] consideration of a change in the custody order's terms with respect to the deadlocked matter." Holloway, 133 
Hawai
'i at 422, 329 P.3d at 327. Specifically, PO points to this 
court's statement, "There is . . . no infringement on [constitutionally protected liberty interests in the right of parents to direct the upbringing of their children] when a court, properly interposed between two parents, each equally vested with such rights, resolves an impasse between them regarding the exercise of those rights." Id. at 423, 329 P.3d at 328. 
Hollaway, however, does not guide our decision. Hollaway 
involved the fundamental right of a parent to determine the school their child would attend. Id. at 416, 329 P.3d at 321. 
Here, we consider whether one parent can waive the statutory psychologist-patient privilege over the objection of another 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parent. Our focus is not on whether the family court may act as
 
tie-breaker, but whether the child's mental and/or emotional
 condition is an element in determining child custody and child
 support under the HRE Rule 504.1(d)(3) exception.
 
In cases involving a dispute as to the custody of a
 
minor child, the court is required to evaluate the "best
 interests of the child." HRS § 571-46(a) (Supp. 2015); 
see AC v.
 
AC, 134 Hawai 'i 221, 230, 339 P.3d 719, 728 (2014). PO offered 
Dr. Welch's testimony at trial as pertinent to "what would be
 better for the [Child]" and "how the prior contacts or lack of
 contacts [with JS] have impacted [the Child]."
 
By statute, the family court considers several factors
 
in determining the best interests of the child. See HRS § 571­
46(b) (Supp. 2015).
2 No one factor is dispositive of a family
 
2 The family court is required to consider, at a minimum, certain
enumerated factors:
 
(1)	 Any history of sexual or physical abuse of a child by
a parent;
 
(2)	 Any history of neglect or emotional abuse of a child
by a parent;
 
(3)	 The overall quality of the parent-child relationship;
 
(4)	 The history of caregiving or parenting by each parent
prior and subsequent to a marital or other type of
separation; 
(5)	 Each parent's cooperation in developing and
implementing a plan to meet the child's ongoing needs,
interests, and schedule; provided that this factor
shall not be considered in any case where the court
has determined that family violence has been committed
by a parent;
 
(6)	 The physical health needs of the child;
 
(7)	 The emotional needs of the child;
 
(8)	 The safety needs of the child;
 
(9)	 The educational needs of the child;
 
(10)	 The child's need for relationships with siblings;
 
(11)	 Each parent's actions demonstrating that they allow
the child to maintain family connections through
family events and activities; provided that this
factor shall not be considered in any case where the
court has determined that family violence has been
(continued...)
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court's best interests of the child determination. We agree with
 
JS's position that the child's emotional and/or mental condition
 was not an "element" of the family court's best interests of the
 child analysis, although it is a highly relevant factor.
 
This court in Sussman considered whether a parent of a 
child, who has made a confidential communication for the purpose of diagnosis or treatment of the parent's mental or emotional condition and is seeking physical child custody and visitation, has a privilege to prevent the psychologist from testifying about the confidential communication. Sussman, 112 Hawai
'i at 442, 146 
P.3d at 602. We answered that the parent was able to claim the privilege, and the HRE Rule 504.1(d)(3) exception did not apply because it required the parent who sought treatment "to rely upon his 'mental or emotional condition' as an element of his claim or defense." Id. at 443, 146 P.3d at 603.
 The mental health of each parent is an explicitly 
relevant factor in determining the best interests of a child. HRS § 571-46(b)(14). Yet in Sussman, we determined that "the HRE Rule § 504.1(d)(3) exception requires more than relevance." Sussman, 112 Hawai
'i at 443, 146 P.3d at 603. Similarly, while a 
child's mental and emotional state is without a doubt a relevant and important factor in the family court's determination of the best interests of the child, see HRS § 571-46(b)(7), we cannot say that it is an "element" of a claim or defense either party 
2(...continued)
committed by a parent;
 
(12)	 Each parent's actions demonstrating that they separate
the child's needs from the parent's needs;
 
(13)	 Any evidence of past or current drug or alcohol abuse
by a parent;
 
(14)	 The mental health of each parent;
 
(15)	 The areas and levels of conflict present within the
family; and 
(16)	 A parent's prior wilful misuse of the protection from
abuse process under chapter 586 to gain a tactical
advantage in any proceeding involving the custody
determination of a minor.
 
HRS § 571-46(b) (Supp. 2015).
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
has brought into question. Therefore, the HRE Rule 504.1(d)(3)
 
exception does not apply and the family court erred in deciding 
to admit Dr. Welch's testimony under this exception. See Kealoha
 
v. Cty. of Hawaii, 74 Haw. 308, 319, 844 P.2d 670, 676 (1993)
 ("When application of a particular evidentiary rule can yield
 only one correct result, the proper standard for appellate review
 is the right/wrong standard."). 
We next address the dispute between JS and PO over the
 
right of each parent to assert or waive the psychologist-patient
 privilege on behalf of the child. Under the rules of evidence,
 "[t]he [psychologist-patient] privilege may be claimed by the
 client, the client's guardian or conservator, or the personal
 representative of a deceased client. The person who was the
 psychologist at the time of the communication is presumed to have
 authority to claim the privilege but only on behalf of the
 client." HRE Rule 504.1(c).
 
Other jurisdictions have considered the tension between
 
the rights of parents and the rights of their children that
 emerges when a child has made a confidential communication to a
 psychologist.
3 The weight of authority on the issue leads us to
 
the conclusion that in cases in which the parents are involved in
 litigation themselves and where the child's mental state is
 relevant to litigation, the parents are precluded from asserting
 or waiving the privilege on their child's behalf. See Attorney
 
ad Litem for D.K. v. Parents of D.K., 780 So.2d 301, 307 (Fla.
 Dist. Ct. App. 2001) ("Where the parents are involved in the
 litigation themselves over the best interests of the child, the
 parents may not either assert or waive the privilege on their
 child's behalf."); Bond v. Bond, 887 S.W.2d 558, 560 (Ky. Ct.
 App. 1994) ("[W]e see no logic in permitting one or both of the
 parents in a custody battle to assert the psychotherapist-patient
 privilege on behalf of their child, especially when the child's
 
3
 A "psychologist," under HRE Rule 504.1(a)(2), is "a person
authorized, or reasonably believed by the client to be authorized, to engage
in the diagnosis or treatment of a mental or emotional condition, including
substance addiction or abuse."
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
mental, emotional, and/or physical well-being is the key issue in
 
the custody dispute. Oftentimes, one parent, at least, will have
 a significant motivation to prevent full disclosure, to the
 detriment of the child."); Nagle v. Hooks, 460 A.2d 49, 51 (Md.
 1983) ("[T]he appointment of a neutral third party would
 eliminate the very real possibility, as may exist in this case,
 of one of two warring parents exercising the power of veto for
 reasons unconnected to the polestar rule of 'best interests of
 the child.'"); In re Berg, 886 A.2d 980, 987 (N.H. 2005) ("We
 conclude that parents do not have the exclusive right to assert
 or waive the privilege on their child's behalf.").
 
Different approaches have emerged as to how trial
 
courts are to resolve the assertion or waiver of a child's
 psychologist-patient (or related) privilege when the child's
 mental or emotional state is at issue in litigation. One
 approach is to require the trial court to appoint a guardian to
 assert or waive the privilege on behalf of a child. See Attorney
 
ad Litem for D.K., 780 So.2d at 308 ("A child less than twelve
 years old does not have the emotional maturity or capacity of a
 seventeen year old. A court faced with the child's desire to
 assert the privilege in such circumstances should determine
 whether the child is of sufficient emotional and intellectual
 maturity to make the decision on his or her own. If the court
 decides that the child is sufficiently mature, then the court
 should appoint an attorney ad litem to assert the child's
 position, as the court did here."); Nagle, 460 A.2d at 51 ("[W]e
 hold that when a minor is too young to personally exercise the
 privilege of nondisclosure, the court must appoint a guardian to
 act, guided by what is in the best interests of the child."). 
Another approach is to leave the trial court with broad
 
discretion in determining how and what testimony to admit. See
 
Bond, 887 S.W.2d at 561 ("We will not attempt to require any
 specific procedure by the trial court, but allow broad
 discretion. The judge may personally and directly interview the
 therapist to determine what, if any, information is relevant and
 material for disclosure; or, the judge may appoint a guardian ad
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
litem . . . for the sole purpose of determining the best
 
interests of the child and for recommending whether, and to what
 extent, the privilege should be waived."); 
In re Berg , 886 A.2d
 
at 987 ("We refrain from establishing a detailed procedure
 through which the privilege should be waived or asserted, and
 instead leave that determination to the sound discretion of the
 trial court.").
 
We agree with the conclusion of the courts of other
jurisdictions in that where the parents are involved in the
 litigation themselves over the best interests of the child, the
 parents may not either assert or waive the privilege on their
 child's behalf.
4 We believe the family court is in the best
 
position to determine whether a child is emotionally and
 intellectually mature enough to personally assert or waive
 privilege, and thus do not mandate a particular process by which
 the family court must act. If the child is not sufficiently
 mature to assert or waive privilege, the family court is within
 its discretion to appoint an independent guardian ad litem solely
 for the purpose of the privilege issue, or to rely on the
 existing guardian ad litem. See HRS § 551-2 (2006 Repl.).
5
 

 
4 In Bond, the Kentucky Court of Appeals explained the potential for
parents to forget the best interests of their child or children: 
We have considered this case with deep concern about

the apparent oversight of the children's rights in this
case. This dispute, however, is no different from other
custody disputes where the child becomes the pawn–-the prize
after which two people seek–-no matter what the effect is on
the child. Society expects that a mother and father are the
ones most likely concerned with the best interests and well­being of their child and, under normal circumstances, this
is true. However, when custody of the child becomes the
subject of a bitter contest between mother and father, the
personal interests of the contestants in almost all cases
obliterate that which is in the best interests of the child. 
It is at this point that it can be said the interests of
both parents become potentially, if not actually, adverse to
the child's interests.
 
Bond, 887 S.W.2d at 560. 
5 HRS § 551-2 provides in relevant part:
 
§ 551-2 Guardian ad litem; next friend; appointment.  
Nothing in this chapter impairs or affects the power of any
court to appoint a guardian to defend the interests of any
minor . . . or its power to appoint or allow any person as
next friend for a minor, to commence, prosecute, or defend
(continued...)
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under the circumstances of this case, neither JS nor PO
 
may assert or waive the psychologist-patient privilege. We
 
remand to the family court with instructions to determine whether
 asserting or waiving the privilege is in the best interests of
 the Child. If appointing a guardian ad litem would be helpful to
 the determination, the family court may appoint one as it deems
 necessary.
B. Legal Custody Award
 
JS challenges the family court's conclusion that there
 
had been a material change in circumstances to justify a change
 
6
in legal custody  and the family court's award of sole legal
custody to PO. JS argues, 
In granting [PO] sole legal custody of the [Child],
the [family court] is limiting [JS's] rights, a fundamental
interest, solely because of communication issues between the
parties. If the court believes that it is impossible to co-
parent and have joint legal custody over a child without
communication, then [JS] should in turn be awarded sole
legal custody of the [Child] as [PO's] inappropriate and
overbearing actions are what led to the communication
breakdown in the first place.
 
In the alternative, if the Court believes that co-
parenting is possible, even in highly acrimonious situations
such as this one, the [family court] should be directed to
issue a ruling on how and to what extent the parties can
communicate so that they can co-parent. This will in turn
 allow for a joint custody arrangement that is more in line
with the [Child's] best interests. There will always be
cases where the parties cannot communicate well with one
another. This should not lead to an automatic conclusion
 that one party must be granted sole legal custody of the
child.
 
The party seeking modification of a joint legal custody
 
order "must first make a threshold showing of material change in
 
circumstances." Hollaway , 133 Hawai 'i at 421, 329 P.3d at 326. 
In the March 2008 Stipulation, which was the only

 
5(...continued)
any action or proceeding in the minor's behalf[.]

 
6 "Legal custody" under HRS § 571-2 (2006 Repl.) is defined as:
 
the relationship created by the court's decree which imposes
on the custodian the responsibility of physical possession
of the minor and the duty to protect, train, and discipline
the minor and to provide the minor with food, shelter,
education, and ordinary medical care, all subject to
residual parental rights and responsibilities and the rights
and responsibilities of any legally appointed guardian of
the person.
 
12
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
agreement on the legal custody of the child, JS and PO agreed to
 
joint legal custody. The family court described the relationship
 between JS and PO after their cooperative relationship began to
 deteriorate in July 2012:
 
7. [JS] testified, and the Court finds, that [JS]
does not have a current relationship with [PO]: he does not
want an on-going relationship with [PO]; his view is there
is no benefit to [PO], [JS] or the Child; and he feels that
less communication with [PO] is better.
 
8. [JS] testified, and the Court finds, that he
wants only e-mail contact from [PO] regarding emergencies
regarding the Child. See Exhibit M-13, a text from [JS] to
 
[PO] which states:
 
First off your of Fuckin piece of shit
that has never done anything for yourself.
You have nothing. Have done nothing are
nothing accept a Fuckin leach. You have
 done nothing but steal money from me and
try to justify it by saying its for my
son. You're a piece of shit. And you
don't deserve or warrent my time or any
time. I don't ever wanna hear your greedy
voice again. Have my son skype me on
tuesdays and thursdays at seven pm pacific
time. Don't ever call or attempt to speak
to me again. You are less than nothing.
Your whole existsance is a joke and you
know it. Stop poisoning my son with your
weakness and hate. You have already heard
from my attorny you hold diggin bitch.
And I will see your filthy ass in court.
Fuck you.
 
. . . .
 
9. [JS] sent an e-mail to [PO] on March 9, 2013
which included "there is no reason for you to be emailing me
other than an emergency or a two week notice of visitation
as agreed upon in mediation. Do not sent me texts or
 pictures or emails ever unless it falls under one of those
two categories[.]"
 
10. At one point, [JS] told [PO] that she may
address him as "Mr. [S]". . . .
 
11. [JS's] stated position that the only
communication he wants from [PO] is e-mails regarding an
emergency or a two week notice of visitation makes joint
legal custody not feasible, and not in the best interests of
the Child. [JS] testified that his last phone call with
[PO] was in 2012.
 
(Mistakes in original; brackets and citations to record omitted.) 
This court has held that an "extraordinarily high level
 
of conflict between . . . parents, notwithstanding the many
 
attempts to encourage and/or aid the parties through mediation,
 professional services, and prior court orders, qualifie[s] as a
 
13
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
material change in circumstances," especially where there is a
 
"lack of specificity and clarity in the original custody and
 visitation provisions[.]" Carr v. Buenger, No. CAAP-11-0000545
 
at *11 (App. May 30, 2014) (mem.). Here, there was no lack of
 clarity in the original legal custody agreement—the parties were
 clearly awarded joint legal custody. However, the parties'
 deteriorating relationship to the point that there was no
 communication between them except "regarding an emergency or a
 two week notice of visitation" is sufficient in these
 circumstances to constitute a material change in circumstances,
 because joint legal custody requires parents to make decisions
 together for the child's basic needs. JS has suggested that
 
joint legal custody without communication is possible, but makes
 
no suggestion of an arrangement between JS and PO that would
 mitigate the changed circumstance. Therefore, the circuit court
 did not err in concluding that PO had established a material
 change in circumstances warranting the award of sole legal
 custody to PO.
C.	 Modification of the 2008 Stipulated Order Regarding
Visitation/Time-Sharing
 
1.	 Material Change in Circumstances 
JS challenges the family court's conclusion that he had
 
not demonstrated a material change of circumstances to warrant a
 
change of the visitation schedule set forth in the March 2008
 Stipulation. JS contends that there are four bases for
 concluding that there was a material change in circumstances: (1)
 "the [Child] has matured from being an infant in 2008 to an
 elementary school aged boy in 2014"; (2) "the [Child's] schedule
 has changed in that he is now in school for a majority of the
 year, thus limiting [JS's] potential timesharing with him"; (3)
 "[PO] continuously violated the [March] 2008 Stipulation by
 aligning the [Child] against [JS and JS's] wife, by not
 encouraging a positive parent-child relationship between the
 [Child] and [JS], and by interfering with the parent-child
 relationship between [JS] and the [Child]"; and (4) "there has
 been an increase in acrimony between the parties."
 
"A person seeking a change in visitation must show a
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
material change in circumstances since the previous visitation 
order." In re Guardianship of Doe, 93 Hawai 'i 374, 388, 4 P.3d 
508, 522 (App. 2000) (citing Nadeau v. Nadeau, 10 Haw. App. 111, 121, 861 P.2d 754, 759 (1993)). "[T]he question is whether substantial change has occurred since the initial [order] requiring modification or change in the award of custody of the minor child." Turoff v. Turoff, 56 Haw. 51, 55, 527 P.2d 1275, 
1278 (1974). 
The March 2008 Stipulation, the most recent agreement
 
on visitation and time-sharing, granted JS "unlimited daytime
 visitation with the Child when [JS] travels to Hawaii. . . . All
 visitation should be reasonable, as mutually agreed upon by both
 parties. Nothing in the agreement shall prohibit the parties
 from agreeing upon additional visits or extended time-sharing."
 
Regarding JS's request for modification of the March
 
2008 Stipulation, the family court held that JS did not
 demonstrate a material change in circumstances. The family court
 held in the alternative that the visitation/time-sharing schedule
 in the March 2008 Stipulation "is reasonable and is in the best
 interests of the Child." In support of its conclusion, the
 family court found:
 
13. There was testimony from both [JS] and [PO], and
the Court finds, that [JS] has had additional visits and
extended time-sharing with the Child beyond unlimited
daytime visitation with the Child in Hawaii.
 
14. Until July 2012, visitations were worked out
cooperatively between the parents. [JS] had time with the
Child in Hawaii and on the mainland, which included [JS]
having visitation with the Child for periods of time of up
to approximately three weeks.
 
JS's first two bases for modification are related to 
the fact that the child is now in elementary school. At the time 
JS and PO agreed to allow JS "unlimited daytime visitation" in Hawai
'i, their child was approximately five months old. JS also 
argues that PO violated the March 2008 Stipulation by aligning the child against JS and interfering with JS's relationship with the child. JS does not provide any support for this position. Relatedly, JS argues that there is an increase in acrimony between the parties. The family court noted that before the parties' disagreement began, there was a history of extended 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
visitation/time-sharing, in which "visitations were worked out
 
cooperatively between the parents." The family court's FOFs 7­11, excerpted above, describe the deterioration of communication
 in a once cordial and cooperative relationship.
 
The March 2008 Stipulation relied substantially on the
 
parties' ability to come to agreements about visitation and
 assumed a cooperative relationship. The evidence in the record
 shows that the parties' relationship now involves an
 "extraordinarily high level of conflict," in which JS has stated
 that the only contact he permits from PO is "e-mails regarding an
 emergency or a two week notice of visitation . . . ."
 
We agree that JS has demonstrated a material change of 
circumstances and that the circuit court's conclusion otherwise was in error. See Hollaway, 133 Hawai
'i at 421, 329 P.3d at 326; 
Carr, mem. op. at *11.
2. Best Interests of the Child
 
JS challenges two of the family court's justifications
 
for concluding that the existing visitation/time-sharing schedule
 
was in the best interests of the child, which include, "(1) Two
 incidents which occurred during the child's mainland visitations
 with [JS] and (2) on the testimony presented by Dr. Rob Welch."
 
The family court relied on Dr. Welch's testimony in its
 
FOFs 25-31. Because we remand to the family court on the issue
 of the admission of Dr. Welch's testimony, which is relevant to
 whether the March 2008 Stipulation's visitation/time-sharing
 schedule was in the best interests of the child, we remand to the
 family court to reevaluate whether the schedule is in the best
 interests of the child.
 
D. Child Support Modification
1. Most Recent Enforceable Agreement
 
JS contends the last enforceable child support
 
agreement was the July 2010 Stipulation for $8,500 per month and
 
was not the February 2011 Agreement for $3,500 per month.
 Additionally, JS challenges the family court's finding that "his
 last employment [with the National Football League (NFL) was] at
 
the end of 2009, into 2010; he was released as a result of
 
performance lacking and conduct detrimental." JS argues that
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
this error is significant because he became unemployed after the
 
July 2010 Stipulation, which constituted a material change in
 circumstance such that the July 2010 Stipulation could be
 modified.
 
Regarding the February 2011 Agreement, the family court
 
stated:
 
36. The Court finds that on or about February of
2011, [JS] and [PO] agreed to the reduction of child support
to $3,500 per month (from $8,500 per month), and ordered
that [JS] pay monthly child support of $3,500 commencing
February 1, 2011. The Court ordered the $3,500 per month
child support notwithstanding that: (1) no written agreement
or order was filed at that time; (2) [PO] viewed the
agreement as conditional; and (3) [JS] testified that the
parents agreed to further reductions in the monthly amount
of child support.
 
37. [PO] testified that she viewed the $3,500 per
month child support agreement as conditional (conditions
including that [JS] have open communication with [PO], that
[JS] not stop making child support payments without talking
to [PO] first, that they not litigate in court). [JS]
testified that he didn't agree that the $3,500 monthly child
support amount was accurate. The Court finds that the
 parents agreed to reduce the child support to $3,500 per
month. The Court also notes that both parents had an
attorney at the time of the agreement to the $3,500 monthly
child support. [PO] testified that when [PO] told [Katherine
Bennett, PO's previous attorney], months later, about the
agreement, Ms. Bennett was upset that [PO] had agreed to the
$3,500 per month child support.
 
PO testified at trial that in October 2010 JS was released from
 
the NFL. PO explained that following his release, PO and JS
 agreed to modify JS's child support obligations:
 
[PO's counsel] Okay. [October of 2010] is when [JS]
was released by the NFL?
 
[PO] Correct. And then he had a visit in mid
 
December to Hawaii. 
And at this point he was friendly with
me; he was able to come over and eat at my house and he
played with [Child]. And at that point he said, you know,
things have changed for me financially, would you agree –­he said I remember what your expenses were, would you agree
to lowering child support to 3,500? And I said if you
promise that you're not going to do this thing where you
just cut child support without interacting with me, I said
as long as you don't –- if you, you know, like stop talking
bad about me to friends, you know, 'cause we have similar
friends because we went to Udub, and I said as long as you
have open communication, you know, you don't have time
periods where you just absolutely don't connect with me,
then that's fine, we can drop it to 3,500.
 
[PO's counsel] And did any order ever get entered for

that?
 
[PO] No, it didn't. And [Ms. Bennett] was upset with
me when I told her months later that I had agreed to drop
 
17
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
it.
 
JS began to pay the reduced amount of $3,500 beginning in
 
February 2011. PO testified that there were no changes until
 December 2012, when JS "unilaterally decided to cut child support
 without ever saying anything to me."
 
JS testified that there was an agreement to modify the 
child support subsequent to the February 2011 Agreement. The family court found that this testimony was not credible. The family court's credibility finding as to JS's testimony regarding a subsequent modification in 2012 cannot be reversed on appeal. See In re Doe, 95 Hawai
'i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001) ("It 
is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." (ellipsis and brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai
'i 87, 
101, 997 P.2d 13, 27 (2000)). 
The family court's finding that the most recent 
agreement regarding child support payments was made in February 2011 following the termination of JS's employment with the NFL is supported by substantial evidence in the record, and is therefore not clearly erroneous. See Balogh, 134 Hawai
'i at 38, 332 P.3d 
at 640. 
2. 	Changed Circumstances Affecting JS's Ability to Pay
Child Support
 
JS argues that even if the February 2011 Agreement was
 
the most recent child support agreement, there was a material
 
change in circumstances that warranted a reduced child support
 obligation. JS argues that subsequent to the agreement, he (1)
 expended $200,000 on his November 2012 wedding and (2) paid off
 all of his debts because "it was very important for [him] to pay
 off his debts so that he started off his marriage without debts."
 
The family court's relevant findings were:
 
39. At the time that parents agreed to reduce the
monthly child support to $3,500, [JS] was retired from the
National Football League ("NFL"). When asked how he made
 child support payments even though he was retired, [JS]
testified, and the Court finds, that he had money
accumulated from his employment with the NFL.
 
40. [JS] and his wife both testified, and the Court
finds, that [JS] paid all of the $200,000.00 expenses for
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
their wedding in November of 2012, and that it was very
important to [JS] that he pay off his debts so that he
started off their marriage without debts.
 
. . . .
 
43. [JS] chose to make his payment of the entire
costs of the wedding and paying off his debts priorities
over the support of his Child.
 
44. In December of 2012, the month after his
marriage, [JS] started to make monthly child support
payments of $1,500, which was less than what had been agreed
to by the parents ($3,500 per month). . . .
 
. . . .
 
47. [JS] has not applied for work since he graduated
from college in 2013.
 
. . . .
 49. There was no written evidence that [JS] is
disabled, or unable to work.
 
. . . .
 52. [JS] failed to meet his burden of proof to show
that the $3,500 monthly child support agreed to should be
modified, or the amount of any warranted modification.
 
53. There has not been any material change of
circumstances from the time when [JS] agreed to child
support in the amount of $3,500 per month.
 
A party seeking modification of a child support
 
obligation must show that there has been "a substantial and
 
material change in the relevant circumstances so as to permit
 consideration of the modification request." Davis v. Davis, 3
 
Haw. App. 501, 506, 653 P.2d 1167, 1170 (1982). 

 
We agree with the family court's conclusion that JS's
wedding expenses and debt payments, which JS testified depleted
 his savings, do not constitute a material change in circumstances
 sufficient to warrant a modification of February 2011 Agreement
 regarding child support.

 
E. Child Support Guidelines

 
JS contends the family court erred because it was
 
7
required under HRS § 584-15(e) (2006 Repl.)  to calculate JS's
7 HRS § 584-15(e) provides in relevant part:
 
§584-15 Judgment or order. . . .
 
(e)
 In determining the amount to be paid by a parent
(continued...)
 
19
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
child support obligations based on Child Support Guidelines
 
(Guidelines).
 
HRS § 571-52.5 (2006 Repl.) provides, "When the court 
establishes or modifies the amount of child support required to be paid by a parent, the court shall use the guidelines established under section 576D-7, except when exceptional circumstances warrant departure." Agreements for child support payments in excess of the amount dictated by the Guidelines are considered an "exceptional circumstance" under which a family court is permitted to order the amount greater than the amount specified by the Guidelines. See Hartman v. Thew, 101 Hawai
'i 
37, 42, 61 P.3d 548, 553 (App. 2002) ("This court has concluded that the agreement of the parties [to an amount in excess of the Guidelines] is an exceptional circumstance authorizing the family court to order [the amount in excess of the Guidelines]."). 
While HRS § 584-15(e) does not provide a statutory 
exception to the rule requiring family courts to use the Guidelines, we conclude that the two provisions do not conflict. See State, Child Support Enf't Agency v. Doe, 98 Hawai
'i 58, 63­
64, 41 P.3d 720, 725-26 (App. 2001) (holding that effect could be 
given to both HRS § 571-52.5 and HRS § 584-15(d) (2006 Repl.).8 
While the family court made no specific finding or 
conclusion regarding whether the February 2011 Agreement was an 
"exceptional circumstance," we cannot conclude that enforcing the February 2011 Agreement without reliance on the Guidelines was a manifest abuse of discretion. See Kakinami, 127 Hawai
'i at 136, 
7(...continued)
for support of the child and the period during which the

duty of support is owed, a court enforcing the obligation of
support shall use the guidelines established under section
576D-7. Provision may be made for the support, maintenance,
and education of an adult or minor child and an incompetent
adult child, whether or not the petition is made before or
after the child has attained the age of majority.
 
8 In Doe, we explained that the enactment of HRS § 571-52.5 in 1986 was
not meant to repeal HRS § 584-15(d), which was enacted and remained unchangedsince 1975. Doe, 98 Hawai' i at 63, 41 P.3d at 725. We elaborated that HRS 
chapter 571 "governs the family courts in general" while "[t]he chaptercontaining HRS § 584-15(d) . . . is concerned specifically and exclusivelywith actions to establish the paternity of a child and to obtain childsupport, reimbursement and other relief[.]" Id. We concluded, "it cannot be
said as a matter of statutory construction that [HRS § 571-52.5] ousts [HRS§ 584-15(d)] in the matter of past child support." Id. 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
276 P.3d at 705. 
F. Past Due Child Support
i. HRS § 584-15(d)
 
9
 JS argues that under HRS § 584-15(d), the family court
should have taken into account that he had paid PO more than the
 child needed in monthly expenses.
 
HRS § 584-15(d) allows, but does not require, a family

 
court to order a lump sum payment or the purchase of an annuity
 in lieu of periodic payments, or to limit a parent's liability
 for past support. JS does not argue, nor do we conclude, that
 the family court abused its discretion by not limiting JS's past
 due support obligations in proportion to the payments he had
 already made. Therefore, the court did not err. 
ii. Doctrine of Laches
 
JS also argues that PO "should have been barred from
 
requesting past due support from [JS] under the principle of
 
laches." JS argues that because PO waited from December 2012,
 when JS began paying only $1,500 in child support, to November
 2013, when PO challenged the reduced child support payment, PO
 should be precluded from challenging the reduced child support
 amount.
 
The doctrine of laches requires that there was "a delay
 
by the plaintiff in bringing his claim, and that delay must have
 been unreasonable under the circumstances." Adair v. Hustace, 64
 
Haw. 314, 321, 640 P.2d 294, 300 (1982) (citing W. McClintock,
 Equity § 528 at 71 (2d ed. 1948)). We hold that under the
 circumstances of this case, which involves a history of
 agreements between the parties and the resolution of
 disagreements without intervention by the court, the eleven
 month delay was not unreasonable. The family court did not abuse
 
9 HRS § 584-15(d) provides in relevant part:
 
§584-15 Judgment or order. . . .
 
(d) Support judgment or orders ordinarily shall be for
periodic payments which may vary in amount. In the best
 
interest of the child, a lump sum payment or the purchase of
an annuity may be ordered in lieu of periodic payments of
support. The court may limit the father's liability for
past child support of the child to the proportion of the
expenses already incurred that the court deems just.
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
its discretion in declining to apply the doctrine of laches. See 
Kakinami, 127 Hawai 'i at 136, 276 P.3d at 705. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The (1) December 30, 2014 "Order Re: Trial" and (2)
 
January 21, 2015 "Order Re: Child Support Arrears" both entered
 
in the Family Court of the First Circuit are vacated in part and
 this case is remanded to evaluate whether the admission of Dr.
 Welch's testimony was in the best interests of the child and for
 proceedings regarding whether a modification of the visitation
 schedule was in the best interests of the child. The orders are
 affirmed in all other respects.
 
On the briefs:
 
Steven L. Hartley
Elsa F.M. McGehee
 (Hartley & McGehee)
for Respondent-Appellant.
 
Steven J. Kim
 
for Petitioner-Appellee.
 
22
 