NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000633
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JONAH K. ABERILLA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
KÂNE'OHE DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-16-02933)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jonah K. Aberilla (Aberilla) 
appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and 
Plea/Judgment, entered on April 25, 2017, and Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, entered on August 1, 2017, in the District Court of the First Circuit, Kâne' ohe 
Division (District Court).
1 
Aberilla was convicted of Operating a Vehicle Under the
 
Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) §291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2017), as a second
 offense within five years of a prior OVUII conviction, pursuant
 to HRS § 291E-61(b)(2).
2
 
1
 The Honorable Lanson K. Kupau presided on April 25, 2017. The
 
Honorable Steven L. Hartley presided on August 1, 2017.
 
2
 HRS § 291E-61 states in part:
 
§291E-61 Operating a vehicle under the influence of
an intoxicant.  (a) A person commits the offense of
operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if
the person operates or assumes actual physical control of a
vehicle:
 
(continued...)
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Aberilla contends there was insufficient
 
evidence of impaired driving to convict him. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Aberilla's point of error as follows:
 
When the evidence adduced at trial is considered in the 
strongest light for the prosecution, State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai'i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 (2007), there was 
sufficient evidence to convict Aberilla of OVUII. 
Sergeant Robert Beatty (Sergeant Beatty) testified that
 
on July 22, 2016, at approximately 2:10 a.m. he stopped Aberilla
 for weaving on the road on Ahuimanu Place, which is a public
 street, road, or highway. He observed Aberilla drive his SUV two
 to three feet over double solid yellow lines that separated the
 left turn lane from the northbound lane of Kahekili Highway for
 about 100 feet. Aberilla overcompensated and drove his passenger
 tires over a solid white line, then back over the double solid
 yellow lines. When Sergeant Beatty attempted to stop Aberilla,
 Aberilla drove up a curb before stopping his vehicle. Sergeant
 Beatty detected a strong odor of alcohol coming from Aberilla's
 
2(...continued)
(1)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an
 
amount sufficient to impair the person's normal
mental faculties or ability to care for the
person and guard against casualty;
 
. . . .
 
(b) A person committing the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant shall be
 
sentenced without possibility of probation or suspension of
sentence as follows:
 
(1)	 For the first offense, or any offense not
preceded within a five-year period by a
conviction for an offense under this section or
 section 291E-4(a):
 
. . . .
 
(2)	 For an offense that occurs within five years of
a prior conviction for an offense under this
section or section 291E-4(a):
 
. . . .
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
breath, Aberilla's eyes were red and glassy and he slurred his
 
speech. Aberilla also stumbled while exiting his vehicle.
 
Officer Charmaine Freeman (Officer Freeman) testified
 
that on July 22, 2016, Aberilla had a strong odor of an alcoholic
 beverage, slow or slurred speech, and red and glassy eyes. 
Aberilla could not maintain his balance and stepped out of the
 starting position twice during the walk-and-turn test. Aberilla
 stopped after taking three steps, did not touch his heel to toe
 on four of eight steps forward, took only eight steps forward
 instead of nine, and did not touch his heel to toe on nine of
 nine steps back, all contrary to the instructions. He also
 raised his arms more than six inches from his sides, contrary to
 the instructions. Prior to the one-legged-stand test, Aberilla
 was swaying in a circular motion. During the one-legged-stand
 test, Aberilla raised his arms more than six inches from his
 side, hopped three or four times, and put his foot down three or
 four times, all contrary to the instructions. There was
 sufficient evidence that Aberilla was under the influence of
 alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair his normal mental
 faculties or ability to care for himself or guard against
 casualty.
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of Entry of 
Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, entered on April 25, 2017 and Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, entered on August 1, 2017, in the District Court of the First Circuit, Kâne' ohe Division, are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 25, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Jacqueline R. Ma' ele,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Sonja P. McCullen,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3
 