NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001107
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,v.
CHARLES LEE, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 5DCW-13-0000125)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Charles Lee appeals from the
 
Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence; Notice of Entry,
 
entered on August 22, 2014 by the District Court of the Fifth
 Circuit ("District Court").
1/ Lee allegedly assaulted his
 
girlfriend's sister ("CW") and, after a jury-waived trial, was
 convicted of Assault in the Third Degree in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes ("HRS") section 707-712 (1993).
 
On appeal, Lee contends that the District Court erred:
(1) by not requiring Appellee State of Hawai
'i to disprove his 
claims of self-defense and defense of property beyond a reasonable doubt; (2) by imposing upon him a duty to retreat; (3) by considering evidence outside of what was presented at trial; and (4) by finding him guilty despite there being insufficient evidence that he acted intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly. 
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments they advance and the issues they raise, we resolve
 Lee's points of error as follows and affirm:
 
(1) In Lee's first point of error, he claims that
 
"[t]he District Court denied [him] due process of law by not
 
1/
 The Honorable Frank Rothschild presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
requiring the State[] to disprove [his] self-defense and defense
 
of property claims beyond a reasonable doubt given that [he] was
 found guilty despite insufficient evidence presented to negative
 these claims beyond a reasonable doubt." 
In order to raise a claim of self-defense, the 
defendant must first come forward with some credible evidence of facts constituting the defense. State v. Lubong, 77 Hawai
'i 429, 
431, 886 P.2d 766, 768 (App. 1994). The burden then shifts to the prosecution "to disprove the facts that have been introduced or to prove facts negativing the defense and to do so beyond a reasonable doubt." Id. The test for self-defense "involves a 
two-step analysis; a determination that the defendant held a subjective belief that the force was necessary and that the subjective belief was objectively reasonable." State v. Kawelo, 
No. CAAP-14-0001146, 2015 WL 7421396, at *2 (Hawai
'i App. Nov. 
20, 2015) (citing Lubong, 77 Hawai 'i at 433, 886 P.2d at 770). 
Lee stated that he believed that he was acting in self-
defense when he came around the corner to see what was going on,
 and found CW "in the next room damaging property, yelling, coming
 at him, and aggressively throwing punches at [him]." The
 District Court rejected Lee's claim of self-defense, concluding
 that there was no evidence in support of it apart from Lee's own
 testimony, and accepting CW's version of events. 
Lee contends that the State failed to provide 
sufficient evidence to negative his claim. However, given the District Court's determination that CW's version of events was more credible than Lee's version, the State proved facts negativing Lee's self-defense claim. When reviewing the legal sufficiency of the evidence on appeal, the test is whether, "viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, substantial evidence exists to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." Lubong, 77 Hawai
'i at 432, 886 P.2d at 769. 
Further, 
"Substantial evidence" is credible evidence which is of
 
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
reasonable caution to reach a conclusion. In reviewing
whether substantial evidence exists to support a conviction,
moreover, due deference must be given to the right of the
trier of fact to determine credibility, weigh the evidence,
and draw reasonable inferences from the evidence adduced.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. (citations omitted).
 
There is substantial evidence to support the District
 
Court's conclusion that the State disproved Lee's self-defense
 
claim beyond a reasonable doubt. CW testified that she saw her
 sister, Christina, and Lee together and noted the condition of
 Christina's hair and face, which caused her to believe that Lee
 had pulled Christina's hair. CW went into Christina's empty
 kitchen and yelled "[Lee], you get the F out of here[,]" while
 slamming a pan on the table. CW testified that Lee came around
 the corner about 20 seconds later, and instead of stopping and
 yelling, like CW expected, Lee "kept on coming in, full force"
 and hit her in her face with his head. CW further stated that
 when Lee came at her, she did not attempt to hit him, and that
 she "never even put [her] hands up because [she] never
 anticipated him to come like that." The District Court found
 CW's testimony to be more credible than Lee's testimony, and thus
 the District Court did not err in concluding that Lee's use of
 force was not justified. See State v. Alsip, 2 Haw. App. 259,
 
262, 630 P.2d 126, 128 (1981) (noting that "[i]t is well-settled
 that in reviewing a decision rendered in a case tried by the
 court without a jury, an appellate court will indulge every
 reasonable presumption in favor of findings made by the court
 below as the basis of its decision and in the absence of specific
 findings, every finding of fact necessary to support the decision
 appealed from will be presumed to have been made" (citing 5 Am.
 Jur. 2d Appeal and Error ยง 840 (1962)); Kawelo, 2015 WL 7421396
 at *2. 
Lee further contends that the District Court erred when
 
it concluded that he did not have a defense of property claim
 because he did not reside in Christina's house. Lee, however,
 fails to state "where in the record the alleged error was
 objected to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought
 to the attention of the court[.]" Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(4)(iii). 
Even if we assume that the issue was properly addressed to the
 District Court, Lee does not establish that the District Court's
 observation about whether Lee resided in Christina's house had
 any relation to Lee's claim that he was entitled to protect his
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
or Christina's property. Rather, the transcript establishes that
 
the discussion to which Lee refers arose in the context of Lee's
 request for a ruling on the claim of self-defense. 
In sum, the record does not demonstrate that Lee was
 
attempting to protect himself, the pan that CW was allegedly
 damaging, or Christina's house. Therefore, the District Court
 did not err when it rejected Lee's claims of self-defense or
 defense of property.
 
(2) Lee's second point of error is that "[t]he District
 
Court denied [Lee] due process of law and committed plain error
 by improperly imputing a duty to retreat on [him]." Lee relies
 upon the District Court's statement that "[i]f you want to bring
 a trespass case against [CW], you can go right ahead. A civil or
 a criminal, but that's not the case. It's not about trespass. 
It's about an assault[,]" to substantiate his argument for error.
 
Lee relies on HRS section 703-304(5)(b)(i), which
 
pertains to the use of deadly force. This statute is
 inapplicable to this particular situation, as deadly force is not
 an issue in this case. Lee provides no argument besides stating
 that the District Court plainly erred and that under the court's
 ruling he had no choice but to either leave the area and allow CW
 to continue to cause a ruckus and damage his or Christina's
 property, or to sit by and do nothing. Lee's argument is
 factually inaccurate. Nothing in the record shows that the
 District Court imposed a duty to retreat on Lee. Furthermore,
 Lee is incorrect in contending that the District Court allowed
 him only two options, to leave the area or to sit by and do
 nothing. For instance, Lee could have requested that CW not bang
 the pan on the table, or that CW leave Christina's house, rather
 than hitting his head against CW's face. Furthermore, he could
 have called upon Christina to assist in addressing her sister's
 outburst. There is no evidence that Lee attempted these
 alternative options or demonstrated that they would have been
 futile. Accordingly, the District Court did not improperly
 impute a duty to retreat on Lee.
 
(3) In his third point of error, Lee asserts that the
 
"District Court denied [him] due process of law and committed
 plain error by allowing and considering evidence outside of that
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
which was presented at trial." Lee asserts that the District
 
Court erred when, during closing arguments, it: 1) noted that Lee
 and Christina had a child who was "born after the date of the
 incident in question"; 2) allowed the State, over Lee's
 objection, to repeatedly use the term "rushed" when referring to
 Lee coming towards CW; and 3) presumably considered the State's
 argument in closing that CW "willingly admitted" to police that
 she threatened Lee with a gas can after the alleged assault.
 
Lee requests that we consider the first and third items 
as matters of plain error, because, although he failed to object to either occurrence at trial, his substantial rights were adversely affected. Under the plain error doctrine, plain error will apply "to correct errors which seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings, to serve the ends of justice, and to prevent the denial of fundamental rights." State v. Miller, 122 Hawai
'i 92, 
100, 223 P.3d 157, 165 (2010) (quoting State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai
'i 325, 330, 966 P.2d 637, 642 (1998)). The errors alleged, 
however, are either not errors or are harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. As to the first item, it was harmless error in light of the evidence in the record regarding Christina's potential bias. As to the third item, the State's argument summarized CW's trial testimony and not what she told police. 
The second item, though objected to at trial, is
 
harmless. While CW did not explicitly use the word "rushed," she
 did testify that "he just kept on coming in, full force, hit me
 in my face with his head[,]" which is close to the definition of
 the term "rush." Rush, Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary
 
(11th ed. 2003) (stating that "rush" is defined as "a violent
 forward motion," or "to push or impel on or forward with speed,
 impetuosity, or violence"). Thus, the District Court did not err
 in considering evidence properly before it.
 
(4) In his fourth point of error, Lee asserts that "the
 
District Court erred by finding [him] guilty of the charged
 offense despite there being insufficient evidence to prove that
 [he] acted intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly." Lee argues
 that CW never testified that Lee's actions were intentional, and
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
further contends that the District Court "clearly has no
 
experience in fighting as a very common tactic in a fight is to
 duck forward so as to close the distance between yourself and
 your attacker, thereby neutralizing their space in which they
 have to attack." Lee provides no legal citation to support his
 argument, and the argument is without merit.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated that, 
it is not necessary for the prosecution to introduce direct
evidence of a defendant's state of mind in order to prove that
the defendant acted intentionally, knowingly or recklessly.
Given the difficulty of proving the requisite state of mind by
direct evidence in criminal cases, proof by circumstantial
evidence and reasonable inferences arising from circumstances
surrounding the defendant's conduct is sufficient. The mind
 of an alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct and
inferences fairly drawn from all circumstances. 
Eastman, 81 Hawai 'i at 140-41, 913 P.2d at 66-67 (citations 
omitted). Although the State did not introduce direct evidence 
showing Lee's state of mind at the time he assaulted CW, the same substantial evidence showing that Lee's head hit CW's face also supports a finding that, at a minimum, Lee consciously disregarded a substantial and unjustifiable risk of assaulting CW. Thus, the State provided substantial evidence from which the trial court could infer that Lee assaulted CW with the minimum requisite state of mind. See Id. at 140, 913 P.2d at 66 (noting 
that "the prosecution needs only to prove the lowest of the three alternative levels of culpability, i.e. recklessness, in order to satisfy the state of mind requirement"). 
Based on the foregoing, the Judgment of Conviction and
 
Probation Sentence Notice of Entry, entered on August 22, 2014 by
 the District Court of the Fifth Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 23, 2017. 
On the briefs: Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Kai Lawrence

 
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Sinclair Salas-Ferguson,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Kauai,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
6
 