 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000666 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
KAWIKA FRANCO, Individually and as Personal Representative for
the Estate of TIARE FRANCO; PEACHES KONG AND APPLES ELABAN, as
Next Friends of LOVELY FRANCO (Minor); TAUA GLEASON, as Next
Friend of KOLOMANA KONG KANIAUPIO GLEASON AND KAULANA KONG 
KANIAUPIO GLEASON (Minors); and CHERYL RUSSELL, as Next Friend of
JEANNE RUSSELL (minor), Plaintiffs-Appellants,
 v. 
SABIO REINHARDT, Defendant/Cross-Claim Plaintiff/Appellee,
and 
JOSIAH OKUDARA, Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/Appellee,
and 
JOHN DOES 2-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE
PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE "NON-PROFIT" CORPORATIONS 1-10; and DOE
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0458(1)) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
This case arises from a motor vehicle accident in which 
Defendant-Appellee Sabio Reinhardt (Reinhardt) was allegedly 
driving a 2005 Dodge Ram pickup truck (Truck) owned by his 
girlfriend, Reinette Kama (Kama). On May 14, 2011, Reinhardt was 
allegedly driving the Truck with Tiare Franco (Franco) as a 
passenger when Reinhardt crashed and Franco died at the scene. 
National Interstate Insurance Company, Inc. (NIIC) issued an  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
automobile insurance policy (Policy) for the Truck.1 Following 
Franco's death in 2011, her estate, spouse, and four minor 
children (collectively, Plaintiffs)2 initiated a wrongful death 
action against Reinhardt. 
This appeal concerns whether counsel retained by NIIC 
to defend Reinhardt (Retained Counsel) could withdraw from 
representing Reinhardt, then re-represent Reinhardt and file 
motions on his behalf without re-establishing contact or obtaining Reinhardt's consent.
3 
Plaintiffs appeal from the: (1) "Order Granting 
[Reinhardt's] Motion to Set Aside Final Judgment Filed on May 18, 2016 and Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for Taxation of Costs and Pre-Judgment Interest Filed on July 28, 2016 and for New Trial" (Order Granting Motion to Set Aside); and (2) "Order 
Denying Plaintiffs' Motion to Disqualify Counsel" (Order Denying
Motion to Disqualify), both entered on September 6, 2017 by the 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).
4 
On appeal, Plaintiffs contend that the Circuit Court 
erred in: (1) granting the Motion to Set Aside because there were 
no exceptional circumstances to justify relief under Hawai# i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP
) Rule 60(b); (2) granting a new 
1 NIIC issued the Policy to Kama's ex-husband, William A. Cornelio, Jr . 
2 Plaintiffs include Kawika Franco, Individually and as Personal
Representative for the Estate of Tiare Franco; Peaches Kong and Apples Elaban,
as Next Friends of Lovely Franco (Minor); Taua Gleason, as Next Friend ofKolomana Kong Kaniaupio Gleason and Kaulana Kong Kaniaupio Gleason (Minors);and Cheryl Russell, as Next Friend of Jeanne Russell (Minor). 
3 This case is currently before us on remand from the Hawai #i Supreme
Court after this court dismissed the Plaintiffs' appeal for lack ofjurisdiction because the Circuit Court had set aside the final judgment andgranted a new trial, which we deemed was an unappealable interlocutory andnon-final order. Franco v. Reinhardt, SCWC-17-0000666, 2018 WL 1392334, at *1
(Haw. March 20, 2018). The Hawai #i Supreme Court held that the post-judgment
Order Granting Motion to Set Aside and Order Denying Motion to Disqualify areappealable for purposes of appellate jurisdiction. Id. Accordingly, the
supreme court vacated our dismissal order and remanded the case to this courtfor disposition. Id. Thus, in light of the Hawai #i Supreme Court's order, we
address Plaintiffs' appeal on the merits. 
4 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial and a second bite at the apple where NIIC decided not to 
defend Reinhardt while the issue of NIIC's duty to defend was not fully resolved; and (3) denying Plaintiffs' Motion to Disqualify because Reinhardt's Retained Counsel had voluntarily withdrawn from representing Reinhardt and failed to newly obtain Reinhardt's consent to representation pursuant to Hawai# i Rules 
of Professional Conduct (HRPC
) and Hawai# i law. 
For the reasons discussed below, we conclude that 
Retained Counsel did not have the authority or Reinhardt's consent to file motions on behalf of Reinhardt and the Circuit Court erred in denying the Motion to Disqualify and granting the Motion to Set Aside. Thus, we vacate the Order Granting Motion to Set Aside and the Order Denying Motion to Disqualify.
I. Procedural Background
A. Reinhardt's Representation in the Instant Case 
On May 3, 2012, Plaintiffs filed a Complaint against 
Reinhardt alleging, inter alia
, that Reinhardt operated the Truck 
in a "negligent, grossly negligent, reckless or wanton and willful manner, which action or omission was the legal and substantial cause of and/or a substantial factor in causing [Franco's] wrongful death[.]" On June 11, 2012, NIIC informed Reinhardt that it had retained the Law Offices of Cary T. Tanaka to defend him under a reservation of rights. 
On March 20, 2013, NIIC filed a separate action in the 
Circuit Court for declaratory judgment (DJ Action) to determine 
whether NIIC owed a duty to defend and indemnify Reinhardt.
5 In 
the DJ Action, the Circuit Court granted NIIC's motion for 
summary judgment, concluding there was no possibility of insurance coverage for Reinhardt under the Policy. Plaintiffs appealed in National Interstate Insurance Company, Inc. v. Reinhardt, No. CAAP-14-0001066, 2017 WL 1210101 (Haw. App. March 31, 2017) (Mem. Op.), as corrected (May 15, 2017) (DJ Appeal). 
5 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo also presided over the DJ Action. 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On July 29, 2014, following the Circuit Court's grant 
of summary judgment in favor of NIIC in the DJ Action, Retained 
Counsel filed a "Motion to Withdraw as Counsel for [Reinhardt]" (Motion to Withdraw) in this case citing, inter alia, HRPC Rule 
1.16.
6 In support of the Motion to Withdraw, Retained Counsel 
attested to the following: 
5. On June 11, 2012, NIIC informed [Reinhardt] that it had
retained our office to defend him in the subject lawsuit
under a reservation of rights. 
. . . . 
7. During such representation, our office's attorneys' fees
and costs have been billed to and paid for by NIIC and not[Reinhardt]. 
. . . . 
9. On November 21, 2013, this Court granted NIIC's Motion
for Summary Judgment . . . finding that there was nopossibility of coverage for [Reinhardt]. 
. . . . 
11. On July 30, 2014, our office received a copy of a
letter from Gregory K. Markham, Esq., attorney for NIIC, to 
6 In 2014, HRPC Rule 1.16 (2014) provided in pertinent part: 
Rule 1.16. DECLINING OR TERMINATING REPRESENTATION. 
(a) Except as stated in paragraph (c), a lawyer shall not
represent a client or, where representation has commenced,
shall withdraw from the representation of a client if:
. . . (3) the lawyer is discharged.
(b) Except as stated in paragraph (c), a lawyer may withdrawfrom representing a client if:
. . . (6) the representation will result in an unreasonable
financial burden on the lawyer or has been renderedunreasonably difficult by the client[.]
. . . . 
(c) A lawyer must comply with applicable law requiringnotice to or permission of a tribunal when terminating arepresentation. When ordered to do so by a tribunal, alawyer shall continue representation notwithstanding goodcause for terminating the representation. 
(d) Upon termination of representation, a lawyer shall take
steps to the extent reasonably practicable to protect aclient's interests, such as giving reasonable notice to theclient, allowing time for employment of other counsel,surrendering papers and property to which the client isentitled and refunding any advance payment of fee or expensethat has not been earned or incurred. 
4   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Reinhardt], wherein NIIC notified [Reinhardt] that NIIC
"hereby withdraws coverage of your defense effectiveimmediately." .... 
12. Subsequent to this letter, I contacted the NIIC
insurance adjuster, Walter Tani, assigned to this matter and
confirmed that our office would no longer be retained todefend [Reinhardt]. 
13. I informed Mr. Tani that I would be required to file
this Motion to Withdraw. 14. On July 22, 2014, I informed [Reinhardt], who is
currently incarcerated on [sic] at the Maui Correctional
Facility, that our office was no longer retained by NIIC todefend him in this case, and that we would be filing thisMotion to Withdraw. 
15. [Reinhardt] indicated that he understood that our Firm
would be withdrawing from representation and agreed withsuch withdrawal. He requested that we copy and transmit alldocuments and materials in the litigation to him, which weare in the process of doing. He further acknowledged that hehas no source of income to pay our office to continue todefend him. 
On March 11, 2015, the Circuit Court granted Retained 
Counsel's Motion to Withdraw. Thereafter, Reinhardt proceeded to 
defend this case pro se. Approximately one month before the trial date, the Plaintiffs and the Circuit Court lost contact with Reinhardt who had been released from prison.
7 A jury trial 
took place during the week of April 25, 2016, without Reinhardt's presence. The jury returned a verdict in favor of Plaintiffs and the Circuit Court entered Final Judgment on May 18, 2016.
B. Post-DJ Appeal 
On March 31, 2017, after the Circuit Court entered 
Final Judgement in the instant case, this court in the DJ Appeal 
vacated the Circuit Court's judgment in favor of NIIC. In the DJ Appeal, we held that the Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment because there were "genuine issues of material fact regarding whether Reinhardt reasonably believed he was entitled 
7 During a hearing on April 21, 2016, the Circuit Court stated that the
court clerk was unable to contact Reinhardt and that the court contacted 
Reinhardt's last criminal attorney who was unable to provide Reinhardt's e-mail or mailing address, or a telephone number. At the hearing, Plaintiffs'counsel also stated that she had no contact with Reinhardt, had tried tocontact Reinhardt's criminal attorney, and had been mailing everything to theprison. 
5  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to operate the Truck at the time of the fatal accident." 2017 WL 
1210101, at *7-8. Following the DJ Appeal, NIIC again retained the same law firm and attorney to represent Reinhardt under a reservation of rights.
8 
In this case, on May 16, 2017, nearly a year after the 
Final Judgement was entered, Retained Counsel filed the Motion to Set Aside, seeking relief pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(5)
9 and 
60(b)(6). The Motion to Set Aside stated that "[t]o date, counsel for [Reinhardt] has still not been able to make contact with him." On June 15, 2017, Plaintiffs filed the Motion to Disqualify, arguing that Retained Counsel failed to obtain Reinhardt's informed consent and waiver of any potential conflicts of interest, and that Reinhardt had no idea he was being represented in this action or that a Motion to Set Aside had been filed on his behalf. 
During the hearing on August 24, 2017, for the Motion 
to Set Aside and the Motion to Disqualify (8/24/17 Hearing), the 
Circuit Court orally granted the Motion to Set Aside and denied 
the Motion to Disqualify. The written orders were entered on September 6, 2017. 
II. Discussion 
We address Plaintiffs' third point of error because our 
resolution of this point is dispositive of the issues on appeal. 
Plaintiffs contend the Circuit Court erred in denying the Motion 
to Disqualify because, inter alia, HRPC Rules and Hawai# i law 
8 On remand in the DJ Action, it does not appear the Circuit Court has
made any determination as to whether NIIC owes a duty to defend and/or
indemnify Reinhardt. 
9 Plaintiffs contend that the Motion to Set Aside was based on HRCP 
Rule 60(b)(1) and (6). In the memorandum in support of the Motion to SetAside, Retained Counsel provided a block quote of HRCP Rule 60(b) which quotedsubsections (1) and (6). However, the memorandum in support of the motionstated "Defendant REINHARDT's position is that this motion is brought undernumbers (5) and (6) above which allows for the reasonable filing forrelief[.]" Further, during the hearing on the Motion to Set Aside, RetainedCounsel asserted that the motion was made pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(5) and(6). 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  
 required Reinhardt's knowledge and consent to Retained Counsel's 
representation. 
Appellate courts apply the abuse of discretion standard 
for reviewing a lower court's denial of a motion for disqualification. Hussey v. Say, 139 Hawai# i 181, 185, 384 P.3d 
1282, 1286 (2016).   "Under the abuse of discretion standard, the 
trial court may not be reversed by an appellate court unless the trial court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." 
Id. at 185-86, 384 P.3d at 1286
-
87 (citation omitted). 
During the 8/24/17 Hearing, Retained Counsel argued: 
[Retained Counsel]: Yeah, the position is well, you don't
have authority. We tried, your Honor. There was a letterthat was sent to Mr. Reinhardt that appears to have beensigned by him via certified mail from National saying pleasecontact [Retained Counsel] and his office because they werenow retained to represent you and they need to file thismotion to set aside. 
In addition to that, we hired a private investigator who was
able to go to his house -- he wasn't there -- but to get a phonenumber, and I personally have left several messages with himasking him to call me. At the point when his number no longerworked, I sent the investigator out to go back once again to tryto get another number. He was unsuccessful. 
We then hired a second set of investigators to see if
they had -- they would have better success. They went outthere twice. They weren't able to find him a second time.They delivered a letter from me informing him about thehearing today and our representation. So to say we haven'tdone everything we could to try to contact him, I think, isjust not the case. 
We did do our best to try to contact him which then
puts me in a weird position because what do I do? Sit on myhands and allow the one-year time period to lapse or do I dosomething and I file the motion? Well, I'm not going to siton my hands. I'm going to do my best to try to defend himproperly, and that's why we filed this motion, your Honor,and that's why we're here today. 
After the Circuit Court had already granted the Motion to Set 
Aside, the Circuit Court denied the Motion to Disqualify stating: 
[The Court]: The second motion regarding the disqualifying
counsel, additionally, the Court also finds in light of theunusual facts surrounding this case, it would not beequitable to disqualify [Retained Counsel] as counsel. TheCourt does recognize plaintiff's concerns regarding therules of professional conduct; however, the Court feels 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
confident, as defense counsel assured in its brief, that
defense counsel is making every effort – significant effortsto locate Mr. Reinhardt to receive his consent, and that anyerror in denying this motion can be quickly and harmlesslyremedied if Defendant Reinhardt is finally located andcontacted and expressed a desire, perhaps, not to retain[Retained Counsel] as counsel at that time. 
Accordingly, the Court is denying plaintiff's motion
to disqualify counsel. 
(Emphases added.) 
"An attorney-client relationship is contractual and 
consensual, and such a relationship can be formed only with the 
consent of the attorney and the individual seeking representation. The consent of the parties must be personal and must flow between the particular individuals." Office of Disciplinary Counsel v. Cusmano, 93 Hawai# i 411, 415, 4 P.3d 
1109, 1113 (2000) (brackets, ellipsis and citation omitted). 
Here, the parties do not dispute that following the 
Circuit Court's grant of Retained Counsel's Motion to Withdraw on March 11, 2015, Retained Counsel withdrew from representing Reinhardt in this case. 
Accordingly, the attorney-client 
relationship between Retained Counsel and Reinhardt was terminated and Retained Counsel was required to newly obtain Reinhardt's consent to representation. However, as explained above, despite Retained Counsel's multiple attempts to contact Reinhardt, Retained Counsel was unable to establish any means of contacting Reinhardt before filing the Motion to Set Aside. 
Although NIIC again hired Retained Counsel for 
Reinhardt after the DJ Appeal, NIIC's retention of counsel does not change the requirement for Reinhardt's consent to the representation and Reinhardt has the right to refuse representation under a reservation of rights. 
In this regard, 
Plaintiffs cite, inter alia, HRPC Rule 1.8(f) (2014), which provides: 
Rule 1.8. CONFLICT OF INTEREST: PROHIBITED TRANSACTIONS. 
. . . . 
(f) A lawyer shall not accept compensation for
representing a client from one other than the client unless: 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 (1) the client consents after consultation;
 (2) there is no interference with the lawyer's
independence of professional judgment or with the
client-lawyer relationship; and
 (3) information relating to representation of a
client is protected as required by Rule 1.6.
 In Finley v. Home Ins. Co., 90 Hawai# i 25, 975 P.2d 
1145 (1998), the 
Hawai# i Supreme Court considered the application 
of the HRPC rules, including HRPC Rule 1.8(f), to the 
relationship between the insured, insurer, and the insurer's retained counsel for the insured. With regard to representation under a reservation of rights, the supreme court stated, "[a]lthough we acknowledge the contractual right of an insurer to select counsel for the insured in the tender of a defense under a reservation of rights, it is well settled that the insured must have the right to reject this tender
." Id. at 35, 975 P.2d at 
1155 (emphasis added) (citation omitted). 
Moreover, the right to refuse an insurer's tender of a
defense under a reservation of rights is mandated by theHRPC. See HRPC Rule 1.8(f), stating that "a lawyer shall notaccept compensation for representing a client from one otherthan the client unless: (1) the client consents afterconsultation." The requirement of client consent necessarilyimplies the right not to consent. Therefore, if the clientdoes not desire the representation under the terms offeredby the insurer, the insurer must either choose to defendunqualifiedly or allow the insured to conduct its owndefense of the action. 
Id. (emphases added) (brackets omitted). 
Therefore, without obtaining Reinhardt's consent to 
representation under a reservation of rights, Retained Counsel 
did not establish an attorney-client relationship and was not authorized to file motions on Reinhardt's behalf. See HRPC Rule 1.2(a) (2015) ("a lawyer shall abide by a client's decisions concerning the objectives of representation, and, as required by Rule 1.4, shall consult with the client as to the means by which the objectives are to be pursued. A lawyer may take such action on behalf of the client as is impliedly authorized to carry out the representation."). It follows that without Reinhardt's consent, Retained Counsel also did not have the right to appear 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in this case on Reinhardt's behalf. See Cusmano, 93 Hawai# i at 
415, 4 P.3d at 1113; see also HRS § 605-8(a) (2016) ("The 
practitioners shall have the right to practice in all the courts of the State, and to appear therein as attorneys in behalf of persons who may choose to retain them, for the prosecution or defense of actions."). 
Retained Counsel does not argue that consent to 
representation was not required or that it should otherwise be excused in this case. Rather, the answering brief's arguments related to Plaintiffs' third point of error address Plaintiffs' contention that Retained Counsel was required to obtain Reinhardt's waiver of any potential conflicts of interest under the HRPC Rules.
10 Retained Counsel also argues that given the 
one-year limitation in HRCP Rule 60(b), counsel "had to file the Motion to Set Aside before the one-year period for the Final Judgment expired on May 18, 2017[.]" However, Retained Counsel does not argue or provide authority that the time limitation in HRCP Rule 60(b) would allow an attorney to file a motion to set aside without consent of the client. 
Therefore, because Retained Counsel did not have the 
authority to file the Motion to Set Aside or appear in court on Reinhardt's behalf, the Circuit Court erred in granting the Motion to Set Aside and denying the Motion to Disqualify. Resolution of this issue is dispositive, and thus we do not reach whether the Circuit Court erred in granting the Motion to Set Aside on the merits. 
III.  Conclusion 
For the reasons set forth above, we vacate the Circuit 
Court's (1) "Order Granting [Reinhardt's] Motion to Set Aside Final Judgment Filed on May 18, 2016 and Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for Taxation of Costs and Pre-Judgment Interest Filed on July 28, 2016 and for New Trial"; and (2) 
10 Plaintiffs argue that Retained Counsel was required to obtain
Reinhardt's waiver of any potential conflicts of interest under HRPC Rules 1.7
and 1.8(h) because of potential bad faith claims against NIIC. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Order Denying Plaintiffs' Motion to Disqualify Counsel" both 
entered on September 6, 2017. The case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this memorandum opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 28, 2023. 
On the briefs: 
Rebecca A. Copeland,
(
Law  Office  of  Rebecca  A.
Copeland,  LLC)
and 
Sue V. Hansen,(Law  Office  of  Sue  Vo  Hansen)
for Plaintiffs-Appellants 
Cary T. Tanaka,
Alana B. Rask,(Law  Office  of  Cary  T.  Tanaka),
and 
Greg H. Takase,(Of Counsel)for Defendant-Appellee /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullenAssociate Judge 
11 