FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
---o0o---
HSBC BANK USA, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION AS TRUSTEE
FOR DEUTSCHE ALT-A SECURITIES, INC. MORTGAGE LOAN
TRUST, SERIES 2005-2, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
FELICITAS B. MOORE, Defendant-Appellant, and
PNC BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, Defendant-Appellee, and
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50; and
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50, Defendants
NO. CAAP-17-0000478
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0648 (2))
MAY 10, 2018
GINOZA, CHIEF JUDGE, LEONARD AND CHAN, JJ.
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
Defendant-Appellant Felicitas B. Moore ( Moore) appeals
from the Judgment entered on May 22, 2017, in the Circuit Court
of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court ),1 in favor of Plaintiff-
Appellee HSBC Bank USA, N.A., as Trustee for Deutsche, Alt-A
1The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided.FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Securities, Inc. Mortgage Loans Trust, Series 2005-2 ( HSBC Bank ),
and against all defendants.  Moore also challenges the Circuit
Court's Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law; Order Granting
Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and for Interlocutory
Decree of Foreclosure, also entered on May 22, 2017 (Foreclosure
Decree).
I.BACKGROUND
On June 3, 2013, HSBC Bank filed a Verified Complaint
for Foreclosure (Complaint ).  In the Complaint, HSBC Bank alleged
that on December 17, 2004, Moore executed a promissory note in
favor of National City Mortgage Co. dba Accubanc Mortgage in the
amount of $420,000.00 (Note ), secured by a mortgage on real
property recorded on December 23, 2004 in the Bureau of
Conveyances ( Mortgage).  HSBC Bank alleged that National City
Mortgage Co. merged with National City Bank effective October 1,
2008, and National City Bank then merged with PNC Bank, N.A.,
(PNC Bank) effective November 6, 2009.  HSBC Bank alleged that it
was the owner of the Mortgage by virtue of an Assignment of
Mortgage recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances on November 7,
2012 (Assignment of Mortgage), that it was "entitled to enforce
the Note" and Mortgage, and that Moore was in default.  The
Complaint does not specifically allege that HSBC Bank possessed
the Note or reference any indorsements.  
However, the Complaint was supported by an attached 
"Verification of Complaint for Foreclosure" executed on May 22,
2013, by Rodney Carpenter (Carpenter ), an employee and
"Authorized Signer" of PNC Bank, the loan servicing agent for
2FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
HSBC Bank ( Carpenter's Declaration), in which Carpenter attested,
in relevant part, that "[HSBC Bank] is in possession of the Note.
As evidenced by the recorded Mortgage and applicable assignment,
[HSBC Bank] is also the mortgagee of record.  As such, [HSBC
Bank] is the proper plaintiff in this matter."2  Carpenter also
2The Carpenter Declaration more fully provides:
1. I have knowledge of and I am competent to testify
to the matters stated herein by virtue of my employment for
PNC Mortgage, a division of PNC Bank, N.A., the loan
servicing agent for Plaintiff HSBC BANK USA, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION AS TRUSTEE FOR DEUTSCHE ALT-A SECURITIES, INC.
MORTGAGE LOAN TRUST, SERIES 2005-2 ("Plaintiff"). I have
been trained to use and understand the record keeping system
utilized for this loan. I know that pursuant to normal
business practices, the entries in the business records are
made at or near the time of the occurrence by the person
with actual knowledge of the occurrence being recorded in
the business record. I have also been trained to use and
understand the entries in the record and am familiar with
the same. My knowledge is based on my review of the business
records and files related to the mortgage loan which is the
subject of this foreclosure.
2. . . . A true and correct copy of the Indorsed Note
is attached as Exhibit "A" .
. . . .
5. Plaintiff is in possession of the Note. As
evidenced by the recorded Mortgage and applicable
assignment, Plaintiff is also the mortgagee of record.  As
such, [HSBC Bank] is the proper plaintiff in this matter. 
. . . .
9. All documents, memoranda, reports and records of
data compilation (collectively, "Records of Acts") that are
attached as Exhibits "A"–"E" to my [Declaration], as well as
all other factual information contained herein, represent
records of regularly conducted business activity relating to
the subject loan.
10. The Records of Acts were and are made in the
course of Plaintiff's and Plaintiff's servicing agent's
regularly conducted business activity of mortgage lending
and mortgage servicing.
11. All herein referenced Records of Acts were and are
made at or near the time of the acts reported. Entries into
these records are made by persons having personal knowledge
of such event, and are reviewed by me from time to time to
ensure accuracy and completeness, and are relied upon by
Plaintiff and its servicing agent in the conduct of its
business. 
12. I am familiar with the referenced Records of Acts,
which is used to record and track events and documents by
Plaintiff and its servicing agent that are relevant to this
loan. These records are routinely made in the ordinary
course of business in a filing and computer system that I
have access to, have been trained to use and understand, and
with which I am familiar. 
(continued...)
3FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
attested, inter alia , that "[a] true and correct copy of the
Indorsed Note" was attached as Exhibit A.  Notably, there are no
indorsement stamps directly on the Note that was attached as
Exhibit A.  Instead, attached to this copy of the Note is an
undated allonge, apparently executed by a representative of PNC
Bank, specifically indorsing the Note to HSBC Bank.3 
Carpenter's Declaration also purported to authenticate
other loan documents which were also attached thereto, including
a recorded copy of the Mortgage, a recorded copy of the
Assignment of Mortgage, payment records for Moore's loan account,
and an October 4, 2011 notice of default and of intent to
accelerate the loan. 
2(...continued)
13. I reviewed the Verified Complaint for Foreclosure
prepared by RCO Hawaii, LLLC, including the attached
exhibits and I have confirmed the factual accuracy of the
allegations set forth therein.
14. I reviewed the notarizations contained in the
supporting documents filed with the Verified Complaint for
Foreclosure and confirmed the accuracy of the notarizations
by examining the notarizations for signs of forgery or
tampering and verifying the factual accuracy of the
notarized documents using business records.
3This allonge reads in pertinent part,
  
PAY TO THE ORDER OF:
HSBC Bank USA, National Association as Trustee fore [sic]
Deutsche Alt-A Securities, Inc., Mortgage Loan Trust, Series
2005-2
WITHOUT RECOURSE:
PNC Bank, National Association, successor in interest to
National City Real Estate Services, LLC, successor by merger
to National City Mortgage, Inc., formerly known as National
City Mortgage Co.
BY: [signature Sharon Lynch]
Name: Sharon Lynch
Title: Authorized Signer
4FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On December 16, 2013, Moore filed an answer denying all
allegations in the Complaint.  Moore also separately filed her
affirmative defenses, asserting among other things that HSBC Bank
lacked standing because HSBC Bank had not shown that it owned the
Note and was authorized to bring the foreclosure action. 
On March 18, 2015, HSBC Bank filed a Motion for Summary
Judgment Against all Parties and for Interlocutory Decree of
Foreclosure (Motion for Summary Judgment ).  The Motion for
Summary Judgment was supported by:  (1) a declaration by Jeffrey
Moler (Moler ), an employee and "Authorized Signer" of PNC Bank,
(First Moler Declaration) which indicated,  inter alia , that he
was the custodian of the exhibits attached to the Carpenter
Declaration and Complaint which "remain true and accurate;" and
(2) a declaration executed by Andrew R. Tellio ( Tellio), former
counsel for HSBC Bank in this case, which purported to
authenticate various documents related to the Mortgage and the
mergers of National City Mortgage Co., National City Bank, and
PNC Bank.  Neither the Note nor any allonges were attached to the
Motion for Summary Judgment or these declarations.  Also on March
18, 2015, HSBC Bank filed an Affirmation of Attorney pursuant to
HRS § 667-17 wherein Tellio affirmed that, inter alia , none of
HSBC Bank's filings "contain any false statements of fact or law" 
5FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and that "[HSBC Bank] has legal standing to bring this
foreclosure action" ( Attorney Affirmation ).4
On May 26, 2015, Moore filed a memorandum in opposition
to the Motion for Summary Judgment asserting that there were
genuine issues of material fact as to whether "Carpenter is
competent to authenticate Plaintiff's business records, and with
respect to whether Plaintiff is the holder of the subject
promissory note[.]" 
On July 21, 2016, HSBC Bank filed a supplemental
memorandum in support of its Motion for Summary Judgment.  In
support of its argument that HSBC Bank possessed the Note, HSBC
Bank attached a declaration of HSBC Bank's counsel, David B.
Rosen dated July 20, 2016 ( Rosen Declaration), and a supplemental
declaration by Moler dated June 20, 2016 (Second Moler
Declaration).  The Rosen Declaration provides in relevant part:  
4The Attorney Affirmation, which HSBC Bank does not reference on
appeal, provides in pertinent part:
1. I am an attorney duly licensed to practice in
the State of Hawaii and am employed by RCO Hawaii, LLLC, the
attorneys of record for Plaintiff . . . .
2. I received communication from representatives of
Plaintiff regarding this action declaring that the
representative (a) personally reviewed Plaintiff's documents
and records relating to this case for factual accuracy; and
(b) confirmed the factual accuracy of the allegations set 
forth in the Complaint and any supporting affidavits or
affirmations filed with the Court . . . .
The Statement of Review was prepared by and provided
as follows: 
Date Name Title
May 5, 2013 Rodney Carpenter Authorized Signer
3. Based upon my communication with representatives
of Plaintiffs, and upon my own inspection and other
reasonable inquiry under the circumstances, I affirm that to
the best of my knowledge, information, and belief, the
Summons, Complaint, and other papers filed with the Court in
this matter contain no false statements of fact or law and
that Plaintiff has legal standing to bring this foreclosure
action.
6FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3. I have personally reviewed the original "wet-
ink" note dated December 17, 2004 ("Note"), executed by
Defendant FELICITAS B. MOORE ("MOORE"). A true and correct
copy of the original Note, which I personally reviewed is
attached hereto as Exhibit H . 
4. The original wet-ink Note is indorsed in blank.
I am in possession of the original wet-ink Note on behalf of
Plaintiff, which Plaintiff forwarded to me in response to
MOORE's demand to inspect the Note. The original wet-ink
Note is currently stored at my office located at . . . .
The Second Moler Declaration provided in pertinent
part:
1. I have personal knowledge of and am competent to
testify to the matters stated herein by virtue of my
employment for PNC Bank, National Association, the mortgage
servicer for the Plaintiff HSBC BANK . . . . My personal
knowledge is based on my review of the records and files
related to the mortgage loan ("Loan") which is the subject
of this foreclosure and my knowledge of the regular business
practices of PNC Bank . . . .
2. . . . . The Note contains an indorsement in
blank on page 3. A true and correct copy of the Note is
attached as Exhibit A . 
3. An outdated copy of the Note, which included a
specially indorsed Allonge in favor of Plaintiff, was
attached to the Verified Complaint . . . . As mentioned
above, the original Note contains a blank indorsement on
page 3.  As a result, the Allonge to the Note has been
removed from the Note.
Unlike the Note that was attached to Carpenter's
Declaration, the copy of the Note attached as an exhibit to these
declarations contains a blank indorsement stamp on the third and
final page as follows: 
Pay to the order of
without recourse in any event
NATIONAL CITY MORTGAGE CO.
DBA ACCUBANC MORTGAGE
BY [signature Elaine C. Gilmer]
Elaine C. Gilmer, Allocations Coordinator
The Motion for Summary Judgment was heard on February
8, 2017.  After brief oral arguments, the Circuit Court stated: 
[P]laintiff has shown it is the holder of the note,
it's been endorsed in blank.  As Mr. Rosen has represented,
which I accept, he's produced the original note for review
and inspection by both the defendant and her counsel.
And so at that point, the burden was upon the defendant
to come in with admissible facts demonstrating that the
falsity, or at least the alleged falsity of the statements
set forth in the declaration, that has not been done. And
7FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
plaintiff is the assignee of the mortgage. All the successor
documents have been put into the record and have been
acknowledged and verified in an admissible format.
. . . .
The appropriate affidavit under HRS 667 has been
filed. The record shows there are no material questions of
fact in dispute. Defendant has failed to submit anything
other than argument.
To question the declarations, as well as the
production of the original note, plaintiff has shown it has
standing to bring the mortgage foreclosure action and is
entitled to judgment as a matter law.
(Emphasis added). 
On May 22, 2017, the Circuit Court entered its Judgment
and Foreclosure Decree.  In its Foreclosure Decree, the Circuit
Court found, inter alia, that HSBC Bank was the holder of the
Note. 
On June 20, 2017, Moore timely filed a notice of
appeal.
II.POINT OF ERROR ON APPEAL
Moore raises a single point of error, arguing that the
Circuit Court erred by granting HSBC Bank's March 18, 2015 Motion
for Summary Judgment because HSBC Bank's declaring witness was
not qualified to authenticate its business records and failed to
meet its burden of demonstrating that it was the holder of the
subject note at the time the complaint was filed, as required by
the Hawai #i Supreme Court in Bank of America, N.A. v.
Reyes–Toledo, 139 Hawai# i 361, 390 P.3d 1248 (2017).
III.APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
"Appellate courts review an award of summary judgment
de novo under the same standard applied by the circuit court." 
Salera v. Caldwell, 137 Hawai #i 409, 415, 375 P.3d 188, 194 
8FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(2016) (citation omitted).  The Hawai# i Supreme Court has
articulated that standard as follows: 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. 
This court must review the evidence and inferences in the
light most favorable to the non-moving party.
Id. (citation omitted; format altered).   
IV.DISCUSSION
Moore's primary contention on appeal is that HSBC Bank
did not produce any admissible evidence that it was in possession
of the blank-indorsed Note at the time it filed the Complaint.
The Hawai #i Supreme Court's decisions in Bank of
America, N.A. v. Reyes–Toledo, 139 Hawai #i 361, 390 P.3d 1248
(2017), U.S. Bank, N.A. v. Mattos, 140 Hawai #i 26, 398 P.3d 615
(2017), and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Behrendt, SCAP-16-0000645,
2018 WL 1325153 (Mar. 15, 2018) (designated for publication), are
dispositive in this case.  We also note that this case is similar
to this court's decision in HSBC Bank USA, N.A. v. Yamashita,
CAAP-17-0000026, 2017 WL 6048908 (Haw. App. Dec. 7, 2017) (SDO). 
In Reyes–Toledo , the supreme court held that the
foreclosing plaintiff must establish standing or entitlement to
enforce the subject note at the time the action was commenced. 
139 Hawai #i at 367–71, 390 P.3d at 1254–58.  The supreme court
stated, inter alia , that a foreclosing plaintiff must typically
"prove the existence of an agreement, the terms of the agreement,
a default by the mortgagor under the terms of the agreement, and
giving of the cancellation notice."  Id. at 367, 390 P.3d at 1254
9FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(citing Bank of Honolulu, N.A. v. Anderson, 3 Haw. App. 545, 551,
654 P.2d 1370, 1375 (1982)).  Furthermore, "[a] foreclosing
plaintiff must also prove its entitlement to enforce the note and
mortgage."  Id.  (citations omitted).  The supreme court
explained, "[a] foreclosing plaintiff's burden to prove
entitlement to enforce the note overlaps with the requirements of
standing in foreclosure actions as 'standing is concerned with
whether the parties have the right to bring suit.'"  Id.
(citation and internal brackets omitted).  The supreme court
further stated that "[a]s standing relates to the invocation of
the court's jurisdiction, it is not surprising that standing must
be present at the commencement of the case."  Id. at 368, 390
P.3d at 1255 (citation omitted).  In concluding that the
foreclosing bank failed to satisfy its burden as the movant for
summary judgment, the court reasoned, "[a]lthough Bank of America
produced evidence that it possessed the blank-indorsed Note at
the time it sought summary judgment, a material question of fact
exists as to whether Bank of America possessed the Note, or was
otherwise the holder, at the time it brought the foreclosure
action."  Id. at 370, 390 P.3d at 1257. 
In Mattos , summary judgment was granted in favor of the
foreclosing bank, U.S. Bank.  140 Hawai #i at 29, 398 P.3d at 618. 
On appeal, one of the issues was whether relevant loan documents
had been properly admitted through the declaration of an
individual named Richard Work (Work ), as records of regularly
conducted activity under Hawai #i Rules of Evidence ( HRE) Rule
803(b)(6).  Id. at 28, 30–33, 398 P.3d at 617, 619–22.  In his
10FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
declaration, Work attested, inter alia, that he was a "Contract
Management Coordinator" of OCWEN Loan Servicing, LLC ( Ocwen), the
"servicer" for U.S. Bank on the subject loan.  Id.  at 30–31, 398
P.3d at 619–20.  Because Work did not attest that he was the
custodian of records for either U.S. Bank or Ocwen, the supreme
court noted that "the documents attached to his declaration are
admissible under the HRE 803(b)(6) hearsay exception only if he
is a 'qualified witness' with respect to those documents."  Id.
at 32, 398 P.3d at 621.  The supreme court applied its analysis
in State v. Fitzwater , 122 Hawai #i 354, 365–66, 227 P.3d 520,
531–32 (2010), and ruled as follows:
To the extent the ICA ruled that Work's declaration
established him as a "qualified witness" with respect to
Ocwen's records, we agree. To the extent the ICA opinion
concluded that Work met the requirements to be a "qualified
witness" with respect to U.S. Bank's records, however, we
disagree. Fitzwater addresses situations in which one
business receives documents created by another business and
includes them in its own records. Work's declaration does
not indicate that U.S. Bank's Records were received by Ocwen
and incorporated into the Ocwen Records. Work's declaration
also does not establish that Work is familiar with the
record-keeping system of U.S. Bank. Rather, Work merely
states that he has access to and is familiar with U.S.
Bank's records. Thus Work's declaration does not satisfy
foundational requirements to make him a "qualified witness"
for U.S. Bank's records pursuant to Fitzwater.
Mattos, 140 Hawai #i at 32–33, 398 P.3d at 621–22.
In light of its prior ruling in Reyes–Toledo , the
supreme court in Mattos  further held that:
[s]ince [an] allonge was apparently used to specifically
indorse the note to U.S. Bank, admissible evidence was
needed to demonstrate that U.S. Bank was in possession of
the note and allonge at the time of the filing of this
foreclosure complaint for U.S. Bank to be entitled to
summary judgment.
Id. at 33, 398 P.3d at 622.  Among other infirmities, the supreme
court noted that Work did not attest that U.S. Bank possessed
both the note and the allonge when the foreclosure complaint was
11FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
filed.  Id.   The supreme court thus ruled that "Work's
declaration failed to meet U.S. Bank's burden of establishing
facts necessary for a grant of summary judgment."  Id.
In Behrendt , the supreme court addressed a
substantially similar issue and declaration as in Mattos,5 this
time determining the sufficiency of a declaration of Vanessa
Lewis (Lewis), who was also a "contract management coordinator"
for Ocwen, the foreclosing bank's (Wells Fargo's) loan-service
provider.  Behrendt, 2018 WL 1325153 at *2.  Because Lewis did
not attest that she was the custodian of records for either Wells
Fargo or Ocwen, the supreme court again stated that the documents
attached to her declaration were admissible under HRE Rule
803(b)(6) only if her declaration demonstrated that she was a
"qualified witness."  Id. at *7 (citing Mattos , 140 Hawai #i at
32, 398 P.3d at 621).  In holding that Lewis was not a "qualified
witness" under its decision in Mattos, the Behrendt court stated: 
Here, as in Mattos, the Lewis Declaration does not
establish that the loan documents were received by Ocwen and
then incorporated into Ocwen's records. In addition,
although Lewis averred that Ocwen's records relating to the
loan were made and maintained in the regular course of
Ocwen's business, Lewis asserted only that she had "access
to and [was] familiar" with Wells Fargo's records and
documents relating to this case. The Lewis Declaration does
not establish that Lewis was familiar with Wells Fargo's
record-keeping system. It also makes no assertions as to
Lewis's familiarity with the record-keeping systems of
Funding Group or Option One, which first created the Note
and allonges. Thus, the Lewis Declaration satisfies the
foundational requirements to make Lewis a qualified witness
only with respect to Ocwen's original records about the loan
and not any records of Wells Fargo or the loan documents
themselves.
The Lewis Declaration also refers only to the Note and
not the allonges that Wells Fargo asserts were used to
endorse the Note in blank. As noted, the Lewis Declaration
5 The Behrendt court observed that the Lewis and Work declarations
were "nearly identical."  Behrendt, 2018 WL 1325153 at *7.
12FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
does not establish that Lewis was a qualified witness, and
thus she could not have satisfied the requirements of HRE
Rule 803(b)(6) with respect to the allonges. But, as with
the declaration in Mattos , the Lewis Declaration did not
attempt to admit the allonges under the business records
exception.  Thus, even if the Note fell within the bounds of
HRE Rule 803(b)(6), the allonges endorsing it in blank did
not because the declaration did not provide the requisite
foundation. This is to say that the documents purporting to
allow Wells Fargo to enforce the Note were not admissible
under the business record exception. Since the documents
were not admissible as asserted, Wells Fargo did not meet
its burden of establishing facts necessary for a grant of
summary judgment.
Id. at *8 (citing Mattos , 140 Hawai #i at 32-33, 398 P.3d at
621-22).
In Yamashita, this court reviewed the sufficiency of a
declaration attached to the foreclosing-bank's (HSBC Bank's)
motion for summary judgment.  2017 WL 6048908 at *3-4.  The
declaration was made by Luann Jones (Jones), an employee of HSBC
Bank's "loan-servicing agent," PNC Bank, and is substantially
similar to the Carpenter Declaration.  In the declaration, Jones
attested that PNC Bank possessed the subject note, which was
attached to the complaint with an allonge specifically indorsing
the note to HSBC Bank.  Id. at *3.  This court rejected HSBC
Bank's argument that Jones's affirmation that "PNC is in
possession of the Note" established that HSBC Bank possessed the
Note and the allonge under Mattos .  Id.  This court rejected HSBC
Bank's argument that Jones's statement that she was trained to
use and understood "the record keeping system utilized for this
loan," was sufficient to render her a "qualified witness" as to
HSBC Bank's records stating, "[t]his does not appear to satisfy
the requirements discussed in Mattos."  Id. at *4, n.5.  We held
that there was no admissible evidence to demonstrate that HSBC
Bank was in possession of the subject note and allonge at the
13FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
time the action was commenced and therefore HSBC Bank failed to
meet its burden to show entitlement to summary judgment under
Reyes–Toledo, 139 Hawai# i at 370–71, 390 P.3d at 1257–58.  Id. at
*4. 
Here, HSBC Bank maintains that "it was in possession of
the Note, and that the Note had been indorsed in blank.  HSBC was
therefore a holder entitled to enforce the Note at the time it
filed its foreclosure Complaint."  HSBC Bank relies on the
following, filed contemporaneously with the Complaint:  (1) the
Carpenter Declaration; (2) the Note attached to the Complaint;
(3) the Mortgage; and (4) the Assignment of Mortgage.   HSBC Bank
also relies on the following, filed in relation to its Motion for
Summary Judgment:  (5) the First Moler Declaration; (6) the
Second Moler Declaration; (7) the Rosen Declaration; and (8) the
Note indorsed in blank attached to the Rosen and Second Moler
Declarations. 
However, there is no evidence in the record, including
either version of the Note or the declarations and documents
relied upon by HSBC Bank on appeal, showing that the blank
indorsement on the Note occurred prior to the initiation of the
suit.  See Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai #i at 371, 390 P.3d at 1258.6
Like the foreclosing bank in Reyes-Toledo, HSBC Bank was granted
summary judgment and the Foreclosure Decree was entered based in
part on the declaration of HSBC Bank's counsel, David B. Rosen,
6In fact, in light of the fact that the Note attached to
Carpenter's Declaration did not have the indorsement on the Note, and the Note
attached to the Second Moler Declaration did, HSBC's own evidence seems to
suggest that the indorsement post-dated the Complaint or, at minimum, creates
a genuine issue of material fact.
14FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
which attests in part, "I am in possession of the wet-ink Note on
behalf of Plaintiff[.]"  Even if the Note indorsed in blank were
admissible through the Rosen and Second Moler Declarations,
neither the Note indorsed in blank nor these declarations show
that HSBC Bank possessed the Note indorsed in blank at the
initiation of this foreclosure action.  See Id., at 370-71, 390
P.3d at 1257-58.   
Nor does Carpenter's statement that "[HSBC Bank] is in
possession of the Note" show that HSBC Bank possessed the Note
indorsed in blank at the time of the filing of the Complaint.  
Although Carpenter's Declaration was executed just prior to the
filing of the Complaint and a copy of the Note was attached, the
copy of the Note that Carpenter attempted to authenticate is not
indorsed in blank.7  Carpenter's statement that "[HSBC Bank] is
in possession of the Note" also does not establish that HSBC Bank
had possession of the allonge specifically indorsing the Note to
HSBC Bank at the time the Complaint was filed.8  See Mattos , 140
Hawai#i at 33, 398 P.3d at 622 ("Since the allonge was apparently
7Because the Carpenter Declaration does not purport to authenticate
the Note indorsed in blank, the First Moler Declaration, which purports to
verify the documents attached to the Complaint, likewise does not support the
proposition that HSBC Bank possessed the Note indorsed in blank when the
Complaint was filed.
8Carpenter's description of the "Note" in his declaration does not
appear to include the allonge which indorses the Note to HSBC Bank. 
Specifically, Carpenter describes the "Note" as the promissory note executed
by Moore and delivered "to National City Mortgage Co dba Accuabanc Mortgage"
on December 17, 2004 and makes no mention of an allonge.  Although Carpenter
states that a "true and correct copy of the Indorsed Note is attached as
Exhibit 'A,'" the referenced Note is not itself indorsed and, as discussed
infra, was later described by Moler as "outdated."  See also Mattos, 140
Hawai#i at 33, 398 P.3d at 622 ("Work's declaration refers only to the
original note and makes no reference to the allonge.  Although Exhibit 1 also
contains the allonge, which indorses the note to U.S. Bank, the allonge was
never authenticated.") 
15FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
used to specifically indorse the note to U.S. Bank, admissible
evidence was needed to demonstrate that U.S. Bank was in
possession of the note and allonge at the time of the filing of
this foreclosure complaint for U.S. Bank to be entitled to
summary judgment.").
Moreover, according to the Second Moler Declaration,
the copy of the Note attached to the Complaint was "outdated" and
"the original Note contains a blank indorsement on page 3.  As a
result, the Allonge to the Note has been removed from the Note."  
This declaration does not provide any dates for these events. 
Therefore, it is unclear whether the Note and the allonge
attached to the Complaint were "outdated" when the Complaint was
filed. 
Lastly, regarding the admissibility of the documents
attached to Carpenter's Declaration, like in Mattos and Behrendt,
Carpenter did not attest that he was the custodian of record for
PNC Bank or HSBC Bank, and as explained below, he is not a
"qualified witness" for the purposes of admitting HSBC Bank's
records into evidence under HRE Rule 803(b)(6), pursuant to the
analysis in Mattos and Behrendt.  Like the Work declaration in
Mattos, the Lewis declaration in Behrendt, and the Jones
declaration in Yamashita , Carpenter's Declaration does not
indicate that HSBC Bank's records were received by PNC Bank or
incorporated into PNC Bank's records.  Also similar to the
declarations in those cases, Carpenter's Declaration does not
establish that he is familiar with the record-keeping system of
HSBC Bank, only that "[t]hese records are routinely made in the
16FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
ordinary course of business in a filing and computer system that
I have access to, have been trained to use and understand, and
with which I am familiar," and that "I have been trained to use
and understand the record keeping system utilized for this loan." 
In Yamashita, we concluded that identical language was
insufficient to establish that the declarant, Jones, was familiar
with the record-keeping system of HSBC Bank.  See Yamashita, 2017
WL 6048908 at *4, n. 5 ("Jones attests that 'I have been trained
to use and understand the record keeping system utilized for this
loan.'  This does not appear to satisfy the requirements
discussed in Mattos.")  We reject HSBC Bank's argument that
Mattos is factually distinguishable because Carpenter "explicitly
states that he is familiar with the record-keeping system used by
HSBC," because he did not in fact state that he was familiar with
the record-keeping system used by HSBC Bank.  
For these reasons, Carpenter is not a "qualified
witness" with respect to the admission of HSBC Bank's records. 
See Mattos , 140 Hawai #i at 32–33, 398 P.3d at 621–22.  
We further conclude that the Second Moler Declaration
does not provide adequate foundation to admit the Note indorsed
in blank under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) for the same reasons as the
Carpenter Declaration.  Moler, an employee of PNC Bank, did not
attest that he is the custodian of record for PNC Bank or HSBC
Bank, that PNC Bank incorporated HSBC Bank's records into its
own, or that he had any personal knowledge of HSBC Bank's record-
keeping system.  Rather, the Second Moler Declaration states that
Moler's personal knowledge is based on his "review of the records
17FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and files related to the mortgage loan" and based on "my
knowledge of the regular business practices of PNC Bank [.]" 
Moreover, like the Rosen Declaration, the Second Moler
Declaration does not indicate that HSBC Bank possessed the Note
indorsed in blank at the time HSBC Bank filed its Complaint. 
Therefore, even if the Note indorsed in blank were admissible
through the Second Moler Declaration, this evidence is not
sufficient to establish standing.  See Reyes-Toledo , 139 Hawai #i
at 370-71, 390 P.3d at 1257-58. 
We also reject HSBC Bank's remaining argument that the
Mortgage and Assignment of Mortgage, executed prior to the filing
of the Complaint, are evidence that HSBC Bank possessed the Note
indorsed in blank prior to the filing of the Complaint.  Similar
arguments have been rejected by the supreme court.  See id.  at
371, n.17, 390 P.3d at 1258, n.17 ("An assignment of the Mortgage
to Bank of America prior to the commencement of the action would
not be sufficient to establish standing as an injury to the
plaintiff in the foreclosure proceeding, which is premised on the
default under the note.  Although the security follows the debt,
the debt does not automatically follow the security.").
We conclude, viewing the facts and inferences in the
light most favorable to Moore, as we must for purposes of a
summary judgment ruling, that there is a genuine issue of
material fact as to whether HSBC Bank was entitled to enforce the
subject note at the time this foreclosure action was commenced.
Therefore, the Circuit Court erred in granting HSBC Bank's Motion
for Summary Judgment.
18FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
V.CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit
Court's Foreclosure Decree and Judgment, both entered May 22,
2017, and remand this case to the Circuit Court for further
proceedings.
On the briefs:
Gary Victor Dubin,
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Jade Lynn Ching,
Ryan B. Kasten,
(Nakashima Ching LLC),
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
19