FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
RICHARD PERRY, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ROBERT WILLIAMS, ALSO KNOWN AS
ROBIN WILLIAMS, Defendant-Appellant
 
NO. CAAP-13-0003357
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-0616)

 
FEBRUARY 25, 2015
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., FOLEY AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
The instant case arises from an alleged default on a

 
promissory note. Defendant-Appellant Robert Williams, also known
 
as Robin Williams (Williams) appeals from the "Order Denying
 
Defendant's Motion to Set Aside Default Judgment" filed August
 
13, 2013 (Order Denying Williams' Motion to Set Aside) in the
 
1
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit  (circuit court).  
On appeal, Williams contends the circuit court erred in

 
denying his January 23, 2013 "Motion to Set Aside Default
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided. 
FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Judgment" (Motion to Set Aside Default Judgment) because the
 
Default Judgment was entered without authority by the circuit
 
court clerk (Clerk), entered in violation of Williams' right to
 
due process, and procured by fraud. We vacate the circuit
 
court's Order Denying Williams' Motion to Set Aside because the
 Clerk did not have the authority to enter the Default Judgment
 with regard to attorneys' fees.
I. BACKGROUND
 
On September 29, 2010, Plaintiff-Appellee Richard Perry
 
(Perry) filed a "Complaint on Promissory Note" (Complaint)
 
against Williams alleging that Perry loaned Williams $45,000
 
"[o]n or about September 7, 2007," that Williams executed a
 "Confirmation Note And Guaranty of Repayment" (Note) whereby he
 
promised to repay Perry the $45,000 plus 6% interest by December
 
31, 2009, and Williams "failed or refused to make payment." The
 Complaint requested the circuit court enter judgment in favor of
 Perry and against Williams "for the sum of $45,000 plus interest
 cost, and attorney's fees."
 
The Note provided in part: 
1. Purpose. Maker [(Williams)] has entered
into an agreement with Payee [(Perry)] regarding the loan of
investment funds to [Williams], in connection with the
planned development of Marina Puerto Bonito, Las Terrenas,
Dominican Republic (the "Project"). The terms and
 provisions of [Perry's] investment in the Project are set
forth in the agreement between [Williams] and [Perry], dated
August 6, 2007 (the "Agreement"). [Perry] has advanced to
[Williams] funds in the amount represented by this
Confirmation Note and Guaranty of Repayment (the "Note").
Per the Agreement, [Williams] has agreed to guaranty the
repayment of such funds advanced by [Perry]. The purpose of
this Note is to confirm [Williams'] obligation to repay the
amounts set forth above, and any additional soft costs
advanced by [Perry] that are invoiced and related to the
Project, to [Perry] in the event the Project does not
proceed. This Note is a recourse obligation of [Williams],
and is unsecured.
 
2. Repayments. This Note shall bear simple
interest at the rate of 6% per annum from September 1, 2007,
until paid. The full principal amount of this Note and all
accrued and unpaid interest shall be due and payable on
December 31, 2009.
 
. . . .
 
5. Attorneys' Fees.  Should suit be brought to
enforce, interpret or collect any part of this Note, the
 
2
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prevailing party shall be entitled to recover, as an element
of the costs of suit and not as damages, reasonable
attorneys' fees and other costs of enforcement and
collection. 
6. Entire Agreement.  This Note, together with
the Agreement, constitute the entire agreement between the
parties on the subject matter thereof, and supersede any
prior negotiation, understanding, representation, or
agreement.
 
On October 7, 2010, "Return and Acknowledgment of 
Service," was filed, which stated that on October 7, 2010, a 
"Sheriff/Police Officer" of the State of Hawai 'i personally 
served the "Complaint; Exhibits 'A'; Summons" on Williams. Williams did not sign the acknowledgment of personal service document. 
On December 8, 2010, the Clerk filed an "Entry of 
Default" against Williams pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 55(a) for "having failed to answer, appear 
or otherwise defend by the date and the time stated in said 
Complaint . . . ."2 
On December 13, 2010, Perry's attorney, James P.
 
Brumbaugh (Brumbaugh), filed a certificate of service stating
 
that the Entry of Default had been served on Williams by U.S.
 
Mail on December 13, 2010.
 
On January 20, 2011, Perry filed a "Request for Default
 
Judgment by Clerk," which requested entry of default against
 
3
Williams pursuant to HRCP Rule 55(b)(1)  for the amount of
2 HRCP Rule 55(a) provides: 
Rule 55. DEFAULT.
 
(a) Entry. When a party against whom a judgment for
affirmative relief is sought has failed to plead or otherwise
defend as provided by these rules and that fact is made to appear
by affidavit or otherwise, the clerk shall enter the party's
default.
 
3
 HRCP Rule 55(b)(1) provides:
 
Rule 55.   DEFAULT.
 
(b) Judgment.  Judgment by default may be entered as
follows: 
(continued...)
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
$56,326.46 for "principal, interest, court costs and reasonable
 
attorneys' fees." Brumbaugh attached an affidavit affirming that
 Perry incurred $8,995.07 in interest, $275 in filing fees, $95.31
 in service fees, and $1,961.08 in attorneys' fees.
 
On January 20, 2011, the Clerk entered the Default
Judgment against Williams in accordance with the amounts
 specified in Perry's request and Brumbaugh's affidavit.
 

 
On January 23, 2013, Williams filed his Motion to Set
 
Aside Default Judgment, arguing that the Default Judgment should
 be set aside because: (1) Perry's "request was not for a sum
 certain" and thus the Clerk lacked authority to issue the Default
 Judgment under HRCP Rule 55(b)(1) and therefore the judgment
 
4
; (2) entry of
 should be set aside pursuant to HRCP Rule 55(c) 
5
 the Default Judgment violated HRCP Rule 54(c) and Williams' due
process rights and therefore the judgment should be set aside
 
3(...continued)
(1) BY THE CLERK. When the plaintiff's claim
against a defendant is for a sum certain or for a sum
which can by computation be made certain, the clerk
upon request of the plaintiff and upon affidavit of
the amount due shall enter judgment for that amount
and costs against the defendant, if the defendant has
been defaulted for failure to appear and is not an
infant or incompetent person.
 
4 HRCP Rule 55(c) provides: 
Rule 55.   DEFAULT.
 
(c) Setting aside default.  For good cause shown the
court may set aside an entry of default and, if a judgment
by default has been entered, may likewise set it aside in
accordance with [HRCP] Rule 60(b)."
 
5 HRCP Rule 54(c) provides:
 
Rule 54.   JUDGMENTS; COSTS; ATTORNEY FEES.
 
(c) Demand for judgment.  A judgment by default shall
not be different in kind from or exceed in amount that
 prayed for in the demand for judgment. Except as to a party
against whom a judgment is entered by default, every final
judgment shall grant the relief to which the party in whose
favor it is rendered is entitled, even if the party has not
demanded such relief in the party's pleadings.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
6
; and (3) Perry's request for
 pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) 
entry of the Default Judgment was knowingly made as an improper
 request constituting fraud and therefore the judgment should be

 
set aside pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(3).7
 
"Exhibit 5" to Williams' Motion to Set Aside Default
 
Judgment was a Counterclaim that included its own exhibit,
 "Exhibit A," which appears to be an email sent on August 6, 2007.
 The subject line of the email states that it is the third draft
 of "an Agreement for Marina Puerto Bonito Partnership"
 (Agreement). The body of the email appears to be a copy of a
 
notarized document allegedly signed by Williams and Perry in
 
which Williams agreed to pay Perry 10% of the profits from a
 project that planned to develop and sell "285 condominium and
 town house [units] plus 285 boat slips and 2 boutique hotels"
 (Project) in Las Terrenas, Dominican Republic in exchange for a
 
$700,000.00 investment paid in specified stages. Williams'
 
Counterclaim, which alleges that Perry breached the Agreement,
 includes the following allegations:
 
5. [Williams] confided confidential information about
the [Project] to the [Perry] and, in reliance upon the
Agreement and [Perry's] representations and promises, ceased
to seek other partners in the development of this [Project].
 
6. [Perry] commenced his performance under the
Agreement and partially performing by providing sums as
agreed pursuant thereto. [Perry] further represented to the
[Williams] that he had the necessary cash funds which were
immediately available to fully perform the Agreement.
 
7. [Perry], without any reason therefore, notified
[Williams] that he was going to fully breach the Agreement
and led [Williams] to believe that he might reconsider his
position if [Williams] executed a confirmation note and
guaranty of payment as an addendum to the Agreement.
[Williams] agreed to amend the Agreement by adding to the
Agreement a confirmation note and guaranty of payment dated
January 30, 2013 which merely set forth the funds that
[Perry] had advanced and reaffirmed the Agreement.
 
6
 HRCP Rule 60(b)(4) (RELIEF FROM JUDGMENT OR ORDER) provides that a
court may set aside a judgment if "the judgment is void[.]"
 
7
 HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) (RELIEF FROM JUDGMENT OR ORDER) provides that a
court may set aside a judgment on the basis of "fraud (whether heretofore
denominated intrinsic or extrinsic), misrepresentation, or other misconduct of
an adverse party[.]"
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
8. [Perry], despite [Williams'] full cooperation and
performance under the Agreement, refused to perform
thereunder and remains in breach of the Agreement. 
9. [Perry's] breach caused [Williams] to be unable to
proceed with the project, damaging [Williams] for the sums
as set forth therein[.]
 
10. [Williams], in reliance on the Agreement and
[Perry's] performance, had incurred and further incurred out
of pocket sums in an amount in excess of $100,000.00, the
exact amount of which will be proven at trial, which were
lost as the result of the [Perry's] breach.
 
11. [Williams], as the result of the [Perry's] breach
of the Agreement, suffered damages of up to $99,000,000.00,
the exact amount of which will be proven at trial.
 
At the February 22, 2013 hearing on Williams' Motion to
 
Set Aside Default Judgment, Williams' counsel, Gordon Stewart
 
(Stewart), argued that the Default Judgment was void because
 
Perry's request for reasonable attorneys' fees did not constitute
 
a "sum certain" and thus the Clerk did not have authority to
 enter the judgment under HRCP 55(b)(1). Brumbaugh responded that
 "[i]f the Court has some problem with the attorney fees issue,
 they can strike the attorney fees; but we would request that the
 underlying judgment remain." When the circuit court asked
 Brumbaugh to clarify his argument with respect to the attorneys'
 fees, Brumbaugh stated that the "[a]ttorney fees were within the
 parameters of the law and certainly reasonable." Brumbaugh then
 reiterated that if the circuit court agreed with Stewart "that
 the attorney fees were not a sum certain[,]" the court should
 strike the attorneys' fees and allow the remainder of the Default
 Judgment to stay in place. Stewart responded "that if there is
 any irregularity in [the Default Judgment], it is a nullity[,]"
 and that the circuit court can decide whether the attorneys' fees
 are reasonable.
 
In denying Williams' Motion to Set Aside Default

 
Judgment, the circuit court explained: 
[HRCP] Rule 55 authorizes default to be entered by the
clerk if it is for a sum certain or a sum that can be
 
calculated. In this particular instance, the sum was for
$45,000, and that's clearly set forth in the complaint, and
simple interest per annum.
 
[HRCP] Rule 55(d)(1) [sic] provides in relative [sic]
 
6
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
part that when the plaintiff -- claim against a defendant is
for a sum certain or a sum which can be, by computation, be
made certain. The clerk, upon request of the plaintiff and
upon affidavit of the amount due, shall enter judgment for
that amount and costs against the, defendant, if the
defendant has been defaulted for failure to appear and is
not a infant or incompetent person. 
In this particular instance, the request for entry of
default judgment was for, as I noted, for the sum certain
together with interest. And that interest was one that
 could be calculated based on the note. 
The Court is satisfied that in this particular
instance, the clerk properly entered the default judgment in
this case, and about — notwithstanding the arguments of the
defendants at this point in time, the Court is of the view
that given the record herein, that the motion to set aside
default judgment should be and is hereby denied.
 
Stewart asked the circuit court to clarify whether it
 
had found that the Clerk had "the capacity to compute the
 
attorney fees even though they were not supported by an affidavit
 of counsel or declaration of counsel[.]" The circuit court
 responded that "the Court prefers an affidavit in support of fees
 and costs[,]" but the parties had reached "an agreement relative
 to fees and costs[,]" and the amount requested for the fees and
 costs "was clearly well within . . . what was provided for by
 law." The circuit court then instructed Brumbaugh to supplement
 the record with an affidavit or declaration supporting fees and
 costs and that the court would review the affidavit "to see if
 there is any basis[;]" and would "issue an order one way or the
 other just indicating whether the declaration fails to support
 the fees and costs. Or if it does, then the amounts will stand." 
By letter dated April 4, 2013, Brumbaugh notified the
 
circuit court that on March 14, 2013, he sent an affidavit and
 exhibits in support of Perry's attorneys' fees and costs to
 Stewart, and enclosed the affidavit for the court.
 
On June 19, 2013, Williams filed a motion to reconsider
 
the circuit court's February 22, 2013 oral order denying
 Williams' Motion to Set Aside Default Judgment and objection to
 Perry's proposed order denying the Motion to Set Aside Default
 Judgment (Motion to Reconsider). Williams argued that the oral
 
ruling was clearly erroneous because the Clerk did not have the
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
authority to award attorneys' fees and thus the Default Judgment
 
was void, and that new information revealed that the attorneys'
 fees awarded were not reasonable. At the July 31, 2013 hearing
 on Williams' Motion to Reconsider, Stewart stated that Perry's
 request for a default judgment should have been filed under HRCP
 Rule 55(b)(2), which provides that the court may enter default
 judgment when the clerk lacks authority, but did not articulate
 reasoning for this conclusion. The circuit court denied
 Williams' Motion to Reconsider based on its conclusion that the
 services which were the basis for the attorneys' fees awarded
 were paralegal in nature rather than clerical.
 
On August 13, 2013, the circuit court filed its Order
 
Denying Williams' Motion to Set Aside.
 
On September 12, 2013, Williams filed his notice of
 
appeal from the circuit court's Order Denying Williams' Motion to
 Set Aside.
 
On September 23, 2013, the circuit court filed an order
 
denying Williams' Motion to Reconsider.
II.
 STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
Motion to Set Aside Default Judgment
 
In general, a motion to set aside a default entry or a
default judgment may and should be granted whenever the
court finds (1) that the nondefaulting party will not be
prejudiced by the reopening, (2) that the defaulting party
has a meritorious defense, and (3) that the default was not
the result of inexcusable neglect or a wilful act. The mere
 fact that the nondefaulting party will be required to prove
his [or her] case without the inhibiting effect of the
default upon the defaulting party does not constitute
prejudice which should prevent a reopening.
 
BDM, Inc. v. Sageco, Inc., 57 Haw. 73, 76, 549 P.2d 1147, 1150
 
(1976) (citations omitted). 
The three-part test set forth by BDM, however, does not 
apply "where the default judgment was void . . . ." Wagner v. 
World Botanical Gardens, Inc., 126 Hawai 'i 190, 196, 268 P.3d 
443, 449 (App. 2011). A circuit court's ruling on whether a default judgment is void is reviewed de novo because "[t]he determination of whether a judgment is void is not a discretionary issue." Id. at 195, 268 P.3d at 448 (citation and 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
internal quotation marks omitted). "A judgment is void only if
 
the court that rendered it lacked jurisdiction of the subject
 matter, or of the parties, or if it acted in a manner
 inconsistent with due process of law." Id. (citation and
 
internal quotation marks omitted).
III. DISCUSSION
 
Williams argues that the Default Judgment is void for
 
the following three reasons: (1) the Clerk did not have the
 authority to enter the judgment for lack of a "sum certain" as
 required by HRCP Rule 55(b)(1); (2) the Default Judgment violated
 his right to due process; and (3) Perry's request for a default
 judgment constituted fraud.
 
Under HRCP Rule 55(b)(1), a court clerk, rather than
 
the court itself, may enter a default judgment if: 
(1) the plaintiff's claim against the defendant must be for
a sum certain or for a sum which can, by computation, be
made certain; (2) default must have been entered against the
defendant because the defendant failed to appear; and (3)
the defendant must not be an infant or incompetent person.
 
Casuga v. Blanco, 99 Hawai 'i 44, 50-51, 52 P.3d 298, 304-05 (App. 
2002) (emphasis added). 
Although the question of whether a request for 
reasonable attorneys' fees may constitute a "sum certain or for a 
sum which can, by computation, be made certain" under HRCP Rule 55(b)(1) is not addressed by Hawai
'i precedent, federal precedent 
offers sound guidance. See Gonsalves v. Nissan Motor Corp. in 
Hawai'i, Ltd., 100 Hawai 'i 149, 159, 58 P.3d 1196, 1206 (2002) 
(holding that the federal court interpretations of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP) "are deemed to be highly 
persuasive" when interpreting a Hawai
'i procedural rule that was 
modeled after the federal rule). FRCP Rule 55(b)(1) contains 
language nearly identical to that of HRCP Rule 55(b)(1). FRCP Rule 55(b)(1) provides: 
Rule 55. Default; Default Judgment
 
(b) Entering a Default Judgment .
 
(1) By the Clerk. If the plaintiff's claim is for a sum
certain or a sum that can be made certain by computation,
the clerk--on the plaintiff's request, with an affidavit
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
showing the amount due--must enter judgment for that amount
and costs against a defendant who has been defaulted for not
appearing and who is neither a minor nor an incompetent
person.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Under the federal rules, a court clerk may not enter a
 
default judgment under FRCP Rule 55(b)(1) when a plaintiff seeks
 
"not only a 'sum certain,' but also, attorney's fees." See,
 
e.g., Deutsche Bank Nat. Trust Co. v. Strunz, 2013 WL 122644
 (M.D. Pa. Jan. 9, 2013) (citing 10 James Wm. Moore, et al.,
 Moore's Federal Practice § 55.20[4] (Matthew Bender ed.2010) ("A
 claim for attorney's fees will rarely be for a 'sum certain'
 because, typically, a judicial determination is necessary to
 decide whether to award fees, and, if an award will be made, in
 what amount.")); 10A Charles Alan Wright et al., Federal Practice
 and Procedure § 2683 (3d ed. West 2014) ("[T]he need to fix
 'reasonable' attorney's fees prevents the clerk from entering a
 judgment under [FRCP] Rule 55(b)(1)."). The amount requested for
 "reasonable" attorneys' fees does not constitute a "sum certain"
 within the meaning of FRCP Rule 55(b)(1) because "[t]he
 reasonableness of the fees requested . . . is a 'judgment call'
 which only the Court can make." Combs v. Coal & Mineral Mgmt.
 
Servs., Inc., 105 F.R.D. 472, 475 (D.D.C. 1984); see also Ferraro
 v. Arthur M. Rosenburg Co., 156 F.2d 212 (2d Cir. 1946) (holding
 that the need to fix a "reasonable" attorneys' fee prevented the
 clerk from entering default judgment on a complaint seeking
 overtime compensation and liquidated damages).
 
Here, Perry's request for default judgment sought

 
"$56,326.46,
 which includes principal, interest, court costs and
 
reasonable attorneys' fees[,]" and attached an affidavit stating
 that Perry incurred 
$1,961.08 
in attorneys' fees. The affidavit
 
goes to the "certainty" of the amount incurred by Perry for
 attorneys' fees, but not to the "certainty" or "reasonableness"
 of the amount of attorneys' fees that Williams should be required
 to pay. Combs, 105 F.R.D. at 475. We hold that the Clerk lacked
 
authority to enter the Default Judgment under HRCP 55(b)(1)
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
because Perry's request for attorneys' fees did not constitute a
 
request for a "sum certain." The circuit court erred in denying
 Williams' Motion to Set Aside Default Judgment because the
 Default Judgment was void as to the attorneys' fees. See McGrew
 
v. McGrew, 82 P.3d 833, 841 (Idaho S. Ct. 2003) ("If a judgment
 is only void in part [under the Idaho counterpart to HRCP Rule
 60(b)(4)] and the void portion can be separated from the balance,
 relief may be granted to that extent."). Accordingly, the Order
 Denying Williams' Motion to Set Aside is vacated.
 
Because we vacate the Order Denying Williams' Motion to
 
Set Aside, Williams' two other arguments are moot.
IV. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the "Order Denying
 
Defendant's Motion to Set Aside Default Judgment" filed August
 13, 2013 in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit, and remand
 this case for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Rebecca A. Copeland
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Ted N. Pettit
 
Dana R. Lyons
(Case Lombardi & Pettit)
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
11
 