NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000581
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MAPUANA M. MACDONALD; CHELSIE ANN K.K. MORITA;
MIKEL THOMAS K. MORITA; KENDRA C. SHIM, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v. CARDINAL MAINTENANCE SERVICE, INC., a Michigan Corporation;
ARNOLD GOMES, Defendants-Appellees, and
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE "NON-PROFIT" CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE LIMITED PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE LIMITED LIABILITY
COMPANIES 1-10; DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10; and
DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-0642)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Mapuana M. MacDonald, Chelsie Ann
 
K.K. Morita, Mikel Thomas K. Morita, and Kendra C. Shim
 
(together, Appellants) appeal from the February 18, 2014 Order
 
Denying Plaintiffs' Motion Pursuant to Rule 60(b)(3) of the
 
Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure [(HRCP)] for Relief from Final NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Judgment [(Judgment)] Filed on May 16, 2013, Filed on December
 
23, 2013 (Order Denying Relief), in the Circuit Court of the
 First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
 
Appellants raise two points of error on appeal:
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred in denying Appellants' HRCP
 
Rule 60(b)(3) Motion for Relief by basing its ruling on an
 erroneous view of the evidence; and
 
(2) The Circuit Court erred by disregarding rules or
 
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of
 Appellants when it applied the incorrect standard to Appellants'
 HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) motion by requiring a showing that the
 ultimate result of trial would have been different absent the
 misrepresentation.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Appellants' points of error as follows:
 
(1) Appellants argue that they established: (1) by
 
clear and convincing evidence that Defendant-Appellee Cardinal
 Maintenance Service, Inc. (Cardinal) obtained its defense jury
 
verdict through fraud and/or misrepresentation; and (2) that the
 
false testimony of Arnold Gomes (Gomes), the operations manager
 
for Cardinal, and defense counsel Jeffrey Sia's (Sia's) closing
 argument, which was based on that false testimony, prevented
 
Appellants from fully and fairly presenting their case.
 
1
 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
It is well settled that the trial court has a very large
measure of discretion in passing upon motions under Rule
60(b) and its order will not be set aside unless we are
persuaded that under the circumstances of the particular
case, the court's refusal to set aside its order was an
abuse of discretion.
 
Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. United Agri Prod., 86 Hawai 'i 214, 256, 
948 P.2d 1055, 1097 (1997), (quoting Hawai 'i Hous. Auth. v. 
Uyehara, 77 Hawai 'i 144, 147, 883 P.2d 65, 68 (1994)); see also 
Moyle v. Y & Y Hyup Shin, Corp., 118 Hawai 'i 385, 402, 191 P.3d 
1062, 1079 (2008) (denial of HRCP Rule 60(b) motion reviewed for 
abuse of discretion). 
HRCP Rule 60, entitled "Relief from Judgment or Order" 
states, in subsection (b)(3): "On motion and upon such terms as are just, the court may relieve a party or a party's legal representative from a final judgment, order, or proceeding for the following reasons: . . . (3) fraud (whether heretofore denominated intrinsic or extrinsic),
[2] misrepresentation, or 
other misconduct of an adverse party[.]" To obtain such relief, the movant must satisfy a two-prong test which requires that the movant "(1) prove by clear and convincing evidence that the verdict was obtained through fraud, misrepresentation, or other misconduct [and] (2) establish that the conduct complained of prevented the losing party from fully and fairly presenting his case or defense." Kawamata, 86 Hawai
'i at 252, 948 P.2d at 1093. 
2
 "Extrinsic fraud occurs when a party unfairly prevents another
from obtaining a fair hearing or presenting a full claim or defense.
Intrinsic fraud includes perjury, falsified evidence, and other false claimsor defenses arising during the course of litigation or arbitration." Low v. 
Minichino, 126 Hawai' i 99, 106, 267 P.3d 683, 690 (App. 2011) (citations
omitted). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"[C]lear and convincing" evidence may be defined as an
intermediate standard of proof greater than a preponderance
of the evidence, but less than proof beyond a reasonable
doubt required in criminal cases. It is that degree of
proof which will produce in the mind of the trier of fact a
firm belief or conviction as to the allegations sought to be
established, and requires the existence of a fact be highly
probable.
 
Kekona v. Abastillas, 113 Hawai 'i 174, 180, 150 P.3d 823, 829 
(2006) (quoting Masaki v. Gen. Motors Corp., 71 Hawai 'i 1, 14-15, 
780 P.2d 566, 574-75 (1989)). 
Appellants submit that the primary issue at trial was
 
whether Cardinal breached its duty to Appellants by failing to
 
prune an ironwood tree prior to the subject incident, and that
 the facts at trial established: that Cardinal was at the beach
 park a month before the incident; that Cardinal had a duty to
 prune trees for safety of the public; that the subject ironwood
 tree posed a danger; that Cardinal should have known of the
 danger; that, therefore, Cardinal had a duty to prune the
 ironwood tree; that there would not have been any reasonable
 basis to contact the Navy before performing the safety cut; and
 that its failure to prune it was a breach of that duty. 
Appellants point out that Cardinal did not call an
 
arborist at trial to rebut the testimony of Appellants' expert
 witness, Steve Nimz (Nimz) (a certified arborist or tree
 
specialist), but only called Gomes. Gomes maintained that, for
 
the definite or fixed portion of Cardinal's tree-trimming
 contract with the Navy (Contract), Cardinal only was required to
 
prune to a certain height to meet Contract specifications and,
 
even after being shown the Contract, Gomes stated that he knew
 the language was in the Contract someplace and that he thought
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the height limit was ten feet. However, when asked "for the
 
contract specs," Gomes responded "[n]o I can't say I can find
 it." Appellants then argue that the subsequent deposition in the
 related federal case (Federal Case) of the Navy's designated
 
agent, Gail Akemi Tazawa (Tazawa), establishes that there is no
 such limitation in the Contract; thus Gomes's statements were
 
false. Appellants also submit that: 
The cornerstone of [defense counsel]'s closing argument on
the issue of liability was that the pruning cuts Plaintiffs
claim Cardinal should have made to the subject tree were
outside Cardinal's duties under the fixed portion of the
contract and could only be undertaken as IDIQ work specified
by EMALLs.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Appellants argue that "Cardinal's closing argument on
 
liability focused on Mr. Gomes' false testimony," and that Sia
 
"clearly represented to the jury that pertinent specifications
 pertaining to Cardinal's tree pruning responsibilities under the
 fixed price portion of the contract were contained in portions of
 the 235 page contract that had not been given to Mr. Nimz." 
Accordingly, Appellants contend that the clear and convincing
 evidence before the court on the Rule 60(b) motion was that
 Cardinal introduced false testimony through Gomes, which defense
 counsel repeatedly referred to in his closing argument, and thus,
 the defense obtained its verdict through fraud and/or
 misrepresentation.
 
This argument is without merit. Appellants do not show
 
that, rather than being honestly mistaken about the written terms
 of the Contract, Gomes knew that there were no height limits
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
anywhere in the Contract, but that he nonetheless testified to
 
the contrary. As the Circuit Court stated, "it's very difficult 
for this court in light of that little equivocal language by Mr.
 Gomes to find that he intentionally misrepresented." In
 addition, the Contract was in evidence. Appellants had the
 opportunity to thoroughly cross-examine Gomes concerning the
 terms of the Contract or otherwise rebut Gomes's testimony about
 the terms of the Contract. Although Tazawa's deposition in the
 Federal Case included testimony that Gomes's trial testimony
 about the terms of the Contract was incorrect, we cannot conclude
 that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in declining to set
 aside the jury verdict based on the argument that Tazawa's
 deposition testimony constituted clear and convincing evidence
 that Cardinal committed fraud in obtaining the verdict. 
(2) Appellants argue that the court erred in holding
 
them to an "outcome determinative" standard in considering their
 motion for relief when the court stated that the jury could have
 considered other factors in reaching their verdict, outside of
 Gomes's allegedly false statements. 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held that a trial court 
can decline to grant relief from judgment under HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) on the basis that the losing party has not shown how the alleged fraud or misrepresentation "affected the outcome of the case." Moyle, 118 Hawai
'i at 403, 191 P.3d at 1080. 
Accordingly, this argument is without merit. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
For these reasons, we affirm the Circuit Court's
 
February 18, 2014 Order Denying Relief.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 3, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Laurent J. Remillard, Jr.,
Don V. Huynh,Rechelle A.M. Barbour,(Remillard & Huynh)for Plaintiffs-Appellants. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge 
Jeffrey H.K. Sia,
Diane W. Wong,David A. Gruebner,(Ayabe, Chong, Nishimoto,
Sia & Nakamura)
for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge 
7
 