NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000692 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I  
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
HAIDEE SUEYASU, Defendant-Appellant,
and 
RYAN KAIPO SILVA, Defendant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(5PC161000443) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(
By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Haidee Sueyasu (Sueyasu
) was 
charged with promoting a dangerous drug and unlawful use of drug 
paraphernalia. She appeals from orders entered by the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit
1 denying her motion to suppress evi-
dence and dismissing the charges against her without prejudice. 
For the reasons explained below, we affirm the denial 
of the motion to suppress and affirm the ruling that Sueyasu's constitutional right to a speedy trial was not violated, but vacate the circuit court's dismissal of the charges against Sueyasu without prejudice and remand for the circuit court to enter findings of fact and conclusions of law to support its decision to dismiss without prejudice. See State v. Fukuoka, 141 
Hawai# i 48, 404 P.3d 314 (2017). 
1 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. Procedural History 
On October 30, 2015, at about 10:38 p.m., Kaua# i Police 
Department officer Dustin Broad was on patrol near Kô
loa.  He 
stopped a Honda traveling north on Maluhia Road. Sueyasu was the 
driver. The registered owner of the Honda, Ryan Silva (Silva), 
was the passenger. Officer Broad saw an ice pipe on the center 
console of the Honda. He arrested Sueyasu and Silva. The Honda was towed and a search warrant was obtained. Upon execution of the search warrant other illegal items were found in the Honda. Sueyasu was released on bail on November 3, 2015. 
On December 27, 2016, Sueyasu and Silva were charged by 
felony information with Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712
-
1243(1),2 and Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia in violation of 
HRS § 329-43.5(a).3 Both were arraigned on January 10, 2017, and 
entered pleas of not guilty. The circuit court set a jury trial for May 22, 2017. By stipulation filed on May 4, 2017, the trial date was continued to October 23, 2017. 
On May 4, 2017, Silva filed a motion to dismiss, 
claiming violations of his constitutional right to a speedy trial and Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 48.
4 On May 28, 
2 On October 30, 2015, HRS § 712-1243(1) (2014) provided: 
A person commits the offense of promoting a dangerous
drug in the third degree if the person knowingly possesses
any dangerous drug in any amount. 
3 On October 30, 2015, HRS § 329-43.5(a) (2010) provided: 
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess
with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, orotherwise introduce into the human body a controlledsubstance in violation of this chapter. Any person whoviolates this section is guilty of a class C felony and uponconviction may be imprisoned pursuant to section 706-660and, if appropriate as provided in section 706-641, finedpursuant to section 706-640. 
4 HRPP Rule 48(b) provides, in relevant part: 
[T]he court shall, on motion of the defendant, dismiss
the charge, with or without prejudice in its discretion, iftrial is not commenced within 6 months: (1) from the date of
(continued...) 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4 (...continued)2017, Sueyasu filed a motion to suppress evidence, contending 
that Officer Broad's traffic stop was unlawful. On May 29, 2017, Sueyasu filed her own motion to dismiss that incorporated by reference "all factual assertions, legal arguments, and legal authorities cited" in Silva's motion. 
All three motions were heard on June 28, 2017. The 
circuit court orally denied the motion to suppress and orally denied the motions to dismiss based upon constitutional violations, but orally granted dismissals without prejudice based on the State's concession of an HRPP Rule 48 violation. 
On August 8, 2017, the circuit court entered a written 
"Order Denying Defendant Silva's Motion to Dismiss for Violation of His Constitutional Rights to a Speedy Trial but Granted as to Rule 48 of the Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure and Case Dismissed Without Prejudice." Despite the title referring to Silva, the body of the document referenced Sueyasu and stated: 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED AND DECREED that Defendant 
Sueyasu's Motion to Dismiss for Violation of his [sic]
Constitutional Rights to Speedy Trial filed on May 4, 2017is hereby Denied in part and as to Rule 48 of the HawaiiRules of Penal Procedure is hereby Granted in part and thecase is dismissed without prejudice. 
Silva's attorney objected to the form of the order, writing on 
page two of the order: "Requires FOF, COL." There was no space in the document allocated for Sueyasu's attorney to approve the form; no separate order denying Sueyasu's motion to dismiss was entered. On August 28, 2017, the circuit court entered "Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law; Order Denying Defendant Sueyasu's Motion to Suppress Evidence." Sueyasu filed a notice of appeal on September 27, 2017. 
On August 29, 2018, we temporarily remanded this case 
to the circuit court for entry of an appealable, final order on Sueyasu's motion to dismiss. On September 18, 2018, the circuit court entered the "Order Denying Defendant Sueyasu's Motion to Dismiss for Violation of Her Constitutional Rights to Speedy 
arrest if bail is set or from the filing of the charge,
whichever is sooner, on any offense based on the sameconduct or arising from the same criminal episode for whichthe arrest or charge was made[.] 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Trial and/or Rule 48 of the Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure with
Prejudice, and Order Dismissing Case Without Prejudice for Violation of Rule 48 of the Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure."
  
The form of the circuit court's order was prepared by the State;Sueyasu's counsel waived approval as to form. 5 
 
II. Discussion 
We review Sueyasu's contention that the charges against
her should have been dismissed with prejudice first, because it 
is potentially dispositive of her entire appeal. She argues thatshe was deprived of her constitutional right to a speedy trial,and that the State violated HRPP Rule 48. 
We review the consti-
tutional issue first, because while a trial court has discretion to dismiss charges with or without prejudice for an HRPP Rule 48 violation, it is required to dismiss charges with prejudice if the defendant's constitutional right to a speedy trial was violated. State v. Lau, 78 6 
Hawai# i
 54, 62, 890 P.2d 291, 299 
(1995).  
 
A. Sueyasu's constitutional right to a speedy trial
was not violated. 
5 The State contends we lack jurisdiction over Sueyasu's appeal from
the August 8, 2017 order because her notice of appeal was filed more thanthirty days after entry of that order. As we stated in our order for tempo-rary remand, the August 8, 2017 order on Silva's motion to dismiss does notappear to resolve Sueyasu's separate motion to dismiss. Sueyasu's notice ofappeal was filed after the circuit court announced its denial of Sueyasu'smotion, but before entry of the written order on September 18, 2018, onremand. Thus, Sueyasu's notice of appeal is deemed to have been timely filedon September 18, 2018. See Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 4(b)(4). 
The State also contends we lack jurisdiction over Sueyasu's appeal
from the August 28, 2017 order denying her motion to suppress because she didnot obtain the circuit court's express written permission to appeal, asrequired by HRS § 641-17. We disagree. "As a general rule, an appeal from afinal judgment in a case brings up for review all preceding interlocutoryorders in the case." State v. Adam, 97 Hawai #i 475, 482, 40 P.3d 877, 884
(2002) (citations omitted). 
The September 18, 2018 order dismissing the
charges against Sueyasu without prejudice was a final, appealable order.Accordingly, Sueyasu's timely appeal from that order also brings up for reviewthe order denying her motion to suppress. 
6 "The Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution and article 
I, section 14 of the Hawai #i Constitution guarantee a defendant in a criminal
case the right to a speedy trial in all prosecutions." State v. Visintin, 143
Hawai #i 143, 156, 426 P.3d 367, 380 (2018) (citation omitted). 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A trial court's ruling that a defendant's constitu-
tional right to a speedy trial was not violated, as a matter of 
law, is reviewed de novo. Lau, 78 Hawai# i at 58, 890 P.2d at 
295. 
Whether the Government has violated an accused's right to a
speedy trial is determined by applying the four-part testarticulated in Barker v. Wingo, 407 U.S. 514 (1972), andadopted by this court in State v. Almeida, 54 Haw. 443, 509P.2d 549 (1973), to the particular facts in each case. 
The four factors to be considered in determining whether
dismissal is warranted are: (1) length of the delay;(2) reasons for the delay; (3) defendant's assertion of[their] right to speedy trial; and (4) prejudice to thedefendant. 
Because the right to speedy trial, unlike other rights
guaranteed by the United States and Hawai #i Constitutions,
is unusually amorphous and serves to protect the separate,often conflicting interests of the accused and of the publicin the speedy disposition of cases, the weight accorded eachof these factors is to be determined on an ad hoc basis. None of these four factors is to be regarded as either anecessary or sufficient condition to the finding of adeprivation of the right to a speedy trial, but rather theyare related factors and must be considered together withsuch circumstances as may be relevant. 
Lau, 78 Hawai# i at 62, 890 P.2d at 299 (cleaned up and reformat-
ted). We must review each of the circuit court's conclusions 
regarding the Barker factors de novo to determine whether Sueyasu's constitutional right to a speedy trial was violated. Id. at 58, 890 P.2d at 295. 
1. Length of delay
. 
The length of the delay is to some extent a triggering
mechanism to the other Barker factors. Until there is some delay which is presumptively prejudicial, there is no neces-sity for inquiry into the other factors that go into thebalance. The precise length of the delay that will be con-sidered "presumptively prejudicial" depends upon the factsof each case. 
Lau, 78 Hawai# i at 62, 890 P.2d at 299 (cleaned up). In this 
case, Sueyasu was arrested on October 30, 2015, released on bail 
on November 3, 2015, and formally charged on December 27, 2016. When she was arraigned on January 10, 2017, the circuit court settrial for May 22, 2017. Sueyasu's motion to dismiss was not filed until May 29, 2017 (after Sueyasu stipulated to continue the trial date). 
The circuit court concluded:  
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The length of the delay (factor one) between the date of
Defendant Sueyasu's arrest and the date Defendant Sueyasufiled the instant motion (approximately 18 months) weighs inDefendant Sueyasu's favor, but was not sufficient to dismissthe case with prejudice outright; and required analysis ofthe remaining three factors. 
We agree that the delay between the date of Sueyasu's arrest and 
the original trial date requires that the remaining Barker factors be analyzed and weighed. Lau, 78 Hawai# i at 62, 890 P.2d 
at 299. 
2. Reasons for the delay. 
The circuit court concluded: 
The reason for delay (factor two) weighs in favor of
Defendant Sueyasu, the State having failed to establish areason. 
The State's answering brief does not take issue with this 
conclusion, and offers no explanation for the amount of time it took to formally charge Sueyasu. But Sueyasu did not establish "a deliberate attempt to delay the trial in order to hamper the defense[, which] should be weighted heavily against the government." Lau, 78 Hawai# i at 63, 890 P.2d at 300 (cleaned up) 
(quoting Barker, 407 U.S. at 531). "[A] more neutral reason such as negligence or overcrowded courts should be weighted less heavily." Id. (cleaned up). This factor weighs slightly in 
favor of Sueyasu. 
3. Assertion of defendant's right to speedy trial. The circuit court found that Sueyasu requested a speedy 
trial when she was arraigned on January 10, 2017, and weighed that factor in favor of Sueyasu. We note that the circuit court set trial for May 22, 2017, and Sueyasu's motion to dismiss was not filed until May 29, 2017, after Sueyasu stipulated to continue the trial date. 
Cf. State v. Visintin, 143 Hawai# i 143, 
161, 426 P.3d 367, 385 (2018) (noting that defendant filed motion to dismiss on speedy trial grounds within two weeks of his arraignment). This factor weighs only slightly in favor of Sueyasu. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4. Prejudice to defendant. 
Prejudice . . . should be assessed in the light of the
interests of defendants which the speedy trial right wasdesigned to protect. This Court has identified three such interests: (i) to prevent oppressive pretrial incarceration;(ii) to minimize anxiety and concern of the accused; and(iii) to limit the possibility that the defense will beimpaired. Of these, the most serious is the last, becausethe inability of a defendant adequately to prepare [their]case skews the fairness of the entire system. If witnesses die or disappear during a delay, the prejudice is obvious.There is also prejudice if defense witnesses are unable torecall accurately events of the distant past. 
Lau, 78 Hawai# i at 64, 890 P.2d at 301 (quoting Barker, 407 U.S. 
at 532 (footnote omitted)). In this case the first interest is 
not implicated because Sueyasu was released on bail four days after she was arrested. As to the second, Sueyasu does not argue that she was anxious or concerned about the time it was taking for her case to be tried; even if she had, "a mere assertion that one had been upset or concerned about a pending criminal prosecu-tion is not sufficient to establish prejudicial anxiety[.]" Id. 
(cleaned up) (quoting State v. Ferraro, 8 Haw. App. 284, 300, 800 P.2d 623, 632 (1990)). Finally, Sueyasu's opening brief concedes that "no actual prejudice was shown," but argues — without citing authority — that "prejudice could be presumed[.]" "The precise length of the delay that will be considered 'presumptively prejudicial' depends upon the facts of each case." Lau, 78 
Hawai# i at 62, 890 P.2d at 299. Sueyasu does not direct us to 
any facts that would support a de novo finding of presumptive prejudice. 
We hold that Sueyasu failed to establish prejudice. 
Sueyasu argues that "the [circuit c]ourt did not 
conduct a balancing of the four [Barker
] factors." The order 
denying Sueyasu's motion to dismiss in fact stated that the Barker factors "weigh in favor of the State's position that Defendant Sueyasu's speedy trial rights were not violated." Because our review is de novo, we must independently weigh the Barker factors based on the evidence in the record. The reason for delay and assertion of right to speedy trial factors weigh slightly in favor of Sueyasu. But Sueyasu has not established actual prejudice, or facts that would support a de novo finding of presumptive prejudice. We hold that Sueyasu failed to 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
establish a violation of her constitutional right to a speedy
trial.  
B. The record does not enable us to determine whether 
the circuit court abused its discretion bydismissing the case without prejudice. 
The State conceded an HPRR Rule 48 violation; the issue
on appeal is whether the dismissal should have been with or with-
out prejudice. When a trial court dismisses a criminal case for violation of HRPP Rule 48, its decision to dismiss with or with-out prejudice is reviewed for abuse of discretion. 
Fukuoka, 141 
Hawai# i at 55, 404 P.3d at 321.  
In determining whether to dismiss the case with or without
prejudice, "the court shall consider, among others, each ofthe following factors: the seriousness of the offense; thefacts and the circumstances of the case which led to the dismissal; and the impact of a reprosecution on the admini-stration of this chapter and on the administration ofjustice." 
Id. at 55-56, 404 P.3d at 321-22 (quoting State v. Estencion, 63 
Haw. 264, 269, 625 P.2d 1040, 1044 (1981)). "Although not set forth as one of the three enumerated factors, prejudice to the defendant may be a relevant consideration in the trial court's decision to dismiss with or without prejudice under HRPP Rule 48." Id. at 56, 404 P.3d at 322 (cleaned up) (quoting State v. Coyaso, 73 Haw. 352, 357, 833 P.2d 66, 69 (1992)). "[T]he trial court may consider other factors it finds to be relevant to the case before it[.]" Id. (quoting Coyaso, 73 Haw. at 357, 833 P.2dat 69).  
In analyzing whether to dismiss a case with or without
prejudice under HRPP Rule 48 and Estencion, the trial courtmust clearly articulate the effect of the Estencion factorsand any other factor it considered in rendering itsdecision. Accordingly, the court must explain the effect ofthe Estencion factors on its reasoning to dismiss a chargewith or without prejudice. Id. The court is not required,
however, to make a determination as to whether eachindividual factor weighs in favor of dismissal with orwithout prejudice. 
The trial court must therefore provide an explanation of its
consideration of the Estencion factors, and any otherfactors it considered, and the basis for its decision. 
Fukuoka, 141 Hawai# i at 56, 404 P.3d at 322 (cleaned up). 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1. Seriousness of the offense. 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has held that "considering 
the seriousness of an offense does not mean that a court simply 
determines whether the offense is serious or not serious. 
Courts
are reluctant to identify any crime as 'non-serious.'" Fukuoka, 141 Hawai# i at 57, 404 P.3d at 323 (citations omitted). The 
supreme court identified the following factors to be considered in evaluating seriousness:  
[O]ffenses vary in seriousness, and whether an offense is
more or less serious will depend on the particular chargesin a given case. 
Determining the relative seriousness of an offense is
consistent with the wording of the factor itself, whichrequires that the court consider the seriousness of theoffense rather than whether an offense is serious or non-serious. Analyzing the relative seriousness of the offenserather than making a categorical determination of "serious"or "non-serious" also facilitates a more nuanced balancingof the three Estencion factors. 
Thus, although every crime may be considered "serious"
in a general sense, the trial court in considering the firstEstencion factor should determine the relative seriousness of the particular offense at issue, i.e., whether theoffense is more serious or less serious for purposes ofdismissal under HRPP Rule 48 and not whether an offense is "serious" or "non-serious." 
. . . [R]ather than deem certain classes of offenses to be
categorically serious or nonserious, the trial court shouldconsider whether the individual offenses charged are moreserious or less serious by looking to a variety of factorsrelating to the individual offense. 
The trial court may
consider, for example, the possible penalties for theoffense charged. Consideration of an offense's possiblepenalty may include a review of both the possible term ofimprisonment and other penalties that may be implicatedfollowing a finding of guilt. 
Significantly, a trial court considering whether an
offense is more or less serious for purposes of HRPP Rule 48may also look to the nature of the offense charged. 
In evaluating seriousness, a trial court may also
consider the combination of charges and the relation amongmultiple charges. 
Additionally, although the trial court may consider
the nature of the offense charged, the inquiry intoseriousness generally centers on the charge, rather than onthe underlying facts of the particular case. Focusing onthe charge rather than on the underlying facts isappropriate because, by the very nature of the HRPP Rule 48violation, it is likely that evidence has yet to beproffered and analyzed for admissibility under the HawaiiRules of Evidence and the state and federal constitutions;as a result, such evidence may not have been tested forreliability or accuracy. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Permitting the State and the defendant to present
evidence on the underlying facts of the case, and requiring
the court to determine whether these facts weigh in favor ofdismissal with or without prejudice, would alsounnecessarily complicate and lengthen proceedings that areintended to relieve congestion in the trial court and toadvance the efficiency of the criminal justice process.However, when the charge itself includes informationpertinent to the seriousness inquiry, such information maybe relied upon by the trial court. 
Id. at 57-58, 404 P.3d at 323-24 (citations, quotation marks, and
footnote omitted).  
In this case, the circuit court concluded: 
Defendant Sueyasu was charged with three felonies and three
violations (Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degreeand Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia) thereby making thecharges serious offenses (factor one). 
No other findings of fact were made and the circuit court did not 
otherwise make a determination of the "relative seriousness" of the offenses charged. See Fukuoka, 141 Hawai# i at 60 n. 14, 404 
P.3d at 326, n. 14 ("Such a determination would assist the trial court in determining whether the balance of the factors weighs in favor of allowing or precluding reprosecution . . . and the appellate court in its review of that determination.") 
2. Facts and circumstances which led to dismissal. 
"In evaluating the facts and circumstances of the case, 
the court should focus on the culpability of the conduct that led to the delay." Fukuoka, 141 Hawai# i at 60, 404 P.3d at 326 
(citation and quotation marks omitted). 
Relevant considerations 
within this factor may include whether the delay was caused by the State's neglect or deliberate misconduct, or by the defendant's conduct, or by the court itself. Id. 
In this case, the circuit court concluded: 
The reason for the delay was not a deliberate attempt to
delay trial in order to hamper a defense (factor two). 
No other findings of fact were made and the circuit court did not 
determine whether any portion of the delay was attributable to the defendant or to the court itself. See id. 141 Hawai# i at 62, 
404 P.3d at 328 (noting that "the court, the prosecution, and the 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defendant have a responsibility to facilitate timely resolution
of proceedings . . . and moving the case forward.") (footnote omitted).  
3. Impact of reprosecution on the administration of
HRPP Rule 48 and on the administration of justice. 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has instructed: 
HRPP Rule 48 operates to ensure an accused a speedy trialand to further policy considerations to relieve congestionin the trial court, to promptly process all cases reachingthe courts, and to advance the efficiency of the criminaljustice process. One way in which these goals are achievedis through the threat of sanctions for violation of HRPPRule 48. The rule's sanction of a dismissal with prejudicecreates an incentive for courts to design and implementefficient and fair procedures to decrease the potential fordelay and for prosecutors to design screening procedures toensure that as much as possible those cases that may bedisposed of by means other than trial are removed from thecriminal justice system as quickly as possible. 
. . . Courts have noted that the government can always argue
that reprosecution furthers the public's interest inbringing defendants to trial. On the other hand, theadministration of justice is also furthered by the timelyand efficient adjudication of criminal cases. 
These diverse and often competing interests in
furthering the administration of HRPP Rule 48 and in servingthe administration of justice are inherent in every case.There are, however, circumstances that are unique to eachcase that are relevant to these interests and that a court may consider in analyzing the third Estencion factor. For example, the court may consider whether the State or thecourt's conduct in the case reflect[s] a pattern of lack ofdiligence, thereby suggesting that dismissal with prejudiceis necessary to vindicate the purposes of HRPP Rule 48 andjustice generally. 
Prejudice to the defendant may also be considered[.] 
Fukuoka, 141 Hawai# i at 62-63, 404 P.3d at 328-29 (cleaned up). 
In this case, the circuit court concluded: 
Reprosecution would further the administration of justice,as the State did not purposefully delay trial for an unfairadvantage (factor three). 
No other findings of fact were made. 
The record in this case does not enable us to determine
whether the circuit court abused its discretion by dismissing the
case without prejudice. We vacate the portion of the circuit court's September 18, 2018 order dismissing this case without   
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prejudice, and remand for the circuit court to enter findings of 
fact and conclusions of law as directed by Fukuoka. 
C. The circuit court did not err in denying the
motion to suppress. 
We review a ruling on a motion to suppress evidence de 
novo to determine whether the ruling was "right" or "wrong." 
State v. Weldon, 144 Hawai# i 522, 530, 445 P.3d 103, 111 (2019). 
Sueyasu contends that Officer Broad did not have 
probable cause to stop the Honda she was driving, so that all evidence obtained as a result of the stop should be suppressed. Officer Broad stopped the Honda for violation of the basic speed rule, HRS § 291C–101 (2007). The statute provides, in relevant part: 
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater
than is reasonable and prudent and having regard to the
actual and potential hazards and conditions then existing.Consistent with the foregoing, every person shall drive at asafe and appropriate speed when . . . approaching and goingaround a curve, . . . when traveling upon any narrow orwinding roadway, and when special hazards exist with respectto pedestrians or other traffic, or by reason of weather orhighway conditions. 
Sueyasu contends that "there was no evidence presented whatsoever 
that there were any actual or potential hazards or conditions existing at the time that made the speed at which Ms. Sueyasu was operating the vehicle not reasonable and prudent." 
Officer Broad was the only witness to testify during 
the hearing on Sueyasu's motion to suppress. He testified that he was on patrol near Kôloa when he saw a Honda enter Maluhia Road from the bypass road and head north. It was about 10:38 p.m. "When it pulled out from the bypass on to Maluhia, it was traveling at an -- it was traveling fast." The Honda was tailgating another car through the S-turns on Maluhia Road. After coming out of the S-turns, the Honda overtook the other car "at a high rate of speed." There were no street lights in the area. The roadway was narrow, without a shoulder. Officer Broad activated his lights and siren and pursued the Honda. The circuit court's finding that "Officer Broad accelerated to over 50 miles per hour to catch up to [the Honda] and maintained that 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
speed while behind" the Honda is supported by substantial 
evidence and is not clearly erroneous.   Officer Broad's
testimony established that he had probable cause to stop
Sueyasu's vehicle for violation of the basic speed rule.  The
circuit court did not err in denying Sueyasu's motion to
suppress.7
III. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the August 28,
2017 order denying Sueyasu's motion to suppress evidence.  We
affirm the portion of the September 18, 2018 order denying
Sueyasu's motion to dismiss based upon alleged violation of her
constitutional right to speedy trial.  We vacate the portion of
the September 18, 2018 order granting Sueyasu's motion to dismiss
based on violation of HRPP Rule 48, and remand for the circuit
court to enter findings of fact and conclusions of law to support
its decision to dismiss without prejudice.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 3, 2020.
On the briefs:
Justin F. Kollar,
Tracy Murakami,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Lisa R. Arin,
for Defendant-Appellant./s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Alexa D.M. Fujise
Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
7Sueyasu argues that the State did not establish what the speed
limit was for Maluhia Road, or that the speedometer on Officer Broad's police
vehicle was accurately calibrated.  However, Sueyasu was not charged with
exceeding the speed limit; Officer Broad's testimony about vehicle speeds
tends to support the circuit court's conclusion that Officer Broad "had a
reasonable suspicion to warrant to [sic] the warrantless traffic stop for the
offense of Basic Speed Rule" — that is, "driv[ing] a vehicle at a speed
greater than is reasonable and prudent and having regard to the actual and
potential hazards and conditions then existing."  HRS § 291C–101.
13