NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000382
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
RICHARD P. SILVA, III, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 11-1-0926)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Richard P. Silva, III (Silva)
 
appeals from a March 5, 2013 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence,
 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
1
Court),  for the following offenses:  Reckless Endangering in the
 
Second Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (
HRS)
 
§ 707-714(1)(a) (Supp. 2013); Assault in the Second Degree in
 violation of HRS § 707-711(1)(d) (Supp. 2013); and Carrying or
 Use of Firearm in the Commission of a Separate Felony in
 violation of HRS § 134-21 (2011).
 
I. BACKGROUND

 
A. Events Leading to the Charges Against Silva
 In 1991 or 1992, Silva was involved in a fight with
 
David Kawika Kahanu (Kahanu), whom Silva knew from high school. 
Kahanu punched Silva in the mouth, and Silva was hospitalized and
 
1
 The Honorable Judge Randal K. O. Lee presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
received three or four stitches. The two men did not speak for
 
over ten years.
 
One night in 2006 or 2008, the two men saw each other
 
at The Shack in Mililani Shopping Center (The Shack). Kahanu
 
testified that Silva tried to start a fight, but Kahanu declined. 
Silva testified that Kahanu approached him and said that The
 Shack was Kahanu's hangout, and Silva was not allowed to go
 there. Silva left, and the two men did not fight. 
On the night of July 3, 2011, Kahanu helped sponsor a
 
fundraiser event at The Shack. Chadwick "Chad" Ceno (Ceno),
 
Travis William Joaquin (Joaquin), and William "Bill" Peters
 
(Peters) were among the attendees. The event ended at around 11
 
p.m., but many of the attendees remained at The Shack into the
 
early hours of July 4, 2011. Silva was also at The Shack with
 two friends, but was not attending the event.
 
1. Silva's testimony
 
Silva's version of the events differs significantly
 
from that of the State's witnesses. Silva testified that while
 he was urinating in the bathroom in The Shack, Ceno and Joaquin
 approached and harassed him, threatening to put him in the
 hospital and to burn down his family's house in Waipio. When
 Silva left The Shack, Kahanu and a group of approximately twenty
 men (including Ceno, Joaquin, and Peters) confronted him. When
 Silva tried to move away from Kahanu, Joaquin blocked his way,
 and the group of men "threatened and harassed" him. Peters, who
 was "yelling," "shouting," and "sticking out his chest," told
 Kahanu to "break it up" and let Silva go because they were going
 to meet Silva "at his house in Waipio." 
Silva was concerned for his family's safety, because he
 
thought some of the men knew the location of his childhood home
 in Waipio Valley. He returned to his car and looked for his
 phone, but could not find it. A thirteen-inch silver hatchet
 with a black handle, which he used for work, was on the floor of
 his car. He set it on the passenger seat with the handle on the
 center console because he thought he might need to use it for
 protection.
 
2  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Silva drove to the Jack-in-the-Box across the street
 
from The Shack to look for Kahanu. He testified that he did so
 
because Kahanu and his friends had made threats to go to Silva's
 
2
family's house,  and that he wanted to speak to Kahanu to end the
incident. He pulled into the parking lot, rolled down his
 window, and told Kahanu they needed to talk. Kahanu said, "we go
 down . . . to the park. I'll meet you there." Silva drove to
 Kipapa Park (Park) and waited for Kahanu. 
Silva waited near the Park for a few minutes, and then
 
saw several cars driving near the Park on Kipapa Drive toward
 Waipio Valley. Concerned, Silva began to drive toward Waipio
 Valley and noticed a white truck and two other cars driving close
 behind him. Silva drove past his family's house in Waipio to see
 if everything was alright, and the truck apparently stopped
 following him. He then drove back to the Jack-in-the-Box parking
 lot. Silva told Kahanu to meet him at the Park, and then drove
 back toward Kipapa Park. 
As Silva turned into the street next to the Park, he
 
again noticed a white truck following him. Ceno was driving the
 
truck, and Peters was riding in the passenger seat. Near Kipapa
 
Park, Ceno pulled his truck in front of Silva's car from the left
 side and parked diagonally, causing Silva to stop. Joaquin,
 driving a red Dodge Charger, pulled up and parked on the left
 side of Silva's car. 
Peters, who was not wearing a shirt, jumped out of
 
Ceno's truck before it completely stopped and approached the
 passenger window of Silva's car. Peters yelled at Silva and
 attempted to open the locked passenger door, inserting his right
 hand into the partially rolled-down window. Silva picked up the
 
hatchet with his right hand and waved it at Peters, telling
 
Peters to get away from the car. 
Ceno and Joaquin approached the driver's window of
 
Silva's car. Ceno was holding a small silver handgun, which he
 
2
 Silva testified that his family's house is about a two or three
minute drive from The Shack. 
3  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pointed inside the open window at Silva. Silva grabbed Ceno's
 
hand and twisted the gun away from his face, and then heard the
 gun fire. Ceno stepped back a few feet, dropped the gun, held
 his stomach with both hands, and fell to the ground. Ceno
 suffered a through-and-through gunshot wound to his abdomen. 
Silva exited his car and grabbed the gun from the road
 
as Ceno tried to grab it. Silva fired the gun randomly into the
 dark, attempting to scare the men away. He threw the gun on the
 ground near Ceno's truck and drove away.
 
2. The State's Witnesses' Testimony
 
Both Ceno and Joaquin testified that they did not see
 
or speak to Silva inside The Shack. Kahanu testified that after
 he saw Silva exit The Shack, he went over and "tapped" Silva and
 said in a "firm and soft" voice that he was not happy about Silva
 "hopping around, calling [him] out" the last time they met. 
Shortly after Silva and Kahanu began talking, several police cars
 arrived and the crowd dispersed.
 
Two to three minutes later, Silva drove up to where
 
Kahanu was standing and said, "[f]ollow me to the park right
 now." Kahanu got into his car and began to drive to the Park
 with his fiancée in the passenger seat, but then realized that he
 did not want her to be involved and pulled over on the other side
 of the street. 
Around four minutes later, Silva returned, stopped his
 
car in the middle of the road, shouted, "Kawika, follow me, you
 faggot," and then drove off. Kahanu's friends told him not to
 follow Silva, and Kahanu drove home with his fiancée. In
 Kahanu's statement to the police, he stated that his "buddies"
 told him to "go home, take care your family. We take care him." 
Ceno, Peters, and Joaquin testified that they drove to
 
the Park intending to tell Silva to go home because the incident
 was over. Ceno denied possessing a gun or any other weapon when
 he approached Silva's car. Peters testified that when he was
 standing near Silva's passenger side door, there was a gun on top
 of the console, and Silva had his right hand directly over the
 gun. 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
When Ceno approached Silva's driver's side window,
 
Silva turned to Ceno, pointed the gun at Ceno, and fired a shot.3
 
Peters shouted, "[h]e's got a gun, he's got a gun." Joaquin
 
turned to run across the street, heard more shots, and felt a hot
 feeling in his lower back. Joaquin fell to the pavement and
 crawled towards a wall and some trees. He saw two flashes and
 felt a burning sensation in his right arm and in the right side
 of his stomach area. Joaquin suffered gunshot wounds to his
 right side mid-back area, his right stomach area, and his right
 elbow.
 
Silva walked to where Ceno was lying on the ground,
 
stood over him, and pulled the trigger of the gun three times. 
The first time, a bullet discharged, but did not hit Ceno. The
 gun did not fire the second and third times. Silva then ran to
 his car and drove towards Waipio Valley. 
Between 3:00 and 3:45 a.m. on the morning of July 4,
 
2011, Silva turned himself in to police. 
On the evening of July 4, 2011, a passerby found a
 
five-chamber 38 Special Smith & Wesson Model 60 revolver matching
 the description of the gun used in the shooting south of Mililani
 on the northbound shoulder of Kamehameha Highway. A bullet
 removed from Joaquin's body had markings that were similar to
 those on test bullets fired from this gun, but ballistics experts
 were unable to conclude that the gun was used in the shooting. 
B. Procedural History
 On July 7, 2011, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i 
(State) charged Silva by indictment with the following offenses: 
Attempted Murder in the First Degree in violation of HRS §§ 705­
500 (1993) and 707-701(1)(a) (Supp. 2013) (Count I); two counts 
of Attempted Murder in the Second Degree in violation of HRS 
§§ 705-500 and 707-701.5 (1993) (Counts II and III); two counts 
of Carrying or Use of Firearm in the Commission of a Separate 
Felony in violation of HRS § 134-21 (2011) (Counts IV and V); 
3
 Peters testified during direct examination that he saw Silva shoot
Ceno. However, during cross examination, Peters testified that he heard a
shot, but did not actually see Silva shoot Ceno. 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ownership or Possession Prohibited of Any Firearm or Ammunition
 
by a Person Convicted of Certain Crimes in violation of HRS
 §§ 134-7(b) and (h) (2011) (Count VI); and Place to Keep Pistol
 
or Revolver in violation of HRS § 134-25 (2011) (Count VII). 
On August 15, 2011, the Circuit Court appointed the
 
Office of the Public Defender as trial counsel for Silva, citing
 
his financial inability to obtain private counsel. 
On February 9, 2012, during a trial call, Silva orally
 
motioned for his trial counsel to withdraw. The court denied the
 motion.
4
 
On November 5, 2012, after the jury had been selected
 
and sworn in, but before opening statements, Silva again orally
 motioned for his trial counsel to withdraw, alleging that his
 counsel was not working in his best interests and stating that he
 was in the process of trying to retain private counsel. The
 court denied the motion. 
On November 14, 2012, during direct examination of
 
Ceno, the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (DPA) asked Ceno how he
 
felt after he had been shot, to which he responded, "I felt like
 
I was going die." Silva's trial counsel did not object to the
 question or answer.
 
During direct examination of Joaquin, the DPA also
 
asked Joaquin whether he was "fully recovered" from the incident
 and asked him to describe what he went through as a result of the
 incident. Defense counsel objected to the question as
 irrelevant, but the court overruled the objection because the
 question went "to whether or not [Joaquin suffered] serious or
 substantial bodily injury." 
Joaquin stated that he got "sketchy" with "some of the
 
things that goes on" and got "flashbacks thinking of that night." 
Defense counsel again objected, and the court this time sustained
 the objection and instructed the jury to disregard the answer. 
4
 During trial on November 5, 2012, the court noted that Silva had
agreed to continue to be represented by his trial counsel after making this
motion on the condition that he would receive additional discovery, and that
he had not voiced any concerns regarding his counsel since.
 
6  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Defense counsel orally motioned for a mistrial based on Joaquin's
 
statement. The Circuit Court denied the motion, noting that it
 had given an instruction to disregard the question and answer.
 
On November 16, 2012, after the close of the State's
 
case, Silva orally motioned for judgment of acquittal. The court
 denied the motion. After the close of the defense's case, Silva
 renewed his motion for judgment of acquittal, and the court again
 denied it. 
On November 21, 2012, during the State's closing
 
argument, the DPA stated the following regarding self-defense: 
"[W]hat this means, in lay person's language, is if you can leave
 the scene without using force, and you don't, you can't say self
 defense." The defense objected to the comment as a misstatement
 of the law. The court sustained the objection and struck the
 comment from the record. 
The DPA then restated his comment: "So what this
 
instruction is telling you, that if a person is using self
 defense as his defense, if the opportunity to retreat was not
 taken, then it is no longer available to you as self defense." 
The defense again objected, but the court overruled the second
 objection and let the DPA's second comment stand after the DPA
 said to the jury, "[w]ell, you can read the instruction
 yourself." The DPA then cited several instances of Silva's
 behavior and described them as "not self-defense." 
At the end of his closing argument, the DPA told the
 
jury that "either [the DPA is] telling you the truth, or [defense
 counsel is] telling you the truth. One of us. But not both." 
Following closing arguments, Silva made a motion for mistrial
 based on the DPA's comments regarding self-defense and the
 truthfulness of the attorneys. The court denied the motion. 
On November 27, 2012, the jury acquitted Silva as to
 
Counts I, IV, VI, and VII, and convicted Silva of the lesser
 included offense of Reckless Endangering in the Second Degree in
 violation of HRS § 707-714(1)(a) as to Count II, the lesser
 included offense of Assault in the Second Degree in violation of
 
HRS § 707-711(1)(d) as to Count III, and of Carrying or Use of
 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Firearm in the Commission of a Separate Felony with respect to
 
Assault in the Second Degree in violation of HRS § 134-21 as to
 Count V. 
On November 28, 2012, the Circuit Court entered its
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying
 Defendant's [November 5, 2012] Motion to Withdraw as Counsel. 
On March 5, 2013, the court sentenced Silva to
 
indeterminate terms of imprisonment of one year as to Count II,
 five years as to Count III, and twenty years as to Count V, with
 a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment of three years as to
 Count III, and all terms to be served concurrently with credit
 for time served. On April 3, 2013, Silva timely appealed. 
II.	 POINTS OF ERROR
 
Silva raises the following points of error on appeal:
 (1) the Circuit Court abused its discretion in denying
 
Silva's motion to have his counsel withdraw;
 
(2) the court abused its discretion in denying Silva's
 
motion for mistrial where the DPA (a) elicited improper testimony
 from the complaining witnesses, and (b) stated during closing
 argument that either he or defense counsel was lying to the jury; 
(3) the DPA committed prosecutorial misconduct during
 
his closing argument by (a) misstating the law related to self-
defense, and (b) making misleading remarks describing certain
 behaviors as "not self-defense;" and
 
(4) the court erred in denying Silva's motion for
 
judgment of acquittal where there was no substantial evidence to
 negate his self-defense and choice of evils justifications.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
"A motion to withdraw as counsel is subject to the 
'approval of the court'" and a trial court's denial of a motion for withdrawal is reviewed for an abuse of discretion. State v. 
Plichta, 116 Hawai
'i 200, 214, 172 P.3d 512, 526 (2007) (quoting 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 57 (2000)). 
The Supreme Court of Hawai 'i has applied the following 
standard of review to the denial of a motion for mistrial: 
8 State
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The denial of a motion for mistrial is within
 
the sound discretion of the trial court and will not
 
be upset absent a clear abuse of discretion. The
 trial court abuses its discretion when it clearly
exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or
principles of law or practice to the substantial
detriment of a party litigant.
 
State v. Acker, 133 Hawai 'i 253, 274, 327 P.3d 931, 952 (2014) 
(citation omitted). 
The court in Acker also articulated the standard
 
applicable to an allegation of prosecutorial misconduct:

 
Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed
under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which
requires an examination of the record and a determination of
whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error
complained of might have contributed to the conviction.
Prosecutorial misconduct warrants a new trial or the setting
aside of a guilty verdict only where the actions of the
prosecutor have caused prejudice to the defendant's right to
a fair trial. In order to determine whether the alleged
prosecutorial misconduct reached the level of reversible
error, [the appellate court considers] the nature of the
alleged misconduct, the promptness or lack of a curative
instruction, and the strength or weakness of the evidence
against defendant.
 
Id. (internal citation and quotation marks omitted). 
The standard to be applied by the trial court in
ruling upon a motion for a judgment of acquittal is whether,
upon the evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the
prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the
[trier of fact], a reasonable mind might fairly conclude
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. This court employs the
same standard of review in reviewing a motion for a judgment
of acquittal. In reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence
supporting a conviction on appeal, the evidence adduced at
trial must be considered in the strongest light for the
prosecution. The test on appeal is not whether guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was
substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier
of fact. 

State v. Walton, 133 Hawai 'i 66, 90, 324 P.3d 876, 900 (2014) 
(citation and quotation marks omitted). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 A. Motion to Withdraw as Counsel
 
The Supreme Court of Hawai 'i recently reiterated that 
"a criminal defendant has a constitutional right under article I,
 section 14 of the Hawai
'i Constitution to privately retained 
counsel of his or her choice. This right, however, must be
 balanced against countervailing governmental interests." v. Cramer, 129 Hawai
'i 296, 301, 299 P.3d 756, 761 (2013) (citing 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Maddagan, 95 Hawai 'i 177, 180, 19 P.3d 1289, 1292 
(2001)). The denial of a continuance to allow a defendant to 
retain private counsel 
is not per se a denial of the constitutional right to
counsel, but the appellate court should scrupulously review
the record to determine whether, under all the
circumstances, there was an abuse of discretion that
prejudiced the defendant by amounting to an unconstitutional
denial of the right toi [sic] effective assistance of
counsel.
 
Id. at 302, 299 P.3d at 762 (citation and quotation marks
 
omitted).
 
In Cramer, the Court quoted a California case in
 
identifying several factors for a trial court to consider in

 
deciding a motion for substitution of counsel and continuance:
 
(1)	 length of the continuance;
(2)	 whether there was a dilatory motive for the
continuance;
(3)	 whether the prosecution knew of the motions beforehand
and whether the prosecution objected;
(4)	 whether the delay would have inconvenienced the
prosecution or its witnesses;
(5)	 whether current court-appointed counsel was prepared
to proceed;
(6)	 whether the defendant had already retained private
counsel; and
(7)	 whether the continuance would interfere with the
 efficient administration of justice.
 
Id. at 301, 299 P.3d at 761 (citation omitted, format altered). 
The Court also cited a Wisconsin case that considered the
 following factors:
 
[T]he length of the delay requested, whether competent
counsel was presently available and prepared to try the
case, whether prior continuances have been requested and
received by the defendant, the inconvenience to the parties,
witnesses and the court, and whether the delay was for
legitimate reasons or whether its purpose was dilatory.
 
Id. (citation omitted). In the instant case, the record shows
 
that the Circuit Court carefully considered and weighed several
 of the Cramer factors in making its decision. 
When Silva orally motioned for his trial counsel to
 
withdraw and to substitute new counsel, the jury had already been
 selected and sworn in, and both the State and the defense were
 ready to proceed with opening statements.   Silva had not yet
 
retained private counsel, and admitted that he could not afford
 to do so at the time. When the court asked Silva to clarify
 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
whether he could afford to hire private counsel, Silva stated,
 
"I'll do whatever I gotta do to get an attorney that's going to
 help me. . . . I'm in the process right now of trying to get an
 attorney."
 
The court allowed Silva to voice his concerns about his
 
trial counsel. The court noted that Silva's trial counsel was an
 experienced and competent attorney who had "done everything up
 until th[at] point to zealously represent" Silva and was prepared
 to proceed. The court also asked the DPA to comment on the
 motion, and the DPA stated that Silva's trial counsel "ha[d]
 always been concerned about getting information to Mr. Silva[,]"
 and had raised several motions in limine that were "appropriate
 and exhibit[ed] a vigorous attempt to defend Mr. Silva[.]" 
The Circuit Court took judicial notice of the records
 
and files in Silva's case dating back to July 14, 2011, and
 orally reviewed the progress of the case and the actions of
 Silva's trial counsel in detail. The court noted that it had
 previously granted continuances on September 1, 2011, October 27,
 2011, January 13, 2012, February 16, 2012, May 30, 2012, August
 15, 2012, and October 23, 2012. The court also noticed that
 Silva was unlikely to be able to find and hire a private attorney
 at that point in the case.
 
After reviewing these factors, the Circuit Court found
 
that Silva "had presented no reasons amounting to good cause for
 a substitution of counsel, and appointment of new counsel would
 delay the trial and disrupt the orderly flow of business in the
 court system[.]" Based on the record before us, we cannot
 conclude that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in denying
 Silva's motion to withdraw and substitute counsel.
 
B. The Alleged Prosecutorial Misconduct
 Silva asserts that the DPA committed prosecutorial
 
misconduct when he: (1) elicited improper testimony from the
 complaining witnesses regarding the effect the incident had on
 them; (2) stated during closing argument that either he or
 defense counsel was lying to the jury; (3) misstated the law of
 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5Silva's trial counsel did not object to Ceno's testimony that he
felt like he was going to die after he was shot.  As Silva did not preserve
this issue for appeal, we focus solely on whether the DPA's questioning of
Joaquin about the effect of the incident on him constituted misconduct.  See
Hawai#i Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4).
6See, e.g., State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai #i 405, 413, 984 P.2d 1231,
1239 (1999) (prosecutors "should not use arguments calculated to inflame the
passions or prejudices of the jury."); State v. Palabay, 9 Haw. App. 414, 430,
844 P.2d 1, 10 (1992).
7See, e.g., State v. Espiritu, 117 Hawai# i 127, 143, 176 P.3d 885,
901 (2008) ("If improper comments are made by a prosecutor, harm or prejudice
to [a defendant] can be cured by the court's instructions to the jury.")
(citation and quotation marks omitted); Rogan, 91 Hawai #i at 415, 984 P.2d at
1241 ("it is presumed that the jury abided by the court's admonition to
disregard the [improper] statement.") (citation omitted); Palabay , 9 Haw. App.
at 433, 844 P.2d at 11 (holding that while the court overruled defendant's
first objection to complainant holding a teddy bear while testifying, the
court shortly thereafter sustained defendant's second objection, making it
"highly unlikely that the jury's verdict was swayed by the brief presence of
the stuffed animal."); State v. Klinge, 92 Hawai #i 577, 592-93, 994 P.2d 509,
524-25 (2000) (holding that, in light of the court's curative instruction, a
prosecutor's isolated improper statement did not amount to prosecutorial
misconduct).
12self-defense; and (4) made misleading remarks describing certain
behaviors as "not self-defense." 
Silva contends that the DPA elicited improper testimony
from Joaquin5 about what he went through as a result of the
incident in an "attempt to appeal to the emotions and sympathies
of the jury."  Defense counsel orally motioned for a mistrial,
objecting to the DPA's questions as "more prejudicial than
probative" and intended "to engender sympathy from the jury[.]"6  
In our view, the DPA's questions, while irrelevant, did not
constitute misconduct. 
Even assuming the DPA's questioning constituted
misconduct, the Circuit Court immediately sustained defense
counsel's objection and gave a curative instruction to disregard
Joaquin's answer.  At the end of the trial, the court also
instructed the jury that it "must not be influenced . . . by
passion or prejudice against the defendant" and must
"conscientiously and dispassionately consider and weigh all of
the evidence" in reaching a verdict.  These instructions cured
any potential prejudice arising from Joaquin's testimony.7  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
During closing argument, the DPA stated: "Now, either
 
I'm telling you the truth, or he's telling you the truth. One of
 
us. But not both." Defense counsel moved for a mistrial,
 stating that the DPA improperly implied that one of the attorneys
 was lying. The Circuit Court denied the motion, finding that the
 DPA's comment, "though not well versed, perhaps, was argument in
 retort to [defense counsel's] closing argument." 
In State v. Klinge, 92 Hawai
'i 577, 593, 994 P.2d 509, 
525 (2000), the prosecutor told the jury during closing argument that defense counsel was "not going to give [the jury] the whole picture because he has a duty [to] get his client off." The Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that "the prosecutor's comment was 
clearly prosecutorial misconduct[,]" and "strongly disapprove[d] of such reckless and unsupportable comments" as "an impermissible attack on defense counsel's integrity" that "operated to denigrate the legal profession in general." Id. at 595, 527. 
Similarly, the DPA's comments in this case were improper. 
The trial court in Klinge sustained defense counsel's
 
objection and ordered the comment stricken from the record, and
 also later advised the jury that "[s]tatements or remarks made by
 counsel are not evidence." Id. Thus, the supreme court held
 
that the remark, "though distasteful and unprofessional, was not
 so prejudicial as to deny [the defendant] a fair trial." Id. 
In the instant case, although the Circuit Court did not
 
sustain all of defense counsel's objections, it immediately
 instructed the jury to disregard the DPA's comment "in regards to
 [defense counsel]." The court also gave a specific curative
 instruction at the end of closing arguments to address the DPA's
 comments about the truthfulness of the attorneys.
8
 
8
 Following closing arguments, and in response to defense counsel's
motion for mistrial, the court stated:
 
[A]s I informed you previously, opening statements and
closing arguments are not evidence. And what the attorneys
may say during closing arguments is not evidence. And you
are not bound by how the attorneys may see or remember the
evidence.
 
(continued...)
 
13    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Silva next argues that the DPA's "lay" interpretation
 
9
of Jury Instruction No. 50  "left out the fact that the defendant
had to 
know that he could avoid the necessity of using such force 
with complete safety by [retreating]." First, we agree that the 
DPA misstated the law under HRS § 703-304(5)(b) (1993) when he stated that "if the opportunity to retreat was not taken, then it is no longer available to you as self defense."
10 As 
prosecutorial misconduct "refers to any improper action committed by a prosecutor, however harmless or unintentional[,]" this misstatement constituted misconduct. State v. Basham, 132 
Hawai
'i 97, 112 n.13, 319 P.3d 1105, 1120 n.13 (2014) (citation 
and quotation marks omitted). 
"[A]rguments of counsel which misstate the law are 
subject to objection and to correction by the court." Id. at 
110, 319 P.3d at 1119 (citations and quotation marks omitted). The prejudicial effect of a prosecutor's misstatement of the law is not cured where the court overrules defense counsel's timely objection to the prosecutor's misstatement of the law and fails to give a specific curative instruction. See Espiritu, 117 
Hawai
'i at 143, 176 P.3d at 901. This is because when defense 
counsel's objections to such misstatements are overruled, "the jury would reasonably perceive that the misstatement of the law 
8(...continued)
Now, during the course of trial, sometimes -- or in
the heat of battle, attorneys say things. In this
 
particular case, you are to disregard [the deputy
prosecutor's] comments during his closing arguments with
regards to any reference to either -- any of the attorneys
lying to you. So you shall disregard and not even consider
that argument.
 
9 Jury Instruction No. 50 read: "The use of deadly force is not
justifiable if the defendant knows that he can avoid the necessity of using
such force with complete safety by retreating, but the defendant is not
required to retreat from his own dwelling unless he was the initial
aggressor." 
10
 HRS § 703-304(5)(b) (1993) provides:
(5)	 The use of deadly force is not justifiable under

this section if:
 
. . . .
 (b)
	 The actor knows that he can avoid the
 necessity of using such force with
complete safety by retreating[.]
 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was not incorrect." Id.; see also Basham, 132 Hawai 'i at 110, 
319 P.3d at 1118 (holding that the court effectively endorsed the 
erroneous definitions given by the prosecutor by overruling the defense's objection and not giving a curative instruction). 
Additionally, a misstatement of law is not cured where 
the court has an opportunity to clarify the law to the jury, but fails to do so. See Espiritu, 117 Hawai
'i at 143, 176 P.3d at 
901 ("the court had an opportunity to clarify the law regarding the [extreme mental or emotional disturbance] defense when defense counsel objected to the [State's] closing argument . . . [but] failed to cure the misstatement by overruling the objection and by not clarifying the law to the jury.") (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Thus, "the failure to correct misstatements of law by a prosecutor may result in reversal of a defendant's conviction." Id. (citation and quotation marks 
omitted). 
Here, although the Circuit Court sustained defense
 
counsel's first objection and struck the DPA's first paraphrasing
 of the jury instruction from the record, it did not explain to
 the jury why or in what way the DPA had misstated the law. Thus,
 the court did not promptly redress the possible harm caused by
 the DPA's misstatement of the law of self-defense in that it did
 not clarify the law or give a curative instruction specifically
 addressing the misstatement.
11 The DPA proceeded to misstate the
 
law in a similar manner, and when defense counsel again objected,
 the court overruled the objection and let the DPA's second
 misstatement stand. 
The State argues that, in light of the strong evidence
 
against Silva, "there is no reasonable possibility that the
 omission of the state of mind when paraphrasing the jury
 instruction on the duty to retreat contributed to Silva's
 conviction[.]" We disagree. In Espiritu, the supreme court held
 
11
 See Espiritu, 117 Hawai' i at 143, 176 P.3d at 901 (finding that
the court's general instruction to the jury that "statements or remarks made
by counsel are not evidence" was not sufficiently curative, because the
misstatement pertained to law and not evidence). 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the prosecutor's multiple misstatements of the law regarding 
an extreme mental or emotional disturbance (EMED) defense were 
not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, even when the evidence 
strongly indicated that the defendant was not acting under EMED or that the defendant's reason for the EMED was not "reasonable." Espiritu, 117 Hawai
'i at 143, 176 P.3d at 901. These 
misstatements "erroneously suggested to the jury that certain prerequisites were necessary to the applicability of the defense," which "was manifestly prejudicial to Petitioner." Id. 
at 144-45, 902-03. 
Here, although the testimony of the State's witnesses
 
was somewhat conflicting, and Silva's version of the events
 differed significantly from that of the State's witnesses, it was
 undisputed that Silva shot Ceno and Joaquin. The evidence to
 negate Silva's self-defense justification, while strong, was not
 overwhelming.
12 Silva's state of mind based on the events and
 
circumstances leading up to the shootings was a key issue for the
 jury in determining whether self-defense should apply.
13 Absent
 
the DPA's erroneous and potentially confusing misstatement of the
 law of self-defense, the jury could have found that Silva acted
 in self-defense and acquitted him on all charges.
14 We conclude
 
there is a reasonable possibility that the DPA's misstatement of
 
12 "[W]hen a prosecution's case against the defendant is not
overwhelming but turns on the credibility of the defendant, it is likely that
the error might have contributed to the conviction." State v. Walsh, 125 
Hawai'i 271, 260 P.3d 350 (2011). See also State v. Pacheco, 96 Hawai' i 83,
97, 26 P.3d 572, 586 (2001) (noting that, when acquittal or conviction turnedon whether the jury credited the defendant's testimony or the state'sevidence, the evidence was not so overwhelming as to overcome the DPA'simproper attacks on defendant's credibility). 
13
 See Walsh, 125 Hawai' i at 298, 260 P.3d at 377 ("Under the self
defense statute, 'the critical factor in determining whether an actor'sconduct is justified is the actor's state of mind or belief respecting factsand circumstances.'") (quoting Supplemental Commentary on HRS § 703–300(1993)). 
14
 See Walsh, 125 Hawai' i at 299, 260 P.3d at 378 (holding that, but
for the prosecutor's improper attack on the defendant's credibility, the jurycould have found that he reasonably believed he was under continuous attackand acted to defend himself, raising a reasonable doubt as to whether theState had disproved his justification of self-defense beyond a reasonabledoubt). 
16  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the law of self-defense contributed to Silva's convictions, and
 
thus affected Silva's right to a fair trial.15
 
C. Silva's Motion for Acquittal
 We reject Silva's argument that the State failed to
 
prove his guilt because there was "no substantial evidence to
 negate Silva's justification defenses of self-defense and choice-
of-evils."
 
Silva raised self-defense against the charges in Counts
 
II and III. As to Count II, the State was required to establish
 
beyond a reasonable doubt that Silva engaged "in conduct that
 
recklessly place[d] [Ceno] in danger of death or serious bodily
 injury[.]" HRS § 707-714(1)(a). As to Count III, the State was
 required to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that Silva
 "intentionally or knowingly cause[d] bodily injury to [Joaquin]
 with a dangerous instrument[.]" HRS § 707-711(1)(d). 
The State
16 also had the burden to prove beyond a
 
reasonable doubt that the force Silva used was not justified
 under HRS § 703-304, which provides that the use of deadly force
 is justifiable "if the actor believes that deadly force is
 necessary to protect himself against death [or] serious bodily
 injury[.]" HRS § 703-304(2). "[A] person employing protective
 force may estimate the necessity thereof under the circumstances
 as he believes them to be when the force is used without
 retreating[.]" HRS § 703-304(3). 
However, self-defense is not a justification for the
 
use of deadly force where "the actor, with the intent of causing
 serious bodily injury, provoked the use of force against himself
 in the same encounter[,]" or where the "actor knows that he can
 avoid the necessity of using such force with complete safety by
 
15
 Accordingly, we need not address Silva's final contention of
prosecutorial misconduct.
 
16
 "Self-defense is not an affirmative defense, and the prosecution
has the burden of disproving it once evidence of justification has been
adduced." State v. Van Dyke, 101 Hawai' i 377, 386, 69 P.3d 88, 97 (2003)
(citation omitted). "[O]nce the issue of self-protection is raised, theburden is on the prosecution to disprove the facts that have been introducedor to prove facts negativing the defense and to do so beyond a reasonabledoubt." Id. (citation omitted). 
17  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
retreating[.]" HRS § 703-304(5)(a), (b) (1993). Furthermore,
 
self-defense is not a justification for an offense for which
 recklessness or negligence are sufficient to establish
 culpability when "the actor is reckless or negligent in having
 such belief or in acquiring or failing to acquire any knowledge
 or belief which is material to the justifiability of the actor's
 use of force[.]" HRS § 703-310(1) (1993).
17
 
It is undisputed that Silva caused a gun to discharge
 
in close proximity to Ceno, and that Ceno suffered a gunshot
 wound to his abdomen as a result. It is also undisputed that
 Silva fired several shots in Joaquin's direction while Joaquin
 was facing away from the gun, as evidenced by the location of his
 gunshot wounds.
 
Silva had a history of aggressive or violent encounters
 
with Kahanu, and was confronted while alone by three of Kahanu's
 friends in a dimly-lit park in the early hours of the morning. 
The manner in which Ceno and Joaquin purportedly stopped their
 vehicles "in a blocking trip" limited Silva's movement. Silva
 
testified that Ceno and Joaquin had threatened him earlier that
 
night at The Shack, and that he fired into the dark to scare the
 men away because he was "scared for his life[,]" did not know
 what weapons they might have or how many men were there, and
 "knew their intentions already" as soon as Peters and Ceno
 approached his car. 
The State presented evidence that Silva knew he had
 
multiple opportunities to avoid using deadly force by retreating
 from or avoiding the Park. The State also presented evidence
 that Silva provoked the incident by returning to the Jack-in-the-
Box and asking Kahanu multiple times in front of Kahanu's friends
 to meet him at the Park. 
17
 See State v. Culkin, 97 Hawai' i 206, 216, 35 P.3d 233, 243 (2001)
("HRS § 703–310 quite plainly instructs that self-defense is not available as
justification where a defendant believes that the use of force is necessary,
but is reckless or negligent in so believing. HRS § 703–310, read in pari materia with HRS §§ 703–300 and 703–304, thus reflects the legislature's
decision to limit the availability of self-defense as justification to
situations in which the defendant's subjective belief that self-defense wasnecessary is objectively reasonable.") (internal citations omitted). 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
To prove Silva guilty of Carrying or Use of a Firearm
 
in the Commission of a Separate Felony under HRS § 134-21, the
 
State was required to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that
 Silva "knowingly carr[ied] on the person or ha[d] within [his]
 immediate control or intentionally use[d] or threaten[ed] to use
 a firearm while engaged in the commission of a separate
 felony[.]" The State also had the burden to prove beyond a
 reasonable doubt that Silva's conduct was not legally justified
 by his need to "avoid an imminent harm" under HRS § 703-302.
18
  
Silva contends that there was insufficient evidence to negate
 Silva's choice of evils defense as to Count V.
19
  
Although there is conflicting evidence regarding who
 
brought the gun to Kipapa Park, the State presented strong

 
evidence that Silva possessed and used the gun at some time
 during the morning of July 4, 2011 to commit Assault in the
 Second Degree as to Joaquin. Additionally, the State presented
 evidence to show that Silva was reckless or negligent in bringing
 about the situation.
20  Viewing the evidence adduced at trial in
 
the light most favorable to the State, there was substantial
 
18	 HRS § 703-302 (1993) provides, in relevant part:
 
(1)	 Conduct which the actor believes to be necessary to
avoid an imminent harm or evil to the actor or to
 another is justifiable provided that:
(a)	 The harm or evil sought to be avoided by such
conduct is greater than that sought to be
prevented by the law defining the offense
charged; and
(b)	 Neither the Code nor other law defining the
offense provides exceptions or defenses dealing
with the specific situation involved; and
(c)	 A legislative purpose to exclude the
justification claimed does not otherwise plainly
appear.
 
19
 Silva was charged with two counts of Carrying or Use of a Firearm
in the Commission of a Separate Felony in violation of HRS § 134-21 (2011):
Count IV (Ceno) and Count V (Joaquin). The jury acquitted Silva on Count IV
after finding Silva guilty of the misdemeanor of Reckless Endangering in the
Second Degree as to Count II. The jury convicted Silva on Count V in relation
to the felony of Assault in the Second Degree as to Count III. 
20
 The choice of evils justification is not available for any
offense for which recklessness suffices to establish culpability when the
defendant "was reckless or negligent in bringing about the situation requiring
a choice of harms or evils or in appraising the necessity for the actor's
conduct[.]" HRS § 703-302(2) (1993). 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence to support the jury's conclusion that Silva committed
 
the offenses and that the self-defense and choice of evils
 justifications did not apply. Thus, we cannot conclude that the
 Circuit Court abused its discretion in denying Silva's motion for
 judgment of acquittal.
 V. CONCLUSION
 
For the reasons stated above, we vacate the Circuit
 
Court's March 5, 2013 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence and
 remand this case for a new trial.
21
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, October 22, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Jeffrey A. Hawk
(Hawk Sing & Ignacio)for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
21
 Silva does not argue, and we do not find, that the DPA's
misstatement of the law was so egregious that double jeopardy should attach so
as to prevent his retrial. See State v. Mainaaupo, 117 Hawai' i 235, 255, 178
P.3d 1, 21 n.11 (2008) (vacating and remanding for new trial); see also Statev. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 504, 516, 78 P.3d 317, 329 (2003) (holding that while
the prosecutor's improper comment on the defendant's failure to testifyreached the level of reversible error, it "was not so egregious that doublejeopardy should attach to prevent retrial"). 
20 