         
        
 
    
           
       
     
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC  REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000743 30-JAN-2026 08:04 AM Dkt. 95 SO 
NO.  CAAP-23-0000743 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT   OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
STATE  OF  HAWAI I,  Plaintiff-Appellee,  v. 
SILBER  M.
  JERCY,  Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  CIRCUIT  COURT  OF  THE  FIRST  CIRCUIT 
(CR.  NO.  1CPC-22-0000352) 
SUMMARY  DISPOSITION  ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka
 and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant  Silber  M.   Jercy  (Jercy)  appeals 
from  the  November  21,  2023  Amended  Judgment  of  Conviction  and 
Sentence  (Amended  Judgment )  entered  by  the  Circuit  Court  of  the 
First  Circuit  (Circuit  Court).  Jercy  also  challenges  the 
Circuit  Court's  July  28,  2022  Findings  of  Fact,  Conclusions  of 
Law  and  Order  Denying  Defendant's  Motion  to  Suppress 
Identification  (Order  Denying  Motion  to  Suppress ).2 1 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai i (State) charged  
Jercy with a single count of Assault in the Second Degree, in 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-711(1)(m) 
1 The Honorable Lesley N. Maloian presided. 
2 The Honorable Rowena A. Somerville presided.          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
           
          
     
        
          
       
          
        
         
         
     
        
         
          
       
          
      
       
          
       
          
         
       
          
         
       
   (Supp. 2021).3 After a jury trial, Jercy was found guilty as 
charged. The Circuit Court sentenced Jercy to, inter alia, a 
four-year term of probation. 
Jercy raises a single point of error on appeal, 
contending the Circuit Court erred in denying his June 14, 2022 
Motion to Suppress Identification (Motion to Suppress ), including 
error reflected in the findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Jercy's 
point of error as follows: 
Jercy argues that the Circuit Court erred when it 
denied the Motion to Suppress, because even though the Circuit 
Court found that the police show-up where Jercy was identified by 
the complaining witness (CW) was impermissibly suggestive, it 
failed to examine the impact the impermissible show-up had on the 
reliability of the identification itself. 
It is well-established that a defendant's due process 
rights may be violated if the procedure used to obtain an 
eyewitness identification is impermissibly suggestive. State v. 
Kaneaiakala , 145 Hawai i 231, 240, 450 P.3d 761, 770  (2019). 
Whether an eyewitness identification may be admissible even if it 
3 §  707-711   Assault  in  the  second  degree.   (1)  A  person  
commits  the  offense  of  assault  in  the  second  degree  if  the 
person: 
    . . . . 
(m) Intentionally or knowingly causes bodily injury 
to a person who is sixty years of age or older 
and the age of the injured person is known or 
reasonably should be known to the person causing 
the injury. 
2          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
       
          
         
      
      
       
           
       
         
        
         
       
          
         
      
     
       
          
           
        
        
        
        
        
   
        is obtained through an impermissibly suggestive procedure depends 
on the reliability of the identification. Id. In Kaneaiakala , 
the Hawai i Supreme Court held that its prior framework  for 
determining the admissibility of eyewitness identifications was 
insufficient and, prospectively, adopted new requirements for 
trial courts evaluating whether an eyewitness identification must 
be suppressed. Id. at 241-47, 450 P.3d at 771-77. 
The supreme court first pointed to thirteen factors 
that a trial court should consider including in jury instructions 
regarding how to assess the reliability of an eyewitness 
identification4 and held that the judge must consider those same 
factors in addressing the admissibility of an eyewitness 
identification. Id. at 242-47, 450 P.3d at 772-77. 
In so doing, the supreme court also noted its prior 
holding that field show-up identifications are "inherently 
suggestive ," and therefore require additional instructions 
regarding how the suggestiveness of show-up identifications may 
affect the reliability of the identification. Id. at 243, 450 
P.3d at 773 (citing State v. Cabinatan , 132 Hawai i 63, 76, 319 
P.3d 1071, 1084
 (2014)). These additional instructions regarding 
show-up identifications have been promulgated as HAWJIC 3.19A 
Show-Up Identification.5 The supreme court in Kaneaiakala stated 
4 These thirteen factors have been adopted by Hawaii's Standard 
Committee on Pattern Jury Instructions in Hawai i Stan dard Instru ction 
(HAWJIC) 3.19 Eyewitness Testimony. 
5 HAWJIC 3.19A, Show-Up Identification, reads as follows: 
In  this  case,  in  addition  to  other  eyewitness  
identification  testimony,  you  have  received  evidence  that 
the  defendant  was  identified  by  a  witness  at  a  so-called 
"show-up"  conducted  by  the  police.   While  show-ups  are 
permissible,  they  are  inherently  suggestive  police 
procedures.   In  determining  the  reliability  and  accuracy  of 
(continued...) 
3          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 (Emphasis added.) that  this  instruction  "appropriately  points  out  additional 
factors  that  a  judge  should  consider  including  in  a  jury 
instruction  regarding  the  reliability  of  show-up 
identifications,"  but  had  yet  not  been  required  to  be  considered 
in  evaluating  "reliability  for  admissibility  purposes."   Id.   at 
244-45,  450  P.3d  at  774-75.   After  considering  admissibility 
requirements  in  other  states,  the  supreme  court  prospectively 
held  that  additional  relevant  factors  that  a  jury  must  consider 
in  a  show-up  identification  must  also  be  considered  by  a  trial 
court  in  addressing  the  reliability  and,  therefore,  admissibility 
of  an  impermissibly  suggestive  show-up  identification.   Id.  at 
247,  450  P.3d  at  777. 
The  supreme  court   further  held  that,  prospectively, 
trial  judges  must  also  consider  the  impact  of  suggestive 
procedures  as  a  part  of  the  reliability  evaluation  used  to 
5(...continued) 
an  identification  made  at  a  police  show-up,  you  must 
consider  the  totality  of  the  circumstances  involved  in  the 
show-up,  which  may  include  the  following:  
[Whether  t he  identification  was  the  result  of  a 
suggestive  procedure,  including  actions  taken  or  words 
spoken  by  police  or  anyone  else  to  the  witness  before, 
during,  or  after  the  identification  process;]  
[Whether  the  police  either  indicated  to  the  witness 
that  a  suspect  was  present  in  the  procedure  or  failed  to 
warn  the  witness  that  the  perpetrator  may  or  may  not  be  in 
the  procedure;]  
[Whether  the  defendant  was  required  to  wear 
distinctive  clothing  that  the  perpetrator  allegedly  wore,  or 
was  handcuffed  or  otherwise  appeared  to  be  in  police 
custody ;]  
[Whether  the  witness  was  exposed  to  opinions, 
descriptions,  or  identifications  made  by  other  witnesses,  or 
to  photographs,  news  media,  or  to  any  other  information  that 
may  have  influenced  the  independence  of  the  identification;] 
[Whether  other  participants  in  the  show-up  were 
similar  in  appearance  to  the  defendant;]  
[Whether  the  witness's  identification  was  made  
spontaneously  and  remained  consistent  thereafter;]  
[and  any  other  circumstance  relating  to  the  witness's  
ability  to  make  an  identification.]  
4          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
         
      
         
        
         
           
   
         
        
        
          
        
        
         
       
      
 
        
          
          
          
        
         
       
           
          
           
           determine admissibility. Id. at 248, 450 P.3d at 778. 
Finally, the supreme court noted that "factors 
affecting reliability are not set in stone [and] [r]eliability is 
a totality of the circumstances determination that can encompass 
more than the factors that are included in our standard 
instructions or discussed in this opinion." Id. at 249, 450 P.3d 
at 779 (citation omitted). 
Here, the Circuit Court found and it is undisputed on 
appeal that CW's identification of Jercy was a show-up 
identification and it was impermissibly suggestive. The disputed 
issue is whether the Circuit Court erred in failing to consider 
the relevant HAWJIC 3.19A factors, the impact of the 
suggestiveness of the procedures used in the identification, and 
other relevant factors under the totality of the circumstances of 
the identification in its determination that the identification 
was reliable, notwithstanding that it was impermissibly 
suggestive. 
The Order Denying Motion to Suppress shows the Circuit 
Court considered the factors in HAWJIC 3.19, but not the factors 
in HAWJIC 3.19A. Under the totality of the circumstances here, 
we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in failing to consider 
relevant HAWJIC 3.19A factors, the impact of the suggestiveness 
of the procedures used in the identification, and other relevant 
factors. The entire show-up identification was extraordinarily 
suggestive. CW was strapped to a gurney, wearing a neck brace, 
and attached to other medical equipment in the back of an 
ambulance on the way to Pali Momi Medical Center. The ambulance 
was diverted to a parking lot near the USS Arizona Memorial and 
5
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
   
        
           
           
             
          
             
       
        
         
        
         
       
       
       stopped,  for  the  sole  purpose  of  identifying  Jercy  as  the 
perpetrator  of  the  assault.   With  his  hands  cuffed  behind  his 
back,  his  arm  held  by  a  uniformed  police  officer  wearing  gloves, 
Jercy  was  walked  past  an  open  side  door  of  the  stopped  ambulance 
and  held  (still  handcuffed)  by  the  uniformed  officer  several  feet 
away  from  the  back  of  the  ambulance,  with  other  police  officers 
moving  around  in  the  area.   The  back  ambulance  doors  were  closed, 
but  had  two  windows.   At  least  one  person  (possibly  more)  -
presumably  one  or  more  police  officers  –  can  be  heard  on  the 
audio  of  a  police  bodycam  recording  (that  was  facing  in  through 
the  side  door  of  the  ambulance)  saying,  inter  alia:   Is  that  the 
guy?   Look  out  the  window.   Is  this  the  guy?   Is  that  the  guy?  
Is  that  the  same  person? 
On cross-examination, CW was asked: "Okay. The 
officers at your house, they told you they had the guy who 
attacked you, right?" CW answered, "Yes, they told me they found 
him, but I would identify him before I go to the hospital." One 
of the officers testified that he recalled telling CW that there 
was a suspect and that she needed to go identify him prior to any 
arrest. 
Relevant factors set forth in HAWJIC 3.19A include 
whether the identification was the result of suggestive procedure 
including actions taken or words spoken by police before, during, 
or after the identification process; whether the defendant was 
handcuffed or otherwise appeared to be in police custody; whether 
the witness was exposed to opinions, descriptions, or 
identifications made by other witnesses; other information that 
may have influenced the independence of the identification; 
6
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
        
        
          
         
         
         
       
            
          
        
           
         
           
         
         
          
       
         
        
         
         
        
       
 
        
         
          
        whether the identification was made spontaneously; and any other 
circumstances relating to the witness's ability to make an 
identification. The Circuit Court did not consider any of these 
factors in its findings and conclusions. The Circuit Court 
clearly erred in finding and concluding that CW identified Jercy 
during the field show-up without any prompting. The entire 
procedure was extremely suggestive, beginning with her testimony 
that "they told me that they found him" – with "they" meaning the 
police, to the dramatic diversion of an ambulance headed to the 
emergency room of a hospital, to the stressful identification 
from a gurney in the back of an ambulance prompted with repeated 
uniformed police queries of is that the guy, including the 
extreme suggestiveness that he was in fact the guy because he was 
in handcuffs, and physically restrained by a police officer, with 
multiple officers in the immediate vicinity. The Circuit Court 
clearly erred in its findings and conclusions when it found and 
concluded that the identification was made "without any 
prompting." These are precisely the kind of circumstances that 
warrant trial court examination of the impact of suggestive 
procedures as a part of the reliability evaluation. See 
Kaneaiakala ,
 145 Hawai i at 242, 450 P.3d at 772 (discussing, 
inter alia, that false identifications are more common than 
previously understood and the leading contributing factor in 
wrongful convictions). 
Upon review of all of the evidence adduced concerning 
CW's identification of Jercy, including the evidence relied on by 
the Circuit Court, we conclude based on the totality of the 
circumstances, the Circuit Court clearly erred in failing to 
7
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
         
       
        
        evaluate HAWJIC 3.19A factors and the impact of the suggestive 
procedures in determining that CW's identification was reliable 
and therefore erred in concluding that CW's identification of 
Jercy was "sufficiently reliable" for the purposes of determining 
admissibility. 
Accordingly,  we   vacate  the  Circuit  Court's  July  28, 
2022  Order  Denying  Motion  to  Suppress  and  the  November  21,  2023 
Amended  Judgment.   See,  e.g.,  State  v.  Kong,  77  Hawai i  264,  269, 
883  P.2d  686,  691  (App.  1994).   This  case  is  remanded  to  the 
Circuit  Court  for  further  proceedings  consistent  with  this 
Summary  Disposition  Order. 
DATED:   Honolulu,  Hawai i,  January  30,  2026. 
On  the  briefs: 
Benjamin  E.  Lowenthal, 
Deputy  Public  Defender, 
for  Defendant-Appellant. 
Robert  T.  Nakatsuji, 
Deputy  Prosecuting  Attorney, 
City  &  County  of  Honolulu, 
for  Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Presiding  Judge 
/s/  Keith  K.  Hiraoka 
Associate  Judge 
/s/  Clyde  J.  Wadsworth 
Associate  Judge  
8
 