NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001051
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
RNM, Petitioner-Appellee,
v.
 
JMKK, Respondent-Appellant
and
 
CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT AGENCY,
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-P NO. 13-1-6166)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant JMKK (Mother) appeals from the
 
Order denying her July 11, 2014 Motion for Relief After Judgment
 
or Order and Declaration (Motion to Relocate), entered on July
 
1
15, 2014 in the Family Court of the First Circuit  (family
 
court
).
 
On appeal, Mother contends the family court erred in:

 
(1) denying the motion to relocate with prejudice;
 (2) making its Finding of Fact (FOF) 8;
 
(3) concluding there was not a material change of
 
circumstances in Conclusion of Law (COL) 9;
 
(4) concluding Mother was bound to the June 5, 2014
 
Stipulation regarding relocation;
 
(5) concluding Child Support Enforcement Agency v. MS­
1
 The Honorable Patricia C. Aburano presided unless otherwise noted.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
M, No. CAAP-11-0000387 (App. Sept. 20, 2013)(SDO) did not apply;
 
and
 
(6) concluding there was not a material change of
 
circumstances in COL 11.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On May 3, 2013, Petitioner-Appellee RNM (Father) filed
 
a paternity action to establish legal parentage for his child
 with Mother. On June 5, 2014, the parties entered into a
 stipulation (June 5, 2014 Stipulation) regarding Father's
 
petition for paternity. The parties agreed to joint legal
 
custody of their child. Sole physical custody of the child was
 awarded to Mother, subject to Father's visitation rights. Father
 agreed to pay child support to Mother, including past due child
 support. The June 5, 2014 Stipulation stated, "Neither party
 shall relocate with the Child without agreement of the parties or
 further order of the Court."
 
On June 12, 2014, the Honorable Gale L.F. Ching entered
 
an order granting Father's Motion for Relief After Judgment or
 Order, taking under advisement Father's request for the child's
 last name to change and for adjustments to the visitation
 schedule on specific dates and times. On July 3, 2014, Mother
 filed a "Motion to Reconsider Judge Gale L.F. Ching's June 12,
 2014 Order and Decision on the Motion for Relief After Judgment
 or Order Filed June 10, 2014."
 
On July 11, 2014, Mother filed her Motion to Relocate
 
requesting the family court allow her to relocate to Oklahoma
 with the child. In support of her motion, Mother described what
 she believed to be a material change in circumstances:
 
8.	 As of Tuesday, July 1, 2014, [Mother's] father
is retired from the City and County of HonoluluFire Department with 25 years of service. Said retirement is in addition to [Mother's] fatheralso being retired from the State of Hawai' i Air 
National Guard with 21 years of service. In light of such, [Mother's] immediate family("[Mother's] family") wants to relocate to theState of Oklahoma where the cost of living ismuch more affordable. 
9.	 [Mother's] family has recently secured a place
of residence in the City of Norman, Oklahoma.
 
. . . .
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
12.	 Due to prior abuse by [Father], the lengthy
duration of the case, and caring for the Child
full-time; [Mother] was unable to apply to any
graduate school programs in a timely manner. In
 light of such, [Mother] was offered a special
admission opportunity as a graduate student at
the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center [(OUHSC)], to begin classes on Monday,
August 18, 2014, as long as she completes and
turns-in the required enrollment form by Monday,
August 11, 2014.
 
(Emphasis and exhibits omitted.) The hearing on the motion took
 
place on July 15, 2014. The family court entered the order on
 the same day, finding Mother had failed to demonstrate that there
 had been a material change in circumstances.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A. Family Court Decisions
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide
discretion in making its decisions and those decisions
will not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse
 of discretion. Thus, [an appellate court] will not
disturb the family court's decisions on appeal unless
the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a
party litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the
bounds of reason.
 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(quoting In re Doe, 95 Hawai 'i 183, 189-90, 20 P.3d 616, 622-23 
(2001)).
B. Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
 
A family court's FOFs are reviewed under the "clearly
 
erroneous" standard. Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360. 
A family court's COLs, however, are reviewed de novo.  Id. 
(citing In re Doe, 95 Hawai 'i at 190, 20 P.3d at 623). In cases 
in which a family court determines issues of mixed questions of
 
law and fact, including determinations "of what is or is not in a
 child's best interests," the issue is reviewed on appeal for
 clear error. In re Doe, 95 Hawai
'i at 190, 20 P.3d at 623. A 
finding of fact is clearly erroneous when:
 
(1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support
the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in
support of the finding, the appellate court is
nonetheless left with a definite and firm conviction
 that a mistake has been made. "Substantial evidence"
 is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality
and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
caution to support a conclusion.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360 (quoting In re Doe, 95 
Hawai'i at 190, 20 P.3d at 623).
III. DISCUSSION
 
Mother argues that the circuit court erred in
 
concluding that her plans to relocate to Oklahoma were not a
 
material change in circumstance sufficient to warrant a change in
 the custody arrangement.
2
 
At the hearing on Mother's Motion to Relocate, the
 
family court questioned Mother on the timing of her motion.
 
THE COURT: . . . . I know you say here, as of July 1,
2014, that your father retired from the

fire department after 25 years.
 
[MOTHER]:	 Yes.
 
THE COURT:	 -- of service.

 
[MOTHER]:	 Yes.
 
THE COURT:	 And so was he–-you know, when did he
contemplate going up to Oklahoma and
relocating?
 
[MOTHER]:	 It was in the beginning of June when we
were notified by our landlord that our
house -- we weren't going to be renewed a lease -­
THE COURT: Okay. 
[MOTHER]: -- for that. So he had to think of other options, because he had just turned in hisretirement papers. 
THE COURT: I see. 
[MOTHER]: And there's only so much of a grace periodbefore you can rescind it, and it just missed it.And in the midst of all that, he had to quicklylook for someplace. 
2
 Mother's third point of error on appeal challenges the family
court's finding: "The [family court] denied [Mother's Motion to Relocate] as
the circumstances had not changed between June and July 2014, and the [family
court] deemed [Mother] to be bound by the June 5, 2014 Stipulation signed by
both parties and which specifically addressed the issue of relocation."
 
Mother's fifth point of error on appeal argues that an unpublished
decision from this court relating to material change in circumstances should
have guided the family court's decision.
 
Mother's sixth point of error on appeal disputes COL 11, which
states: "[Mother] has failed to demonstrate a material change in circumstances
since the June 5, 2014 Stipulation."
 
Mother's third, fifth, and sixth points of error on appeal are
related to the question of whether Mother's relocation was a material change
in circumstance. Therefore, we address these points of error together.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . . 
THE COURT: In early June, your father was
contemplating the move to Oklahoma? 
[MOTHER]: Yes. 
THE COURT: And that -- that triggered, I guess -­around that time period, in early June,you were also contemplating maybe goingoff to Oklahoma to study -­
[MOTHER]: Yes. 
THE COURT: -- for this health services course of study; correct? 
[Mother]: Yes, yes. 
At the conclusion of the hearing, the family court held:
 
Based -- looking at the records and files and taking
into consideration the testimony of [Mother],
representations of counsel, the [family court] finds
that there is not a sufficient showing to demonstrate
a material change in circumstances.
 
The [family court] is basing this primarily on
the fact that it-–it was an issue that should have
 been raised sooner, during the times when these issues
regarding custody were the subject of stipulation that
was filed on June 5th, 2014, that states joint legal,
sole physical to Mother, with a visitation schedule,
and a specific provision that there was to be no
relocation without the parties' agreement or Court
order.
 
Generally, a party seeking an amendment to a custody
 
determination is required to demonstrate that there has been a
 
material change in circumstances. In re Guardianship of Doe, 93
 
Hawai'i 374, 4 P.3d 508 (App. 2000) (applying the material change 
of circumstances standard to a request for modification to a
 custody order); Nadeau v. Nadeau, 10 Haw. App. 111, 861 P.2d 754
 (1993) (considering whether relocation was a material change in
 circumstances). 
In Nadeau, the parties entered a divorce decree
 
awarding the mother legal and physical custody of the child and
 awarded the father Wednesday overnight and alternate weekend
 visitation. Nadeau, 10 Haw. App. at 113, 861 P.2d at 756. The
 
decree stated:
 
(e) While the parties are living in the same
geographical area, each party may remove said child
for his/her thirty (30) days annual leave;
 
(f) Should the parties live too far apart for Father
to receive the above-ordered visitation, Father shall
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
be entitled to visitation for two and one-half (2½)
months out of the summer and alternate Spring and
Christmas vacations, plus whatever leave time he can
spend in Mother's geographical area. The parties
shall divide the cost of transportation. 
Id. (brackets omitted).   The mother sought a modification of the
 
custody order because the father was moving to the continental
 
United States. Id. at 114, 861 P.2d at 756. This court held,
 
In 1989 the family court knew that both Father and
Mother would each be ordered to different duty
stations within the following three years and
reasonably entered an order providing for that future
occurrence. If either party believed that the family
court reversibly erred, their option was to appeal.
The relocations in 1991 were not material changes in
circumstances.
 
Id. at 119-20, 861 P.2d at 758-59. 
Here, the possibility of relocation was contemplated in
 
the June 5, 2014 Stipulation: "7. Relocation with Child. Neither
 
party shall relocate with the Child without agreement of the
 
parties or further order of the Court."
 
Mother was required to show that there had been a
 
material change in circumstances, and that a change in custody is
 in the best interest of the child between the June 5, 2014
 Stipulation and the time she filed her Motion to Relocate. See
 
Nadeau, 10 Haw. App. at 121, 861 P.2d at 759.
 
The family court held that there was not a material
 
change in circumstances because Mother should have raised the
 possibility of her relocation before the June 5, 2014 Stipulation
 was entered. Mother's testimony indicated that at earliest, she
 was aware of the possibility of relocation in early June.
 Nothing in the record suggests that Mother had begun to make firm
 plans to relocate before the June 5, 2014 Stipulation. Father's
 recitation of the facts concede that Mother made plans to
 relocate after the June 5, 2014 Stipulation was entered. While
 Mother may have begun to research the OUHSC program before the
 stipulation, she received a detailed explanation of the
 application process on June 6, 2015 after the stipulation had
 been entered. Mother received an acceptance of her application
 for admission to OUHSC on June 17, 2014.
 
The family court's holding that Mother had not
 
demonstrated a material change in circumstances because she
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
should have raised the issue earlier is a misapplication of the
 
"material change in circumstances" doctrine. The family court
 erroneously held that because the June 5, 2014 Stipulation
 addressed relocation, future requests for modification based on
 relocation should have been addressed prior to the Stipulation.
 However, unlike the divorce decree in Nadeau, the June 5, 2014
 Stipulation did not contemplate imminent relocation of either or
 both parties, but did allow for the possibility of relocation
 under either a mutual agreement or a court order. Mother
 properly used the process allowed by the June 5, 2014 Stipulation
 by seeking a court order. We hold that Mother has made a
 sufficient showing of a material change in circumstances between
 the June 5, 2014 Stipulation and her Motion to Relocate, and
 remand this case to the family court to determine whether the
 change in custody is in the best interests of the child. Nadeau,
 
10 Haw. App. at 121, 861 P.2d at 759. 
Because we vacate and remand, we need not address
 
Mother's remaining points of error on appeal.
 
The Order denying JMKK's Motion for Relief After
 
Judgment or Order and Declaration, entered on July 15, 2014 in
 the Family Court of the First Circuit, is vacated and this case
 is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this
 Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 12, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Dominique Tansley
for Respondent-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Elsa F.M. McGehee

 
Amanda O. Jenssen
 
(Hartley & McGehee)
for Petitioner-Appellee.
 
7

 