NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-000637
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE SHARON M.Y. YOUNG
 
REVOCABLE LIVING TRUST AGREEMENT DATED APRIL 28, 1995
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. T-05-1-0001)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Mark WS Young (Young), a
 
beneficiary of the Sharon M.Y. Young Revocable Living Trust
 
Agreement dated April 28, 1995 (Trust), appeals pro se from two
 
August 1, 2011 judgments entered by the Circuit Court of the
 
First Circuit (Circuit Court),1
 the Judgment on Order Denying
Beneficiary Mark W.S. Young's Petition to Remove Trustee and the
 Judgment on Order Granting Remainder of Trustee's Petition for
 Instructions. On this appeal, Young also challenges: the
 Circuit Court's December 2, 2008 Order Denying Beneficiary Mark
 WS Young's Petition to Remove Trustee;
2
 the Circuit Court's
November 10, 2010 Order Granting Remainder of Trustee's Petition
 for Instructions; the Report of the Master Concerning Beneficiary
 Mark WS Young's Petition to Remove Trustee, filed on February 29,
 2008; the Supplemental Report of the Master Concerning
 Beneficiary Mark WS Young's Petition to Remove Trustee, filed on
 
1
 The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presiding, except as otherwise
indicated.
 
2
 The Honorable Colleen K. Hirai presiding.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
May 5, 2008; and two November 10, 2010 judgments which were
 
entered by the Circuit Court, but which failed to contain the
 findings necessary to establish appellate jurisdiction.
 
On appeal, Young principally contends that the Circuit 
Court erred when it declined to remove James Francis Vrechek (Vrechek or Trustee) as the Trustee of the Trust. Young raises 
the following points of error: (1) the Circuit Court improperly 
determined that Vrechek was honest and trustworthy enough to be a trustee; (2) the Circuit Court failed to apply existing Hawai
'i 
law on trustee removal; (3) the Master appointed by the Circuit Court had a conflict of interest because he represents trustees and he is using his master position to lobby for new law to make it harder to remove a trustee; (4) the Master failed to adequately investigate the Trustee's accountings, including that he failed to investigate whether the Trustee embezzled $49,000 from the Trust; and (5) the Circuit Court improperly adopted the Master's report, which did not support removal of the Trustee. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced, applicable authorities, and the issues
 raised by the parties, we resolve Young's points of error as
 follows:
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has adopted the following 
standard with respect to our review of the Circuit Court's denial of Young's request to remove the Trustee: 
The power of a court of equity to remove a trustee is
a discretionary power and its exercise will not be disturbed
on appeal unless the discretion has been abused. . . . The
 question primarily before us in this case is not whether
this court would remove the trustees for these causes, if
the trustees were on trial here; but it is whether the trial
court, in refusing to remove them for these causes, did or
did not wisely exercise the discretion which the law
empowers it to exercise in such cases. . . . Whether a
 trustee should or should not be removed is a question
addressed to the sound discretion of the court, and is
dependent upon the circumstances of each particular case. .
. . A court of equity may and will remove a trustee who has
been guilty of some breach of trust or violation of duty. 
The exercise of this function by a court of equity belongs
to what is called its sound judicial discretion and is not
controlled by positive rules except that the discretion must
not be abused.
 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In re Holt's Trust Estate, 33 Haw. 352, 356-57 (1935) (citations
 
and internal quotation marks omitted; emphasis in original).
 
We reject Young's argument that the Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion when it refused to remove Vrechek as
 trustee of the Trust because he had used the designation "CPA" on
 his letterhead during the time period during which Vrechek had
 prepared tax returns for Young's mother, and/or because, in 1976,
 Vrechek had been held jointly and severally liable for a (long-
since satisfied) judgment for certain taxes owed by a business
 Vrechek had worked for as the controller.
 
Young has cited no evidence in the record supporting
 
his suggestion that Trust funds were embezzled and/or otherwise
 missing, and therefore the Trustee should be removed; we find
 none.
3 Young's contention that the Trustee should be removed
 
based on the Trustee's counsel's initial response to a request
 for inspection of "all trust records" is meritless.
 
Young does not point to where in the record he objected 
to the appointment of the Master, or sought the removal of the Master, based on the alleged conflict of interest. Moreover, Young's contention that the Master's citation to non-Hawai
'i case 
law, in light of the Master's representation of the trustees of Bishop Estate/Kamehameha Schools and other trustees in other cases, evidenced an improper attempt to benefit the Master's other clients and/or created an appearance of impropriety, is without merit. Young otherwise fails to support his contention that the Circuit Court abused its discretion when it adopted the Master's recommendation that the Trustee need not be removed. 
3
 No issues were raised on this appeal concerning the approval of
the Trust's accounts, if any such orders have been entered.
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's August 1, 2011 
judgments are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 25, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Mark WS Young 
Petitioner-Appellant Pro Se
 Presiding Judge
Jerry A. Ruthruff
for Trustee JAMES FRANCIS 
VRECHEK, Appellee
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
4 