NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000092 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I 
JOHN THATCHER, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
HAWAII STATE PUBLIC CHARTER SCHOOL COMMISSION;
THOMAS HUTTON, INDIVIDUALLY AND IN HIS OFFICIAL
CAPACITY AS EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE HAWAII STATE 
PUBLIC CHARTER SCHOOL COMMISSION, Defendants-Appellees
and 
DOE PERSONS 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; ROE "NON-PROFIT"
CORPORATIONS 1-10; AND ROE GOVERNMENTAL
ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-1583) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant John Thatcher (Thatcher), Director 
of Connections Public Charter School (Connections), appeals from 
the "Order Granting Defendants Hawaii State Public Charter School 
Commission's and Thomas Hutton's, Individually and in His Official Capacity as Executive Director of the Hawaii State Public Charter School Commission, Motion for Summary Judgment" (Order Granting MSJ), "Final Judgment," and "Notice of Entry of  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Final Judgment," all entered on February 1, 2017, by the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 
Thatcher commenced a lawsuit against 
Defendants-Appellees Hawaii State Public Charter School Commission (Commission) and former Executive Director, Thomas 
Hutton (Hutton), for alleged violations of Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) chapter 92 (Sunshine Law). The Commission and 
Hutton moved for and were granted summary judgment on the basis 
that there was an open meeting after which Connections requested a written decision and the Commission's issuance of that written decision was an adjudicatory function exempt from the Sunshine Law.
2 
On appeal Thatcher contends the Circuit Court: (1) 
"clearly erred" in finding that there was an open meeting, a decision was made in March 2015, Connections requested a written decision per the terms of the State Public Charter School Contract between the Commission and Connections (Charter 
Contract), and the individual Defendants were acting as 
Commission board members; and (2) was wrong as a matter of law to 
conclude that the issuance of the written decision was an adjudicatory function under the terms of the contract, not subject to open meeting requirements under HRS § 92-6(a)(2), and limited to Connections' specific request for a final decision. 
This case concerns Connections' use of a Department of 
Education (DOE) form for enrollment in public schools as its 
1 The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided. 
2 See HRS § 92-6 (2012), providing, in part: 
§92-6 Judicial branch, quasi-judicial boards and
investigatory functions; applicability.  (a) This part shall
not apply:
.... 
(2) To adjudicatory functions exercised by a board
and governed by sections 91-8 and 91-9, orauthorized by other sections of the HawaiiRevised Statutes. 
(Emphases added.) 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
application form. The Commission determined that the enrollment 
form included discriminatory questions inappropriate at the application stage that would violate Hawai# i law.
3 
For the reasons that follow, we resolve Thatcher's 
assertions of error and affirm. 
(1) In his first assertion of error, Thatcher argues 
that the Circuit Court was "clearly erroneous" in finding (at the summary judgment hearing)
4 that: 
(a) "There was an open meeting. A decision was made in 
March. After that open meeting, Connections requested a written decision pursuant to the terms of the contract." 
(b) "the individual Defendants were acting as Board 
members[.]" 
We first note that the clearly erroneous standard does 
not apply. Rather, because we are reviewing the Circuit Court's summary judgment ruling in favor of the Commission and Hutton, we review de novo based on the applicable summary judgment standard. 
Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawai# i 46, 55, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285 (2013) 
(citing First Ins. Co. of Hawai# i v. A & B Props., Inc., 126 
Hawai#i 406, 413, 271 P.3d 1165, 1172 (2012)). 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions onfile, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
3 The Commission determined the questions in the DOE enrollment form
were inappropriate at the application stage because they can be used todiscriminate against applicants where, unlike DOE public schools, publiccharter schools are not required to accept all students that apply. 
4 Contrary to Thatcher's characterization of the Circuit Court's
actions, the Circuit Court did not issue findings of fact. Instead, afterargument by the parties, the Circuit Court verbally granted the Commission'smotion for summary judgment, stating at the hearing: 
. . . For the reasons just stated by Mr. Kuwabe, the Court
grants the motion.
There was an open meeting. A decision was made in March. 
After that open meeting, Connections requested a written decisionpursuant to the terms of the contract. The issuance of thatwritten decision was an adjudicatory function. It was pursuant tothe terms of the contract. It is not subject to the open meetingspursuant to 92-6(a)(2). It's an adjudicatory function exercised bythe board and it was a decision limited to the specificapplication being made by Connections. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Afact is material if proof of that fact would have the effectof establishing or refuting one of the essential elements ofa cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. Theevidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to thenon-moving party. In other words, we must view all of theevidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light mostfavorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Id. at 55-56, 292 P.3d at 1285-86 (citation and brackets 
omitted). 
Further, the following burden-shifting paradigm 
applies: 
The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue asto all material facts, which, under applicable principles ofsubstantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment as amatter of law. This burden has two components. 
First, the moving party has the burden of producing support
for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material factexists with respect to the essential elements of the claimor defense which the motion seeks to establish or which the motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed facts, itis entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. Onlywhen the moving party satisfies its initial burden ofproduction does the burden shift to the nonmoving party torespond to the motion for summary judgment and demonstratespecific facts, as opposed to general allegations, thatpresent a genuine issue worthy of trial. 
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion. This burden always remains with the moving partyand requires the moving party to convince the court that nogenuine issue of material fact exists and that the movingparty is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. 
Id. at 56–57, 292 P.3d at 1286–87 (quoting French v. Hawaii Pizza 
Hut, Inc., 105 Hawai# i 462, 470, 99 P.3d 1046, 1054 (2004)).
(a) The crux of Thatcher's first argument is that the 
Circuit Court overextended the application of the Sunshine Law's exemption for adjudicatory functions, and that the Commission andHutton instead engaged in unlawful rulemaking that was contrary to the spirit of the Sunshine Law.  
The Sunshine Law is based on a policy 
"that the formation and conduct of public policy—the
discussions, deliberations, decisions, and action ofgovernmental agencies—shall be conducted as openly aspossible." HRS § 92-1. The Sunshine Law implementsthis policy by establishing the presumption that allgovernment board meetings will be open to the public. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
See HRS § 92-3 ("Every meeting of all boards shall be
open to the public and all persons shall be permittedto attend any meeting unless otherwise provided in theconstitution or as closed pursuant to sections 92-4and 92-5."). 
Civ. Beat L. Ctr. for the Pub. Int., Inc. v. City and Cnty. of 
Honolulu, 144 Hawai# i 466, 476, 445 P.3d 47, 57 (2019). The 
Sunshine Law reflects the Legislature's concern with balancing public access to board meetings and the board's continued ability to effectively conduct its business. H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 889, in 1985 House Journal, at 1424. 
As noted above, HRS § 92-6 provides that a board is 
exempt from the Sunshine Law when exercising its adjudicatory functions pursuant to sections of HRS chapter 91 or as authorized
 
by other Hawai# i statutes. Under HRS § 302D-5 (Supp. 2014),5 
which governs public charter schools, the Commission is responsible for, among other things, "[m]onitoring, in accordance 
5 HRS § 302D-5 provides, in relevant part: 
§302D-5 Authorizer powers, duties, and liabilities . 
(a) Authorizers are responsible for executing the following
essential powers and duties:
(1) Soliciting and evaluating charter applications;
(2) Approving quality charter applications that meetidentified educational needs and promote adiversity of educational choices;
(3) Declining to approve weak or inadequate charterapplications;
(4) Negotiating and executing sound chartercontracts with each approved charter applicantand with existing public charter schools;
(5) Monitoring, in accordance with charter contractterms, the performance and legal compliance ofpublic charter schools; and
(6) Determining whether each charter contract meritsrenewal, nonrenewal, or revocation.
(b) An authorizer shall: 
.... (2) Be responsible for and ensure the compliance ofa public charter school it authorizes with allapplicable state and federal laws, includingreporting requirements; 
.... (c) An authorizer shall have the power to make and
execute contracts and all other instruments necessary orconvenient for the exercise of its duties and functions under this chapter. 
(Emphases added.) 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with charter contract terms, the performance and legal compliance 
of public charter schools[,]" and "[d]etermining whether each charter contract merits renewal, nonrenewal, or revocation[,]" and shall "[b]e responsible for and ensure the compliance of a public charter school it authorizes with all applicable state and federal laws[.]" In turn, pursuant to the applicable Charter Contract, Connections "shall comply with its admission policies and procedures as approved by the Commission." 
Under the Charter Contract, Connections is also 
obligated to: 
make all student recruitment, admissions, enrollment,
and retention decisions in a nondiscriminatory mannerand without regard to race, color, ethnicity, nationalorigin, religion, sex, sexual orientation, maritalstatus, income level, academic or athletic ability,disability, need for special education services, orlack of proficiency in the English language. 
Here, although Thatcher disputes that there was an open 
meeting, the Commission and Hutton submitted evidence 
establishing an open meeting and Thatcher failed to submit contrary evidence. In support of the motion for summary judgment (MSJ), Hutton submitted a declaration attaching the Notice of 
Meeting for the open meeting on February 26, 2015 (February
Meeting) held by the Commission's Performance and Accountability 
Committee (Committee). He also submitted minutes from the 
February Meeting during which the Committee discussed and 
conditionally approved Connections' admissions policy upon modification of the DOE SIS-10W, the DOE enrollment form at issue in this case. Hutton's declaration also attached a General Business Meeting Notice of Meeting for the March 12, 2015 open meeting (March Meeting) held by the Commission, a Recommendation 
Sheet from Hutton to the Commission recommending conditional 
approval of Connections' admissions policy, "provided the school uses a modified version of the DOE Enrollment form as its application form[,]" and minutes from the March Meeting noting that the Commission had unanimously passed the recommendation from the February Meeting and the Recommendation Sheet. 
6  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Consequently, for purposes of admissions, Connections was 
required to remove from the DOE SIS-10W enrollment form questions regarding McKinney-Vento eligibility,
6 ethnicity, gender, and 
language spoken by an applicant. 
The uncontested evidence further establishes that after 
the open meeting in March 2015, Thatcher requested a final decision on the use of the DOE enrollment form, pursuant to the Charter Contract. Hutton's declaration attached a letter from Thatcher to Hutton, dated March 13, 2015, the day after the Commission conditionally approved Connections' admissions policy, which stated: 
Pursuant to section 14.7 of our Contract, Connections PCS
claims that a dispute between the Commission and ConnectionsPCS has arisen under and by virtue of this Contract. It hasnot been resolved by mutual agreement. Connections PCS isofficially requesting a final decision concerning our use ofthe DOE enrollment form with a no discrimination disclaimer within 90 calendar days as provided for in Section 14.5 ofthe Contract. 
(Emphasis added.) Hutton's declaration also attached a 
subsequent letter dated April 6, 2015, from Thatcher to the Commission, again requesting a final decision pursuant to section 14.5 of the Charter Contract. Section 14.5 provides, in pertinent part: 
Any disputes between the Commission and the School
which arise under, or are by virtue of, this Contractand which are not resolved by mutual agreement, shallbe decided by the full Commission in writing, within90 calendar days after a written request by the Schoolfor a final decision concerning the dispute[.] 
Hutton also submitted a letter he wrote informing Thatcher that 
although the Commission would not be placing the matter on the agenda for another public meeting, prior to issuing a written decision, the Commission would give Thatcher an opportunity to 
6 The purpose of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act of 1987,
reauthorized in 2002 as part of the No Child Left Behind Act, is to "ensure
that each child of a homeless individual and each homeless youth has equalaccess to the same free, appropriate public education, including a publicpreschool education, as provided to other children and youths." Nat'l L. Ctr. 
on Homelessness & Poverty, R.I. v. New York, 224 F.R.D. 314, 318 (E.D. N.Y.2004) (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 11431 (2004)). 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
submit a further written statement no later than May 11, 2015. 
Thatcher responded with a letter to the Commission stating his concern that the matter should be placed on a Commission agenda for another public meeting. 
Catherine Payne (Payne), chairperson of the Commission, 
submitted a declaration attached to the MSJ, which stated that on May 14, 2015, the Commission, during a closed mid-day break from its general meeting, reviewed Thatcher's request for a final decision.
7 The Commission issued the Final Written Decision the 
following day, which "affirm[ed] in writing its decision of March 12, 2015, conditionally approving Connections' admissions policy and practices, provided that the school agree to use as its application form a modified version of the DOE [SIS-10W] enrollment form."
8 
Given the uncontested evidence, there is no genuine 
issue of material fact that there was an open meeting, a decision was made in March 2015, and Thatcher requested a Final Written Decision pursuant to the Charter Contract. Thus, the Circuit Court did not err in this regard.
(b) Thatcher also contends that the Circuit 
7 In particular, Payne stated that the Commission reviewed the
following in its closed meeting: 
The Commission's prior deliberations on Connections' application
form;
The submittals, i.e., the Recommendation Sheets for the meetings
of both the full Commission and the Committee on Performance and 
Accountability;The correspondence between Mr. Thatcher and the Commission onConnections' application form; andThe Commission's prior consultation with its Deputy AttorneyGeneral regarding Connections' application form. 
8 Thatcher also asserts that the Commission intentionally violated the
Sunshine Law by "already [making] a decision, in private email communications[that occurred prior to the Final Written Decision]." Thatcher appears toargue that these communications should have occurred publicly pursuant to the"public notice and testimony requirements of [HRS] Chapters 91 and 92[.]"However, the email correspondence Thatcher references occurred prior to theFinal Written Decision and was pertinent to addressing Thatcher's request for
a final decision. Given our conclusion infra that the Circuit Court properly
determined the Commission's decision was an adjudicatory function, this
argument is without merit. 
8  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court was clearly erroneous "in finding that the individual 
Defendants were acting as Board members[.]"9 Thatcher fails to 
clearly cite where in the record this alleged error occurred or present a clear argument. However, we address his contention to the extent we can discern it. See Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 
Hawai#i 490, 496, 280 P.3d 88, 94 (2012). At best, it appears 
Thatcher is referring to the Circuit Court's conclusion at the summary judgment hearing that "the board" exercised its adjudicatory function when it made its decision regarding Connections' application form. We interpret Thatcher's point of error as an attempt to discredit the Commissioners' status as board members to invalidate the Final Written Decision. 
However, 
the only individual defendant named in this case is Hutton, who is the former Executive Director of the Commission, not a Commissioner. Therefore, this argument is without merit.
(2) In his second point of error, Thatcher contends the 
Circuit Court was wrong as a matter of law to conclude at the summary judgment hearing that: 
[t]he issuance of that written decision was an
adjudicatory function. It was pursuant to the termsof the contract. It is not subject to the openmeetings pursuant to 92-6(a)(2). It's an adjudicatoryfunction exercised by the board and it was a decisionlimited to the specific application being made byConnections. 
As noted above, we will review the Circuit Court's summary 
judgment ruling de novo. 
Thatcher asserts that the Commission and Hutton engaged 
in unlawful rulemaking without a public hearing pursuant to HRS chapter 91, the Hawai# i Administrative Procedures Act. We thus 
address whether the Commission's issuance of the Final Written Decision was rulemaking or adjudication. 
"Hawai#i appellate courts have typically discussed the 
meaning of the general definition of 'rule' in cases where there is a question of whether the agency action is legislative or 
9 As noted above, the Circuit Court did not issue findings of fact. 
9  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adjudicative." Green Party of Hawaii v. Nago, 138 Hawai# i 228, 
237-38, 378 P.3d 944, 953-54 (2016) (citations omitted). 
Rulemaking is the process by which an agency lays down
new prescriptions to govern the future conduct ofthose subject to its authority; adjudication is theprocess by which the agency applies either law orpolicy, or both, to the facts of a particular case.Rulemaking is essentially legislative in nature, notonly because it operates in the future, but alsobecause it is concerned largely with considerations ofpolicy. Adjudication, conversely, is concerned withthe determination of past and present rights andliabilities. Typically, there is involved adetermination as to whether past conduct was unlawful,so that the proceeding is characterized by anaccusatory flavor and may result in disciplinaryaction. 
Shoreline Transp., Inc. v. Robert's Tours and Transp., Inc., 70 
Haw. 585, 591, 779 P.2d 868, 872 (1989) (emphasis added) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted) (format altered). 
We agree with the Circuit Court's determination that 
the Commission's issuance of the Final Written Decision was an adjudication, not rulemaking, and is thus exempt from the Sunshine Law. First, Thatcher framed his disagreement with the Commission's decision as a "dispute" between the Commission and Connections that arose under the Charter Contract, evidenced by the letter he wrote to the Commission requesting a final decision pursuant to section 14.5 of the Charter Contract. Thatcher reiterated this point in his letter to the Office of Information Practices, which he attached to his declaration in opposition to the MSJ. This discredits Thatcher's argument that the Commission's Final Written Decision embodied a policy change. Second, the Commission's Final Written Decision addressed Connections' specific use of the DOE SIS-10W enrollment form in its application process, as the Commission is responsible for ensuring that all charter schools comply with state and federal laws.
10 HRS § 302D-5. Third, Connections' failure to comply 
10 The Final Written Decision expressly noted that Connections could
obtain "[t]he desired information . . . during the post-admission enrollment
(continued...)  
10 10(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with the Commission's directive in the Final Written Decision 
would render Connections in violation of the Charter Contract, and subject to disciplinary action. 
In issuing the Final Written Decision, the Commission 
essentially applied law or policy, or both, to the facts of this particular case, which is an adjudicative function. Shoreline 
Transp., 70 Haw. at 591, 779 P.2d at 872. Furthermore, the Performance and Accountability Committee, through the Recommendation Sheet, advised that Connections' failure to modify the DOE SIS-10W enrollment form would subject the school to disciplinary action pursuant to the Charter Contract. See id. 
("Typically, there is involved a determination [in adjudication] as to whether past conduct was unlawful, so that the proceeding is characterized by an accusatory flavor and may result in disciplinary action.") (citation omitted). The circumstances which led to the Commission's Final Written Decision clearly reflect that the Commission was exercising its adjudicatory function regarding Connections' use of the DOE SIS-10W enrollment form in its application process. Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in determining that the Commission's Final Written Decision constituted an adjudicatory function exempt from the Sunshine Law. 
Finally, the record does not support Thatcher's 
contention that the Circuit Court ignored the Commission's alleged bias against him. "Administrators serving as adjudicators are presumed to be unbiased. The presumption can be rebutted by a showing of disqualifying interest, either pecuniary or both[.] But the burden of establishing a disqualifying interest rests on the party making the assertion." Sifagaloa v. 
Bd. of Trs. of Emps'. Ret. Sys. of State of Hawaii, 74 Haw. 181, 192, 840 P.2d 367, 372 (1992) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted) (format altered). Thatcher asserts that the 
phase.
" (Emphasis added.) 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Commissioners' comments in email correspondence, which were 
attached to his declaration, evidenced a lack of impartiality, for example: "Wow so much work for one problem child[;]" "Talked to Mitch about some of our fun. He may be enough to take care of Thatcher all by himself[;]" and Hutton characterized Thatcher's email as "fan mail." In our view, these comments — though sarcastic and unnecessary — do not evidence a disqualifying interest, or a "direct, personal, pecuniary interest" in the Commissioners' decision. Id. at 192, 840 P.2d at 372 (citation 
omitted). Moreover, the Final Written Decision does not reflect a failure to be impartial or unbiased towards Thatcher. Thus, Thatcher fails to overcome the presumption that the Commissioners were not biased. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order 
Granting Defendants Hawaii State Public Charter School Commission's and Thomas Hutton's, Individually and in His Official Capacity as Executive Director of the Hawaii State Public Charter School Commission, Motion for Summary Judgment," the "Final Judgment," and "Notice of Entry of Final Judgment," entered on February 1, 2017, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 18, 2023. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge
12 Ted H.S. Hong,for Plaintiff-Appellant 
Kunio Kuwabe,
Holly T. Shikada, Deputy Attorneys General, for Defendants-Appellees 