NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000819
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
KRISHNA NARAYAN; SHERRIE NARAYAN; VIRENDRA NATH;
NANCY MAKOWSKI; KEITH MACDONALD AS CO-TRUSTEE FOR THE DKM
TRUST DATED OCTOBER 7, 2011; SIMON YOO; SUMIYO SAKAGUCHI;
SUSAN RENTON, AS TRUSTEE FOR THE RENTON FAMILY TRUST
DATED 12/3/09; STEPHEN XIANG PANG; FAYE WU LIU;
MASSY MEHDIPOUR AS TRUSTEE FOR MASSY MEHDIPOUR
 
TRUST DATED JUNE 21, 2006; G. NICHOLAS SMITH;
TRISTINE SMITH; RITZ 1303 RE, LLC, A COLORADO LIMITED
LIABILITY COMPANY; AND BRADLEY CHAFFEE AS TRUSTEE OF
THE CHARLES V. CHAFFEE BRC STOCK TRUST DATED 12/1/99 AND
THE CLIFFORD W. CHAFFEE BRC STOCK TRUST DATED 1/4/98,
Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
 
THE RITZ-CARLTON DEVELOPMENT COMPANY, INC.;
THE RITZ-CARLTON MANAGEMENT COMPANY, LLC;
JOHN ALBERT; EDGAR GUM,
Defendants-Appellants,
 
MARRIOTT INTERNATIONAL, INC.; MAUI LAND & PINEAPPLE CO.,
INC.; EXCLUSIVE RESORTS, LLC; KAPALUA BAY, LLC;
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS OF KAPALUA BAY CONDOMINIUM;
CAROLINE PETERS BELSOM; CATHY ROSS; ROBERT PARSONS; RYAN
CHURCHILL; AND JOHN DOES 1-10,
Defendants-Appellees 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0586(3))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
  
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants The Ritz-Carlton Development
 
Company, Inc.; The Ritz-Carlton Management Company, LLC; John
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Albert; and Edgar Gum (Defendants) appeal from the August 28,
 
2012 "Order Denying Defendants The Ritz-Carlton Development
 
Company, Inc., The Ritz-Carlton Management Company, L.L.C., John
 
Albert and Edgar Gum's Motion To Compel Arbitration And To
 
Dismiss, Or Alternatively, Stay Proceedings Pending Arbitration"
 
1
entered in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit  (circuit
court). On appeal, Defendants contend the circuit court erred in
 
denying their motion to compel arbitration.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
This appeal arises out of a dispute concerning the
 
development of The Ritz-Carlton Residences at Kapalua Bay
 
(Project), a residential development project in Lahaina, Maui. 
Plaintiffs-Appellees Krishna Narayan, et al. (Plaintiffs) are
 
individual owners of whole ownership units at the Project. 
On
 
June 7, 2012, Plaintiffs filed a complaint in the circuit court
 against Defendants and several other defendants who are not a
 
party to this appeal. Plaintiffs' complaint alleged the
 
Defendants defaulted on loans encumbering the Project, left the
 
Project and its owners' association underfunded, and failed to
 
adequately respond to Plaintiffs' requests for information. 
Plaintiffs asserted claims against all Defendants for (1) breach
 
of fiduciary duty, (2) denial of access to the owners'
 
association's books and records, and (3) injunctive and
 
declaratory relief.
 
On July 5, 2012, Defendants filed their "Motion To
 
Compel Arbitration And To Dismiss, Or Alternatively, Stay
 
Proceedings Pending Arbitration." Defendants argued that certain
 
written arbitration provisions mandated sending Plaintiffs'
 
claims to arbitration. The "Declaration of Condominium Property
 
Regime of Kapalua Bay Condominium" (Declaration) states, in
 
pertinent part:
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided. 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
XXXIII. ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
 
In the event of the occurrence or claim arising out
of, or related to, this Declaration . . . ("dispute"), if
the dispute cannot be resolved by negotiation, the parties
to the dispute agree to submit the dispute to mediation[.]
. . . If the dispute is not resolved through mediation, the
dispute shall be resolved by arbitration pursuant to this
Article and the then-current rules and supervision of the
American Arbitration Association. The duties to mediate
 hereunder shall extend to any officer, employee,
shareholder, principal[.]
 . . . .
 
Issues of arbitrability shall be determined in
accordance with the federal substantive and procedural laws
relating to arbitration; all other aspects of the dispute
shall be interpreted in accordance with . . . the
substantive laws of the State of Hawaii.
 
The circuit court held a hearing on the Motion to
 
Compel Arbitration on August 8, 2012, orally denied the motion at
 
the hearing's conclusion, and entered its order denying the
 
motion on August 28, 2012. Neither the hearing transcript nor
 
the written order states the circuit court's grounds for its
 
decision. Defendants filed a timely notice of appeal from the
 
order on September 26, 2012.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A petition to compel arbitration is reviewed de novo. 
The standard is the same as that which would be applicable
to a motion for summary judgment, and the trial court's
decision is reviewed using the same standard employed by the
trial court and based upon the same evidentiary materials as
were before it in determination of the motion.
 
Sher v. Cella, 114 Hawai' i 263, 266, 160 P.3d 1250, 1253 (App. 
2007) (quoting Douglass v. Pflueger Hawaii, Inc., 110 Hawai' i 
520, 524-25, 135 P.3d 129, 133-34 (2006)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
"[W]hen presented with a motion to compel arbitration, 
the court is limited to answering two questions: 1) whether an 
arbitration agreement exists between the parties; and 2) if so, 
whether the subject matter of the dispute is arbitrable under 
such agreement." Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai' i 226, 
238, 921 P.2d 146, 158 (1996). Defendants contend the 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
arbitration clause in the Declaration required arbitration of
 
Plaintiffs' claims. Plaintiffs respond that (1) the
 
Declaration's arbitration provision is unenforceable because of
 
ambiguity; (2) even if there is an unambiguous agreement to
 
arbitrate, Plaintiffs' claims are not within the scope of that
 
agreement; and (3) the Declaration's arbitration provision is
 
unconscionable. 
When interpreting an arbitration agreement governed by 
the Federal Arbitration Act, as in this case, we "apply[] general 
state-law principles of contract interpretation, while giving due 
regard to the federal policy in favor of arbitration by resolving 
ambiguities as to the scope of arbitration in favor of 
arbitration." Wagner v. Stratton Oakmont, Inc., 83 F.3d 1046, 
1049 (9th Cir. 1996). To be valid and enforceable, an arbitration agreement must be unambiguous as to the intent to 
submit disputes to arbitration. Douglass, 110 Hawai' i at 531, 
135 P.3d at 140. "As with any contract, the parties' intentions control, but those intentions are generously construed as to 
issues of arbitrability." Lee v. Heftel, 81 Hawai' i 1, 4, 911 
P.2d 721, 724 (1996) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
A. Whether An Arbitration Agreement Exists
 
There is no dispute that the Declaration in general is 
binding on Plaintiffs and that it contains an arbitration provision that is unambiguous on its face. Cf. Douglass, 110 
Hawai'i at 532-33, 135 P.3d at 141-42 (concluding employee was 
not bound by arbitration provision contained in an employee 
handbook described as "guidelines" that "do not create a 
contract"). But Plaintiffs argue the Declaration's arbitration 
provision is unenforceable because language in the "Bylaws Of 
Association Of Apartment Owners Of Kapalua Bay Condominium" 
(Bylaws), their purchase agreements, and the condominium's public 
report create ambiguity as to whether the parties intended to 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
submit their disputes to arbitration. We conclude nothing in the
 
language Plaintiffs cite vitiates the Declaration's arbitration
 
provision.
 
Unlike the Declaration, the Bylaws do not contain a 
section on dispute resolution procedures. Plaintiffs instead 
rely on a section titled "Abatement And Enjoinment Of Violations 
By Apartment Owners," which states that the board of directors 
may initiate "appropriate legal proceedings, either at law or in 
equity[.]" Although the Hawai' i Supreme Court has concluded that 
such language may create ambiguity regarding the parties' intent to arbitrate, see Luke v. Gentry Realty, Ltd., 105 Hawai' i 241, 
249, 96 P.3d 261, 269 (2004), here, that language specifically applies to the board of directors and against owners and does not 
apply to Plaintiffs' claims. 
The Bylaws also refer to an owner's ability to bring an
 
"action." The Bylaws state, in pertinent part:
 
Section 6. ATTORNEYS' FEES AND EXPENSES OF ENFORCEMENT.
 
. . . .
 
b. If any claim by an Owner is substantiated in any
action against the Association, any of its officers or
directors or its Board to enforce any provision of the
Declaration, these Bylaws, the House Rules or the Act, then
all reasonable and necessary expenses, costs and attorneys'
fees incurred by such Owner shall be awarded to such
Owner[.]
 
Plaintiffs argue the term "action" refers solely to legal
 
proceedings in court and irreconcilably conflicts with the
 
Declaration's arbitration clause, creating ambiguity.
 
We interpret contracts so as to give reasonable and 
effective meaning to all terms. Cnty. of Hawai' i v. UNIDEV, LLC, 
129 Hawai' i 378, 395, 301 P.3d 588, 605 (2013). Assuming 
arguendo that Plaintiffs' definition of "action" is correct, the 
Bylaws' attorneys' fees provision can be understood as 
complementary to the arbitration clause. Under the Declaration's 
arbitration clause, a party may still seek relief in court in 
certain circumstances. The arbitration clause itself admits the 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6possibility of litigation in court, stating: "Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in this Article, . . . [a] party may
seek temporary injunctive relief from any court of competent
jurisdiction pending appointment of an arbitrator."  A party may
also file suit to enforce an arbitral award or to challenge the
validity or application of the arbitration agreement.  We
interpret the Declaration and the Bylaws to mean that the parties
are generally required to arbitrate consistent with the
Declaration, but the Bylaws governs the award of attorneys' fees
if a party litigates in court the limited disputes that are not
subject to arbitration. 
Plaintiffs' arguments based on the condominium public
report and the purchase agreement language are similarly
unpersuasive.  The public report states: "The provisions of [the
Declaration and the Bylaws] are intended to be, and in most cases
are, enforceable in a court of law[,]" and the purchase agreement
states: "Venue for any cause of action brought by Purchaser
hereunder shall be in the Second Circuit Court, State of Hawaii." 
Because arbitration awards are "enforceable in a court of law,"
e.g., Krystoff v. Kalama Land Co., Ltd.,  88 Hawai #i 209, 213-14,
965 P.2d 142, 146-47 (1998), the language can be reconciled with
the arbitration clause rather than revoking it.  E.g., Bank
Julius Baer & Co., Ltd. v. Waxfield Ltd., 424 F.3d 278, 284 (2d
Cir. 2005) (concluding a forum selection clause in one agreement
did not foreclose applying an arbitration clause contained in
another agreement); Pers. Sec. & Safety Sys. Inc. v. Motorola
Inc., 297 F.3d 388, 395 (5th Cir. 2002) (same). 
B. Whether The Subject Matter Of This Dispute Is
Arbitrable
Plaintiffs argue their claims arise out of the Bylaws,
not from the Declaration.  Therefore, the issue is whether
Plaintiffs' claims are within the scope of the Declaration's
provision requiring arbitration "[i]n the event of the occurrenceNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of any controversy or claim arising out of, or related to, th[e]
 
Declaration" (emphasis added).
 
Consistent with the strong state and federal policy 
favoring arbitration, arbitration "should not be denied unless it 
may be said with positive assurance that the arbitration clause 
is not susceptible of an interpretation that covers the asserted 
dispute." AT & T Technologies, Inc. v. Commc'ns Workers of Am., 
475 U.S. 643, 650 (1986); see also UNIDEV, 129 Hawai' i at 394, 
301 P.3d at 604. In UNIDEV, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that 
an arbitration provision containing "arising under" language constitutes a "general" arbitration clause whose scope is broad. 
Id. at 395, 301 P.3d at 605. The supreme court concluded that 
the clause's general language and "[t]he failure of the parties 
to unambiguously limit the arbitrability of disputes suggests 
that they intended a longer reach for the arbitration clauses." 
Id. at 396, 911 P.2d at 606. The court also noted federal courts 
have uniformly concluded that language such as "arising out of or 
relating to" should be interpreted broadly. Id. at 395, 301 P.3d 
at 605. Given that the arbitration provision in this case uses the "arising out of, or related to" language, we conclude the 
clause governs a broad range of disputes relating to the 
Declaration. 
"Whether a claim falls within the scope of an 
arbitration agreement turns on the factual allegations in the 
complaint." UNIDEV, 129 Hawai' i at 396, 301 P.3d at 606. Here, 
Plaintiffs' claims are based on allegations that the Defendants improperly failed to inform Plaintiffs of the Project developer's 
default on loans encumbering the Project, abandoned the Project, 
improperly withdrew from the owners' association's funds, and 
assessed the Project's operational expenses on Plaintiffs. 
We conclude Plaintiffs' claims are subject to the
 
Declaration's broad arbitration clause. The Declaration
 
establishes the Project's existence, and it states its provisions
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"shall constitute covenants running with the land" and are
 
"binding . . . upon the Developer, its successors and permitted
 
assigns, and all subsequent owners" of the Project. The
 
Declaration defines key terms used in the Declaration and the
 
Bylaws, including the owners' association, the board of
 
directors, and the managing agent. It vests the Project's
 
administration in the owners' association and sets forth the
 
association's powers and obligations, including the power to
 
assess the Project's expenses on owners.
 
Thus, Plaintiffs' claims "arise out of the relationship 
between the parties" created by the Declaration. UNIDEV, 129 
Hawai'i at 397, 301 P.3d at 607. The Declaration initiated the 
Project's development and is essential to the overall dispute: 
without the Declaration, Plaintiffs' claims would not exist. The 
Declaration is specifically referenced throughout the Bylaws, and 
the Bylaws state the Declaration governs to the extent there is 
any conflict between the two. Because the parties inserted a 
broad arbitration clause in an agreement that is essential to and 
governs the Bylaws, we presume the parties intended the clause to 
reach disputes that implicate the Bylaws. The failure to insert 
a dispute resolution section in the Bylaws further demonstrates 
this intent. Therefore, Plaintiffs' claims fall within the 
arbitration clause's scope. 
C. Whether The Arbitration Clause Is Unconscionable
 
Plaintiffs argue that even if their claims are within 
the Declaration's arbitration provision, the provision is an 
unenforceable adhesion contract. Under Hawai' i law, a contract 
is an unenforceable contract of adhesion where (1) the party seeking to avoid enforcement had no viable alternative source to 
obtain the services contracted for, and (2) the contract 
unconscionably advantages the stronger party. Brown, 82 Hawai' i 
at 247, 921 P.2d at 167. 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although we have not addressed whether real property
 
contracts constitute contracts of adhesion, our courts have
 
concluded home mortgages are not contracts of adhesion because
 
other sources of mortgage loans are available. Aames Capital
 
Corp. v. Hernando, No. 26706 (Apr. 17, 2006) (SDO) ("The mortgage
 containing the power of sale clause was not an unenforceable
 
contract of adhesion because there is no evidence that Aames was
 
the only source of home mortgage loans in Kauai or that the power
 
of sale clause was unconscionable."); Pascua v. U.S. Bank Nat'l
 
Ass'n, No. 25596 (App. Sept. 29, 2004) (SDO) ("[I]t is abundantly
 
clear that the [plaintiffs] were not forced to apply for a
 
mortgage loan from [lender] . . . amidst the myriad mortgage
 
lenders we notice were available to them." (internal quotation
 
marks, citations, and brackets omitted)). At least one other
 
jurisdiction has held that a pre-printed home purchase contract
 
provided by a developer is not a contract of adhesion because
 
purchasers can seek other, more attractive contracts. State ex
 
rel. Vincent v. Schneider, 194 S.W.3d 853, 857-58. (Mo. 2006);
 cf. Aguiar v. Hawaii Hous. Auth., 55 Haw. 478, 498, 522 P.2d
 
1255, 1268 (1974) ("([T]he public housing lease is the epitome of
 
a contract of adhesion. . . . An applicant for public housing has
 
no choice but to adhere to the dictated terms; if he objects he
 
remains in, or is relegated to, private slum housing.").
 
There is no factual basis to conclude that the
 
contracts in this case were contracts of adhesion. Nothing in
 
the record indicates Plaintiffs were subjected to "oppression" or
 
a lack of all meaningful choice; individual homeowners could
 
elect to buy property subject to the recorded Declaration and the
 
arbitration clause, or not.
 
Moreover, Plaintiffs fail to show that the arbitration 
provision is unconscionable. Unconscionability in the context of 
arbitration agreements requires a showing of both a procedural 
and substantive element of unconscionability. Brown, 82 Hawai' i 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 247, 921 P.2d at 167; Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Waikoloa 
Beach Villas ex rel. Bd. of Directors v. Sunstone Waikoloa, LLC, 
129 Hawai' i 117, 121-22, 295 P.3d 987, 991-92 (2013), aff'd in 
part, vacated in part on other grounds, SCWC-11-0000998, 2013 WL 3364390 (Haw. June 28, 2013) (Waikoloa Beach Villas); see also 
Branco v. Norwest Bank Minnesota, N.A., 381 F. Supp. 2d 1274, 
1280 (D. Haw. 2005). 
In Waikoloa Beach Villas, this court concluded an 
arbitration provision in a declaration was not procedurally 
unconscionable against an owners' association because there was 
no showing of oppression or unfair surprise. Waikoloa Beach 
Villas, 129 Hawai' i at 122, 295 P.3d at 992. The same reasoning 
applies here. The record in this case shows Plaintiffs received 
reasonable notice of the arbitration provision. The arbitration 
clause's heading "ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION" is written in 
bolded, capitalized letters, and the clause covers one page of 
the Declaration. Each purchaser acknowledged receipt of the 
Declaration and the "full and complete opportunity to read, 
review and examine" it. Each purchaser also acknowledged they 
had received the developer's public report, which disclosed 
material facts regarding the Project and advised purchasers to 
"[s]tudy the [P]roject's Declaration[.]" Finally, purchasers 
were informed of their statutory right to cancel their purchase 
agreement within thirty days after receiving the public report. 
See Hawaii Revised Statutes §§ 514A-36, 514A-62 (2006 Repl.). 
Thus, there is no element of unfair surprise or oppression in 
Plaintiffs' transaction, and the arbitration clause is not 
unconscionable and is enforceable against Plaintiffs. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Circuit Court of
 
the Second Circuit's August 28, 2012 "Order Denying Defendants
 
The Ritz-Carlton Development Company, Inc., The Ritz-Carlton
 
Management Company, L.L.C., John Albert and Edgar Gum's Motion To
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Compel Arbitration And To Dismiss, Or Alternatively, Stay
 
Proceedings Pending Arbitration" and remand this case for further
 
proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 23, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Lisa W. Cataldo 
R. John Seibert (McCorriston Miller MukaiMacKinnion)and Bert T. Kobayashi, Jr.Lex R. Smith Joseph A. Stewart(Kobayashi, Sugita & Goda)for Defendants-Appellants. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge 
Terence J. O'Toole 
Judith Ann PaveyAndrew J. Lautenbach (Starn O'Toole Marcus &Fisher)for Plaintiffs-Appellees. Associate Judge 
11
 