NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001139
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ALFRED W.K. COMBES, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-1895)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ., with
Nakamura, Chief Judge concurring separately)
 
Defendant-Appellant Alfred W.K. Combes (Combes) appeals
 
from the Judgment filed on September 17, 2014 in the Circuit

 
Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).1 Combes was
 
convicted of Burglary in the First Degree in violation of Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-810(1)(c) (2014).2 He was sentenced
 
1
 The Honorable Colette Y. Garibaldi presided.
 
2
 HRS 708-810(1)(c) provides:
 
§708-810 Burglary in the first degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of burglary in the first degree if the
person intentionally enters or remains unlawfully in a
building, with intent to commit therein a crime against a
person or against property rights, and:
. . . .
 (c)	 The person recklessly disregards a risk that the building is
the dwelling of another, and the building is such a
dwelling.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to ten (10) years imprisonment with credit for time served and
 
concurrent with any other term of imprisonment, and given a
 mandatory minimum term of three (3) years, four (4) months. 
On appeal, Combes contends: (1) the circuit court erred 
when it allowed hearsay evidence regarding the unavailability of a witness for Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State); (2) 
the circuit court plainly erred when it allowed hearsay evidence regarding the alleged burglary; (3) the deputy prosecutor committed prosecutorial misconduct when he elicited evidence regarding the unavailability of a witness at trial; (4) the deputy prosecutor committed prosecutorial misconduct when he violated the circuit court's limiting instruction and exceeded the scope of his offer of proof regarding the unavailability of a witness; (5) there was insufficient evidence to convict Combes of Burglary in the First Degree; and (6) the cumulative effect of the circuit court's errors and the prosecutorial misconduct violated Combes's constitutional right to due process. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant legal authorities, we resolve Combes's
 points of error as follows and affirm.
(1) Relevance.  Combes contends that the circuit court
 
erred in allowing Deputy Sheriff Chester Dasalla (Deputy Sheriff
 Dasalla) to testify about when he last spoke to Lisa Winkelspecht
 (Winkelspecht), who lived at the subject house at the time it was
 burglarized, claiming that the testimony was not relevant.
3
 
"A trial court's determination that evidence is 
'relevant' within the meaning of HRE Rule 401 (1993) is reviewed under the right/wrong standard of review." State v. St. Clair, 
101 Hawai
'i 280, 286, 67 P.3d 779, 785 (2003) (citation omitted); 
3
 In his points of error, Combes contends that the circuit court erred
because it allowed hearsay testimony, however, Combes's argument section
challenges the testimony as irrelevant. Points not argued may be deemedwaived. See Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7). 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Walsh v. Chan, 80 Hawai 'i 212, 215, 908 P.2d 1198, 1201 (1995). 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 401 provides that
 
"'[r]elevant evidence' means evidence having any tendency to make
 the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the
 determination of the action more probable or less probable than
 it would be without the evidence." Further, 
[r]elevance is a low threshold. Relevant evidence need not
prove a case on its own; it "need only be a building block
of a prima facie case." See State v. Silva, 67 Haw. 581,
586, 698 P.2d 293, 297 (1985). Indeed, it is evidence
having any tendency to make a material fact more or less
likely. HRE Rule 401. Nor must the evidence establish the
 
fact by itself; it is enough to establish a link in a
longer, evidentiary chain. 
State v. Griffin, 126 Hawai 'i 40, 55, 266 P.3d 448, 463 (App. 
2011). 
Unchallenged testimony by Deputy Sheriff Dasalla
 
established that Winkelspecht had moved to the mainland since the
 
alleged burglary. On appeal, Combes challenges the following
 testimony:
 
[STATE].  And what, if any, contact have you had with
[Winkelspecht] recently?

 
[DASALLA]. I actually tried calling her about maybe four

times.
 
[DEFENSE]:  Objection, relevance, hearsay, speculation.

 
THE COURT: Sustained.

 
[STATE]:  Your Honor, if we could approach, please?

 
THE COURT: You may approach.

 
(The following proceedings were held at the bench:)

 
[STATE]: Judge, I think the objection was speculation. He is

testifying from personal knowledge. The relevance is he's

 
going to say that he tried to contact her about returning
for trial and the only reason is the jury's understanding
why no victim is present in the trial. And that's all he's
 going to say.
 
THE COURT:
 Limited to that, I'll allow over your objection.

 
[DEFENSE]:  What's the proffered response?

 
[STATE]:  That she didn't answer his phone calls.

 
[DEFENSE]: All right, if that's all he's going to say. We

still object.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(The bench conference was concluded.)
 
[STATE]. [] Deputy sheriff, you were explaining that you had
recent contact with her, if any?
 
[DASALLA]. Yes, in February. 
 
[STATE]. I mean recently, within the past two weeks?
 [DASALLA]. I made several attempts to actually contact
[Winkelspecht].
 
[STATE]. Why is that?
 [DASALLA]. You know, 'cause her and I usually talk maybe
once a month just to see how things are going with her new
job and everything like that. And also to talk about the
case.
 
[DEFENSE]: Objection, Your Honor.
 THE COURT: Overruled. You are leading to your ultimate
question?
 
[STATE]: Yes, Your Honor.
 [STATE]. [] And did you get a response?
 [DASALLA]. No, not in the last two weeks I haven't.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
As noted by the State during the bench conference, the
 
purpose of the questioning was to establish for the jury's
 
understanding why there was no victim present at trial. Although
 the line of questioning did not prove the case on its own, it was
 a building block to establishing the case as a whole. Showing
 that Deputy Sheriff Dasalla was unable to contact Winkelspecht
 indicated to the jury why there was no victim to testify about
 the burglary, which provided broader context for the jury's
 understanding of the case. The testimony was relevant and the
 circuit court did not err in allowing it.
(2) Hearsay. Combes contends that the circuit court 
plainly erred when it allowed hearsay testimony into evidence. "'Hearsay' is a statement, other than one made by the declarant while testifying at the trial or hearing, offered in evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted." HRE Rule 801. Hearsay is not admissible unless an exception applies. State v. Sua, 92 
Hawai
'i 61, 70, 987 P.2d 959, 968 (1999) (stating "[h]earsay is 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
inadmissible at trial, unless it qualifies as an exception to the
 
rule against hearsay") (citation omitted); HRE Rule 802.
 
In this case, Combes challenges two separate statements
 
during Deputy Sheriff Dasalla's testimony as inadmissible
 hearsay. First, Deputy Sheriff Dasalla testified that "[o]n that
 day when [Winkelspecht and Jose a.k.a Gilbert Martinez
 (Martinez)] came home, they actually . . . notified me when they
 came to my house that their house got broken into." Second,
 Deputy Sheriff Dasalla testified "[a]nd [Winkelspecht] had
 notified me she had called HPD, or police – the Honolulu Police
 Department to come by to report the burglary."
 
Both statements appear to be hearsay because they were
 
statements made by Winkelspecht, as testified to by Deputy
 Sheriff Dasalla, offered as evidence to prove that the subject
 house "got broken into" and that Winkelspecht called the Honolulu
 Police Department to report a burglary. Neither party cites to
 an applicable hearsay exception. Combes, however, did not object
 to the statements at trial. Therefore, the plain error standard
 applies.
 
Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(b) 
provides "[p]lain errors or defects affecting substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the court." However, the appellate court's "power to deal with plain error is one 'to be exercised sparingly and with caution because the rule represents a departure from a presupposition of the adversarial system-that a party must look to his or her counsel for protection and bear the cost of counsel's mistakes.'" State v. Lee, 83 Hawai
'i 267, 274, 925 P.2d 1091, 1098 (1996) 
(citations omitted). Thus, "[t]he decision to take notice of plain error must turn on the facts of the particular case to correct errors that 'seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public reputation of judicial proceedings.'" Id. (citations 
omitted). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In this case, Deputy Sheriff Dasalla's testimony that
 
Winkelspecht notified him that her house "got broken into" and
 
that Winkelspecht had called the police did not affect Combes's
 substantial rights and thus the circuit court did not plainly
 err. Although the testimony was hearsay, it was cumulative given
 other evidence presented at trial. Officer Dominic Madamba
 (Officer Madamba) testified that he was called to a burglary
 complaint located at the subject home. In addition, Officer
 Madamba testified that when he arrived at the home, he met with
 both residents, Winkelspecht and Martinez. Thus, Officer
 Madamba's admissible testimony established that a report was made
 to the police about a burglary at the subject home where
 Winkelspecht lived at the time. 
Given that other admissible testimony was offered to
 
show that a report was made to the police about the burglary and
 considering the overall evidence in this case, Deputy Sheriff
 Dasalla's hearsay testimony did not seriously affect the
 fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial
 proceedings. Therefore, the circuit court did not plainly err.
(3) Prosecutorial Misconduct.  Combes alleges two
 
instances of prosecutorial misconduct based on the deputy
 prosecutor's following questions to Deputy Sheriff Dasalla. 
[STATE].  And what, if any, contact have you had with
[Winkelspecht] recently?

 
[DASALLA].  I actually tried calling her about maybe four

times.
 
[DEFENSE]:  Objection, relevance, hearsay, speculation.

 
THE COURT:  Sustained.

 
[STATE]:  Your Honor, if we could approach, please?

 
THE COURT:  You may approach.

 
(The following proceedings were held at the bench:)

 
[STATE]:  Judge, I think the objection was speculation. He is

testifying from personal knowledge. The relevance is he's
 
going to say that he tried to contact her about returning
for trial and the only reason is the jury's understanding
why no victim is present in the trial. And that's all he's
 going to say.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: Limited to that, I'll allow over your objection.
 
[DEFENSE]: What's the proffered response?
 
[STATE]: That she didn't answer his phone calls.

 
[DEFENSE]: All right, if that's all he's going to say. We
still object.
 
(The bench conference was concluded.)
 [STATE]. [] Deputy sheriff, you were explaining that you had
recent contact with her, if any?
 
[DASALLA].
 Yes, in February.
 
[STATE]. I mean recently, within the past two weeks? 
 
[DASALLA].
 I made several attempts to actually contact
[Winkelspecht]. 
 
[STATE].
 Why is that?
 
[DASALLA]. You know, 'cause her and I usually talk maybe
once a month just to see how things are going with her new 
job and everything like that. And also to talk about the

case.
 
[DEFENSE]: Objection, Your Honor.
 THE COURT: Overruled. You are leading to your ultimate
question?
 
[STATE]:
 Yes, Your Honor.
 
[STATE]. [] And did you get a response?
 
[DASALLA]. No, not in the last two weeks I haven't.
 
"Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed
 
under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which
 
requires an examination of the record and a determination of
 'whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error
 complained of might have contributed to the conviction.'" State
 
v. Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999) 
(citation and block format omitted). 
First, Combes contends the deputy prosecutor committed
 
prosecutorial misconduct when he questioned Deputy Sheriff
 Dasalla regarding the unavailability of Winkelspecht at trial,
 asserting that this violated the State's motion in limine G(5). 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State filed a motion in limine requesting the circuit court
 
to issue an order providing in pertinent part:
 
G. Restriction on Comments of Counsel
 
. . . . 
5. Precluding Defendant and/or his attorney from
commenting or suggesting that the State failed to call or is
obligated to call as witnesses all of the witnesses listed
in the State's Witness List or all persons who may have been
present at any of the events disclosed by the evidence or
who may appear to have some knowledge of the events.
 
This request was granted by the circuit court. 
The deputy prosecutor's line of questioning did not
 
violate the motion in limine. The in limine ruling precluded
 
Combes and his attorney from commenting, but did not preclude the
 State from explaining the absence of witnesses.
 
Combes also contends that the deputy prosecutor
 
committed prosecutorial misconduct by violating the circuit
 court's limiting instruction and by exceeding the scope of the
 State's offer of proof regarding the unavailability of
 Winkelspecht as a witness. During the bench conference, after
 Combes objected, the State argued that the questions were
 relevant to the jury's understanding as to why no victim was
 present at the trial. The circuit court ruled that, "[l]imited
 to that," it would allow the testimony over Combes's objection. 
The State further provided that the proffered response would be
 that Winkelspecht did not answer Deputy Sheriff Dasallas' phone
 calls.
 
The deputy prosecutor did not go beyond what he
 
proffered during the bench conference. The deputy prosecutor
 asked Deputy Sheriff Dasalla about recent contact with
 Winkelspecht and if he got a response after he made several
 attempts to contact her. Deputy Sheriff Dasalla responded by
 stating that he had not received a response in the last two
 weeks. Thus, the deputy prosecutor's questioning was not
 improper and did not exceed the scope of the circuit court's
 order.
 
In sum, the deputy prosecutor did not commit
 
prosecutorial misconduct.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(4) Sufficiency of the Evidence. Combes contends
 
there was insufficient evidence to establish the element that
 
entry into the residence was unlawful, because "[n]o testimony
 was presented by the [sic] Winkelspecht regarding who was, and
 who was not allowed into the residence." 
The test on appeal for sufficiency of the evidence is 
"not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai
'i 131, 135, 
913 P.2d 57, 61 (1996) (citation omitted). Further, 
[s]ubstantial evidence as to every material element of the
offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
caution to support a conclusion. Under such a review, we
give full play to the right of the fact finder to determine
credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable
inferences of fact.
 
State v. Bowman, 137 Hawai 'i 398, 405, 375 P.3d 177, 184 (2016) 
(citation omitted). 
To establish that Combes intentionally entered
 
unlawfully into the subject home, the State presented the
 
testimony of Jolynn Silva (Silva), who was arrested and charged
 with Burglary in the First Degree as a co-defendant to Combes and
 who eventually pled no contest to the charge. Silva testified
 that on the day of the burglary she, Combes, and two other
 individuals were driving around looking for a house to ring
 doorbells, to see if anybody was home, for the purpose of
 breaking in. According to Silva, she approached the subject
 house, rang the door bell and knocked, and nobody answered. She
 then saw Combes enter the subject house through the window. 
Silva testified that only Combes entered the home. After a
 sheriff had approached Silva to ask what she was doing, she used
 her cell phone to call Combes, who was still in the house,
 alerting him that she had just spoken to a sheriff. Combes told
 her to reverse the car into the driveway. According to Silva,
 after she reversed into the driveway, Combes came out of the
 house ducking down on the passenger side of the car and he got
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
into the car carrying a backpack and a pillowcase. Silva
 
testified that she took jewelry that came from the subject house
 to Cash for Gold to exchange it for money, and that the other
 items that were taken from the house were sold on the street by
 Combes and Silva. 
Based on Silva's testimony, especially that she and
 
Combes were looking for a house to break into, and that Combes
 entered the subject house through the window when nobody was
 home, the State produced sufficient evidence to prove that Combes
 entered the house unlawfully.
(5) Due Process. Combes contends, without making any
 
argument to support his contention, that the cumulative effect of
 the errors he alleges on appeal denied him of his due process
 rights to a fair trial. Given the above, we reject this
 argument.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment filed on
 
September 17, 2014 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, 
On the briefs: 
Walter J. Rodby,
for Defendant-Appellant. Associate Judge 
Sonja P. McCullen,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
10
 