NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001122
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
TOM THANH TRAN, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
VAN THANH SATO fka VAN THANH TRAN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 07-1-3662)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
In a post-divorce decree proceeding, Defendant-
Appellant Van Thanh Sato, formerly known as Van Thanh Tran
 
(Appellant), appeals from the August 19, 2014 "Order Regarding
 
Defendant's Motion and Affidavit for Post-Decree Relief" (Order
 
for Post-Decree Relief) entered in the Family Court of the First
 
1
Circuit  (family court).
 
On April 13, 2010, the family court entered a "Decree

 
Granting Absolute Divorce and Awarding Child Custody" in the
 
divorce proceeding between Appellant and Plaintiff-Appellee Tom
 Thanh Tran (Appellee).
 
On January 16, 2013, Appellant filed a "Motion and
 
Affidavit For Post-Decree Relief" (Motion and Affidavit),
 
requesting the following:
 
a. A change in [Appellee's] timesharing with the
subject child from joint physical custody to supervised
visitation with the child. . . .
 
1
 The Honorable Christine E. Kuriyama presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
b. Child support modification "per the child support
guidelines" since "[t]he current child support is based upon
an extended visitation schedule."
 
c. That [Appellant] be awarded the tax dependency
exemption for their child for each tax year based on
increased expenses [Appellant] has had to bear . . . .
 
d. [Appellee] should be ordered to attend parenting
classes.
 
e. A Guardian Ad Litem should be appointed to
represent the child's interests.
 
f. [Appellee] should be ordered to undergo a
psychological evaluation.
 
g. [Appellee] should reimburse [Appellant] for all of
the legal expenses she has incurred.
 
On October 2, 2013, the family court ordered the
 
parties and their child each to undergo a psychological
 
evaluation.
 
On August 19, 2014, the family court issued the Order
 
For Post-Decree Relief denying Appellant's Motion and Affidavit
 and ordering each party to bear his or her own attorneys' fees
 and costs. On September 18, 2014, Appellant filed a notice of
 appeal from the August 19, 2014 post-decree order.
 
On appeal, Appellant contends the family court erred:
 (1) "when it confined itself to the factual allegations
 
in the Motion and Affidavit for Post-Decree Relief, filed on
 January 16, 2013" without considering a "December 28, 2013 taped
 conversation" providing "evidence regarding the material change
 as well as the best interest of the subject child";
 
(2) when it "found and concluded that there was no
 
material change in circumstance"; and
 
(3) when it denied Appellant's request for modification
 
of physical custody and timesharing.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude this
 appeal is without merit.
 
There was sufficient evidence to support the family
 
court's determination that no material change in circumstance
 existed to justify Appellant's Motion and Affidavit. "Generally,
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the family court possesses wide discretion in making its 
decisions and those decisions will not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus, we will not disturb the family court's decisions on appeal unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of reason." Fisher v. Fisher, 111 
Hawai
'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006). 
At the April 28, 2014 hearing on Appellant's Motion and
 
Affidavit, the family court heard testimony from Carol P. Tyler,
 PSY.D (Dr. Tyler), a licensed psychologist who conducted the
 
psychological evaluations on the subject child, Custody Evaluator
 
Stacey Fukuhara-Barclay (Ms. Fukuhara-Barclay), Appellee, and
 
Appellant. Dr. Tyler testified that Appellant had a short temper
 
and would react without thinking. Dr. Tyler also testified that
 while Appellee was rigid in his way of thinking, he had the
 ability to work through his issues with individual therapy.
 
Dr. Tyler noted that the subject child was happy with
 
both her families and that both households were stable.
 
Ms. Fukuhara-Barclay stated that it would be
 
devastating to subject child for her not to be with Appellee. 
Ms. Fukuhara-Barclay also noted that the subject child was older
 and more mature than she was during Ms. Fukuhara-Barclay's prior
 case involvement and that the subject child was resilient in
 dealing with her situation. Regarding the question of religion,
 the main source of the parties' division, Appellant represented
 that she did not have a preference as to the subject child's
 religion.
 
Dr. Tyler and Ms. Fukuhara-Barclay both acknowledged
 
listening to the December 28, 2014 taped conversation and both
 were questioned about their impressions regarding that
 conversation. The family court's finding that there was not a
 material change in circumstance is supported by the record in
 this case. 
Assuming, arguendo, the family court improperly
 
excluded the December 28, 2013 taped conversation from its
 evaluation of whether Appellant had shown the existence of a
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
material change of circumstance regarding custody and visitation,
 
there was no substantial prejudice to Appellant. The family
 court heard testimony from all the witnesses Appellant chose to
 present, and Appellant's exhibits proffered for admission other
 than the December 28, 2013 audio recording were admitted into
 evidence. Both Dr. Tyler and Ms. Fukuhara-Barclay had listened
 to the December 28, 2013 audio recording, commented on it, and
 considered it in their testimony. Facts from the December 28,
 2013 audio recording were also highlighted in Ms. Fukuhara­Barclay's Fact Finder report.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the August 19, 2014 "Order
 
Regarding Defendant's Motion and Affidavit for Post-Decree
 Relief," entered in the Family Court of the First Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 28, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
A. Debbie Jew
 
(Ogawa, Lau, Nakamura & Jew)
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
 
Steven L. Hartley
Seth R. Harris
 (Hartley & McGehee)
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
4
 