 
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
  
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000223 20-FEB-2024 09:09 AM Dkt. 62 SO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000223 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
STATE OF HAWAI ‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
JOSHUA LAGRANGE, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1PC141001041) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Wadsworth and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Joshua LaGrange ( LaGrange ) appeals 
from the March 6, 2023 Order Revoking Conditional Release ( Order 
Revoking CR ) entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
(
Circuit Court ).1 Following a March 6, 2023 hearing on 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai ‘i's (State ) February 17, 2022 
"Motion to Revoke Order Granting Conditional Release [( CR)] and 
Issuance of Bench Warrant" ( Motion to Revoke CR ), the Circuit 
Court granted the motion, revoked CR, and ordered LaGrange be 
1 The Honorable Christine E. Kuriyama presided.       
 
  
   
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
committed to the custody of the Department of Health ( DOH). The 
Motion to Revoke CR alleged that LaGrange violated the terms of 
his conditional release by leaving his court-approved residence, failing to notify his probation officer of his new address, and causing his whereabouts to become unknown. At the hearing, LaGrange did not contest the violation, but argued that the State had failed to adduce evidence that LaGrange was "still affected by a . . . mental disease, disorder, or defect[,]" 
which was required under HRS § 704-413(4)(a).   
3 2
  On appeal, LaGrange challenges the revocation of his 
CR, contending that the Circuit Court erroneously took judicial 
notice of a February 22, 2023 letter from Hawai ‘i State Hospital 4
2 LaGrange had been placed on CR on March 31, 2016 following entry
of a judgment of acquittal and commitment to DOH custody on the basis of a
mental disease, disorder, or defect excluding penal responsibility under
Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 704-404, for a second-degree assault charge. 
3 HRS § 704-413(4)(a)(2014) provides in pertinent part: 
(4) If, at any time after the order pursuant to this
chapter granting conditional release, the court determines,after hearing evidence, that: 
(a) The person is still affected by a physical or
mental disease, disorder, or defect, and the
conditions of release have not been fulfilled[,] . . . 
the court may forthwith modify the conditions of release or
order the person to be committed to the custody of the
director of health, subject to discharge or release inaccordance with the procedure prescribed in section 704-412[.] 
(Emphases added.) 
4 Hawai‘i Rules of Evidence ( HRE ) Rule 201(b) provides: 
2  A judicially noticed fact must be one not subject to
reasonable dispute in that it is either (1) generally knownwithin the territorial jurisdiction of the trial court, or(2) capable of accurate and ready determination by resortto sources whose accuracy cannot reasonably be questioned. 
 
 We do not agree with the State's assertion on appeal that the HRE do
not apply to a CR revocation hearing, citing HRS § 704-415(2) (applicationfor CR or discharge from CR) and HRS § 706-625(2) (revocation of probation).      
 
   Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve LaGrange's point of error as follows, and vacate and remand. 
  "[W]hether a particular fact is a proper subject for 
judicial notice is a question of law" reviewed de novo under the 
right/wrong standard of review. Ditto v. McCurdy, 98 Hawai ‘i 
123, 128, 44 P.3d 274, 279 (2002) (citation omitted). 
  In granting the State's Motion to Revoke CR, the 
Circuit Court took judicial notice of Dr. Booher's February 22, 
2023 letter over defense objection, and made the "still 
affected" finding under HRS § 704-413(4)(a).   5 
 
 
   
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
psychiatrist, Kent Booher, M.D. ( Dr. Booher ) as evidence that 
LaGrange was "still affected by a . . . mental disease, 
disorder, or defect" under HRS § 704-413(4)(a) ( "still affected" 
finding). 
3 HRS § 706-625(2) pertains to revocation of probation and is inapposite. HRS 
§ 704-415(2), pertaining to application for CR on discharge from CR, states:"such hearing shall be deemed a civil proceeding . . . ." We conclude that the statute here, HRS § 704-413(4), pertaining to the modification or
revocation of CR, is also a "civil proceeding." HRE Rule 1101(b) provides
that the rules "apply generally to civil and criminal proceedings[,]" andsubsection (d)(3) lists specific types of "[m]iscellaneous proceedings" wherethe HRE are inapplicable. Among the list of HRE-inapplicable proceedings areproceedings "granting or revoking probation[.]" CR proceedings are not
listed among the exclusions. Thus, the HRE apply here. 
5 Regarding Dr. Booher's letter, the Circuit Court stated: "The 
Court has taken judicial notice of the record and file, which would include
the February 22, '23 letter from Dr. Booher, staff psychiatrist at the Hawaii
State Hospital." 
Defense counsel objected to the Circuit Court's "still-affected"
finding as follows: 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: So is the Court finding that
[LaGrange] is still affected by a physical or mental
disease, disorder, or defect? And if the Court is makingthat finding, I am objecting. I believe you can only makethat finding based on reviewing letters that have been
submitted over the last year, and in so doing, as I said,
that is not evidence presented, and you are violating myclient's due process rights . . . . That can't be taken away without due process of law. Those rights apply right      
 
   LaGrange argues that the Circuit Court "exceeded the 
permissible scope of judicial notice when it noticed the alleged 
facts set forth in the letter and used Dr. Booher's statements as evidence to support a finding that Lagrange was still affected by a physical or mental disease, disorder or defect." The State counters that "although the statute specifies that the court must determine at a hearing that a person is still 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  now, regardless of the--the rules of evidence. He has not 
had an opportunity to confront anybody who said--presented
evidence that he is currently suffering from a mentaldisease, disorder, or defect. That is our position. 
THE COURT: Okay. Thank you. 
 [DEFENSE COUNSEL]: So I'm asking the Court to make a
clear determination. Are you--are you making thatdetermination today that he is still affected or not?'Cause [sic] that--that was not in the recitation of the
Court's ruling. 
(Pause 
in proceedings.) 
THE COURT: Let's go off record briefly. 
  (Recess taken.) 
THE CLERK: Back on record. 
 THE COURT: All right. Counsel, having reviewed
Section 704-413, subsection (4), the Court is, based on the
record and the arguments made by the State, and the recordwould include the record in file and the credible and reliable evidence, the Court's making the finding that Mr.
Lagrange is still affected by a physical or mental disease,
disorder, or defect, and the conditions of release have notbeen fulfilled. And this is over your objection, correct? 
 
 [DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Yes, Your Honor. And--and I think 
I made most of it on the record, but just so it's veryclear, my objection to the Court making that specificfinding that he's still suffering a mental illness is thatthere has not been evidence put before the Court today.And merely going and looking at old letters does not say
that he is still in that mental position. And of course 
looking at those old letters to make a factualdetermination that today he still has a mental illness Iwould argue is a big-time due process violation when youare depriving him of liberty indefinitely. 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
(Emphases added.) 
4       
 
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
affected by a physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect, 
this does not require a full-blown evidentiary hearing with live 
testimony." The State maintains that "[i]t is sufficient for a court to rely on a prior finding of physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect, especially when no showing has been made of any change of condition." In this case, however, the record reflects the Circuit Court did not rely on a prior finding of mental disease, disorder, or defect and instead took judicial 
notice of Dr. Booher's letter. 
"'[A] distinction must be carefully drawn between 
taking judicial notice of the existence of documents in the 
Court file as opposed to the truth of the facts asserted in 
those documents.'" Uyeda v. Schermer, 144 Hawai ‘i 163, 172, 439 
P.3d 115, 124 (2019) (emphases in original) (citation omitted). 
In State v. Akana, 68 Haw. 164, 706 P.2d 1300 (1985), the 
supreme court drew a distinction between "[t]he existence of a conviction properly recorded in court records" as "an adjudicative fact 'capable of accurate and ready determination,'" and the "facts underlying the conviction," which cannot be "the proper subject of judicial notice." 
Uyeda, 
144 Hawai ‘i at 172-73, 439 P.3d at 124-25. 
Here, although the Circuit Court could take judicial 
notice of the existence of Dr. Booher's letter, the Circuit Court erred when it relied on the contents of Dr. Booher's letter to make its "still-affected" finding under HRS § 704-
413(4)(a). 
See id. at 172, 439 P.3d at 124; Ditto, 98 Hawai ‘i at 
128, 44 P.3d at 279. Assuming arguendo  the "truth of the facts 
asserted" in Dr. Booher's letter could be considered, the letter contains no statement that LaGrange was "still affected" by a mental disease, disorder, or defect at the time the letter was 
5       
 
   
  
  
  
 
   
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
written, six days before the hearing.6 See Uyeda, 144 Hawai ‘i at 
172, 439 P.3d at 124. 
Under HRS § 704-413(4)(a), the Circuit Court cannot 
modify CR unless the court determines that "[t]he person is 
still affected by a physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect and the conditions of release have not been fulfilled[.]" Because the record lacks evidence regarding the "still-affected" 
finding, the Motion to Revoke CR was erroneously granted. 
For the foregoing reasons, the Order Revoking 
Conditional Release filed on March 6, 2023 by the Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit is vacated, and we remand for a new hearing or further proceedings consistent with this order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai ‘i, February 20, 2024. 
 
 
  
 
 On the briefs: 
Jon N. Ikenaga, /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Acting Chief JudgeDeputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant. /s/ Clyde J. WadsworthAssociate JudgeBrian R. Vincent,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney /s/ Karen T. Nakasonefor Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
6 Dr. Booher's letter contains only implicit references to
LaGrange's mental disease, disorder, or defect, that "Mr. Lagrange remains
stable at his medicated baseline" and that LaGrange was "well down the pathof becoming permanently institutionalized."
6 