NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000872
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DARIN J. VANDORN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 3DTA-12-01530)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Darin J. Vandorn (Vandorn) appeals
 
from the Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment, entered on
 
September 27, 2012 in the District Court of the Third Circuit1
 
(district court). Vandorn was convicted of operating a vehicle
 
under the influence of an intoxicant, in violation of Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a) (Supp. 2014).
 
Vandorn contends (1) the district court relied on 
insufficient evidence to conclude the driving under the influence (DUI) roadblock operated by the Hawai
'i County Police Department 
(HCPD) on April 15, 2012 was lawful, and (2) the United States 
Supreme Court and HRS § 291E-20(a)(3)(D) (2007 Repl.) created a 
constitutional requirement that Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i present some admissible evidence of the police 
supervisor's purpose in conducting a DUI roadblock. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo presided. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
 
Vandorn's appeal is without merit.
 
(1) There was sufficient evidence to prove the DUI
 
checkpoint was in compliance with HRS § 291E-20(a)(3)(D). HRS
 § 291E-20(a)(3)(D) provides that, "adequate advance warning of
 the fact and purpose of the roadblocks, either by sign posts,
 flares, or other alternative methods" should be used as one of
 the minimum safety precautions at every intoxicant control
 roadblock. Additionally, HRS § 291E-19 (2007 Repl.) states,
 "failure to comply scrupulously" with any internal police
 procedures "shall not invalidate a roadblock that otherwise meets
 the minimum statutory criteria provided in section 291E-20."
 
HCPD Officer Jason Foxworthy (Officer Foxworthy) 
testified that he set up a sign with a flare so it was visible to all motorists approaching the checkpoint satisfying the "advance warning" element of HRS § 291E-20(a)(3)(D). See In Re Doe, 95 
Hawai
'i 183, 196, 20 P.3d 616, 629 (2001) (to provide substantial 
evidence "the testimony of a single witness, if found by the trier of fact to have been credible, will suffice."). 
The district court relied on sufficient evidence in
 
finding:
 
the roadblock procedures as proven in the testimony of
Officer Foxworthy did comply with the requirements of 291E­20, that is, that there was proper illumination; that there
was an off-road safe and secure holding area for vehicles
involved in the roadblock stop; there were uniformed law
enforcement officers carrying proper identification; there
was adequate advance -- adequate advance warning of the fact
and purpose of the roadblock by either sign posts, flares,
or other alternative methods; the roadblock was terminated,
and it was at the discretion of law enforcement officers in
 charge; that as required in section 291E-20(a)(1), all
vehicles were stopped at the roadblock.
 
(2) There was adequate notice of the purpose of the DUI
 
checkpoint, and the checkpoint was constitutional. The United
 
States Supreme Court held that DUI checkpoints do not violate the
 Fourth Amendment's prohibition against unreasonable searches and
 seizure as long as sobriety checkpoint guidelines are met as they
 were in this case. Michigan Dep't of State Police v. Sitz, 496
 
U.S. 444, 455 (1990).
 
In support of his contention that no "purpose" for the
 
roadblock has been shown, Vandorn cites to City of Indianapolis
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
v. Edmond, 531 U.S. 32 (2000). Vandorn contends the Edmond
 
decision requires a police supervisor to state the purpose of a
 DUI roadblock. We disagree. Edmond stated the Supreme Court has
 
upheld seizures at sobriety checkpoints with the purpose of
 removing drunk drivers off the roads. Edmond, 531 U.S. at 37. 
Edmond, however, involved highway checkpoints whose primary
 purpose was the discovery and interdiction of illegal narcotics. 
Id. at 34. Unlike DUI roadblocks, the Supreme Court held that
 the purpose of the checkpoints in Edmond was to advance "the
 general interest in crime control" and thus declined to "suspend
 the usual requirement of individualized suspicion" in such
 circumstances. Id. at 44. Edmond is therefore inapposite. 
Officer Foxworthy testified that the roadblock was set up in
 order to try to "curb drinking and driving," and that the
 roadblock was conducted accordingly, pursuant to sobriety check
 guidelines.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Judgment and Notice of Entry
 
of Judgment, filed September 27, 2012 in the District Court of
 the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 28, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Christopher P. Schlueter
for Defendant-Appellant. Prediding Judge 
Linda L. Walton Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3
 