FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
---o0o--­
HAWAI'I STATE TEACHERS ASSOCIATION,
Union-Appellant,
v.
 
UNIVERSITY LABORATORY SCHOOL,
EDUCATION LABORATORY PUBLIC CHARTER SCHOOL LOCAL
 
SCHOOL BOARD, (GRIEVANCE OC-11-24)(2011-013),
Employer-Appellee
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000295
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(SPECIAL PROCEEDING NO. 11-1-0411)
 
APRIL 15, 2013
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., FUJISE AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J. 
Union-Appellant Hawai
'i State Teachers Association 
(HSTA) appeals from the March 2, 2012 "Order Denying HSTA's 
Motion to Compel Arbitration Filed August 3, 2011" and the March 
28, 2012 "Final Judgment" entered in the Circuit Court of the FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1
First Circuit  (circuit court) in favor of Employer-Appellee
University Laboratory School, Education Laboratory Public Charter
 
School Local School Board (collectively, ULS).
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
HSTA is the bargaining representative of teachers and 
other personnel of the State of Hawai
'i Department of Education 
in bargaining unit 5. Pursuant to a June 30, 2009 Memorandum of Agreement (MOA), ULS became the employer of several bargaining 
unit 5 employees. The MOA provided that the conditions of 
employment would be defined according to the collective 
bargaining agreement between the HSTA and the State of Hawai' i 
Board of Education in effect at the time (Master Agreement). The MOA also required ULS and HSTA to negotiate a supplemental 
agreement and stated that the bargaining unit 5 employees' 
salaries would be subject to future supplemental agreements with 
ULS. 
After executing the 2009 MOA, ULS and HSTA engaged in
 
bargaining, and the parties signed a supplemental agreement
 
executed on June 21, 2010 (Supplemental Agreement). Appendix XIV
 
of the Supplemental Agreement states:
 
2. Designation on Salary Schedule
 
P Designation: an employee's appropriate salary
placement designation (class and step) is made onto
the unit 5 master agreement salary schedule. For stepplacement, parties shall use the attached chart(Exhibit 1) indicating negotiated step increments forunit 5 members. 
The Master Agreement salary schedule referenced above identified
 
the different salary amounts for each step but did not provide
 
any information about the teachers' step placement. Exhibit 1,
 
which purportedly contained information about the teachers' step
 
placement, was not attached to the Supplemental Agreement when
 
the parties executed the agreement.
 
1
 The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On October 29, 2010, HSTA emailed the ULS principal
 
stating it had "inadvertently omitted 'Exhibit 1' for Appendix
 
XIV. . . . This should be included as part of the [Supplemental
 
Agreement]." ULS's principal responded that the Exhibit 1
 
attached to HSTA's email had not been formally presented to ULS's
 
bargaining team during negotiations over the Supplemental
 
Agreement's terms. He stated he had assumed that Appendix XIV's
 
reference to Exhibit 1 referred to a salary table used by one of
 
HSTA's negotiation team members during negotiations. During the
 
parties discussions over the next several months, ULS maintained
 
the parties did not reach an agreement as to the contents of
 
Exhibit 1 of Appendix XIV, and ULS demanded further negotiation.
 
The record indicates the parties did not engage in
 
further bargaining. On April 13, 2011, HSTA filed a grievance
 
asserting that Exhibit 1 and Appendix XIV had been bargained in
 
good faith and that ULS violated the Supplemental Agreement by
 
repudiating Exhibit 1. On May 31, 2011, HSTA informed ULS that
 
the HSTA Board of Directors had approved its grievance for
 
arbitration.
 
On April 28, 2011, ULS filed a prohibited practice 
complaint with the Hawai' i Labor Relations Board (HLRB), alleging 
HSTA had engaged in prohibited practices by attempting to unilaterally insert unbargained-for contract terms, in violation 
of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 89-13(b)(1), (2), (4), and 
(5) (2012 Repl.), and by filing an illegal grievance disputing
 
the terms of an initial agreement, in violation of HRS
 
§ 89-10.8(a)(1) (2012 Repl.). HSTA filed a motion to dismiss the
 
complaint, which the HLRB denied. The HLRB's adjudication of the
 
prohibited practice complaint was pending at the time of the
 
circuit court proceedings on appeal. 
On August 3, 2011, HSTA filed as a special proceeding a
 
motion to compel arbitration of its grievance in the circuit
 
court. On March 2, 2012, the circuit court entered its "Order
 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Denying HSTA's Motion to Compel Arbitration Filed August 3,
 
2011." On March 28, 2012, the circuit court entered its "Final
 
Judgment" in ULS's favor.
 
HSTA filed a timely notice of appeal on March 29, 2012. 
On appeal, HSTA contends the circuit court erred in denying its
 
motion to compel arbitration.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A petition to compel arbitration is reviewed de novo. 
The standard is the same as that which would be applicable
to a motion for summary judgment, and the trial court's
decision is reviewed using the same standard employed by the
trial court and based upon the same evidentiary materials as
were before it in determination of the motion.
 
Sher v. Cella, 114 Hawai' i 263, 266, 160 P.3d 1250, 1253 (App. 
2007) (quoting Douglass v. Pflueger Hawaii, Inc., 110 Hawai' i 
520, 524-25, 135 P.3d 129, 133-34 (2006)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Both the Master Agreement and the Supplemental
 
Agreement include provisions for filing and processing grievances
 
through binding arbitration. The two agreements state, in
 
pertinent part:
 
ARTICLE V - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
 
A.	 DEFINITION. Any claim by [HSTA] or a teacher that
there has been a violation, misinterpretation or
misapplication of a specific term or terms of this Agreement
shall be a grievance.
 
.  .  .	 .
 
H.	 
ARBITRATION.  If a claim made by [HSTA] or teacher has
not been satisfactorily resolved, [HSTA] may present a
request for arbitration of the grievance[.]
 
. . . .
 
e)
 If the Employer disputes the arbitrability of any
grievance submitted to arbitration, the arbitrator
shall first determine the question of
arbitrability. If the arbitrator finds that it is
 not arbitrable, the grievance shall be referred back
to the parties without decision or recommendation on its
merits.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Because the existence of an agreement to arbitrate is 
not in dispute, and because the agreements state that disputes 
over the arbitrability of grievances must be submitted to 
arbitration, HSTA contends HRS Chapter 658A, the Uniform 
Arbitration Act (Supp. 2012), mandates that the circuit court 
compel arbitration. See In re United Pub. Workers, AFSCME, Local 
646, AFL-CIO, 124 Hawai' i 372, 378, 244 P.3d 609, 615 (App. 2010) 
("When agreements reserve questions of arbitrability for the 
arbitrator, . . . the court may only consider [whether there is a 
valid agreement to arbitrate]."). 
The circuit court's order does not specify its grounds
 
for denying HSTA's motion to compel arbitration. However, the
 
hearing transcript indicates the court determined the motion was
 
premature. The court concluded it would be more temperate to
 
wait until the HLRB issued a ruling on ULS's prohibited practice
 
complaint, noting the possibility of overlap and conflicts
 
between an arbitration and the ongoing HLRB proceedings. The
 
circuit court did not, however, make a ruling on its jurisdiction
 
to compel arbitration or on the arbitrability of the dispute. We
 
conclude the circuit court neither exceeded its proper role nor
 
erred in concluding that arbitration was premature until the HLRB
 
ruled on ULS's complaint.
 
Although public policy favors arbitration, arbitration 
is ultimately a matter of contract, and "a party cannot be 
required to submit to arbitration any dispute which he has not 
agreed so to submit." Sher, 114 Hawai' i at 267, 160 P.3d at 
1254. Here, the agreements calls for arbitration of union grievances only, not other controversies, and grants to the 
arbitrator jurisdiction to determine the arbitrability of 
grievances only. The agreements' arbitration provisions comply 
with HRS § 89-10.8(a), which states: "A public employer shall 
enter into written agreement with the exclusive representative 
setting forth a grievance procedure culminating in a final and 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
binding decision, to be invoked in the event of any dispute
 
concerning the interpretation or application of a written
 
agreement."
 
The existence of a grievance, however, is conditioned
 
on a finding that the parties negotiated the terms of the initial
 
Supplemental Agreement in good faith. HRS § 89-10.8(a)(1) ("A
 
dispute over the terms of an initial or renewed agreement shall
 
not constitute a grievance[.]"). Thus, an arbitrator cannot
 
determine whether there has been a violation of the Supplemental
 
Agreement without first considering whether the initial terms,
 
specifically the contents of Exhibit 1, had ever been properly
 
negotiated in the first place. 
Consequently, the issue which HSTA wishes to compel to
 
arbitration is closely related to the issues raised in ULS's
 
prohibited practice complaint. ULS's prohibited practice
 
complaint alleges HSTA failed to bargain in good faith and
 
requests an order declaring that Exhibit 1 was never properly
 
negotiated. The complaint also challenges the validity of HSTA's
 
grievance, alleging the grievance violates HRS § 89-10.8(a)(1) by
 
improperly attempting to give an arbitrator subject matter
 
jurisdiction to adjudicate a bargaining dispute over terms that
 
have not yet been negotiated into the initial Supplemental
 
Agreement.
 
Pursuant to HRS § 89-14 (2012 Repl.), the HLRB has 
exclusive original jurisdiction over the issues raised in ULS's 
complaint. See also Hawai' i Gov't Employees Ass'n, AFSCME Local 
152, AFL–CIO v. Lingle, 124 Hawai' i 197, 204, 239 P.3d 1, 8 
(2010) ("[T]he legislature clearly intended for the HLRB to have 
exclusive original jurisdiction over prohibited practice 
complaints[.]"). In this case, the HLRB has already chosen to 
exercise its exclusive jurisdiction over ULS's complaint, as 
indicated by its denial of HSTA's motion to dismiss the 
complaint. 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We conclude HSTA's motion to compel arbitration 
implicates technical and policy issues within the jurisdiction of 
an administrative agency with statutory and comprehensive 
regulatory authority, and in such cases, a court may apply the 
primary jurisdiction doctrine and defer to the agency before 
proceeding. Fratinardo v. Employees' Ret. Sys. of State of 
Hawai'i, 121 Hawai' i 462, 468, 220 P.3d 1043, 1049 (2009). A 
court's application of the primary jurisdiction doctrine does not 
indicate that it lacks jurisdiction. Id. Contrary to HSTA's 
assertions, therefore, the circuit court did not ignore Hawai' i's 
policy favoring arbitration, nor did it improperly decide the 
underlying issue of arbitrability when it denied HSTA's motion to 
compel arbitration. 
Although HSTA correctly asserts that parallel
 
proceedings may be pursued, under these circumstances, compelling
 
arbitration likely would have produced conflicting or redundant
 
judgments and wasted effort and expense. On the other hand, the
 
HLRB's resolution of ULS's statutory claims will not require the
 
HLRB to adjudicate the interpretation or application of the
 
terms. Furthermore, ULS does not dispute that if the HLRB
 
decides that HSTA did not violate its statutory duties under HRS
 
Chapter 89 and that the grievance is valid, any remaining issues
 
would be subject to arbitration. Therefore, we agree with the
 
circuit court's assessment that HSTA's motion to compel
 
arbitration was premature.
 
However, we conclude the circuit court exceeded its 
authority when it dismissed the action. "Where the doctrine of 
primary jurisdiction applies, the court has the discretion either 
to retain jurisdiction and stay the proceedings or, if the 
parties would not be unfairly disadvantaged, to dismiss the case 
without prejudice." Pavsek v. Sandvold, 127 Hawai' i 390, 402, 
279 P.3d 55, 67 (App. 2012) (emphasis added; internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). Based on the record we cannot 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
determine whether the circuit court considered whether "unfair
 
disadvantage" would result from its dismissal. Accordingly, we
 
remand for determination of whether a stay or dismissal without
 
prejudice is appropriate. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the March 28, 2012
 
"Final Judgment" entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
and remand this case with instructions to consider whether a stay
 
or dismissal without prejudice would be the appropriate remedy
 
under the primary jurisdiction doctrine.
 
On the briefs:
 
Herbert R. Takahashi
 
Rebecca L. Covert
 Davina W. Lam
 (Takahashi and Covert)
for Union-Appellant.
 
James E. Halvorson
 
Richard H. Thomason
 Deputy Attorneys General
for Employer-Appellee.
 
8
 