NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000148
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
PAULO I. NOGA, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
HONOLULU DIVISION
(CASE NO. 1DTC-16-016314)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, C.J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Paulo I. Noga ( Noga) appeals from
the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment,
filed on February 15, 2017, in the District Court of the First
Circuit, Honolulu Division ( district court).1  Following a bench
trial, the district court convicted Noga of excessive speeding,
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) ยง 291C-105(a)(1)
(2007).2
On appeal, Noga asserts the following points of error:
(1) the charge was insufficient because it failed to allege the
essential element that the offense took place upon a highway; and
1  The Honorable Rebecca A. Copeland presided.
2  HRS ยง 291C-105(a)(1) provides: "No person shall drive a motor vehicle
at a speed exceeding . . . [t]he applicable state or county speed limit by
thirty miles per hour or more[.]"NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(2) the district court erred in admitting the testimony of
Officer Jason Mike ( Officer Mike) as to the radar gun speed
reading where the State failed to lay the requisite foundation
for admission of his testimony.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant legal authorities, we resolve Noga's points
of error as follows, and affirm.
(1) Sufficiency of the charge.   Noga did not object to
the charge while the case was before the district court.  We
therefore apply the "liberal construction" standard.  State v.
Tominiko, 126 Hawai# i 68, 76, 266 P.3d 1122, 1130 (2011).  Under
the liberal construction standard, "we will not reverse a
conviction based upon a defective [charge] unless the defendant
can show prejudice or that the [charge] cannot within reason be
construed to charge a crime."  Id.
In State v. Wheeler , 121 Hawai #i 383, 219 P.3d 1170
(2009), the Hawai# i Supreme Court noted that:
this court [has] recognized the general principle that in
determining whether a defendant has been adequately informed
of the charges against him, the appellate court can consider
other information in addition to the charge that may have
been provided to the defendant during the course of the case
up until the time defendant objected to the sufficiency of
the charges against him.
Id. at 396, 219 P.3d at 1183; see also State v. Hitchcock, 123
Hawai#i 369, 379, 235 P.3d 365, 375 (2010).
Here, because Noga challenged the sufficiency of the
charge for the first time on appeal, we consider the information
provided to him during the course of the case while it was before
the district court.  In this regard, Noga's citation indicated
that the location of the offense was "H1 EB / Punchbowl Off." 
Further, at trial, Officer Mike testified that he first observed
Noga's vehicle as it entered the H-1 eastbound freeway coming
from the Likelike Highway on-ramp.  Officer Mike testified that
he followed Noga's vehicle until the Punchbowl off-ramp, during
which he obtained a radar speed reading of Noga's vehicle.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Based on the information provided to Noga during the
trial court proceedings, he was informed that the offense was
alleged to have occurred on the H-1 freeway.  Noga's first point
of error thus lacks merit.
(2) Admission of the radar speed reading.   During trial
in this case, Officer Mike testified that his vehicle was
equipped with a Stalker DSR radar and that between the Vineyard
on-ramp and the Punchbowl off-ramp, Noga's vehicle was measured
going 75 miles per hour in an area where the speed limit is 45
miles per hour.  Although Noga contends on appeal that the
district court erred in admitting Officer Mike's testimony
regarding the radar speed reading, Noga did not object to this
testimony at trial.  Specifically, Noga did not object when
Officer Mike testified to the 75 miles per hour radar speed
reading, nor did Noga argue at any point that the radar speed
reading was inadmissible.  Thus, Noga has waived his challenge to
admission of the radar speed reading.  See State v. Vliet, 91
Hawai#i 288, 298-99, 983 P.2d 189, 199-200 (1999); State v.
Wallace, 80 Hawai# i 382, 409-10, 910 P.2d 695, 722-23 (1996);
State v. Winfrey , No. 28737, 2009 WL 4988719 (SDO) (Haw. Dec. 22,
2009); State v. Duran , No. 30047, 2010 WL 2914377 (SDO) (Hawai #i
App. Jul. 27, 2010).
At most, Noga objected when the prosecutor was asking
questions about Officer Mike's training and asked about his
knowledge of the Stalker DSR radar manufacturer's recommendations
or requirements regarding training.  The defense objection arose
as follows:
[THE STATE]:  Can you please describe -- before you
tell us exactly what you were training with, can you please
first tell us what the manufacturer of the device requires
for someone to be trained to use the device?  
[OFFICER MIKE]:  It's 40 hours of training that
consist on [sic] hands-on training.  It goes into different
theories of the radar, goes over case law as well, and then
on top of having a proficiency, being able to properly use
the radar with the master instructor in the vehicle to
certify that you can use the radar up to proficiency.  
[THE STATE]:  Okay.  And how do you know that -- or
how do you know what the manufacturer's recommendations or
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
requirements are regarding the training for someone to be
able to use the device?  
[OFFICER MIKE]:  They had a manual and they --  
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Objection, your honor.  This is
hearsay.  Lack of personal knowledge.  Best evidence.
Foundation.  
(Emphasis added).  After further argument, the district court
overruled Noga's objection "for now."  Officer Mike further
testified that "we had a manual that was given in the class on
top of the Stalker representative who's actually one of the
hands-on manufacturers and the technical experts [who] come out
and teach the course."  Officer Mike testified that what the
representative said and what the manual said coincided.
Hawaii Rules of Evidence ( HRE) Rule 104 provides, in
pertinent part:
Rule 104  Preliminary questions . (a) Questions of 
admissibility generally.  Preliminary questions concerning the
qualification of a person to be a witness, the existence of a
privilege, or the admissibility of evidence shall be determined by
the court, subject to the provisions of subsection (b).  In making
its determination the court is not bound by the rules of evidence
except those with respect to privileges.
(b) Relevancy conditioned on fact.  When the relevancy
of evidence depends upon the fulfillment of a condition of
fact, the court shall admit it upon, or subject to, the
introduction of evidence sufficient to support a finding of
the fulfillment of the condition.
See also HRE Rule 1101(d)(1).
In State v. Gonzalez , 128 Hawaii 314, 288 P.3d 788
(2012), the Hawai
#i Supreme Court recognized that the trial court
had not abused its discretion to conclude that an LTI laser gun's
manual was provided by the manufacturer where the police officer
who used the laser gun testified that he possessed a manual "from
LTI[.]"  Id. at 325-26, 288 P.3d at 799-800.  The supreme court
explained:#
[d]efendant cannot establish that the court abused its
discretion by ruling that the laser gun's accuracy was
tested according to procedures recommended by the
manufacturer, as several facts in the record support this
conclusion.  See [State v. Assaye, 121 Hawai #i 204, 210, 216
P.3d 1227, 1233 (2009)] ("When a question arises regarding
the necessary foundation for the introduction of evidence,
the determination of whether proper foundation has been
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
established lies within the discretion of the trial court,
and its determination will not be overturned absent a
showing of clear abuse."). It is undisputed that Officer
Franks possessed a manual that recommended four procedures
to verify the accuracy of the laser gun, and that Officer
Franks did in fact observe those procedures.  The only issue
is whether the State demonstrated that the manual containing
the procedures was provided by LTI, the laser gun's
manufacturer.  Officer Franks testified at trial that the
manual was "from [LTI]."  Further, on cross-examination,
Officer Franks related that the manual bore the LTI
copyright, that it was reviewed by LTI personnel, and that
information provided by the same LTI personnel was "covered
in the manual we use to train on." Based on this testimony,
it was within the court's discretion to conclude that the
manual was provided by the manufacturer and, therefore, the
procedures contained therein were recommended by the
manufacturer.
This conclusion is not altered by Defendant's contention
that some parts of Officer Franks' testimony-his testimony
that the manual was reviewed by LTI personnel and that LTI
personnel provided similar information to that covered in
Officer Franks' manual-were inadmissible hearsay.  Although
the transcript provides few details, it appears that the
evidence adduced was not hearsay.  The testimony that LTI
personnel "reviewed" the manual, is not hearsay because in
reviewing the manual it does not appear that the LTI
personnel intended to communicate any assertion regarding
the manual.  See Commentary to Hawai #i Rules of Evidence
(HRE) Rule 801 (2011) ("[M]uch nonverbal conduct, although
tending logically to prove the actor's belief in an event or
condition, is not motivated by the intent to assert that
belief and should not be considered hearsay.").
Further, the assertion that the information provided by LTI
representatives corresponded to the information in the manual was
offered not for the truth of the matter asserted, but only to
prove the similarity between information provided by LTI personnel
and information contained in the manual.  Because the only
significance of the statement was the fact that it was made, the
statement does not fall within the scope of the hearsay rule.  See
Island Directory Co. v. Iva's Kinimaka Enterprises
, 10 Haw.App.
15, 21, 859 P.2d 935, 939 (1993) ("If the significance of an
offered statement lies solely in the fact that it was made, no
issue is raised as to the truth of anything asserted, and the
statement is not hearsay.").
Id. (emphasis added).
Given the record in this case, HRE Rule 104(a), and the
discussion in  Gonzalez set forth above, we conclude that the
district court did not abuse its discretion in allowing Officer
Mike to testify about the Stalker DSR radar manual in this case.
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Notice of Entry of
Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, filed on February 15,
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2017, in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu
Division, is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 27, 2018.
On the briefs:
Jon N. Ikenaga,
Deputy Public Defender,
(assisting on the briefs,
Shay F. Shibata, Law
Student Intern), 
for Defendant-Appellant.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Brian R. Vincent, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge
6