FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
---o0o---
RICHARD W. BAKER, Appellant-Appellant, v.
BRICKWOOD M. GALUTERIA, ABIGAIL L. GALUTERIA, and
GLEN TAKAHASHI, City Clerk, City and County of Honolulu,
Appellees-Appellees
NO. CAAP-16-0000045
APPEAL FROM THE BOARD OF REGISTRATION, ISLAND OF OAHU
(CASE NO. 15-1)
JANUARY 29, 2018
FUJISE, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
Appellant-Appellant Richard W. Baker (Baker) appeals
from the January 15, 2016 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law,
Decision and Order ( Order) entered by the Board of Registration
for the Island of O #ahu (Board).  In the Order, the Board
concluded that the Appellees-Appellees Hawai# i State Senator
Brickwood M. Galuteria (Brickwood ) and Abigail L. Galuteria
(Abigail ) (together, the Galuterias) were residents of RoyalFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Capitol Plaza at 876 Curtis Street in Honolulu, Hawai# i (Curtis
Street Apartment ), with respect to their registration to vote in
the November 2014 General Election.
Baker's primary contention is that the Galuterias
resided at 3462 P âkui Street in the P âlolo neighborhood of
Honolulu (the Pâlolo Property), rather than at the Curtis Street
Apartment.  On appeal, Baker requests that this court:  (1)
declare that the Galuterias were improperly registered to vote in
the November 2014 General Election; (2) declare that the Board's
proceedings were in excess of its statutory and regulatory
authority and that its decision is invalid; and (3) vacate the
January 15, 2016 Order and award Baker reasonable attorney's fees
and costs.  As discussed herein, we conclude that the Board did
not err in finding and concluding that the Galuterias' residence
was the Curtis Street Apartment, and we affirm.
I.BACKGROUND
On Sunday, November 2, 2014, Baker sent a letter1 by
email to the City and County of Honolulu (City ) Office of the
City Clerk challenging Brickwood's voter registration address at
the Curtis Street Apartment.2  In support of his challenge, Baker
asserted that Brickwood claimed a real estate tax exemption for
the Pâlolo Property and for another property located at 45-565
Mahinui Road in K âne#ohe (Kâne#ohe Property).  Baker requested
1This letter, which was emailed to clerks@honolulu.gov , contains a
handwritten notation indicating that the letter was emailed at 6:10 p.m. on
November 2, 2014, and faxed at 3:05 p.m. on November 3, 2014.
2Although Baker's letter focuses primarily on Brickwood, it also
appears to challenge Abigail's residency.
2FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
that the Office of the City Clerk investigate his claim and
prohibit Brickwood from voting or, in the alternative, allow
Brickwood to cast a provisional ballot. 
On Monday, November 3, 2014, the City Clerk ( Clerk)3
sent a letter to Baker acknowledging receipt of his challenge of
Brickwood's voter registration address.  As Baker's challenge was
emailed and unsigned, the Clerk asked Baker to return a signed
copy of the November 2, 2014 letter to confirm that Baker was the
person who sent the challenge.  The Clerk also notified Baker
that it was not able to separate Brickwood's ballot because
Brickwood had voted by "absentee walk"4 prior to the Clerk's
receipt of Baker's challenge.  Elections were held on Tuesday,
November 4, 2014.
On November 13, 2014, the Clerk sent a letter to
Brickwood notifying him of Baker's challenge.  The Clerk
requested information and documentation to substantiate the
Curtis Street Apartment as Brickwood's residence, and asked
Brickwood to submit any statements that would assist in making
the determination that he had the intention to permanently occupy
the Curtis Street Apartment and that he had abandoned any former
residence.
3On November 3, 2014, the City Clerk was Bernice K.N. Mau ( Mau).  
Mau retired on December 31, 2014, and Glen Takahashi ( Takahashi ) became the
Acting City Clerk.  On June 3, 2015, the City Council of the City and County
of Honolulu confirmed Takahashi as City Clerk. 
4"Absentee walk ballots are ballots cast by voters who vote prior
to election day at a polling place outside of their precinct set up for early
voting."  Green Party of Hawaii v. Nago, 138 Hawai #i 228, 233 n.3, 378 P.3d
944, 949 n.3 (2016).  
3FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On December 6, 2014, Brickwood sent a letter to the
Clerk confirming his residence at Curtis Street with Abigail and
his mother, Juliette K. Galuteria ( Juliette).  Brickwood attached
a copy of a rental agreement, signed on December 6, 2014, for the
Curtis Street Apartment.  The term of the rental agreement was
for a period of one year, commencing on November 1, 2014 and
terminating on October 31, 2015.  Brickwood confirmed that he
owns properties in K âne#ohe and Pâ lolo and explained that he and
Abigail "literally split [their] time between Curtis Street and
Pâlolo" due to Juliette's medical conditions and to assist their
daughter and five grandchildren. 
On December 12, 2014, the Clerk sent a letter to
Brickwood informing him that a real property tax exemption
results in a rebuttable presumption that the P âlolo Property is
Brickwood's residence.  The Clerk asked the Galuterias to submit
any information or documentation to rebut the presumption of
residency and support their habitation at Curtis Street.  The
Clerk also requested that the Galuterias respond to a list of six
questions related to their habitation at the Curtis Street
Apartment. 
On January 5, 2015, the Galuterias submitted a response
to the Clerk's request, which included, inter alia :  pay stubs
from Pacific Center for Economic Development and Entertainment
Partners, bank statements from First Hawaiian Bank and Aloha
Pacific Federal Credit Union, and a State of Hawai #i Department
of Taxation Promise Reminder Notice.  Additionally, the
Galuterias submitted two earlier rental agreements for the Curtis
4FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Street Apartment.  The term of the first rental agreement was for
a period of one year, commencing on June 15, 2011, and
terminating on May 31, 2012.  The term of the second rental
agreement was for a period of one year commencing on November 1,
2013, and terminating October 31, 2014.  The first rental
agreement listed Juliette and Brickwood as tenants, and the
second rental agreement listed Juliette as the tenant.  Brickwood
asserted that Juliette executed the second rental agreement
without his knowledge.  The Galuterias also submitted photographs
of the Curtis Street Apartment, and Brickwood's affidavit in
which he explained that due to family circumstances and health
issues, he spends over 50 percent of his time at Curtis Street
and less than 50 percent of his time at the P âlolo Property, and
that Abigail spends 40 percent of her time at Curtis Street and
60 percent of her time at the P âlolo home.  Brickwood declined
the Clerk's request for the names and contact information of
residents or employees that could verify their residence at
Curtis Street.  Brickwood did not consent to a site inspection of
the Curtis Street Apartment.
On February 2, 2015, the Clerk issued a decision.  The
decision summarized research findings from government and public
sources, as well as documents and sworn statements submitted by
the Galuterias.  The Clerk stated that the Clerk's Office was
"unable to segregate the [Galuterias'] ballots from the General
Election results" because the Galuterias voted prior to Baker's
challenge, and their ballots were commingled with other in-person
absentee voting cast ballots.  The Clerk noted that the
5FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Galuterias submitted pay stubs, paychecks, copies of statements
from financial institutions, and a State of Hawai #i Department of
Taxation notice to support their residency at the Curtis Street
Apartment.  As such, the Clerk determined that the Galuterias had
rebutted the presumption of residency at the Pâlolo Property, and
concluded that the Galuterias' residence was the Curtis Street
address. 
On or about February 11, 2015, Baker sent a letter to
the Board appealing the Clerk's February 2, 2015 decision.  In
his letter, Baker stated that "Senator Galuteria may have
violated tax laws and regulations (city, state, and possibly
federal) due to his false claims of property tax exemptions for
two properties in Honolulu that are not his principal residence." 
On March 13, 2015, the Board issued a Notice of
Prehearing Conference ( Notice).  The Notice scheduled the
prehearing conference for March 24, 2015.  The Notice provided
that the appeal was brought pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes
(HRS) § 11-26 (2009), and would be conducted under the procedures
of Hawai #i Administrative Rules (HAR) § 3-172-43 (2010). 
On April 9, 2015, the Board issued a Prehearing Order;
Notice of Disclosures of Potential Conflicts and Deadline to File
Objections.  Due to Baker's failure to file requested documents
with the Office of Elections, the Board concluded that it
"lack[ed] jurisdiction over whether Senator Galuteria is
qualified to serve in the State Senate."  The Board reiterated
that it set a motions deadline, and a motions hearing date at the
prehearing conference.  
6FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On or about April 14, 2015, the Galuterias filed a
motion to dismiss Baker's appeal of the Clerk's February 5, 2015
decision ( Motion to Dismiss).  The Galuterias argued that they
were entitled to a dismissal of the appeal because they presented
substantial evidence of their residency at the Curtis Street
Apartment, and Baker failed to present any evidence to support
his voter registration challenge.  In a May 5, 2015 response,
Baker contended that the evidence submitted by the Galuterias
"fails to rebut the presumption of their residency at Pakui
Street and to substantiate their residency at Curtis Street." 
The Galuterias filed a reply memorandum on May 12, 2015. 
The Board held a hearing on the Motion to Dismiss on
May 26, 2015.  The Board stated that it was treating the Motion
to Dismiss "as the equivalent of a motion for summary
judgment[.]"  The Board also stated that Baker "has under the law
the burden of producing evidence and the burden of proof as to
the ultimate issues in his challenge of the residency of Senator
Galuteria and Mrs. Galuteria."  After hearing the parties'
arguments, the Board requested that the City provide a response
to the following three questions:  (1) "explain how/why
segregation of the Galuterias' cast absentee walk-in ballots was
not possible;" (2) "why the Acting City Clerk did not discuss, in
his February 2, 2015 ruling, the significance and/or impact of
the Galuterias' Bishop Street address prior to moving to the
Curtis Street address;" and (3) "why the Acting City Clerk
proceeded to decide the issues presented in the voter
registration residency challenge if the inability to segregate
7FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the Galuterias' cast ballots 'mooted' the challenge."  The Board
requested that the Galuterias and Baker submit their response to
the City's statement by June 16, 2015.  The Board permitted the
City to reply to any responses by July 2, 2015. 
On June 8, 2015, the City filed a statement regarding
issues raised at the hearing on the Motion to Dismiss
(Statement ).  The City attached the Clerk's declaration to its
Statement.  The Clerk declared that the Galuterias voted in the
absentee walk-in polling location at Honolulu Hale on October 30,
2014.  The Clerk explained that after a person completes his or
her ballot, the ballot is placed in a sealed box containing
"every other ballot deposited therein."  The voter retains a
"ballot stub."  The Clerk declared that "[o]nce a ballot stub is
detached and the deposited ballot is placed into the sealed
ballot box, the deposited ballot has no identifiable tracing
marks, numbers, alphabets, codes, etc. to link the deposited
ballot to a particular voter."  The Clerk explained that the "bar
markings/code, numbers along the side of the ballot do not
identify the persons casting the ballot.  The markings are
computer readable information regarding polling place, precinct
number, etc. for purposes of ballot tabulation."  The City
asserted that the Clerk does not have the "authority to
unilaterally order the unsealing of the ballot box in order to
segregate a ballot or ballots . . . without the concurrence of
the State of Hawaii, Office of Elections."  Additionally, the
City asserted that the Galuterias' Bishop Street address was
"irrelevant to the disposition of the voter registration
8FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
residency issue that was presented to the City Clerk based on
what Mr. Baker asserted in his challenge (the Pakui Street real
property tax exemption)." 
On June 16, 2015, Baker filed a Second Response to 
Motion to Dismiss ( Second Response ).  Baker argued that the
Galuterias were not permitted to file a Motion to Dismiss under
the HAR, and that the Motion to Dismiss "does not meet the Court
Rules' standard."  Baker also argued that the "[i]nvocation of
the mootness doctrine is not permitted by statute or rule."  
Additionally, Baker contended that the "Clerk's failure to
segregate the Galuterias' ballots prior to counting, for which
there was an available procedure, improperly undercut the
statutory framework for handling voter registration challenges." 
On June 23, 2015, the Galuterias filed a motion to
strike Baker's Second Response ( Motion to Strike) pursuant to
HAR § 3-172-43(d).  The Galuterias contended that Baker's Second
Response was improper and untimely because it raised arguments
that should have been brought by May 5, 2015, i.e. , the Board's
deadline to respond to any dispositive motions.  Baker filed a
response to the Motion to Strike on June 25, 2015.  The
Galuterias filed a reply memorandum in support of the Motion to
Strike on June 26, 2015. 
On October 16, 2015, the Board filed an order granting
in part and denying in part the Motion to Strike, and denying the
Motion to Dismiss.  The Board granted the Galuterias' Motion to
Strike to the extent that it "opposes the Galuterias' motion to
dismiss as the Board previously set the briefing schedule and
9FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
arguments were heard on the motion to dismiss."  The Board denied
the Galuterias' Motion to Strike with regard to "those parts of
Baker's second response that respond to the City Clerk's
positions on the questions posed by the Board, i.e. , regarding
mootness and the segregation of ballots."  With regard to the
Motion to Dismiss, the Board determined that "there are material
issues of fact present in the record that preclude dismissing
Baker's appeal[.]"
The Board held a second prehearing conference on
November 9, 2015, and issued a Second Prehearing Order on
November 10, 2015.  The Board requested that the parties submit
their exhibit lists, witnesses list, and prehearing memorandum by
November 23, 2015.  The Board set a November 25, 2015 deadline
for any responses to the prehearing memoranda. 
On November 30, 2015, and December 5, 2015, an
evidentiary hearing was held before the Board (Hearing ).  The
Board accepted the parties' exhibits "in terms of authenticity,
but not as to relevance and weight."  Louise Black (Black), Eva
Gallegos ( Gallegos), Matthew Johnson (Johnson ), Brickwood, and
the Clerk testified at the Hearing.
Black was the first witness to be called by Baker to
testify.  Black testified that she has lived at Royal Capitol
Plaza for eighteen years and that she has seen Brickwood at Royal
Capitol Plaza.  Black related that she was aware that Brickwood's
mother lived at Royal Capitol Plaza.  Black testified that she
has never visited the Galuterias' apartment at the Royal Capitol
Plaza.  Black stated that she had no personal knowledge as to
10FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
whether Brickwood resides in Royal Capitol Plaza.  Black also
testified that she knew Baker because he was the campaign manager
for Chris Lethem (Lethem ), who had been running against Brickwood
for State Senate in 2014, and that she supported Lethem.
Gallegos testified that she has lived at Royal Capitol
Plaza for nine years.  Gallegos testified that she has never seen
Abigail at Royal Capitol Plaza.  Gallegos related that her
interactions with Juliette were "casual."  Gallegos stated that
she has seen Brickwood in the elevator at Royal Capitol Plaza. 
Gallegos testified that she has never visited the Galuterias'
apartment in Royal Capitol Plaza.  Gallegos also testified that
she was a Lethem supporter.
Johnson testified that he has lived at Royal Capitol
Plaza for eight years.  Johnson related that he had no way of
saying whether or not the Galuterias lived at Royal Capitol
Plaza, but he had never seen them there.  On cross-examination,
Johnson admitted that he did not know what Abigail or Juliette
looked like.
Brickwood testified at the Hearing.  Brickwood
explained that Abigail was not present at the Hearing because she
suffers from a "high degree of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. "  Brickwood related that he and Abigail had established
the Pâlolo Property as their voting residence in 2005.  As to his
claimed property tax exemption for the P âlolo Property, Brickwood
testified that his failure to change his address with the real
property assessment division was a mistake.
11FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Brickwood testified that he and Abigail later resided
at the Executive Centre at 1088 Bishop Street from 2007 to 2011. 
Brickwood stated that he and Abigail also maintained one of four
units at the P âlolo Property in 2007.  Brickwood explained that
there were four families, including his daughter, her husband,
and their five children, living at the P âlolo Property in 2007. 
When asked "[a]fter you established your residence at Executive
Centre, how much time, if any, did you maintain at Pakui Street,"
Brickwood responded, "our grandchildren are there, so we'd be
there as often as we possibly could.  So you know, a couple of
days a week, three days a week." 
Brickwood related that he has resided at the Curtis
Street Apartment since 2011 with Abigail and Juliette.  Brickwood
testified that he moved to the Curtis Street Apartment due to
changes made to district boundaries for the 2012 election.  When
asked by Baker to identify his bed and Juliette's bed on a
diagram of the Curtis Street Apartment, Brickwood indicated that
he and Abigail slept on a pull-out sofa bed in the living room,
and that Juliette slept in the bedroom.  Brickwood said that he
shares a closet with Abigail and Juliette.  Brickwood also
testified that he, Abigail, and Juliette planned to relocate to
the Moana Pacific because "[Abigail's] pulmonary disease requires
central air-conditioning. . . . [and also to] expand the living
conditions and enter into a three-bedroom[.]"  When asked by the
Board "once you move [to Moana Pacific], you're not necessarily
going to feel a need to keep a presence in Pâ lolo at all[,]"
Brickwood replied, "[j]ust as a landlord.  Landlord presence."  
12FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Clerk also testified at the Hearing.  The Clerk
explained that, upon receipt of a challenge, the City notifies
the challenged voter and provides them with an opportunity to
respond.  The City conducts its own investigation and eventually
the Clerk makes a ruling on the voter registration challenge.  
As to Baker's challenge, the Clerk testified that the Galuterias
were registered to vote at the Pâlolo address, then a Bishop
Street address, and then at the Curtis Street address.  The Clerk
also testified that there was no challenge involving the
Galuterias' Bishop Street voter registration address.  The Clerk
stated that the Galuterias had claimed a homeowner real property
tax exemption for the Pâ lolo Property, which created a rebuttable
presumption of residency there.  The Clerk testified that the
Galuterias submitted rental agreements, bank statements, pay
checks, and sworn statements to establish their residency at
Curtis Street.  Upon review of the documents and statements, the
Clerk was satisfied that the Galuterias had rebutted the
presumption of residency in P âlolo. 
On January 15, 2016, the Board issued its Order.  The
Board concluded that Baker had not met his burden of proof that
the Galuterias did not reside at the Curtis Street Apartment for
voting purposes.  The Board also concluded that the Galuterias
had rebutted the presumption that their actual residence was the
Pâlolo address, and that for the 2014 elections the Galuterias
were residents of the Curtis Street Apartment.  The Board made
several Findings of Fact (FOFs ) and Conclusions of Law ( COLs)
including, inter alia , the following FOFs:
13FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2. In 2005, [Abigail] inherited property at 3462 Pakui
Street, in Palolo Valley, in the City and County of
Honolulu (the "Palolo property").  Currently,
Brickwood and [Abigail] jointly own that property. 
3. There are four residential units on the Palolo
property. From 2005 until mid-2014, the Galuterias'
daughter resided in one of those residential units
with her husband and their five children. In mid-2014,
the daughter experienced a "tumultuous separation"
from her husband, who left, and she and the children
remained at Palolo.
4. The Galuterias have retained one unit on the Palolo
property so that they may retain a "presence" on it.
5. When the Galuterias initially acquired the
Palolo property, they applied for and received
from the Real Property Assessment Division of
the City and County of Honolulu a partial
"homeowner" exemption from their real property
taxes on this property as owner-occupants.  See,
e.g., annual assessment notices for Tax Years
July 1, 2011 through June 30, 2016.  Appellant's
Hearing Exhibits 6-10.  
6. In 2007, the Galuterias began occupying Suite 2812 at
the Executive Centre, at 1088 Bishop Street in
downtown Honolulu as their new residence.  Brickwood
and [Abigail] both executed voter registration
applications dated August 30, 2007, showing this
address as their residence. 
. . . . 
10. In early 2011, the Galuterias ascertained that
redistricting would change the boundaries of District
12, and that Executive Centre would no longer be part
of that district.
11. Accordingly, to ensure that Brickwood could continue
to represent District 12 in the State Senate, the
Galuterias decided to relocate to the Kaka #ako area.
At the same time, they agreed with Brickwood's mother,
Juliette, that she would relocate from Kane #ohe to the
same residential unit as the Galuterias, because
Juliette was advancing in years and suffered from
various age-related illnesses and limitations.
12. The Galuterias and Juliette rented Unit 2408 of the
Royal Capitol Plaza, at 876 Curtis Street in Kaka #ako,
commencing as of June 15, 2011.  A factor in the
decision to choose the Curtis Street residence was
that Juliette's church is only one block away, and
this enables her to visit her church every day.  
. . . . 
16. On or about October 30, 2014, the Thursday prior to
the general election day of Tuesday, November 4, 2014,
the Galuterias voted by absentee walk-in ballot.
Thereafter, pursuant to the regular processing of
mail-in and walk-in absentee ballots, the Galuterias'
ballots were commingled with those of thousands of
14FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
other mail-in and walk-in absentee ballots and could
not be isolated from them as of the time that the
challenge to them was made.
. . . . 
18. For reasons that remain unclear, Baker's complaint has
made no reference to the Galuterias' prior residence
at Executive Centre, but rather Baker has contended
that the Galuterias never abandoned their Palolo
residence. 
. . . .
 
22. During December 2014 and January 2015, the Clerk
conducted an investigation of the Galuterias' claims
to be residents at Curtis Street for voting purposes. 
The Clerk took into account the addresses listed by
the Galuterias on their drivers' licenses and vehicle
registrations, and the claims by the Galuterias that
they regularly received mail related to Brickwood's
employment, and other mail at the Curtis Street
address.  The Clerk also took into consideration the
fact, admitted by the Galuterias, that the Galuterias
had been claiming a homeowner's property-tax exemption
with respect to the Palolo property ever since they
acquired the property in 2005. 
23. Although the Galuterias abandoned their residence at
the Palolo property in 2007, they did not promptly
request that the property tax assessment status for
that property be modified to reflect that they were no
longer owner-occupants of the Palolo property.  They
made such a request in late 2014, after Baker had made
public that the Galuterias were continuing to claim
favorable tax treatment as owner-occupants of the
Palolo property. 
Baker filed a notice of appeal on January 25, 2016. 
II.POINTS OF ERROR  
On appeal, Baker raises four points of error,
contending that the Board:  (1) clearly erred by finding that the
Galuterias had abandoned the P âlolo Property as their residence
in 2007; (2) abused its discretion by affirming the Clerk's
decision despite substantial evidence of the Clerk's violation of
statutory procedures for Baker's challenge and for failing to
segregate the Galuterias' ballots; (3) based its Order on
unlawful procedures, including fact-finding, receiving argument,
and delegating or failing to delegate to the chairperson; and (4)
15FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
engaged in unlawful procedures prior to the evidentiary hearing
by following rules that were not promulgated pursuant to HRS
§ 91-3.
III.APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
An agency's conclusions of law are reviewed de novo,
while an agency's factual findings are reviewed for clear
error. A conclusion of law that presents mixed questions of
fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous
standard because the conclusion is dependent upon the facts
and circumstances of the particular case.
As a general matter, a finding of fact or a mixed
determination of law and fact is clearly erroneous when (1)
the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding
or determination, or (2) despite substantial evidence to
support the finding or determination, the appellate court is
left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake
has been made. Substantial evidence is credible evidence
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable
a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.
Dupree v. Hiraga, 121 Hawai# i 297, 312, 219 P.3d 1084, 1099
(2009) (quoting Del Monte Fresh Produce (Hawaii), Inc. v. Int'l
Longshore & Warehouse Union, 112 Hawai# i 489, 499, 146 P.3d 1066,
1076 (2006)).  
"Interpretation of a statute is a question of law which
we review de novo."  Kikuchi v. Brown, 110 Hawai# i 204, 207, 130
P.3d 1069, 1072 (App. 2006) (quoting Gap v. Puna Geothermal
Venture, 106 Hawai# i 325, 331, 104 P.3d 912, 918 (2004)). 
General principles of statutory construction apply in
interpreting administrative rules.  As in statutory
construction, courts look first at an administrative rule's
language.  If an administrative rule's language is
unambiguous, and its literal application is neither
inconsistent with the policies of the statute the rule
implements nor produces an absurd or unjust result, courts
enforce the rule's plain meaning.
Panado v. Bd. of Trs., Emps.' Ret. Sys., 134 Hawai #i 1, 11, 332
P.3d 144, 154 (2014) (quoting Liberty Dialysis-Haw., LLC v.
Rainbow Dialysis, LLC, 130 Hawai# i 95, 103, 306 P.3d 140, 148
(2013)).
16FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IV.DISCUSSION
A.Abandonment of the P âlolo Property
Baker argues that the Board clearly erred by finding
that the Galuterias abandoned the P âlolo Property as their
residence in 2007.  Before addressing this contention, we put the
issue in context.  
HRS § 11-12(a) (2009) provides, in relevant part, that
"[n]o person shall register or vote in any other precinct than
that in which the person resides[.]"5  HRS § 11-13 (2009) sets
forth the rules for the determination of a person's residency, as
follows:
§ 11-13  Rules for determining residency.  For the
purpose of this title, there can be only one residence for
an individual, but in determining residency, a person may
treat oneself separate from the person's spouse. The
following rules shall determine residency for election
purposes only: 
(1) The residence of a person is that place in which
the person's habitation is fixed, and to which,
whenever the person is absent, the person has
the intention to return;
(2) A person does not gain residence in any precinct
into which the person comes without the present
intention of establishing the person's permanent
dwelling place within such precinct;
(3) If a person resides with the person's family in
one place, and does business in another, the
former is the person's place of residence; but
any person having a family, who establishes the
person's dwelling place other than with the
person's family, with the intention of remaining
there shall be considered a resident where the
person has established such dwelling place;
(4) The mere intention to acquire a new residence
without physical presence at such place, does
not establish residency, neither does mere
physical presence without the concurrent present
 
5In addition, pursuant to article III, section 6 of the Hawai #i
Constitution, to be eligible to serve as a member of the Hawai #i Senate, a
person must be a qualified voter of the senatorial district from which he or
she seeks to be elected.
17FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
intention to establish such place as the
person's residence;
. . . . 
In case of question, final determination of residence shall
be made by the clerk, subject to appeal to the board of
registration under part III of this chapter.
The Hawai #i Supreme Court examined these rules in
Dupree v. Hiraga , 121 Hawai# i 297, 219 P.3d 1084 (2009).  In
Dupree, several individuals challenged the residency of Solomon
P. Kaho #ohalahala ( Kaho#ohalahala ), a candidate for the L âna#i
seat on the Maui County Council.  Id.  at 299-300, 219 P.3d at
1086-87.  Kaho #ohalahala was registered to vote on L âna#i from
1982 to 2006.  Id. at 299, 219 P.3d at 1086.  In 2006,
Kaho#ohalahala registered to vote as a resident of Lahaina, Mau# i. 
Id.  In 2008, Kaho #ohalahala registered to vote as a resident of
Lâna#i.  Id.  Following its investigation, the Clerk of the
County of Maui ( Maui Clerk ) concluded that Kaho #ohalahala was a
resident of L âna#i "when he registered to vote there in July
2008."  Id.   The Board concluded, however, that Kaho #ohalahala
was a resident of Lahaina, and the supreme court affirmed.  Id.
at 324, 219 P.3d at 1111. 
In Dupree, the supreme court recognized that HRS § 11-
13(4) "requires both action and intent on the part of the voter
before a new residence is established."  Id. at 318, 219 P.3d at
1105.  The voter must have the requisite intent to "acquire a new
residence," and by implication the "intent to abandon his or her
prior residence, since a person can have only one residence under
the statute."  Id.  The supreme court determined that
Kaho#ohalahala lost his L âna#i residency when he registered to
18FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
vote in Lahaina in 2006.  Id. at 318, 219 P.3d at 1105.  The
supreme court explained that Kaho# ohalahala's change of voter
registration address constituted a "statement of intent" that he
resided in Lahaina.  Id.  Kaho#ohalahala's "statement of intent,
together with his habitation on Maui, established Maui as his
residence."  Id.  (citing HRS §§ 11-13(1) & (4)).  Additionally,
Kaho#ohalahala lacked sufficient physical presence on L âna#i.  Id.
at 319-20, 219 P.3d at 1106-07.  "[W]hat is required is not
momentary, or occasional or sporadic physical presence; it is
significant physical presence consistent with the ordinary
conception of living (or abiding, or residing, or dwelling, or
maintaining a habitation) in a place."  Id. at 321, 219 P.3d at
1108 (citation, internal quotation marks, and emphasis omitted). 
There was substantial evidence to establish that Kaho# ohalahala
"did not own or work for a business on L âna#i, and did not own or
rent a house or keep a car on the island."  Id.  at 319, 219 P.3d
at 1106.6
Thus, the issue of a person's "abandonment" of his or
her former residency stems from the rule that a person cannot
reside at more than one place at a time for the purposes of
establishing residency for voter registration.  If an individual
does not intend to give up his or her former residence or does
6The supreme court further noted that the Board's finding that
Lâna#i residents had not seen Kaho #ohalahala at the post office, bank, gas
station, or any restaurants supported "the inference that Kaho #ohalahala had
not established a sufficient physical presence on L âna#i."  Dupree, 121 Hawai #i
at 320, 219 P.3d at 1107.
19FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
not actually do so, that individual cannot establish a new
residency pursuant to HRS § 11-13.
HAR § 3-172-25 provides further guidance, in relevant
part, as follows:
§ 3-172-25  Determination of residence .  (a)  In
addition to the rules for determining residency provided in
HRS § 11-13, the following shall also be applicable in
determining the residence of a person for election purposes:
(1) The residence of a person is that place in
which the person's habitation is fixed,
where the person intends to remain, and
when absent intends to return;
(2) When a person has more than one dwelling:
(A) If a person maintains a homeowner's
property tax exemption on one of the
dwellings, there shall be a
rebuttable presumption that the
dwelling subject to the homeowner's
property tax exemption is that
person's residence;
. . . .
(c)  For purposes of this section, a rebuttable
presumption is a presumption considered true unless proven
false by evidence to the contrary .
Finally, we note that HAR § 3-172-43(h), which governs
appeals to the Board, states that "[r]ules of evidence as
specified in HRS § 91-10 shall be applicable thereto."  HRS § 91-
10(5) states that "[e]xcept as otherwise provided by law, the
party initiating the proceeding shall have the burden of proof,
including the burden of producing evidence as well as the burden
of persuasion.  The degree or quantum of proof shall be a
preponderance of the evidence."
In this case, the Board found that the Galuterias
abandoned the P âlolo Property in 2007, when they began occupying
and established a new residence at the Executive Centre in
20FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
downtown Honolulu.  The Galuterias executed voter registration
applications for this address in August of 2007, thus manifesting
a "statement of intent" under HRS § 11-13(1) to establish
residency at the Executive Centre.  See Dupree , 121 Hawai# i at
318, 219 P.3d at 1105.  The Galuterias "renounced [their]
preexisting residency" when they registered to vote at the
Executive Centre address, as well as physically resided there. 
See id. at 319, 219 P.3d at 1106.
However, as argued by Baker and addressed by the Board,
even after their move to the Executive Centre, as well as their
later move to the Curtis Street Apartment, the Galuterias did not
promptly request that the property tax assessment status for the
Pâlolo Property be modified to reflect that they were no longer
owner-occupants.  Accordingly, pursuant to HAR § 3-172-25, there
was a rebuttable presumption that the P âlolo Property was the
Galuterias' residence.  Both the Clerk and the Board concluded
that the Galuterias adequately rebutted this presumption.  The
evidence included, inter alia , the addresses listed by the
Galuterias on their driver's licenses and vehicle registrations,
regularly-received mail, including mail related to Brickwood's
employment and from financial institutions, rental agreements
(albeit with gaps), sworn statements, photographs of the Curtis
Street Apartment, the Galuterias' arrangement to revise the
property tax status and pay increased back taxes to the City, and
Brickwood's testimony at the hearing before the Board.  This
21FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
evidence constitutes substantial evidence in support of the
Board's findings and the Board's conclusions that the Galuterias
rebutted the presumption that the P âlolo Property was their
residence.
The Clerk and the Board also weighed the evidence
concerning Brickwood's continued ties to the P âlolo Property,
including the substantial periods of time that Brickwood and
Abigail spent there in 2014.  The Board heard and considered the
testimony of Baker's witnesses.  The Clerk and the Board
recognized that the Galuterias' daughter and five grandchildren
lived at the P âlolo Property and that the Galuterias retained one
of the four units at the property and spent a great deal of time
there with their extended family.  We reject Baker's suggestion
that it was necessary for the Galuterias to abandon all ties to
the Pâlolo Property in order to abandon it as their residence and
establish a new residence.  The Clerk and the Board found and
concluded that the Galuterias did in fact abandon the P âlolo
Property as their residence and had both the intent and physical
presence necessary to establish a new permanent dwelling place,
first at the Executive Centre in 2007, and later at the Curtis
Street Apartment commencing in 2011 through the 2014 General
Election.  We conclude that there was substantial evidence in the
record to support this determination.
22FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B.Ballot Isolation
Baker contends the Board clearly erred in finding that
the Galuterias' ballots could not be isolated, erroneously
interpreted the City Clerk's obligation under HRS § 11-25 and HAR
§ 3-172-103 to do so, and otherwise erred in acting on Baker's
challenge. 
HRS § 11-25 (2009 & Supp. 2016) states:
§ 11-25  Challenge by voters; grounds; procedure .  (a) 
Any registered voter may challenge the right of a person to
be or to remain registered as a voter in any precinct for
any cause not previously decided by the board of
registration or the supreme court in respect to the same
person; provided that in an election of members of the board
of trustees of the office of Hawaiian affairs the voter
making the challenge must be registered to vote in that
election.  The challenge shall be in writing, setting forth
the grounds upon which it is based, and be signed by the
person making the challenge.  The challenge shall be
delivered to the clerk who shall forthwith serve notice
thereof on the person challenged.  The clerk shall, as soon
as possible, investigate and rule on the challenge.
     (b)  Any voter rightfully in the polling place,
including absentee polling places established pursuant to
section 15-7, may challenge the right to vote of any person
who comes to the precinct officials for voting purposes. 
The challenge shall be on the grounds that the voter is not
the person the voter alleges to be, or that the voter is not
entitled to vote in that precinct; provided that only in an
election of members of the board of trustees of the office
of Hawaiian affairs, a person registered to vote in that
election may also challenge on the grounds that the voter is
not Hawaiian.  No other or further challenge shall be
allowed.  Any person thus challenged shall first be given
the opportunity to make the relevant correction pursuant to
section 11-21.  The challenge shall be considered and
decided immediately by the precinct officials and the ruling
shall be announced.
     (c)  If neither the challenger nor the challenged voter
shall appeal the ruling of the clerk or the precinct
officials, then the voter shall either be allowed to vote or
be prevented from voting in accordance with the ruling.  If
an appeal is taken to the board of registration, the
challenged voter shall be allowed to vote; provided that
ballot is placed in a sealed envelope to be later counted or
rejected in accordance with the ruling on appeal.  The chief
election officer shall adopt rules in accordance with
chapter 91 to safeguard the secrecy of the challenged
voter's ballot.
23FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
HAR § 3-172-103 further provides:
§ 3-172-103  Challenged voter's ballot; disposition of
at counting center.  (a)  The board of registration shall
notify the clerk and the counting center manager of the
disposition of each challenge immediately after the board
makes its decision provided that if an appeal is made to an
appellate court, or the opportunity for an appeal exists,
pursuant to HRS § 11-51, the ballot shall remain in the
sealed envelope to be counted or rejected in accordance with
the supreme court's ruling.
(b) If the board rules that a challenged voter is not
entitled to vote and the opportunity for appeal to an
appellate court has elapsed, pursuant to HRS § 11-51, the
voted ballot shall remain in the unopened envelope and shall
be stored as provided by law.
(c) If the board rules that a challenged voter is
entitled to vote and the opportunity for appeal to an
appellate court has elapsed, pursuant to HRS § 11-51, the
counting center manager shall instruct the ballot
preparation team to prepare the ballot for processing.  The
ballot shall be inserted into the ballot deck of the
appropriate precinct using procedures established by the
chief election officer.  In all cases, the secrecy of the
ballot must be preserved.  If the secrecy of the ballot
cannot be preserved, the challenged ballot shall not be
processed except to break a tie vote, as ordered by the
appellate court.  It shall be disposed of as provided by
law.
The Galuterias voted by absentee walk-in ballots at the
Honolulu Hale polling location on October 30, 2014, days prior to
Baker's submission of his challenge to their voter registration. 
As explained in the Declaration of then-Acting Clerk Takahashi,
during the course of the voting process, a voter receives a
ballot with a detachable ballot stub.  The ballot is deposited
into a sealed ballot box and the voter retains the stub. 
Deposited ballots are commingled and have no codes or numbers
that link them to particular voters.  
Baker contends that the Clerk failed to enforce HRS
§ 11-25(c), which requires a challenged voter's ballot to be
placed in a sealed envelope to be later counted or rejected, 
24FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
because the Clerk failed to set aside the Galuterias' ballots
upon receipt of Baker's challenge.  Baker points to the procedure
set forth in HAR § 3-172-103 and argues that all of the walk-in
ballots cast in the Galuterias' precinct should have been
segregated upon the unsealing of the ballot boxes on Election Day
and held pending a determination of the Galuterias' eligibility
to vote in their precinct.7  Baker contends that the Clerk failed
to adhere to "statutory" procedures for a pre-election day
challenge.  However, the pre-election day procedure referenced by
Baker contemplates a challenge prior to a ballot being cast,
deposited in the ballot box, and commingled with other ballots. 
Baker identifies no statute or administrative rule authorizing
the Clerk to unseal a ballot box in order to attempt to segregate
a ballot or ballots, or to segregate all absentee walk-in ballots
cast for an entire precinct on Election Day when the ballot boxes
are unsealed, and we find none.  
Baker also relies on Dupree to support his argument
that the Clerk erred in failing to locate and segregate the
Galuterias' ballots.  However, the instant case is notably
distinguishable from Dupree.  In Dupree, several Lâna# i residents
challenged Kaho #ohalahala's voter registration status for the
November 4, 2008 General Election.  121 Hawai #i at 300-02, 219
P.3d at 1087-89.  The residents submitted their challenges to the
7The Clerk submits that segregation of the absentee walk-in ballots
commingled with the Galuterias' ballots would have disenfranchised roughly
2,000 other voters.  Baker argues that it was possible just to segregate the
ballots cast in the Galuterias' precinct, which was a total of 184 ballots.  
25FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Maui Clerk's office from September 23, 2008, to October 3, 2008. 
Id.  On October 10, 2008, the Maui Clerk issued its decision and
concluded that Kaho #ohalahala was a resident of Lâ na#i.  Id. at
303-04, 219 P.3d at 1090-91.  On November 1, 2008, three days
prior to the general election, the Board issued its decision and
concluded that Kaho# ohalahala was a resident of Lahaina.  Id.  at
310, 219 P.3d at 1097.  The Board's decision provided that "[i]n
the event of an appeal of this decision, Mr. Kaho #ohalahala shall
be allowed to vote 'provided that the ballot is placed in a
sealed envelope to be later counted or rejected in accordance
with the ruling on appeal.' See [HRS] § 11-25(c)."  Id. at 311,
219 P.3d at 1098.
Here, unlike Kaho# ohalahala in Dupree, the Galuterias
voted prior to Baker's challenge and appeal to the Board.  HRS
§ 11-25(c) permits a challenged voter to vote after an appeal is
filed with the Board provided that the ballot is "placed in a
sealed envelope."  HRS § 11-25(c) does not address the
circumstances under which a challenged voter casts his or her
vote prior to his or her eligibility being challenged and prior
to the filing an appeal to the Board.  Likewise, HAR § 3-172-103
presupposes that the City Clerk had the opportunity to segregate
the challenged voter's ballot.  See  HAR § 3-172-103(a) ("the
ballot shall remain  in the sealed envelope. .  ."); HAR § 3-172-
103(b) ("the voted ballot shall remain  in the unopened
envelope. . .") (emphases added). 
26FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
For these reasons, we reject Baker's contention that
the Board clearly erred by finding that the Galuterias' ballots
could not be isolated and by incorrectly interpreting the Clerk's
obligations under HRS § 11-25 and HAR § 3-172-103.8
C.Allegedly Unlawful Procedures
Baker contends that the Board acted under unlawful
procedures and in excess of its authority when it considered and
decided the Galuterias' Motion to Dismiss, the City's Joinder in
the Motion to Dismiss, and the Galuterias' Motion to Strike,
which sought to strike Baker's Second Response.  Baker argues
that the Board lacked the authority to consider and decide the
Motion to Dismiss and Motion to Strike under HRS chapter 11 and
HAR § 3-172-43.  The Appellees submit that the Board had
authority under HRS §§ 11-25 and 11-43, HAR § 3-172-43, and
Dupree to consider and rule on the motions.  The Galuterias also
argue that even if the Board erred in considering a dispositive
motion, it was harmless error. 
HRS § 11-43 (2009) states:
§ 11-43  Powers; procedures.   (a)  Each board of
registration is given all of the powers and authority for
the summoning and examining of witnesses and the maintenance
of order, including the power to punish for contempt and
8Baker also contends that the Clerk failed to act upon Baker's
challenge in a timely manner and improperly considered whether Baker's
challenge was moot.  Baker cites no authority supporting the proposition that
the three-month period for the Clerk's investigation and decision was
unreasonable.  In addition, Baker fails to identify how, under the
circumstances of this case, he is aggrieved by the Clerk's consideration of
whether the challenge was mooted by the fact that the Galuterias' ballots had
already been cast.  The Clerk nevertheless conducted a complete investigation
of the Galuterias' residency and issued a decision on the matter, which was
then appealed to the Board and given a full hearing.  These further
contentions are without merit.
27FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
award witness fees in accordance with section 621-7, by law
given to circuit courts.
     (b)  Every member of the board of registration may
administer oaths in all cases in which oaths are by law
authorized.
     (c)  The procedures for challenges and appeals under
sections 11-25 and 11-26 and this part shall be exempt from
the provisions of chapter 91 regarding contested case
hearings, but shall be administered according to rules
adopted by the chief election officer.
Therefore, by statute, the Board is given power and
authority "for the summoning and examining of witnesses and the
maintenance of order."  HRS § 11-43(a).  Furthermore, the statute
states that the procedures for appeals "shall be administered
according to rules adopted by the chief election officer."  HRS
§ 11-43(c).  One of the duly-promulgated rules, HAR § 3-172-43,
states in relevant part:
(b) The board may hold an informal pre-hearing
conference for the purpose of:
(1) Simplifying and clarifying issues;
(2) Making necessary or desirable amendments to the
notice of the charges, or its answer, if any;
(3) Obtaining admissions of fact or documents to
avoid unnecessary proof; limiting the number of
expert witnesses; and
(4) Any other materials that may aid in the
reasonable and expeditious disposition of the
matter;
Notice and opportunity to participate shall be given to each
party and each party's attorney.  The entire board or one of
its members designated for such purpose shall preside at the
conference.  No attempt at fact finding or argument shall be
permitted.  Prejudicial comment or conclusion on any issue
being controverted shall not be made or stated at any time
by any member or the presiding member of the board.  Minutes
of the conference shall be kept and agreements shall be
concisely noted.
(c) The petitioner and the respondent shall have the
opportunity to challenge any member of the board.
(d) The chairperson of the board shall be the
presiding officer and shall be authorized to make any
preliminary determinations necessary for the prompt and
efficient management of the appeal hearing.
28FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(e) Before presentation of the case, each party shall
have the opportunity to make an opening statement. . . .
. . . .
(i) After all the evidence has been presented, the
board shall give each party the opportunity to
summarize. . . .
 
(j) At the end of the hearing, the board may give an
oral decision or take the matter under advisement with a
written decision to be issued at a later date.  Regardless
of whether the board gives an oral decision, the board shall
issue a written decision, including findings of fact and
conclusions of law.
Here, the Board construed the Galuterias' Motion to
Dismiss as a motion for summary judgment, and applied a summary
judgment standard in deciding on the motion.  Receiving, hearing,
and deciding a motion for summary judgment is not summoning or
examining witnesses, nor is it maintaining order under HRS § 11-
43(a).9  No other "rules adopted by the chief election officer"
allow for summary judgment proceedings.  Summary judgment
proceedings are not sanctioned in HAR § 3-172-43 or elsewhere in
Chapter 172.  Rather, it appears that, under HAR § 3-172-43,
summary judgment proceedings are improper.  First, the Board may
only issue a decision "[a]t the end of the hearing," which calls
for "opening statement[s]" and a "presentation of the case."  HAR
§ 3-172-43(e) & (j).  Subsection (b) specifically forecloses the
possibility of pre-hearing summary judgment because, at the pre-
hearing conference, "conclusion on any issue being controverted
shall not be made or stated at any time by any member or the
presiding member of the board."  Summary judgment unquestionably
9However, consideration of a motion to strike submissions to the
Board would appear fall within the Board's authority pursuant to HRS § 11-43
and HAR § 3-172-43.
29FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
constitutes a "conclusion on [an] issue being controverted." 
Subsection (b) also forbids argument in conjunction with a pre-
hearing conference, which the parties necessarily do for summary
judgment motions.  Moreover, the Board concedes that the hearing
on the motion for summary judgment "was not part of the
prehearing conference[.]"
We conclude that the Board does not have authority to
conduct summary judgment proceedings under HAR § 3-172-43(d). 
This provision addresses the chairperson's unilateral powers. 
Entering a decision on the merits of an appeal, on the other
hand, would require the entire Board.  See HAR § 3-172-43(j). 
Moreover, HAR § 3-172-43(d) gives the chairperson power for the
management of the hearing process, not for the adjudication of
the appeal itself. 
The Galuterias further argue that, in Dupree, the
supreme court recognized that the Board has authority to consider
pre-hearing motions.  In Dupree, Kaho#ohalahala filed a motion to
dismiss for lack of jurisdiction, which was denied.  121 Hawai# i
at 305, 219 P.3d at 1092.  However, the issue of summary judgment
is distinguishable from the determination of subject matter
jurisdiction, which is an "absolute necessity;" the "lack of
subject matter jurisdiction can never be waived by any party at
any time."  Chun v. Emps.' Ret. Sys. of State of Haw. , 73 Haw. 9,
13, 828 P.2d 260, 263 (1992) (citation omitted).  If the Board
lacked jurisdiction, "its proceedings and decision must be
30FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
rendered void and legally ineffective."  See, e.g., Ass'n of
Apartment Owners of Governor Cleghorn v. M. F. D., Inc., 60 Haw.
65, 69, 587 P.2d 301, 304 (1978).  Accordingly, while the Board
may, as a preliminary matter, consider whether it has
jurisdiction over a matter, such authority does not extend to
summarily ruling on the merits of the matter submitted to the
Board.
For these reasons, we conclude that the Board erred in
considering the Galuterias' pre-hearing Motion to Dismiss.  
Nevertheless, we further conclude the Board's error was
harmless.  HRS § 11-43 states that challenges to the Clerk and
appeals to the Board are exempt from the provisions of HRS
chapter 91 regarding contested case hearings, but does exempt
judicial review of such proceedings from HRS chapter 91
standards.  In Dupree, the supreme court stated that Del Monte
identifies the applicable standard of review.  121 Hawai #i at
312, 219 P.3d at 1099.  And in Del Monte , the supreme court
"appl[ied] the standards set forth in HRS § 91-14(g) (1993) to
the agency's decision."  112 Hawai #i at 498, 146 P.3d at 1075. 
HRS § 91-14(g) provides that the court "may reverse or modify the
decision and order [of the agency] if the substantial rights of
the petitioners may have been prejudiced[.]"  See also S. Foods
Grp, L.P. v. Dep't of Educ., 89 Hawai# i 443, 453, 974 P.2d 1033,
1043 (1999) ("Indeed, in order to reverse or modify an agency 
31FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
decision, the appellate court must conclude that an appellant's
substantial rights were prejudiced by the agency.").
Baker has not shown that his substantial rights have
been prejudiced.  The Board denied the Galuterias' Motion to
Dismiss and Baker was given a full hearing before the Board. 
Baker has not shown that the summary judgment proceedings
affected his ability to fully present evidence and arguments at
the Hearing.  Accordingly, we conclude that the Board's error was
harmless.  
D.Other Challenged Pre-Hearing Procedures
Finally, Baker argues that the Board's prehearing
actions, specifically its decision to conduct a second prehearing
conference and its consideration of the Motion to Dismiss and
Motion to Strike, constituted improper rulemaking under the 
Hawai#i Administrative Procedures Act (HAPA). 
Under HAPA, a "rule" is defined as an
agency statement of general or particular applicability and
future effect that implements, interprets, or prescribes law
or policy, or describes the organization, procedure, or
practice requirements of any agency.  The term does not
include regulations concerning only the internal management
of an agency and not affecting private rights of or
procedures available to the public, nor does the term
include declaratory rulings issued pursuant to section 91-8,
nor intra-agency memoranda.
HRS § 91-1 (2012).
"Additionally, Hawai #i appellate courts typically have
discussed the meaning of the general definition of 'rule' in
cases where there is a question of whether the agency action is
legislative or adjudicative."  Green Party of Haw. v. Nago , 138
32FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Hawai#i 228, 237-38, 378 P.3d 944, 953–54 (2016) (citations
omitted).  The supreme court has recognized that "rule-making is
essentially legislative in nature because it operates in the
future; whereas, adjudication is concerned with the determination
of past and present rights and liabilities of individuals where
issues of fact often are sharply controverted."  Id. at 238, 378
P.3d at 954 (quoting In re Application of Hawaiian Elec. Co. , 81
Hawai#i 459, 467, 918 P.2d 561, 569 (1996)) (internal quotation
marks omitted).  On the other hand, "the purpose of rule-making
is to govern the future conduct of groups and individuals, not
determining damages resulting from past conduct."  Pila#a 400,
LLC v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 132 Hawai #i 247, 266, 320 P.3d
912, 931 (2014).
While Baker contends that the Board could not hold a
second prehearing conference, HAR § 3-172-43(b) provides that the
Board "may hold an informal pre-hearing conference[.]"  We do not
read this provision so narrowly as to limit the Board to only a
single pre-hearing conference and, therefore, conclude that
Baker's argument is without merit.
However, with regard to the Board's consideration of
summary judgment motions, we have concluded that the chief
election officer has not properly adopted administrative rules
with regard to these procedures.  "Thus, if the challenged
procedures qualify as 'rules' as defined in HAPA, then they are
invalid for not complying with HAPA's statutory rulemaking
33FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
requirements."  Green Party , 138 Hawai# i at 239, 378 P.3d at 955
(citation omitted). 
We conclude that the Board's hearing of and decisions
on summary judgment motions has "general or particular
applicability" and "future effect" and "implements, interprets,
or prescribes law or policy" with respect to its determination of
a voter eligibility challenge.  The same procedures that applied
to Baker's challenge in this case would apply to future
challenges to an individual's eligibility to vote.  Accordingly,
the Board's summary judgment procedure is a rule as defined in
HRS § 91-1(4), and subject to the rulemaking procedures of HAPA.
Although the Board's summary judgment procedures were
conducted pursuant to an invalid rule, in light of the fact that
the Galuterias' Motion to Dismiss was denied and the Board
conducted a full evidentiary hearing on Baker's challenge, we
conclude that the improper procedure was harmless and does not
require a remand for a further hearing.  See, e.g. , Korean
Buddhist Dae Won Sa Temple of Haw. v. Sullivan, 87 Hawai #i 217,
241, 953 P.2d 1315, 1339 (1998) ("In conducting [an HRS § 91-
14(g)] review, this court must often employ a type of harmless
error analysis to violations of HAPA.")
V.CONCLUSION
We conclude that, although the Board improperly
considered the Galuterias' Motion to Dismiss, the Board's action
constituted harmless error.  We otherwise affirm the Board's
34FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
January 15, 2016 Order.  Baker's request for attorney's fees and
costs is hereby denied.
Lance D. Collins,
for Appellant/Appellant.
William C. McCorriston,
Jessica M. Wan,
(McCorriston Miller Mukai
 MacKinnon LLP),
for Appellees/Appellees,
BRICKWOOD M. GALUTERIA and
  ABIGAIL L. GALUTERIA.
Ernest H. Nomura,
Deputy Corporation Counsel,
City and County of Honolulu,
(Leslie P. Chinn, Deputy
 Corporation Counsel, City and
 County of Honolulu, with him
 on the answering brief),
for Appellee/Appellee,
GLEN TAKAHASHI, in his official
 capacity as City Clerk, City and
 County of Honolulu.
Ewan C. Rayner,
Deputy Solicitor General,
(Patricia Ohara and Valri Lei
 Kunimoto, Deputy Attorneys
 General, State of Hawai #i,
 on the brief).
35