NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000192
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
MARK N. BEGLEY, Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee, v.
COUNTY OF KAUA' I; DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL
SERVICES, COUNTY OF KAUA' I; THOMAS T. TAKATSUKI,
individually, and in his official capacity as
Acting Director of Personnel Services; DEPARTMENTOF HUMAN RESOURCES, COUNTY OF KAUA' I; JANINE M.Z.
RAPOZO, individually, and in her official capacityas Director of Human Resources, and DOES 1-50,Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-0085)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
I.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Mark N. Begley
 
(Begley), appeals from the February 18, 2016 Final Judgment
 
Against Plaintiff (Final Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court
 of the Fifth Circuit
1 (Circuit Court).
 
Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant County of Kaua' i; 
Department of Human Resources, County of Kaua' i; Thomas T. 
Takatsuki, Acting Director of Personnel Services, County of Kaua'i; and Janine Rapozo, Director of Human Resources, County of 
Kaua'i in their individual and official capacities, 
(collectively, County) cross-appeal from the Final Judgment. 
1
 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
A. Factual Background
 
Begley is employed by the Kaua' i Police Department 
(KPD) as Assistant Chief.2 After he reported improper workplace 
conduct, he experienced retaliation at his workplace, which 
caused him mental stress. Begley's workers' compensation claim for mental stress was accepted by the County without contest.
3 
During the course of Begley's treatment and medical
 
leave, a dispute arose regarding whether certain conditions
 Begley's treating psychiatrist placed on his return to work were
 permanent or temporary. Based on her response, the County took
 the position that Begley was permanently unable to return to his
 previous position at the KPD and informed Begley that it wanted
 him to participate in the County's Return to Work Program (RTWP).
 
The policy of the RTWP is "to encourage injured workers
 
to return to work following a job-related injury or illness as
 soon as authorized by a health care provider." To this end,
 "[e]mployees who are injured due to a work related injury or
 illness may be provided temporary light duty job assignments and
 shall be provided a priority of placement in other jobs when they
 are unable to permanently return to their usual and customary
 work. "Priority Placement" is defined in the RTWP as "a job
 placement process for those employees who are medically
 determined to be unable to permanently return to perform their
 essential functions of their job because of a work related injury
 or illness."
 
The RTWP also cites a number of provisions within the 
"Workers' Compensation Law," Hawai' i Revised Statutes (HRS) 
Chapter 386, including HRS § 386-142, pertaining to the employment rights of injured employees. The RTWP provides for 
2
 In his Complaint, Begley alleged that he held the position of
Police Inspector, but had been informed this position had been changed to
Assistant Chief. The County refers to Begley as the Assistant Chief.
 
3
 Begley also filed discrimination charges with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC). The EEOC found that there was reasonable cause
 to believe that Begley was subjected to retaliation for engaging in a
protected activity. As of the filing of the Complaint in the instant case,
the EEOC's conciliation efforts proved unsuccessful and the matter remained
under review by the United States Department of Justice.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
participation by employees with permanent work restrictions where
 
"[t]he employee has been released by an appropriate physician to
 return to alternate work and the physician has determined that
 the employee is permanently unable to perform any/all of the
 essential functions of the employee's regular pre-injury
 position." The placement procedure section also outlines the
 "Departmental Meeting" and "Notification" that is required for
 placement of employees with permanent work restrictions.
 
The RTWP specifies when termination of a county
 
employee disabled by a work injury is appropriate. This includes
 when the employee fails to attend the required departmental
 meeting, does not timely notify the departmental personnel
 representative of his decision to participate in priority
 placement, refuses an offer of employment, refuses or fails to
 attend a scheduled job placement meeting, fails to report for
 work for the assigned position, cannot be placed within the
 county by the end of their eligibility period in the priority
 placement procedure, or the County is unable to place the
 employee in another position.
 
Begley initially refused to participate in RTWP
 
meetings, but on February 19, 2015, Begley, Begley's counsel, and
 a Human Resources specialist from the County's Department of
 Human Resources, met to discuss Begley's employment with the
 County under the RTWP. Begley was required by the County to
 inform them of his decision to participate in the RTWP but he
 failed to do so. On February 2, 2016, apparently because he did
 not inform them of his decision, Begley was sent a termination
 notice, but the termination notice was subsequently retracted. 
As of October 6, 2016, Begley remained on leave and continued to
 receive treatment; he had yet to participate any further in the
 RTWP.
 
B. Procedural Background
 
Begley claims he is being "forced" into the RTWP. As a
 
result, he filed his June 16, 2015 Complaint (Complaint) in
 Circuit Court, in which he alleged and requested the following:
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Count I:	 Preliminary4 and permanent "Injunctive
Relief" "preventing [the County] from
forcing [Begley] into the RTWP and/or
taking action to terminate [Begley's]
employment."
5
 
Count II:	 "Declaratory Relief" declaring that: 
(1) Begley is not "permanently
disabled;"
 
(2) The County's acts of forcing Begley
into the RTWP is unsupported and
improper;
6
 
(3) "Plaintiff is fully capable of
returning to his usual and
customary work, provided that
Defendants ensure a safe working
environment for Plaintiff;"
 
(4) "the RTWP was unconstitutionally
adopted;"
7
 
4 On June 22, 2015, Begley also moved for a preliminary injunction.
The Motion requested that Begley be granted an injunction:
 
(1)	 prohibiting the County from forcing Begley to decide whether
to participate in the RTWP;
 
(2)	 prohibiting the County from taking any action or further
action in terminating Begley's employment; and
 
(3) 	preserving the status quo pending resolution of
Begley's claims asserted in the action.
 
On October 23, 2015, the Circuit Court granted the injunction.
 
5	 Begley views
 
the RTWP as a mechanism to prematurely terminate him.
Specifically, [Begley] believes [the County] will seek to
terminate him if he does not participate in a "Priority
Placement" assignment of the RTWP. Alternatively, [Begley]
believes his participation in a "Priority Placement"
assignment of the RTWP will lead to a job placement that
does not preserve his retirement and other benefits specific
to his status as a police officer and/or his eventual
termination.
 
6
 Begley argued that the County is using the RTWP as leverage to
force his termination and/or is an effort to settle his retaliation claims.
 
7
 Begley argues that "County employees, such as [Begley], had no
notice of the adoption of the RTWP and its application to them."
Furthermore,
 
[t]he RTWP is neither codified in the Hawaii RevisedStatutes nor the [Kaua 'i] County Code. 
Rather, it appears
(continued...) 
4
   
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(5) 	the RTWP is unconstitutional
 
because it does not provide for
adequate due process;8 and 
(6) Begley's due process and equal
protection rights were violated
when the County forced him into the
RTWP and failed to reconsider its
 decision.
9
 
Count III:	 Damages and injunctive relief for
"Violation of 42 U.S.C. § 1983."10
 
Count IV:	 Damages for "Intentional Infliction of
Emotional Distress" for willfully and/
or wantonly deciding to force Begley
into the RTWP. 
Count V: 	 Damages for "Aiding and Abetting" for,
with knowledge of improper and illegal
conduct taken against Begley, helping,
and/or encouraging such conduct. 
Count VI: 	 Damages for "Civil Conspiracy" for
agreeing, approving and/or otherwise
engaging in unlawful activities to
achieve a common goal. 
Count VII: 	 Damages for "Concert of Action" for
engaging in tortious and/or wrongful
activity pursuant to a common design.
 
7(...continued)
to be a "policy" adopted by the [County]. . . . Moreover,[Begley] was never given notice about the RTWP - it wasnever a term of [Begley's] employment and he was neverissued a copy or asked to acknowledge receipt of the RTWP.Finally the RTWP is not (and has never been)a part of theState of [Hawai 'i] Organization of Police Officers ("SHOPO")
contract, of which [Begley] is a member[.] 
8 Begley argues that "the RTWP does not allow County employees, such
as [Begley], to challenge disability classifications made by the County, even
though these classifications form the basis of the County's decision to
terminate its employees, such as [Begley]."
 
9
 Begley argues that he "has not been given the opportunity to
contest his unilateral classification as an employee eligible for 'Priority
Placement' assignment of the RTWP, nor appeal that classification." He argues
that this is true "even though these classifications form the basis of the
County's decision to terminate its employees, such as [Begley]."
Furthermore, "the RTWP, as properly applied to [Begley], would result in his
termination and loss of his vested retirement benefits without giving [Begley]
the opportunity to challenge his classification of being 'permanently
disabled' . . . In short, the RTWP provides no remedy for [Begley] to correct
his (and Dr. Gerard's) mis-classification."
 
10
 This Count was voluntarily dismissed and is not at issue in this
appeal.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[County's] Motion to Dismiss Complaint filed on
 
June 16, 2015" (Motion to Dismiss) was filed on September 21,
 
2015. At the hearing on the Motion to Dismiss, County argued
 that the claims for injunctive and declaratory relief "are
 outside of this Court's jurisdiction because of the exhaustion
 doctrine[,]" and that while the Circuit Court has jurisdiction
 over the tort claims, the doctrine of primary jurisdiction
 required that the Circuit Court "defer any decisions on those
 tort claims . . . pending proper agency determination[.]" The
 Circuit Court granted the Motion to Dismiss as to all counts 
based on the doctrine of primary jurisdiction. On February 18,
 2016, the Circuit Court entered the Final Judgment, from which
 both Begley and the County timely appeal.
11
 
III.
 
DISCUSSION
 
A.	 The Department of Labor and Industrial Relations has
exclusive original jurisdiction in this case; thus,
Counts I and II of the Complaint should have been
dismissed based upon the doctrine of exhaustion.
 
The Circuit Court dismissed all claims in Begley's 
Complaint, concluding that it should defer to the Director of the 
Department of Labor and Industrial Relations of the State of Hawai'i (Director & DLIR), which has "specialized knowledge 
regarding these types of matters," based on the primary jurisdiction doctrine. The County asserts that the Director has exclusive original jurisdiction, not primary jurisdiction, over Counts I and II, but agrees that the Director has primary jurisdiction over the remaining counts in the Complaint. Begley asserts that the Circuit Court has exclusive original jurisdiction as to all claims in the Complaint. "The existence of jurisdiction is a question of law that we review de novo under the right/wrong standard." Lingle v. Hawaii Gov't Emps. Ass'n, 
107 Hawai' i 178, 182, 111 P.3d 587, 591 (2005) (citation 
omitted). 
11
 During the hearing on the Motion to Dismiss, Begley also moved to
continue the October 23, 2015 injunction during the anticipated appeal. The
 
Circuit Court also granted this motion.
 
6
 claim requires the resolution of issues which, under a
regulatory scheme, have been placed within the special
competence of an administrative body." . . . "When this
happens, the judicial process is suspended pending referral
of such issues to the administrative body for its views,"
and the courts are effectively "divested of whatever
original jurisdiction they would otherwise possess."
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Courts have developed two principal doctrines to
enable the question of timing of requests for judicial
intervention in the administrative process to be answered:
(1) primary jurisdiction; and (2) exhaustion of
administrative remedies." . . . "These principles are
doctrines of comity designed to outline the relationship
between courts and administrative agencies and secure their
proper spheres of authority."
 
Kellberg v. Yuen, 131 Hawai' i 513, 527, 319 P.3d 432, 446 (2014) 
(quoting Kona Old Hawaiian Trails Grp. v. Lyman, 69 Haw. 81,
 
92–93, 734 P.2d 161, 168 (1987); and then quoting Leone v. Cnty.
 of Maui, 128 Hawai' i 183, 192, 284 P.3d 956, 965 (App. 2012)). 
The doctrine of exhaustion of administrative remedies
provides that "where a claim is cognizable in the first
instance by an administrative agency alone," "[j]udicial
review of agency action will not be available unless the
party affected has taken advantage of all the corrective
procedures provided for in the administrative process."
. . . "As such, the doctrine of exhaustion of remedies
 
temporarily divests a court of jurisdiction."
 
Id. (quoting Kona Old Hawaiian Trails Grp., 69 Haw. at 93, 734
 
P.2d at 168; and then quoting Williams v. Aona, 121 Hawai' i 1, 9, 
210 P.3d 501, 509 (2009)). 
In contrast, the doctrine of primary jurisdiction
"applies where a claim is originally cognizable in the
courts, and comes into play whenever enforcement of the
Id. (citations omitted) (quoting Kona Old, 69 Haw. at 93, 734
 
P.2d at 168-69). The United States Court of Appeals for the
 Fifth Circuit phrases the criteria for the application of this
 doctrine as follows:
 
(1) the court has original jurisdiction over the claim
before it; (2) the adjudication of that claim requires the
resolution of predicate issues or the making of preliminary
findings; and (3) the legislature has established a
regulatory scheme whereby it has committed the resolution of
those issues or the making of those findings to an
administrative body.
 
Jou v. Nat'l Interstate Ins. Co. of Hawaii, 114 Hawai' i 122, 128, 
157 P.3d 561, 567 (App. 2007) (quoting Northwinds Abatement, Inc.
 
v. Empl'rs Ins. of Wausau, 69 F.3d 1304, 1311 (5th Cir. 1995)). 
In applying these doctrines, the court "must first
 
determine whether the agency has exclusive original jurisdiction,
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in which case, the doctrine of exhaustion would apply. If not, 
and the court finds that it does possess jurisdiction over the matter, the court can then decide if it is appropriate to apply the doctrine of primary jurisdiction." Pac. Lightnet, Inc. v. 
Time Warner Telecom, Inc., 131 Hawai' i 257, 269, 318 P.3d 97, 109 
(2013). A subject matter jurisdiction analysis is required even where the parties do not dispute whether claims are "originally cognizable" in the court. See id. at 272, 318 P.3d at 112 ("The 
ICA noted that there is no dispute over whether the Feature Group D claims were 'originally cognizable' in the court, and analyzed the case only with respect to whether the court had primary jurisdiction over the matter. However, this court must address subject matter jurisdiction to first determine whether the claims were cognizable in circuit court.") 
The County argues that HRS § 386-142 requires it to try
 
to find "alternative employment for those employees permanently
 unable [] to perform their prior duties," that the RTWP is the
 "vehicle through which the County satisfies" this mandate, and
 that the core of Begley's Complaint is a dispute over the County
 designating Begley as "permanently disabled." The County
 concludes that Begley cannot seek injunctive or declaratory
 relief from the Circuit Court to circumvent "the statutory scheme
 granting sole original jurisdiction over workers' compensation
 issues, to the DLIR[.]" Begley responds that HRS chapter 386
 does not apply because he is not seeking recovery for a "work
 injury," he is not making a wrongful termination claim under HRS
 § 386-142, and no effective administrative remedy exists to
 redress his constitutional challenge to the RTWP.
 
Hawai'i's Workers' Compensation Law, HRS chapter 386, 
provides that, subject to exceptions not applicable here, the "rights and remedies" for an employee who suffers a "work injury" granted by that chapter, excludes "all other liability of an employer to an employee . . . on account of an injury[.]" HRS § 386-5 (2015). HRS § 386-73 (2015) provides that the Director "shall have original jurisdiction over all controversies and 
8
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disputes arising under this chapter."12 The supreme court has
 
stated that this section "preclude[s] original court action to
 
settle controversies involving the workers' compensation law,"
 and "relegates the circuit court to a secondary role where
 workers' compensation is concerned--the enforcement of the
 Director's decisions." Travelers Ins. Co. v. Hawaii Roofing,
 
Inc., 64 Haw. 380, 384, 641 P.2d 1333, 1336 (1982); see also HRS
 § 386-91 (2015);
13 HRS § 386-88 (2015).14
 
Travelers Ins. Co. pertains to a dispute between two
 
workers' compensation insurance carriers, Travelers and Hawaii
 Roofing. The Director awarded benefits to the injured employee
 and ordered Travelers to reimburse Hawaii Roofing for payments
 Hawaii Roofing had previously made to the employee. Id. at 382,
 
641 P.2d at 1335. The reimbursement order was premised on
 specific findings, including that Travelers had not served the
 Director with the a notice of cancellation of insurance coverage,
 as required by HRS § 386-127.
15 Id. Travelers appealed to the
 
12 HRS § 386-73 more fully provides:
 
§ 386-73. Original jurisdiction over controversies.
Unless otherwise provided, the director of labor and
industrial relations shall have original jurisdiction over
all controversies and disputes arising under this chapter.
The decisions of the director shall be enforceable by the
circuit court as provided in section 386-91. There shall be
a right of appeal from the decisions of the director to the
appellate board and thence to the intermediate appellate
court, subject to chapter 602, as provided in sections
386-87 and 386-88, but in no case shall an appeal operate as
a supersedeas or stay unless the appellate board or the
appellate court so orders.
 
13 To summarize, HRS § 386-91 allows the parties or the Director to
obtain a judgment from the circuit court enforcing a decision by the Director
or the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals board (LIRAB) assessing
penalties or awarding compensation or other relief, if that decision was not
appealed or if the decision includes a stay order. 
14
 HRS § 386-88 provides in relevant part:
 
§386-88 Judicial review.  The decision or order of the
 
appellate board shall be final and conclusive, except as
provided in section 386-89 . . . . The appeal shall be on
the record, and the court shall review the appellate board's
decision on matters of law only.
 
15
 HRS § 386-127 (2015) pertaining to "Cancellation of insurance
contracts" provides that
 
(continued...) 
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
LIRAB and simultaneously filed a complaint in the circuit court
 
seeking "relief from the Director's orders." Id. at 383, 641
 
P.2d at 1335. The issue presented to the supreme court was
 whether the circuit court had jurisdiction under HRS §§ 632-1
16
 
and 386-73 to issue declaratory relief as to disputes between
 insurance carriers related to reimbursement of workers'
 compensation benefits. Id. at 383, 641 P.2d at 1336. Travelers
 
argued, inter alia, that the circuit court had exclusive original
 jurisdiction to resolve matters "incidental and collateral" to a
 claimant's entitlement to benefits. Id. at 384, 641 P.2d at
 
1336. In other words, Traveler's argued, the Director's role was
 limited to resolving disputes "directly related to benefit
 claims." Id. The supreme court disagreed and held that HRS
 
15(...continued)
No policy or contract of insurance issued by a stock company
or mutual association against liability arising under this
chapter shall be canceled within the time limited in the
contract for its expiration until at least ten days after
notice of intention to cancel such contract, on a date
specified in the notice, has been filed with and served on
the director of labor and industrial relations and the
 employer.
 
16 HRS § 632-1(b) (2016) provides: 
§ 632-1. Jurisdiction; controversies subject to.
 
. . . .
 (b) Relief by declaratory judgment may be granted in
civil cases where an actual controversy exists between
contending parties, or where the court is satisfied that
antagonistic claims are present between the parties involved
which indicate imminent and inevitable litigation, or where
in any such case the court is satisfied that a party asserts
a legal relation, status, right, or privilege in which the
party has a concrete interest and that there is a challenge
or denial of the asserted relation, status, right, or
privilege by an adversary party who also has or asserts a
concrete interest therein, and the court is satisfied also
that a declaratory judgment will serve to terminate the
uncertainty or controversy giving rise to the proceeding.
Where, however, a statute provides a special form of remedy
for a specific type of case, that statutory remedy shall be
followed; but the mere fact that an actual or threatened
controversy is susceptible of relief through a general
common law remedy, a remedy equitable in nature, or an
extraordinary legal remedy, whether such remedy is
recognized or regulated by statute or not, shall not debar a
party from the privilege of obtaining a declaratory judgment
in any case where the other essentials to such relief are
present.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
chapters 386 and 632 deprived the circuit court of the power to
 
decide the dispute. Id. at 384, 641 P.2d at 1336. The supreme
 
court reasoned as follows:
 
The instant controversy stems from a purported neglect to
serve the Director with notice of an imminent cancellation
 of a workers' compensation insurance policy. Travelers
 would have us assume the dispute is only peripherally
related to HRS Chapter 386 and its central purpose. But
 HRS §§ 386-121 through 128 constitute an essential component
of an independent statutory system of legal relations
designed to shield workers from the consequences of work
injuries. S. Riesenfeld, Study of the Workmen's
Compensation Law in Hawaii , iii (1963) (Legislative
Reference Bureau, Report No. 1). For this part of the law
ensures the payment of compensation to injured workers. The
 Director has a duty thereunder of compelling employers who
choose insurance as the means of securing compensation
payments to their employees to maintain insurance coverage
at all times. The notice of cancellation requirement
obviously serves a vital function in this regard. A dispute
over an alleged failure to comply therewith definitely
arises under HRS Chapter 386, is hardly an "equitable"
issue, and is of direct concern to the Director in his
enforcement of the law.
 
Id. at 384–85, 641 P.2d at 1336–37. The supreme court stated
 
that HRS § 632-1 "precludes the utilization of declaratory
 actions in workers' compensation cases." Id. at 386, 641 P.2d at
 
1337. "Although section 632-1 generally endorses declaratory
 relief in civil cases, it nonetheless disallows such relief
 '[w]here . . . a statute provides a special form of remedy for a
 specific type of case.' The 'independent system of legal
 relations' established by the Hawaii Workers' Compensation Law
 thus debars declaratory relief here." Id. (footnote omitted).
 
In Ras v. Hasegawa, 53 Haw. 640, 640, 500 P.2d 746, 747
 
(1972), the Director issued an order directing the claimant to
 submit himself to a medical examination pursuant to HRS § 386-79. 
The claimant filed suit in the circuit court seeking a
 preliminary injunction barring the enforcement of the Director's
 order. Id. The supreme court held that the claimant was not
 
entitled to seek review of the Director's decision under Hawaii's
 Administrative Procedures Act as HRS §§ 386-73 and 386-88 "remove
 the circuit court from the appellate process altogether with
 regard to proceedings brought under HRS ch. 386." Id. at 641,
 
500 P.2d at 747. The supreme court also held, "[n]or may the
 appellant properly bring an original action in the circuit court
 which would bar the operative effect of the director's order.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Injunctive relief should not serve to circumvent the pursuit of a
 
timely and statutorily mandated remedy by way of appeal." Id. 
The court explained, "[A] statute which provides for a thing to
 be done in a particular manner or by a prescribed person or
 tribunal implies that it shall not be done otherwise or by a
 different person or tribunal." Id. (internal quotation marks
 
omitted) (quoting State ex rel. Battle v. Hereford, 133 S.E.2d
 86, 90 (W. Va. 1963).
 
The instant case involves provisions related to
 
Begley's ability to work. "Where a work injury causes total
 disability not determined to be permanent in character," the
 employer is required to pay the employee temporary total
 disability (TTD) benefits. HRS § 386-31 (2015). An employee is
 "totally disabled for work for that day" if he or she is "unable
 to complete a regular daily work shift due to a work injury." 
Id. "Disability" is defined as "loss or impairment of a physical
 
or mental function." HRS § 386-1 (2015). The employer must pay
 TTD benefits "promptly" and "without waiting for a decision from
 the director," unless disputed. HRS § 386-31. "Payment of these
 benefits shall only be terminated upon order of the director or
 if the employee is able to resume work." Id. "Able to resume
 
work" is broadly defined as "an industrially injured worker's
 injury has stabilized after a period of recovery and the worker
 is capable of performing work in an occupation for which the
 worker has received previous training or for which the worker has
 demonstrated aptitude." HRS § 386-1 (emphasis added).
 
"When the employer is of the opinion that temporary
 
total disability benefits should be terminated because the
 injured employee is able to resume work, the employer shall
 notify the employee and the director in writing of an intent to
 terminate the benefits at least two weeks prior to the date when
 the last payment is to be made." HRS § 386-31(b). The notice
 must notify the employee of his or her ability to request a
 hearing before the Director "if the employee disagrees with the
 employer." Id. HRS § 386-31(b) provides as follows regarding
 
the Director's determination of medical stabilization:
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§386-31 Total disability.
 
. . . . 
(b) Temporary total disability.
 . . . .
 (1) 	If the director determines, based upon a review
of medical records and reports and other
relevant documentary evidence, that an injured
employee's medical condition may be stabilized
and the employee is unable to return to the
employee's regular job, the director shall issue
a preliminary decision regarding the employee's
entitlement and limitation to benefits and
 rights under Hawaii's workers' compensation
laws. The preliminary decision shall be sent to
the affected employee and the employee's
designated representative and the employer and
the employer's designated representative and
shall state that any party disagreeing with the
director's preliminary findings of medical
stabilization and work limitations may request a
hearing within twenty days of the date of the
decision. The director shall be available to
 answer any questions during the twenty-day
period from the injured employee and affected
employer. If neither party requests a hearing
challenging the director's finding the
determination shall be deemed accepted and
binding upon the parties. In any case where a
hearing is held on the preliminary findings, any
person aggrieved by the director's decision and
order may appeal under section 386-87.
 
A preliminary decision of the director
shall inform the injured employee and the
employer of the following responsibilities,
benefits, and limitations on vocational
rehabilitation benefits that are designed to
facilitate the injured employee's early return
to suitable gainful employment:[
17]
 
(A)	 That the injured employee may invoke the
employee's rights under section 378-2,
378-32, or 386-142, or all of them, in the
event of unlawful discrimination or other
 unlawful employment practice by the
employer; and
 
17
 "Suitable gainful employment" means
 
employment or self-employment within the geographical area
where the employee resides, which is reasonably attainable
and which offers an opportunity to restore the employee's
earnings capacity as nearly as possible to that level which
the employee was earning at the time of injury and to return
the employee to the active labor force as quickly as
possible in a cost-effective manner, giving due
consideration to the employee's qualifications, interests,
incentives, future earnings capacity, and the present and
future labor market.
 
HRS § 386-1. 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(B)	 That after termination of temporary total
disability benefits, an injured employee
who resumes work may be entitled to
permanent partial disability benefits,
which if awarded, shall be paid regardless
of the earnings or employment status of
the disabled employee at the time.
 
(Emphasis added.) See also HAR §§ 12-10-100 - 104
 
(administrative procedures for seeking medical stabilization
 
review). Although it is incumbent upon the employer to request a
 medical stabilization review, HAR § 12-10-72.1 authorizes either
 party to request a hearing before the Director "if the parties
 are unable to resolve a claim, dispute, or controversy arising
 under [HRS chapter 386][.]" It appears that these proceedings
 have not yet occurred in this case.
 
The following decision by the LIRAB appears to be an
 
example of an appeal to the LIRAB from a determination by the
 Director of medical stabilization in a factually similar case. 
See Davis v. County of Maui, Fire Dep't, Case No. AB 2016-283(M),
 2017 WL 8181554, at *1 (LIRAB Dec. 18, 2017). On August 5, 2016,
 the Director issued a decision that awarded the claimant, inter
 alia, TTD benefits for his April 3, 2014 "mental stress injury." 
Id. at *1. The employer appealed this decision to the LIRAB,
 arguing that the claimant was not entitled to TTD benefits after
 August 8, 2014. On appeal, the LIRAB made the following
 pertinent findings of fact: 
On April 3, 2014, "Claimant sustained a work-related
 
mental stress injury that stemmed from interactions and conflicts
 with a supervisor." Id. at *2. Beginning May 9, 2014, the
 
claimant's doctor "released Claimant to work with the restriction
 of no contact with the supervisor who caused him stress and
 anxiety at work." Id. On January 13, 2015, the doctor
 
"certified that Claimant could return to work, but she continued
 to restrict him from direct contact with the supervisor who
 caused him stress and anxiety," and "stated that Claimant should
 be off work if Employer cannot accommodate the restriction." Id. 
In a September 15, 2015 chart note, the doctor "determined that
 Claimant was stable and rateable and recommended a permanent
 partial impairment rating." Id. at *3. "Claimant reached
 
maximum medical improvement by September 15, 2015," and "the
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
environmental work restriction of no contact with a specific
 
supervisor, which was continued by Dr. Mathias beyond the medical
 stability date of September 15, 2015, became permanent by
 September 15, 2015." Id. "Employer confirmed that if it was not
 
able to accommodate Claimant's work restriction with this
 supervisor, Claimant was authorized to leave work." Id.
 
"Claimant worked regular duty, but whenever the supervisor in
 question was assigned to work with him, he would leave work." 
Id. The LIRAB found that the claimant met his burden of showing
 
that he "was not able to work, because Employer was unable to
 accommodate his work restriction" on certain dates. Id. The
 
LIRAB concluded that the claimant was entitled to TTD benefits
 for the dates in which he was unable to work or left work,
 because the employer was unable to accommodate his work
 restriction. Id. at *4. However, the claimant was not entitled
 
to TTD benefits after September 14, 2015, under HRS § 386-31(b)
 because "TTD benefits are paid for disability that is not
 permanent in character," and "Claimant's stress condition became
 stable and rateable, and his work restriction became permanent on
 September 15, 2015." Id. Therefore, "any disability for work
 
became permanent in character from September 15, 2015." Id. 
An employee's ability to work is also implicated by HRS
 
§ 386-142 (2015), which affords an employee suffering a work
 injury with employment rights as follows:
§ 386-142. Employment rights of injured employees.  It
 
shall be unlawful for any employer to suspend or discharge
any employee solely because the employee suffers any work
injury which is compensable under this chapter and which
arises out of and in the course of employment with the
employer unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the
director that the employee will no longer be capable of
performing the employee's work as a result of the work
injury and that the employer has no other available work
which the employee is capable of performing. Any employee
who is suspended or discharged because of such work injury
shall be given first preference of reemployment by the
employer in any position which the employee is capable of
performing and which becomes available after the suspension
or discharge and during the period thereafter until the
employee secures new employment. This section shall not
 apply to the United States or to employers subject to part
III of chapter 378.[
18]
 
18
 HRS § 386-142 applies to the County. HRS § 378-31 (2015) provides
in pertinent part,
 
(continued...) 
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The supreme court has held that "[p]ursuant to HRS § 386–73
 
(1993), the Director has original jurisdiction over HRS § 386–142
 claims[.]" Zhang v. State, Dep't of Land & Nat. Res.,
 
SCWC-11-0001106, 2016 WL 4182511, at *14 (Hawai' i Aug. 8, 2016) 
(mem. op.) (footnote omitted).
19 In numerous decisions by the
 
LIRAB, an employee's inability to secure employment after
 participating in a public employer's return to work program, an
 employee's refusal to participate in the program, or an
 employee's refusal to accept an offer for a light duty or
 alternate position have served as evidence that the public
 employer did not terminate the employee "solely" because he or
 she filed a workers' compensation claim. See, e.g., Cremer v.
 
Dep't of Transp., State of Hawaii, Case No. AB 98-142(K) (4-94­10128), 2000 WL 33765920, at *3 (LIRAB Oct. 25, 2000) (department
 and state-wide job searches yielded no suitable jobs); Dewitt v.
 Dep't of Pub. Safety, State of Hawaii, Case No. AB 98-405(H), (1­
18(...continued)
As used in this part [(part III of HRS chapter 378)]:
 
. . . .
 "Employer" includes any individual, partnership,
association, joint-stock company, trust, corporation, the
personal representative of the estate of a deceased
individual, or the receiver, trustee, or successor of any of
the same, employing any persons, but shall not include the
State or any political subdivision thereof or the United
States.
 
Thus, HRS § 386-142 does not apply to the United States and private
employers as provided in HRS § 378-31, but does apply to State and County
employees.
 
19 In Zhang, the supreme court briefly discussed claim and issue
preclusion in the context of HRS § 386-142, but this case is not directly on
point. Zhang sued the DLNR for, inter alia , wrongful discharge based on
alleged retaliation for filing a grievance in the circuit court. The circuit
 
court found in written findings of fact and conclusions of law that she was
terminated based on her employer's belief that Zhang had failed to fill out an
immigration form, and not a retaliatory reason. She did not appeal the
judgment. Id. at *14. She then brought a HRS § 386-142 claim before the
Director years later. Id. at *8. The Director concluded that she was not
 
terminated "solely" due to her workers' compensation claim; the LIRAB affirmed
and concluded that whether her workers' compensation claim was the sole reason
for her termination was not previously adjudicated by the circuit court. Id.
 
at *9. The supreme court held that the circuit court's finding precluded
Zhang from asserting that she was terminated "solely" because of her workers'
compensation claim and, in any event, the LIRAB's conclusion was not clearly
erroneous. Id. at *13. The supreme court stated "pursuant to HRS § 386-73[],
the Director has original jurisdiction over HRS § 386-142 claims, and the
Circuit Court did not address the statute," without further explanation. Id.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
88-06162), 2000 WL 33765933, at *3 (LIRAB Dec. 15, 2000)
 
(claimant "unable to perform her usual and customary job" and
 "refused to accept available work [(light duty position)] within
 her physical capabilities."); and Leonida v. Judiciary, State of
 Hawaii, Case No. AB 92-416 (2-88-26078), 1994 WL 1886392, at *2-3
 (LIRAB 1994) (claimant failed to report to work for light duty
 position).
 
The County argues that the RTWP is merely the
 
procedural "vehicle" that the County uses to comply with the
 mandate of HRS § 386-142. Because HRS § 386-142 makes past
 conduct unlawful, the County is correct that the County must
 essentially make a judgment call about whether a proposed
 termination of an employee is likely to be deemed "unlawful" by
 the Director if challenged. Thus, in order to ensure that it
 does not suspend or discharge an employee unlawfully under this
 provision, the County must make a determination about whether
 "the employee will no longer be capable of performing the
 employee's work as a result of the work injury," and if so, "that
 the employer has no other available work which the employee is
 capable of performing."
 
Both Count I and parts 1-3 of Count 2 concern the
 
County's use of the RTWP to determine whether Begley's ability to
 work, that is to say, whether he is permanently disabled. Based
 on the foregoing, the Director has exclusive, original
 jurisdiction over this matter.
 
Likewise, in parts 4-6 of Count II, Begley argues that
 
(1) the RTWP was unconstitutionally adopted; (2) it provides
 inadequate due process; and (3) the County violated his due
 process rights when it forced him to participate in the RTWP. As
 we have observed, HRS § 386-73 provides that the Director "shall
 have original jurisdiction over all controversies and disputes
 arising under this chapter." As the RTWP is the process County
 uses to determine whether and under what conditions Begley may
 return to his position, a dispute over the validity of County's
 reinstatement-after-injury-process is a dispute arising under
 chapter 386 and must be brought, in the first instance, before
 the Director.
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B.	 The Circuit Court Abused Its Discretion By
Dismissing Counts IV, V, VI, and VII.
 
Begley grounds Counts IV, V, VI, and VII in tort and 
bases them upon the County's action of "forcing [him] to 
participate in the RTWP with the goal of terminating him in retaliation for reporting improper conduct at the [KPD]." Tort claims are matters over which the circuit court has jurisdiction. HRS §§ 603-21.5(3) (2016) and 663-1 (2016).
20 However, these 
alleged torts depend in part on whether the procedures used by the County in determining whether and under what circumstances Begley may return to his previously held position were proper, a matter that, as we have said, is within the exclusive and original jurisdiction of the Director. Thus, the Circuit Court was correct in ruling it had primary jurisdiction over these claims. Kellberg, 131 Hawai' i at 527, 319 P.3d at 446 ("the 
doctrine of primary jurisdiction 'applies where a claim is originally cognizable in the courts, and comes into play whenever enforcement of the claim requires the resolution of issues which, under a regulatory scheme, have been placed within the special competence of an administrative body.'"). 
However, because Counts IV through VI are based on the 
illegitimacy of a process (the RTWP) that determines whether an employee is ratable/eligible to return to work and what work he is eligible for is something within the expertise of the Director. Therefore, validity of the RTWP is an issue over which the Director should have the first opportunity for review. See, 
United Public Workers v. Abercrombie, 133 Hawai' i 188, 202, 325 
P.3d 600, 614 (2014). 
20
 HRS § 603-21.5(a)(3) provides: "The several circuit courts shall
have jurisdiction, except as otherwise expressly provided by statute of . .
 
.Civil actions and proceedings. . . [.]" HRS § 663-1 provides, 
Torts, who may sue and for what.  Except as otherwise
provided, all persons residing or being in the State shall
be personally responsible in damages, for trespass or
injury, whether direct or consequential, to the person or
property of others, or to their spouses or reciprocal
beneficiaries, children under majority, or wards, by such
offending party, or the offending party's child under
majority, or by the offending party's command, or by the
offending party's animals, domestic or wild; and the party
aggrieved may prosecute therefor in the proper courts.
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Abercrombie, the supreme court considered whether 
layoffs were imposed as retaliation for the Union's lawsuit 
challenging furloughs. The United Public Workers (UPW) filed a complaint with the Hawai' i Labor Relations Board (HLRB) alleging 
prohibited practices, and a complaint in the circuit court alleging violations of the Hawaii Whistleblowers' Protection Act and the Free Speech Clause. The supreme court held that, so long as the agency and the court had "concurrent jurisdiction over issues presented in the claims," the doctrine of primary jurisdiction applied. The supreme court discussed whether the case should have been stayed rather than dismissed, stating: 
In the instant case, the ICA concluded that UPW's
First Circuit Complaint alleged that Defendants had
essentially engaged in prohibited practices by implementing
the layoffs and privatization, but that UPW's statutory
claims could be raised directly in the circuit court. The
 ICA held, therefore, that pursuant to the primary
jurisdiction doctrine, a stay rather than a dismissal of
UPW's claims was appropriate because the statute of
limitations could prevent UPW from refiling its claims at
the conclusion of the HLRB's proceedings. As to UPW's
retaliation claims, we agree.
 
Id. at 203, 325 P.3d at 615.
 
In Jou, the doctor sued in circuit court for, inter
 
alia, insurer bad faith for failure to pay him for therapeutic
 
massage services although he was not licensed. The circuit court
 dismissed the suit based on failure to exhaust because it ruled
 Jou was required to obtain a ruling from the agency on whether he
 was entitled to payment before bringing an action for bad faith. 
Jou appealed, challenging both the circuit court's ruling that he
 failed to exhaust, claiming he was entitled to sue in tort for
 insurer bad faith because, as a matter of law, he was an intended
 third-party beneficiary of his patient's employer's workers'
 compensation insurance policy. We held that the circuit court
 was wrong, and that it should have applied the doctrine of
 primary jurisdiction. With regard to the appropriate disposition
 of a case where primary jurisdiction applied, we observed,
 
[a] trial court has discretion in fashioning an
appropriate remedy when applying the primary jurisdiction
doctrine. As an alternative to staying the proceedings
pending administrative resolution of predicate issues, the
court has the discretion to dismiss the case without
 prejudice. Reiter, 507 U.S. at 268–69, 113 S.Ct. 1213.
However, dismissal is an appropriate remedy only "if the
parties would not be unfairly disadvantaged." Id. at 268,
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
113 S.Ct. 1213. In Dr. Jou's case, the circuit court did
not consider whether Dr. Jou would be unfairly disadvantaged
by the dismissal because it held, incorrectly, that
dismissal was required on jurisdictional grounds for failure
to exhaust administrative remedies.
 
Jou, 114 Hawai' i at 129, 157 P.3d at 568 (affirming the dismissal 
on other grounds, inter alia, that Jou was not an intended third 
party beneficiary of the insurance contract). 
Likewise, the Circuit Court here abused its discretion
 
by dismissing Counts IV through VII without considering whether
 the dismissal would "unfairly disadvantage" Begley in bringing
 his claims. Therefore, on remand, the Circuit Court should
 consider whether Counts IV through VI should be dismissed or
 stayed under Abercrombie.
 
IV.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the February 18,
 
2016 Final Judgment Against Plaintiff entered by the Circuit
 Court of the Fifth Circuit and remand for proceedings consistent
 with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 30, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Lyle S. Hosoda
Kevin T. Morikone
 (Hosoda & Morikone),for Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee.
 
Presiding Judge

Adam P. Roversi,Office of the County Attorney,for Defendant-Appellee/
Cross-Appellant.
 Associate Judge

Associate Judge
 
20
 