NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000646
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MICHAEL D. WOODFALL, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
ERIC A. SEITZ, ATTORNEY AT LAW, A LAW CORPORATION;
ERIC A. SEITZ; LAWRENCE I. KAWASAKI, Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-0506)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellant Michael D. Woodfall (Woodfall), pro
 
se, appeals from a Judgment for Defendants (Judgment) in favor of
 
Defendants-Appellees Eric A. Seitz, Attorney at Law, a Law
 Corporation (Law Firm), Eric A. Seitz (Seitz), and Lawrence I.
 Kawasaki (Kawasaki) (collectively, the Defendants), entered on
 August 4, 2011, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (circuit court)
1. The Judgment was entered based on the circuit
 
court's order granting Defendants' motion for summary judgment. 
The circuit court had also denied Woodfall's motion for partial
 summary judgment, in which Woodfall had sought judgment as to
 liability. 
In this case, Woodfall asserts causes of action for
 
legal malpractice and breach of contract. He claims that he had
 an attorney-client relationship with the Defendants to file a
 
1 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
lawsuit related to injuries he sustained while incarcerated (slip
 
and fall case), but that Defendants failed to timely file the
 lawsuit and he is now barred by the statute of limitations.
 
On appeal, Woodfall raises the following points of
 
error:
 
(1) the circuit court failed to apply proper summary
 
judgment standards and thus erred in granting summary judgment
 while: (a) acknowledging there was a genuine issue of material
 fact as to the creation of an attorney-client relationship
 between Woodfall and the Defendants; (b) making a finding of "the
 undisputed existence of a substantial child support lien against
 [Woodfall];" (c) determining that the lien would have precluded
 recovery of any damages by Woodfall in the slip and fall case;
 and (d) thus determining that even if Defendants were retained
 and failed to file a timely lawsuit, Woodfall could not have
 recovered, was not injured by Defendants' alleged conduct, and
 therefore has no damages to establish a legal malpractice claim. 
(2) the circuit court erred by failing to address
 
Woodfall's breach of contract claim and
 
(3) the circuit court erred by allowing court hearings
 
where only the Defendants participated, because Woodfall was
 incarcerated at the time. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, having given due consideration to the
 arguments advanced and the issues raised, and having considered
 the applicable legal authority, we conclude that summary judgment
 for Defendants was not warranted. We vacate the Judgment and
 remand.
 
I. Standard of Review
 
We review the circuit court's grant of summary judgment 
de novo. Querubin v. Thronas, 107 Hawai
'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 
697 (2005). 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has stated: 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law.
 
A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. We review the evidence in the light most favorable
to the party opposing the motion for summary judgment. 
The party moving for summary judgment bears the burden
of proof to show the absence of genuine issues of material
fact and entitlement to judgment as a matter of law. Where,
as here, the moving party is the defendant and does not bear
the burden of proof at trial, he may prevail on a motion for
summary judgment by demonstrating that the plaintiff fails
to make a showing sufficient to establish the existence of
an element essential to that party's case, and on which that
party will bear the burden of proof at trial.
 
Thomas v. Kidani, 126 Hawai 'i 125, 129-30, 267 P.3d 1230, 1234-35 
(2011) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).
II. Discussion
 
The elements for a legal malpractice cause of action
 
are "(1) the parties had an attorney-client relationship, (2) the
 
defendant committed a negligent act or omission constituting
 breach of that duty, (3) there is a causal connection between the
 breach and the plaintiff's injury, and (4) the plaintiff suffered
 actual loss or damages." Id. at 129, 267 P.3d at 1234.
 
The Defendants' motion for summary judgment was based
 
on two grounds. First, Defendants asserted that there was no
 attorney-client relationship and thus there could not have been a
 breach of contract or legal malpractice. Second, Defendants
 asserted that Woodfall knew that the Defendants had declined to
 represent him in the slip and fall case, that he later retained
 the Defendants to represent him regarding claims that he was not
 getting proper medical treatment (medical care case), and that he
 waived any legal malpractice or professional misconduct claims
 when he entered the later agreement to retain the Defendants.
 
In rendering its summary judgment ruling, the circuit
 
court did not rely on either of the grounds asserted by the
 Defendants. Instead, the circuit court noted that there may be
 genuine issues of material fact as to whether an attorney-client
 relationship had been created between Woodfall and Defendants,
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
but found that Woodfall had a substantial child support lien that 
would have precluded him from recovering any damages in the slip and fall case. The circuit court thus ruled that, even if an attorney-client relationship had existed, Woodfall could not establish any damages against the Defendants.
2 In essence, the 
circuit court ruled that Woodfall could not establish the fourth element of a legal malpractice claim. See Thomas, 126 Hawai
'i at 
129, 267 P.3d at 1234. 
The circuit court erred in determining that a 
substantial child support lien existed against Woodfall. The record is sparse as to the child support lien and there is no admissible evidence establishing its existence or its size. The child support lien is referenced in Seitz's affidavit, but he only states that "[r]ecently we learned that Mr. Woodfall has a substantial lien for unpaid child support which would preclude him or us from collecting any judgment or settlement in the civil litigation we have been pursuing in his behalf for the past two years." There is nothing in Seitz's affidavit that establishes his personal knowledge related to the lien. See Hawai
'i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(e) ("Supporting and opposing affidavits shall be made on personal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as would be admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that the affiant is competent to testify to the matters stated therein."). Moreover, even if we could consider Seitz's affidavit statement, it only indicates that the size of the lien would preclude recovery in the medical care case, not in the slip and fall case. 
2 The order granting summary judgment to Defendants states, in
pertinent part:
 
[A]lthough there may be genuine issues of fact as to the
creation of an attorney-client relationship between
Plaintiff and the Defendants, the undisputed existence of a
substantial child support lien against the Plaintiff would
have precluded his recovery of any damages in the underlying
slip and fall tort case so that even if the Defendants were
retained to and failed to file a timely lawsuit in
Plaintiff's behalf Plaintiff could not have recovered and
 was not injured thereby and therefore has no damages that he
can assert against Defendants.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court's ruling as to the child support lien
 
is also in error because there is no evidence as to the amount of
 
any child support lien and the record is unclear as to the amount
 that Woodfall likely would have been awarded if he prevailed in
 the slip and fall case. Thus, the record does not establish that
 a lien would have precluded an actual recovery by Woodfall.
3 As
 
to the lien amount, even if we consider Seitz's affidavit, it
 does not indicate the amount of the lien. As to likely damages
 in the slip and fall case, a letter from Woodfall to Seitz, which
 is attached to Woodfall's declaration, indicates that Woodfall
 was claiming a back injury which he described as "intense burning
 sensation in [his] right hip/buttocks, across the right upper
 thigh, continuing down the right side of the right leg, to the
 right foot. There it changed to numbness, especially in the last
 two toes of the right foot." In his declaration, Woodfall claims
 that an MRI in April 2008 revealed he was suffering from a
 "severe pinched nerve in [his] low back." It is unclear how the
 circuit court determined that any child support lien would
 preclude recovery in the slip and fall case. Based on our de
 novo review of the record, we conclude there are genuine issues
 of material fact whether any child support lien would have
 exceeded any tort recovery in the slip and fall case.
 
"[T]he appellate court may affirm a lower court's 
decision on any ground in the record supporting affirmance, even if not cited by the lower court." Kiehm v. Adams, 109 Hawai
'i 
296, 301, 126 P.3d 339, 344 (2005). In their answering brief, Defendants continue to assert that Woodfall failed to establish that an attorney-client relationship had been created. In this regard, Defendants' main contention is that they had not agreed 
3 We do not reach the legal issue of whether the "actual loss or
damages" element for a legal malpractice claim cannot be met, as a matter of
law, where a child support lien is larger than any likely recovery in the
underlying case. The parties did not brief this legal issue and the circuit
court did not point to any legal authority supporting this conclusion. Our
 ruling is based on the record and that, even assuming a child support lien
larger than any likely recovery would preclude a legal malpractice claim, the
evidence in this case does not establish that there was a child support lien
larger than any likely recovery.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to represent Woodfall. However, we agree with the stated 
inclination of the circuit court that, based on the record in the case, there is a genuine issue of material fact whether an attorney-client relationship had been created. See Stender v. 
Vincent, 92 Hawai
'i 355, 363, 992 P.2d 50, 58 (2000) ("Whether 
and to what extent an attorney-client relationship is present is a question of fact.") (citing Dietz v. Doe, 935 P.2d 611, 615 (Wash. 1997)); DiCenzo v. Izawa, 68 Haw. 528, 536, 723 P.2d 171, 176 (1986) ("[M]eaningful inquiry into the existence of an attorney-client relationship . . .' turns largely on the client's subjective belief that it exists[.]'") (quoting In re McGlothen, 663 P.2d 1330, 1334 (Wash. 1983)); see also Bohn v. Cody, 832 P.2d 71, 75 (Wash. 1992) ("The client's subjective belief, however, does not control the issue unless it is reasonably formed based on the attending circumstances, including the attorney's words or actions."); In re Disciplinary Proceeding Against Egger, 98 P.3d 477, 485 (Wash. 2004). 
The evidence in the record indicates that Kawasaki
 
initially spoke with Woodfall by telephone and then met with him
 at Halawa Correction Center. During their meeting, Kawasaki
 presented Woodfall with a retainer letter dated July 22, 2008,
 that had a signature line for Seitz, but which Seitz had not
 signed (retainer letter). It is undisputed that Kawasaki asked
 Woodfall to sign the retainer letter and that Woodfall signed the
 retainer letter as well as medical releases. In his affidavit,
 Kawasaki contends that he advised Woodfall that until Seitz
 signed the retainer letter and provided a copy to Woodfall, no
 attorney-client relationship existed. The record indicates that
 Seitz never did sign the retainer letter. However, in Woodfall's
 declaration, he states inter alia that Kawasaki told him during
 their meeting that he had "come prepared to do business," that
 Woodfall understood the retainer letter to be an offer for legal
 representation, that Kawasaki pointed out that Woodfall had
 agreed to provide all information or documents to them, and that
 Kawasaki had assured Woodfall that Kawasaki would file the case
 
6
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
before the statute of limitations deadline. Given the
 
conflicting evidence in the record, we cannot say that there
 exists no genuine issue of material fact on the question of
 whether an attorney-client relationship was created.
 
Defendants also maintain on appeal that Woodfall waived
 
any legal malpractice claims related to the slip and fall case
 when he later retained Defendants in the medical care case. It
 is undisputed that Woodfall and Seitz both signed a retainer
 letter agreement in June 2009 related to the medical care case
 (second retainer letter), which was entered into after Woodfall
 had already discovered that the Defendants had not filed the
 action in the slip and fall case. In his affidavit, Seitz states
 that he signed the second retainer letter after Woodfall assured
 him that "he did not intend to pursue any claims against [Seitz
 or his] law firm in connection with the 'slip and fall'
 matter[.]" Woodfall, to the contrary, states in his declaration
 that although he did accept the Defendants' offer to represent
 him in the medical care case, he did not waive any potential
 malpractice claims. The second retainer letter does not refer to
 any waiver of Woodfall's claims.
 
A waiver may be expressed or implied, and it may be
established by express statement or agreement, or by acts
and conduct from which an intention to waive may be
reasonably inferred.
 
Generally, waiver is defined as an intentional
relinquishment of a known right, a voluntary
relinquishment of rights, and the relinquishment or
refusal to use a right. To constitute a waiver, there
must have existed a right claimed to have been waived
and the waiving party must have had knowledge, actual
or constructive, of the existence of such a right at
the time of the purported waiver.
 
Coon v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 98 Hawai 'i 233, 261, 47 P.3d 
348, 376 (2002) (citations, internal quotation marks and brackets 
omitted). 
The existence of a waiver is generally a question of

 
fact, unless the facts are undisputed:
 
While the question whether a valid waiver exists is
generally a question of fact, "when the facts are undisputed
it may become a question of law." Hawaiian Homes Comm'n v.
 
Bush, 43 Haw. 281, 286 (1959) (citations omitted); see also
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Stewart v. Spalding, 23 Haw. 502, 517 (1916) ("The question
of waiver is usually a mixed one of law and fact . . . , but
where the facts are undisputed and are susceptible of but
one reasonable inference it becomes one of law for the
 court." [ ]).
 
Id. at 261-62, 47 P.3d at 376-77.
 
Based on the state of the record, summary judgment on
 
waiver grounds is not appropriate.
 
Given the conclusions above, we need not reach the
 
other points of error raised by Woodfall challenging the summary
 
judgment entered in favor of Defendants. 
Moreover, as to Woodfall's contention that the circuit
 
court erred in denying his motion for partial summary judgment,
 we disagree. The record establishes that Woodfall was not
 entitled to summary judgment, and the circuit court did not err
 in denying Woodfall's motion.
III. Conclusion 
For the reasons stated above, we affirm the Order
 
Denying Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment filed on
 August 4, 2011; and we vacate the Judgment for Defendants and the
 Order Granting Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment, both
 filed on August 4, 2011. The case is remanded to the circuit
 court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 27, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Michael D. Woodfall
 
Plaintiff-Appellant pro se
 
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Eric A. Seitz

 
Della Au Belatti
 
Ronald N.W. Kim
 for Defendants-Appellees
 
8

 