 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000298 06-MAR-2026 10:26 AM Dkt. 63 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000298 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
LINDSAY N. MCANEELEY, Petitioner-Appellee, 
v. 
DOREEN FUKUSHIMA, Respondent-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DSS-24-0000308) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
Respondent-Appellant Doreen Fukushima (Fukushima) 
appeals from the "Injunction Against Harassment" (Injunction) 
entered on March 22, 2024 by the District Court of the First 
Circuit
1 (district court). 
In the underlying case, Petitioner-Appellee Lindsay N. 
McAneeley (McAneeley) filed a "Petition for Ex Parte Temporary 
1 The Honorable Shellie K. Park- Hoapili presided.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 Restraining Order [(TRO)] and for Injunction Against Harassment" 
(Petition) against Fukushima. On March 11, 2024, the district 
court granted McAneeley's Petition for a TRO, prohibiting 
Fukushima from "contacting, threatening, or physically 
harassing" McAneeley. Fukushima was served with the TRO on 
March 18, 2024. On March 22, 2024, following a trial on the 
Petition at which Fukushima was self-represented, the district 
court issued the Injunction.2 
Fukushima asserts three points of error on appeal, 
contending that the district court erred by: (1) "violat[ing] [Fukushima's] constitutional rights to substantive and 
procedural due process of law" by not "advis[ing] [Fukushima] at 
the commencement of the case that [Fukushima] had a right to be 
represented by counsel," and by not "advis[ing] [Fukushima] that 
if she needed more time to obtain counsel or prepare for the 
hearing she could make such a request"; (2) "violat[ing] 
[Fukushima's] constitutional right to freedom of speech when it allowed [McAneeley's] counsel to introduce two exhibits 
(Exhibits 8 and 9) into evidence even though they were not 
addressed to [McAneeley] and [Fukushima] stated that her posts 
were protected by her right to freedom of speech"; and (3) 
"determin[ing] that [McAneeley] had proved by clear and 
2 The district court denied McAneeley's request for attorney's 
fees, as well as Fukushima's request to be compensated for income lost during 
the time she was in court to defend against the Petition. 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 convincing evidence that [Fukushima] had committed harassment as 
defined by [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] §[ ]604-10.5(a)(2) 
[(2016)]." 
Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration 
to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we resolve Fukushima's points of error as follows: 
(1) Fukushima contends that the district court 
violated her due process rights by not advising her "that [she] had a right to be represented by counsel," and that she could 
request a continuance "if she needed additional time to prepare 
for the hearing." (Formatting altered.) "We review questions 
of constitutional law de novo, under the right/wrong standard." 
Jou v. Dai-Tokyo Royal State Ins. Co., 116 Hawaiʻ i 159, 164-65, 
172 P.3d 471, 476-77 (2007) (cleaned up). 
The underlying TRO proceeding is civil in nature. See
Duarte v. Young
, 134 Hawaiʻi 459, 463, 342 P.3d 878, 882 (App. 
2014) ("[T]he purpose of HRS § 604-10.5 was to prevent 
harassment that cannot be effectively controlled by criminal 
processes and penalties and to adopt a civil statute that can be 
used to interrupt systematic and continuous intimidation that 
stops short of assault or threats." (cleaned up)). Parties to a 
civil case have no constitutional right to the assistance of counsel, though courts have acknowledged the right of civil 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 
 litigants to retain and fund counsel of their choice. See Adir
Int'l, LLC v. Starr Indem. & Liab. Co., 994 F.3d 1032, 1039 (9th 
Cir. 2021) (recognizing that "courts have generally acknowledged 
a civil litigant's Fifth Amendment due process right to retain 
and fund the counsel of their choice." (citation omitted)). 
Here, the record reflects that the TRO provided notice 
to Fukushima that she had the right to retain an attorney to 
represent her at the hearing: 
Prior to the scheduled hearing date, you or your 
attorney may file a written response explaining, excusing, 
justifying, or denying the alleged act or acts of 
harassment. At the hearing, the parties shall be prepared 
to testify, call and examine witnesses, present any 
documents, and give legal or factual reasons why the 
Injunction should or should not be granted. Each party may be represented by an attorney and shall be prepared to 
proceed at the hearing. IF YOU OR YOUR ATTORNEY FAIL TO 
ATTEND AT THE TIME AND PLACE DESIGNATED, AN ORDER GRANTING PETITION FOR INJUNCTION AGAINST HARASSMENT WILL BE TAKEN 
AGAINST YOU FOR THE RELIEF DEMANDED IN THE PETITION. 
At the hearing on the Petition, the district court 
asked Fukushima whether she had received a copy of the TRO (she 
had), and whether she agreed to an injunction (she expressed 
that she wanted to challenge the Petition). At that time, the 
district court raised the option of a continuance, informing the parties that "[it] can either continue -- the TRO's in place 
until -- it's certified till June." Fukushima indicated that 
she wished to proceed with trial that day, and that she was 
willing to wait until the district court could recall the case 
for trial later that day. Following an hour-long recess, during 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 which the district court addressed other matters to which it had 
referred, the district court recalled the case, and asked the 
parties if they were ready for trial. Fukushima replied, "[d]id 
my best, Your Honor." 
In Luat v. Cacho, upon which Fukushima relies, this 
court clarified that "a TRO, in view of its emergency remedial 
nature, may be granted ex parte," but "a respondent who, either 
orally or in writing, denies or controverts the material allegations contained in a petition for injunction under HRS 
§ 604-10.5 is statutorily and constitutionally entitled to a 
prior evidentiary hearing before a three-year injunction order 
may issue." 92 Hawaiʻ i 330, 346, 991 P.2d 840, 856 (App. 1999). 
We therefore held that, "[g]iven the serious consequences that 
may flow from such an injunction order, a respondent must be 
given a reasonable time to obtain the services of a lawyer, 
conduct discovery, obtain documentary and testimonial evidence, 
and prepare a proper defense to the allegations raised in the 
petition." Id.This court also noted that "[t]he TRO served on 
[the respondent] also failed to inform [the respondent] that he 
was entitled to an evidentiary hearing on [the petitioner's] 
petition if he contested or denied the allegations in the 
petition." Id. at 345, 991 P.2d at 855. 
Luat is distinguishable from the present case. In 
Luat, the respondent informed the presiding judge that he was 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
 not aware he could introduce witness testimony at the hearing, 
and that there were witnesses not present at the hearing who 
would testify on his behalf. Id. at 334-35, 991 P.2d at 844-45. 
We held that, under those circumstances, "the district court should have sua sponte continued the TRO and the hearing in 
order to allow [the respondent] the opportunity to adduce 
evidence and witnesses critical to his defense." Id. at 346, 
991 P.2d at 856. 
Here, the TRO served on Fukushima advised that an 
evidentiary hearing would be conducted and that Fukushima or her 
attorney should be "prepared to testify, call and examine 
witnesses, present any documents, and give legal or factual 
reasons why the Injunction should or should not be granted." 
Fukushima appeared at the hearing, did not indicate any need or 
desire for a continuance, and proceeded to introduce her 
evidence at trial. Fukushima submitted twenty-four exhibits; 
the district court admitted all of Fukushima's exhibits except for Exhibit 13, which was stricken. She also testified at trial 
and cross-examined McAneeley. 
On this record, we conclude that Fukushima's due 
process rights were not violated. 
(2) Fukushima contends that the district court's 
admission of McAneeley's Exhibits 8 and 9 violated her right to 
free speech. Exhibits 8 and 9 are social media postings by 
6   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
  
 
 Fukushima. When asked, Fukushima did not object to the 
admission of these exhibits at trial. In any event, Fukushima 
contends on appeal that she "had a constitutionally protected 
right to express," via social media, her "dissatisfaction with 
the performance of an attorney who had undertaken to represent 
her."  
Fukushima posted the following message on social media 
on January 30, 2024, which was introduced as McAneeley's Exhibit 8: 
I celebrated my birthday last week and my crazy staff 
surprised me with balloons, decorations and cup cakes. I 
owe them for staying with me through all of the challenges 
our practice has faced since last year. I tried to reason 
with a law firm that has done so much wrong to me and they 
have made it clear that they have no interest in reconciliation. It's a shame because lawyers usually tell 
you that settlement is the best option but I guess that 
goes out the window when they're personally involved. I 
have chosen to fight this battle but I wish the one 
attorney whose actions I feel were misguided would have the strength to come forward and admit her wrongdoing. If she 
did, then I would be willing to accept her apology and move 
forward because once I start down this road I won't stop 
which is likely going to result in outcomes that will 
change the lives of everyone involved. I have made my 
peace with that and know I'm justified in doing what I have 
to do because now my ex law firm has become goliath but I'm 
still David. This time I won't lose because I never give 
up without a fight. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Fukushima posted the following message on social media 
on February 1, 2024, which was introduced as McAneeley's 
Exhibit 9: 
I went out with my mother and friend to get some much 
needed support and advice during this tough time. They 
both agree that I'm doing the right thing by taking legal 
action against my ex law firm for how horrendously they've treated me. I am definitely going to keep blasting them on 
7   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
social media because people should see how they treat their 
clients and how incompetent they are. However I have held 
off because I'm giving one last chance to the female 
attorney who started all this to right her wrong by coming 
to me, taking accountability and apologizing for what she 
has done. In case she's got brain damage and doesn't know 
who she is, her initials are LM. If she doesn't come by 
tomorrow (2-2- 24), then I will air all of her dirty laundry 
to the public and pursue a complaint to the Hawaii Bar and 
the Office of Disciplinary Counsel which will likely result 
in her disbarment. If she values being honest and wants any chance to still be a lawyer in the future, she has 
until tomorrow to own what she has done. I've given her 
more than enough chances for redemption, so if she passes this up for the 20th or so time, then maybe she needs to 
lose her license because she's too foolish to do what's right. She should know where i work since she did defend 
my practice when she was my attorney and i will be there tomorrow all day working until 4 pm when I end and get 
ready to cheer on the UH Men's volleyball at 7 pm. [sic] 
At this point I haven't found anyone to come with me so I'll be going solo which doesn't bother me but it would be 
fun for someone to laugh and have a good time to start off 
the weekend. 
(Emphasis added.) 
McAneeley alleged that Fukushima harassed her through 
an intentional and knowing course of conduct that included 
unwelcome communications and romantic overtures, unwanted gifts, 
and uninvited appearances at her home. Fukushima testified that 
the messages in McAneeley's Exhibits 8 and 9 referenced and were 
directed towards McAneeley, and that Fukushima was "trying to 
get [McAneeley] to see the error of her ways."  When asked if her postings were "an invitation for [McAneeley] to reach out to 
[her]," Fukushima replied, "[y]es, if she'd like."  On this 
record, we conclude that Fukushima's social media postings were 
admitted for the purpose of establishing Fukushima's pattern of 
harassing conduct towards McAneeley, and not to punish Fukushima 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 for expressing her opinion regarding McAneeley's legal 
representation. See Justo v. Kauka, No. CAAP-21-0000423, 2023 
WL 6804757, at *5 (Haw. App. Oct. 16, 2023) (SDO) (citing Moysa 
v. Davies, No. 28753, 2009 WL 1178659, at *2 (Haw. App. May 4, 
2009) (SDO)) ("Courts may properly restrict statements made with 
the intent to harass." (citations omitted)). 
We therefore conclude that the district court did not 
violate Fukushima's free speech rights by permitting the admission of Exhibits 8 and 9 into evidence. 
(3) Fukushima contends that the district court erred 
by finding that McAneeley met her burden of proving by clear and 
convincing evidence that Fukushima committed harassment pursuant 
to HRS § 604-10.5(a)(2).
3 "Whether there was substantial 
evidence to support an injunction against an alleged harasser is 
3 HRS § 604- 10.5(c) (Supp. 2023) permits "[a]ny person who has been 
subjected to harassment" to "petition the district court for a temporary 
restraining order and an injunction from further harassment." The statute 
defines "[h] arassment" as, in relevant part, 
(2) An intentional or knowing course of conduct directed at 
an individual that seriously alarms or disturbs 
consistently or continually bothers the individual and 
serves no legitimate purpose; provided that such course of conduct would cause a reasonable person to suffer 
emotional distress. 
HRS § 604- 10.5(a)(2). 
"Course of conduct" is defined as "a pattern of conduct 
composed of a series of acts over any period of time evidencing a 
continuity of purpose." HRS § 604- 10.5(a) (2016). 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
  reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard." Duarte , 134 
Hawaiʻi at 462, 342 P.3d at 881 (cleaned up).   
There is substantial evidence in the record to support 
the Injunction. 
McAneeley testified that she and another 
attorney had represented Fukushima in a litigation matter, and 
that, during the course of the representation, Fukushima had 
expressed interest in a romantic relationship with McAneeley. 
McAneeley told Fukushima "that would not be possible" because 
McAneeley was not interested in women, and that a romantic 
relationship would be inappropriate given her role as 
Fukushima's counsel. 
The litigation matter ended. Fukushima sent a gift 
and thank you note to McAneeley, and McAneeley sent Fukushima an email thanking her and "wishing her well." McAneeley testified 
that she did not expect further contact with Fukushima. 
The record reflects that Fukushima continued to pursue 
communication with McAneeley by voicemail and email. 
Fukushima's email message, with the subject line "Strike 2", 
dated October 15, 2023, invited McAneeley to play "walking soccer" with Fukushima, and said "[i]t's supposed to be light 
contact but I won't cry too hard if you slap me around a 
little." Fukushima's email message, with the subject line 
"Strike 3", dated October 17, 2023, invited McAneeley to travel 
with her to Disneyland, and communicated to McAneeley that, 
10   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 "unless you serve me with a restraining order, . . . I'll assume 
you still are looking for me to send an email with whatever 
it'll take to get you to hit the reply button on your email." 
McAneeley did not respond to Fukushima's email messages. 
Fukushima twice showed up uninvited and unannounced at 
McAneeley's home. McAneeley testified that she did not tell 
Fukushima where she lived, that she did not know how Fukushima 
found her address, and Fukushima's appearance at her home was "[a]bsolutely unwelcome."  During the first encounter, Fukushima 
was accompanied by three other individuals, and McAneeley 
testified that she found the experience "absolutely terrifying." 
Fukushima testified that McAneeley "look[ed] petrified." 
Following Fukushima's first uninvited visit, 
McAneeley's law firm sent an email message to Fukushima, 
requesting that Fukushima cease all contact and communication 
with McAneeley: 
We've . . . been made aware of some communications you've 
sent to [McAneeley] over the past couple of months that 
have made her uncomfortable. We understand that over the 
weekend, you showed up at [McAneeley's] home uninvited. 
These contacts were not welcomed by [McAneeley].  As a 
result of these actions, we are writing to request that you cease communicating with [McAneeley] and that you not 
attempt to come to the firm's offices. . . . The firm will 
not be taking on any new engagements for you[.] 
(Emphasis added.) 
Notwithstanding the clear request that Fukushima cease 
contact and communications with McAneeley, Fukushima went to 
McAneeley's home a second time. McAneeley testified that, 
11   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 during that encounter, um -- [Fukushima] said she had 
brought bail money because she knew that it was -- I may 
call the police on her and that she may have to go to jail 
for coming, that people had told her not to come, but that 
she wanted -- she felt that she needed to come because I 
was her twin flame, that a psychic had told her, that I was 
her twin flame, and that, uh -- we share one soul. 
Fukushima acknowledged that she went to McAneeley's 
home for the second time after receiving the "banning email." 
Fukushima described the second encounter as follows, 
And I said, you know what? I will take a gamble. I told 
my mother, I said, I'm gonna go one more time. And, you 
know, I might get a restraining order on me. And jokingly 
I said I had bail money on me. 
 And when I got there, [McAneeley]  panicked again , and 
I said, look, [McAneeley]. I said, give me a minute. I 
said, you know, I take a risk that by coming here today you  
could call the police and have a restraining order on me.   
And I -- I guess I was right.  
 So I do own that I went there. And I went there with 
a job offer for [McAneeley].  The job offer I came in 
November to offer  her, which was for her to start her  own 
firm and I would help her.   Because I said, I don't feel 
like you're respected in your  law firm. I would never bark 
or yell at you. I think you're a very good attorney. And 
I actually jokingly said, hey, why don't you sue your law 
firm with me? Wrongful termination, uh -- hostile work 
environment. Because once upon a time I was a worker's comp, uh -- evaluator.  
 And, you know, just seeing [McAneeley]  panic, and 
when I offered her  the job, her  response is --  three times 
is I am not gay.  
And I'm like, that's not a job qualification is to be 
gay. 
But [McAneeley] kept saying that
. Which means to me, 
she is probably suppressing whatever her feelings are. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Fukushima also, in an attempt to communicate with 
McAneeley, posted the social media messages at issue in section 
(2), supra. At around the same time, McAneeley received a 
12   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 delivery of roses, a stuffed teddy bear, candy, and a balloon, 
accompanied by a note. Although the note was unsigned, 
McAneeley testified that she knew it was from Fukushima because 
it asked McAneeley to "bring[] those 51 fingers and toes to 
where they're supposed to be," referencing a phrase that 
Fukushima had said to McAneeley in prior communications. 
The substantial record evidence supports that 
Fukushima engaged in "[a]n intentional or knowing course of conduct directed at [McAneeley] that seriously alarm[ed] or 
disturb[ed] consistently or continually bother[ed] [McAneeley]" 
and that "such course of conduct would cause a reasonable person 
to suffer emotional distress." See HRS § 604-10.5(a)(2). We 
therefore conclude that the district court's Injunction was not clearly erroneous. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Injunction. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, March 6, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
Francis T. O'Brien, 
for Respondent-Appellant. 
 Kirk M. Neste, 
for Petitioner-Appellee. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Chief Judge  
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Associate Judge  
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge 
13 