NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000610 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
NB, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
GT, Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(FC-D NO. 12-01-056K) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: 
Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant NB (Mother) appeals from the "Order 
re Plaintiff's Motion and Declaration for Post-Decree Relief 
filed on 06/21/2018 and Defendant's Motion for Post-Decree Relief to Modify Physical Custody and Visitation Orders filed on 04/23/2019" (
2019 Post-Decree Order) entered on August 6, 2019 in 
favor of Defendant-Appellee GT (Father) by the Family Court of 
the Third Circuit (Family Court).1 In the 2019 Post-Decree 
Order, the Family Court, inter alia, denied Mother's post-decree 
motion to relocate Mother and Father's three minor children, S.K.T., K.K.T, and Z.K.T., to the state of Washington and granted Father's motion for joint physical custody of the children. 
On appeal, Mother challenges the Family Court's 2019 
Post-Decree Order, and the findings of fact (FOFs) and 
conclusions of law (COLs) made in relation to the order, "to the 
1 The Honorable Wendy M. DeWeese presided.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
extent they are germane to this appeal".2 Mother asserts that 
the Family Court abused its discretion in denying her request to 
relocate with her minor children and granting Father's request for joint physical custody, arguing that those rulings: (1) were not in the best interest of the children as contemplated under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-46 (2018); (2) were contrary 
to Hawaii's case law; (3) failed to consider the history of 
domestic violence by Father, and (4) improperly relied on the recommendation and testimony of the appointed guardian ad litem (GAL) because it was based on an incorrect assumption. 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm. 
I. Background 
On March 16, 2012, Mother filed a complaint for divorce 
against Father. On May 29, 2012, the Family Court entered a Divorce Decree in favor of Mother which, inter alia, awarded joint legal custody of the three minor children to Mother and Father, and sole physical custody of the children to Mother, with a detailed visitation/time sharing schedule with Father. On January 26, 2016, Father filed a post-decree motion for relief seeking to modify his visitation schedule. On August 22, 2016, the Family Court entered a post-decree order (2016 Post-Decree 
Order), which, inter alia, denied Father's motion and adjusted 
the visitation schedule.
3 
In the 2016 Post-Decree Order, the Family Court made a 
number of FOFs in relation to its denial of Father's request to 
adjust the visitation schedule: 
1. The Court has concerns for that [sic] the minor
children being exposed to violent video games and gunsthat are inappropriate for their age while in[Father's] care.
2. The children are exhausted when returning from 
2 The Family Court entered its "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law re
Order re Plaintiff's Motion and Declaration for Post-Decree Relief Filed on 06/21/2018 and Defendant's Motion for Post-Decree Relief to Modify PhysicalCustody and Visitation Orders Filed on 04/23/2019" on September 20, 2019. 
3 The Honorable Aley K. Auna, Jr. presided over the Divorce Decree and
2016 Post-Decree Order. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Father's] house. This was recognized by the teachers
and counselors. 
3. The Court is concerned with the children's access to social media accounts which may place the children indanger, but [Mother] did not meet her burden inproving that the minor children's access to theInternet has placed them in danger.
4. The parties' minor son was injured while in [Father's]care and did not notify [Mother] for two days, whichis not in the best interests of the child, nor does itsupport [Father's] motion for 50-50 custody.
5. Both parties appear to be loving, caring parents.
6. The Court must decide what is in the children's best interests. 
7. There was domestic violence in the past.
8. The parties have difficulties getting along when itcomes to parenting, and this goes against sharedcustody being in the best interests of the children.
9. [Father] has not proven by a preponderance of theevidence that there has been a material change incircumstances. 
10. It is in the best interests of the minor children for [Mother] to have sole physical custody and for[Mother] and [Father] to have joint legal custody ofthe children, as provided for in Stipulation RegardingLegal and Physical Custody, Approved and So Ordered bythe Honorable Judge Aley K. Akuna, Jr., and filed onApril 9, 2013.
11. It is in the best interests of the minor children for the visitation order currently in place to bemodified, as set forth in the Order below. 
(Emphasis added). 
On June 21, 2018, Mother filed a motion for post-decree 
relief seeking, inter alia, sole legal custody and permission to 
relocate the three children to the state of Washington. On February 7, 2019, the Family Court entered an order appointing a GAL. On April 23, 2019, Father filed a competing motion for post-decree relief, seeking, inter alia, joint physical custody of the children, or in the alternative, if Mother relocates to Washington, an order granting sole physical custody of the children to Father with reasonable visitation with Mother. 
Evidentiary hearings on the motions were held on June 
28, 2019, and July 11, 2019. On August 6, 2019, the Family Court entered the 2019 Post-Decree Order which, inter alia, denied Mother's motion to relocate the children and granted Father's motion for joint physical custody, giving rise to this appeal. On September 20, 2019, the Family Court entered its FOFs and COLs 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in relation to the 2019 Post-Decree Order. 
II. The Family Court properly considered the
HRS § 571-46(b) factors in its Post-Decree Order 
Mother asserts that the Family Court abused its 
discretion in denying her request to relocate the children to 
Washington and in awarding joint physical custody of the children to Father because the HRS § 571-46(b) factors and the best interests of the children weighed in favor of relocation and/or at the very least Mother maintaining sole physical custody over the children. We conclude that the Family Court did not abuse its discretion and appropriately considered the best interests of the children under the HRS § 571-46(b) factors in its 2019 Post-Decree Order. 
"It is well settled that in child custody cases the 
paramount concern is the best interests of the child." W.N. v. 
S.M., 143 Hawai# i 128, 135, 424 P.3d 483, 490 (2018) (citation 
omitted). Likewise, in cases where one parent wishes to relocate with the children over the objection of the other parent, courts have consistently adhered to the best interests of the child standard as the governing consideration. See HRS § 571-46(a)(1); 
see also Fisher v. Fisher
, 111 Hawai# i 41, 50, 137 P.3d 355, 364 
(2006); Waldecker v. O'Scanlon, 137 Hawai# i 460, 471, 375 P.3d 
239, 250 (2016). HRS § 571-46(b) provides a non-exhaustive list of factors for the Family Court to consider in determining the best interest of the children.
4 "The trial court possesses broad 
4 HRS § 571-46(b) provides: 
(b) In determining what constitutes the best
interest of the child under this section, the court
shall consider, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Any history of sexual or physical abuse ofa child by a parent;
(2) Any history of neglect or emotional abuseof a child by a parent;
(3) The overall quality of the parent-childrelationship;
(4) The history of caregiving or parenting byeach parent prior and subsequent to amarital or other type of separation;
(5) Each parent's cooperation in developing 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
discretion in making custody decisions and in its determination
of what is in the best interests of the child." A.A. v. B.B., 139 Hawai# i 102, 106, 384 P.3d 878, 882 (2016) (citation 
omitted).  
and implementing a plan to meet the
child's ongoing needs, interests, andschedule; provided that this factor shallnot be considered in any case where thecourt has determined that family violencehas been committed by a parent;
(6) The physical health needs of the child;
(7) The emotional needs of the child;
(8) The safety needs of the child;
(9) The educational needs of the child;
(10) The child's need for relationships withsiblings;
(11) Each parent's actions demonstrating thatthey allow the child to maintain familyconnections through family events andactivities; provided that this factorshall not be considered in any case wherethe court has determined that familyviolence has been committed by a parent;
(12) Each parent's actions demonstrating thatthey separate the child's needs from theparent's needs;
(13) Any evidence of past or current drug oralcohol abuse by a parent;
(14) The mental health of each parent;
(15) The areas and levels of conflict presentwithin the family; and
(16) A parent's prior wilful misuse of theprotection from abuse process underchapter 586 to gain a tactical advantagein any proceeding involving the custodydetermination of a minor. Such wilful misuse may be considered only if it isestablished by clear and convincingevidence, and if it is further found byclear and convincing evidence that in theparticular family circumstance the wilfulmisuse tends to show that, in the future,the parent who engaged in the wilfulmisuse will not be able to cooperatesuccessfully with the other parent intheir shared responsibilities for thechild. The court shall articulate findingsof fact whenever relying upon this factoras part of its determination of the bestinterests of the child. For the purposesof this section, when taken alone, thevoluntary dismissal of a petition forprotection from abuse shall not be treatedas prima facie evidence that a wilfulmisuse of the protection from abuseprocess has occurred. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Mother reiterates many of the arguments she 
made to the Family Court in the underlying proceedings. Mother 
asserts that she has maintained sole physical custody of the children and has performed all of the day-to-day care of the children since the Divorce Decree was entered in 2012. Mother points to the alleged shortcomings of Father's care of the children, including a lack of structure and enforcement of rules, and occasions where the children were injured while in his care. Mother also notes that she has never interrupted Father's visitation with the children, despite the alleged domestic violence that Father has subjected her to and his failure to pay child support. 
Mother also asserts the record establishes that 
relocation to Washington with Mother is in the best interests of the children. Mother notes that the cost of living in Washington, including housing costs, are significantly lower than in Hawai# i. Mother further notes that based on her research, the 
area of Washington where she intends to move offers the children access to better educational opportunities and medical care, which is especially important in light of an allergy condition suffered by Z.K.T. Mother also notes that she has received informal job offers at two different companies in Washington. Mother also asserts that the children will continue to receive the support of their extended family, as her current partner is moving to Washington, and her parents intend to join her as soon as they are able to sell their house in 
Hawai# i. 
However, the Family Court considered all of these 
arguments in its evaluation of the HRS § 571-46(b) factors, and within its discretion, ultimately concluded that it was in the children's best interests to remain in the state of Hawai# i, and 
for Father to be granted joint physical custody of the children. 
In considering the history of care giving or parenting 
by each parent, the Family Court concluded that while Mother became the primary custodial parent during the school week pursuant to the 2016 Post-Decree Order, Father has maintained 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
substantial time with the children during weekends, holidays, and 
vacations. The Family Court further found that Father is active in the children's school and sports activities, and that "while the parents do not share exactly equal time with their children, [Father] has a substantial and meaningful role in the children's lives." 
The Family Court further concluded that each parent has 
made fairly equal efforts to ensure that their children's needs are met. While Mother has been responsible for a majority of the weekday care of the children by virtue of the 2016 Post-Decree Order, the Family Court found that Father "has maximized the opportunities he does have during the week and weekends to be with his children[,]" and there is no evidence Father is unwilling or unable to care for the children's medical needs. The testimony presented to the Family Court support the court's conclusion. 
In regards to Father's parenting style, the Family 
Court noted that while some of the children have been injured while in both parents' care, both parents handled the situations appropriately and have addressed the accidental injuries. The Family Court noted that both parents had strengths and weaknesses, and the children ultimately benefitted from having a relationship with both Father and Mother. 
In regards to the areas and levels of conflict between 
the parties, the Family Court indicated that the level of conflict has been relatively low, and that both Mother and Father have been able to cooperate and co-parent with each other. As discussed in more detail infra, the record is devoid of any finding by the Family Court of family violence on the part of Father. The Family Court also noted that while it appears that Father owes Mother a significant amount in child support arrearages, the exact amount appears to legitimately be in dispute based on prior court orders and agreements by the parties. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Family Court also made numerous FOFs and COLs 
explaining why it did not believe it was in the children's best 
interest to be relocated to Washington. The Family Court found that there is limited information about the proposed relocation, including what schools the children would attend, their long-term housing arrangements, a clear description of the local community, Mother's employment, and whether Mother's partner would contribute financially to the household. The Family Court found that although Mother has proposed a visitation plan for Father, there is no plan for how to distribute the costs for the children's travel expenses. 
The Family Court concluded that the educational needs 
of the children were adequately met in Hawai# i, and that there 
was limited information about the specific educational opportunities in Washington. 
The Family Court concluded that 
although Z.K.T. has suffered from allergies that have not yet been definitively diagnosed, the issue appears to have been resolved, and it does not appear that Z.K.T. requires any extraordinary care or treatment. The Family Court also noted the significant disruption that would occur in the children's relationship with their extended family if they were permitted to relocate, considering that only Mother's brother was currently in Washington and although Mother testified her parents intended to move, there was limited testimony about the details of such move. The Family Court also expressed concern that Mother's intention to move was motivated more by her desire to follow her partner to Washington as opposed to improve her children's lives. 
At the July 11, 2019 hearing, the Family Court stated 
that it was granting Father's request for joint physical custody based on the same findings it had made in relation to its denial of Mother's relocation request. The Family Court further noted that its custody determination was also based on considerations by the GAL, who expressed that the children have requested for equal time with Mother and Father, and appear to be happy with both parents. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In sum, the Family Court considered Mother's arguments 
in its evaluation of the HRS § 571-46(b) factors, and within its 
discretion concluded that it was in the children's best interests to remain in Hawai# i and for Father to be awarded joint physical 
custody of the children. Although Mother challenges the Family Court's FOFs and COLs "to the extent they are germane to this appeal", she does not challenge any specific finding or conclusion, nor does she provide any basis as to why any finding was clearly erroneous. Accordingly, the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in its 2019 Post-Decree Order. 
I
II.  The Family Court's Post-Decree Order
was not contrary to Hawaii's case law 
Mother contends that the Family Court misapplied 
Hawaii's case law in its 2019 Post-Decree Order. 
Specifically, 
Mother asserts that the court erroneously applied Gillespie v. Gillespie, 40 Haw. 315 (Haw. Terr. 1953), Maeda v. Maeda, 8 Haw. App. 139, 794 P.2d 268 (1990), Tetreault v. Tetreault, 99 Hawai# i 
352, 55 P.3d 845 (App. 2002) and Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 41, 137 P.3d 
355 in denying Mother's request to relocate the children. We disagree and conclude that the Family Court properly considered and applied 
Hawai# i case law in its 2019 Post-Decree Order. 
Mother asserts that the instant case is distinguishable 
from Gillespie and 
Maeda, where the parents' requests to relocate 
their children were denied because the relocating parent did not provide evidence that the relocation destination was well-suited for their children. See Gillespie, 40 Haw. at 320-23; Maeda, 8 
Haw. App. at 143, 794 P.2d at 270. Mother instead contends that this case is more akin to Fisher and Tetreault, where the record supported the court's determination that relocation was in the best interests of the children. See Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 50-
51, 137 P.3d at 364-65; Tetreault, 99 Hawai# i at 358, 55 P.3d at 
851. However, as discussed above, the Family Court considered 
the evidence and ultimately concluded that there was not enough information about the relocation to determine whether the move would be beneficial to the children. The record supports this conclusion. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  While Mother testified that she received two informal 
job offers in Washington, her testimony on cross-examination 
indicated that the terms of her employment were speculative. Mother also testified that her partner did not currently have a job in Washington. Mother also testified that she had not yet secured any long-term housing, and intended to move in with her brother until she was able to find a suitable home for the children. However, as noted by the Family Court, there was no evidence regarding the details about her brother and his residence. 
Further, Mother testified that the schools in 
Washington were ranked significantly higher than the schools in Hawai# i based on her research on "Google", but there was no 
testimony as to any specific school in which Mother intended to enroll the children, or how the new school would benefit the children. The Family Court noted that the absence of such evidence was significant because it is undisputed that S.K.T. is thriving in her current school, and although K.K.T. and Z.K.T. have needed additional educational assistance, there was evidence presented that established that the children were receiving such assistance from their teachers and counselors in 
Hawai# i. 
In sum, our review of the record confirms that the 
Family Court appropriately considered Hawai# i case law in denying 
Mother's request to relocate her children to Washington.
IV. The Family Court did not err in finding
that there was no history of domestic abuse by Father 
Mother asserts that the Family Court erred in its Post-
Decree Order because it found no history of abuse on the part of Father, and erroneously concluded that Father had rebutted the presumption in HRS § 571-46(a)(9) against an award of joint physical custody to a parent where there is a determination by the court that family violence had been committed by that parent. We disagree because the record does not contain a finding that Father committed family violence, and thus there was no rebuttable presumption against Father's joint physical custody of the children. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
One of the factors in awarding child custody under HRS 
§ 571-46(b) is "[a]ny history of sexual or physical abuse of a 
child by a parent". As stated in HRS § 571-46(a)(9), if the family court makes any determination that family violence had been committed by a parent, a rebuttable presumption is raised against that parent's custody over the children in every proceeding determining custody: 
In every proceeding where there is at issue a dispute
as to the custody of a child, a determination by thecourt that family violence has been committed by aparent raises a rebuttable presumption that it isdetrimental to the child and not in the best interest of the child to be placed in sole custody, joint legalcustody, or joint physical custody with theperpetrator of family violence. In addition to otherfactors that a court shall consider in a proceeding inwhich the custody of a child or visitation by a parentis at issue, and in which the court has made a findingof family violence by a parent:
(A) The court shall consider as the primaryfactor the safety and well-being of the childand of the parent who is the victim of familyviolence;(B) The court shall consider the perpetrator'shistory of causing physical harm, bodily injury,or assault or causing reasonable fear ofphysical harm, bodily injury, or assault toanother person; and(C) If a parent is absent or relocates becauseof an act of family violence by the otherparent, the absence or relocation shall not be afactor that weighs against the parent indetermining custody or visitation; 
(Emphasis added). 
HRS § 571-2 (2018) defines "family violence" as 
follows: 
"Family violence" means the occurrence of one or moreof the following acts by a family or household member,but does not include acts of self-defense: 
(1) Attempting to cause or causing physical harm to
another family or household member;(2) Placing a family or household member in fear ofphysical harm; or(3) Causing a family or household member to engageinvoluntarily in sexual activity by force, threat offorce, or duress. 
(Emphases added). 
Here, in the 2019 Post-Decree Order, the Family Court 
concluded that the factor under HRS § 571-46(b)(1), "[a]ny 
history of sexual or physical abuse of a child by a parent", was 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not applicable, presumably because there was no prior history of 
physical or sexual abuse by either parent. However, the Family Court further concluded: 
With respect to the finding of the Court contained in
its [2016 Post-Decree Order], that "there was domesticviolence in the past," the Court finds and concludes[Father] has rebutted the presumption in [HRS §] 571-46(a)(9) against an award of joint legal and physicalcustody to [Father]. 
Mother asserts that this conclusion was erroneous 
because the Family Court had previously found that Father had 
committed domestic violence in the 2016 Post-Decree Order. Accordingly, Mother asserts that the Family Court failed to undertake any of the analysis required by HRS § 571-46(a)(9) & (10) before concluding that Father had rebutted the statutory presumption against his joint custody of the children. However, the 2016 Post-Decree Order does not reflect a finding of family violence on the part of Father. 
As stated in its FOFs in the 2016 Post-Decree Order, 
the Family Court found that "[t]here was domestic violence in the past." However, the Family Court's FOFs did not indicate who had committed such conduct, or what such conduct entailed. Further, this finding does not appear to implicate a finding of family violence on the part of Father. As Mother asserts in her opening brief, the Family Court's finding of domestic violence appears to pertain to the following FOFs in the 2016 Post-Decree Order: 
1. The Court has concerns for that [sic] the minor
children being exposed to violent video gamesand guns that are inappropriate for their agewhile in [Father's] care.
2. The children are exhausted when returning from[Father's] house. This was recognized by theteachers and counselors. 
3. The Court is concerned with the children's access to social media accounts which may placethe children in danger, but [Mother] did notmeet her burden in proving that the minorchildren's access to the Internet has placedthem in danger.
4. The parties' minor son was injured while in[Father's] care and did not notify [Mother] fortwo days, which is not in the best interests ofthe child, nor does it support [Father's] motionfor 50-50 custody. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
While these FOFs relate to concern over Father's 
ability to properly care for the children, it does not indicate 
that Father had committed any "family violence" as defined under HRS § 571-2. To the contrary, the Family Court in the 2016 Post-Decree Order found that "[b]oth parties appear to be loving, caring parents." Further, it is telling that while the Family Court did make a finding in the 2016 Post-Decree Order that "there was domestic violence in the past[,]" it did not undertake any analysis under HRS § 571-46(a)(9) to determine whether to amend Father's joint legal custody with the children, thus indicating that it did not find any family violence on the part of Father. 
On appeal, Mother asserts that "[Father] continued a 
pattern of domestic violence after the divorce aimed at [Mother]." Mother notes that she testified that she has been subjected to verbal abuse by Father, including at least one occasion where Father had berated her with insults. Mother also asserts that she was subjected to Father's "controlling behavior and financial control, including refusing to pay much needed child support, which itself exacerbated [her] financial dilemma." While the definition of "family violence" is not limited to physical acts of domestic violence, and may include non-physical acts such as threats, see HRS § 571-2; see also Tumaneng v. Tumaneng, 138 Hawai# i 468, 475, 382 P.3d 280, 287 (2016), it 
cannot be said that Mother's allegations rise to the level of "family violence". 
In sum, the record is devoid of any finding of family 
violence on the part of Father in both the 2016 Post-Decree Order and 2019 Post-Decree Order. Mother points to nothing in the record that would indicate that Father committed family violence as defined under HRS § 571-2. Therefore, there was no rebuttable presumption against Father's joint custody of the three children, and the Family Court did not err in its 2019 Post-Decree Order for finding no history of abuse. We further note that to the extent that the Family Court erred in concluding that Father 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rebutted the presumption under HRS § 571-46(a)(9), such error was 
harmless in light of our conclusion.
V. The Family Court did not err in relying
on the GAL's recommendation and testimony 
Finally, Mother asserts that the Family Court erred in 
relying on the testimony and recommendation of the GAL because "it was premised on a faulty presumption that tainted the opinion." Mother asserts that the GAL approached her assessment of this case under the erroneous belief that Mother would not relocate to Washington if the Family Court denied her motion to relocate the children, and that such assumption rendered the GAL's recommendation and testimony "less meaningful, if not invalid." Mother also asserts that the GAL did not acknowledge the prior domestic violence as being one of the reasons why Mother intended to relocate. 
We first note that in the 2019 Post-Decree Order, the 
Family Court explicitly found that "[i]t is unknown whether, if her motion is denied, [Mother] will stay in [Hawai# i] with the 
children or follow [her partner] to Washington." Therefore, there is no indication that the Family Court's decision to deny Mother's motion was guided by an apparently erroneous belief by the GAL that Mother would not relocate to Washington in the event her motion was denied. 
Further, while the GAL indicated that she was under the 
belief that Mother would stay in Hawai# i should Mother's motion 
be denied, her testimony provided ample support for her recommendation to deny Mother's request to relocate the children to Washington. 
In her testimony, the GAL noted that S.K.T. and 
K.K.T. expressed their preference not to move to Washington, and that while Z.K.T. expressed that he would move if Mother moved, he also indicated that "if he didn't have to move he didn't want to move." 
The GAL also noted that while K.K.T. had encountered 
some issues in school, all three children were prospering with their education and were receiving ample support from their teachers and counselors. The GAL noted that the children were doing well in their current living conditions in Hawai# i, and 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the children were involved in a number of extracurricular 
activities that they would not be able to continue if relocated to Washington. The GAL also noted that the children's school counselor expressed that it would be devastating for the children to leave Father considering his active role in their lives. Finally, the GAL indicated that Mother had not communicated a specific plan to her for Mother's move and children's relocation to Washington. Based on her testimony, the GAL provided ample evidence supporting her recommendation to deny Mother's request to relocate the children, even despite her apparently erroneous understanding that Mother would stay if her motion was denied. 
As to Mother's second contention, while Mother 
testified that she attempted to discuss instances of prior domestic violence and verbal abuse with the GAL as one of the reasons why she intended to relocate, there was no evidence presented to the Family Court that this was one of the reasons Mother sought to relocate to Washington. Indeed, Mother testified that the reasons she sought to relocate the children to Washington were to improve their living conditions with the cheaper costs of living, provide better educational opportunities and medical care, pursue employment opportunities, follow her partner, and to be with her parents who intended to move to Washington in the future. Nowhere in Mother's testimony does she assert that the alleged domestic violence and verbal abuse was one of the reasons Mother sought to relocate to Washington. Mother also did not indicate in her motion that she was relocating to Washington because of Father's alleged domestic violence. 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the Family 
Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Mother's request to relocate the children to Washington, and in granting joint physical custody of the children to Father and Mother.
VI. Conclusion 
The Family Court of the Third Circuit's "Order Re 
Plaintiff's Motion and Declaration for Post-Decree Relief filed on 06/21/2018 and Defendant's Motion for Post-Decree Relief to 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Modify Physical Custody and Visitation Orders filed on 
04/23/2019," entered on August 6, 2019, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, July 31, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
Kai Lawrence,
(Rebecca A. Copeland on theopening brief),for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Daniel S. Peters,
for Defendant-Appellee. /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge 
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
16 