 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000251 28-FEB-2025 08:39 AM Dkt. 45 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000251  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
MARK ANDREW CARLSON, Personal Representative of the Estate of 
Brian Paul Esteban, Deceased, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
DOUGLAS BRADFORD ESTEBAN, Defendant-Appellant,  
and DOE DEFENDANTS 1-10, Defendants  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 1CCV-20-0001114)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION  ORDER  
(By: Wadsworth, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendant -Appellant Douglas Bradford Esteban ( Esteban) 
appeals from the Order Granting Plaintiff -Appellee Mark Andrew 
Carlson's ( Carlson), Personal Representative of the Estate of 
Brian Paul Esteban (Decedent ), Motion for Summary Judgment and 
Order of Partition Sale (Summary Judgment Order) , filed on 
March 8, 2022, and the Judgment on Order Granting Carlson's, 
Personal Representative of the Estate of the Decedent, Motion 
for Summary Judgment and Order of Partition Sale ( Judgment ),   
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
    
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
filed on January 23, 2023, by the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit ( circuit court ). 1 
This appeal arises out of a Complaint filed by Carlson 
on August 10, 2020 pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) 
chapter 668A, in his capacity as personal representative of the 
Decedent's estate . The Complaint sought the partition by sale 
of the subject property, which was owned by Esteban and the 
Decedent as tenants in common . The circuit court granted 
summary judgment in Carlson's favor , finding the subject 
property to be "Heirs Property" pursuant to HRS § 668A -2 (2016). 
This appeal followed. On appeal, Esteban raises a 
single point of error, contending that the circuit court erred 
in granting summary judgment pursuant to HRS chapter 668A, 
because "the probate court must first make a determination as to 
the interest and title held by [Carlson] in the real property 
before the interest can be subject to a sale by partition in the 
partition case." 
Upon careful review of the record and relevant legal 
authorities, and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve 
Esteban's point of error as follows: 
1 The Honorable James C. McWhinnie presided over the entry of the 
Summary Judgment Order, and the Honorable Kevin T. Morikone presided over the 
entry of the Judgment. 
2   
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We review the circuit court's grant of summary 
judgment de novo, applying the following standard, 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to judg ment as a matter of law. A 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non -moving party. In other words, we must 
view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in 
the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawaiʻi  46, 55–56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285–86 
(2013) (citation omitted).  
We conclude that Carlson satisfied his initial burden 
on summary judgment through his declaration  and attached 
exhibits. Carlson established, through his declaration and 
authenticated Letters Testamentary,  that he had been appointed 
by the probate court as personal representative of the 
Decedent's estate  on July 29, 2020.  
In his declaration, Carlson also stated facts 
supporting his conclusion  that the subject property was "Heirs 
Property,"  as defined by HRS § 668A-2.   Carlson represented that 2 
2 HRS § 668A -2 states, in pertinent part: 
"Heirs property" means real property held in tenancy 
in common that satisfies all the following requirements as 
of the filing of an action for partition:  
(1) There is no agreement in a record binding all the 
cotenants that governs the partition of the 
property; 
(continued . . .) 
3   
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
he had "no knowledge of the Decedent having had an agreement in 
a record with [Esteban] governing the partition of the [s]ubject 
[p]roperty." Carlson further declared that the Decedent and 
Esteban were brothers, and that the subject property, which was 
first owned by the Decedent and Esteban's parents, was held in 
trust for the Decedent and Esteban until 201 3. Upon the 
parents' death, the trust terminated, and 100% of the subject 
property was conveyed to the Decedent and Esteban in equal 
shares. Carlson submitted an authenticated copy of the deed, 
recorded on January 14, 2014, pursuant to which Esteban and the 
Decedent each held a 50% interest in the subject property as 
tenants in common. 
Carlson therefore presented sufficient evidence to 
satisfy the requirements for partition of Heirs Property under 
HRS chapter 668A. 
The burden then shifted to Esteban, and Esteban did 
not raise a genuine issue of material fact. See Ralston, 
129 Hawaiʻi at 56–57, 292 P.3d at 1286 –87 ("[W]hen the moving 
2(. . . continued) 
(2) One or more of the cotenants acquired title from 
a relative, whether living or deceased; and 
(3) Any of the following applies: 
(A) Twenty per cent or more of the interests 
are held by cotenants who are relatives; 
(B) Twenty per cent or more of the interests 
are held by an individual who acquired 
title from a relative, whether living or 
deceased; or 
(C) Twenty per cent or more of the cotenants 
are relatives. 
4   
 
  
 
    
  
 
 
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
party satisfies its initial burden of production, . . . the 
burden shift[s] to the nonmoving party to respond to the motion 
for summary judgment and demonstrate specific facts, as opposed 
to general allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of 
trial.") ( citation omitted ). Esteban contends that "in order to 
be granted the relief under HRS § []668A-2, [Carlson] had to have 
been awarded or received title as a tenant in common, which the 
probate court had yet to do as of the filing of the Complaint." 
Esteban does not dispute the evidence establishing 
Carlson's appointment as personal representative of the 
Decedent's estate, pursuant to the Letters Testamentary, on 
July 29, 2020 . As personal representative, Carlson had , 
"[u]ntil termination of [his] appointment [,] . . . the same 
power over the title to property of the estate that an absolute 
owner would have , in trust however, for the benefit of the 
creditors and others interested in the estate." HRS § 560:3 -711 
(2018). Esteban agrees, in his opening brief, that "the last 
recorded Deed showing how title to the real property was held 
shows title in the name of [Esteban] and the Decedent." 
Esteban therefore has not raised a genuine issue as to 
Carlson's authority to seek, or the circuit court 's authority to 
grant, the partition of the subject property pursuant to HRS 
chapter 668A . 
5   
 
   
   
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the circuit 
court's Summary Judgment Order and Judgment . 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, February 28 , 2025. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth  
 Presiding Judge  
Pablo P. Quiban,   
for Defendant-Appellant.  /s/ Karen T. Nakasone  
 Associate Judge  
Christin D.W. Kawada,   
for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge  
6 