NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-22-0000481 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
JOHN P. DUNBAR, JR., Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
ARCHIE HAPAI, III, Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3CC111000158) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant John P. Dunbar, Jr. (
Dunbar) 
appeals pro se
 from two orders on non-hearing post-judgment 
motions: (1) the order denying Plaintiff's Non-Hearing Motion to 
Extend the Life of the Judgment (Order Denying Extension) entered 
on May 20, 2022, by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit 
(Circuit Court);1 and (2) the order denying Motion for Relief of 
Judgment or Order (Order Denying Reconsideration) entered by the 
Circuit Court on July 6, 2022.2 
1 The Honorable Peter K. Kubota presided. 
2 Defendant-Appellee Archie Hapai, III ( Hapai) is also pro se. The 
parties' briefs do not comply with Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule
28(b)(4), but we nevertheless have considered the merits of both of their
arguments to the extent that we have been able to discern them. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dunbar raises two points of error on appeal, contending 
that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) finding (in the Order 
Denying Extension) that the May 14, 2012 Judgment (Judgment) 
entered in favor of Dunbar and against Hapai expired without the 
timely filing of a motion to extend the judgment; and (2) finding (in the Order Denying Reconsideration), that Dunbar's motion to extend was untimely because it was filed on May 16, 2022, and the Judgment expired on May 14, 2022. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Dunbar's points of error as follows: 
As noted above, the Judgment was entered on May 14, 
2012. Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 657-5 (2016) states: 
§ 657-5 Domestic judgments and decrees.  Unless an 
extension is granted, every judgment and decree of any court
of the State shall be presumed to be paid and discharged atthe expiration of ten years after the judgment or decree wasrendered. No action shall be commenced after the expiration
of ten years from the date a judgment or decree was rendered
or extended. No extension of a judgment or decree shall be
granted unless the extension is sought  within ten years of
the date the original judgment or decree was rendered. A 
court shall not extend any judgment or decree beyond twenty
years from the date of the original judgment or decree. No extension shall be granted without notice and the filing ofa non-hearing motion or a hearing motion to extend the lifeof the judgment or decree. 
(Emphases added). 
In addition, Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP)
Rule 6(a) provides, in relevant part: 
Rule 6. TIMES. 
(a)Computation.  In computing any period of time prescribed
or allowed by these rules, by order of court, or 
by any applicable
statute, the day of the act, event, or default after which the 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
designated period of time begins to run shall not be included.
The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless itis a Saturday, a Sunday or a holiday, in which event the periodruns until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, aSunday or a holiday. 
(Emphases added). 
Thus, pursuant to HRS § 657-5, absent an extension 
being granted, the May 14, 2012 Judgment was presumed to be paid 
and discharged at the expiration of ten years after the Judgment was entered. Also, pursuant to HRS § 657-5, no extension of the Judgment could be granted unless the extension was sought within ten years of the date of the original Judgment. That said, HRCP Rule 6(a), which applies to any applicable statute, provides that 
the last day of that ten-year period is included unless, inter 
alia, it falls on a Saturday, in which case the period runs until 
the end of the following day that is not excluded. 
Here, the ten-year period after the Judgment was 
rendered would have ended on May 14, 2022, except for the 
undisputed and indisputable fact that May 14, 2022 was a Saturday. Accordingly, here, the statutory period ran until the end of the day on Monday, May 16, 2022. [Dunbar's] Non-Hearing 
Motion to Extend the Life of the Judgment (Motion to Extend) was 
timely filed on May 16, 2022.
3 Therefore, the Circuit Court 
erred when it denied that motion, as well as the motion for 
3 Hapai's argument that an extension must be granted within the
statutory period is inconsistent with the plain language of the statute and
therefore is without merit . 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reconsideration, on the grounds that the Judgment expired on May 
14, 2022, and the Motion to Extend was untimely. 4
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit 
Court's May 20, 2022 Order Denying Extension and July 6, 2022 Order Denying Reconsideration, and remand this case to the Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, July 26, 2023. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge John P. Dunbar, Jr., 
Plaintiff-Appellant Pro Se. 
Archie Hapai, III, 
Defendant-Appellee Pro Se. 
4 We note that Hapai did not object or respond to either motion,
notwithstanding that the record reflects that he was served with both. See 
Sacor Fin., Inc. v. Naluai, CAAP-22-0000465, 2023 WL 4145924, *1 (Haw. App.
June 23, 2023) (SDO) (concluding that HRS § 657–5 is a statute of limitationsfor actions to enforce domestic judgments, which includes a deadline forseeking to extend the time period to enforce the judgment, and that thedefense of the statute of limitations is a personal defense, the defendantalone may exercise or waive it, and it may not be invoked on behalf of thedefendant by the court). 
4 