 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-21-0000168 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
RONALD MELVIN BARNES, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-CRIMINAL NO. 1FC121000057) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Ronald M. Barnes (Barnes) appeals 
from the February 19, 2021 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence; 
Notice of Entry (Resentencing Judgment) entered by the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).1 
This appeal arises from a resentencing upon remand from 
a prior appeal.  On March 31, 2015, a jury found Barnes guilty of 
five counts of Sexual Assault in the First Degree (Sexual Assault 
First) under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-730(1)(b) (2014).
2 On October 26, 2015, Barnes was sentenced to 20 years 
1 The Honorable Kevin A. Souza presided over the resentencing 
hearing.  The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided over the original trial and
sentencing. 
2 HRS § 707-730 states, in pertinent part: 
§ 707-730  Sexual assault in the first degree.  
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault in
the first degree if: 
(continued...) 2(...continued)
. . . .  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of imprisonment for each of Counts 1, 3, 5, and 6, to run 
concurrently with each other, and 20 years of imprisonment for Count 13, to run consecutively with the other counts.  The Hawai# i Supreme Court vacated the sentence and remanded for 
resentencing after it concluded that the sentencing court plainly erred when it considered Barnes's failure to express sadness or admit guilt at his initial sentencing.  State v. Barnes, 145 Hawai# i 213, 220-22, 450 P.3d 743, 750-52 (2019) (Barnes I).  On 
February 19, 2021, Barnes was sentenced by a different judge to 20 years of imprisonment for Counts 1, 3, 5, and 6, to run concurrently with each other, and 20 years of imprisonment for Count 13, to run consecutively with the other counts.
 Barnes 
timely filed a notice of appeal. 
Barnes raises a single point of error on appeal, 
contending that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in sentencing Barnes to a consecutive term of imprisonment with respect to Count 13, rather than all concurrent terms, i.e.
, a 
maximum 20-year term of imprisonment. 
Barnes has also filed a motion for retention of oral 
argument in this case, which is hereby DENIED. 
(b) The person knowingly engages in sexual
penetration with another person who isless than fourteen years old; 
. . . . 
(2) Sexual assault in the first degree is aclass A  felony. 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Barnes's point of error as follows: 
Barnes argues that the Circuit Court abused its 
discretion in imposing a consecutive sentence in this case because the consecutive sentence was not warranted and the Circuit Court's statements during sentencing showed that Barnes was prejudiced by extraneous factors such as the state of the alleged victims in 2021, rather than at the time of the offense. 
Under HRS § 706-668.5(2) (2014),
3 when determining 
whether to impose multiple terms of imprisonment concurrently or consecutively, a court "shall consider the factors set forth in [HRS §] 706-606."  When imposing consecutive terms of imprisonment, "a court must state its reasons as to why a consecutive sentence rather than a concurrent one was required." Lewi v. State, 145 Hawai# i 333, 350, 452 P.3d 330, 347 (2019) 
(quoting State v. Hussein, 122 Hawai# i 495, 509, 229 P.3d 313, 
327 (2010)).  
3 HRS § 706-668.5 states: 
§ 706-668.5  Multiple sentence of imprisonment.   (1) 
If multiple terms of imprisonment are imposed on a
defendant, whether at the same time or at different times,or if a term of imprisonment is imposed on a defendant whois already subject to an unexpired term of imprisonment, theterms may run concurrently or consecutively.  Multiple termsof imprisonment run concurrently unless the court orders orthe statute mandates that the terms run consecutively. 
(2)  The court, in determining whether the terms
imposed are to be ordered to run concurrently orconsecutively, shall consider the factors set forth insection 706-606. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[T]he dual purposes behind the requirement that
reasons be stated for a court's imposition of aconsecutive sentence are to "(1) identify [] the factsor circumstances within the range of statutory factorsthat the court considered, and (2) confirm [] for thedefendant, the victim, the public, and the appellatecourt that the decision was deliberate, rational, andfair." 
Id. (quoting State v. Kong, 131 Hawai# i 94, 102-03, 315 P.3d 720, 
728-29 (2013)).  
However, a sentencing court "is not required to 
articulate and explain its conclusions with respect to every 
factor listed in HRS § 706-606.  Rather, it is presumed that a sentencing court will have considered all factors before imposing concurrent or consecutive terms of imprisonment under HRS § 706
-
606."  Id.
 at 350-51, 452 P.3d at 347-48 (quoting Kong, 131 
Hawai# i at 102, 315 P.3d at 72) (internal footnote and quotations 
omitted).  Accordingly, a sentencing court "is required to articulate its reasoning only with respect to those factors it relies on in imposing consecutive sentences."  Id.
Here, upon resentencing, the Circuit Court articulated 
its consideration and application of the HRS § 706-606 factors: 
With respect to the nature and circumstance of the
underlying offense and the nature and characteristics of the
defendant, the court does find that this was an egregiousbreach of trust of two young children who the defendant wasessentially a stepfather to. 
. . . . 
These offenses were committed against young and
vulnerable victims.  The court finds that the serious nature of these offenses indicates that the defendant is indeed a danger to the safety of the public.  These factors when considering the factors of the nature of the offense, natureand circumstance of the underlying offense, and the natureand characteristics of the defendant do weigh in favor ofconsecutive sentencing. 
. . . . 
This court has reviewed the victim impact statements
that were submitted by both children.  The court must saythat in reviewing the victim impact statements, they do 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
describe the fear and the sadness that [Barnes's] conduct
caused them and their family and how [Barnes's] conduct hascaused them lasting trauma.  And based on Madam Prosecutor's representations to the court today, the court finds thateven as adults the victims in this case still feel the effects of the trauma caused by [Barnes's] conduct. 
The occurrence and the description of even one of the
counts here is shocking and horrifying.  As Madam Prosecutor correctly points out, the offenses are what they are, andher description of the offenses for sentencing purposes thecourt does not find to be inflammatory.  The court finds them to be merely a description of the evidence presented attrial that the jury based its verdict on.  And here we have not just one occurrence, we have five counts, not just one. Here we have two young vulnerable victims, not just one.   
So when the court takes into account the serious 
nature of these offenses as well as the need to promoterespect for the law and to provide a just punishment, thecourt again finds that these factors weigh in favor ofconsecutive sentencing.  And the court does again reiteratethat it finds that the defendant is a danger to the public. 
Finally, with respect to affording adequate deterrence
to criminal conduct and to promote protection -- and for theprotection of the public, the court finds that due to themagnitude of the harm and lasting psychological trauma thatthe defendant caused on these two victims at a young andtender age, and noting how the sexual assault spanned asubstantial period of time, involving acts of deception toboth children and to adults, and the deep and profoundbetrayal of trust by someone in a position to be a fatherfigure, it is this court's judgment that a just punishmentthat protects the public from harm and provides an adequatedeterrence to future criminal conduct is a consecutive sentence. 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its 
discretion in imposing the term of imprisonment for one count, 
which stemmed from sexual assault of a second victim under the age of fourteen, consecutive to the four concurrent terms, which stemmed from the four sexual assault convictions as to the first victim.  The Circuit Court explained its application of each of the HRS § 706-606 factors that it considered.  Regarding the nature and circumstance of the underlying offense and characteristics of the defendant, the Circuit Court found that this was "an egregious breach of trust of two young children" and that Barnes was "essentially [their] stepfather".  The Circuit 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  Court also considered the need for the sentence imposed in light 
of the serious nature of these offenses as well as the need to promote respect for the law and to provide a just punishment. The court determined that those factors weighed in favor of consecutive sentencing and reiterated that it found Barnes to be a danger to the public. The Circuit Court adequately explained 
the rationale for imposing consecutive sentences, and in doing so 
confirmed for Barnes, the public, and this court that the decision to impose consecutive sentences was deliberate, rational, and fair. The Circuit Court further explained that the consecutive sentence served as an appropriate and effective future deterrent, as Barnes's acts constituted a crime of opportunity that could perhaps happen again. 
Barnes contends that the Circuit Court improperly 
considered the "state of the alleged victims in 2021 rather than at the time of the offense."  Barnes's contention stems from the State's argument at resentencing that the things Barnes did to the two children were horrific and that the children were still suffering as young adults, as a result of Barnes's acts of abuse. The Presentencing Investigation Report (PSI) reviewed by the 
resentencing judge did not include any new statements, but did 
include 2015 Victim Impact Statements from both of the children, in which they described how the abuse, which began in 2001, continued to affect them. 
Importantly, Barnes failed to object to the State's 
argument or otherwise raise this issue at the time of resentencing.  "Generally, if a party does not raise an argument 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at trial, that argument is deemed waived on appeal."  State v. 
McDonnell, 141 Hawai# i 280, 295, 409 P.3d 684, 699 (2017) (citing 
State v. Moses, 102 Hawai# i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003)); 
see also Kong, 131 Hawai# i at 107, 315 P.3d at 733 (declining to 
exercise plain error review where the defendant-appellant did not challenge the PSI in the circuit court).  Barnes's counsel addressed the Circuit Court after the State made its proffer that the children continued to suffer as young adults.  Counsel did not object to or otherwise address the State's assertion.  Instead, counsel argued that Barnes was not a "child predator," that he was not a danger to the community, and that concurrent 20-year sentences were appropriate.
4  Barnes's argument regarding 
the victims' continued suffering is waived, and we decline to exercise plain error review of this issue.  Based on the entirety of the record, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in sentencing Barnes to a consecutive term of imprisonment. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's February 19, 
2021 Resentencing Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 9, 2022. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Associate Judge Shawn A. Luiz,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Loren J. Thomas,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee.   
4  Barnes also addressed the Circuit Court; he reiterated his claim
of innocence, but did not otherwise address the State's proffer.  
7 