 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-10-0000140
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
SHON K. POTEAT, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
'EWA DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-10-01645)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Shon Poteat (Poteat) appeals from 
the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment 
(judgment) filed on October 13, 2010 in the District Court of the 
First Circuit, 
'Ewa Division (District Court).1 
After a bench trial, Poteat was convicted of Excessive
 
Speeding, in violation of HRS § 291C-105(a)(1)(a)(2) (2007
 
Repl.).2
 
1 The Honorable Michael Marr presided.
2
 HRS § 291C-105(a)(1)(a)(2) provides:
 
§291C-105 Excessive speeding. (a) No person shall drive a
motor vehicle at a speed exceeding:
 
. . .
 
(2)	 Eighty miles per hour or more irrespective of the
applicable state or county speed limit.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Poteat contends that the District Court
 
erred in receiving evidence of a laser speed gun reading because:
 
(1) there was insufficient foundation that the laser gun was
 
tested according to the manufacturer's recommended procedures and
 
insufficient foundation that the officer was qualified by
 
training and experience to operate the laser gun; and (2) the
 
officer's testimony about alleged statements by representatives
 
of the laser gun manufacturer was inadmissible hearsay and
 
violated Poteat's right to confront witnesses.3
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Poteat’s points of error as follows.
 
At trial, Officer Jeremy Franks (Officer Franks)
 
testified that on February 22, 2010, he observed Poteat's vehicle
 
on the H-1 freeway and it appeared to be traveling faster than
 
the speed limit. Officer Franks testified that he activated a
 
laser gun, pointed it at Poteat's vehicle, and the reading from
 
the laser gun indicated a speed of 86 miles per hour. The
 
defense objected to the laser gun reading, but the objection was
 
overruled by the district court.
 
We conclude that there was insufficient foundation for
 
admission of the laser gun reading and therefore the district
 
court abused its discretion in admitting this evidence. 
Sufficient foundation for admission of the laser gun reading
 
requires evidence: (1) "that the laser gun's accuracy was tested
 
according to procedures recommended by the manufacturer[;]" and
 
(2) that "the nature and extent of an officer's training in the 
operation of a laser gun meets the requirements indicated by the 
manufacturer." State v. Assaye, 121 Hawai' i 204, 215, 216 P.3d 
1227, 1238 (2009) (citations omitted). 
3 Poteat objected to testimony of the officer's training, testing and
operation of the laser gun and to the laser gun reading.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In this case, there was sufficient evidence that the
 
testing of the laser gun's accuracy was done according to the
 
manufacturer's recommendations. However, there was not
 
sufficient evidence that Officer Franks's training in the
 
operation of the laser gun met the manufacturer's requirements. 
Specifically, although Officer Franks testified that his training
 
in testing the laser gun was done according to manufacturer
 
recommendations, there is no evidence that his training in
 otherwise operating the laser gun met manufacturer
 
recommendations.
 
Officer Franks testified that he was initially trained
 
in 2003 to use the laser gun. This consisted of four hours of
 
classroom training, as well as practical use and operating the
 
laser gun. As part of the classroom training, he testified he
 
was issued a laser manual which "was generated by the
 
manufacturer through HPD, and we were issued a copy of it from
 
HPD." The manual had a "copyright from Laser Technologies" or
 
"LTI" on the front cover, which stands for "Laser Technologies,
 
Incorporated[,]" which is "the manufacturer of the laser".
4
 
Officer Franks confirmed that he was trained to do four tests on
 the laser gun that were contained in the manual as part of the
 
manufacturer's recommended procedure. Notably, other than the
 
training for the four tests, there is no testimony or evidence
 
that any other part of Officer Frank's training met the
 
recommendations of the laser manufacturer. Under Assaye, this
 
was insufficient foundation for admission of the laser gun
 
reading. 
Officer Franks also testified about other training he
 
received, but this evidence also does not meet the Assaye
 
requirements. He testified that in November 2009, he was
 
4 Although, in cross-examination, testimony indicated that Sergeant Lum
at HPD wrote the manual, in redirect examination, Officer Franks clarified
that the manual he received in training was the manual that contained the LTI
copyright.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
selected to be an instructor to teach and qualify operators of
 
the laser gun. As part of this training, Officer Franks
 
testified that he had additional classroom training and
 
instruction on the laser, but again, there is insufficient
 
evidence that this training met the requirements of the
 
manufacturer. Curiously, Officer Franks testified that after
 
passing a test at the end of this training, he "then qualified
 
instructor and actually got instructor cards certified by LTI to
 
become instructors [sic]." But when asked if representatives of
 
LTI were involved in this process, Officer Franks testified
 
"[n]ot at this point." On cross-examination, Officer Franks
 
testified that the person who qualified him as an instructor in
 
November of 2009 was retired Sergeant Robert Lum (Lum). Officer
 
Franks did not know if Lum was employed with LTI, only that Lum
 
was the coordinator between Hawaii and LTI, "the person that
 
brings them down for training." Therefore, it is completely
 
unclear how or at what point in time Officer Franks received an
 
instructor card certified by LTI.
 
Officer Franks testified that in April of 2010 -- after
 
Poteat's arrest in this case on February 22, 2010 -- two
 
representatives from LTI came and gave an instructor refresher
 
course. Officer Franks testified, over the objection of the
 
defense, as follows:
 
A.	 Well, at that point when we had that refresher course, we
actually show them a PowerPoint presentation that we give
and also the manual, and they said that it was more than
enough to train and to use - ­
. . . .
 
Q.	 So, Officer Franks, when the LTI representatives came and
you explained to them the way that HPD trains people, and in
fact the way that you train people in the use of the laser,
did it meet with their requirements?
 
A.	 Yes. They said it was sufficient.
 
(Emphasis added). This testimony, and all of Officer Franks's
 
testimony related to the refresher course in April of 2010, fails
 
to establish that any of the training discussed with the LTI
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
representatives was the same training he had received prior to
 
Poteat's arrest in this case. For that reason alone, any
 
evidence regarding the April 2010 refresher course is
 
insufficient to meet the foundation requirements under Assaye. 
We therefore need not address Poteat's other challenge to Officer
 
Franks's testimony that the alleged statements by the LTI
 
representatives were inadmissible hearsay and violated Poteat's
 
right to confront witnesses.
 
In sum, therefore, there was insufficient evidence that
 
Officer Franks's training was conducted according to the
 
manufacturer's specifications, as required under Assaye. 
Accordingly, insufficient foundation existed for admission of the
 
laser gun speed reading.
 
Other than the laser gun reading, there was no other
 
evidence that Poteat was operating his vehicle eighty miles per
 
hour or more. Indeed, there was no other evidence as to the
 
speed Poteat was driving. Therefore, Poteat's conviction must be
 
reversed because the prosecution did not adduce sufficient
 
evidence to prove every element of the offense under HRS § 291C­
105(a)(1)(a)(2). 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT the judgment, filed on 
October 13, 2010 in the District Court of the First Circuit, ' Ewa 
Division, is reversed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 26, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Chad N. Enoki 
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
5
 