NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000721
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ANGEL KAAHANUI, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 14-1-2018)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Angel Kaahanui (Kaahanui) appeals
 
from the September 8, 2015 Amended Judgment entered by the
 
1
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  convicting
her of Assault in the Second Degree (Assault 2), in violation of
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-711(1) (2014) and imposing a
 four-year probationary term with, inter alia, a special condition
 of six months of incarceration.
 
On appeal, Kaahanui maintains that there was

 
2
insufficient evidence supporting her conviction  because
1
 The Honorable Shirley M. Kawamura presided.
 
2
 Kaahanui was charged in the alternative, with violating HRS
§ 707-711(1)(a), (b), and (d) which provide:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the second
degree if: 
(a) The person intentionally or knowingly causessubstantial bodily injury to another; 
(b) The person recklessly causes serious orsubstantial bodily injury to another; [or]
 
. . . .
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) there was insufficient evidence that the complainant suffered
 
"substantial bodily injury" to warrant Kaahanui's conviction
 under HRS § 707-711(1)(a) and/or (1)(b); (2) there was
 insufficient evidence that Kaahanui acted intentionally or
 knowingly in using a dangerous instrument to warrant her
 conviction under HRS § 707-711(1)(d); and (3) because the jury
 was not asked to specify which alternative method of committing
 Assault 2 it chose, it cannot be determined whether it found her
 guilty of the substantial bodily injury alternative where there
 was insufficient evidence of substantial bodily injury, or
 whether it found her guilty of the dangerous instrument
 alternative method despite insufficient evidence to prove that
 Kaahanui acted intentionally or knowingly, or both.
 
After a careful review of the point on appeal, the
 
parties' arguments, the record, and the applicable legal
 authority, we resolve Kaahanui's appeal as follows and affirm.
 
1. Kaahanui contends that there was insufficient
 
evidence presented to prove that the complainant suffered
 substantial bodily injury because "the two BBs which lodged in
 [the complainant's] skin did not cause major avulsions or
 lacerations; nor did they constitute major penetrations of the
 skin." Kaahanui contends that absent substantial evidence of
 substantial bodily injury, she could not have been convicted of
 the substantial bodily injury alternative of Assault 2.
 
Substantial bodily injury is defined, in relevant part, 
as "bodily injury which causes . . . [a] major avulsion, laceration, or penetration of the skin," HRS § 707-700 (2014), and the jury was so instructed here. To penetrate means "to pass into or through; to extend into the interior of; . . . to enter or go through by overcoming resistance; . . . to pass, extend, pierce, or diffuse into or through something." State v. Tanielu, 
82 Hawai
'i 373, 378 n.4, 922 P.2d 986, 991 n.4 (App. 1996) 
(citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). Major modifies avulsion, laceration, and penetration. Id. "In 
2(...continued)
(d)	 The person intentionally or knowingly causes
bodily injury to another with a dangerous
instrument[.]" 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
this context, the definition of 'major' as 'greater in size,
 
amount, extent, or rank' would appear to apply." Id., (citation
 
omitted). "This definition finds support in the legislature’s
 intent to 'account for injuries which are far more serious than
 mere bodily injury but do not approximate a risk of death or
 permanent loss or disfigurement[.]'" Id. 
Kaahanui does not challenge that the BB penetrated the
 
complainant's skin, but contends that the penetration was not
 major. Dr. Brian Tobe (Dr. Tobe) testified that the
 complainant's eyelid was swollen and she had abrasions over the
 right eye and on her nose. Dr. Tobe testified that he could
 "feel the palpable little BB underneath the skin, so clearly
 something penetrated the skin." X-rays confirmed "two round
 metallic foreign bodies" in her face. The complainant reported
 loss of vision out of her right eye. At trial, the complainant
 testified that she still had the floaters that she experienced at
 the time of the shooting, but "it's like a bo[]rder around my
 eye. And I have like a blind spot from looking to the right
 side, but it's better." She also testified that at the time of
 trial, her vision was still blurry.
 
Unlike the complainant in State v. Webster, 94 Hawai
'i 
241, 11 P.3d 466 (2000) relied on by Kaahanui, the complainant here suffered more than an abrasion treated with a topical cream. Surgery was necessary to remove the two BBs from her face and she suffered long lasting effects to her vision in the affected eye. See, In re Doe, 106 Hawai
'i 530, 537-58, 107 P.3d 1203 (App. 
2005) (concluding blurred and dioplopic vision lasting until trial was substantial evidence of serious bodily injury). Considering the evidence in the strongest light for the prosecution, State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 
1241 (1998) (quoting State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai 'i 128, 145, 938 
P.2d 559, 576 (1997)), there was substantial evidence to support the jury's conclusion that the complainant suffered a major penetration of her skin. 
2. Kaahanui argues that there was insufficient
 
evidence that she acted intentionally or knowingly in using a
 dangerous instrument to injure the complainant. HRS
 § 707-711(1)(d). Kaahanui asserts that her "actions in bringing
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the gun up and just shooting without aiming it anywhere were
 
reckless, not knowing or intentional."
 
"A person acts intentionally with respect to his 
conduct when it is his conscious object to engage in such conduct" and "[a] person acts knowingly with respect to his conduct when he is aware that his conduct is of that nature." HRS §§ 702-206(1)(a) and (2)(a) (2014). The Hawai
'i Supreme Court 
has held that "proof by circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences arising from circumstances surrounding the defendant's conduct is sufficient. . . . Thus, the mind of an alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances." State v. Bui, 104 Hawai
'i 
462, 467, 92 P.3d 471, 476 (2004) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Here, the complainant testified that Kaahanui
 
disappeared, returned with a gun, and then fired the gun from
 about two feet away. Anthony Nao (Nao) testified that Kaahanui
 told the complainant to back off, and had a BB gun in her hand. 
Nao testified that Kaahanui tried to fire the gun, but the gun
 jammed, so Kaahanui unjammed it and fired the gun again. 
Kaahanui admitted that she fired the gun twice. This testimony,
 taken in the light most favorable to the prosecution, supported
 the conclusion that it was Kaahanui's conscious object to fire
 the gun at the complainant.
 
Given our resolution of Kaahanui's first two arguments,
 
it is unnecessary to reach her last argument.
 
For the foregoing reasons, the September 8, 2015
 
Amended Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence, entered by
 the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 30, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Phyllis J. Hironaka,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Sonja P. McCullen,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 