 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000357 28-MAR-2024 08:18 AM Dkt. 181 SO 
NO.  CAAP-22-0000357  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I
  
K.P., Petitioner-Appellant,  
v.  
E.M., Respondent-Appellee  
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY  COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO.  2PA211000062)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.)  
Petitioner -Appellant K.P. ( mother) appeals from the 
Family Court of the Second Circuit's1 (family court ) "Findings of 
Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision and Order [,]" entered 
March 28, 2022 ( Order), which denied mother's petition for 
1 The Honorable Lance D. Collins presid ed.   
 
 
  
    
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
   
   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
custody of the two minor children (collectively, the children ),  
and "Order Denying Petitioner's Motion for Reconsideration, 
Clarification and Further Hearing, filed April  7, 2022"  (Order 
Denying Reconsideration ). The family court's Order granted 
Respondent-Appellee E.M. ( father) sole legal and physical 
custody of the children, and permitted father to relocate and 
return to the State of Utah  with the children.  32
  Mother raises two points of error on appeal. Upon 
careful review of the record and briefs, and having given due 
consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, 
we resolve Mother's contentions as follows:  
  (1) Mother contends that the family court "erred as a 
matter of law, and abused [its] discretion when [it] dissolved 
Judge Healy's [sic] [amended] protective order,[]  granted father 4
2 Mother's Petition for Custody, Visitation, Support Orders After 
Voluntary Establishment of Paternity , entered May 6, 2021, request ed that the 
family court grant mother legal and physical custody of the children, and no 
visitation between father and the children until further order of the family 
court. Father's Motion for Emergency Custody and Relocation, entered 
August 12, 2021, requested that the family court grant father temporary 
emergency custody of the children, and permit father to relocate to Utah with 
the children. 
3 The Order Denying Reconsideration was filed in the family court 
on April 25, 2022. 
4 The Honorable Judge Adrianne Heely ( Judge Heely ) issued the 
protective order, in October 2021, in the separately docketed Domestic Abuse 
case (Domestic Abuse case ), FC-DA No. 21-1-0510. The transcript of the 
November 2021 evidentiary hearing in the Domestic Abuse case, on mother's 
petition requesting the protective order, was filed in this custody case. The 
protective order was amended in December 2021 (amended protective order ). At 
the time the amended protective order was entered, Judge Heely was presiding 
over both the Domestic Abuse case and this custody case. Although the 
Domestic Abuse case was not formally consolidated with this custody case, the 
record reflects the parties ' understanding that no further motions were to be 
(continued . . .) 
2   
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sole custody and relocation to Utah with the children, and 
limited mother to supervised visitation of uncertain time, place 
and duration." 
We review the family court's rulings under the abuse 
of discretion standard. "Generally, the family court possesses 
wide discretion in making its decisions and those decisions will 
not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of 
discretion." In re Doe , 95 Hawaiʻi 183, 189, 20 P.3d 616, 622 
(2001) ( cleaned up ). "[W]e will not disturb the family court's 
decision s on appeal unless the family court disregarded rules or 
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a 
party litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of 
reason." Id. (cleaned up). 
We conclude that the family court did not abuse its 
discretion by dissolving the amended protective order. Although 
Judge Heely issued the amended protective order in the separate 
Domestic Abuse case, this custody matter is a closely -related 
proceeding that involves the same parties. In addressing the 
custody matter, the family court considered the children's 
4(continued . . .) 
filed in the Domestic Abuse case, and that "everything would be heard" in 
this custody case. 
It appears that, subsequent to Judge Heely's issuance of the 
amended protective order, the Domestic Abuse case and this paternity case 
were both reassigned, such that Judge Heely was no longer the presiding judge 
in these cases. 
3   
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
    
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
safety and made findings and conclusions, based on the evidence 
presented at the custody trial,5 that there was insufficient 
evidence of sexual or other abuse of the children by father.6 On 
this basis, the family court did not abuse its discretion by 
dissolving the amended protective order in this case docket, as 
well as in the Domestic Abuse case docket. 
We further conclude that the family court did not err 
in awarding father sole physical and legal custody, and granting 
father permission to relocate and return to the State of Utah 
with the children. The family court made sufficient findings 
and conclusions, based on the record evidence, that this would 
be in the children's best interest.7 AC v. AC , 134 Hawaiʻi 221, 
5 The custody trial was held on January 28 and 31, 2022, and 
February 15, 2022. 
6 "It is well -settled that an appellate court will not pass upon 
issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the 
evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." In re Doe , 95 Hawaiʻi 
at 190, 20 P.3d at 623. 
7 The family court found, inter alia , that mother filed multiple 
petitions for a TRO or protective order because "Mother has coached the minor 
children to make statements regarding inappropriate touching by Father [.]" 
The family court also made the following conclusions regarding 
the children's best interest, 
21. Father is a fit and proper parent who can provide a 
stable, safe and wholesome home for the minor children in 
Utah. 
22. Mother is not present [sic] a fit or proper parent who 
can provide a stable, safe and wholesome home for the minor 
children. 
(continued . . .) 
4   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
230, 339 P.3d 719, 728 (2014) ("[I]n child custody cases, a 
guiding principle for family courts in awarding custody under 
Hawaiʻi law is the best interest of the child.") (cleaned up); 
DJ  v. CJ, 147 Hawai ʻi 2, 23, 464 P.3d 790, 811 (2020) ("[T]he 
governing consideration is not a parent's interests, but whether allowing relocation is in the best interests of the child.")  
(cleaned up); see also  HRS § 571-46 (2018).  
  The family court's findings of fact (FOF) are not 
clearly erroneous. Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 116, 839 P.2d 10, 28 (1992) ("Where there is substantial evidence, which is credible evidence of sufficient 
quantity and probative value to justify a reasonable person in 
reaching conclusions that support the FOFs, the FOFs cannot be 
set aside.")  (citation omitted). Moreover, the family court's 
mixed findings of fact are not clearly erroneous, and its 
conclusions of law are not wrong. Id.  at 119, 839 P.2d at 29 
("A COL that is supported by the trial court's FOFs and that 
7(continued . . .) 
23. Father's relocation plan is realistic, credible and 
sustainable. 
24. Mother's conduct demonstrates she is unable to act in 
the best interest of the minor children and that 
unsupervised visitation of the children would presently be 
detrimental to their best interest. 
25. Mother's actions demonstrate that either she is unable 
to separate her needs from the minor children or she is 
unable to protect the children from her parents' needs and 
wants. 
5   
 
 
  
  
 
  
   
 
  
 
    
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be 
overturned. However, a COL that presents mixed questions of 
fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous 
standard [.]") (citation omitted ). 
On this record, we conclude that the family court did 
not abuse its discretion in awarding sole legal and physical 
custody to father, and allowing the children to relocate with 
father out -of-state. 
(2) Mother contends that the family court "denied 
mother due process of law and her [] fundamental liberty 
interest in the care, custody and control of her children , by 
limiting this case to a two -day trial because of court 
congestion, refusing to admit evidence regarding the credibility 
of the children's disclosures and Mother's good faith, and 
vacating a prior judge's protective order. . . ."8 We conclude 
that mother's contentions lack merit for the reasons set forth 
in section (1), supra. 
8 We decline to address mother's contentions regarding the family 
court's limitations on the duration of trial, and the admission of evidence, 
because those contentions were not properly raised pursuant to Hawaiʻi Rules 
of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4)(ii) and (iii). HRAP 28(b)(4) 
("Each point [of error] shall state . . . (ii) where in the record the 
alleged error occurred; and (iii) where in the record the alleged error was 
objected to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought to the 
attention of the court or agency."). 
6   
 
 
   For the reasons set forth above, the family court's 
Order and Order Denying Reconsideration are  affirmed.  
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘i,  March 28 , 2024. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Katherine G. Leonard  
 Acting Chief Judge  
Peter Van Name Esser,   
for Petitioner-Appellant.  /s/ Karen T. Nakasone  
 Associate Judge  
Benard M. Herren,   
for Respondent-Appellee.  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge  
7 