NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001017
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
THADDEAUS ZIEMLAK, Successor Trustee of the Marguerite M.
Ziemlak Revocable Living Trust, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JI WON KEELEY, Defendant/Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellant,
and ESTATE OF STANLEY F. ZIEMLAK, Defendant-Appellee, and
JOHN DOES 1-20, JANE DOES 1-20, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-20,
DOE LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANIES 1-20, and
DOE ENTITIES 1-20, Defendants, v. FIRST HONOLULU
SECURITIES, INC., Third-Party Defendant-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-2576)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, and Ginoza, J.;
and Nakamura, Chief Judge, dissenting)
Defendant-Appellant Ji Won Keeley ( Keeley) appeals from
a July 9, 2014 Judgment ( Final Judgment ), which was entered
against Keeley and in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Thaddeus
Ziemlak, as Successor Trustee of the Marguerite M. ZiemlakNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1The Marguerite M. Ziemlak Revocable Living Trust will be referred
to herein as the Marguerite Trust.
2The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
2Revocable Living Trust ( Thaddeus),1 in the Circuit Court of the
First Circuit ( Circuit Court).2  
The points of error set forth in Keeley's opening brief
fail to comply with Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP)
Rule 28(b)(4) and, while overlapping with each other, the points
of error fail to identify significant issues argued on appeal. 
Nevertheless, this court observes the policy of attempting to
permit litigants the opportunity to have their cases heard on the
merits, to the extent possible.  See O'Connor v. Diocese of
Honolulu, 77 Hawai# i 383, 386, 885 P.2d 361, 364 (1994).  Thus,
we will construe the points of error on appeal as contending that
the Circuit Court:  (1) abused its discretion in denying Keeley's
post-judgment motion to disqualify Thaddeus's counsel based on an
alleged conflict of interest; (2) erred in entering the damages
amount set forth in the default judgment; (3) abused its
discretion in denying Keeley's motion to set aside the default
judgment; and (4) abused its discretion in granting sanctions
against Keeley.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Keeley's contentions as follows: NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3(1) There are a number of infirmities with Keeley's
argument that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in failing
to disqualify Thaddeus's counsel.  First, the record on appeal
does not include an order entered by the Circuit Court disposing
of Keeley's motion to disqualify Thaddeus's counsel, which motion
was filed on July 15, 2014, after final judgment was entered in
this case.  Even if we were able to review the denial of the
disqualification request based on the minute order which appears
in the record, we note that Keeley's motion to disqualify was
based on Thaddeus's claim in this case against the Estate of
Stanley F. Ziemlak (the Stanley Estate ) (and not on any alleged
adversity to Keeley, who does not claim to be a client or former
client of Thaddeus's attorney, or a beneficiary of the Stanley
Estate).  However, as reflected in the Circuit Court's July 9,
2014 Judgment, judgment was entered in favor of Thaddeus, in his
capacity as Successor Trustee of the Marguerite Trust, and
against Keeley in the amount of $539,900, Keeley's third-party
complaint was dismissed without prejudice, and all other claims,
counterclaims, or cross-claims were dismissed without prejudice. 
Thus, before Keeley filed her motion, Thaddeus's claim against
the Stanley Estate, which had been filed on behalf of the
Marguerite Trust, was dismissed.  The dismissal of this claim is
not challenged on appeal.  For these reasons alone, Keeley is not
entitled to relief on this appeal and we need not further address
her arguments that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in
denying her post-judgment motion to disqualify Thaddeus's
attorney.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4(2 & 3)  On February 26, 2013, roughly a month after an
entry of default based on Keeley's failure to answer the
complaint, the clerk of the circuit court entered a Default
Judgment against Keeley in the amount of $539,900 in damages. 
Keeley argues, inter alia , that this amount of damages was
inherently flawed because the allegations of the First Amended
Verified Complaint include that $169,900 was withdrawn from the
Marguerite Trust's account and used to purchase certain real
property in North Carolina, that an additional $100,000 was 
withdrawn from the Marguerite Trust's account, and that the
subject North Carolina property was later sold for $270,000 and
the property sale proceeds were not paid to the Marguerite Trust,
but the damages amount of $539,900 "double counts" the amounts
taken from the accounts to buy the North Carolina property and
the proceeds of the sale of the North Carolina property.
Hawai#i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 55
provides, in relevant part:
Rule 55.  Default.
(a)  Entry.  When a party against whom a judgment for
affirmative relief is sought has failed to plead or
otherwise defend as provided by these rules and that fact is
made to appear by affidavit or otherwise, the clerk shall
enter the party's default.
(b)  Judgment.  Judgment by default may be entered as
follows:
(1)  BY THE CLERK .  When the plaintiff's claim
against a defendant is for a sum certain or for a sum
which can by computation be made certain, the clerk
upon request of the plaintiff and upon affidavit of
the amount due shall enter judgment for that amount
and costs against the defendant, if the defendant has
been defaulted for failure to appear and is not an
infant or incompetent person.
(2)  BY THE COURT .  In all other cases the party
entitled to a judgment by default shall apply to the
court therefor; but no judgment by default shall be
entered against an infant or incompetent person unlessNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3HRCP Rule 54(c) provides:
(c)  Demand for judgment.  A judgment by default shall
not be different in kind from or exceed in amount that
prayed for in the demand for judgment.  Except as to a party
against whom a judgment is entered by default, every final
judgment shall grant the relief to which the party in whose
favor it is rendered is entitled, even if the party has not
demanded such relief in the party's pleadings.
5represented in the action by a guardian, or other such
representative who has appeared therein, and upon whom
service may be made under Rule 17. If the party
against whom judgment by default is sought has
appeared in the action, the party (or, if appearing by
representative, the party's representative) shall be
served with written notice of the application for
judgment at least 3 days prior to the hearing on such
application. If, in order to enable the court to enter
judgment or to carry it into effect, it is necessary
to take an account or to determine the amount of
damages or to establish the truth of any averment by
evidence or to make an investigation of any other
matter, the court may conduct such hearings or order
such references as it deems necessary and proper and
shall accord a right of trial by jury to the parties
when and as required by any statute.
(c)  Setting aside default.  For good cause shown the
court may set aside an entry of default and, if a judgment
by default has been entered, may likewise set it aside in
accordance with Rule 60(b).
(d)  Plaintiffs, counterclaimants, cross- claimants. 
The provisions of this rule apply whether the party entitled
to the judgment by default is a plaintiff, a third-party
plaintiff, or a party who has pleaded a cross-claim or
counterclaim. In all cases a judgment by default is subject
3to the limitations of Rule 54(c).
This court has previously explained:
Pursuant to HRCP Rule 55, a judgment by default
involves two steps: (1) the entry of default by the court
clerk when it is made to appear, by affidavit or otherwise,
that a defending party on any claim has failed to plead or
otherwise defend; and (2) the entry of default judgment. See
J. Moore, 10 Moore's Federal Practice § 55.10 (3d ed. 2002).
Where default judgment is entered by a court clerk
rather than by the court itself, HRCP Rule 55(b)(1) provides
that three requirements must be met before a default
judgment can be entered:  (1) the plaintiff's claim against
the defendant must be for a sum certain or for a sum which
can, by computation, be made certain; (2) default must have
been entered against the defendant because the defendant
failed to appear, and (3) the defendant must not be an
infant or incompetent person.
Casuga v. Blanco, 99 Hawai #i 44, 50-51, 52 P.3d 298, 304-05 (App.
2002). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4In addition, based on paragraph 7.10 of the Marguerite Trust,
which was referenced in and attached to the First Amended Verified Complaint,
it appears that an annual withdrawal of the greater of $5,000 or five percent
of the principal assets was allowed, which renders further uncertainty to the
damages amount.
6We construe Keeley's arguments to contend that the
amount claimed in the First Amended Verified Complaint was not
for a sum certain or a sum which, by computation, can be made
certain and therefore her motion to set aside the clerk's default
judgment damages award should have been granted.  We agree. 
Although it appears that the amounts taken from the Marguerite
Trust account were for a sum certain, a judicial determination is
necessary to decide, inter alia , whether and to what extent a
damages award should be made based on the proceeds from the sale
of the North Carolina property.4  See Perry v. Williams , 135
Hawai#i 142, 147–48, 346 P.3d 211, 216–17 (App. 2015); see also,
e.g., Binkley v. MP Auto, LLC , CAAP-12-0000564, 2015 WL 8527336
at *2-*3 (Hawai #i App. Dec. 9, 2015) (SDO); Ledcor - U.S. Pac.
Constr. LLC v. Joslin, CAAP-12-0000041, 2014 WL 5905077 at *7
(Haw. App. Nov. 13, 2014) (mem. op.).  As the claim in the First
Amended Verified Complaint for the additional $270,000, for
example, cannot be construed as a sum certain, the requirements
of HRCP Rule 55(b)(1) were not met, and the clerk was without
authority to enter a default judgment for damages.  Thus, the
Circuit Court erred in denying Keeley's motion to set aside the
Default Judgment because the Default Judgment by the clerk was
void.  Perry, 135 Hawai# i at 147-48, 346 P.3d at 216-17.
Keeley also appears to argue that the Circuit Court
erred in failing to set aside the default entered against her.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7Hawai#i courts follow the test established in BDM, Inc. v.
Sageco, Inc., 57 Haw. 73, 76, 549 P.2d 1147, 1150 (1976), to
determine whether to set aside an entry of default:
[A] motion to set aside a default entry or a default
judgment may and should be granted whenever the court finds
(1) that the nondefaulting party will not be prejudiced by
the reopening, (2) that the defaulting party has a
meritorious defense, and (3) that the default was not the
result of inexcusable neglect or a wilful act.
However, "[i]f a movant fails to meet any one prong of
the test, a trial court does not abuse its discretion in refusing
to set aside a default judgment."  Citicorp Mortgage, Inc. v.
Bartolome, 94 Hawai #i 422, 439, 16 P.3d 827, 844 (App. 2000),
citing Park v. Tanaka, 75 Haw. 271, 281, 859 P.2d 917, 922 (1993)
(no meritorious defense); Dillingham Inv. Corp. v. Kunio Yokoyama
Tr., 8 Haw. App. 226, 236, 797 P.2d 1316, 1321 (1990) 
(inexcusable neglect and wilful act).
Here, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse
its discretion when it determined, inter alia , that Keeley failed
to show that the default was not the result of inexcusable
neglect or a wilful act.  As noted in the Circuit Court's order,
it was established that Keeley speaks and writes English, she has
familiarity with the legal process, and counsel for Thaddeus
reminded her to answer the complaint before he sought entry of
default.  Indeed, there was evidence that Keeley had experience
retaining counsel (four times), that she had been both a
plaintiff and a defendant in prior suits, and that as a plaintiff
in a prior suit, Keeley herself was granted an order for entry of
default.  In addition, prior to the complaint being filed herein,
first through her then-counsel and then directly, Keeley was sentNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8demand letters and was told that Thaddeus's attorney was
authorized to draft a complaint and commence suit.  We conclude,
therefore, that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
denying Keeley's various motions seeking relief from the entry of
default.
(4) On May 13, 2014, Thaddeus filed a motion for
sanctions under HRCP Rule 11 ( Motion for Sanctions ) against
Keeley for presenting her January 16, 2014 motion for relief fro
judgment or order.  Thaddeus argued that "[t]his was the third
time . . . Keeley filed, essentially, the same motion for relief
from the Default Judgment filed February 26, 2013.  She presente
no new evidence and in many instances repeated the same argument
she had previously made."  After further briefing and a hearing,
on June 24, 2014, the Circuit Court entered an order granting th
Motion for Sanctions noting, inter alia , the repetitive filings
and directing Keeley to pay $3,334.42 in attorneys' fees (plus
interest until paid).  On appeal, Keeley argues that she had goo
reasons to set aside the Default Judgment and therefore the cour
erred in granting sanctions.  In light of our ruling that the
Circuit Court erred in denying Keeley's motion to set aside the
Default Judgment as void, we vacate the Circuit Court's Rule 11
sanctions against Keeley.m
d
s
e
d
t
Accordingly, we affirm the January 24, 2013 entry of
default by the clerk.  We vacate the Circuit Court's June 24,
2014 Order Granting Motion for Sanctions, the July 9, 2014 Final
Judgment, and the entry of Default Judgment by the clerk; this
case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further proceedingsNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9consistent with HRCP Rule 55(b)(2) and this Summary Disposition
Order.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 30, 2017.
On the briefs:
Joseph A. Kinoshita,
Bruce F. Sherman,
for Defendant-Third Party
 Plaintiff-Appellant.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Kenn N. Kojima,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.