     
   
    
     
      
    
         
         
         NOT  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST'S  HAWAI I  REPORTS  AND  PACI FIC  REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000451 30-JUN-2025 07:51 AM Dkt. 57 SO 
NO.  CAAP-23-0000451 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
STATE  OF  HAWAI I,  Plaintiff-Appellee,  v. 
JAYDEN  JU,  Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  DISTRICT  COURT  OF  THE  FIRST  CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU  DIVISION 
(CASE  NO.  1DCW-22-0003158) 
SUMMARY  DISPOSITION  ORDER 
By:   Leonard,  Acting  Chief  Judge,  Wadsworth  and  Nakasone,  JJ.) (
Defendant-Appellant  Jayden  Ju  (Ju)  appeals  from  the  
June  28,  2023  Notice  of  Entry  of  Judgment  and/or  Order  (Judgment ) 
entered  against  him  by  the  District  Court  of  the  First  Circuit, 
Honolulu  Division  (District  Court).   Ju  was  convicted  of  a 
single  count  of  Assault  in  the  Third  Degree  (Assault  3)  in 
violation  of  Hawaii  Revised  Statutes  (HRS)  §  707-712  (1)(a) 
(2014).  2 1
1 The Honorable Steven L. Hartley presided. 
2 HRS § 707-712 provides: 
§  707- 712   Assault  in  the  third  degree.   (1)  A  person 
commits  the  offense  of  assault  in  the  third  degree  if  the 
person: 
(a)
 Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causes 
bodily injury to another person; or 
(b) Negligently causes bodily injury to another 
person with a dangerous instrument. 
(2) Assault in the third degree is a misdemeanor 
unless committed in a fight or scuffle entered into by 
mutual consent, in which case it is a petty misdemeanor.          
         
         
         
          
   
        
         
         
    
       
           
         
         
            
      
       
        
         
        
             
        
       
          
           
          
       
        
       
        
        
          
           
       
 
          
 
         
            
          
           
         
         
             
            
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ju raises a single point of error on appeal, contending 
that there was not substantial evidence presented at trial to 
support the District Court's conclusion that the State of Hawai i 
(State) had
 proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Ju's use of 
force was unjustified. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Ju's 
point of error as follows: 
Ju argues that the District Court erroneously concluded 
that Ju's use of force was not justified as self-defense based on 
the court's "misapprehension" that Ju's use of force was not 
immediately necessary due to the twenty to thirty seconds between 
when Ju was punched in the nose by someone wearing red and when 
he used force against Paul Aquino (Aquino). 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be 
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution when 
the appellate court passes on the legal sufficiency of such 
evidence to support a conviction; the same standard applies 
whether the case was before a judge or a jury. The test on 
appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a 
reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence 
to support the conclusion of the trier of fact. Indeed, 
even if it could be said in a bench trial that the 
conviction is against the weight of the evidence, as long as 
there is substantial evidence to support the requisite 
findings for conviction, the trial court will be affirmed. 
"Substantial evidence" as to every material element of 
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of 
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a [person] 
of reasonable caution to support a conclusion. And as trier 
of fact, the trial judge is free to make all reasonable and 
rational inferences under the facts in evidence, including 
circumstantial evidence. 
State v. Calaycay , 145 Hawai i 186, 196,  449 P.3d 1184, 1194 
(2019). 
It is undisputed that twenty to thirty seconds after Ju 
was punched by someone wearing red, Ju walked up to Aquino (in a 
Halloween crowd in Waikīkī) and punched him in the eye, which 
caused Aquino pain. Aquino was wearing a red shirt. The 
defense's argument rests upon the use of force being justified. 
The use of force for self-protection is codified in HRS 
§ 703-304 (2014) and is a defense to Assault 3. See State v. 
Sanchez , 2 Haw. App. 577, 578, 636 P.2d 1365, 1366 (1981). HRS 
§ 703-304 states in relevant part: 
2          
         
         
          
        
       
            
          
 
       
         
      
           
 
       
      
        
        
         
         
        
          
        
        
        
    
 
       
         
         
            
         
        
          
          
      
        
        
       
          
          
  
         
           
               NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 703-304 Use of force in self-protection . (1) 
Subject to the provisions of this section and of section 
703-308, the use of force upon or toward another person is 
justifiable when the actor believes that such force is 
immediately necessary for the purpose of protecting himself 
against the use of unlawful force by the other person on the 
present occasion. 
   . . . . 
(3
) .
 . . a person employing protective force may 
estimate the necessity thereof under the circumstances as he 
believes them to be when the force is used without 
retreating, surrendering possession, doing any other act 
which he has no legal duty to do, or abstaining from any 
lawful action. 
HRS § 703-300 (2014) provides definitions relating to 
justification, including that: "'Believes' means reasonably 
believes," and "'Force'" means any bodily impact, restraint, or 
confinement, or the threat thereof." "Unlawful force" is 
force which is employed without the consent of the person 
against whom it is directed and the employment of which 
constitutes an offense or would constitute an offense except 
for a defense not amounting to a justification to use the 
force. Assent constitutes consent, within the meaning of 
this section, whether or not it otherwise is legally 
effective, except assent to the infliction of death or 
serious or substantial bodily injury. 
Id. 
"Self-defense is not an affirmative defense, and the 
prosecution has the burden of disproving it once evidence of 
justification has been adduced." State v. Culkin, 97 Hawai i 
206, 215,
 35 P.3d 233, 242 (2001). The Hawai i Supreme Court  
has consistently held that the test for "[s]elf-defense to a 
criminal charge contains both a subjective and an objective 
prong: the defendant must believe that force is necessary, and 
that belief must be reasonable." State v. Sandoval , 149 Hawai i  
221, 237,
 487 P.3d 308, 324 (2021). 
The crux of this appeal is whether there was 
substantial evidence to support the objective prong, i.e., the 
District Court's finding and conclusion that, evaluating the 
reasonableness of Ju's action from the perspective Ju had at the 
time, it was not objectively reasonable for Ju to believe that 
force was necessary. 
Here, Ju initially testified, "After I got hit, I was 
stumbling around. And then I seen somebody else that was wearing 
red. That was that guy. And I didn't know if that was him or 
3          
               
             
            
          
           
           
           
            
           
           
         
        
        
       
            
        
        
  
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not." Ju had been hit in the nose, but did not see who hit him; 
he did not see the person's face and only saw that the person was 
wearing red. It was a crowded Halloween night in Waikīkī. Later 
in his testimony, Ju answered in the affirmative when his lawyer 
asked him if, at the time he struck Aquino, he believed Aquino 
was the one who had punched him. However, the District Court 
also pointed to Ju's testimony that there was a twenty to thirty 
second gap between when Ju got hit and when he saw Aquino. 
Aquino was the first person Ju saw wearing red. They were 
walking toward each other. They made eye contact. Ju hit 
Aquino. 
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the 
prosecution, we conclude that there is substantial evidence to 
support the District Court's conclusion that Ju's belief that 
force was immediately necessary was not objectively reasonable 
due to the twenty to thirty second gap between Ju being hit and 
Ju hitting Aquino, and that self-defense did not apply. 
For these reasons, the District Court's June 28, 2023 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai i, June 30,  2025. 
On  the  briefs: /s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Acting  Chief  Judge 
Cindy  Huynh, 
Deputy  Public  Defender, /s/  Clyde  J.  Wadsworth 
for  Defendant-Appellant. Associate  Judge 
Robert  T.  Nakatsuji, /s/  Karen  T.  Nakasone 
Deputy  Prosecuting  Attorney, Associate  Judge 
City  &  County  of  Honolulu, 
for  Plaintiff-Appellee. 
4 