 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-10-0000206
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
FREEDUS W. WILTON, II, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 01-1-0006(1); CR. NO. 97-0050)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Freedus W. Wilton, II (Wilton)
 
appeals from the Corrected Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law,
 
and Judgment Denying Rule 40 Petition for Post-Conviction Relief,
 filed on November 9, 2010 (Judgment Denying Rule 40 Relief), in
 
the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
 
On July 30, 1998, Wilton was convicted of Burglary in
 
the First Degree, Robbery in the First Degree, Attempted Murder
 
in the First Degree, Place to Keep Firearm, Carrying or Use of
 Firearm in the Commission of a Separate Felony, and Use of Deadly
 or Dangerous Weapon in the Commission of a Crime.
 
Wilton appealed his convictions, but on July 29, 1999,
 
he voluntarily stipulated to dismiss his appeal so that he could
 file a Petition for Post Conviction Relief.
 
On March 20, 2001, Wilton filed a Verified Petition to
 
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner
 from Custody (Petition). Wilton claimed that he received
 
ineffective assistance of trial counsel because: (1) trial
 
1
 The Honorable Joel E. August presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel failed to present evidence of his physical disability
 
resulting from Multiple Sclerosis (MS) that prevented him from
 
being able to run, in light of a security guard pursuing the
 
alleged assailant over a substantial distance on foot; (2) trial
 counsel failed to allow him to testify at trial; and (3) trial
 counsel failed to present any evidence in his defense. 
On August 26, 2004, Wilton filed an Amendment to
 
Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release
 Petitioner from Custody (Amended Petition).  Wilton asserted two
 
additional claims: the sentence imposed was an illegal sentence
 
and appellate counsel was ineffective in perfecting his direct
 appeal.
 
On December 1, 2004, the Circuit Court issued its
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Petition
 to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release
 Petitioner from Custody.
 
On March 21, 2007, this court issued a Summary
 
Disposition Order that affirmed the denial of Wilton's Petition
 and Amended Petition.
 
On November 13, 2007, the supreme court issued an 
opinion in Wilton v. State, 116 Hawai
'i 106, 108, 170 P.3d 357, 
358 (2007), which vacated this court's affirmance and ordered that a hearing be held on some of the claims in Wilton's Petition. The court stated that the question presented was "whether the ICA gravely erred in holding that the [court] did not err in denying [Petitioner's] HRPP Rule 40 petition where his trial counsel's failure to present exculpatory evidence in his defense constituted ineffective assistance of counsel[.]" Id. at 
110, 170 P.3d at 361. The court noted that Wilton's affidavit in support of the Petition stated that Wilton had been unable to run due to MS for some time prior to his diagnosis in 1989, and his medical records showed his history of MS and the effect of the disease on his gait, "such that any competent medical expert could have described the meaning of . . . those records[.]" Wilton also averred that he informed his trial counsel of his disability due to MS on more than one occasion. Id. at 113, 170 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.3d at 364. The court held that Wilton presented a colorable
 
claim of ineffective assistance of counsel because, if the facts
 therein were taken as true, specifically that Wilton could not
 run in the same manner as the perpetrator, coupled with the
 inability of witnesses to unequivocally identify Wilton as the
 perpetrator, they could have changed the verdict. Id. at 122,
 
170 P.3d at 373. The court ordered a hearing only on Wilton's
 claims regarding his MS evidence, but not Wilton's trial
 testimony claim. Id. at 123, 170 P.3d at 374.
 
Beginning on August 7, 2009, the Circuit Court held an
 
evidentiary hearing to address Wilton's claim of ineffective
 assistance of trial counsel with respect to counsel's failure to
 present the MS evidence. 
On November 9, 2010, the Circuit Court issued the
 
Judgment Denying Post-Petition Relief. Wilton timely filed this
 appeal.
 
On appeal, Wilton claims that the Circuit Court erred
 
by denying his Petition. Wilton specifically challenges Findings
 of Fact (FOFs) 22, 28, and 32 as clearly erroneous, and
 
Conclusions of Law (COLs) 6, 7, and 8 as wrong. Wilton again
 
argues that he was provided ineffective assistance of counsel
 
because trial counsel failed to adequately investigate Wilton's
 MS condition.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Wilton's points of error as follows: 
Wilton contends that FOF 22 is clearly erroneous
 
because his trial counsel, David Sereno (Sereno), obtained his
 
medical records from 1990 to 1994 from a Colorado treatment
 
center. FOF 22 states:
 
Relative to the existence of medical records relating
to his [MS] condition, Defendant testified that there would
have been no medical records relating to his diagnosis or
treatment of MS created between January 1990 and February
11, 2000, when he was seen by the medical staff at Halawa
Prison. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wilton does not challenge that there are no medical
 
records relating to his diagnosis or treatment from 1995 to
 
February 11, 2000. Thus, in this respect, FOF 22 is not clearly
 erroneous.
 
Sereno testified that he had no recollection of 
receiving any of Wilton's medical records. The Circuit Court found Sereno to be a credible witness. See FOF 40. "An 
appellate court will not pass upon the trial judge's decisions with respect to the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence, because this is the province of the trial judge." Porter v. Hu, 116 Hawai
'i 42, 60, 169 P.3d 994, 1012 (App. 2007) 
(quoting State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai 'i 131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 
(1996)). 
However, Wilton testified at the hearing that he and
 
Sereno discussed "that he [Sereno] had read the records, so the
 only way he could do that is if he had them so . . ." Sereno
 also stated that if he had received medical records, he would
 have looked at them. Assuming, arguendo, that FOF 22 is, in
 part, erroneous in that Sereno did review Wilton's medical
 records from 1990 to 1994 and/or that such records existed, as
 discussed below, it would not aid Wilton's claim that he received
 ineffective assistance of trial counsel. Thus, for the reasons
 discussed below, any error included in FOF 22 is harmless error.
 
Wilton argues that FOF 28 is clearly erroneous. 
FOF 28
 
states:
 
The defendant's father testified that he spoke to Mr.
Sereno several times about his son's [MS] condition and its
recurrent symptoms and that Mr. Sereno had stated he had
researched the issue and that he did not intend to present
such evidence.
 
In support of his claim, Wilton argues that Wilton's
 
father "testified that he expected expert testimony regarding
 
Wilton's MS to be presented." Even if Wilton's father expected
 certain testimony to be presented at trial, it does not change
 the fact that Sereno informed Wilton that no such testimony would
 be presented at trial. Thus, FOF 28 is not clearly erroneous.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
FOF 32 states:
 
Defendant testified that his decision not to testify
was conditioned upon the introduction of all of his medical
evidence. However, Defendant never stated that any records
existed between January 1990 and the trial in April 1998.
 
In support of his claim that FOF 32 is clearly
 
erroneous, Wilton argues that he testified that he signed a
 
release form for Sereno to obtain the medical records for 1990 to
 1994 from a Colorado treatment center, and that he believed that
 Sereno had such records. Wilton's argument rests on the implied
 argument that, because he signed a release form to obtain his
 medical records from 1990 to 1994, a finding that he never
 testified that any records existed from January 1990 to trial in
 1998 is clearly erroneous. Again, Wilton does not challenge that
 medical records for 1995 to April 1998 do not exist. However,
 Wilton testified that he had recently attempted to obtain his
 medical records for 1990 to 1994 from a Colorado treatment
 center, but that they had destroyed them after seven years. 
Thus, Wilton sufficiently stated that such records existed and
 FOF 32 is, in part, clearly erroneous. However, for the reasons 
discussed below, we again conclude that such error is harmless.
 
The basic premise of Wilton's ineffective assistance of
 
counsel claim is that Sereno failed to introduce evidence that
 Wilton could not have run the same way witnesses described the
 perpetrator as having fled on foot from the apartment complex
 where the crimes were committed. Wilton posits that such
 evidence would have aided in creating reasonable doubt because it
 would tend to show that Wilton was misidentified as the
 perpetrator of the crimes. Thus, Wilton argues that Sereno's
 failure to introduce such evidence resulted in the withdrawal or
 substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. In
 conjunction with this argument, Wilton challenges COLs 6, 7, and
 8. 
Wilton characterizes this argument as a failure to
 
investigate. Wilton claims that he received ineffective
 assistance of trial counsel because Sereno failed to adequately
 investigate Wilton's physical limitations due to MS. Wilton
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argues: "Given Wilton's diagnosis and corroboration by Krau and
 
[Wilton's father], Sereno had [a] duty to further investigate and
 gather the underlying facts of the case and Wilton's physical
 limitations. Sereno failed to gather the underlying facts of the
 case." Wilton also faults Sereno for failing to have Wilton
 examined by a physician at the time of his arrest, which was only
 days after the crimes occurred. 
Even if Wilton's assertions and claims regarding
 
Sereno's performance and knowledge prior to trial were true, it
 would not negate that Sereno's decision not to introduce such
 evidence at trial was a tactical one. Although Wilton vigorously
 contests whether there were medical records for 1990 to 1994,
 such a finding would only support a conclusion that Sereno knew
 of Wilton's MS diagnosis, and potential evidence supporting that
 diagnosis, prior to trial. However, it is not disputed that
 Sereno had knowledge of Wilton's diagnosis of intermittent MS
 prior to trial. Sereno testified that he independently
 researched the issue prior to trial. However, the earlier
 medical records would not prove Wilton's assertion that he could
 not run at the time of the crime in 1997. Notably, Wilton does
 not claim that such records would have established that he could
 not run in 1997. The existence of Wilton's medical records for
 1990 to 1994 simply establishes that he was diagnosed with
 intermittent MS as early as 1990, a fact that is not disputed. 
Wilton does not challenge, and there is no evidence of, medical
 records after 1994 up to the time of trial. 
Wilton also points to Sereno's failure to obtain a
 
medical examination to determine the extent of Wilton's inability
 to run as the perpetrator did. At best, a post-arrest medical
 examination might support a contention that Wilton was incapable
 of running well at the time the crimes were committed. However,
 Sereno admitted that he was aware that Wilton could assert that
 he could not run as part of his defense. In fact, Sereno
 testified that he and Wilton discussed getting a physical
 examination that would corroborate the MS, but he and Wilton
 decided they were not going to use it as part of the defense, and
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Wilton was okay with that. See FOF 25. Sereno stated that
 
Wilton initially was not happy when told that the MS evidence
 
would not be introduced until he explained to Wilton why he did
 not want to use it; after listening to Sereno, Wilton agreed. 
See also FOF 38 (stating that Wilton's criminal defense expert
 witness did not testify that the prevailing professional norm is
 to obtain an independent medical examination of a defendant in
 the circumstances of this case). A post-arrest medical
 examination would not provide additional or different facts upon
 which to weigh whether such evidence would actually be presented
 at trial. Wilton cannot complain that he received ineffective
 assistance of counsel when he agreed that evidence of MS would
 not be presented at trial.
 
Further, during the hearing, Sereno explained the
 
reasoning for not presenting evidence of Wilton's MS. Sereno
 testified that, if he brought in evidence regarding Wilton's MS
 diagnosis, there would also likely be evidence of Wilton's
 extensive judo background, including that he was extremely
 accomplished and an instructor. Sereno also stated, and a police
 officer corroborated, that there was evidence that Wilton went
 pig hunting, and there is a good amount of running involved over
 roots, running on trails which are uncut, and Wilton had no
 apparent problem with that. Further, Sereno contacted Wilton's
 employer, and there was no evidence that he had difficulty doing
 his job, which involved carrying heavy dive tanks, heavy lifting,
 and moving, all of which were inconsistent with a MS defense. 
Sereno further testified that he strategically decided not to
 proffer evidence of Wilton's MS because it would provide an
 opening to additional evidence and argument by the prosecution. 
Namely, the perpetrator tripped while being chased, but when
 Sereno investigated the scene, there appeared to be nothing to
 trip over. As such, entering the MS evidence would allow the
 prosecutor to argue that Wilton's leg dragged a little bit due to
 the MS, so he could not pick up high enough, he fell, and then
 did a judo roll. Sereno was concerned that all of this evidence
 would be presented at trial if Wilton asserted that he could not
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
run because of MS. Sereno also believed that raising an MS 
defense would damage their case by leaving the jury with the impression that the defense was just "trying to come up with something" and "creating a lie." Based on these considerations, Sereno stated that he had no doubt that it would hurt the case to put in any evidence of the MS defense. Assuming that Sereno could show that Wilton was not able to run well, Sereno considered the possibility of presenting such evidence, including offering to obtain a current medical examination to confirm Wilton's MS diagnosis, but he and Wilton agreed that it would not be presented based on a tactical decision. When viewed as a whole, the assistance provided by Sereno was within the range of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases. See Dan v. 
State, 76 Hawai
'i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994). "[M]atters 
presumably within the judgment of counsel, like trial strategy, will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight." State v. 
Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 39-40, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247-48 (1998) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted; emphasis in original). For these reasons, we conclude that COLs 6, 7, and 8 are not wrong.
 Accordingly, we affirm the Circuit Court's Corrected 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Judgment Denying Rule 40 Petition for Post-Conviction Relief, filed on November 9, 2010. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 17, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Keith S. Shigetomi
for Petitioner-Appellant Chief Judge 
Peter A. Hanano Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Respondent-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8
 