NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000574 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
WILLIAM F. PRESCOTT, Defendant-Appellant  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CRIMINAL NO. 1CPC-17-0001381) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant William F. Prescott
 appeals from 
the "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" entered by the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit on August 26, 2020.  For the reasons 
explained below, we vacate the Judgment and remand for a new 
trial. 1
Prescott was indicted by a grand jury on September 28, 
2017. The indictment stated, in relevant part: 
On or about July 4, 2017, in the City and County of
Honolulu, State of Hawai #i, WILLIAM F. PRESCOTT did
knowingly engage in sexual penetration with [ CW], who was
less than fourteen years old, by inserting his penis into
her mouth, thereby committing the offense of Sexual Assaultin the First Degree, in violation of Section 707-730(1)(b)
of the Hawaii Revised Statutes.[] 2
1 The Honorable Fa #auuga To #oto #o  presided. 
2 Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 707-730 (2014) provides, in
relevant part: 
(continued...) 2 (...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Prescott pleaded not guilty. He informed the State he intended 
to rely on the defense of alibi. 
Prescott's jury trial began on February 10, 2020. 
During opening statement, his attorney told the jury "[Prescott] could not have done it because he wasn't there and he was . . . continuously with other people who can corroborate and verify that he was not in [CW's] house and could not have done this." 
STATE'S CASE 
CW was 14 years old when she testified at trial. In 
2017 she was 12 years old. She lived with her parents, two 
brothers Gordon and D.J., a sister, Prescott, and Daniel 
(Prescott's older brother). Prescott was a friend of D.J. 
Prescott stayed downstairs with CW's brothers. On July 4, 2017, CW was to perform a dance with a church group at Ke# ehi Lagoon, 
for Samoan Flag Day. 
Earlier that day, she practiced with other 
church members at Kam Field park, then went home with her father and sister to get ready for the performance. She went downstairs to shower. Her father and sister stayed upstairs. She was wearing a bra and panties, and was wrapped in a towel. She went into Gordon's room to look for a Q-tip. She did not find one, so she went into D.J.'s room to look. Prescott was in D.J.'s room. CW did not expect to see Prescott in D.J.'s room. He was wearing sweat pants. He was not wearing a shirt. 
Prescott asked CW who was home. CW replied, "me, my sister, and my dad." Prescott closed the bedroom door. He asked CW for a 
massage. 
She sat at the edge of the bed. When she turned her 
head she saw Prescott's "penis sticking out of his pants." It 
Sexual assault in the first degree . 
(1) A person commits
the offense of sexual assault in the first degree if: 
. . . . 
(b) The person knowingly engages in sexual
penetration with another person who is less thanfourteen years old[.] 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was pointing up. Prescott forced her head down "to like try to 
suck it." She told him to stop. He did not stop. She scooted backward to get away. He pulled her waist and laid her on the bed. He started climbing on her. He kissed her. He said, "make sure not to tell your brothers." Prescott forced his penis into her mouth. After a few seconds, there was a noise "and then he got off real quickly and [CW] ran straight to the bathroom." She rinsed her mouth because she "didn't want his penis germs to be in [her] mouth." She showered, then went upstairs to change her clothes. But before she went upstairs, Prescott said "make sure not to tell anybody." She did not tell her father or her sister what happened. She was afraid she would be spanked by her father. CW went with her father and sister to Ke# e
hi Lagoon. 
She did not tell her mother or her brothers what happened. 
She eventually told Daniel what happened. She thought 
"the older brother would put him in check and tell him why he did that." 
That was when her cousin Fili found out. Fili went to 
CW's house. It was nighttime. They were outside the house. Prescott, Daniel, and her sister were also there. She felt scared. She told them what happened. Prescott denied it. She "felt kind of upset[] . . . '[c]ause he's lying." Daniel believed Prescott. 
CW's friend convinced her to tell Bishop Lesa from her 
church what happened. She did. Bishop Lesa encouraged her to tell her parents. [CW] did not tell her parents because she "was afraid that [she] might get lickens, spankings." 
Fili testified that she was at work when she received a 
call from Daniel, who said he needed to talk to her about Prescott and CW. After work, Fili went to CW's house. CW's parents were not home. Daniel suggested to Fili they get Prescott and CW face-to-face to say what happened. Prescott said that on July 4, 2017, he had come home from work with D.J. He was in Gordon's room, resting before going to Ke# ehi Lagoon to 
perform for Samoan Flag Day. 
CW came downstairs. Prescott told 
CW she could not be downstairs because the rule in the house was 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"the girls cannot go downstairs and the boys can't go upstairs." 
CW "was breaking down, she was crying, she was trying to explain her side." Fili was "shocked" and "was trying to see what really happened." The meeting ended when CW's parents came home. 
Bishop Lesa testified that CW came to talk to him. She 
was nervous and crying. She told him what happened with Prescott. He advised her to tell her parents. A week later, he learned that CW had not told her parents. He told CW that he would have to call her parents in and share what happened. 
CW's father testified that on Tuesday, July 4, 2017, he 
took [CW] and her sister to Kam Field park to practice the dance they were to perform that night. They went home to shower before the performance. His older daughter showered upstairs, and CW showered downstairs, while he got dressed. After 30 minutes they left for Ke# ehi Lagoon. Bishop Lesa later told him what happened 
between CW and Prescott. 
He was angry because he let Prescott 
stay in his house. His wife was angry with him for letting Prescott stay in their house. 
CW's mother testified that on July 4, 2017, she and 
Gordon went to prepare the food booth at Ke# ehi Lagoon. Her 
husband and their daughters went to the park for dance practice. She thought D.J. had gone to work with Prescott. 
Her husband and 
daughters arrived at Ke# ehi Lagoon between 3:00 to 4:00 p.m. 
Later, D.J., Prescott, and Daniel came to the food booth to eat before their performance. One day, she came home and found CW, her other daughter, Fili, Daniel, D.J., and Prescott outside their garage. They stopped talking when she came home. CW looked like she had been crying. She asked CW why she was crying. CW said she had something in her eyes. Bishop Lesa later spoke with CW's mother and father, after church. CW's mother went home and told Daniel that she did not want him and Prescott living in her house. She then went to the police. 
CW's sister testified that she learned from Fili what 
happened between CW and Prescott. She met with Fili, CW, Daniel, and Prescott outside their house. 
CW told them what Prescott 
4  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
did. Prescott denied it; "He said he was at work." CW was 
crying. CW's sister corroborated CW's and her father's testimony about practicing at Kam Field, going back to the house, getting ready for the performance, and going to Ke# ehi Lagoon. 
D.J. testified that he woke up a little after 7:00 a.m. 
on July 4, 2017. Prescott was at his house. D.J. drove Prescott and a friend named Alex to work at a job in Kâne# ohe. They 
finished work around 1:30 or 2:00 p.m. D.J. drove them back to D.J.'s house. 
D.J. dropped Prescott off at his house at about 
2:30 p.m. D.J. and Alex went "[s]omewhere in Kalihi" to pick up uniforms for the dance performance that night. 
They went back to 
the house at about 3:30 p.m., got Prescott, and drove to Ke# ehi 
Lagoon. They got to 
Ke#ehi Lagoon at about 4:00 p.m. They met 
up with Prescott's friend Browny and rehearsed. There was a 
rugby tournament going on but D.J. testified that Prescott did 
not play. D.J. first learned of CW's allegations about Prescott during the meeting Fili called outside his and CW's house. 
The State rested its case. Prescott moved for a 
judgment of acquittal. The circuit court denied the motion. 
DEFENSE CASE 
Prescott chose to testify. He worked side demolition 
jobs with D.J. 
When they worked, he would stay at D.J.'s house 
so D.J. would not have to drive to pick him up. Prescott stayed 
at D.J.'s house the night of Sunday, July 2, 2017, because they worked on Monday, July 3. They worked until noon, then went to Ke#e
hi Lagoon to practice the dance for Samoan Flag Day with Browny. 
After practice, D.J. left and Prescott watched the rugby 
game with his girlfriend, Lepa. After the rugby game he watched 
Lepa play volleyball. After the volleyball game, he told Lepa he 
was going to mix (prepare and drink kava) with his friend Finau. 
He caught a ride with his friends Tereena and Leilani.  Finau was 
with them in the car. They left Ke# ehi Lagoon around 8:00 p.m. 
On the way to # Ewa Beach, they picked up Galo in Red Hill. They 
got to #Ewa Beach at about 9:00 p.m. They mixed there until 9:00 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or 10:00 the next morning, July 4. Prescott left in the car with 
Tereena, Leilani, Finau, and Galo. They dropped Galo off, then went to Lepa's home in Kû hi
ô Park Terrace (KPT). Finau (who also 
lived in KPT) went home. 
Prescott testified that he slept at Lepa's place. He 
planned to go to Ke# ehi Lagoon to watch Lepa play volleyball and 
for his dance performance. 
He had been awake the entire night, 
so he went to sleep between 10:00 and 11:00 a.m. Lepa woke him at about 2:00 or 2:30 p.m. Tereena and Leilani came to pick them up. Finau was with them. They went straight to Ke# ehi Lagoon. 
They arrived around 3:00 p.m. Browny asked him to play rugby because they needed players. He played rugby, then practiced for the dance performance. The performance lasted 30 minutes to an hour. He then went to watch Lepa's volleyball game. The volleyball game ended at about 8:00 p.m. Daniel picked him and Lepa up around 9:00 or 10:00 p.m. They went to Foodland, stopped at Lepa's house, then continued to celebrate Finau's birthday in the parking lot of KPT. He slept at Lepa's house that night. On July 5, he woke up and went to D.J. and CW's house. D.J. worked that day, but Prescott did not work with D.J. 
Prescott learned of CW's sexual abuse allegations some 
time later, when Daniel called him. Daniel asked him to go to CW's house to meet with him. 
When he got to the house Fili, 
Daniel, CW's sister, and CW were there. D.J. arrived later. Prescott was accused of sexually assaulting CW. Prescott responded to CW, "saying why would you say this about me. And telling her why would you do it, like say those kind stuffs." Prescott further testified: 
A. Because when she accused me of rape I then said
that when she came into the room, I told her what are you
doing down here that you need to leave. 
Q. Okay. When was it that this, she came into the
room and you told her you need to leave, do you know whenthat happened? 
A. Not too sure. 
Q. Was it during the Flag Week? 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. Not too sure. 
Q. But other than that had you had any kind of
interactions really with [CW]? 
A. No. 
Prescott said he wanted to talk to CW's parents, who would 
understand. CW then "said that I didn't do it." They shook hands then went into the house. At trial, Prescott denied having any kind of improper sexual contact with CW. 
Browny testified that he had known Prescott for 8-10 
years, and their mothers "are real good friends." Browny's rugby team played in a tournament during Samoan Flag day. There was a game on July 4, 2017. It started at 2:30 p.m. His team was short players so he asked Prescott to play with them. There was a uniform for Prescott because "the team brings the uniforms." Browny also danced with D.J. and Prescott later that evening. The rugby game ran late, so they did not have time to shower. "We had to run off, take off our clothes that we were using for the game, put on our costumes to perform and then head over to the stage to wait." After the performance, they changed out of their costumes, got something to eat, then watched Lepa play volleyball. 
Lepa testified that Prescott is the father of her 
children, a 1 year old and a 10 month old. In July 2017 they had been together for a month or two. She played in the Samoan Flag Day volleyball tournament. On July 3, Prescott watched her game. After her game finished, she went home, and Prescott left with Tereena and Leilani. She next saw Prescott at 9:00 or 10:00 a.m. on July 4. He was in a car with Tereena, Leilani, and Finau. Prescott got out of the car and went into Lepa's house. He went to sleep. Lepa woke Prescott up when it was time to go to Ke# ehi 
Lagoon for her volleyball tournament. 
They got a ride from 
Tereena and Leilani. They left at about 3:00 p.m. They got to Ke#ehi Lagoon at almost 4:00 p.m.  Prescott went to "his rugby." 
They played their games at the same time. She next saw Prescott at about 7:00 p.m. He was watching her volleyball game. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Finau testified that he was born on the 4th of July. 
On the evening of July 3, 2017, Tereena and Leilani took Finau to 
#Ewa Beach to mix. Prescott and Galo were also with them. They 
mixed for 12 hours, to celebrate Finau's birthday. 
Other people 
were also present. Finau took a video with his phone at 3:17 a.m. on July 4. 
He testified that Prescott was shown in the 
video, and in a screenshot time-stamped July 4, 2017 at 3:19 a.m. The video and screenshot were admitted into evidence. 
VERDICT 
The State's and Prescott's counsel gave closing 
arguments on February 13, 2020. The jury found Prescott guilty 
as charged the same day. On August 26, 2020, Prescott was sentenced as a youthful offender to eight years in prison, with credit for time served. This appeal followed. 
APPEAL 
Prescott raises a single point of error: "The DPA 
[deputy prosecuting attorney] committed misconduct during his 
closing argument that deprived Prescott of his right to a fair trial." 
Prescott did not object during the State's closing 
argument. "Normally, an issue not preserved at trial is deemed to be waived. But where plain errors were committed and substantial rights were affected thereby, the errors may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the trial court." State v. Fagaragan, 115 Hawai# i 364, 367-68, 167 
P.3d 739, 742-43 (App. 2007) (cleaned up). 
We review for plain 
error because of Prescott's contention that his constitutional right to a fair trial was violated. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct[3] are 
reviewed under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, 
which requires an examination of the record and a determination of whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have contributed to the conviction." State 
v. Rogan, 91 Hawai# i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999) 
(cleaned up). We make the determination by considering: (1) the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant. Id."Misconduct of a prosecutor may 
provide grounds for a new trial if there is a reasonable possibility that the misconduct complained of might have contributed to the conviction." Id. (citation omitted). 
1. Nature of Conduct 
Prescott contends that the DPA, in closing argument: 
expressed his personal opinion about 
Browny's credibility; 
personally vouched for 
CW's credibility; and argued that Prescott 
had the bias, interest, and motive to testify falsely because he was the defendant. We conclude the DPA's arguments about Browny's and CW's credibility were not improper, but the DPA's argument about Prescott's credibility violated State v. Basham, 132 Hawai# i 97, 115, 319 P.3d 1105, 1123 (2014). 
"It is well-established under Hawai# i case law that 
prosecutors are bound to refrain from expressing their personal views as to a defendant's guilt or the credibility of witnesses." Basham, 132 Hawai# i at 115, 319 P.3d at 1123 (cleaned up). 
"Prosecutors may, however, cite to specific facts or evidence indicating the lack of trustworthiness of the witness or defendant when discussing a witness or defendant's testimony during summation." State v. Salavea, 147 Hawai# i 564, 582, 465 
3 "The term 'prosecutorial misconduct' is a legal term of art that
refers to any improper action committed by a prosecutor, however harmless or
unintentional." State v. Underwood, 142 Hawai #i 317, 325 n.12, 418 P.3d 658,
666 n.12 (2018) (citation omitted) (underscoring omitted). 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.3d 1011, 1029 (2020) (citing State v. Walsh, 125 Hawai# i 271, 
295, 260 P.3d 350, 374 (2011)) ("[T]he prosecution is free to 
refer to specific inconsistencies and contradictions in a defendant's testimony or with other evidence[.]"). 
"A statement 
about a witness's credibility that is made without reference to the evidence or facts supporting the assertion amounts to an expression of personal opinion." Id. (footnote omitted) (citing 
Basham, 132 Hawai# i at 118, 319 P.3d at 1126) (noting that 
prosecutor's argument that defendant had "no reason to tell you the truth" was improper because it was not based on the evidence or a reasonable inference drawn from the evidence). 
Concerning Browny's credibility, the DPA argued (the 
portions challenged by Prescott's point of error are shown in bold italics): 
Defense witnesses, Browny. Browny came here and said
that, you know what, I was with the defendant from 8:30 in
the morning all the way to night on the 3rd. You know that's false because the defendant already said he went towork with the –- with D.J. Browny is already credibility
shot. He wants you to believe that he was just with him.
He doesn't know, he was just out with him the whole time. 
The only time he wasn't with him is on the 4th when he
came there and he needed all these players, remember that?He was short. This is July 4th, think about this. He has his own league. July 4th when everybody is off, the mostimportant day that they're playing rugby and he can't findpeople to show up. He's got 20 to 30 dancers couple ofhours before and he can't find enough players that he needsthe defendant to play for him. 
These players are in a league. Browny wants you to
believe that he brings the uniforms, all these uniforms togrown people, grown men playing rugby. They can do theirown uniform. They can wash their own uniform. But Brownywants you to believe that he's the den mother taking care ofall this, bringing the uniforms for the dance, bringing theuniforms for the rugby. Think about it, it doesn't make anysense. 
And luckily he had cleats for the defendant too,
right, that day that fit him playing rugby. Hogwash.  He 
wasn't playing rugby. That's what Browny wants you tothink. 
And Browny, what did he say, oh, I only known him like
nine years. But after a while, oh, 15 years. Our parentsare good friends. Known him. I only know D.J. and [CW'sfamily] since May, that's two months before that. Who's his allegiance too? [sic] Who's his bias for? The defendant. Think about this. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Prescott contends that the DPA's argument was similar 
to the argument at issue in Basham. In that case the deputy 
prosecuting attorney argued: "On behalf of the prosecution, I adamantly state to you, that [the State's witnesses] have been completely credible witnesses, that they are worthy of your belief." Basham, 132 Hawai# i at 115, 319 P.3d at 1123. That 
argument, the supreme court noted, was similar to those held improper by State v. Marsh, 68 Haw. 659, 660-61, 728 P.2d 1301, 1302 (1986) (prosecutor improperly expressed personal opinion by stating, "I feel it is very clear and I hope you are convinced, too, that the person who committed this crime was none other than [defendant]," and referring to defense witness's alibi testimony by stating, "I sincerely doubt if [witness] had seen [defendant] there.") and State v. Sanchez, 82 Hawai# i 517, 534, 923 P.2d 934, 
951 (App. 1996) (prosecutor improperly asserted "personal evaluation of the credibility of certain witnesses in final argument" by using personal pronoun "I."). Basham, 132 Hawai# i 
at 115, 319 P.3d at 1123. 
The DPA's argument about Browny was not like the ones 
at issue in Basham, Marsh, or Sanchez. Browny's testimony presented a potential alibi for Prescott — that Prescott was at Ke#e
hi Lagoon playing rugby at the time he allegedly sexually assaulted CW. 
The DPA challenged Browny's credibility by 
establishing the length of time he had been friends with Prescott; that their mothers were friends; and questioning Prescott's ability to fill in on Browny's rugby team without having a uniform or cleats. The DPA did not express a personal opinion about Browny's credibility. Nor was the DPA's use of the colloquial "hogwash" improper under the circumstances. See State 
v. Clark, 83 Hawai# i 289, 304-05, 926 P.2d 194, 209-10 (1996) 
(where prosecutor described defendant's testimony as "a cockamamie story[,]" supreme court stated "the use of [a] slang term, if supported by evidence, is not improper argument."). 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Of CW's credibility, the DPA argued (the portions 
challenged by Prescott's point of error are shown in bold 
italics): 
Who is that witness that the State's asking you to
believe? [CW]. It's [CW].  She came here and testified. 
You be the judges whether she's lying, mistaken, or telling
the truth. That 12-year-old girl, is she smart enough tomake up something like that? Is [CW] believable? The 
answer is yes. 
What did [CW] tell you? [CW] tells you that all she
remembers is on the 4th it was a very important day, she hadto perform. She went to go practice with her dad and hersister. They came home. [CW] tells you that she wentupstairs to get her clothes and because her dad and hersister were taking the only other bathroom she had to godownstairs. 
She left her clothes upstairs. She was wrapped in a
towel and she went downstairs. She said she needed Q-tipsso she went to [Gordon]'s room because usually [he] has theQ-tips. No Q-tips. So she went to [D.J.]'s room thenthat's where the defendant was. She opens the door -- thedefendant opens the door and she goes inside looking for theQ-tip. 
What does she tell you the defendant asked her? Who's 
home. She tells him, oh, my dad and sister are upstairstaking a shower right now. You're not suppose [sic] to bedown here, that's what he says. But she says that's notwhat happened. What he said was, I want you to massagesomething. So he closes the door and she sits on the bed and what does he do? Grabs her head, exposes his penis andforces her head down to his penis trying to make her suckhis penis. She says she's fighting him off, that her neckhurt so badly, but she does. 
Then what does he do? He grabs her and pulls her onto
the bed. And she's scooting back on the bed. And that's how she gets to the middle of the bed. And what does he do as he's trying to kiss her now at this time? Don't tell your brothers. And then he kisses her, straddles her. Gets on top of her. And now he's there with his hand taking hispenis and trying to stick it into her mouth. And she's fighting him off, telling him no, and stop. She tells youthat. She said she trying [sic] to cover her hand but heremoves her hand away. 
Then she tells you, she shows you on the stand how he
pinches her mouth open so he can stick his penis into hermouth. She explains that to you. She shows that to you.Is that girl devious enough to make up something like that?You be the judges of that. If she's trying to make up thisstory. She doesn't have to. She can just say he tried totouch me. She could make up a story, you know, so easilyand so believable why do all that? Why complicate things?Why say my dad didn't hear. Why say, you know, I couldn'tyell because he was covering my mouth. She said she justdidn't yell. She didn't think anybody would hear. Why make 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
her own case more difficult? Because she's credible. 
Everybody knows she's credible. 
So then what happens? He hears a noise. She says she
believes it's the neighbors but he hears a noise and he
takes his penis out of her mouth and gets off. And what does she do? 
She runs to the bathroom. What's the first 
thing this girl -- 12-year-old does is wash her mouth out.Why? Because she doesn't want his penis germs in her mouth,that's what she tells you. And then she takes a shower. And then she goes to perform. Doesn't say nothing to dad.Doesn't say nothing to her sister. Why? Don't tell nobody. 
That's what happened, ladies and gentlemen. Why make
her case difficult? Why? Why make it up? She's not mad at the defendant. Nobody -- defendant says that I don't havemy problems with her. She has no reason to make this up.She has no animosity against the defendant. She's not mad at the brother. Not trying to get back at the brother. She has no reason to make this up. No reason to just bring thisup out of the blue. 
What does she have to gain from this? What does she 
gain from this really? Two-and-a-half years later she'sstill dealing with this. What does she gain from it?Having to confront the brother. Having to talk to theBishop. Having to explain to her parents. What did she lose? Her brother lost a good friend. She broke up thatrelationship, right? That was her intent, a 12-year-old? 
. . . . 
Is [CW] believable? The answer is yes. [CW],
12-years-old. Is she believable? The answer is yes.  Why?
Because she was sexually assaulted by the defendant on July4th, 2017 when the defendant stuck his penis into her mouth,into her [sic] mouth of a 12-year-old. Thank you. 
The DPA's argument concerning CW's credibility was not 
improper. The DPA did not express a personal belief in CW's 
testimony. Rather, the DPA summarized CW's testimony and argued that: a 12-year-old could not make up such a detailed story; CW bore no grudge against Prescott or Daniel; and the consequences to CW — having to tell her story to her cousin, brother, sister, and Daniel (when the group met outside CW's house), having to tell Bishop Lesa, having to tell her parents, having her brother lose a good friend — made it unlikely that CW was not telling the truth. On this record, the argument was not improper. 
About Prescott, the DPA argued (the portions challenged 
by Prescott's point of error are shown in bold italics): 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
When the defendant testifies, ladies and gentlemen,
his credibility is to be tested in the same manner as any
other witness. This is in your instructions. And understand that he doesn't get points because he testified.He does not get points because he testified. Once he goesup there and he says I didn't do this. I didn't do this,this, this, this, this. You can now base your credibilityas any other witness. Those credibility factors work forhim too. Does he have an interest, motive, or bias in this?Absolutely. He's on trial. What is he going to say? He has to say I was with somebody. I was with Finau. I was with Browny. I was with Lepa. I didn't do this. I 
couldn't have done this. He has to say that.   
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has held: 
A suggestion that defendants have no reason to tell
the truth impinges upon fundamental principles of our systemof justice, including the presumption of innocence, theburden of proof upon the government, the right to testifywithout penalty, and the right to a fair trial with anunbiased jury. 
. . . . 
Generic arguments by the prosecutor that defendants,
by virtue of being defendants, have no reason to tell thetruth or have the greatest incentive to lie also transform adefendant's decision to testify at trial into an automaticburden on credibility. 
Although the prosecution is allowed
wide latitude when making closing remarks, a prosecutor'scomments may not infringe on a defendant's constitutionalrights. 
Generic arguments that a defendant is not a
credible witness because of the defendant's status, like
generic accusations of tailoring, [] discourage a defendant
from exercising [their] constitutional right to testify on
[their] own behalf. 4
Basham, 132 Hawai# i at 116-18, 319 P.3d at 1124-26 (cleaned up); 
see also Salavea, 147 Hawai# i at 585, 465 P.3d at 1032 
(reaffirming that "it is improper for prosecutors to make generic 
arguments regarding a defendant's credibility during summation") (cleaned up). Here, the DPA's rhetorical question and answer ("Does he have an interest, motive, or bias in this? Absolutely. 
4 "A generic tailoring argument occurs when a prosecutor states that
the defendant was able to sit through the trial and hear the testimony of
other witnesses, thereby allowing the defendant the opportunity to shape[their] testimony to fit that of other witnesses, even when there is noevidence that defendant has actually done so." Basham, 132 Hawai #i at 116,
319 P.3d at 1124 (cleaned up). "[I]t is improper, under article I, section 14of the Hawai #i Constitution, for the prosecution to make generic accusations
during closing argument that a defendant tailored [their] testimony basedsolely on the defendant's exercise of [their] constitutional right to be
present during the trial." Id.
  (cleaned up). 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
He's on trial.") and assertion that Prescott "has to say" he 
"didn't do this. [He] couldn't have done this" was misconduct because it was "uncoupled from evidence showing the defendant has a particular interest in the outcome separate from the generic interest shared by all defendants in criminal cases." Salavea, 
147 Hawai# i at 585 n.29, 465 P.3d at 1032 n.29. This factor 
weighs in favor of Prescott. 
2. Curative Instruction 
No curative instruction was given because Prescott did 
not object to the State's generic credibility argument.
5 This 
factor also weighs in favor of Prescott. State v. Wakisaka, 102 
Hawai#i 504, 516, 78 P.3d 317, 329 (2003). 
3. Strength of Evidence 
The third factor requires that we "weigh the evidence 
supporting the defendant's conviction." State v. Williams, 149 
Hawai#i 381, 396, 491 P.3d 592, 607 (2021) (citing Underwood, 142 
Hawai#i at 328, 418 P.3d at 669). "When evidence is so 
overwhelming as to outweigh the inflammatory effect of the improper comments, reviewing courts will regard the impropriety as ultimately harmless." Id. (citing Underwood, 142 Hawai# i at 
328, 418 P.3d at 669). However, "when it cannot be said beyond a reasonable doubt that the same result would have been reached absent the improper conduct[,] the defendant's conviction must be 
5 Although Prescott did not object to the DPA's closing argument,
his counsel responded during Prescott's own closing: 
Really, the two arguments that the State keeps coming
back to them [sic] are bias, interest, and motive. And they
also say, you know, [Prescott], his testimony, well, he'sbiased. Well, any innocent person who takes the stand hasan interest and motive in telling a story that backs him up.So I mean saying that he's biased, of course, he's adefendant. Yes, he has an interest in the outcome of this case. There's nothing I can do about that. 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
vacated." Id. (citing Underwood, 142 Hawai# i at 328, 418 P.3d at 
669) (cleaned up). 
In Underwood, the defendant was convicted of unlawful 
imprisonment in the second degree and abuse of a family or 
household member. On appeal, Underwood argued that the deputy prosecuting attorney's closing argument — that defense counsel attempted to induce the complaining witness to fabricate her testimony — was prosecutorial misconduct. The supreme court noted that testimony from other witnesses and physical evidence indicated the circumstances were generally consistent with the complaining witness's account of events. However, the complaining witness was the only person who described the actual acts constituting the offenses. 142 Hawai# i at 328-29, 418 P.3d 
at 669-70. 
Under those circumstances, the supreme court noted: 
When a conviction is largely dependent on a jury's
determination as to the credibility of a complainant's
testimony, we have held that the evidence of the offense isnot so "overwhelming" that it renders the prosecutor'simproper statements harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The potential for prejudice is particularly evident where, ashere, the improper comments specifically concerned thecredibility of the testimony on which the case turned. 
Id. at 329, 418 P.3d at 670 (citations omitted). The supreme 
court vacated Underwood's conviction. 
In Williams, the defendant was convicted of sexual 
assault. On appeal, Williams argued three instances of misconduct by the deputy prosecuting attorney. 149 Hawai# i at 
393, 491 P.3d at 604. 
The complaining witness was the only 
witness "who could describe the actual acts constituting the offenses." Id. at 397, 491 P.3d at 608. 
Under those 
circumstances, the supreme court held that "[t]he evidence against Williams was not so overwhelming that it rendered the prosecutor's misconduct . . . harmless." Id.The supreme court 
vacated Williams' conviction. 
In this case, the State called a number of witnesses — 
CW's sister, D.J., and Fili — to challenge Prescott's defense ("he could not have done it because he wasn't there."). Each of 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
those witnesses had a potential bias in favor of their relative, 
CW. See State v. Tuua, 125 Hawai# i 10, 17, 250 P.3d 273, 280 
(2011) ("Because this was a case involving the credibility of witnesses, each of whom arguably had a potential interest or bias, it weighs against holding that the improper statement was harmless."). 
Moreover, even if Prescott was at CW's house on the 
afternoon of July 4, 2017, his being there is not an element of sexual assault in the first degree. The criminal act is "sexual penetration[.]" HRS § 707-730(1)(b). CW was the only witness who testified about the alleged act constituting Prescott's offense. Under those circumstances, we cannot say that the evidence against Prescott was so "overwhelming" that it rendered the prosecutorial misconduct harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Underwood, 142 Hawai# i at 329, 418 P.3d at 670; Williams, 149 
Hawai#i at 397, 491 P.3d at 608. This factor weighs in favor of 
Prescott. 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, all three Rogan factors weigh 
in favor of Prescott, and the prosecutorial misconduct was not 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Accordingly, we vacate the Judgment entered by the circuit court on August 26, 2020, and remand to the circuit court for a new trial. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 3, 2022. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Presiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge 
17 
Randall K. Hironaka, for Defendant-Appellant. 
Donn Fudo, Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu, for Plaintiff-Appellee. 