NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000749
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KAREN KEIKO HIGUCHI, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(Ewa Division)

(CASE NO. 1DCW-14-0000019)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Karen Keiko Higuchi (Higuchi) with violating
 
an injunction against harassment, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) ยง 604-10.5(i) (Supp. 2014).
1 After a bench trial,
 
1HRS 604-10.5 (Supp. 2014) provides in relevant part:
 
(c) Any person who has been subjected to
harassment may petition the district court of the
district in which the petitioner resides for a
temporary restraining order and an injunction from
further harassment.
 
. . . .
 
(i) A knowing or intentional violation of a
restraining order or injunction issued pursuant to this
section is a misdemeanor.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the District Court of the First Circuit (District Court) found
 
Higuchi guilty as charged. The District Court sentenced Higuchi
 to a $300 fine and a $55 crime victim's fee. The District Court
 entered its Judgment on March 10, 2014.
 
On appeal, Higuchi contends that: (1) the District
 
Court plainly erred in failing to ensure that she voluntarily
 waived her right to a jury trial; and (2) there was insufficient
 evidence to support her conviction.
2 We affirm. 
I.
 
We reject Higuchi's contention that the District Court 
plainly erred in failing to ensure that her waiver of her jury trial right was voluntary. "Where it appears from the record that a defendant has voluntarily waived a constitutional right to a jury trial, the defendant carries the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that his/her waiver was involuntary." State v. Friedman, 93 Hawai
'i 63, 69, 996 P.2d 
268, 274 (2000). We conclude that Higuchi failed to carry her burden in this case. 
A.
 
Higuchi represented that she is a retired elementary
 
school teacher and that she has a masters degree in education. 
With the assistance of counsel from the Office of the Public
 Defender, Higuchi signed a "Waiver of Jury Trial" form. The
 waiver form advised Higuchi of her right to a jury trial and the
 consequences of her waiver of that right. In signing the form,
 Higuchi acknowledged that she had read the waiver form
 completely, that she fully understood the nature of her right to
 a jury trial, and that she was waiving her right to a jury trial. 
The waiver form stated in relevant part:
 
I, the undersigned, have read completely this waiver
form and understand that by signing it, I am now and forever
voluntarily waiving and giving up my right to trial by jury
 
2The Honorable Maura M. Okamoto presided over the hearing on
Higuchi's waiver of jury trial. The Honorable Russel S. Nagata
presided over Higuchi's trial. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
on the present charges.
 
I further understand that I have the right to be tried
by a jury of not less than twelve (12) citizens drawn from
the community and that all of those twelve jurors would have
to unanimously agree that the evidence introduced against me
at trial proved my guilt beyond a reasonable doubt before I
could be convicted of the charges against me. If any one of
those twelve should find the evidence not persuasive beyond
a reasonable doubt, a conviction could not be entered.
Further, I would have the opportunity to help select which
members of the community might serve on the jury and to ask
questions of prospective jurors.
 
By giving up my right to trial by jury I understand
that the evidence at any trial will be considered and all
decisions regarding my guilt or innocence will be made by a
single Judge of the District Court.
 
I am not under the influence of any drugs or alcohol
at this time, and my mind is clear.
 
I fully understand the nature of my right to trial by
jury and that the decision to give up the right is entirely
up to me. If I do not give up the right to trial by jury at
this time, I understand that my case will be sent to the
Circuit Court for a jury trial.
 
I HEREBY WAIVE AND GIVE UP MY RIGHT TO BE TRIED BY A
 
JURY AND AGREE THAT MY CASE MAY BE TRIED BY A SINGLE JUDGE.
 
Dated: Pearl City, Hawai' i, 2/19/14 
(signature of Defendant)
Defendant
 
The waiver form also contained a certification of
 
counsel for Higuchi that counsel had explained the waiver form to
 
Higuchi and that counsel believed Higuchi's waiver was made
 voluntarily and intelligently. Counsel's certification stated:
 
CERTIFICATE OF COUNSEL
 
I certify that I have explained the foregoing "Waiver
of Trial by Jury" form to the Defendant; that I believe
Defendant understands the document in its entirety; that the
statements contained therein are in conformity with my
understanding of Defendant's position; that I believe
Defendant's waiver is made voluntarily and with intelligent
understanding of the nature of the charge(s) and
consequences of said waiver; and that Defendant signed the
foregoing in my presence.
 
(signature of counsel)
Attorney for Defendant
 
B.
 
At the hearing on Higuchi's waiver of her right to a
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
jury trial, Higuchi's counsel informed the District Court that
 
the waiver form had been read verbatim to Higuchi and that
 Higuchi had acknowledged that she understood the content of the
 form. Higuchi's counsel represented:
 
And Deputy Public Defender Ivy Kim appearing on behalf
of Miss Karen Higuchi. She's making her way to counsel's
table. 
And, Your Honor, during the recess, my colleague, Miss
Audrey Stanley, and -- she read this form verbatim to Miss
Higuchi, and I was also present when that happened. She
 acknowledged that she understands what's in the form and
affixed her signature.
 
The District Court then questioned Higuchi who
 
acknowledged on the record that she had signed the waiver form
 
and had decided to waive her right to a jury trial.
 
THE COURT: Okay, so, Miss Higuchi --
THE DEFENDANT:  
Yes. 
THE COURT: 
-- you read the form that you signed in
court today? Yes? 
THE DEFENDANT: 
Yeah. 
THE COURT:  
Can you speak out loud. The reason is --
THE DEFENDANT:  
Yes, Your Honor. 
THE COURT:  
-- we record this. Okay, thank you. 
So you understand that signing this form, you were
giving up your right to have a trial with a jury? You
 
understand that? 
THE DEFENDANT: 
Okay. 
THE COURT: 
Yes? 
THE DEFENDANT: 
It was a hard decision, but I guess
that's the way I want it.
 
THE COURT: 
You -- okay. So then that means now that
 
you now have a right to trial by judge. 
So we are going to
set this matter for trial.
 
The District Court accepted Higuchi's waiver of her right to a
 
jury trial.
 
C.

 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 5(b)(3) 
(2014) provides that a defendant may waive his or her right to a
 
4

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
jury trial in writing or orally in open court. HRPP Rule 5(b)(3)
 
states, in relevant part: "In appropriate cases, the defendant
 shall be tried by jury in the circuit court unless the defendant
 waives in writing or orally in open court the right to trial by
 jury." (Emphasis added.)
 
Here, Higuchi waived her right to a jury trial in
 
writing. She signed the waiver form, which thoroughly advised
 Higuchi of her right to a jury trial and the consequences of
 waiving that right, which she acknowledged reading completely and
 understanding, and which contained the certification of counsel
 for Higuchi that counsel had explained the form to Higuchi and
 believed that Higuchi's waiver was made voluntarily and
 intelligently. 
In addition, the District Court confirmed Higuchi's
 
waiver of her right to a jury trial orally in open court. 
Higuchi's counsel represented on the record that the waiver form
 had been read verbatim to Higuchi and that Higuchi had
 acknowledged understanding the form and had signed it. The
 District Court then verified through its questioning of Higuchi
 that Higuchi had read the waiver form and had decided to give up
 her right to a jury trial. The record reflects that Higuchi had
 thought about whether she should waive her jury trial right
 ("[i]t was a hard decision") and that it was her decision to
 waive her jury trial right in favor of a trial before a judge
 ("that's the way I want it"). 
Considering the totality of the circumstances in this 
case, we conclude that the record shows that Higuchi voluntarily waived her right to a jury trial. See Friedman, 93 Hawai
'i at 
70, 996 P.2d at 275 (reviewing the validity of a defendant's jury trial waiver "under the totality of the circumstances surrounding the case, taking into account the defendant's background, experience, and conduct"). Higuchi does not assert that there was some aspect of the jury trial right or the consequences of waiving it that she did not understand or that she was forced in some way to waive her right to a jury trial. She does not 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
articulate any basis for believing that her waiver was
 
involuntary. Nevertheless, after proceeding with a bench trial
 and being convicted, she seeks to have her conviction vacated
 because she contends that the District Court failed to do enough
 to ensure that her waiver was voluntary. We conclude that
 Higuchi's waiver was valid and that she has failed to satisfy her
 burden of showing that her waiver was involuntary. 
II.
 
Higuchi contends that there was insufficient evidence
 
to show that she violated the injunction against harassment by
 contacting Kenneth Lee (Lee), one of the petitioners who had
 obtained the injunction against her.
3 We conclude that Higuchi's 
claim is without merit.
 
Higuchi and Lee were next-door neighbors. Lee had
 
obtained an injunction against harassment, which prohibited
 Higuchi from "[c]ontacting, threatening or harassing" Lee for
 three years beginning on October 14, 2013. 
The charged incident occurred on December 25, 2013. 
Lee testified that on that date at about 6:25 p.m., he was on the
 balcony of his home and noticed Higuchi on the balcony of her
 home. The two balconies were about thirty feet apart. While Lee
 and Higuchi were on their respective balconies, Higuchi
 complained about Lee's family making too much noise. During
 Higuchi's complaints, she said, "Did you hear that, Mr. Lee?" 
Lee testified that he believed that Higuchi was speaking to him
 because she faced him while saying, "Did you hear that, Mr. Lee?"
 
We conclude that when viewed in the light most
 
favorable to the State, there was sufficient evidence to show
 that Higuchi had contacted Lee in violation of the injunction
 against harassment. We therefore reject Higuchi's claim that
 there was insufficient evidence to support her conviction.
 
3The petitioners protected by the injunction against
harassment were Kenneth Lee and Elaine Lee.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. 
We affirm the District Court's Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 31, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Voltaire A. Gansit 
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge James M. Anderson 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
7

 