NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000704
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
T.W., nka T.A., Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
D.W., Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 06-1-007K)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellant T.W. (Wife) appeals from an Amended
 
Judgment of Divorce (Amended Judgment) filed on August 25, 2011,
 
1
in the Family Court of the Third Circuit  (family court).  In
 
doing so, Wife challenges parts of the family court's Findings of
 
Fact and Conclusions of Law (FOF/COL) entered July 5, 2011.
 
This is the second appeal in this case. 
Wife and 
Defendant-Appellee D.W. (Husband) were married on February 26, 1994 (date of marriage or DOM), and completed their divorce trial on October 19, 2006 (the date of completion of evidentiary part of trial or DOCOEPOT). In the first appeal, after the family court filed its Divorce Decree, Wife appealed and Husband cross-appealed. This court issued a Memorandum Opinion, affirming on a number of grounds and remanding four narrow issues to the family court. Doe v. Roe, No. 28596, 2010 WL 2535138 at *6-8, 10, 123 
Hawai
'i 299, 233 P.3d 719 (App. June 23, 2010) (mem.). Upon 
1
 The Honorable Aley K. Auna, Jr. presided.
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
remand, the family court filed the FOF/COL and the Amended
 
Judgment.2
 
In this appeal, Wife makes a series of challenges
 
related to the credits given in the family court's property
 division, and contends that the family court erred when it
 (1) recalculated Husband's obligations as to a San Francisco,
 
California condominium (condo) in which he has a fifty percent
 
ownership interest; (2) failed to value the couple's grand piano
 and identify a proper equalization amount; (3) improperly awarded
 Husband a category 1 capital contribution credit for an
 employment benefit existing at DOM that did not exist at
 DOCOEPOT; (4) failed to consider the tax consequences of the
 
property division; and (5) failed to specify in the Amended
 
Judgment that interest should accrue from the date of the Amended
 Judgment and not the original Divorce Decree. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as 
well as the relevant legal authorities, we affirm.
(1) San Francisco Condo  Wife argues that the family 
court erred in calculating Husband's obligations related to the San Francisco condo, as well as the impact of improvements on the condo's net market value. We construe this point of error as a mixture of fact and law, which we review under the clearly erroneous standard. Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Employees' Ret. Sys. 
of the State of Hawai
'i, 106 Hawai 'i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 
(2005). 
At the DOM and DOCOEPOT, Husband and his sister
 
(Sister) each owned half of the condo. Since 1983, Husband has
 not paid any money to maintain the property. Sister paid off the
 
2
 This court's Memorandum Opinion did not order an evidentiary hearing
on remand and neither party requested one. After a telephone conference,
Judge Auna signed a stipulated order requiring the parties to file proposed
findings of fact and conclusions of law addressing the four issues remanded by
this court and responses to each other's proposed findings and conclusions.
 
2
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
$35,000 mortgage and spent at least $220,000 maintaining and
 
improving the property, both before and after the DOM between
 Husband and Wife. The family court determined that fairness
 required Husband to pay his Sister half of what she had spent on
 the property, and calculated Husband's interest in the condo
 accordingly. 
On remand, this court directed the family court to
 
revisit its calculations as to the condo, to the extent possible,
 so that: (1) the amounts Sister incurred prior to DOM are
 accounted for in the category 1 value and the amounts Sister
 incurred after DOM are considered in determining the category 2
 value; and (2) the improvements to the property are calculated
 according to the change in value to the property and not the cost
 of the improvement.
3 Doe, 2010 WL 2535138, at *5. Wife
 
disagrees with the family court's recalculations as to both
 issues, even though Husband's obligation to Wife increased by
 $57,181 (from $29,750 to $86,931).
4
 
The family court did not err in recalculating Husband's
 
obligations to Sister because it properly deducted the amounts
 incurred before DOM from the category 1 value, and amounts
 incurred after from the category 2 value. The record indicates
 
3
 The Memorandum Opinion distinguished between "maintenance expenses"
and "improvements," concluding that:
 
For basic maintenance of the property -- i.e. mortgage
payments, property taxes and homeowners association fees -­it is not error to utilize the cost amount because these
 types of payments maintain (rather than increase) the
ownership interest. However, as to improvements -- such as
the interior remodeling in 1998 -- the change in value to
the property, as opposed to costs, is the appropriate
consideration.
 
Doe, 2010 WL 2535138, at *5 n.11.
4
 Wife also attempts to argue that Husband does not owe Sister anything
because the parties stipulated to the DOM and DOCOEPOT values of the property
which the family court could not reduce on the basis of "equity." This issue
 was not before the family court on remand. This court determined that it was
 within the family court's discretion to conclude that Husband owes half of all
of the debt and costs paid for by Sister on equitable principles. Doe, 2010
 
WL 2535138, at *4.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Sister's contributions before DOM consisted of: renovating
 
the bathroom in 1988 (cost of $21,000), remodeling the kitchen in
 1989-90 (cost of $40,000), and paying off the mortgage ($35,000),
 in addition to property taxes and homeowners' association fees. 
Sister's contributions after DOM included: assessments for the
 exterior remodeling of the building in 1995 (cost of $9,000),
 interior remodeling in 1998 (cost of $16,000), and property taxes
 and homeowners' association fees. Because there is substantial
 evidence in the record to support the family court's
 determinations, they are not clearly erroneous.
 
Second, the family court did not err in finding that
 
"the improvements (bathroom renovations, kitchen remodeling, and
 interior remodeling) most likely added value at least equal to
 the associated expenditure." Wife argues that the family court
 ignored this court's mandate in the prior Memorandum Opinion to
 "account for improvements based on their impact to the value of
 the property[ ]" Doe, 2010 WL 2535138, at *5, rather than their
 dollar amounts. The Memorandum Opinion added, however, that
 "[i]f the evidence does not allow the family court to make such a
 determination, the court may rely on its broad discretion to
 determine a just result." Doe, 2010 WL 2535138, at *5. On
 
remand, the family court found that "[t]here is nothing in the
 record with respect to the impact of the improvements . . . on
 the value of the [condo]." Because the parties did not present
 any evidence as to the impact of the improvements, the family
 court acted within its discretion in relying on the costs of the
 improvements, and was not clearly erroneous.
(2) Grand Piano Wife argues that the family court
 
should have given a specific equalization amount in the event one
 party decided to keep the couple's grand piano. The family
 court's failure to give a dollar amount was not erroneous. 
In its Amended Judgment on remand, the family court

 
provided that:
 
The Bosendorfer grand piano shall be offered for sale at the
best possible price, and the net proceeds divided equally,
provided however, either party may purchase the piano from
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the other party for an amount equal to one half of any bona
fide offer received for the purchase of the piano from a
qualified third-party, and in the event that each party
proposes to purchase the piano based on a bona fide offer,
it shall go to the party who offers more.
 
(Quotation marks omitted.)
 
Wife argues that the family court should have issued an
 
equalization amount as there was "ample evidence in the record to
 
enable the court to exercise its discretion" and "both parties
 agree the DOCOEPOT value of the piano is (at a minimum!)
 $70,000." However, the record does not reflect agreement between
 the parties with respect to the value of the piano. Thus, the
 family court properly exercised its discretion when it provided
 the parties with the option of selling the piano and splitting
 the proceeds, or for one party to purchase the piano from the
 other in the amount of one half of a bona fide offer from a
 third-party. In short, the family court has addressed what
 should happen if one party chooses to keep the piano.
(3) Husband's Employment Benefit  Wife argues that the
 
family court erred in failing to adjust Husband's capital
 contribution credit despite the court's ultimate finding that
 Husband's employment benefit no longer existed at the DOCOEPOT. 
In its initial distribution of the marital estate, the
 
family court gave Husband a $116,886 category 1 contribution
 credit for a termination benefit he was entitled to under his
 employment contract with Clinical Labs of Hawaii (CLH) which
 existed at DOM. In the prior Memorandum Opinion, this court
 acknowledged that although the family court correctly determined
 that Husband's benefit was a valid category 1 credit, the court
 should have determined the appropriate DOCOEPOT value, if any, of
 the benefit. Doe, 2010 WL 2535138, at *7. On remand, the family
 
court found that Husband had terminated his employment with CLH
 well before DOCOEPOT. The family court thus concluded that "[a]t
 the time of the divorce no termination benefits were still due to
 [Husband] on account of his previous employment with CLH." 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wife argues that the family court should have made the
 
necessary finding that "the DOCOEPOT value was zero" and that the
 
logical conclusion was that "therefore Husband is not entitled to
 a Category 1 capital contribution credit at DOM greater than its
 value at DOCOEPOT." 
Wife's reliance on Wong v. Wong, 87 Hawai
'i 475, 960 
P.2d 145 (App. 1998) is misplaced. The rule articulated in Wong reads: 
If [a] specific Category 1 property has been separately
owned continuously from the DOM to the DOCOEPOT, and the
[net market value (NMV)] of that property on the DOCOEPOT is
no greater than its NMV on the DOM, then its value
includable in Category 1 is its NMV on the DOCOEPOT. 
Id. at 483, 960 P.2d at 153. Here, Husband did not own the CLH
 
termination benefit "continuously from the DOM to the DOCOEPOT" ­-rather, the family court found that Husband ended his
 
employment with CLH well before DOCOEPOT.
 
The applicable precedent, as expressed by this court in 
Helbush v. Helbush, 108 Hawai
'i 508, 122 P.3d 288 (App. 2005) 
provides: 
A party is entitled to a Category 1 net market value ("NMV")
capital contribution credit for an asset owned at the time
of marriage . . . even if the asset no longer exists.
However, if the asset is still owned, and it has diminished
in value, the capital contribution credit is limited to its
current value.
 
Id. at 517, 122 P.3d at 297 (emphasis added) (block quote format
 
altered). In this case, Husband's CLH termination benefit no
 longer existed at DOCOEPOT. Under prevailing precedent, Husband
 was entitled to the category 1 credit.
(4) Tax Consequences of Property Division  Wife argues
 
that the family court erred in failing to consider the tax
 ramifications of the property division and equitably deviate from
 the partnership model such that "Wife shall not owe a property
 equalization payment to Husband." 
This court previously determined that because Wife was
 
required to pay a $437,000 property equalization payment to
 Husband and the only substantial asset awarded to Wife was a
 $1,151,346 Fidelity stock account, "the sale of marital
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
partnership property [by Wife] is implicitly ordered" and "the 
family court must consider the tax ramifications of the sale." Doe, 2010 WL 2535138, at *8 (quoting Jackson v. Jackson, 84 Hawai
'i 319, 334, 933 P.2d 1353, 1368 (App. 1997)) (quotation 
marks omitted). On remand, the family court concluded: "It would not be just and equitable to adjust the overall divorce property division on account of the possibility that [Wife] might owe capital gains taxes in connection with the liquidation of assets to fund her property division obligations to [Husband]." 
In its FOF, the family court emphasized that the
 
absence of evidence regarding the "actual tax impact" that would
 result from Wife's stock sale (FOF no. 25), noted that there was
 "no basis in the record to determine the gain, if any, associated
 with the securities awarded to [Wife]" (FOF no. 26), determined
 that "[t]he only evidence in the record suggests that, generally,
 any gains would be relatively small[]" (FOF no. 27), and found
 that any taxes would be affected by "existing and future tax
 rates, and all other tax relevant aspects of [Wife's] personal
 financial situation at the time, all of which are at this point
 entirely speculative[]" (FOF no. 28). The family court stressed
 that Wife, as "the proponent for a credit for tax consequences,
 if any, . . . bore the burden of producing evidence of them,
 which she did not do." 
In her proposed findings, Wife asked the family court
 
to take judicial notice of the prevailing state and federal tax
 rates, and asserted that "[t]he evidence presented at trial was
 that the parties' Fidelity stock portfolios contained both short
 and long-term capital gains." Based on this alone, Wife urged
 that the family court "must conclude that Wife has incurred
 considerable capital gain tax consequences from the sale of her
 Fidelity stock account[]" and that therefore "Wife shall not owe
 a property equalization payment to Husband in any amount." 
Because Wife made no attempt to even estimate the taxes
 associated with the stock transaction, she failed to meet her
 burden. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Based on the record, the family court did not err in
 
deciding that Wife's possible tax consequences did not warrant
 
deviation from marital partnership principles or reduction of her
 equalization payment.
(5) Date of Interest Accrual  Wife argues that the
 
family court erred when it issued its Amended Judgment (filed
 August 25, 2011) by leaving intact the provision of the original
 Divorce Decree that Wife owes statutory interest on the judgment
 dating back to the date of the original Divorce Decree (filed
 May 24, 2007). The Amended Judgment reduced Wife's equalization
 payment from $437,300 to $380,119 and provided that "[i]nterest
 on past due amounts shall accrue interest at ten percent (10%)
 per annum." Wife asserts that she has accrued $152,047.60 in
 interest to date and that "[i]nterest should commence to run only
 after all legal issues are resolved and the judgment on which the
 interest is based is a final judgment." 
First, we agree with Husband that Wife implicitly
 
waived this issue by failing to object to Husband's proposed
 findings, which requested language that "[i]n all other respects,
 the provisions of the Divorce Decree as previously entered by the
 Family Court shall remain in force and effect." In her proposed
 findings and conclusions to the family court, Wife did not ask
 for interest to run from the Amended Judgment forward. 
Second, Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) 
Rule 37 provides that: 
Unless otherwise provided by law, if a judgment for money in
a civil case is affirmed, whatever interest is allowed bylaw shall be payable from the date the judgment was enteredin the circuit or district court. If the judgment ismodified or vacated with a direction that a judgment formoney be entered in the circuit or district court, thenotice and judgment on appeal shall contain instructionswith respect to allowance of interest.
 
"When the judgment is affirmed in part, the portion of the
 
judgment that is affirmed accrues interest from the date the
 judgment was originally entered in the court below." Richards v.
 
Kailua Auto Mach. Serv., 10 Haw. App. 613, 625, 880 P.2d 1233,
 1239-40 (1994). "Fairness dictates this result because
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
calculating interest from the date of the second judgment would
 
penalize appellees for the trial judge's error." Id. at 625-26,
 
880 P.2d at 1240 (citation, internal quotation marks and brackets
 omitted). In this case, this court has affirmed the vast
 majority of the 2007 original Divorce Decree and thus interest
 from the date of the 2007 decree, on the amounts set forth in the
 Amended Judgment, are appropriate.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Findings of Fact and
 
Conclusions of Law filed on July 5, 2011 and the Amended Judgment
 of Divorce filed on August 25, 2011, in the Family Court of the
 Third Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 21, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Michael S. Zola 
for Plaintiff-Appellant Presiding Judge 
William C. Darrah Peter Van Name Esser for Defendant-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
9
 