  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
NOS. CAAP-21-0000584 & CAAP-21-0000585 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
NO. CAAP-21-0000584 
IN THE INTEREST OF AQ
(FC-S NO. 19-039K) 
AND 
NO. CAAP-21-0000585 
IN THE INTEREST OF Q CHILDREN
(FC-S NO. 18-016K) 
APPEALS FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, and Wadsworth and Chan, JJ.) 
Appellant Mother (
Mother) appeals from the Family Court 
of the Third Circuit's (family court) October 7, 2021 orders in 
FC-S No. 19-0039K and FC-S No. 18-0016K, both entitled "Findings 
of Fact; Conclusions of Law; Decision and Order Granting [Petitioner-Appellee] Department of Human Services' [(DHS)] 
Motion for Termination of Parental Rights [Filed November 2, 
2020]" (collectively, TPR Orders).
1/ 
Mother contends that the family court erred in 
terminating her parental rights over her children, AQ1, AQ2, and 
1/ The Honorable Mahilani E.K. Hiatt presided over the consolidated
hearing on DHS's respective motions to terminate parental rights, filed in the
two underlying cases, and entered the TPR Orders.  On March 8, 2022, thiscourt entered an order consolidating appellate case numbers CAAP-21-0000584and CAAP-21-0000585 under CAAP-21-0000584.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
AQ3 (collectively, Children),2/ where: (1) the family court 
focused on Mother's inability to comply with the substance abuse 
portion of her service plan, and did not fully consider other factors enumerated in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 587A-7; (2) 
Mother's substance abuse constituted a disability under § 587A-
7.5; and (3) there was insufficient evidence "that Mother was not presently willing and able to provide [the C]hildren . . . with a safe family home." 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Mother's points of error as follows, and affirm. 
I. 
Mother's first and third points of error overlap. She 
contends that in terminating her parental rights, the family court focused on her sobriety issues and failed to fully consider other factors enumerated in HRS § 587A-7.
3/ Relatedly, Mother 
2/ AQ2 and AQ3 are twins (collectively, Twins ). The family court
also terminated the parental rights of AQ1's father and the Twins' father, who
do not appeal from the TPR Orders. 
3/ HRS § 587A-7(a) (2018) provides, in relevant part: 
(a) The following factors shall be fully considered when
determining whether a child's family is willing and able toprovide the child with a safe family home: 
(1) Facts relating to the child's current situation. . . [;] 
(2) The initial and any subsequent reports of harmand threatened harm to the child; 
(3) Dates and reasons for the child's out-of-home placement; description, appropriateness, andlocation of the placement; and who has placementresponsibility; 
(4) Facts regarding the alleged perpetrators of harmto the child, the child's parents, and otherfamily members who are parties to the courtproceedings . . . [;] 
(5) Results of psychiatric, psychological, ordevelopmental evaluations of the child, thealleged perpetrators, and other family memberswho are parties; 
(6) Whether there is a history of abusive or
(continued...) 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
argues there was insufficient evidence to support the family 
court's conclusion that Mother was not presently willing and able to provide the Children with a safe family home. 
HRS § 587A-33(a) (2018) governs the termination of 
parental rights. It provides in relevant part: 
(a) At a termination of parental rights hearing, the court
shall determine whether there exists clear and convincingevidence that: 
(1) A child's parent whose rights are subject totermination is not presently willing and able toprovide the parent's child with a safe familyhome, even with the assistance of a serviceplan; 
(2) It is not reasonably foreseeable that thechild's parent whose rights are subject to 
3/ (...continued) 
assaultive conduct by the child's family membersand others who have access to the family home; 
(7) Whether there is a history of substance abuse bythe child's family or others who have access tothe family home; 
(8) Whether any alleged perpetrator has completedservices in relation to any history identifiedin paragraphs (6) and (7), and acknowledged andaccepted responsibility for the harm to thechild; 
(9) Whether any non-perpetrator who resides in thefamily home has demonstrated an ability toprotect the child from further harm and toensure that any current protective orders areenforced; 
(10) Whether there is a support system available tothe child's family, including adoptive and hanairelatives, friends, and faith-based or othercommunity networks; 
(11) Attempts to locate and involve extended family,friends, and faith-based or other communitynetworks; 
(12) Whether the child's family has demonstrated anunderstanding of and involvement in servicesthat have been recommended by the department orcourt-ordered as necessary to provide a safefamily home for the child; 
(13) Whether the child's family has resolvedidentified safety issues in the family homewithin a reasonable period of time; and 
(14) The department's assessment, which shall includethe demonstrated ability of the child's familyto provide a safe family home for the child, andrecommendations. 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
termination will become willing and able to
provide the child with a safe family home, evenwith the assistance of a service plan, within areasonable period of time, which shall notexceed two years from the child's date of entryinto foster care; 
(3) The proposed permanent plan is in the bestinterests of the child. . . . 
. . . . 
(4) The child consents to the permanent plan if the
child is at least fourteen years old . . . . 
"Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion 
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set aside 
unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion." In re Doe, 95 
Hawai# i 183, 189, 20 P.3d 616, 622 (2001) (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (quoting In re Doe, 84 Hawai# i 41, 46, 928 P.2d 
883, 888 (1996)). 
[T]he family court's determinations . . . with respect to
(1) whether a child's parent is willing and able to providea safe family home for the child and (2) whether it isreasonably foreseeable that a child's parent will becomewilling and able to provide a safe family home within areasonable period of time present mixed questions of law andfact; . . . they are reviewed on appeal under the "clearlyerroneous" standard. Likewise, the family court'sdetermination of what is or is not in a child's best interests is reviewed on appeal for clear error. 
Id. at 190, 20 P.3d at 623 (citations omitted). 
Here, the family court entered extensive findings of 
fact (FOFs) in FC-S No. 19-0039K (AQ1 Case) and FC-S No. 18-0016K 
(Twins Case) related to Mother's willingness and ability to 
provide the Children a safe family home. The FOFs describe, 
among other things, Mother's history of substance abuse; her failure to recognize the problem and its impact on her functioning as a parent; her failure to participate in and complete substance abuse treatment and 12-step program meetings; her history of positive urinalysis tests for marijuana, methamphetamine, and fentanyl; her pattern of missed appointments, missed court dates and discharge from treatment services due to non-compliance; her failure to return phone calls from, and maintain consistent contact with, DHS; the impact of her substance abuse on the Children; the testimony of DHS Social Worker Nancy Radtke (Radtke) that, among other things, Mother is 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
not presently willing and able to provide the Children with a 
safe family home; and the testimony of Radtke and Guardian ad Litem Carol Kitaoka that, among other things, the proposed permanent plan is in the best interest of the Children. Because Mother does not challenge any of the family court's FOFs, they are binding on the parties and this court. See In re Doe, 99 
Hawai# i 522, 538, 57 P.3d 447, 463 (2002) (citing Poe v. Hawaii 
Labor Rels. Bd., 97 Hawai# i 528, 536, 40 P.3d 930, 938 (2002)). 
Based on the entire record in each case, including the 
uncontested FOFs and the testimony presented at trial, we conclude that the family court did not clearly err in determining there was clear and convincing evidence that Mother was not presently willing and able to provide the Children with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan. In making that determination, the family court was required to consider the safe family home factors set forth in HRS § 587A-7(a), including "[w]hether there is a history of substance abuse by the child's family." HRS § 587A-7(a)(7). It appears the family court did so.
4/ The court was not required to recite the 
enumerated factors in its findings; it was "required to only make brief, definite, pertinent findings and conclusions upon the contested matters[.]" In re AS, No. CAAP-21-0000352, 2022 WL 
223286, at *2 (Haw. App. Jan. 26, 2022) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Doe v. Roe, 5 Haw. App. 558, 565, 705 P.2d 535, 542 (1985)). 
In that regard, Mother's history of substance abuse and 
its affect on her parenting were plainly relevant factors in determining whether she was willing and able to provide the Children with a safe family home. Mother cites no authority, and 
4/ The family court's FOFs in each case relate to various HRS § 587A-
7(a) factors, including: the initial and any subsequent reports of harm and
threatened harm to the Children (HRS § 587A-7(a)(2)); the results of Mother'spsychological evaluation (HRS § 587A-7(a)(5)); whether Mother completedservices in relation to her substance abuse history and acceptedresponsibility for harm to the Children (HRS § 587A-7(a)(8)); whether Motherdemonstrated an understanding of and involvement in services that wererecommended by DHS or court-ordered as necessary to provide the Children witha safe family home (HRS § 587A-7(a)(12)); whether Mother resolved identifiedsafety issues in the family home within a reasonable period of time (HRS §587A-7(a)(13)); and DHS's assessment, including Mother's demonstrated abilityto provide the Children with a safe family home, and recommendations (HRS §587A-7(a)(14)). 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
we have found none, suggesting that in making that determination, 
the family court could not consider that "Mother's sobriety is, and has been, the main issue that has prevented reunification with the Child[ren]." 
Further, the record in each case refutes Mother's claim 
that the family court terminated her parental rights based solely on her sobriety issues, without evidence connecting those issues to her ability to provide a safe family home. For example: 
• In the Twins Case, the family court referred to a February 22, 2018 Safe Family Home Report that described "concerns of domestic violence, sex abuse, substance abuse and inappropriate parenting." 
• In the AQ1 Case, the family court referred to a July 18, 2019 Safe Family Home Report describing "ongoing safety concerns of marijuana and methamphetamine use, missed appointments, missed classes, discharge from services, and failure to return calls or contact the Child Welfare Services office." (Emphasis added.) 
• In each case, the family court referred to the July 26, 2018 psychological evaluation stating that it "is critical that [Mother] actively participates in a formal Substance Abuse treatment problem [sic] with aftercare and relapse prevention services to ensure that she will not relapse and continue inappropriate care of her children. (Emphasis added.) 
• In each case, the court found that Mother was hard to reach, often failed to answer calls or texts, kept changing her phone or phone numbers, and had difficulty maintaining consistent contact and communication with the assigned DHS social worker. 
• In the AQ1 case, the family court described the impact of Mother's behavior on AQ1 and concluded that AQ1, who was then sixteen, consented to the permanent plan of permanent custody and adoption when an adoptive home could be identified. 
6   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
• In the Twins case, the family court found that Mother 
was unable to advance to a higher level of unsupervised visits and continued to discuss inappropriate topics with the Twins. In sum, the family court did not clearly err in 
determining there was clear and convincing evidence that Mother was not presently willing and able to provide the Children with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan. 
II. 
In her second point of error, Mother contends that her 
"substance abuse status" constitutes a disability under HRS § 587A-7.5
5/ and that her parental rights could not be terminated 
on that basis. She fails, however, to state "where in the record the alleged error was objected to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought to the attention of the [family] court . . . ." Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 
28(b)(4)(iii). Based on our review of the record in each case, it appears that Mother never argued in the family court that her substance abuse issues constituted a "disability" under HRS § 587A-7.5 (or any other law) or otherwise invoked that section's provisions. Mother's argument is therefore deemed waived. See 
SC v. JC, 151 Hawai# i 153, 165, 509 P.3d 1116, 1128 (App. 2022) 
("As a general rule, if a party does not raise an argument at trial, that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal[.]") (quoting Cnty. of Hawaii v. C & J Coupe Family Ltd., 119 Hawai# i 352, 373, 198 P.3d 615, 636 (2008)). 
5/ HRS § 587A-7.5 (Supp. 2021) provides: 
The court shall not consider the disability of a parent or
caregiver to be the sole factor in the court's determinationmade pursuant to this part. If the court makes a determination that a child's family is unable to provide asafe family home and one or more of the child's parents orcaregivers are disabled, the court shall make specificwritten findings stating the basis for this determination.The party attempting to demonstrate that the disability of aparent or caregiver impairs the parent's or caregiver'sability to parent must prove that the disability is afactor, and demonstrate a clear nexus between the disabilityand the alleged parental deficiency. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. 
For the reasons discussed above, we affirm the Family 
Court of the Third Circuit's October 7, 2021 orders in FC-S No. 
19-0039K and FC-S No. 18-0016K, both entitled "Findings of Fact; Conclusions of Law; Decision and Order Granting Department of Human Services' Motion for Termination of Parental Rights [Filed November 2, 2020]." 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 21, 2022. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Matthew A. Sylva Presiding Judge
(Akamai Law, LLLC)
for Mother-Appellant. 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Abigail S. Dunn Apana and Associate Judge
Julio C. Herrera,Deputy Attorneys General,for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Derrick H.M. ChanAssociate Judge 
8 