NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000399 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
CLIFFORD L. ROSA, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-19-0001438) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
After a jury trial Defendant-Appellant Clifford L. 
Rosa 
was convicted of Robbery in the First Degree (Count 1) and 
Robbery in the Second Degree (Count 2). He was sentenced to 20 years in prison on Count 1 and 10 years in prison on Count 2, to be served concurrently. 
He appeals from the "Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence" entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on May 26, 2020.
1 For the reasons explained below, 
we affirm. 
Rosa contends: (1) the circuit court erred in denying 
his motion to sever Count 1 from Count 2; (2) he was convicted 
because of prosecutorial misconduct; (3) he received ineffective 
assistance from his defense counsel; and (4) the evidence was 
insufficient to convict him. 
1 The Honorable Todd W. Eddins presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1. The circuit court did not abuse its 
discretion by denying Rosa's motion to severCounts 1 and 2. 
Rosa was indicted by the O# ahu grand jury. Count 1 
alleged that on September 26, 2019, in the course of committing 
theft from the Pearl City Starbucks coffee shop while armed with a dangerous instrument or simulated firearm, Rosa threatened NoahSilva
 with intent to compel Silva's acquiescence to the taking of 
or escaping with the property, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-840(1)(b)(ii). At trial Silva testified 
that he was working at the cash register when Rosa approached. 
Rosa said he had a gun in his bag and threatened to kill Silva and everyone else in the store if Silva did not give Rosa the money in the register. Rosa showed Silva what looked like a gun in Rosa's bag. Silva opened the register, filled a bag with money, and handed the bag to Rosa. Rosa also took money from the tip jar in front of the register. 
Count 2 of the indictment alleged that on September 26, 
2019, in the course of committing theft in the parking lot of the Pearl City Foodland, Rosa used force against Geraldine Chang
 with 
the intent to overcome Chang's physical resistance or physical power of resistance, in violation of HRS § 708-841(1)(a). At trial Chang testified she put her groceries in the backseat of her car. Rosa was leaning on his car, which was parked behind Chang's car. Rosa accused Chang of hitting his car. Chang told Rosa she could not have hit his car because it was not there when she arrived, and his car was damaged on the passenger side but she was parked in front of him. As Chang got into her car, Rosa held the driver's door open, grabbed Chang's handbag, and punched Chang. Chang screamed. Two women in the parking lot, StefanieWeaver and Georgina Fernandez, approached Rosa and Chang. Rosa 
gestured towards his waist and said, "I get one gun." 
HRS § 806-22 (2014) allows multiple offenses to be 
joined in one indictment: 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
When there are several charges against any person for the
same act or transaction, or for two or more acts ortransactions connected together, or for two or more acts ortransactions of the same class of crimes or offenses, whichmay be properly joined, instead of having several indict-ments, informations, or complaints, the whole may be joinedin separate counts in one indictment, information, orcomplaint. . . . 
Similarly, Rule 8 of the Hawai# i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (
HRPP) provides, in relevant part: 
(a) Joinder of offenses . Two or more offenses may be
joined in one charge, with each offense stated in a separatecount, when the offenses: 
(1) are of the same or similar character, even if
not part of a single scheme or plan; or 
(2) are based on the same conduct or on a series of 
acts connected together or constituting parts of a singlescheme or plan. 
Rosa's alleged offenses were similar in character and 
were both alleged to have happened in Pearl City on the same day. 
It was not improper to join them in one indictment. Nonetheless, even if multiple charges are properly joined pursuant to HRPP Rule 8(a), they may be severed under HRPP Rule 14. That rule provides, in relevant part: 
If it appears that a defendant . . . is prejudiced by
a joinder of offenses . . . for trial together, the court
may order an election or separate trials of counts[.] 
Joinder of offenses can prejudice a defendant in three ways: 
(1) preventing [them] from presenting conflicting defenses
or evidence with respect to each charge, 
(2) permitting the prosecution to introduce evidence that
would be inadmissible with respect to certain charges if
tried separately, or 
(3) bolstering weak cases through the cumulative effect of
the evidence. 
State v. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai# i 390, 411, 56 P.3d 692, 713 (2002) 
(reformatted) (citations omitted). 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In deciding whether to sever consolidated charges
pursuant to HRPP Rule 14, the trial court must weighthe possible prejudice to the defendant against thepublic interest in judicial economy. The decision to sever is in the sound discretion of the trial court; adefendant is not entitled to a severance as a matter of right. 
Id. (cleaned up). 
In this case, Rosa does not expressly argue that he was 
denied a fair trial for any of the reasons set forth in Cordeiro. 
Instead, he argues that one jury should not have been allowed to hear evidence that he committed two robberies on the same day. During the hearing on Rosa's motion to sever the circuit court ruled: 
So there's a proper joinder under Rule 8, but that
doesn't end the inquiry because, obviously, the court then
looks at Rule 14. As [defense counsel] points out, that thecourt may grant the relief of ordering separate trials oneach of the counts if there is prejudice. Again, it'sdiscretionary with the court. What I look at, theoverriding concern, is whether or not the defendant willreceive a fair trial. And, of course, you know, there --there's some minimal prejudice always associated withmultiple counts that perhaps occur in a -- in a little bitdifferent way. But it's not prejudice, in my view, enoughto compromise Mr. Rosa's right to a -- to a fair trial inthis case. 
I have to balance, I have to weigh the possible
prejudice to Mr. Rosa receiving a fair trial with the publicinterest and judicial economy. And I believe that when I balance that, pursuant to the Timas case of 1996 or theBalanza case from 2000 that the -- the weight and thecalculus weighs in favor of consolidation of the counts inthis case. As I mentioned, the police investigation of thetwo incidents are relatively connected. The decisions and issues regarding, as [the State] points out, with respect tothe car does suggest some -- some nexus as far as the searchfor the firearm. And if we had separate trials, I think[defense counsel] would be arguing, well, why didn't they --you know, the lack of evidence which can support reasonabledoubt. 
I don't see the defense being compromised in -- in --
in presenting and pursuing any defenses that it deemsappropriate in this case. Clearly defense has a SixthAmendment constitutional right to present whatever defenseit wants to present, and it can, and it's not thwarted bythe consolidation of these cases. 
Moreover, any minimal prejudice or any prejudice is --
it's really ameliorated by the safeguards of limitinginstructions as well as the jury instructions, specifically,the multiple count instruction in 4.06 of the Hawaii Pattern 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Criminal Jury Instructions. Plus, I'll be giving a limiting
instruction -- I'll listen to [defense counsel] when we getto that stage of what might be a suitable limitinginstruction to avoid the propensity issue that she -- sheraises. Presumably the jury will follow all theinstructions I give to them, and that's under the June(phonetic) case of 1996. 
So when I look at everything in its totality and I
look at the Balanza case, the minimal prejudice to thedefense is dispelled by the jury instructions that I couldgive. 
It's a palliative. And I look at the balancing, and
it does waiver -- weigh in favor of consolidation. So for all those reasons, the motion is denied. 
Under the circumstances, we cannot say that the circuit court 
abused its discretion by denying Rosa's motion to sever. 
2. There was prosecutorial misconduct, but it
was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
When a defendant alleges prosecutorial misconduct on 
appeal, we must decide: "(1) whether the conduct was improper; 
(2) if the conduct was improper, whether the misconduct was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt; and (3) if the misconduct was not harmless, whether the misconduct was so egregious as to bar reprosecution." State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai# i 20, 26, 108 P.3d 
974, 980 (2005). 
After the incident, Chang was unable to identify Rosa 
in a photographic lineup. 
At trial, after Chang testified about 
what happened in the Foodland parking lot, the State asked her: 
Q Mrs. Chang, I'm -- I'm standing here to your left in
front of the jury, because there is a gentleman that's
seated over to my left --
A Uh-huh. 
Q -- that could possibly be the individual that you
interacted with on that day. 
Do you feel comfortable
pointing him out, if he is that person, or do you not feel
comfortable? 
A I'm not comfortable. 
Q Okay. And why do you not feel comfortable pointing
him out? 
A Because I was afraid of him. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q Okay. So you're afraid of any type of possible
retaliation by this --
The defense immediately objected. The circuit court 
sustained the objection and instructed the jury to "absolutely 
disregard that last question and any inference that could be possibly derived from that question. The objection is sustained. The jury is to disregard." Rosa argues the State knew that Chang was not able to identify Rosa in a photographic lineup, and improperly attempted to ascribe Chang's inability to identify Rosa to a fear of retaliation. 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has "repeatedly held that we 
will not overturn a defendant's conviction if the prosecution's misconduct was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." Maluia, 107 
Hawai# i at 27, 108 P.3d at 981. To determine whether alleged 
prosecutorial misconduct constitutes reversible error, we consider: (1) the nature of the alleged misconduct; (2) the promptness or lack of a curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against defendant. Id.
We conclude that the State's question, which implied 
that Chang's inability to identify Rosa was the result of witness intimidation, was improper. However, the circuit court immediately gave a curative instruction. On cross-examination, Rosa was able to establish that Chang had never been able to identify Rosa: 
Now, do you remember being asked by police to identify the
person that did this to you at Foodland? 
A What -- yes. 
Q And do you remember a detective also speaking to you
about what the person looked like who did this to you at
Foodland? 
A Well, he showed me photos of it. 
Q Okay. So you recall a police officer showing you
photographs about the -- photographs regarding what happened
to you at Foodland, right? 
A No. What he just show -- yeah -- I mean what he
showed was several photos of se -- um, individuals. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q Okay. And he showed you those several photos of
individuals on the same day that this happened at Foodland,
right? 
A I'm not sure if it was the same day or the day
after. 
Q Okay. 
A I'm not sure. Q Did he come to your house or did you --A Yes. Q -- go somewhere else? A No. He came to the house. Q And he showed you about six different photographs? A Yes. Q And then he asked you to try and pick out from the
photographs --
A Yes. Q -- the person who did this to you at Foodland,
right? 
A Yes. Q Yes? And you could not pick out the person who did this to
you at Foodland, right? 
A Yes. I could not. Q You couldn't identify anybody? A Yep, because all the pictures were -- the person was
all clean cut and the mouth was closed, I could not.
Because the person that approached me at Foodland had longhair and was toothless. 
Q Okay. So at Foodland the person -- and you moved
your arms to your shoulders. So that person had long hairat Foodland and didn't have any teeth? 
A Yes. 
Q And the photographs that you were shown, the people
did not have long hair? 
No? A No. No, huh-uh. Q So you told that police officer that you can't
recognize anyone. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A Yes. 
Q And that you couldn't pick out anyone from any of
those photos as the man --
A Yes. Q -- who did this to you? A Yes. 
(Emphasis added.) Before taking a recess the circuit court 
reminded the jury that it was to disregard questions and answers to which an objection was sustained. 
Finally, there was strong evidence of identification. 
One of the women who intervened in the incident — Fernandez — identified Rosa as the person involved in the altercation with Chang. The other woman who intervened — Weaver — recorded the license plate number of the vehicle that Rosa drove away from the scene, and identified a photograph of the vehicle. A police officer located the vehicle. On the dashboard was a prescription bearing Rosa's name. Because strong evidence linked Rosa to the robbery of Chang, we conclude that the State's improper question to Chang was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
3. We decline to review Rosa's claim of 
ineffective assistance of counsel. 
Rosa contends that his trial attorney — a deputy public 
defender — ineffectively represented him by failing to suppress 
evidence of identification, failing to advise him about his constitutional right to testify
2 and trial strategy, and failing 
to move for a new trial. The Hawai# i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP
) provide, in relevant part: 
Rule 28. BRIEFS. 
(a) Format, service, and page limitation.  . . . If a 
brief raises ineffective assistance of counsel as a point of 
2 Rosa does not contend that the circuit court failed to conduct a 
Tachibana colloquy. See Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai #i 226, 236, 900 P.2d
1293, 1303 (1995). 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
error, the appellant shall serve a copy of the brief on the
attorney alleged to have been ineffective. 
There is nothing in the record showing that Rosa's brief was 
served on his trial attorney or upon the Office of the Public Defender. We decline to review Rosa's claim because of his failure to comply with HRAP Rule 28(a), without prejudice to Rosa filing a petition for relief under HRPP Rule 40 that complies with all applicable rules.
3 
4. Substantial evidence supported Rosa's
conviction. 
Rosa makes a conclusory argument that "[i]nsufficient 
evidence was adduced identifying Rosa as the culprit, and 
insufficient evidence was adduced establishing that Rosa used a firearm in the commission of a robbery." 
When reviewing the sufficiency of evidence on appeal, 
we apply the following deferential standard of review: 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be
considered in the strongest light for the prosecutionwhen the appellate court passes on the legalsufficiency of such evidence to support a conviction;the same standard applies whether the case was beforea judge or jury. The test on appeal is not whetherguilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, butwhether there was substantial evidence to support theconclusion of the trier of fact. 
State v. Kalaola, 124 Hawai# i 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010) 
(citations omitted). 
"'Substantial evidence' as to every 
material element of the offense charged is credible evidence 
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Id. 
(citation omitted). "It matters not if a conviction under the 
3 HRPP Rule 40(f) provides, in relevant part: 
Where the petition alleges the ineffective assistance
of counsel as a ground upon which the requested relief
should be granted, the petitioner shall serve written noticeof the hearing upon the counsel whose assistance is allegedto have been ineffective and said counsel shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence as so considered might be deemed to be against the 
weight of the evidence so long as there is substantial evidence tending to support the requisite findings for conviction." State 
v. Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117 (1981) (citations omitted). 
As to Count 1 (Robbery in the First Degree), Silva (the 
Starbucks barista) identified Rosa and testified that Rosa showed him what looked like a real gun and threatened to kill him "and everybody in the store if [Silva] didn't give him the money in the register." Silva testified he put all of the cash and coins in the register into a brown paper bag and handed it to Rosa, and Rosa also took money from the tip jar before leaving the store. A Starbucks surveillance video that corroborated Silva's testimony was also received in evidence. This was substantial evidence to support Rosa's conviction on Count 1. 
As to Count 2 (Robbery in the Second Degree), the 
testimony of Chang, Fernandez, and Weaver described in sections 1. and 2. above, and the evidence from the Honolulu Police Department officers who located Rosa's car in Waianae, found Rosa's prescription medication on the dashboard, and arrested Rosa at Depot Beach Park, was substantial evidence to support Rosa's conviction. 
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment of Conviction 
and Sentence entered by the circuit court on May 26, 2020, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 1, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
10 Sonja P. McCullen, Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu, for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Walter J. Rodby, for Defendant-Appellant. 