NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000883
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
JOHN R. SILVA, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(Case No. 1PC161000733)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Leonard, Presiding Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.)
On July 18, 2018, a jury found Defendant-Appellant
John R. Silva ( Silva) guilty of second degree assault in
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) § 707-711(1)(c).  He
was sentenced by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  to an
open term of imprisonment of five years.  He appealed, contending
that there was insufficient evidence for a conviction.  For the
reasons discussed below, we affirm the Judgment of Conviction and
Sentence entered on October 3, 2018.1
I.
When the defendant in a criminal case challenges the
legal sufficiency of evidence to support a conviction:
evidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution[.] . . . The test on
appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reason-
able doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to
support the conclusion of the trier of fact. . . .
1The Honorable Fa#auuga L. To#oto#o presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"Substantial evidence" as to every material element of the
offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
caution to support a conclusion.
State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai#i 131, 135, 913 P.2d 57, 61 (1996)
(cleaned up and reformatted).  "The jury, as the trier of fact,
is the sole judge of the credibility of witnesses or the weight
of the evidence."  State v. Wagner, 139 Hawai#i 475, 485, 394
P.3d 705, 715 (2017) (citation omitted).
II.
HRS § 707-711 (2014) provides, in relevant part:
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the
second degree if:
. . . .
(c) The person intentionally or knowingly causes
bodily injury to a correctional worker . . . who
is engaged in the performance of duty or who is
within a correctional facility[.]
HRS § 707-700 (2014) contains the following definition:
"Bodily injury" means physical pain, illness, or any
impairment of physical condition.
HRS § 702-206 (2014) defines states of mind:
(1)"Intentionally."
(a)A person acts intentionally with respect to
[their] conduct when it is [their] conscious
object to engage in such conduct.
(b)A person acts intentionally with respect to
attendant circumstances when [they are] aware of
the existence of such circumstances or believes
or hopes that they exist.
(c)A person acts intentionally with respect to a
result of [their] conduct when it is [their]
conscious object to cause such a result.
(2)"Knowingly."
(a)A person acts knowingly with respect to [their]
conduct when [they are] aware that [their]
conduct is of that nature.
(b)A person acts knowingly with respect to
attendant circumstances when [they are] aware
that such circumstances exist.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(c)A person acts knowingly with respect to a result
of [their] conduct when [they are] aware that it
is practically certain that [their] conduct will
cause such a result.
Pat Sooalo testified at Silva's trial.  He worked as an
Adult Correctional Officer (ACO ) at O#ahu Community Correctional
Center ( OCCC).  On December 21, 2015, he was on duty at OCCC and
assigned to Module 17.  Silva was housed in Module 17, cell 111.
ACO Sooalo smelled smoke.  Inmates are not allowed to
smoke in their cells.  ACO Sooalo tracked the scent to Silva's
cell.  A number of inmates were in the cell.  ACO Sooalo told the
inmates who were not assigned to cell 111 to leave.  After they
left, ACO Sooalo entered the cell, which contained Silva and two
other inmates.  Their eyes were open but rolled back.  They were
all breathing.  ACO Sooalo asked them what they were burning.  No
one responded.  Silva was sitting on the toilet.  ACO Sooalo saw
that something in the toilet was burning.  He obtained a pair of
gloves from his shift partner, ACO Dave Valledor, and asked ACO
Valledor to call for backup and to lock down Module 17.
ACO Sooalo then attempted to retrieve the burning
evidence from the toilet.  Silva, who was still seated on the
toilet, started kicking ACO Sooalo in the knees.  Silva stood up
and started punching ACO Sooalo's neck and body.  ACO Sooalo took
Silva down to the ground by sweeping Silva's legs.  Once on the
ground, Silva started kicking ACO Sooalo's knees and thighs.  ACO
Sooalo felt a sharp pain in his calf.  Silva was holding a piece
of wood with a nail in it.  By then, backup had arrived and ACO
Sooalo took the item away from Silva with the help of ACO Anthony
Marcus.  The item was received in evidence as State's Exhibit 3.
ACO Sooalo lifted his uniform pant leg and saw blood. 
The nail had punctured his pants and his calf.  He felt pain in
his calf, knee, and thighs.  He received medical attention in the
OCCC infirmary and from his personal physician.  A photograph of
ACO Sooalo's injured calf was received in evidence as State's
Exhibit 9.  ACO Sooalo was on leave for ten months because of his
knee being injured from Silva's kicks.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
ACO Marcus also testified at Silva's trial.  He
responded to a call for backup in Module 17, and was directed to
cell 111 by ACO Valledor.  When he got to cell 111 he saw ACO
Sooalo using his leg to hold Silva on the ground.  Silva was
kicking and punching.  ACO Marcus put his foot on Silva's chest
to restrain him.  ACO Sooalo was then able to grab a "shank" — a
piece of wood with a nail sticking out — out of Silva's hand. 
ACO Marcus identified State's Exhibit 3 as the item he saw ACO
Sooalo grab from Silva's hand.
There was substantial evidence presented at Silva's
trial to support the jury's conclusion that Silva intentionally
or knowingly caused bodily injury to a correctional worker (ACO
Sooalo) who was in the performance of duty and within a
correctional facility (OCCC).
III.
The Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered by the
circuit court on October 3, 2018, is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 29, 2019.
On the briefs:
Harrison L. Kiehm,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
4Landon M. M. Murata,
Deputy Attorney General,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.