NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000769
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
WILLIAM K. PUULEI, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 12-1-0165)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
  
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant William K. Puulei appeals from the
 
August 7, 2012 Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence
 
1
entered in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit  (circuit
court). Puulei was found guilty of robbery in the second degree
 
pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-841(1)(b) (Supp.
 
2012), terroristic threatening in the second degree pursuant to
 
HRS § 707-717 (1993), attempted extortion in the third degree
 
pursuant to HRS §§ 707-767 (1993) and 707-764(1)(a) (Supp. 2012),
 
and terroristic threatening in the first degree pursuant to HRS
 
§ 707-716(1)(e) (Supp. 2012). The circuit court found that the
 
counts on which guilty verdicts were rendered for terroristic
 
threatening in the second degree and attempted extortion in the
 
third degree merged with the guilty verdict on the count for
 
robbery in the second degree, and therefore as to these counts,
 
1
 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the circuit court only imposed sentence on the robbery in the
 
second degree count. Puulei contends there was insufficient
 
evidence to find him guilty of robbery in the second degree and
 
attempted extortion in third degree.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Puulei's
 
points of error as follows:
 
The standard of review on appeal for sufficiency of the
 
evidence is substantial evidence. The Hawai' i Supreme Court has 
long held that evidence adduced in the trial court must be
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution when
the appellate court passes on the legal sufficiency of such
evidence to support a conviction; the same standard applies
whether the case was before a judge or a jury. The test on
 appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a
reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence
to support the conclusion of the trier of fact. Indeed,
even if it could be said in a bench trial that the
 conviction is against the weight of the evidence, as long as
there is substantial evidence to support the requisite
findings for conviction, the trial court will be affirmed.
 
"Substantial evidence" as to every material
element of the offense charged is credible evidence
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion. And as trier of fact, the trial judge is
free to make all reasonable and rational inferences
 under the facts in evidence, including circumstantial
evidence.
 
State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 248-49, 831 P.2d 924, 931
(1992).
 
State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai' i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 
(2007) (brackets omitted). 
(1) "A person commits the offense of robbery in the
 
second degree if, in the course of committing theft . . . [t]he
 
person threatens the imminent use of force against the person of
 
anyone who is present with intent to compel acquiescence to the
 
taking of or escaping with the property[.]" HRS § 708-841(1)(b). 
"An act shall be deemed 'in the course of committing a 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
theft . . .' if it occurs in an attempt to commit theft . . . in
 
the commission of theft . . . or in the flight after the attempt
 
or commission." HRS § 708-842 (Supp. 2012).
 
There was substantial evidence that when Puulei 
threatened imminent use of force against the vendor, he was 
attempting to commiat theft or in the course of committing theft. 
Puulei had two packages of fruit in his hand, that he had taken 
from the vendor, and his actions indicated he did not intend to 
pay for them. A witness testified that after the vendor told 
Puulei he had to pay, Puulei pulled down the heavy overhead doors 
of the lunch truck and he also told the vendor "[t]his is my 
place right here and I don't think I need to pay for nothing 
here." The vendor repeatedly directed Puulei to put the packages 
back. In response Puulei yelled at vendor repeatedly, "Do you 
want protection?" This was viewed as substantial evidence from 
which the circuit court concluded Puulei was in the course of 
committing theft when he threatened imminent use of force against 
the vendor (by getting close to her and yelling at her, "Do you 
want protection?"). State v. Tran, 105 Hawai' i 148, 95 P.3d 2 
(App. 2002), cert. granted, 99 Hawai' i 212, 53 P.3d 820 (App. 
2002), cert. dismissed, 105 Hawai' i 147, 95 P.3d 2 (App. 2002). 
Tran, supra, supports the State of Hawai' i's position that the 
implicit threat of imminent force was sufficient to support the 
robbery conviction, and that Puulei's demeanor and body language 
can support a finding that Puulei implicitly threatened imminent 
use of force against the vendor. 
(2) A person commits attempted extortion in the third
 
degree if he "[i]ntentionally engages in conduct which, under the
 
circumstances as the person believes them to be, constitutes a
 
substantial step in a course of conduct" (HRS § 705-500(1)(b)
 
(1993)) intended to intentionally "obtain[] or exert[] control
 
over[] the property . . . of another with intent to deprive
 
another of property . . . by threatening by word or conduct
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to . . . [c]ause bodily injury in the future to the person
 
threatened or to any other person[.]" HRS 707-764(1)(a).
 
There was evidence that Puulei committed a substantial
 
step toward exerting control over vendor's property with the
 
intent to deprive her of her property. Puulei said to vendor,
 
"Do you want protection?" before he picked up the packages of
 
fruit off the vendor's table. Puulei continued to yell these
 
words to vendor despite vendor's repeated directions to Puulei to
 
put the packages of fruit back on the table. There was evidence
 
that Puulei, by repeatedly yelling this statement at vendor
 
coupled with his close proximity to her, his much bigger body
 
size, and his refusal to give up possession of the fruit
 
packages, intended to threaten to cause bodily injury to vendor
 
if she did not acquiesce in Puulei taking and keeping the fruit
 
packages without paying for them.
 
Therefore,
 We affirm Puulei's convictions for robbery in the
 
second degree and terroristic threatening in the first degree.
 Both parties agree that the circuit court's judgment does not
 
accurately reflect its finding that the guilty verdicts for
 
terroristic threatening in the second degree and attempted
 
extortion in the third degree (Counts 3 and 4) merged with the
 
guilty verdict on the count for robbery in the second degree
 
(Count 2). The circuit court is directed to file an amended
 
judgment which reflects its merger ruling.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 24, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Phyllis J. Hironaka
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Tracy MurakamiDeputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Kauaifor Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 