FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
SIRIPORN NILSAWIT, Defendant-Appellee, and
HAWAI'I NEWS NOW, Applicant-Appellant
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000372
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 1DCW-14-0001187)
 
FEBRUARY 18, 2016
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Applicant-Appellant Hawaii News Now (HNN) appeals from
 
the (1) "Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law for [HNN's]
 
Application for Extended Coverage and Order" (
FOF/COL and Order),
 
entered on December 12, 2014 and (2) "Order Denying [HNN's]
 Motion for Leave to File Appeal of Findings of Fact and
 Conclusions of Law for [HNN's] Application for Extended
 Coverage," entered on March 5, 2015 in the District Court of the
 First Circuit
1
 (district court).
 
On appeal, HNN contends the district court erred
 
1 The Honorable Faye M. Koyanagi presided, unless otherwise indicated.
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(1) in holding, "the State had met its burden for 
limiting extended coverage under [Rules of the Supreme Court of 
the State of Hawai 'i (RSCH)] Rule 5.1"; 
(2) "because the Findings of Fact contained in the
 
Coverage Order are insufficient to serve as a basis for limiting
 extended coverage under [RSCH] Rule 5.1"; and
 
(3) "when it based the denial in the Appeal Order on
 
HNN's decision not to file for administrative review[.]"
I. BACKGROUND
 
On April 29, 2014, HNN submitted an application for
 
extended coverage2
 to the district court for the criminal case
State v. Nilsawit, No. 1DCW-14-0001187 (Application for Extended
 
Coverage). On that same day, the district court3
 granted HNN's
request on the ground that no objection to extended coverage was
 
made. Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) submitted its 
objection to HNN's Application for Extended Coverage on May 16,
 2014. On October 20, 2014, HNN submitted "[HNN's] Renewed
 Application for Extended Coverage" (Renewed Application). HNN
 
requested that the district court
 
deny any objection from any party in the Criminal Proceeding
and confirm the Order Granting Coverage affirming that HNN
has the right to full and complete coverage of the Criminal
Proceeding, including the filming, televising, and
photographing of Officer Paul Goo and Siriporn Nilsawit. In
 the alternative, if the District Court is inclined to
reconsider the Order Granting Coverage, the District Court
must hold an evidentiary proceeding and, if denying coverage
after the same, must issue a complete findings of fact and
conclusions of law.
 
The State submitted its objection to HNN's Renewed Application on
 
October 31, 2014.
 
A hearing on HNN's Renewed Application took place on
 
November 14, 2014. The district court entered its FOF/COL and
 Order on December 12, 2014, that provided, in relevant part:
 
5. The Court finds that Officers Goo, Lazaro, and
Plevel are involved in other ongoing undercover
 
2 "Extended coverage" is defined as "any recording or broadcasting of
proceedings through the use of television, radio, photographic, or recording
equipment by the media or on behalf of educational institutions." RSCH Rule
 5.1(c)(2).
 
3
 The Honorable Russel S. Nagata presided over the Application for
Extended Coverage.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
investigations and consequently a presumption of good cause
exists in the instant matter.
 
6. The Court further finds by a preponderance of the
evidence that good cause exists to prohibit the extended
coverage requested by HNN.
 
. . . .
 
8. The Court finds and concludes that HNN is
 
prohibited from televising or publishing the faces or
likenesses of Officers Goo, Lazaro, and Plevel.
 
9. The Court further finds and concludes that HNN may
televise or publish the proceedings if the faces of Officers
Goo, Lazaro, and Plevel are blurred or otherwise made
indistinguishable. 
10. Finally, the Court finds and concludes that HNN
may publish the names of witnesses in the instant matter
including the names of Officers Goo, Lazaro, and Plevel.
 
HNN filed a motion for leave to appeal the district
 
court's FOF/COL and Order on January 21, 2015. The district
 
court denied HNN's motion, stating:
 
1)	 Rule 5.1(f)(8) of the [RSCH] finds and concludes [sic] that
HNN exceeded the five (5) day period to file a motion for
review of an order regarding coverage in violation of Rule
5.1(f)(8). On December 12, 2014 the Court filed its
[FOF/COL and Order]. HNN's Motion was filed January 21,
2015 which is beyond the five (5) day period.
 
The district court entered its Notice of Entry of
 
Judgment And/Or Order on April 1, 2015. HNN filed its notice of
 
appeal to this court on April 28, 2015.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
Appellate Jurisdiction
 
This court is "under an obligation to ensure that we 
have jurisdiction to hear and determine each case and to dismiss an appeal on our own motion where we conclude we lack jurisdiction." Brooks v. Dana Nance & Co., 113 Hawai
'i 406, 412, 
153 P.3d 1091, 1097 (2007) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted) (quoting BDM, Inc. v. Sageco, Inc., 57 Haw. 73, 73, 549 P.2d 1147, 1148 (1976)). "When we perceive a jurisdictional defect in an appeal, we must, sua sponte, dismiss that appeal." Brooks, 113 Hawai
'i at 412, 153 P.3d at 1097 (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (quoting Bacon v. Karlin, 68 Haw. 648, 650, 727 P.2d 1127, 1129 (1986)). 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
HNN's appeal challenges the district court's FOF/COL
 
and Order on HNN's request for extended coverage. RSCH Rule
 
5.1(e)(1) permits the media4
 to request extended coverage of a
court proceeding. RSCH Rule 5.1(f)(8) and (9)5
 permit review of
a court's order regarding extended coverage. RSCH Rule 5.1(f)(8)
 provides one avenue for review of a court's order regarding a
 request for extended coverage. This procedure is available to
 "[t]he media or educational institution or any party" within five
 days of the filing of the order, and is subject to review by the
 administrative judge of the court. RSCH Rule 5.1(f)(8).
 
RSCH Rule 5.1(f)(9) provides an alternate avenue, in
 
which 
a party may challenge the court's order as if it were an
 
interlocutory order. "Party," under Rule 5.1(c)(7), is defined as
 "a named litigant of record who has appeared in the case." 
Because HNN falls within the definition of "media" but not
 "party," RSCH Rule 5.1(f)(9) does not provide a mechanism for a
 news organization to appeal a district court's order regarding
 its extended coverage request.
 
4 Under RSCH Rule 5.1(c)(10), "media" is defined as "any news gathering
or reporting agencies and the individual persons involved, and includes
newspapers, radio, television, radio and television networks, news services,
magazines, trade papers, in-house publications, professional journals, or
other news reporting or news gathering agencies whose function it is to inform
the public or some segment thereof."
 
5 RSCH Rule 5.1(f)(8) and (9) state:
 
(8) The media or educational institution or any party
may obtain review of an order regarding extended coverage by
filing a motion for review addressed to the appropriate
administrative judge, who shall have full power to vacate
and modify the order. A motion for review shall be filed no
 later than 5 days after the filing of the order regarding
coverage. In disposing of the motion for review the
administrative judge shall comply with subdivision (f)(2) of
this Rule. The record of the proceeding before the
administrative judge shall be made part of the record of the
underlying proceeding for which coverage is sought. Where a
 request for extended coverage is initially referred to an
administrative judge and ruled upon, there shall be no
further review.
 
(9) A party may seek appellate review of an order
regarding extending coverage, including any such order
issued by the administrative judge, pursuant to the
procedures available for review of other interlocutory
orders, but immediate appellate review of such an order
shall not be available as a matter of right.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HNN was required to comply with the procedures under
 
RSCH Rule 5.1(f)(8) in order to appeal a court's order on
 
extended coverage. The district court entered its FOF/COL for
 HNN's Application for Extended Coverage and Order on December 12,
 2014. HNN filed its motion for leave to file appeal of the
 district court's FOF/COL on January 21, 2015. HNN failed to file
 its motion within the five day period to the administrative judge
 of the district court as required under RSCH Rule 5.1(f)(8).
 
HNN failed to comply with the administrative review
 
process provided by RSCH 5.1(f)(8) for orders regarding requests
 for extended coverage. This court therefore does not have
 jurisdiction over this appeal.
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Therefore, this appeal is dismissed.
 
On the briefs:
 
David R. Major
(Bays Lung Rose & Holma)
for Applicant-Appellant.
 
Brian R. Vincent
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
5
 