NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000829
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
SABINE TARIO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(Honolulu Division)
(CASE NO. 1DCW-12-0001302)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
After a jury-waived bench trial, Defendant-Appellant
 
Sabine Tario (Tario) was convicted of third-degree assault. 
Tario appeals from the Judgment entered by the District Court of
 the First Circuit (District Court)
1
 on April 19, 2013.  On
 
appeal, Tario argues that her conviction must be vacated because
 the advisements she received from the District Court were
 deficient. In particular, Tario contends that the District
 Court's advisements were deficient because although the District
 Court advised her that she had a right to testify, it failed to
 advise her that she had a right not to testify. We conclude that
 Tario's appeal is without merit, and we affirm the District
 Court's Judgment.
 
1The Honorable T. David Woo, Jr. presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Tario exercised her right to testify in this case. In 
State v. Lewis , 94 Hawai 'i 292, 12 P.3d 1233 (2000), the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court held that "the colloquy requirement to advise a
 
defendant that he or she has a right not to testify," which it
 imposed in Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai
'i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 
(1995), "is required only in cases in which the defendant does
 not testify." Lewis, 94 Hawai
'i at 295, 12 P.3d at 1236 
(internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). The
 Supreme Court explained the distinction between the situation
 where a defendant does not testify and where the defendant does
 testify.
 
We see no reason to adopt a collateral Tachibana
colloquy for instances where a defendant chooses to testify.
It has been suggested that while the procedural safeguard of
a waiver proceeding is required where a defendant does not
testify, a similar proceeding is unnecessary if a defendant
chooses to testify because of the likelihood that (1) the
defendant has received "one or more such advisements from
 law enforcement officials during the course of a criminal
investigation," (2) defense counsel would not "allow a
defendant to take the stand without a full explanation of
the right to remain silent and the possible consequences of
waiving that right," and (3) any defendant who testifies
would expect to be cross-examined. 
We concur that when a defendant takes the stand to
 
present his or her own defense, the probability is great
that the defendant and his or her counsel will have
 discussed the advantages and risks of testifying, the nature
of the defense(s) to be presented during the defendant's
testimony, and the subjects upon which the defendant will
likely be challenged on cross-examination. Such a
 discussion must necessarily bring home to a defendant that,
by taking the stand, he or she will have waived his or her
right not to testify. In light of this greater probability,
there is "less need for intervention by the trial court and
an on-the-record advisement concerning these matters before
the defendant testifies." 
In view of the foregoing, we hold that Tachibana  does
not require that the court engage in the colloquy if the
defendant chooses to testify in his or her own behalf.
 
Id. at 296, 12 P.3d at 1237 (brackets, citations, and footnotes
 
omitted).
 
Based on Lewis, we conclude that Tario's claim that her
 
conviction must be vacated because the District Court did not 
advise her of her right not to testify is without merit. Tario
 provides no basis for believing that her lawyer failed to
 
2
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
properly advise her of that right. She also fails to provide a 
persuasive reason for this court to conclude that her decision to testify was anything other than voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently made. See id. at 296, 12 P.3d at 1237; State v. 
Monteil, 134 Hawai
'i 361, 373, 341 P.3d 567, 579 (2014). 
Accordingly, we affirm the District Court's Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 26, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Megan Kau
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3
 