NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000663 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
 
 
ROBERT J. DAHLAGER, 
as Personal Representative of the 
ESTATE OF ROBERT G. DAHLAGER, Deceased, and MARY DAHLAGER, 
Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees, v. 
JACK'S DIVING LOCKER, Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant, and 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; 
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; ROE "NON-PROFIT" CORPORATIONS 1-10; 
and ROE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, 
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellees. 
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3CC14-1-00262K) 
  
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.
 
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees Robert G. 
Dahlager (Robert)1 and Mary Dahlager (Mary) (collectively 
Dahlagers) appeal from the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit's 
(1) August 16, 2017 Final Judgment and (2) June 2, 2017 
 
1  Robert passed away on August 9, 2017.  H is son Robert J. Dahlager 
(Rob) was appointed as personal representative for Robert' s estate, and in 
that capacity was substituted into this case for Robert.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
2 
 "Findings of Fact [(FOF)] and Conclusions of Law [(COL)] and 
Order After Jury-Waived Trial."2 
Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant Jack's Diving 
Locker (Jack's) appeals from the circuit court's 
(1) February 17, 2017 "Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion to Compel Production of Documents Filed December 27, 2016[,]" 
(2) March 1, 2017 "Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion to Compel 
Discovery and for Discovery Sanctions Filed January 13, 2017[,]" 
(3) March 23, 2017 "Order Granting Fees and Costs Related to 
Plaintiffs' Motion to Compel Production of Documents Filed 
December 27, 2016[,]" and (4) March 23, 2017 "Order Granting 
Fees and Costs Related to Plaintiffs' Motion to Compel Discovery 
and for Discovery Sanctions Filed January 13, 2017[.]" 
We affirm. 
I. BACKGROUND 
 
A. Factual Background 
According to the Dahlagers, Robert went to Jack's on 
July 25, 2012, with his son Rob and grandson (Grandson), who 
were visiting from Colorado.  Rob and Grandson were going on an 
open-water dive tour with an instructor from Jack's, however 
Grandson needed to complete a pool certification prior to the tour.  While Robert and Rob waited for Grandson to complete his 
 
2  The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
3 
 certification, Robert sat on a plastic chair on Jack's pool deck 
and Rob sat beside him. 
After sitting on the chair for about an hour, Robert 
turned to speak to Rob and Robert's chair collapsed backwards.3  
FOF 5, 7.  Robert fell on his back and hit his head, and 
immediately shouted that his back hurt.  FOF 8.  Robert was 
unable to straighten his back or "get up off the ground[.]"  
FOF 9, 10. 
An ambulance transported Robert to Kona Community 
Hospital.  FOF 11.  X-rays of his spine taken that same day 
showed old injuries "but no new injury."  FOF 13. 
Two months later, Robert had an MRI and was diagnosed 
with a "T10 Chance Fracture."  FOF 17.  Robert believed his fall 
at Jack's caused this fracture.  FOF 18. 
After his fall at Jack's, Robert suffered other 
injuries.  On October 31, 2013, Robert was on his lanai when he tripped, fell, and broke his right shoulder.  FOF 21.  At trial, 
Robert testified he did "not have range of motion, [could not] 
raise his arm above his eyes, and [could] barely get his arm 
above his arm pits."  FOF 22.  He also testified that on one 
occasion when "he was using an inversion table for physical 
 
 3  The parties do not expressly challenge any findings of fact in their 
points of error. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
4 
   therapy related to the fall at Jack's," he sustained a neck 
injury.  FOF 23. 
Before his fall at Jack's, Robert operated a bed and 
breakfast, but said he was forced to sell it and move to Arizona 
because the business suffered losses due to his injuries.  FOF 24. 
B. Procedural Background 
 1. Dahlagers' Complaint 
On July 22, 2014, three days before the statute of 
limitations would have expired, the Dahlagers filed their 
complaint, claiming the chair collapsed on Jack's pool deck as a 
result of Jack's "negligent and careless disregard of duty[.]"   
The Dahlagers asserted that Jack's failed to "properly inspect 
and maintain the chairs provided to guests; . . . properly warn users" of the chairs' "defective and/or dangerous condition; and 
. . . exercise ordinary care for the safety of users of [its] 
premises open to the public."  The Dahlagers further asserted 
that Robert suffered "serious and permanent injuries" as a 
result of the chair collapse and subsequent fall at Jack's. 
The Dahlagers, however, did not serve the complaint on 
Jack's until January 9, 2015, almost six months later. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
5 
 2.  Interrogatories, Production of Documents, and Expert 
Reports 
 
On October 8, 2015, Jack's responded to the Dahlagers' 
first request for production of documents, identifying the PADI4 
incident report form (PADI Incident Report) and Earl Watanabe's 
investigative report (Watanabe Report).5  Jack's, however, stated 
that it was withholding production of these reports because they were "both prepared in anticipation of litigation and to obtain 
insurance defense." 
A week later, Jack's responded to the Dahlagers' first 
request for answers to interrogatories.  In its response, Jack's explained that of the ten chairs it purchased from Walmart, it 
returned nine of the chairs after the incident but "held" the 
chair Robert sat on for more than two years before disposing of 
it as it received no notice of a suit: 
On June 8, 2012, Defendant purchased from Walmart 10 of the 
same type of chairs that Plaintiff was seated in at the 
time of the claimed fall.  After the incident with 
Plaintiff, the particular chair that Plaintiff was seated in was placed in storage and held for more than 2 years, in 
anticipation of possible litigation, and when Defendant 
received no notice of claim, more than 2 years after the 
incident, the chair was disposed of.  The other 9 chairs 
were returned to Walmart on July 26, 2012 as a precaution. 
 
 
 4  PADI is the Professional Association of Diving Instructors.  PADI 
provides scuba certifications to individuals and dive centers.  Jack's "PADI 
Dive Center/Resort Certificate" states "[t]he insurance afforded by this policy is a master policy issued to PADI Worldwide Corporation." 
 
5  PADI's insurer, Lexington Insurance Company retained York Insurance 
Services Group as its third- party adjustor.  York Insurance Services Group in 
turn retained ICS Merrill, EMSI Investigative Services Division, to 
investigate Robert's claims.  ICS Merrill assigned Watanabe as the 
investigator. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
6 
 On February 22, 2016, the circuit court continued the 
bench trial from July 19, 2016, to March 8, 2017.  The circuit 
court further ordered the Dahlagers to provide their written 
expert reports by November 10, 2016, but the Dahlagers did not 
provide any expert reports.  3. Motions to Compel and Sanctions   
On December 27, 2016, over a year after Jack's 
disclosed the existence and withholding of the Watanabe and PADI 
reports, the Dahlagers moved to compel production of these 
reports. 
Attached to its memorandum opposing the production of 
these reports, Jack's provided a declaration from Teresa Leicher 
(Leicher), co-owner and managing partner of Jack's, dated 
January 2017.  Leicher explained that Jack's purchased ten chairs from Walmart on June 8, 2012.  Leicher further explained 
that an August 28, 2012 letter notified Jack's that Ian Mattoch 
was representing the Dahlagers, but "when more than two years 
passed, and Jack's [] was not served with a Complaint from 
Mr. Dahlager, we disposed of the chair that Mr. Dahlager was 
seated in at the time of his fall." 
The circuit court granted the motion, finding the 
Watanabe Report and the PADI Incident Report were "not within the attorney-client privilege under Sapp v. Wong as well as -- 
as the case being cited in the rules of discovery."  (Formatting NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
7 
 altered.)  62 Haw. 34, 609 P.2d 137 (1980).  Jack's complied, 
providing both reports. 
The PADI Incident Report was a four-page report 
detailing the incident.  It was completed on the day of the 
incident by Andrew Woerner (Woerner), Jack's operations manager at the time, and was faxed to PADI, where a claim file was 
opened.  Jack's submitted the PADI Incident Report "with the 
expectation that the contents would be kept confidential" and 
the first page of the PADI incident Report states "[t]his report 
is prepared in anticipation of litigation[.]"  (Formatting 
altered.)  "PADI [I]nsureds" such as Jack's "are requested to 
prepare an incident report whenever an event occurs which may 
result in litigation." 
As for the Watanabe Report, Watanabe was assigned in 
September 2012 to investigate Robert's claims against Jack's.   The Watanabe Report was dated October 9, 2012, and stated 
"[t]his confidential report is submitted in anticipation of 
future litigation.  It is and should always be considered 
attorney/client work product[.]"  (Formatting altered.)  The 
Watanabe Report included details about the investigation, and 
provided full summaries of interviews with witnesses, examination of the pool deck, and inspection of similar chairs 
sold by Walmart.  In the portion of the Watanabe Report 
detailing Woerner's interview, the report notes "[t]he chair NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
8 
  
(continued . . .) 
 
 
 [from the incident] was returned to [Walmart] with the others 
purchased at the same time as it was felt they may have been too 
small.  None of the chairs had been retained." 
In the meantime, before Jack's produced the reports, 
the Dahlagers filed another motion to compel, and requested sanctions.  The Dahlagers sought information on the Watanabe 
Report and the PADI Incident Report, and the chairs, including 
the chair that collapsed.  The Dahlagers asked the circuit court 
to "issue an order compelling Defendant Jack's to produce the 
subject chair, other 9 exemplar chairs, and related 
investigative reports[.]" 
The Dahlagers also asked the court to "issue 
appropriate sanctions pursuant to [Hawai‘ i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule] 37(b),"
6 assuming Jack's had indeed 
 
6  HRCP 37(b)(2) provides in relevant part: 
 
If a party or an officer, director, or managing agent of a 
party or a person designated under Rule 30(b)(6) or 31(a) 
to testify on behalf of a party fails to obey an order to 
provide or permit discovery, including an order made under 
subdivision (a) of this rule or Rule 35, or if a party 
fails to obey an order entered under Rule 26(f), the court 
in which the action is pending may make such orders in 
regard to the failure as are just, and among others the 
following: 
 
(A) An order that the matters regarding which the 
order was made or any other designated facts shall be 
taken to be established for the purposes of the action in accordance with the claim of the party 
obtaining the order; NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
9 
 "destroyed this highly relevant evidence."  The Dahlagers argued 
for a default judgment against Jack's as a punitive sanction 
because Jack's willfully destroyed the subject chair and 
intentionally returned the others like it. 
Jack's opposed the Dahlagers' motion, and included 
another declaration by Leicher, also dated January 2017.  In this declaration, Leicher stated Ian Mattoch "notified our 
insurer that he no longer represented the Dahlagers on or about 
January 14, 2013." 
The Dahlagers replied, and included copies of the 
Watanabe and PADI reports Jack's produced along with two 
receipts from Walmart - one dated June 8, 2012 showing a 
purchase in the amount of $89.80 pretax for ten chairs along 
with other items, and one dated July 26, 2012 showing credit issued in the amount of $93.54 for "General MDSE Total[.]"  
(Formatting altered.) 
 
(. . . continued) 
 
(B) An order refusing to allow the disobedient party 
to support or oppose designated claims or defenses, 
or prohibiting him or her from introducing designated 
matters in 
evidence; 
 
(C) An order striking out pleadings or parts thereof, 
or staying further proceedings until the order is 
obeyed, or dismissing the action or proceeding or any 
part thereof, or rendering a judgment by default 
against the disobedient party . . . .  
(Formatting altered.) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
10 
 At the hearing on the Dahlagers' motion to compel 
discovery and for sanctions, the circuit court noted there was 
an inconsistency regarding Jack's failure to preserve the chair.   
Jack's position had been that "the chairs were destroyed two 
years after the incident[,]" but the circuit court noted that "based on the [c]ourt's ruling to compel discovery it appears 
they may have been [re]turned . . . to [Walmart] the second day 
after the incident[.]" 
The court also noted Jack's was under a duty to 
preserve the evidence and analyzed whether sanctions were 
appropriate.  In determining sanctions were indeed appropriate, 
the circuit court stated that Jack's "will be precluded from 
opposing or claiming that nothing was wrong with the chair, 
because the [Dahlagers] have not had an opportunity to inspect the chair" and it "will allow reasonable attorney's fees and 
costs."  For the two motions to compel, the circuit court 
awarded the Dahlagers a total of $20,037.55 in fees and costs. 
 4. Motion to Exclude Expert Testimony on Causation 
In a motion in limine, Jack's moved to limit testimony 
from treating physicians because the Dahlagers "chose not to 
submit any expert report regarding what injuries they believe were caused by the fall at Jack's Diving Locker on July 25, 
2012."  Jack's also explained that it requested copies of 
medical records related to the treatment of injuries Robert NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
11 
   claims were sustained at Jack's, but the Dahlagers instead 
"identified particular medical establishments[.]" 
Jack's argued that given the nondisclosure of expert 
reports, treating physicians should be precluded from testifying 
as to causation.  The circuit court granted Jack's motion, ruling that "[a]ny experts called by [the Dahlagers], and there 
are no expert reports, will be excluded from testifying as to 
causation." 
5. Bench Trial 
The circuit court held a bench trial over the course 
of three days with six witnesses testifying - Robert, Rob, Grandson, Mary, Leicher, and Woerner. 
The circuit court entered its "Findings of Fact and 
Conclusions of Law and Order after Jury-Waived Trial[,]" concluding that "Jack's did not breach its duty of care to 
Plaintiff [Robert] Dahlager" and the Dahlagers "failed to prove 
by a preponderance of the evidence that any injury alleged was 
legally or proximately caused by a defective chair on July 25, 
2012."  COL 3 and 12.  The circuit court then entered its final 
judgment in favor of Jack's and against the Dahlagers "as to all 
claims in Plaintiffs' Complaint with prejudice[.]" 
Both parties timely appealed. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
12 
 II. DISCUSSION 
On appeal, the Dahlagers challenge the circuit court's 
decisions regarding breach of duty and causation, sufficiency of 
discovery sanctions, and exclusion of causation testimony by 
treating experts.  In its cross-appeal, Jack's challenges the circuit court's order to produce documents, finding of 
spoliation, and award of attorney's fees and costs.  We affirm. 
A. Negligence - Breach and Causation Elements 
In their first point of error, the Dahlagers contend 
that the circuit court "erred in ruling that [Jack's] did not 
breach its duty of care to [Robert], and [Robert] failed to 
prove by a preponderance of the evidence that any alleged [sic] 
was legally or proximately caused by a defective chair."   
Specifically, the Dahlagers challenge COL 3 and 12.
7 
The elements of a negligence cause of action are: 
1. A duty, or obligation, recognized by the law, requiring 
the defendant to conform to a certain standard of 
conduct, for the protection of others against unreasonable risks; 
 2. A failure on the defendant's part to conform to the 
standard required:  a breach of duty[;] 
3. A reasonably close causal connection between the conduct 
and the resulting injury[;] and 
 
 7  These COL state as follows: 
 
COL 3  "Defendant Jack's did not breach its duty of care to 
Plaintiff [Robert] Dahlager." 
 
COL 12 "This Court concludes that Plaintiffs failed to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that any injury alleged was 
legally or proximately caused by a defective chair on 
July 25, 2012." NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
13 
 4. Actual loss or damage resulting to the interests of 
another[.] 
 
Knodle v. Waikiki Gateway Hotel, Inc., 69 Haw. 376, 384-85, 742 
P.2d 377, 383 (1987) (cleaned up). 
"Whether there was a breach of duty or not, i.e., 
whether there was a failure on the defendant's part to exercise 
reasonable care, is a question for the trier of fact."  Doe 
Parents No. 1 v. State of Hawai‘ i, Dep't of Educ., 100 Hawai‘ i  34, 
57-58, 58 P.3d 545, 568-69 (2002) (emphasis omitted).  "[A]bsent uncontroverted evidence from which only one inference can 
reasonably be drawn, the questions of breach of duty and legal 
causation constitute questions of fact, reviewable on appeal 
only for clear error."  100 Hawai‘ i at 58, 58 P.3d at 569.   
1. Breach of Duty Element 
Challenging COL 3, the Dahlagers argue that Jack's 
"negligently breached its duty of care by ignoring the 
manufacturer's restrictions of use, and by failing to warn its 
customers of the cheap, flimsy chair's limitations."  "The additional fact that [it] 
removed the warnings for its patrons 
and guests only compounded [its] breach of duty to warn." 
At trial, the Dahlagers introduced evidence that a 
chair substantially similar to the chair Robert used warned against use on uneven, wet, or slippery surfaces; listed a NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
14 
 maximum weight capacity of 250 pounds; and was intended for 
residential use only. 
However, the circuit court's findings support COL 3.  
The circuit court found Robert weighed approximately 220-230 
pounds at the time of the incident, which was below the chair's 250-pound weight limit.  FOF 33.  The circuit court also found 
that the Dahlagers did not offer evidence to establish that the 
commercial use of the chair created an unsafe condition.  
FOF 39.  Moreover, there was conflicting evidence whether the 
area Robert was sitting in was wet at the time of the incident, 
and the Dahlagers offered no evidence that pooling of water 
"caused the chair to buckle and collapse."  FOF 52, 61.  
Finally, the circuit court found that Robert was sitting in the 
chair for about an hour before the fall.  FOF 5. 
The Dahlagers did not challenge these findings in 
their points of error and, thus, these findings are binding on this court.  See Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 
Hawai‘i 450, 459, 40 P.3d 73, 82 (2002) (noting unchallenged 
findings of fact are binding on the appellate courts).  Based on these unchallenged findings, the Dahlagers failed to establish 
that Jack's use of the chair posed an unreasonable risk of harm 
as related to the manufacturer's warnings.   
The Dahlagers also argue that, "[a]s part of their 
[sic] mode of operations and marketing strategy, [Jack's] NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
15 
 invited relatives and friends of customers taking scuba lessons 
to sit in plastic chairs on the wet pool deck and observe the 
lessons." 
The Hawai‘ i Supreme Court adopted the mode of operation 
rule in Gump: 
where a plaintiff is able to demonstrate that the business 
proprietor adopted a marketing method or mode of operation 
in which a dangerous condition is reasonably foreseeable 
and the proprietor fails to take reasonable action to discover and remove the dangerous condition, the injured 
party may recover without showing actual notice or 
constructive knowledge of the specific instrumentality of 
the accident. 
 
Gump v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 93 Hawai‘ i 417, 420, 5 P.3d 407, 
410 (2000).   
We note that the supreme court limited the mode of 
operation rule to circumstances such as that case.  See Gump, 93 
Hawai‘i at 421, 5 P.3d at 411 (explaining that "the rule is 
limited to circumstances such as those of this case.  Wal-Mart 
chooses, as a marketing strategy, to lease store space to 
McDonald's in order to attract more customers and encourage them 
to remain in the store longer.  Wal-Mart also chooses, for the 
most part, not to prevent patrons from carrying their McDonald's 
food into the Wal-Mart shopping area.  This mode of operation gave rise to the hazard that caused Gump's injury").  This 
situation is unlike that in Gump.   
We further note that the dangerous condition the 
Dahlagers asserted at trial was the defective condition of the NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
16 
 chair, that is, the narrow gap between the chair's back legs and 
its material that could become brittle if exposed to the sun.   
But, the Dahlagers presented no evidence that the claimed 
dangerousness of the chair was reasonably foreseeable and that 
Jack's failed to take reasonable action to discover the dangerousness and remove the chair.  See generally, Fredrickson 
v. Bertolino's Tacoma, Inc., 127 P.3d 5, 9-10 (Wash. Ct. 
App. 2005) (declining to extend Washington's mode of operation 
exception to a collapsed chair incident where plaintiff did not 
establish, "that the danger of breaking chairs was continuous or 
foreseeably inherent in the nature of" defendant's business).   
In sum, the circuit court's conclusion that Jack's did 
not breach its duty of care to Robert was not erroneous. 
2. Causation Element 
Challenging COL 12, the Dahlagers argue that the 
circuit court erred in ruling that they "failed to prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that any alleged [sic] was legally 
or proximately caused by a defective chair." 
However, COL 12 was supported by the circuit court's 
unchallenged findings.  The circuit court found that the 
Dahlagers "did not introduce evidence of a causal link between the alleged defective condition of the Subject Chair and 
Mr. Dahlager's fall" and that x-rays taken the day of the NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
17 
 incident showed Robert's old back injuries "but no new 
injuries."  FOF 27(a), 47. 
The Dahlagers further contend the doctrine of res ipsa 
loquitur is applicable to the instant case. 
"Res ipsa loquitur permits an inference of negligence 
when the thing that produced a person's injury is under the control and management of the defendant, and the injury could 
not have occurred in the ordinary course of events but for the 
defendant's failure to exercise due care."  Winfrey v. GGP Ala 
Moana LLC, 130 Hawai‘ i 262, 272, 308 P.3d 891, 901 (2013) 
(citation omitted).  However, the doctrine is not applicable "[w]here an accident could have occurred in the normal course 
without negligence, or where two equally plausible inferences 
can be drawn as to whether the accident was caused by 
negligence[.]"  Id. at 272-73, 308 P.3d at 901-02 (citation 
omitted).   
Here, the Dahlagers failed to meet their burden of 
showing that Robert's fall could not have occurred but for 
Jack's failure to exercise due care.  See id. at 273, 308 P.3d 
at 902.  In its findings, the circuit court recounted Robert's extensive medical history that included falls and difficulties 
with balance, and that Robert was sitting in the chair for 
approximately an hour before the incident.  FOF 5, 26-27.  In NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
18 
 light of these unchallenged findings, the Dahlagers did not 
prove the elements of res ipsa loquitur.         
In sum, the circuit court did not clearly err in 
determining that the Dahlagers failed to prove that Jack's 
breached its duty of care and that breach was the cause of Robert's injuries. 
B.  Discovery Rulings 
  Both the Dahlagers' second point of error and Jack's 
cross-appeal stem from the circuit court's orders granting the 
Dahlagers' request for discovery sanctions against Jack's for 
failing to preserve the chair and withholding the Watanabe and 
PADI reports. 
 1. The Dahlagers' Arguments 
  a. Default Judgment 
Specifically, the Dahlagers challenge the circuit 
court's refusal to enter a "default judgment on liability" for spoliation of the subject chair and the late disclosure of the 
Watanabe and PADI reports. 
"[T]he circuit court has wide-ranging authority to 
impose sanctions for the spoliation of evidence."  Stender v. 
Vincent, 92 Hawai‘ i 355, 362, 992 P.2d 50, 57 (2000).  HRCP 
Rule 37(b)(2) "allows the court to 'make such orders . . . as are just,' including the dismissal of claims, in response to 
discovery violations."  Id. (citation omitted).  "In addition to NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
19 
 this rule, the circuit court also 'has the inherent power . . .  
to fashion a remedy to cure prejudice suffered by one party as a 
result of another party's loss or destruction of evidence.'"  
Id. (cleaned up).   
Still, dismissals and default judgments under HRCP 
Rule 37 are drastic sanctions only authorized in extreme circumstances.  See W.H. Shipman, Ltd. v. Hawaiian Holiday 
Macadamia Nut Co., 8 Haw. App. 354, 361, 802 P.2d 1203, 1207 
(1990).  Extreme sanctions, including default judgment, should 
be supported by "evidence of willful or contemptuous or 
otherwise opprobrious behavior[.]"  See Weinberg v. Dickson-
Weinberg, 123 Hawai‘ i 68, 76-77, 229 P.3d 1133, 1141-42 (2010).     
Based on the record in this case, the circuit court 
did not abuse its discretion in its sanction order, including 
its refusal to enter default against Jack's.  The circuit court 
found Jack's breached its duty to preserve the chair and 
sanctioned it for spoliation by precluding it from "contending that the chair involved in the accident was not defective or 
damaged prior to, and at the time [Robert] sat in it." 
Moreover, although conflicting evidence pertaining to 
the handling of the chair arose from the Watanabe Report and 
Jack's took the position that the Watanabe Report was work 
product, Jack's disclosed the existence of the Watanabe Report 
and PADI Incident Report over a year before the Dahlagers filed NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
20 
 a motion to compel production of the reports.  And we note the 
Dahlagers' motion to compel production of the reports was filed 
less than three months before trial.  Further, Jack's turned 
over the reports after the matter was litigated and the circuit 
court ruled in the Dahlagers' favor.  Finally, the Dahlagers did not point to any evidence in the record of "willful or 
contemptuous or otherwise opprobrious behavior" by Jack's.  See 
Weinberg, 123 Hawai‘ i at 77, 229 P.3d at 1142.   
Thus, the circuit court's sanction against Jack's was 
within the court's wide-ranging authority to impose sanctions.   
b. Adverse Inference 
The circuit court also did not abuse its discretion in 
refusing to enter an adverse inference of negligence against Jack's for discovery violations.  HRCP Rule 37(b)(2)(B) allows 
the court to sanction a party who fails to obey an order to 
provide or permit discovery by issuing "[a]n order refusing to 
allow the disobedient party to support or oppose designated claims or defenses, or prohibiting him or her from introducing 
designated matters in evidence[.]"   
Here, the circuit court sanctioned Jack's for 
spoliation of the subject chair by precluding it from opposing 
the Dahlagers' claim that the subject chair was damaged or 
defective at the time of the incident.  This sanction was NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
21 
 warranted because the circuit court found Jack's breached its 
duty to preserve the subject chair. 
Given the overall record in this case, we cannot say 
that the court abused its discretion by refusing to enter an 
adverse inference of negligence against Jack's. 
  c. Findings of No Expert Testimony 
 
The Dahlagers argue that the circuit court's "emphasis 
on the presentation of expert testimony to prove negligence was 
itself error" and point to FOF 34, 37, 39, 42, and 57.8  The 
Dahlagers rely on the Hawai‘ i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 702. 
HRE Rule 702 provides:  
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge 
will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or 
to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or 
 
 8  These FOF state as follows: 
 
FOF 34  "Plaintiffs did not offer expert testimony to establish 
that the Subject Chair was unsafe for Mr. Dahlager 
because of the 250- lb weight limit." 
 FOF 37  "Plaintiffs did not offer expert testimony to establish 
that the Subject Chair was unsafe for Mr. Dahlager 
because of the narrowness of the gap between the chair's 
legs." 
 FOF 39  "Plaintiffs did not offer expert or lay testimony, or any 
other evidence to establish that Jack's commercial use of 
the Subject Chair created an unsafe condition or caused 
Mr. Dahlager's fall." 
 FOF 42  "Plaintiffs did not offer expert testimony at trial to 
establish that the Subject Chair was or could have been 
unsafe at the time of Mr. Dahlager's fall as a result of 
having been left out in the sun and heat." 
 FOF 57  "Plaintiffs did not offer expert testimony regarding the 
safety issues involved with the Subject Chair under 
circumstances where the pool deck at Jack's could be 
wet." NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
22 
 education may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or 
otherwise.  In determining the issue of assistance to the 
trier of fact, the court may consider the trustworthiness 
and validity of the scientific technique or mode of 
analysis employed by the proffered expert. 
 
HRE Rule 702.  "[T]he touchstones of admissibility for expert 
testimony under HRE Rule 702 are relevance and reliability."  
State v. Vliet, 95 Hawai‘ i 94, 106, 19 P.3d 42, 54 (2001).  
"[W]here the issues are within the common knowledge of the [fact 
finder], expert testimony is unnecessary."  Brown v. Clark 
Equip. Co., 62 Haw. 530, 537, 618 P.2d 267, 272 (1980).  But, 
"[e]xpert testimony may be needed in actions involving injury 
from a dangerous condition on a commercial property, such as 
that involving a deck, porch, patio or similar structure."  194 
Am. Jur. Proof of Facts 3d § 275 (2022). 
Expert testimony may have been helpful in assisting 
the court to determine if the chair was not safe for Robert.  Expert testimony on the chair's weight limit (FOF 34), 
narrowness of the gap between the legs of the chair (FOF 37), 
effects of the weather on the chair (FOF 42), and use of the 
chair under the conditions of the pool deck (FOF 57) could have 
assisted the circuit court in determining the chair's safety and 
understanding the chair's design.  Similarly, expert testimony on the commercial use of the chair (FOF 39) could have assisted 
the circuit court in determining whether the chair was unsafe 
and caused Robert's injuries. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
23 
 Making findings on the lack of expert testimony was 
within the court's discretion and does not warrant a new trial.     
2. Jack's Cross-appeal 
 
As mentioned, the circuit court granted the Dahlagers' 
motions to compel, ordered Jack's to produce the Watanabe and 
PADI reports, sanctioned Jack's for destroying the chair, and 
ordered Jack's to pay $20,037.55 in related attorney's fees and 
costs.  In its cross-appeal, Jack's asserts that the circuit 
court abused its discretion, contending the court failed to 
address HRCP Rule 26(b)(4) and the related work product 
doctrine.9 
The appellate courts give deference to the trial 
court's decision to grant discovery.  See Anastasi v. Fid. Nat'l 
Title Ins. Co., 137 Hawai‘ i 104, 111, 366 P.3d 160, 167 (2016). 
a. PADI Incident Report Before the circuit court, Jack's asserted that the 
"only purpose in preparing the PADI Incident Report that has 
been withheld as privileged was to facilitate the rendition of 
legal services if Mr. Dahlager filed suit.  It was prepared with 
the expectation that its contents would be kept confidential, 
 
9  In Jack's memorandum in opposition to, and the January 24, 2017 
hearing on, the Dahlagers' motion to compel, Jack's appears to assert that 
the PADI and Watanabe reports were both protected under the attorney- client 
privilege and as work product.  Jack's, however, analyzed the PADI Incident 
Report as protected under attorney- client privilege, and the Watanabe Report 
as work product, in its memorandum in opposition.  I n determining whether 
Jack's met its burden and whether the circuit court abused its discretion, we 
address the issues as Jack's presented in its analysis to the circuit court.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
24 
   and provided to counsel."  Jack's argued that the PADI Incident 
Report fell within the attorney-client privilege. 
To support its position, Jack's provided a declaration 
from Leicher, which stated that the PADI Report was prepared by 
Woerner on the same day as the incident and faxed to PADI, who would provide it to an attorney should there be a lawsuit:     
At my direction, I had Andy Woern er, an instructor for 
Jack's Diving Locker, complete a PADI Incident Report on 
July 25, 2012.  The 4 page report was then faxed to PADI to 
be provided to our attorney in the event that a lawsuit was 
filed.  The report was specifically prepared for counsel, 
and is labelled "Incident Report Form This Report Is Prepared In Anticipation Of Litigation".  When Jack's 
Diving Locker submitted the PADI Incident Report, it was 
with the expectation that the contents would be kept 
confidential, and provided to counsel assigned to defend 
us.  As a certified PADI facility, Jack's Diving Locker is insured through a policy obtained through PADI, which is 
providing the defense to Jack's Diving Locker in this case. 
 
Jack's also provided a declaration from Michael D. 
Treacy (Treacy), which stated that PADI requests its insureds to 
complete an incident report whenever an event may result in 
litigation, and the report would be forwarded to counsel when a 
suit is filed: 
A claims file was opened for this matter upon submission of 
a PADI Incident Report from Jack's Diving Locker.  PADI 
insureds are requested to prepare an incident report 
whenever an event occurs which may result in litigation.  
The PADI incident report is forwarded to defense counsel, once suit is filed. 
 
The circuit court ordered that the PADI Incident Report be 
produced. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
25 
 The rule on attorney-client privilege provides in 
part: 
A client has a privilege to refuse to disclose and to 
prevent any other person from disclosing confidential 
communications made for the purpose of facilitating the 
rendition of professional legal services to the client  
(1) between the client or the client's representative and 
the lawyer or the lawyer's representative, or  
 
(2) between the lawyer and the lawyer's representative, or  
(3) by the client or the client's representative or the 
lawyer or a representative of the lawyer to a lawyer or 
a representative of a lawyer representing another party 
in a pending action and concerning a matter of common interest, or 
 (4) between representatives of the client or between the 
client and a representative of the client, or  
 (5) among lawyers and their representatives representing 
the same client. 
 
HRE Rule 503(b) (formatting altered).   
This "privilege is bottomed on assumptions that 
lawyers can act effectively only if they are fully advised of 
the facts by the parties they represent and disclosure will be 
promoted if the client knows that what he tells his lawyer 
cannot be extorted from the lawyer."  DiCenzo v. Izawa, 68 Haw. 
528, 535, 723 P.2d 171, 175 (1986) (cleaned up).  But since this 
privilege may suppress relevant evidence and forestall truth 
seeking, it "must be strictly limited to the purpose for which 
it exists."  Id. (citation omitted). 
The  Supreme Court has explained that it has Hawai‘i
"serious doubts about the advisability of making statements taken by an insurance investigator or adjuster immune from NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
26 
 discovery as a matter of policy."  DiCenzo, 68 Haw. at 537, 723 
P.2d at 177 (cleaned up).  "For the internal documents of 
insurance companies obtained in the normal course of business 
relating to the claims of their insureds would then be shielded 
from discovery, and we would be creating a new privilege (insured-insurer) or extending a statutory privilege beyond its 
intended reach."  68 Haw. at 537-38, 723 P.2d at 177 (cleaned 
up).  
Here, Jack's bore the burden of showing the PADI 
Incident Report was protected by attorney-client privilege.  See 
Sapp v. Wong, 62 Haw. 34, 38, 609 P.2d 137, 140 (1980) 
(explaining that "[p]roper practice requires preliminary 
judicial inquiry into the existence and validity of the 
privilege and the burden of establishing the privilege rests on 
the claimant").  
The Leicher declaration made blanket statements that 
the PADI report was, and Jack's expected it to be, confidential.  
But Leicher did not provide specific facts showing the report 
was covered by attorney-client privilege.  And although Leicher 
and Treacy indicated the report would make its way to an 
attorney should a suit be filed, Jack's sent the report to PADI and there was no evidence that PADI acted as Jack's lawyer or 
the lawyer's representative.  HRE Rule 503(a)(4) ("A NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
27 
 'representative of the lawyer' is one directed by the lawyer to 
assist in the rendition of professional legal services"). 
To the extent Leicher's declaration implies that PADI 
is Jack's representative because PADI is providing a defense for 
Jack's, a similar situation occurred in DiCenzo.  68 Haw. at 
534, 723 P.2d at 174; HRE Rule 503(a)(2) ("A 'representative of 
the client' is one having authority to obtain professional legal 
services, or to act on advice rendered pursuant thereto, on 
behalf of the client").   
In DiCenzo, "[t]he trial court ruled . . . that the 
statements made by Defendant Helen M. Izawa to her insurance 
company are privileged under" HRE Rule 503.  DiCenzo, 68 Haw. at 
534, 723 P.2d at 174 (internal quotation marks omitted).  
explained, "[w]ere we to uphold the privilege under these 
circumstances, any report or statement made by an insured person 
to an investigator or adjustor employed or retained by the insurer would be within the attorney-client privilege as a 
matter of law."  68 Haw. at 536-37, 723 P.2d at 176.  The 
supreme court declined to adopt the holdings of other courts 
"that the insured may properly assume the communication was made 
to the insurer as an agent for the dominant purpose of 
transmitting it to an attorney for the protection of the 
interest of the insured" since the insurer selects the attorney Overturning the trial court's ruling, the  Supreme Court Hawai‘iNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
28 
 and conducts the defense.  DiCenzo, 68 Haw. at 537, 723 P.2d at 
176 (cleaned up). 
Based on the evidence it presented to the circuit 
court, Jack's did not meet its burden of showing that the PADI 
Incident Report fell within the attorney-client privilege.  Thus, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in granting 
the Dahlagers' motion to compel production of the PADI Incident 
Report.     
b. Watanabe Report Before the circuit court, Jack's asserted that "the 
purpose of the investigative report being requested was to assist in litigation" and that the report "was requested only 
after the Dahlager's [sic] themselves had an attorney contact 
Jack's . . . ."  Jack's argued that the Dahlagers had "not 
established a substantial need for the investigative report" and 
"[t]he fact that [Jack's] no longer has the subject chair also 
should not be a basis for requiring production of the 
investigative report." 
In support of its position, Jack's attached the Treacy 
declaration, which stated the sequence of events leading to the 
creation of the Watanabe Report:  
On September 11, 2012, Ada De La Cruz of York Insurance 
Services Group, engaged the services of ICS Merrill, EMSI Investigative Services Division to conduct an investigation 
on [Robert's] claims.  Prior to the request being made, attorney Ian Mattoch had submitted a letter of 
representation, dated August 28, 2012.  Investigator Earl 
Watanabe of ICS Merrill prepared a confidential NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
29 
 investigative report, dated October 9, 2012, concerning 
[Robert's] claim.  The investigative report of Earl 
Watanabe is labeled, "This Confidential Report Is Submitted 
In Anticipation Of Future Litigation.  It Is And Should 
Always Be Considered Attorney/Client Work Product." 
 
The circuit court granted the Dahlagers' motion to compel and 
ordered Jack's to produce the Watanabe Report. 
Jack's bore the burden of showing that the Watanabe 
Report was work product.  See Roy v. Gov't Emps. Ins. Co., 152 
Hawai‘i 225, 239, 524 P.3d 1249, 1263 (App. 2023) (explaining 
that "the burden of establishing work product protection lies 
with the proponent, and it must be specifically raised and 
demonstrated rather than asserted in a blanket fashion") 
(citation omitted). 
HRCP Rule 26 governs work product, and provides in 
relevant part as follows: 
A party may obtain discovery of documents, electronically 
stored information, and tangible things otherwise discoverable under subdivision (b)(1) of this R ule and 
prepared in anticipation of litigation or for trial by or for another party or by or for that other party's 
representative (including the other party' s attorney, 
consultant, surety, indemnitor, insurer, or agent) only 
upon a showing that the party seeking discovery has 
substantial need of the materials in the preparation of the 
party's case and that the party is unable without undue 
hardship to obtain the substantial equivalent of the 
materials by other means.  In ordering discovery of such 
materials when the required showing has been made, the 
court shall protect against disclosure of the mental 
impressions, conclusions, opinions, or legal theories of an 
attorney or other representative of a party concerning the 
litigation. 
 
HRCP Rule 26(b)(4) (emphases added). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
30 
 "[T]he relevant inquiry for determining whether a 
document can be protected by work product doctrine is whether 
the document was prepared in anticipation of litigation or 
trial."  Anastasi, 137 Hawai‘ i at 113-14, 366 P.3d at 169-70.  
And "[m]ost courts have recognized that an insurance carrier's 
investigation of a claim is generally performed in the ordinary 
course of business and not protected by work product doctrine."  
Id. at 114, 366 P.3d at 170.   
Hawai‘i courts have adopted the "because of" test in 
situations where a document serves more than one purpose or "was 
not prepared exclusively for litigation."  Id. at 113, 366 P.3d 
at 169; see also Moe v. Sys. Transp., Inc., 270 F.R.D. 613, 625 
(D. Mont. 2010) (noting the "because of" standard often applies to insurance claims investigations).  "In applying the 'because 
of' standard, courts must consider the totality of the 
circumstances and determine whether the 'document was created 
because of anticipated litigation, and would not have been 
created in substantially similar form but for the prospect of 
litigation.'"  Anastasi, 137 Hawai‘ i at 113, 366 P.3d at 169.   
The Treacy declaration set forth the sequence of 
events - Mattoch sent a letter of representation on August 28, 
2012, the insurer engaged the services of an investigator on 
September 11, 2012, and Watanabe prepared a report dated October 9, 2012.  The Treacy declaration also restated that the NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
31 
 report itself was labeled, "This Confidential Report Is 
Submitted In Anticipation Of Future Litigation.  It Is And 
Should Always Be Considered Attorney/Client Work Product." 
Other than providing the order of events and restating 
the report's self-labeling, the Treacy declaration does not provide any insight as to the purpose of the Watanabe Report, 
whether it was created "because of" litigation, or that it would 
not have been created in the ordinary course of business.  See 
Anastasi, 137 Hawai‘ i at 114, 366 P.3d at 170 ("Nowhere in the 
rule is there reference to when a document is prepared.  Instead, the rule clearly focuses on the purpose of the prepared 
material and not on when it is prepared").   
Moreover, the Treacy declaration makes no statement as 
to whether the Watanabe Report contains "the mental impressions, 
conclusions, opinions, or legal theories of an attorney or other 
representative of a party concerning the litigation."  See HRCP 
Rule 26(b)(4) (providing that "the court shall protect against 
disclosure of the mental impressions, conclusions, opinions, or 
legal theories of an attorney or other representative of a party 
concerning litigation").   
Based on the evidence it presented to the circuit 
court, Jack's failed to meet its burden of showing that the 
Watanabe Report was not subject to production under the rules of NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
32 
 discovery.  Thus, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion 
in ordering production of the Watanabe Report. 
c. Spoliation of the Chair Jack's also argues that the court based its spoliation 
finding on the contents of the Watanabe Report, which was not 
authenticated and contained inadmissible hearsay. 
Here, in moving for sanctions, the Dahlagers offered, 
among other things, the Watanabe Report to show the chairs were 
returned to Walmart.
10 
During the hearing on the Dahlagers' request for 
sanctions, the circuit court stated that the "subject chair was 
returned to [Walmart] and only discovered through the Court's -- 
well as the Court ordered the Motion to Compel."  The circuit 
court continued, "there's no dispute that the subject chair is not available at this time" and the Dahlagers "will be suffering 
prejudice as a result of [Jack's] destroying or withholding the 
discovery evidence, the chair."  The circuit court then ruled 
that "inequity would occur in allowing [Jack's] in this case 
[to] accrue benefit from its conduct in destroying the chair." 
The circuit court subsequently ordered that Jack's 
"will be precluded from opposing or claiming that nothing was 
 
10  The Dahlagers proffer that the circuit court had "the [Walmart] 
receipts produced in discovery showing that all 10 of the chairs purchased on 
June 8, 2012 had been returned on July 26, 2012[.]"  But, the return receipt shows only "General Mdse" was returned with no specific description of item 
or quantity. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
33 
 wrong with the chair, because Plaintiffs have not had an 
opportunity to inspect the chair."  The circuit court awarded 
the Dahlagers attorney's fees and costs related to the two 
motions to compel.     
Ultimately, there was no dispute Jack's destroyed the 
chair, which was key evidence in this case.  And Jack's was on notice that litigation arising from Robert's fall from the chair 
was a possibility. 
Based on the particular circumstances in this case, we 
cannot conclude that error, if any, in relying on the Watanabe 
Report injuriously affected Jack's substantial rights.  Hawaii 
Revised Statutes § 641-2 (2016) (providing in part that "[n]o 
judgment, order or decree shall be reversed, amended, or 
modified for any error or defect, unless the court is of the opinion that it has injuriously affected the substantial rights 
of the appellant").        C. Precluding Causation Testimony by Treatment Providers   
 
In their third point of error, the Dahlagers contend 
the circuit court abused its discretion "in granting [Jack's] 
Motion to Limit Testimony from Treating Physicians, sustaining 
[Jack's] objections to opinion testimony by [Mary] based on this 
ruling, and denying [the Dahlagers'] Oral Motion to Reconsider 
its ruling."  The Dahlagers specifically maintain they were unable to prove a defective chair legally caused the injury NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
34 
 because the court limited testimony from Robert's non-retained 
treating physicians because the Dahlagers did not provide 
written expert reports by the court's deadline. 
  "The Hawai‘ i Supreme Court has held that complete and 
accurate pretrial discovery of expert witnesses is critical to a 
fair trial."  Barbee v. Queen's Med. Ctr., 119 Hawai‘ i 136, 157, 
194 P.3d 1098, 1119 (App. 2008) (cleaned up).  "Pretrial 
disclosure of expert witnesses is necessary because effective 
cross-examination of an expert witness requires advance 
preparation."  Id. (cleaned up).  Also, HRCP Rule 26, "is 
designed to promote candor and fairness in the pretrial 
discovery process and to eliminate surprises at trial."  Id. 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted).     
Here, the circuit court ordered the Dahlagers to 
provide written expert reports by November 10, 2016, giving the Dahlagers almost nine months to obtain expert reports.  The 
Dahlagers, however, did not do so.  Jack's contended that the 
Dahlagers' failure to provide expert reports and medical records 
related to the fall deprived it of critical information needed 
to prepare for cross-examination of these experts. 
To be clear, Robert's treating physicians were not 
completely precluded from testifying.  They were only precluded from testifying as to the cause of Robert's injuries. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
35 
   Further, as Jack's asserts, Robert's medical records 
were admitted into evidence.  Regarding certain records from 
Kaiser, the circuit court found that those records made no 
mention of the fall at Jack's. 
  As to Mary's testimony, the circuit court found Mary "qualified as an expert in the area of physical therapy."  When 
the Dahlagers' counsel attempted to solicit Mary's expert 
opinion regarding the cause of Robert's injury, the circuit 
court cautioned counsel "about the motion in limine regarding 
providing any type of opinion when there's no report submitted." 
The Dahlagers' counsel then attempted to ask Mary 
about causation and treatment of Robert's injury after the 
incident at Jack's.  Jack's objected, and the circuit court 
sustained, informing the Dahlagers' counsel that Mary "should have submitted a report as to her treatment and the reasons 
why."  The court warned:  
You cannot use the back door to try to get in reports of 
what she knew and how she treated [Robert] when in fact there were specific instructions in this case and orders by 
this court that if you' re gonna call someone as an expert 
that you need to submit the reports by November 10, 2016[.] 
 
  Under the court's order, Mary should have provided a 
report if she was being held out as an expert who provided 
Robert treatment and was going to testify as to the cause of his 
injuries. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
36 /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
Chief Judge  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Associate Judge 
 /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge 
 In sum, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion 
in limiting the testimony of treatment providers as to 
causation. 
III. CONCLUSION 
  Based on the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court's (1) August 16, 2017 Final Judgment; (2) June 2, 2017 "Findings 
of Fact and Conclusions of Law and Order After Jury-Waived 
Trial"; (3) February 17, 2017 "Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion 
to Compel Production of Documents filed December 27, 2016"; 
(4) March 1, 2017 "Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion to Compel 
Discovery and for Discovery Sanctions filed January 13, 2017"; 
(5) March 23, 2017 "Order Granting Fees and Costs Related to 
Plaintiff's Motion to Compel Production of Documents filed 
December 27, 2016"; and (6) March 23, 2017 "Order Granting Fees and Costs Related to Plaintiffs' Motion to Compel Discovery and 
for Discovery Sanctions filed January 13, 2017[.]" 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, June 26, 2023. 
 
On the briefs: 
 Scott E. Kubota, Christopher S. Bouslog, 
for Plaintiffs-Appellants/
Cross-Appellees.  
 
Gary G. Grimmer, 
Ann Correa, for Defendant-Appellee/ Cross-Appellant.