NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000680
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
CP, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
JO, Defendant-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-P NO. 12-1-6481)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant C.P. ( Mother) appeals from the
"Order Re: Trial Issues" filed on September 15, 2016, and the
related "Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law" (FOF/COL ) filed
on January 10, 2017, both entered by the Family Court of the
First Circuit ( family court).1
On appeal, Mother seeks a new trial alleging that the
family court erred by: (1) failing to impose sanctions and strike
a report by the court-appointed Custody Fact Finder (CFF ),
thereby denying Mother due process; (2) permitting a Child
Custody Recommending Counselor (CCRC ) from California to be
qualified as an expert witness to present evidence regarding
custody of minor child, in violation of Hawai #i Rules of Evidence
(HRE) Rule 403; (3) admitting a report by the CCRC premised on
the belief that the case was a relocation case from California to
1  The Honorable Sherri L. Iha presided, except as otherwise noted.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Hawai#i, in violation of HRE Rules 402 and 403; and (4) holding,
without evidentiary support, that it was in the best interest of
minor child for Mother and Defendant-Appellee J.O. (Father) to
have joint legal and physical custody only if they resided within
75 miles of one another.   
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm.
I.  Due Process
Mother contends the family court denied her due process
of law by not imposing sanctions against Father and striking the
CFF Report pursuant to Hawai# i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule
37(b)(2).  Due to Father's failure to properly respond to
Mother's discovery requests, the family court issued an order on
November 18, 2015, compelling Father to, inter alia , produce
documents by December 7, 2015.  The order also extended the
deadline for the CFF Report.  Subsequently, as to Mother's
request for documents Father planned to use as evidence in the
custody proceeding, Father responded by stating "to be
determined."  Mother argues that she did not receive custody-
related documents from Father as ordered by the family court, but
that Father sent documents within the scope of the discovery
order to the CFF.  Mother thus argues that "not having the
documents submitted to the CFF denied [Mother] the opportunity to
submit materials in rebuttal or to clarify matters that were in
the documents submitted to the CFF by [Father]." 
Our review of the record indicates that, although
Mother made reference to her due process rights in her "Motion to
Impose HFCR 37(b)(2) Sanctions" (
Motion for Sanctions ) filed on
April 8, 2016, her motion was primarily couched in terms of
sanctions under HFCR Rule 37(b)(2).  On appeal, she does not
argue the family court abused its discretion under HRCR Rule
37(b)(2), and thus we limit our review to her due process
argument.  In this regard, we answer "questions of constitutional
law by exercising our own independent judgment based on the facts
of the case.  Thus, [the appellate court reviews] questions of
constitutional law under the 'right/wrong' standard."  Cty. of
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Kaua#i v. Baptiste, 115 Hawaii 15, 25, 165 P.3d 916, 926 (2007)
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted).#
As set forth in Mother's Motion for Sanctions, Father
submitted six documents2 (the six documents) to the CFF, which
Mother argues fell within the scope of her document request and
were not produced to her.  On January 5, 2016, the CFF sent an
email to both parties' counsel, attaching a list of all the
documents she had received from them related to her forthcoming
report.  Mother's counsel was in the hospital on January 5, 2006,
but returned to the office the following week. 
The CFF's final report, filed with the family court on
February 29, 2016, included a complete list of "Contacts Made and
Information Reviewed."  The report listed all of the six
documents.  
Mother objected to the CFF Report in her Motion for
Sanctions.  At the April 14, 2016 hearing on Mother's Motion for
Sanctions, the family court3 asked Mother's counsel if he had
contacted the CFF regarding the documents after the CFF's January
5 email and let the CFF know that Mother had not received some of
the documents.  Mother's counsel stated that he could have
contacted the CFF but did not, explaining that he did not think
to do that because the existing order required Father to provide
the documents to Mother. 
Prior to the CFF Report being filed, Mother's counsel
had notice of the documents submitted to the CFF and could have
immediately raised with the CFF the issue of having not received
certain documents.  See In re Guardianship of Carlsmith , 113
Hawai#i 236, 239, 151 P.3d 717, 720 (2007) ("At its core,
procedural due process of law requires notice and an opportunity
to be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner
2  The six documents include: (1) Father's custody binder, (2)
California Pleadings and Orders in Case No. SF 12-1866 ( UPA action ), (3)
Curriculum Vitae for Linda Tell, RN, MFT (the CCRC), (4) the CCRC Report, (5)
Father's certificate of class completion ( certificate of class completion ),
and (6) various text messages between parents.
3  The Honorable Brian A. Costa presided at this hearing.  
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
before governmental deprivation of a significant liberty
interest.").  Mother had the opportunity to be heard at a
meaningful time and in a meaningful manner by the CFF between
January 12, 2016 (accounting for Mother's counsel's time to
return to work from the hospital) and February 29, 2016 (when the
CFF Report was filed).
After the CFF Report was filed, Mother had further
opportunity to be heard at the April 14, 2016 hearing on her
Motion for Sanctions.  There, Mother's counsel sought sanctions
against Father, including that the CFF Report be struck.  The
family court considered the matter carefully, ordered that Father
would be precluded from using a "Certificate of Class Completion"
for a parenting class, but denied other sanctions.  As noted by
the family court, because the parties had not established what
was in Father's "custody binder" provided to the CFF, the court
was not able to make a determination regarding those documents
and sanctions were denied without prejudice.  As to pleadings and
orders from proceedings in California, as well as text messages,
both parties had access to these documents and the family court
denied sanctions.
Mother also had an opportunity to be heard at trial,
where her counsel cross-examined and re-cross-examined the CFF
regarding her report and the documents upon which the CFF relied. 
An opportunity to be heard is the bedrock of due
process.  Mathews v. Eldridge , 424 U.S. 319, 333 (1976) (citing
Armstrong v. Manzo, 380 U.S. 545, 552 (1965) ("The fundamental
requirement of due process is the opportunity to be heard at a
meaningful time and in a meaningful manner.")) (internal
quotation marks omitted); In re Guardianship of Carlsmith , 113
Hawai#i at 239, 151 P.3d at 720.  Although we do not condone
Father's failure to fully comply with the family court's order
compelling discovery, we conclude that the proceedings in the
family court allowed Mother meaningful and timely opportunities
to address the CFF Report and the documents that the CFF relied
upon. 
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Thus, the family court did not violate Mother's due
process rights by not striking the CFF Report.
II.  The CCRC's Expert Testimony and the CCRC Report
Mother argues that permitting the CCRC to be qualified
as an expert witness and present testimony was a violation of HRE
Rule 403, and that admitting her report violated HRE Rules 402
and 403.  Mother's arguments are grounded in the contention that
because the CCRC's personal knowledge and report were based on
information gathered three years prior in 2012, they were not
relevant to the instant action in 2015 and were prejudicial. 
"A trial court's determination that evidence is
'relevant' within the meaning of [Hawai #i Rules of Evidence] Rule
401 (1993) is reviewed under the right/wrong standard of review." 
State v. St. Clair , 101 Hawai #i 280, 286, 67 P.3d 779, 785
(2003).  Rule 401 defines relevant evidence as "evidence having
any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of
consequence to the determination of the action more probable or
less probable than it would be without the evidence."  HRE Rule
402 provides that "[a]ll relevant evidence is admissible, except
as otherwise provided by the Constitutions of the United States
and the State of Hawaii, by statute, by these rules, or by other
rules adopted by the supreme court.  Evidence which is not
relevant is not admissible."
HRE Rule 403 further provides that "[a]lthough
relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice,
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless
presentation of cumulative evidence."  Whether relevant evidence
should be excluded under HRE Rule 403 is within the trial court's
exercise of discretion because it requires a "cost-benefit
calculus" and a "delicate balance between probative value and
prejudicial effect."  Kaeo v. Davis , 68 Haw. 447, 454, 719 P.2d
387, 392 (1986) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Hawai#i Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 571-46 (Supp. 2016),
titled "Criteria and procedure in awarding custody and
visitation; best interest of the child" provides, in relevant
part:
(a) In actions for divorce, separation, annulment, separate
maintenance, or any other proceeding where there is at issue
a dispute as to the custody of a minor child, the court,
during the pendency of the action, at the final hearing, or
any time during the minority of the child, may make an order
for the custody of the minor child as may seem necessary or
proper. In awarding the custody, the court shall be guided
by the following standards, considerations, and procedures:
(1) Custody should be awarded to either parent or to
both parents according to the best interests of the
child, and the court also may consider frequent,
continuing, and meaningful contact of each parent with
the child unless the court finds that a parent is
unable to act in the best interest of the child;
. . . 
(5) The court may hear the testimony of any person or
expert, produced by any party or upon the court's own
motion, whose skill, insight, knowledge, or experience
is such that the person's or expert's testimony is
relevant to a just and reasonable determination of
what is for the best physical, mental, moral, and
spiritual well-being of the child whose custody is at
issue[.]
HRS § 571-46(b) states that the family court "shall consider" a
non-exclusive list of sixteen factors in determining the best
interests of the child.  These non-exclusive factors are:
(1) Any history of sexual or physical abuse of a child by a
parent;
(2) Any history of neglect or emotional abuse of a child by
a parent;
(3) The overall quality of the parent-child relationship;
(4) The history of caregiving or parenting by each parent
prior and subsequent to a marital or other type of
separation;
(5) Each parent's cooperation in developing and implementing
a plan to meet the child's ongoing needs, interests, and
schedule; provided that this factor shall not be considered
in any case where the court has determined that family
violence has been committed by a parent;
(6) The physical health needs of the child;
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(7) The emotional needs of the child;
(8) The safety needs of the child;
(9) The educational needs of the child;
(10) The child's need for relationships with siblings;
(11) Each parent's actions demonstrating that they allow the
child to maintain family connections through family events
and activities; provided that this factor shall not be
considered in any case where the court has determined that
family violence has been committed by a parent;
(12) Each parent's actions demonstrating that they separate
the child's needs from the parent's needs;
(13) Any evidence of past or current drug or alcohol abuse
by a parent;
(14) The mental health of each parent;
(15) The areas and levels of conflict present within the
family; and
(16) A parent's prior wilful misuse of the protection from
abuse process under chapter 586 to gain a tactical advantage
in any proceeding involving the custody determination of a
minor. Such wilful misuse may be considered only if it is
established by clear and convincing evidence, and if it is
further found by clear and convincing evidence that in the
particular family circumstance the wilful misuse tends to
show that, in the future, the parent who engaged in the
wilful misuse will not be able to cooperate successfully
with the other parent in their shared responsibilities for
the child. The court shall articulate findings of fact
whenever relying upon this factor as part of its
determination of the best interests of the child. For the
purposes of this section, when taken alone, the voluntary
dismissal of a petition for protection from abuse shall not
be treated as prima facie evidence that a wilful misuse of
the protection from abuse process has occurred.
Therefore, relevant evidence in a child custody hearing
is evidence that has a tendency to make the existence of facts
regarding the best interests of the child more or less probable. 
The court may admit relevant evidence regarding the best
interests of the child, including testimony from an expert
witness, as long as its probative value is not substantially
outweighed by the factors listed in HRE Rule 403.
A.  The CCRC's expert testimony
Neither party disputes that the CCRC is qualified to
testify on the issue of child custody determinations pursuant to
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
her training and experience.  Mother instead argues that the
family court abused its discretion by qualifying the CCRC as an
expert witness because (1) the CCRC's knowledge from three years
ago was no longer relevant, (2) the CCRC's testimony would waste
time and confuse the facts, (3) the CFF's more recent report
rendered the CCRC's report cumulative and stale, and (4) that the
CCRC's testimony worked a substantial detriment to Mother.  
The CCRC's personal knowledge is relevant to several
HRS § 571-46(b) factors: the overall quality of the parent-child
relationship; each parent's cooperation in developing and
implementing a plan to meet the child's ongoing needs, interests,
and schedule; each parent's actions demonstrating that they allow
the child to maintain family connections through family events
and activities; each parent's actions demonstrating that they
separate the child's needs from the parent's needs; any evidence
of past or current drug or alcohol abuse by a parent; and the
areas and levels of conflict present within the family.  HRS
§ 571-46(b)(3), (5), (11), (12), (13) and (15).  These factors
are not limited to a present snapshot, but rather assess a
history of family relationships and individual family member
characteristics and actions.  Therefore, with regards to best
interest of the child factors, the CCRC's testimony was relevant
and was not rendered stale by the newer CFF report. 
Further, the family court did not abuse its discretion
in its HRE Rule 403 balancing.  Again, several HRS § 571-46(b)
factors consider the family's history and include words like
"overall," "history," and "any."  HRS § 571-46(b)(1), (2), (3),
(4), and (13).  The CCRC can testify about the parties' family
history circa 2012 more effectively than the CFF, and that
historical information is relevant to the best interest of the
child analysis.  The probative value of the CCRC's testimony is
not outweighed by the danger of being cumulative or causing
confusion.
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
B.  The CCRC Report
Mother also argues that the family court abused its
discretion by admitting the CCRC Report because it (1) was
prepared three years ago and is thus no longer relevant to the
best interest of minor child in 2015, and (2) is rendered
cumulative based on the more up-to-date CFF Report.  We disagree
with these arguments for the reasons stated above.  The CCRC
Report is relevant and the family court did not abuse its
discretion under HRE Rule 403.
III.  Sufficiency of the Evidence as to Custody Ruling
Mother argues that the evidence does not support the
family court's determination that it is in minor child's best
interest that the parties have joint physical custody only if
they resided within 75 miles of one another.  Alternatively, the
family court ruled that if the parties did not reside within 75
miles of each other by December 28, 2016, it was in the child's
best interest that Father be awarded sole physical custody.  In
contesting these custody rulings, Mother challenges the family
court's FOFs 16, 19, 31, 41, 43, 51, 52, 55, 57, and 58.4
4  The FOFs challenged by Mother state:
16. On October 24, 2012, Petitioner returned to California
with child to live with Respondent in their home and
Petitioner returned to work that weekend. 
. . . .
19. On Halloween (October 31, 2012), Respondent's family
came to visit with the child and Petitioner refused to
allow them to see him.  Police were called because
Petitioner claimed they were trying to pull the child
away from her.  Petitioner left the residence and went
to a motel with the child. 
. . . .
31. Ms. Tell recommended that the parents continue to
share custody if they remain in California, but if
Petitioner were to leave California then Respondent
was to have physical custody of the child.  At the
trial before this Court, Ms. Tell testified regarding
her observations and personal knowledge of the case
while it was in California.  Ms. Tell was a credible
witness at trial. 
(continued...)
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
We review Mother's arguments by applying the following
standards:
The family court's FOFs are reviewed on appeal under
the clearly erroneous standard.  A FOF is clearly erroneous
when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support
the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support
of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with
a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. 
Substantial evidence . . . is credible evidence which is of
sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
4(...continued)
. . . .
41. After Petitioner left California with the child,
Respondent requested to have regular Facetime calls
daily with the child.  Despite that, Petitioner did
not make good faith attempts to have the Facetime
calls with Respondent.  Excuses included the child is
napping/sleeping; the child is not at home; the child
needs to take a bath; the child is visiting with
family.  There were many calls that were disconnected
abruptly.  The calls were never consistent; regular;
or at the same time at night. 
. . . .
43. Despite the court order, Petitioner failed to make the
child available for Facetime at the time designated
everyday.  Petitioner requested that the time be
changed, but still Respondent would have difficulty
getting the calls on time.  The Fact Finder suggested
using a bigger screen to see the child, but Petitioner
did nothing about that.  The Fact Finder observed
several different computers in Petitioner's home when
she visited, but none were being used for the Facetime
visits. 
. . . .
51. Petitioner's actions prevented Respondent from having
meaningful, regular, and consistent contact with the child
after she brought the child to Hawaii on January 8, 2015. 
52. Petitioner's actions focus on her needs rather than the
needs of the child.  
. . . .
55. Petitioner has never been self-supporting. 
. . . .
57. Both the Custody Evaluator and the Fact Finder were
concerned about Petitioner's stability. 
58. Petitioner's allegations regarding substance abuse and
domestic violence by Respondent were unfounded.  Both
Petitioner and Respondent drank excessively prior to the
birth of the child.  Since the birth of the child, the Court
has no concerns regarding either parties use of alcohol. 
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
reasonable caution to support a conclusion.  
On the other hand, the family court's COLs are
reviewed on appeal de novo, under the right/wrong standard.
COLs, consequently, are not binding upon an appellate court
and are freely reviewable for their correctness.
In re Doe , 95 Hawai #i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001)
(citations, quotation marks and brackets omitted).  "[T]estimony
of a single witness, if found by the trier of fact to have been
credible, will suffice" to establish substantial evidence.  Id.
at 196, 20 P.3d at 629.  Assessing the credibility of witnesses
and weighing the evidence is the province of the trier of fact,
not the appellate court.  Fisher v. Fisher , 111 Hawai# i 41, 46,
137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006).
Based on the testimony of the witnesses and the
documents admitted into evidence, we conclude that the family
court did not clearly err with regard to FOFs 19, 31, 41, 43, 51,
52, 57, and 58.
With regard to FOFs 16 and 55, we conclude that parts
of these findings are clearly in error.  With regard to FOF 16,
there is not substantial evidence to support the family court's
finding that Mother returned to work upon her return to
California.  Mother took maternity leave from her California job
and was scheduled to return to work shortly after she flew back
to California.  However, Mother testified that when she "arrived
in California," she notified her employer that she did not intend
to return, and Father testified that Mother was "calling out of
work."  It does not appear that there is any other evidence
regarding Mother's return to work after maternity leave.
With regard to FOF 55, the family court's finding that
Mother has "never" been self-supporting lacks substantial
evidentiary support.  Before she met Father, Mother was employed
and paying rent in a shared apartment with a friend.  Although
the CFF testified at trial that Mother has "always" relied on
somebody else in her life and in her households, the CFF Report
does not state that Mother relied on outside financial support
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
while living in Las Vegas or Sacramento prior to meeting Father,
and rather that Mother "often" relied on others for support.
Although part of FOFs 16 and 55 are clearly erroneous,
these errors do not change the outcome of the case.  That is,
given the other findings by the family court and the totality of
the evidence in the case, there is sufficient evidence to support
the family court's ultimate determination as to the best
interests of the child.  As has been long recognized in family
court matters,
[g]enerally, the family court possesses wide discretion in
making its decisions and those decision will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
we will not disturb the family court's decisions on appeal
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of
reason.
Fisher, 111 Hawai #i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360 (citation omitted).
Further, with regard to FOF 55, we disagree with
Mother's argument that the family court erred in using a
"financial test" in determining custody.  Although financial
well-being is not in itself a deciding factor, some of the
considerations for determining the best interest of a child may
be impacted by financial resources.  These include each parent's
cooperation in developing and implementing a plan to meet the
child's ongoing needs, interests, and schedule; the physical
health needs of the child; and the safety needs of a child.  HRS
§ 571-46(b)(5), (6), (8).  Thus, the family court did not err in
considering Mother's financial resources in determining the best
interests of minor child.
As to Mother's overall contention that the family
court's ruling as to custody is not supported by the evidence, we
must disagree.  HRS § 571-46 provides the family court with the
criteria and procedures for awarding child custody and
visitation, and a list of sixteen non-exclusive factors in
determining the best interest of the child.  The best interest of
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the child standard is "paramount when considering the issue of
custody" and "the family court is granted broad discretion to
weigh the various factors involved, with no single factor being
given presumptive paramount weight[.]"  Fisher, 111 Hawai #i at
50, 137 P.3d at 364.
Mother contends that the family court's FOFs do not
address (1) the overall physical and emotional effect of
relocation on minor child, (2) the effect of the relocation on
minor child's relationship with his Mother, (3) what arrangements
will be made for minor child's continued contact with his
extended Hawai #i family, (4) how Mother will afford visiting
minor child in California, and (5) minor child's physical health,
educational, educational, and safety needs.
The family court in the instant case made its custody
determination after an eight-day trial on the custody issues, at
which both Mother and Father were permitted to present evidence. 
In our view, the family court made sufficient findings based on
the evidence to properly exercise its discretion as to the best
interest of the minor child.  
The family court's FOFs point to several of Mother's
attributes relevant to the best interest of the child analysis,
including: several areas of conflict within the family such as
the birth certificate argument and Mother's actions preventing
Father from having meaningful contact with minor child; Mother
demonstrating her unwillingness to allow minor child to maintain
California family connections through family events and
activities such as Halloween and trips to California; Mother's
inconsistent cooperation in implementing the CCRC's parenting
plan and co-parenting; Mother's inability to put minor child's
needs ahead of her own; and Mother's lack of stability compared
with Father, weighing on the safety and physical health needs of
minor child.  See HRS § 571-46(b)(5), (6), (8), (11), (12), (15);
FOFs 4, 13, 19, 22, 30, 35, 38, 41, 43-45, 48, 51-52, 57.  
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The family court's FOFs also addressed several of
Father's relevant attributes, including: co-parenting efforts;
allowing minor child to maintain Hawai# i family connections;
offering a stable home supported by his job; and offering the
support of his nearby family.  See HRS § 571-46(b)(5), (6), (8),
(11); FOFs 29, 50, 53-54.
FOF 28 addresses minor child, finding that he is bonded
with both parents.  HRS § 571-46(b)(3).  FOF 49 addresses both
parents together, finding that Mother and Father successfully co-
parented in the past with the assistance of the CCRC.  HRS § 571-
46(b)(5).  
HRS § 571-46(a)(1) provides that custody should be
awarded to "either parent or both parents according to the best
interests of the child, and the court may also consider frequent,
continuing, and meaningful contact of each parent with the child
unless the court finds that a parent is unable to act in the best
interest of the child[.]" 
Given the distance and relevant constraints, the family
court did not award joint physical custody while Mother and
Father lived in Hawai #i and California, respectively.  However,
the family court reasonably found that it was in the best
interest of minor child to maintain meaningful contact with both
parents.  This determination is supported by substantial evidence
and the family court's FOFs, in particular FOF 28 which finds
minor child has bonded with both parents.
In order to maintain meaningful contact with both
parents, the family court established alternative physical
custody arrangements: joint custody in California, or sole
custody for Father in California with visitation in Hawai #i for
Mother.  The family court is not required to expressly address in
its findings every factor in HRS § 571-46(b).  See  HRS § 571-
46(b).  Here, the family court's physical custody alternatives,
with preference toward sole custody for Father if the parties do
not reside within 75 miles of each other, are supported by the
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
family court's findings regarding the best interest of minor
child.  Ultimately, the family court had substantial evidence
upon which to base its custody decision and did not abuse its
discretion.  Fisher , 111 Hawai #i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360.
IV.  Conclusion
Based on the foregoing, the "Order Re: Trial Issues"
filed on September 15, 2016, by the Family Court of the First
Circuit, is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawaii, November 30, 2017. #
On the briefs:
Francis T. O'Brien,
for Petitioner-Appellant. Presiding Judge
Rebecca A. Copeland, 
for Defendant-Appellee.
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
15