NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000557
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
SHERRI CASPER, Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
VIJAK S. AYASANONDA, M.D. and THE EMERGENCY GROUP, INC.,
Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellant,
and
 
LILY L.L.L. GALLAGHER, M.D.; THE QUEENS MEDICAL CENTER;
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE
CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE "NON-PROFIT" ORGANIZATIONS 1-10; DOE
TRUSTS 1-10 and ROE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-10, Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0613)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Sherri Casper
 
(Casper) appeals from a "Judgment" filed on July 20, 2011, in the

 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).1 After a
 
jury trial and based on the jury's responses to a Special Verdict
 
Form, judgment was entered against Casper and in favor of
 Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants Vijak S. Ayasanonda, M.D.,
 (Dr. Ayasanonda) and The Emergency Group, Inc. (EGI)
 (collectively the Defendants) on Count I (Negligence) and Count
 
1
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
II (Informed Consent) of Casper's complaint. All other claims
 
were dismissed.2
 
In this case, Casper contends that when she went to the
 
Emergency Department (ED) at Queen's Medical Center (QMC),
 Dr. Ayasanonda mis-diagnosed her with cervicitis, suggestive of
 pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), and failed to properly
 diagnose appendicitis. Casper was discharged from the ED with
 treatment to address PID and was told, among other things, to
 return to the ED if her symptoms "get worse." Approximately two
 and a half days later, Casper returned to the ED and was
 diagnosed with a perforated appendix. She was then hospitalized
 for twenty-two days, subsequently underwent surgery, and claims
 permanent injuries. The parties dispute at what point Casper's
 appendix perforated.
 
The Defendants contend that Dr. Ayasanonda did not
 
breach the standard of care and, further, that Casper was
 comparatively negligent because she did not follow the discharge
 instructions by failing to return sooner to the ED when her
 symptoms worsened.
 
On appeal, Casper asserts that the circuit court erred 
by (1) denying Casper's Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) 
3
Rule 50  motion for judgment as a matter of law on the defense of
2 Casper filed a complaint on March 16, 2009, against defendants
Dr. Ayasanonda, Dr. Lily Gallagher (Dr. Gallagher), EGI, and Queen's Medical
Center (QMC), asserting claims for negligence (Count I), failure to obtain
informed consent (Count II), and vicarious liability (Count III). Summary
judgment was granted in favor of Dr. Gallagher, and, pursuant to a stipulation
of the parties, the claims against QMC were dismissed. Therefore, the case
proceeded to trial only against Dr. Ayasanonda and EGI. Based on a further
 stipulation between the remaining parties, the determination of EGI's
liability was based solely on vicarious liability, i.e. whether Dr. Ayasanonda
was found liable.
3
 HRCP Rule 50(a)(1) provides that
 
[i]f during a trial by jury a party has been fully heard on
an issue and there is no legally sufficient evidentiary
basis for a reasonable jury to find for that party on that
issue, the court may determine the issue against that party
and may grant a motion for judgment as a matter of law
against that party with respect to a claim or defense that
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
comparative negligence; (2) giving jury instructions regarding
 
comparative negligence; (3) giving jury instructions on ordinary
 negligence, thus setting out two different and confusing
 instructions –- medical negligence and ordinary negligence -­that Casper had to prove; (4) failing to give Casper's Proposed
 Jury Instruction No. 5; and (5) denying Casper's challenge for
 cause of a juror.
 
4
Dr. Ayasanonda and EGI filed a cross-appeal  asserting
that, in the event we vacate the Judgment and remand for a new

 
trial, we should not remand as to Count II (informed consent)
 because the circuit court improperly denied their HRCP Rule 50
 motion for judgment as a matter of law on this claim. 
Dr. Ayasanonda and EGI thus contend that they were entitled to
 judgment as a matter of law on Casper's informed consent claim,
 the jury should not have been instructed on the informed consent
 claim, and the Special Verdict Form should not have contained any
 questions regarding the informed consent claim. Dr. Ayasanonda
 and EGI further note, however, that Casper's only point of error
 that affects the informed consent claim is her point of error
 regarding the jury panel. Thus, the cross-appeal need be decided
 only if we agree with Casper that one of the jurors should have
 been dismissed for cause. 
We conclude that the jury instructions improperly
 
indicate that Casper was required to prove, among other things,

 
ordinary negligence. These instructions are erroneous,
 
3(...continued)
cannot under the controlling law be maintained or defeated
without a favorable finding on that issue.

4
 The Defendants' opening brief on their cross-appeal does not comply
with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28. Most problematic is
the Defendants' failure to properly present the points of error, in that theyfail to identify in the points of error section where in the record thealleged errors occurred and where the alleged errors were preserved forappeal. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). For the most part, this information is containedin the argument section of the opening brief. See Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 
Hawai'i 490, 496-97, 280 P.3d 88, 94-95 (2012). Nonetheless, counsel is
cautioned that HRAP Rule 28 should be followed or sanctions may result in thefuture. HRAP Rule 51. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
misleading and prejudicial in the context of the medical
 
malpractice claims asserted against Dr. Ayasanonda, and the jury
 instructions improperly contain two different standards of
 negligence pertaining to Dr. Ayasanonda. We therefore vacate the
 Judgment with regard to the negligence claim (Count I) and the
 vicarious liability claim (Count III) to the extent vicarious
 liability is based on the negligence claim.
 
We further conclude that the circuit court did not
 
abuse its discretion in denying Casper's request to dismiss for
 cause a juror whose wife worked for QMC. Because we reject
 Casper's challenge as to the jury panel, and Casper's other
 points of error do not affect the verdict on the informed consent
 claim (Count II), the Judgment regarding the informed consent
 claim is affirmed.
 
The case is remanded to the circuit court for a new
 
trial on Count I and Count III (to the extent Count III is based
 on the negligence claim).
I. Discussion
 
A. Casper's Appeal
1. HRCP Rule 50 Motion
 
Casper contends that the circuit court erred in denying
 
her HRCP Rule 50 motion for judgment as a matter of law on the 
comparative negligence defense. In this regard, Casper argues
 there was insufficient evidence to support a comparative
 negligence defense because there was no evidence of a negligent
 act on her part. Moreover, Casper contends we should rule as a
 matter of first impression that in order to have a viable
 comparative negligence defense to a medical malpractice claim,
 there must be expert opinion that the plaintiff's comparative
 negligence was a proximate cause of the plaintiff's injuries. We
 need not address these issues, however, because the jury never
 reached the issue of Casper's alleged comparative negligence.
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On the Special Verdict Form, the jury found
 
Dr. Ayasanonda not liable as to medical negligence (Count I) and
 
informed consent (Count II). Specifically, the Special Verdict
 Form reads, in pertinent part:
 
Question No. 1:
 
As to Count 1 (Medical Negligence), did Defendant
 
Vijak Ayasanonda fail to comply with the applicable standard
of care in his diagnosis and treatment of Plaintiff Sherri
Casper?
 
Yes
   
No .
 
If you answered "Yes," go to the next question. If
 
you answered "No," go to Question No. 3
 
. . . .
 
Question No. 3:
 As to Count 2 (Informed Consent), did Defendant Vijak
Ayasanonda fail to obtain informed consent from Plaintiff
 
Sherri Casper?
 
Yes    No .  
If you answered "Yes," go to the next question. 
If
 
you answered "No" to Question No. 3 and "No" to either
 Question No. 1 or Question No. 2, please STOP, have your
foreperson sign and date this Special Verdict Form and call
the Bailiff.
 
The issue of Casper's comparative negligence was
 
addressed in Questions 5 and 6 on the Special Verdict Form. 
Given the jury's findings as to Questions 1 and 3, the jury never
 reached the subsequent questions about Casper's comparative
 negligence. Therefore, it is premature and unnecessary to decide
 whether the circuit court erred in denying Casper's HRCP Rule 50
 motion, such that the comparative negligence defense was put
 before the jury. The jury never reached the issue, and we need
 not address sufficiency of the evidence as to the comparative
 negligence defense.
 
However, Casper's related points of error are that, as
 
a consequence of the comparative negligence defense going to the
 jury, the circuit court gave erroneous jury instructions that
 were prejudicial to Casper. Regardless of why certain jury
 instructions were given, we agree that the jury instructions read
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
as a whole are prejudicially erroneous and misleading for the
 
reasons discussed below.
 
2. Jury Instructions on Negligence
 
Among her challenges to the jury instructions, Casper
 
contends that erroneous and confusing jury instructions on
 
ordinary negligence were given affecting the claim against
 Dr. Ayasanonda, and thus the jury was left with the impression
 that Casper had to prove two standards of negligence. 
"The standard of review for a trial court's issuance
 
or refusal of a jury instruction is whether, when read and
considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading." Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc.,
 111 Hawai' i 286, 297, 141 P.3d 459, 470 (2006) (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted). 
Generally,
instructions that are found to be an erroneous articulation
 of the law raise a presumption that they were harmful.
Turner v. Willis, 59 Haw. 319, 326, 582 P.2d 710, 715
(1978). The presumption can be overcome however, if it
"affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the
error was not prejudicial." Id.
 
Udac v. Takata Corp., 121 Hawai 'i 143, 149, 214 P.3d 1133, 1139 
(App. 2009).
 
Casper contends the circuit court erred in giving
 
standard jury instructions 3.2, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3 and 6.4, which

 
generally pertain to negligence and which were modified by the
 
court. As given to the jury in this case, the challenged
 instructions read as follows, with the language most relevant to
 this appeal underlined:
5
 
Pattern Jury Instruction 3.2, as modified
 
Plaintiff must prove by a preponderance of evidence
that defendant was negligent and that such negligence was a
legal cause of plaintiff's injuries and/or damages.
Plaintiff must also prove the nature and extent of her
injuries and/or damages.
 
Defendant must prove by a preponderance of the
evidence that plaintiff was negligent and that such
negligence was a legal cause of plaintiff's injuries and/or
damages.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
5
 Each juror had a copy of the jury instructions while the court read
the instructions to them. The jury also had the instructions during
deliberations.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Pattern Jury Instruction 6.1, as modified
 
Negligence of a layperson  is doing something which a
reasonable layperson would not do or failing to do something
which a reasonable layperson would do. It is the failure to
 use that care which a reasonable layperson would use to
avoid injury to himself, herself, or other people or damage
to property.
 
In deciding whether a 
layperson was negligent, you
must consider what was done or not done under the
 circumstances as shown by the evidence in this case.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Pattern Jury Instruction 6.2, as modified
 
In determining whether a person, lay or otherwise, was
negligent, it may help to ask whether a reasonable person in
the same situation would have foreseen or anticipated that
injury or damage could result from that person's action or
inaction. If such a result would be foreseeable by a
reasonable person in the same situation and if the conduct
reasonably could be avoided, then not to avoid it would be
negligence.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Pattern Jury Instruction 6.3, as modified
 
You must determine whether any of the parties in this
case were negligent and whether such negligence on the part
of a party was a legal cause of plaintiff's injuries or
damages. If you find that at least one defendant was
negligent and such negligence was a legal cause of the
injuries or damages, you must determine the total amount of
plaintiff's damages, without regard to whether plaintiff's
own negligence was also a legal cause of the injuries or
damages.
 
If you find that 
more than one party was negligent  and
the negligence of each was a legal cause of the injuries or
damages, then you must determine the degree to which each
party's negligence contributed to the injuries or damages,
expressed in percentages. The percentages allocated to the
parties must total 100%
.
 
(Emphasis added).

 
Pattern Jury Instruction 6.4, as modified
 
If you find that plaintiff's negligence is 50% or
less, the Court will reduce the amount of damages you award
by the percentage of the negligence you attribute to
plaintiff.
 
If, on the other hand, you find that plaintiff's
negligence is more than 50%, the Court will enter judgment
for defendant and plaintiff will not recover any damages.
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In addition to the challenged instructions, the jury
 
was instructed as to "medical negligence," including instructions
 
based on standard jury instructions 14.1 and 14.3. These
 instructions as read to the jury were as follows:
 Pattern Jury Instruction 14.1, as modified
 
To prove medical negligence, plaintiff must prove all
of the following elements:
 
1. Defendant breached the applicable standard of care;
 
and
 
2. The breach of the standard of care was a legal
cause of injury or damage to plaintiff; and
 
3. Plaintiff sustained injury or damage.
 
Pattern Jury Instruction 14.3, as modified
 
Plaintiff is required to present testimony from an
expert establishing the standard of care, that defendant
breached this standard, and that defendant's breach was a
legal cause of plaintiff's injury or damages.
 
Casper contends that with the challenged jury
 
instructions, the jury was given differing and confusing
 
standards setting out ordinary negligence and medical negligence,
 thus creating two different standards of proof. Based on the
 record, it appears the circuit court attempted to give general
 negligence instructions to address the plaintiff's comparative
 negligence. Thus, for instance, the circuit court added
 "layperson" to the standard 6.1 instruction. However, the
 instructions do not consistently indicate that, as to Dr.
 Ayasanonda, the "medical negligence" standard applies. Rather,
 instructions 3.2 and 6.3 reference whether the "defendant was
 negligent." Most problematic is that the words "lay or
 
otherwise" were added to instruction 6.2, which thus expressly
 
indicates that it applies to Dr. Ayasanonda. This instruction
 
suggests that, in determining whether Dr. Ayasanonda "was
 negligent," the jurors may use their own judgement to consider,
 inter alia, "whether a reasonable person in the same situation
 would have foreseen or anticipated that injury or damage could
 result from that person's action or inaction."
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In short, especially instruction 6.2, but also
 
instructions 3.2 and 6.3 when all are read together, improperly
 
indicate that an ordinary negligence standard applies to
 Dr. Ayasanonda. This is in contradiction to instructions 14.1
 and 14.3, which properly instruct on medical negligence and state
 that medical expert testimony is required as to the standard of
 care, breach of duty, and causation of injury or damage.
 
It is well settled that in medical malpractice actions, the
question of negligence must be decided by reference to
relevant medical standards of care for which the plaintiff
carries the burden of proving through expert medical
testimony. The standard of care to which a doctor has
 failed to adhere must be established by expert testimony
because "a jury generally lacks the 'requisite special
knowledge, technical training, and background to be able to
determine the applicable standard without the assistance of
an expert.'" There are, however, exceptions to the rule.
 
Craft v. Peebles, 78 Hawai 'i 287, 298, 893 P.2d 138, 149 (1995) 
(emphasis added, citations omitted). 
Hawai'i does recognize a "common knowledge" exception
to the requirement that a plaintiff must introduce expert
medical testimony on causation. The exception is similar to
the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur, and when applied,
transforms a medical malpractice case "into an ordinary
negligence case, thus obviating the necessity of expert
testimony to establish the applicable standard of care."
This exception is "rare in application," and applies in
instances such as "[w]hen an operation leaves a sponge in
the patient's interior, or removes or injures an
inappropriate part of his anatomy, or when a tooth is
dropped down his windpipe or he suffers a serious burn from
a hot water bottle, or when instruments are not
sterilized[.]"
 
Barbee v. Queen's Med. Ctr., 119 Hawai 'i 136, 159, 194 P.3d 1098, 
1121 (App. 2008) (emphasis added, citations omitted).
 
In the ordinary negligence case the jury can determine
whether there has been a breach of defendant's duty to the
plaintiff on the basis of their everyday experience,
observations and judgment. The ordinary negligence case
will not require expert opinion evidence to delineate
acceptable from unacceptable standards of care. However, in
the medical negligence case, lay jurors are ill prepared to
evaluate complicated technical data for the purpose of
determining whether professional conduct conformed to a
reasonable standard of care and whether there is a causal
 relationship between the violation of a duty and an injury
to the patient. Therefore, expert opinion evidence is
generally required to aid the jury in its tasks.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Bernard v. Char, 79 Hawai 'i 371, 377, 903 P.2d 676, 682 (App. 
1995) (citations, brackets, and emphasis omitted). 
This is not an ordinary negligence case because the 
facts here do not present "routine or non-complex matters wherein 
a lay person is capable of supplanting the applicable standard of care from his or her 'common knowledge' or ordinary experience." Craft, 78 Hawai
'i at 298, 893 P.2d at 149. Therefore, as 
instructions 14.1 and 14.3 properly explain, expert medical testimony was required to establish the applicable standard of care, breach of duty, and causation on the part of Dr. Ayasanonda. 
It was improper to mix the standards for medical 
malpractice and ordinary negligence in regard to the claim against Dr. Ayasanonda. To the extent that instruction 6.2 suggests that the negligence of a person "lay or otherwise" can be determined by what a reasonable person in the same situation can foresee, without reference to the standard of care established by expert medical testimony, the instruction was not an accurate articulation of the law, was in error and is presumed harmful.
6 See Udac, 121 Hawai 'i at 149, 214 P.3d at 1139. 
Further, instruction 6.2 makes the generic references in instructions 3.2 and 6.3 as to whether the "defendant was 
6 We note that Casper argues the circuit court erred in both giving
instruction 6.2 and in refusing to give Plaintiff's Proposed Instruction No.
5, which also instructs on foreseeability, but from the perspective of a
reasonably prudent physician. In our view, for the same reasons instruction
6.2 is erroneous, Plaintiff's Proposed Instruction No. 5 is not an accuratereflection of the law either. That is, foreseeability is relevant underordinary negligence standards, but is not relevant when medical malpracticestandards apply, which instead must be based on medical expert opinion.Compare Craft, 78 Hawai' i 287, 893 P.2d 138, Barbee, 119 Hawai' i 136, 194 P.3d
1098 and Bernard, 79 Hawai' i 371, 903 P.2d 676 (medical malpractice), with
Knodle v. Waikiki Gateway Hotel, Inc., 69 Haw. 376, 742 P.2d 377 (1987), andBidar v. Amfac, Inc., 66 Haw. 547, 669 P.2d 154 (1983) (ordinary negligence). 
Although Plaintiff's Proposed Instruction No. 5 also erroneously sought
to inject foreseeability into the jury's considerations, Casper specifically
argued to the circuit court that instructions 3.2, 6.2 and 6.3 should not be
given and asserted at various points that the jury instructions were
improperly mixing ordinary negligence and medical malpractice standards that
she had to prove against Dr. Ayasanonda. Thus, Casper sufficiently preserved
her challenges to these instructions for appeal.
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
negligent" even more likely to have caused confusion regarding
 
what standard applied to Dr. Ayasanonda.
 
The presumption that an erroneous jury instruction is
 
harmful can be overcome if it "affirmatively appears from the
 record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial." Id.
 
(citation omitted). The best argument that can be made as to why
 the erroneous instructions are not prejudicial is that Question 1
 in the Special Verdict Form specifically references "medical
 negligence" and asks whether Dr. Ayasanonda "fail[ed] to comply
 with the applicable standard of care in his diagnosis and
 treatment of [Casper]." However, given that instruction 6.2 uses
 the generic word "negligent," yet indicates that it applies to
 Dr. Ayasanonda and that foreseeability may be considered, and
 given further that instructions 3.2 and 6.3 also generically
 reference whether the "defendant was negligent," we cannot say
 with any confidence that the wording in the Special Verdict Form
 cured the erroneous jury instructions.
 
We also note the record indicates that the jury was not
 
unanimous in its findings on the Special Verdict Form. In this
 case, Casper and the Defendants stipulated that 13 jurors would
 deliberate and that each of the issues could be decided by
 agreement of 10 jurors. Based on polling of the jurors after the
 verdict was rendered, the verdict was decided in favor of
 Dr. Ayasanonda by a 10-3 vote.
 
The jury instructions read as a whole presented
 
conflicting standards and some of the instructions suggested that
 Dr. Ayasanonda could be found not negligent based on the jurors'
 own knowledge and expectations. We cannot say the record
 establishes that the erroneous instructions were not prejudicial. 
Therefore, we must vacate the Judgment as to Counts I and III
 related to whether Dr. Ayasanonda was negligent and whether EGI
 is vicariously liable for Dr. Ayasanonda's alleged negligence.
3. Casper's Challenge to Juror for Cause
 
Casper contends the circuit court erred in denying her
 
challenge to a prospective juror whom Casper maintains could not
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be impartial. Casper argues she was harmed by the court's
 
decision because she was forced to use a peremptory challenge to
 excuse the prospective juror. Without reaching the question
 whether Casper has shown she was prejudiced, we conclude the
 circuit court had a sufficient basis not to exclude the juror.
 
A trial court's decision whether to pass a juror for
 
cause is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard. State
 
v. Kauhi, 86 Hawai
'i 195, 197, 948 P.2d 1036, 1038 (1997). "The 
trial court abuses its discretion when it clearly exceeds the
 bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or
 practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Id.
 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
During voir dire, Casper's counsel questioned a
 
prospective juror regarding his wife's employment with QMC. 

MR. BICKERTON: Do you feel that that family connection
that you have to Queen's gives one side a leg up today?

 
PROSPECTIVE JUROR:  I think it's only human nature
that, you know, you kind of back your spouse's
company. . . . I guess you would call it favoritism.
 
MR. BICKERTON:  Does the fact that it's [EGI] and not

Queen's make a difference?
 
PROSPECTIVE JUROR: You know, I mean, she's worked
there for nine years. I never knew this. And as far as I
 know–-I mean, she plays volleyball in the Queen's league and
ER has a team that's in the volleyball league. I never knew
 that. To me, they are all Queen's employees.
 
MR. BICKERTON:  So you think it would actually, even
though you would try to set it aside, you think it would
affect your ability to be fair?
 
PROSPECTIVE JUROR:  I think it would, yes.

 
MR. BICKERTON:  Your Honor, we would ask that

[Prospective Juror] be excused for cause.
 
THE COURT:  [Prospective Juror,] just a follow-up

question.
You know, while it's understandable what you just
shared with us, you know, your wife works at Queen's, you
know, so you sort of look favorably perhaps on Queen's. And
 this particular underlying event did involve the Queen's ER.
. . . .
 
Are you the kind or person if I were to tell you,
[Prospective Juror]–-you know, you recognize you have that
issue, but you cannot and should not allow it to affect your
decision-making. Are you the kind of person that can set it
on the side and go ahead and go forward with the decision­
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
making? Or do you think it's not going to be easy for you?
Because everybody has issues.
 
PROSPECTIVE JUROR: Yeah, I think it will always be
there. And I don't know if–-I don't know what's going to

happen at the time, you know. I can say yeah now, but, you
know, I don't know.
 
THE COURT: Would you do your best to basically follow
the Court's instruction? That's what I need to know .

 
PROSPECTIVE JUROR: I would try my best, yeah.
 
(Emphasis added). The Defendants objected to the challenge for
 
cause, stating that "[t]he witness said he would do his best to
 follow your instructions." The circuit court disallowed the
 challenge for cause at that point in time because it did not
 "believe there is an adequate record shown" but allowed Casper's
 counsel to ask follow up questions. 
MR. BICKERTON: So you know the members of the ER team
at least by face, for example, even if you don't know all

their names?
 
PROSPECTIVE JUROR: Yeah.
 
MR. BICKERTON: The Judge read a list of names you may
not have recognized. 
But if one of them is up here, someone
you know or are friends with from the volleyball games,
would you be able to distance yourself from that and say,
look, I'm just going to treat them like anyone else, I'm not
going to judge their credibility differently just because I
know them or I'm friends with them?
 
PROSPECTIVE JUROR: Yeah, I believe I can do that.
 
MR. BICKERTON: And same thing for a doctor. If a
doctor from Queen's comes and testifies one way or the

other, you feel you could put that aside?
 
PROSPECTIVE JUROR: Unless they play for the volleyball
team, I probably don't know them anyway. 

(Emphasis added).
 
Casper argues that the prospective juror's partiality
 
was clear and manifest. 
When a juror is challenged on grounds that he has
formed an opinion and cannot be impartial, the test is
"whether the nature and strength of the opinion ... are such
as in law necessarily ... raise the presumption of
partiality." The question "is one of mixed law and fact,"
and "the affirmative of the issue is upon the challenger."
Furthermore, the reviewing court is bound by "the
proposition that findings of impartiality should be set
aside only where prejudice is 'manifest.'"
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Graham, 70 Haw. 627, 633-34, 780 P.2d 1103, 1107 (1989)
 
(citations and brackets omitted).
 
The above quoted transcript demonstrates that the
 
prospective juror's opinions were not "strong and deep
 impressions which close the mind against the testimony that may
 be offered in opposition to them." Id. at 634-35, 780 P.2d at
 
1108 (citation omitted). The prospective juror stated that he
 would "try my best" to follow the court's instructions, and that
 he would not base his judgment on credibility of witnesses upon
 possibly recognizing them from a volleyball league. Casper has
 not demonstrated a presumption of partiality nor that the
 prospective juror's prejudice was manifest. See id. at 634-36,
 
780 P.2d at 1107-08.
 
Based on the above, the trial court did not abuse its
 
discretion.
 
B. Defendants' Cross-Appeal as to Informed Consent
 
We need not address the Defendants' cross-appeal which
 
asserts that the circuit court should have granted Defendants'
 motion for judgment as a matter of law on the informed consent
 claim. The jury found for the Defendants on the informed consent
 claim. The only point of error raised by Casper in her appeal
 that potentially affects the verdict on informed consent is
 Casper's challenge to the prospective juror. Because we have
 determined that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion
 with regard to the prospective juror, the verdict on the informed
 consent claim in favor of Defendants will stand.
 
II. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment filed on
 
July 20, 2011, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, is
 
vacated as to the negligence claim (Count I) and the claim for
 vicarious liability (Count III), to the extent that vicarious
 liability is based on the negligence claim. The case is remanded
 to the circuit court for a new trial on these issues.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Judgment in favor of the Defendants on the informed
 
consent claim (Count II) is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 6, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
James J. Bickerton 
Stephanie L. Marn(Bickerton Lee Dang & Sullivan)for Plaintiff-Appellantand Cross-Appellee Presiding Judge 
Edmund Burke John Reyes-Burke(Burke McPheeters Bordner & Estes)for Defendants-Appelleesand Cross-Appellants Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
15

 