FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--–
 
CAAP-12-0000061
 
DANA NAONE HALL, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES,
BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES, WILLIAM J. AILA,
JR. in his official capacity as chairperson of the
Board of Land and Natural Resources and as the State
 
Historic Preservation Officer, PUAALAOKALANI AIU
in her official capacity as administrator of the State
Historic Preservation Division, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH,
LORETTA J. FUDDY in her official capacity as the director
of the Department of Health, ALVIN T. ONAKA in his official
capacity as State Registrar of Vital Statistics and
Chief of the Department of Health's Office of Health
Status Monitoring, KAWAIAHA' O CHURCH, WILLIAM HAOLE
in his official capacity as the Chair of the Board of
Trustees and Chair of the Board of Directors of
 
Kawaiaha' o Church, John Does 1-10, Jane Does 1-10, and
Doe Partnerships, Corporations, Trusts, Governmental
Units or Other Entities 3-20, Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-1828-08)
 
DECEMBER 14, 2012
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
INTRODUCTION
 
I.
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Dana Naone Hall (Hall) has family
 
members who are buried on the grounds of Kawaiaha
'o Church. She 
is concerned that family members may be in unmarked burials on
  
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Kawaiaha' o Church grounds and does not want the unmarked burials 
of family members or other burial remains to be disturbed or 
altered. Hall is a native Hawaiian who is recognized by the O'ahu Island Burial Council (OIBC) as a cultural descendant of 
the native Hawaiian burial remains, or iwi, found on the Kawaiaha' o Church grounds. Hall has a traditional and customary 
practice of protecting iwi. 
Kawaiaha' o Church was founded in about 1820 by the 
first missionaries to arrive in Hawai' i and is a congregational 
church devoted to the Christian faith. At issue in this case is Kawaiaha' o Church's project to construct a new Multi-Purpose 
Center (MPC) to replace its social hall, known as Likeke Hall, and an adjacent office building (MPC Project). 
Hall filed suit against the Department of Land and 
Natural Resources (DLNR), the Board of Land and Natural Resources (BLNR), the Department of Health (DOH), and various State of Hawai'i (State) officials, in their official capacities 
1
(collectively, the "State Defendants"),  and Kawaiaha' o Church 
and the Chair of the Board of Trustees and Board of Directors of Kawaiaha
'o Church, in his official capacity (collectively, 
"Kawaiaha' o Church").2 Hall raised various claims and sought 
declaratory and injunctive relief. Central to Hall's complaint 
is her claim that the State's allowing construction activity to 
proceed on the MPC Project without requiring an archeological inventory survey (AIS) violated Hawai' i's historic preservation 
law, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 6E, and its 
1
 The State officials sued in their official capacities are the
Chairperson of the BLNR and State Historic Preservation Officer, the
Administrator of the State Historic Preservation Division (SHPD), the Director
of the DOH, and the State Registrar of Vital Statistics and Chief of the DOH's
Office of Health Status Monitoring.
 
2
 Hall's lawsuit named Frank Pestana (Pestana), in his official capacity
as the Chair of the Board of Trustees and Chair of the Board of Directors of Kawaiaha' o Church, as a defendant. On October 25, 2012, this court granted
Kawaiaha' o Church's motion to substitute William Haole, in his official
capacity as the Chair of the Board of Trustees and Chair of the Board ofDirectors of Kawaiaha' o Church, as a party for Pestana in this appeal. 
2
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
implementing rules. Hall alleged that an AIS was required; that 
the failure of the DLNR, through its State Historic Preservation Division (SHPD), to require an AIS has resulted in the failure to protect burials and burial sites from improper alteration; and that Kawaiaha' o Church should be enjoined from proceeding with 
the MPC Project until an adequate AIS is prepared. 
On November 12, 2010, Hall moved for a preliminary 
injunction, which was denied by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court). On December 2, 2011, all parties filed motions for summary judgment. At a hearing on the motions, the Circuit Court orally denied Hall's motion for summary judgment and granted the motions for summary judgment filed by Kawaiaha' o 
Church and the State Defendants.
3 On January 24, 2012, the 
Circuit Court filed written orders memorializing its summary judgment decisions. The Circuit Court entered its final judgment on January 31, 2012. 
II.
 
On appeal, Hall argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
denying her motion for summary judgement and in granting
 Defendants' motions for summary judgment.
4
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court's recent decision in 
Kaleikini v. Yoshioka, 128 Hawai' i 53, 283 P.3d 60 (2012), 
provides the framework for our analysis. In Kaleikini, the supreme court held that the rules applicable to Hawai' i's 
historic preservation law establish a sequential review process, under which the completion of an AIS, if required, must precede the SHPD's concurrence in a project. Id. at 68, 283 P.3d at 75. 
HRS § 6E-42 (2009) requires a review and comment process for "any project involving a permit, license, certificate, land use change, subdivision, or other entitlement for use, which may 
3
 We will collectively refer to Kawaiaha' o Church and the State 
Defendants as the "Defendants." 
4
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided over the proceedings relevant
to this appeal.
 
3
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
affect historic property . . . or a burial site[.]" (Emphasis 
added.) The details of this process are governed by Hawai' i 
Administrative Rules (HAR) Chapter 13-284. Under this regulatory regime, prior to State government approval of any project involving a permit, the SHPD must be consulted "to determine if the area proposed for the project needs to undergo an inventory survey to determine if historic properties are present." HAR § 13-284-5(b) (2003). 
As the supreme court stated in Kaleikini, the SHPD may
 
respond in one of three ways:
 
(1) by determining that no historic properties are present;
(2) by determining that an adequate survey exists and that
historic properties are present, which allows the agency to
proceed to the next step in the review process, i.e.,
evaluation of the significance of the historic properties;
or (3) by concluding that an [AIS] needs to be done . . . .
 
Kaleikini, 128 Hawai' i at 74, 283 P.3d at 81 (discussing nearly 
identical rule in HAR § 13-275-5(b)) (internal quotation marks 
and brackets omitted). The SHPD did not make either of the first two determinations in this case. Therefore, the completion of an AIS was a necessary first step. Based on Kaleikini, we conclude that the SHPD should have required Kawaiaha' o Church to complete 
an AIS before concurring in the MPC Project and that the SHPD violated its own rules in failing to require an AIS before permitting the project to go forward.
5 
As explained in greater detail below, we conclude that
 
the MPC Project was subject to the requirements of HRS § 6E-42
 and its implementing rules, and that the Circuit Court erred in
 granting summary judgment in favor of Defendants on Hall's HRS
 Chapter 6E claims. We vacate the Circuit Court's final judgment
 
5
 The Hawai' i Supreme Court issued its decision in Kaleikini on August 
24, 2012. On September 5, 2012, Hall filed a second motion for injunctive
relief pending appeal. On September 27, 2012, the supreme court denied amotion asking it to reconsider its decision in Kaleikini. On September 28,2012, this court granted Hall's motion for injunctive relief and enjoinedKawaiaha' o Church, pending this appeal, from the disinterment of human
skeletal remains or iwi from Kawaiaha' o Church grounds that are related to the
MPC Project and from all construction activities related to the MPC Projectthat could result in the disinterment of human skeletal remains or iwi. 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
with respect to Hall's HRS Chapter 6E claims (Counts 1, 2, 4, 5, 
6, and 11) and remand for further proceedings. Certain of Hall's remaining non-HRS Chapter 6E claims, and the Circuit Court's analysis in dismissing them, are based on the assumption that HRS § 6E-42 would not be applied to the MPC Project. As to these claims, our decision that HRS § 6E-42 is applicable to the MPC Project significantly alters the posture of this case, changes the context in which these claims are made, and undermines the Circuit Court's analysis. We vacate the Circuit Court's final judgment with respect to such claims (Count 3 and Count 8 as against Kawaiaha' o Church) and remand for reconsideration by the 
Circuit Court based on our analysis and on further developments in the case. With respect to Hall's other non-HRS Chapter 6E claims, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Defendants on Count 7 and vacate the final judgment as to Count 7. We affirm the Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment and its final judgment in favor of the State Defendants on Count 8 and in favor of the State Defendants and Kawaiaha' o Church on Counts 9 and 10. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
In about 2002, Kawaiaha' o Church began planning the MPC 
Project to replace Likeke Hall and an adjacent office building. The office building had been constructed in 1929 and Likeke Hall in 1940. Likeke Hall was constructed over burial lots on the Kawaiaha' o Church grounds. During the construction of Likeke 
Hall in 1940, 117 sets of human remains were disinterred from the area where Likeke Hall was built. The MPC Project also included the digging of trenches to install sewer, water, and electrical utility lines. 
The original plans for the MPC Project included a
 
footprint that was significantly larger than the footprint of
 Likeke Hall and the office building and contemplated a
 underground parking structure and a courtyard. In its initial
 evaluation of the MPC Project, the SHPD acknowledged the
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
potential that human burials would be disturbed and the necessity
 
for an AIS to be conducted prior to any ground disturbance. On
 February 10, 2004, the SHPD informed the Hawai' i Community 
Development Authority (HCDA):
 
Historic documentation suggests that significant subsurface
historic deposits including human burials were once located
in this area. Because of the potential for subsurface
historic sites to exist, we believe than [sic] an
archaeological inventory survey with a program of subsurface
testing, be conducted of the areas proposed for ground
disturbance in order to determine if historic sites are
 present, and if so, to gather sufficient information to
evaluate their significance. The archaeological inventory
survey must be conducted prior to beginning any ground
disturbance and a report of the findings should be submitted
to the State Historic Preservation Division for review and
 approval.
 
Accordingly, the HCDA issued a Project Eligibility Permit to 
Kawaiaha' o Church on February 24, 2004, which was conditioned on 
the completion of an AIS. On May 4, 2005, the HDCA issued a Development Permit and Certificate of Appropriateness which stated that the SHPD was "requiring [Kawaiaha' o Church] to 
conduct an archaeological inventory survey with a program of subsurface testing to determine if historic sites are present." The Development Permit was conditioned on "[c]ompliance with the conditions set forth in the Project Eligibility Permit[.]" 
Kawaiaha' o Church eventually decided to scale-back its 
plans for the MPC Project. Under the scaled-back plans, the footprint of the MPC Project would be similar to, but approximately 10 percent larger than, the footprint of Likeke Hall and the office building. 
As part of Kawaiaha' o Church's planing process, it 
retained Ku' iwalu as a native Hawaiian cultural consultant in 
late 2005. Ku' iwalu was involved in Kawaiaha' o Church's outreach 
efforts, which included attempts to contact families associated with old burial plots that may be directly impacted by the MPC Project and publishing notices in newspapers and publications. Kawaiaha' o Church invited such families and other interested 
people to public meetings to gather input and provide information about the MPC Project. 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Kawaiaha' o Church's consultant advised Kawaiaha' o Church 
that preparation of an AIS would be costly and take considerable 
time. In particular, the consultant advised that any human remains found during an AIS would be considered "previously identified," a designation that would require publication of notices and consultation with lineal and cultural descendants, involve the OIBC, and could preclude the relocation of human remains and require their preservation in place. 
After the plans were revised to reduce the footprint of 
the MPC Project and eliminate the underground parking structure, Kawaiaha' o Church decided to approach the SHPD to see whether an 
AIS was still required. In January of 2006, a Kawaiaha' o Church 
representative met with the Administrator of the SHPD to discuss the revised plans and whether an AIS would still be required. After this meeting, Kawaiaha' o Church understood that the SHPD 
would consider allowing the MPC Project to go forward under a archaeological monitoring plan (AMP), instead of requiring an AIS. 
In August 2006, Kawaiaha' o Church submitted its AMP to 
the SHPD for its approval. The AMP noted that the footprint of the new MPC building would be similar to the footprint of the existing Likeke Hall, which was "good in that we know that 117 burials were disinterred in 1940 from this area." Nevertheless, the AMP stated: "It would seem likely however that some human remains would still lie under the footprint of the proposed construction." The AMP further stated: "The project area has the potential for historic cultural deposits relating to the early history of Kawaiaha' o Church as well as both pre-contact and 
historic human burials. . . . Historic properties may be encountered anywhere within the project area." 
The SHPD accepted the AMP. In a letter to Kawaiaha' o 
Church dated December 27, 2006, the SHPD stated: 
We previously commented on this proposed undertaking. In a
 
letter dated September 28, 2006 . . . , we accepted an
archaeological monitoring plan by Cultural Surveys Hawai' i,
Inc. . . . as fulfilling the requirements of Hawai' i 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Administrative Rules (HAR) Chapter 13-279. The monitoring
plan calls for on-site (100%) monitoring of all grounddisturbing activities associated with demolition andconstruction on the Kawaiaha' o Church grounds. Therefore,
provided that the proposed undertaking is implemented asstated in the aforementioned monitoring plan, we believethat the proposed undertaking will have "no adverse effect"on historically-significant resources. 
II.
 
In late 2007, construction work on the MPC Project 
began with the demolition of Likeke Hall and the office building. 
In January 2009, Kawaiaha' o Church began excavation work for the 
MPC Project, which involved areas within the footprint of the old Likeke Hall as well as areas outside this footprint to install utility lines. During excavation for the utility lines, burials were discovered. The SHPD assumed jurisdiction and approved the disinterment of the burials. As the excavation continued, more burials were discovered in the utility line trenches and under the old Likeke Hall, until the number of sets of human remains uncovered grew to 69. A number of the burials were determined to be native Hawaiian. 
In about April 2009, Kawaiaha' o Church stopped work on 
the MPC Project. Kawaiaha' o Church asserts that at that time, 
"it was approximately ninety-five percent (95%) done with the excavation work for the new sewer line and approximately ninety percent (90%) done with the excavation for the footings for the first and second floor of the MPC Building." Construction activities on the MPC Project remained halted until about May 2011. 
After the construction stopped and the SHPD had
 
approved the disinterment of the 69 sets of human remains that
 had been discovered, the State reevaluated the question of agency
 jurisdiction over the MPC Project. The State determined that the
 SHPD and the DOH would exercise joint jurisdiction over the
 burials uncovered during the MPC Project.
 
In a letter to Kawaiaha' o Church dated June 11, 2009, 
the Chairperson of the DLNR explained that because the State viewed the MPC Project as involving a cemetery, the involvement 
8
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of both the DOH and the DLNR was required under HRS § 6E-41 to 
remove or redesignate the cemetery for the MPC Project to move forward. The DOH would be responsible for issuing a disinterment permit and the DLNR would be responsible for coordinating conditions for the disinterment of unidentified burials. The letter advised that once all burials were removed from the project area, the boundaries of the cemetery should be readjusted to remove the project area from the cemetery designation, so that no new interments will be allowed in the project area. The letter outlined the conditions that Kawaiaha' o Church was 
required to follow regarding the removal of burials in order to continue with the MPC Project. 
Thus, based on the June 11, 2009, letter, it was 
determined that the DLNR and the DOH would exercise joint jurisdiction with respect to the MPC Project pursuant to HRS § 6E-41, that Kawaiahao Church would obtain a disinterment permit from the DOH, and the MPC Project could continue based on conditions imposed by the State. On October 22, 2010, the DOH issued a blanket disinterment permit to Kawaiaha' o Church. 
III.
 
A.
 
In the meantime, on August 6, 2009, Hall filed a 
complaint in the Circuit Court against Defendants seeking declaratory and injunctive relief.  On April 6, 2010, Hall filed 
a first amended complaint. On November 12, 2010, after the DOH 
issued the blanket disinterment permit, Hall filed a motion for preliminary injunction to enjoin continued excavation by Kawaiaha' o Church. Hall argued, among other things, that the MPC 
Project should be halted because the required AIS had not been prepared. The Circuit Court denied Hall's motion, and it approved as to form Defendants' proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order regarding Hall's motion for preliminary injunction, which was filed on October 11, 2011. 
On December 1, 2010, Hall filed a second amended
 
complaint, which alleged: 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Count 1: The failure to require an AIS violates HAR
 
Chapter 13-284. 
Count 2: The MPC Project site is not a known,
 
maintained, actively used cemetery within the meaning of HRS 
§ 6E-43 and therefore burials affected by the project cannot be 
disinterred and relocated through a DOH disinterment permit.
 
Count 3: The use of a blanket disinterment permit under 
HRS § 338-25.5, without any rules for such permit that would
 protect historic native Hawaiian burials, to disinter and
 relocate burials violates Hall's due process rights.
 
Count 4: The use of HRS § 6E-41, without applying rules
 
to protect historic native Hawaiian burials, to disinter and
 relocate burials violates Hall's due process rights.
 
Count 5: The burials related to the MPC Project require 
O'ahu Island Burial Council (OIBC) determination before action 
can be taken. 
Count 6: Defendants violated HRS § 6E-43 and HAR
 
Chapter 13-300.
 
Count 7: The failure to perform an environmental
 
assessment violates HRS Chapter 343.
 
Count 8: Defendants have failed to obtain permits
 
required for the MPC Project.
 
Count 9: Defendants failed to fulfill the obligations
 
imposed on them by the public trust doctrine. 
Count 10: Defendants have failed to investigate and
 
protect native Hawaiian rights.
 
Count 11: An AIS necessary for the MPC Project has not
 
been prepared. 
Hall prayed for declaratory and injunctive relief,
 
including that the Circuit Court:
 
1. Declare that Defendants have failed to require the 
preparation of an AIS and require the preparation and approval of an AIS before any further construction activities on Kawaiaha' o 
Church property take place; 
10
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2. Declare that the MPC Project site is not a known,
 
maintained, actively used cemetery; that the State's burial law
 
is applicable to historic native Hawaiian burials located on the
 property; and that the burials may not be disinterred and
 relocated pursuant to a DOH disinterment permit;
 
3. Declare that the burials within the area of the
 
MPC Project are "previously identified" burials and are within
 the jurisdiction of the OIBC. 
4. Enjoin the State Defendants from rendering any 
further decisions regarding the disinterment or relocation of burials until an AIS is prepared and approved and the OIBC renders a decision regarding previously identified burials on the Kawaiaha' o Church grounds; and 
5. Enjoin Kawaiaha' o Church from disinterring any 
remains on the Kawaiaha' o Church property and commencing any work 
on the MPC Project until all approvals are properly authorized. 
B.
 
On October 10, 2011, Hall filed a motion to amend her 
second amended complaint, seeking, among other things, to add a count to allege, in the alternative, that if the area of the proposed MPC Project is a cemetery, then HRS Chapter 441 requires that it be used exclusively for cemetery purposes until the dedication is removed, and thus construction cannot begin until then. On November 8, 2011, the Circuit Court denied Hall's motion to amend the second amended complaint. On November 16, 2011, Paulette Ka' anohiokalani Kaleikini (Kaleikini), a native 
Hawaiian who was also represented by Hall's counsel, filed a separate civil action, Kaleikini v. Kawaiaha' o Church, et. al., 
Civil No. 11-1-2816-11 ECN ("Kaleikini Lawsuit").
6 The 
Kaleikini Lawsuit concerned the MPC Project and was filed against the same defendants as in Hall's case. A different Circuit Court 
6
 We use the term "Kaleikini Lawsuit" to distinguish it from the
Kaleikini decision recently issued by the Hawai' i Supreme Court in Kaleikini 
v. Yoshioka. The same plaintiff, Paulette Ka' anohiokalani Kaleikini, was
involved in both cases. 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Judge, the Honorable Edwin C. Nacino, presided over the Kaleikini
 
Lawsuit.
 
The complaint in the Kaleikini Lawsuit alleged that the 
issue of the appropriateness of disinterment is the subject of Hall's case; that Kaleikini's complaint was narrowly focused on preventing the construction of a building on top of burials that are known, or highly likely, to exist; that Kawaiaha' o Church 
claims that the MPC Project site is a dedicated cemetery; and that HRS Chapter 441 requires that cemeteries be used exclusively for cemetery purposes. In moving for a preliminary injunction to enjoin construction of the MPC building, Kaleikini stipulated with Defendants that the MPC Project site was a dedicated cemetery pursuant to HRS Chapter 441. Based on this stipulation, a stipulation that burials are presently located at the proposed MPC Project site, and a finding that the majority of the area under the MPC Project site has not yet been excavated, the Circuit Court (Judge Nacino) enjoined Defendants from engaging in any construction activity on the MPC Project site until the cemetery designation was properly removed. The order granting Kaleikini's motion for preliminary injunction was filed in the Kaleikini Lawsuit on December 2, 2011. 
C.
 
On that same day, Hall, Kawaiaha' o Church, and the 
State Defendants each filed a motion for summary judgment with respect to Hall's second amended complaint. On January 13, 2012, a hearing was held on the parties' summary judgment motions. At the hearing, the Circuit Court (Judge Sakamoto) denied Hall's motion and granted Defendants' motions, and it provided an explanation for its ruling. The Circuit Court explained that its decision to grant summary judgment in favor of Defendants on the bulk of Hall's claims was based on: (1) its interpretation of the statutory framework of HRS Chapters 6E and 441; and (2) its application of the doctrine of judicial estoppel. 
The Circuit Court concluded that HRS Chapters 441 and
 
6E were intended to cover "separate and distinct situations" and
 
12
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to protect human remains more than 50 years old based on the
 
location at which they were found. The Circuit Court ruled that
 "each chapter is intended exclusively for different
 situations[:]" HRS Chapter 441 was intended to apply to human
 remains found in a cemetery and HRS Chapter 6E was intended to
 apply to human remains over 50 years old (and therefore "historic
 property") found in a location that is not a cemetery.
7
 
The Circuit Court observed that shortly after Hall's
 
request to amend her complaint to add a count for violation of
 HRS Chapter 441 had been denied, a separate complaint was filed
 in the Kaleikini Lawsuit; that Kaleikini was represented by the
 same counsel as Hall and had sued the same defendants as Hall
 over the same MPC Project; and that the Kaleikini Lawsuit
 contains a single count which alleges a violation of HRS Chapter
 441. The Circuit Court took judicial notice of the Kaleikini
 
Lawsuit and considered it to be "an outgrowth" of Hall's case. 
Based on its view that HRS Chapters 6E and 441 were mutually
 exclusive and could not both be applied to a single site
 containing human remains, the Circuit Court reasoned that it
 "cannot allow claims for both HRS [Chapters] 441 and 6E to go
 forward as applied to the same site." The Circuit Court ruled
 that because Hall's counsel had gone forward in the Kaleikini
 Lawsuit and secured a preliminary injunction based on HRS Chapter
 441, Hall was precluded based on the principle of judicial
 estoppel from arguing "that the exact same MPC site is not a
 cemetery but a burial site." Applying its analysis that Hall
 could only claim that the MPC site was a cemetery and that HRS
 Chapter 6E did not apply to human remains found in cemeteries,
 the Circuit Court concluded that Hall's claims arising out of the
 application HRS Chapter 6E were "moot." On this basis, the
 
7 The Circuit Court opined that HRS § 338-25.5 provides "an extra layer
of protection" to human remains, regardless of their age or location, by
requiring a DOH permit before they can be disturbed, but noted that the DLNR
can waive the DOH permit requirement in the case of an HRS Chapter 6E
disinterment pursuant to HRS §§ 6E-43 and 6E-43.6. 
13
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Circuit Court granted summary judgment in favor of Defendants on
 
Counts 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, and 11.
 
The Circuit Court also granted summary judgment in
 
favor of Defendants on Hall's claims in Counts 3, 7, 8, 9, and
 10.
8 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Hall's principal claim in this case is that an AIS,
 
which would identify native Hawaiian burial sites and other
 historic property in the area of the MPC Project, was required
 and that State violated HRS Chapter 6E and its implementing rules
 by allowing ground-disturbing construction activity on the MPC
 Project without first requiring the completion of an AIS. 
Native
 
Hawaiian burials discovered during the AIS process are considered
 "previously identified" and therefore subject to the jurisdiction
 of the island burial councils. See HAR § 13-300-31(b) (1996). 
Under HRS § 6E-43(b) (2009), "[t]he appropriate island burial
 council shall determine whether preservation in place or
 relocation of previously identified native Hawaiian burial sites
 is warranted . . . ."
9
 
In Kaleikini v. Yoshioka, 128 Hawai' i 53, 283 P.3d 60, 
the Hawai' i Supreme Court recently analyzed the requirements for 
8 See discussion infra regarding these counts.
 
9 A committee report on the bill establishing the island burial councils
explained that the bill was "in response to the need for sensitive treatment
of Hawaiian burial sites through cooperative and shared decision-making with
representatives of the Hawaiian community." Stand. Comm. Rep. 379-90, 1990
House Journal at 987. In Act 306, the 1990 legislation that established the
 island burial councils, the Legislature stated:
 
The purpose of this Act is to augment current procedures
relating to the proper care and protection of burial sites found
in the State. In order to avoid future disputes arising from the
discovery of human skeletal remains, this Act provides additional
protection for native Hawaiian burial sites of high preservation
value such as areas with a concentration of skeletal remains, or
prehistoric or historic burials associated with important
individuals or events, that are within a context of historic
properties, or have known lineal descendants.
 
1990 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 306, § 1 at 956.
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the preparation of an AIS to protect historic burial sites under
 
HRS Chapter 6E and its implementing rules. We conclude that
 Kaleikini establishes an analytical framework that controls our
 decision in this case. Based on Kaleikini, we conclude that the
 SHPD violated its own rules by failing to require the preparation
 of an AIS before permitting the MPC Project to go forward.
 
II.
 
Because we view Kaleikini as controlling, we start with 
a discussion of that case. Kaleikini, a native Hawaiian who engaged in the traditional and customary practice of protecting native Hawaiian burial remains, sued the City and County of Honolulu (City) and the State, challenging the approval of the Honolulu High-Capacity Transit Corridor Project (rail project). Id. at 56, 283 P.3d at 63. The rail project involved the construction of a 20-mile fixed guideway rail system in four phases. Id. It was undisputed that the rail project had a high 
likelihood of having a potential effect on archeological resources, particularly native Hawaiian burial sites, in its last phase, which included the Kaka' ako area. Id. at 58, 63, 283 P.3d 
at 65, 70. Kawaiaha' o Church is located in this area. 
Kaleikini argued that the rail project should be
 
enjoined until an AIS, which would identify and document
 archaeological historic properties and burial sites in the
 project area, was completed for all four phases of the rail
 project. Id. at 56, 283 P.3d at 63. She further argued that the
 
"failure to complete an [AIS] prior to the start of construction
 jeopardized the integrity of native Hawaiian burial sites by
 foreclosing options such as not building the rail, changing its
 route, or using a [less intrusive] technology[.]" Id. The City
 
asserted that it had a plan to complete an AIS for each phase of
 the project, which was set forth in a Programmatic Agreement, and
 that HRS Chapter 6E was satisfied as long as an AIS was completed
 for a particular phase before construction on that phase began. 
Id. at 56-57, 283 P.3d at 63-64. Pursuant to the Programmatic
 Agreement and the City's interpretation of HRS Chapter 6E, the
 City had started construction on Phase 1 of the rail project, for
 
15
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
which an AIS had been completed, before an AIS for all phases had
 
been completed.
 
The supreme court held that "the SHPD failed to follow
 
its own rules when it concurred in the rail project prior to the
 completion of an archaeological inventory survey for the entire
 project." Id. at 57, 283 P.3d at 64. The court interpreted the
 
rules promulgated by the DLNR to implement HRS Chapter 6E as
 establishing "a sequential process under which an AIS, if
 required, must precede the SHPD's concurrence in a project." Id.
 
at 68, 283 P.3d at 75. The court emphasized that according to
 the rules, "'the review process is designed to identify
 significant historic properties in project areas and then to
 develop and execute plans to handle impacts to the significant
 properties in the public interest.'" Id. at 57, 282 P.3d at 64
 
(emphasis in original; brackets and citation omitted). 
The court concluded that the rules did not permit the
 
SHPD to consider the rail project in four separate phases for the
 purposes of historic preservation review. Id. It also rejected
 
the City and State's argument that the Programmatic Agreement
 constituted an "interim protection plan" that would allow the
 rail project to start before completion of the full historic
 review process. Id. The court ruled that "that an interim
 
protection plan is a form of mitigation that, under the
 sequential approach of the rules, can be developed only after an
 AIS has been completed." Id. The court also held that Kaleikini
 
had made a sufficient showing of irreparable injury to establish
 standing to sue under HRS § 6E-13 (2009).
10 Id. at 68-71, 283
 
P.3d at 75-78.
 
10
 HRS § 6E–13(b) provides:
 
Any person may maintain an action in the trial court having
jurisdiction where the alleged violation occurred or is likely to
occur for restraining orders or injunctive relief against the
State, its political subdivisions, or any person upon a showing of
irreparable injury, for the protection of an historic property or
a burial site and the public trust therein from unauthorized or
improper demolition, alteration, or transfer of the property or
burial site.
 
16
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Because the rail project was a government construction
 
project, Kaleikini argued that the failure to complete an AIS for
 
the entire project violated the review and approval requirements
 under both HRS § 6E-8 (2009) and HRS § 6E-42 (2009).
11 Id. at
 
71, 283 P.3d at 78. The supreme court held that both the rules
 implementing HRS § 6E-8 and HRS § 6E-42 "clearly establish a
 sequential approach to the historic preservation review
 process[.]" Id. at 72, 283 P.3d at 79.
12 Under this sequential
 
process, an AIS, when required, forms part of the first step of
 the process: to identify and inventory historic properties in the
 project area. Id. at 75, 283 P.3d at 82. Once an adequate AIS
 
is submitted, then the next sequential steps in the process can
 take place: (1) if historic properties are present, the 
11 HRS §§ 6E–8 and 6E-42 provide, in pertinent part:
 
§ 6E-8 Review of effect of proposed state projects. (a)
Before any agency or officer of the State or its political
subdivisions commences any project which may affect historic
property, aviation artifact, or a burial site, the agency or
officer shall advise the [DLNR] and allow the [DLNR] an
opportunity for review of the effect of the proposed project on
historic properties, aviation artifacts, or burial sites,
consistent with section 6E–43, especially those listed on the
Hawaii register of historic places. The proposed project shall
not be commenced, or in the event it has already begun, continued,
until the [DLNR] shall have given its written concurrence.
 
§ 6E-42 Review of proposed projects. (a) Before any agency
or officer of the State or its political subdivisions approves any
project involving a permit, license, certificate, land use change,
subdivision, or other entitlement for use, which may affect
historic property, aviation artifacts, or a burial site, the
agency or office shall advise the [DLNR] and prior to any approval
allow the [DLNR] an opportunity for review and comment on the
effect of the proposed project on historic properties, aviation
artifacts, or burial sites, consistent with section 6E–43,
including those listed in the Hawaii register of historic places.
 
(Emphases added).
 
12 Although the supreme court noted there were differences between HRS
§ 6E-8 and HRS § 6E-42, it stated that the implementing rules for both
sections "provide for a very similar review and comment process[.]"
Kaleikini, 128 Hawai' i at 73, 283 P.3d at 80. The court also stated that for 
purposes of its analysis in Kaleikini, the review steps under HAR Chapter 13­284 (the implementing rules for HRS § 6E-42) "are nearly identical to those
contained in [HAR] chapter 13-275" (the implementing rules for HRS § 6E-8).
Id. at 73 n.27, 283 P.3d at 80 n.27.
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
significance of each historic property is evaluated; (2) if
 
significant historic properties are present, the impact of the
 proposed project on such properties must be assessed; (3) if the
 project will affect significant historic properties, mitigation
 plans and commitments for each significant historic property must
 be developed and approved. Id. The supreme court held that
 
because the SHPD failed to follow this sequential approach to the
 historic preservation review process, the SHPD improperly
 concurred in the rail project. Id. at 76, 283 P.3d at 83.
 
III.
 
Defendants argue that Hall lacks a sufficient personal 
stake in the outcome of the litigation to establish standing to raise her HRS Chapter 6E claims. This argument is foreclosed by the supreme court's decision in Kaleikini. Kaleikini asserted that she is a recognized cultural descendent of the iwi found in Kaka'ako, that there is a high likelihood that the rail project 
will affect burials in that area; that the unnecessary removal of iwi causes her great pain and suffering; and "the City's decision to proceed with the rail project without first completing the required historic preservation review process forecloses options that would provide greater protection to burials[.]" Id. at 68­
69, 283 P.3d at 75-76. The supreme court also cited the views of the OIBC that "'intrusions into burials' are 'considered extremely offensive and disrespectful -- an act of violence and degradation directed at the deceased individual, the living family members, and the larger community associated with the burial.'" Id. at 69, 283 P.3d at 76 (brackets omitted). 
Based on the foregoing, the supreme court concluded
 
that Kaleikini has made a sufficient showing of standing. Id. at
 
69-71, 283 P.3d at 76-78. It ruled that she had made a
 sufficient showing of irreparable injury in the form of
 threatened injury to the Kaka'ako burial sites to satisfy
 standing under HRS § 6E-13(b). Id. at 69-70, 283 P.3d at 76-77. 
18
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
It also ruled that she had shown a sufficient procedural injury,
 
the denial of the opportunity to consult in an AIS prior to the
 rail project's approval, to establish procedural standing. Id.
 
at 71, 283 P.3d at 78.
 
Here, the showing made by Hall is comparable to the 
showing the supreme court found was sufficient for standing in Kaleikini. Hall asserts that she has family members who are buried on the grounds of Kawaiaha' o Church; she is a native 
Hawaiian and a recognized cultural descendant of the iwi found on the Kawaiaha' o Church grounds; she has a traditional and 
customary practice of caring for iwi; she is concerned that her family members may be in unmarked burials on Kawaiaha' o Church 
grounds; and the disturbance of unmarked burials of family members or other cultural ancestors would cause her injury and harm. Based on Kaleikini, we conclude that Hall has standing to raise her HRS Chapter 6E claims. 
Defendants also argue that Hall lacks standing on her
 
HRS Chapter 6E claims because the native Hawaiian burials
 uncovered during the MPC Project were "Christian burials,"
13 and
 
thus could not be considered traditional native Hawaiian burials,
 and because HRS Chapter 6E does not protect burial sites in
 cemeteries. We disagree. 
The protections provided by HRS Chapter 6E to human
 
skeletal remains and burial sites do not turn on religious
 distinctions. In enacting amendments to HRS Chapter 6E, the
 Legislature stated:
 
All human skeletal remains and burial sites within the
 
State of Hawaii are entitled to equal protection under the
law regardless of race, religion, or cultural origin. The
 public has a vital interest in the proper disposition of the
bodies of its deceased members, which is in the nature of a
sacred trust for the benefit of all . . . ." 
13
 Kawaiaha' o Church's expert explained that the phrase "Christian
burial" commonly refers to the a style of burial -- "supine, extended, at adepth" and that "it would be odd to speculate categorically on the religiousbeliefs of sets of human skeletal remains." 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1990 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 22, § 1 at 28; 1990 Haw. Sess. Laws Act
 
306, § 1 at 956. Hall's interest in protecting family members'
 unmarked burials and native Hawaiian burials is not extinguished
 by the burials being Christian burials. Moreover, as explained
 below, the MPC Project site affected burials that were covered by
 the protections provided to historic property by HRS Chapter 6E. 
IV. 
Defendants contend that the MPC Project was exempt from
 
the historic preservation review process required by HRS § 6E-42
 and its implementing rules because the project involved a
 cemetery. We disagree.
 
HRS § 6E-42 provides for a review and comment process
 
for projects that may affect burial sites and other historic
 property. HRS § 6E-42 provides in pertinent part: 
(a) Before any agency or officer of the State or its
political subdivisions approves any project involving a
permit, license, certificate, land use change, subdivision,
or other entitlement for use, which may affect historic
property . . . or a burial site, the agency or office shall
advise the [DLNR] and prior to any approval allow the [DLNR]
an opportunity for review and comment on the effect of the
proposed project on historic properties . . . or burial
sites, consistent with section 6E–43, including those listed
in the Hawaii register of historic places.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
HRS § 6E-2 (2009) defines the terms "burial site" and
 
"historic property" as follows:
 
"Burial site" means any specific unmarked location
where prehistoric or historic human skeletal remains and
their associated burial goods are interred, and its
immediate surrounding archaeological context, deemed a
unique class of historic property and not otherwise included
in section 6E-41.
 
. . . .
 
"Historic property" means any building, structure,
object, district, area, or site, including heiau and
underwater site, which is over fifty years old.
 
20
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
14
HRS § 6E-41 (2009)  sets forth requirements for persons removing
or redesignating a cemetery, and HRS § 6E-43 (2009)15 establishes
 
14 HRS § 6E-41 provides:
 
Cemeteries; removal or redesignation. (a) Any person
removing or redesignating any cemetery shall comply with the
following requirements:
 
(1)	 Publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation
in the State, requesting persons having information
concerning the cemetery or persons buried in it to
report that information to the [DLNR]; 
(2)	 Photograph the cemetery generally, and take separate
photographs of all headstones located in the cemetery; 
(3)	 Turn over to the [DLNR] all photographs and any
other relevant historical records; 
(4)	 Move all headstones to the place of reinterment;
and 
(5)	 Obtain the written concurrence of the [DLNR]
prior to any removal or redesignation if the
cemetery has existed for more than fifty years. 
(b) The requirements of subsection (a) shall be in
addition to any requirements imposed by the department of health.
 
15 HRS § 6E-43 provides in relevant part:
 
Prehistoric and historic burial sites. (a) At any site,
other than a known, maintained, actively used cemetery where human
skeletal remains are discovered or are known to be buried and
 appear to be over fifty years old, the remains and their
associated burial goods shall not be moved without the [DLNR's]
approval.
 
(b) All burial sites are significant and shall be
preserved in place until compliance with this section is met,except as provided in section 6E-43.6 [(relating to inadvertentdiscovery of burial sites)]. The appropriate island burialcouncil shall determine whether preservation in place orrelocation of previously identified native Hawaiian burial sitesis warranted, following criteria which shall include recognitionthat burial sites of high preservation value, such as areas with aconcentration of skeletal remains, or prehistoric or historicburials associated with important individuals and events, or areasthat are within a context of historic properties, or have knownlineal descendants, shall receive greater consideration forpreservation in place. The criteria shall be developed by the[DLNR] in consultation with the councils, office of Hawaiianaffairs, representatives of development and large property ownerinterests, and appropriate Hawaiian organizations, such as HuiMalama I Na Kupuna O Hawai' i Nei, through rules adopted pursuant
to chapter 91. . . . 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
procedures applicable to the discovery of historic human skeletal
 
remains and to burial sites. 
Contrary to Defendants' contention, cemeteries are not
 
exempt from the historic preservation review process required by
 HRS § 6E-42 and its implementing rules. Cemeteries are not
 expressly exempted by the language of HRS § 6E-42. Instead, HRS
 § 6E-42 applies to any project, requiring the specified
 government approvals, "which may affect historic property . . .
 or a burial site[.]" A burial site -- "any specific unmarked
 location where prehistoric or historic human skeletal remains and
 their associated burial goods are interred" -- can certainly be
 found in a cemetery. A cemetery can also fall within the
 definition of "historic property," which includes any structure,
 object, area, or site over fifty years old.
 
Kawaiaha'o Church, however, relies on the phrase "not 
otherwise included in section 6E-41" in the definition of "burial site" to argue that cemeteries are exempt from the requirements of HRS § 6E-42. We disagree. HRS § 6E-41 does not encompass all cemeteries, but only cemeteries that are in the process of being redesignated or removed. When Kawaiaha' o Church applied for 
government approval for the MPC Project, it was not in the process of redesignating or removing a cemetery. Instead, it was seeking approval for construction to replace a social hall and office building with a new building. During the approval process, neither Kawaiaha' o Church nor the SHPD treated the MPC 
Project as being exempt from the historic preservation review process required by HRS § 6E-42. Indeed, the SHPD initially required the preparation of an AIS, and Kawaiaha' o Church then 
sought to substitute an AMP for an AIS in the historic preservation review process after the project was scaled back. 
Thus, when Kawaiaha' o Church was seeking approval for 
the MPC Project -- the time relevant for determining whether an AIS was required -- the MPC Project was a project that "may affect . . . a burial site" under HRS § 6E-42. Kawaiaha' o Church 
and the SHPD both acknowledged that historic human burial sites 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
were likely to be uncovered during the construction of the MPC
 
Project.
 
In addition, the MPC Project was subject to the 
requirements of HRS § 6E-42 because it was a project that "may affect historic property." The MPC Project is in close proximity to Kawaiaha' o Church,
16 which is listed on the National and 
Hawai'i registers of historic places, and the MPC Project 
affected a structure and site over fifty years old. 
Hall acknowledges that HRS § 6E-43(a) excludes human 
skeletal remains found in "a known, maintained, actively used cemetery." We conclude that this exclusion does not apply to the MPC Project. The MPC Project included areas that clearly were not being maintained and actively used as a cemetery. The footprint of the MPC Project largely overlaps the footprint of Likeke Hall and the adjoining office building, which were constructed in 1940 and 1923, respectively. According to Kawaiaha' o Church's archaeologist, the purpose of the 
disinterments of the 117 burials during the 1940 construction of Likeke Hall was to terminate any cemetery function in that area, and the main footprint of the MPC Project has been covered by cement and building foundations for over 60 years. Under the particular circumstances of this case -- where the main footprint of the MPC Project had not been maintained and actively used as a cemetery for over 60 years and Kawaiaha' o Church was not in the 
process of removing or redesignating the project site as a cemetery when government approvals for the MPC Project were 
16
 As discussed below, the parties dispute whether only the Kawaiaha' o 
Church structure itself, as opposed to the Kawaiaha' o Church grounds, is
included in the National and Hawai' i registers of historic places. HRS § 6E­
42, however, encompasses State approvals for project that "may affect"
historic property. The MPC Project was a project that may affect historicproperty regardless of whether only the Kawaiaha' o Church structure itself, or
the entire Kawaiaha' o Church grounds, is included in the National or Hawai' i 
registers. 
23
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
sought -- we conclude that the MPC Project and the burial sites
 
it affected were subject to the requirements of HRS § 6E-42.17
 
V.
 
Having determined that Hall has standing to raise her 
HRS Chapter 6E claims and that the MPC Project was not exempt from the historic preservation review process required by HRS § 6E-42, we now turn to the question of whether an AIS was required for the MPC Project. While HRS § 6E-42 provides generally for a review and comment process, the details of this review process are governed by HAR Chapter 13-284, the DLNR rules that implement HRS § 6E-42. Kaleikini, 128 Hawai' i at 73, 283 
P.3d at 80. We conclude that HAR Chapter 13-284 required the preparation of an AIS before the MPC Project was allowed to go forward. 
The review and comment process established by HAR
 
Chapter 13-284 provides in pertinent part as follows:
 
A State agency responsible for approving a project must
 
identify and inventory historic properties that are present in
 the project area. HAR §§ 13-284-3(a), 13-284-5(a) (2003). To
 meet this obligation, the agency "shall first consult with the
 SHPD to determine if the area proposed for the project needs to
 undergo an inventory survey to determine if historic properties
 are present." HAR § 13-284-5(b). The SHPD, in turn, is required
 to respond in writing. Id. If the SHPD concludes that no
 
significant historic sites are present or likely to be present
 due to past land disturbances or based on documentation submitted
 by the agency concerning the extent and depth of past land
 altering activities, then the SHPD shall make this determination
 in the form of a "no historic properties affected" letter. HAR 
§ 13-284-5(b)(1), (2). If the SHPD responds that "an adequate
 survey exists and that historic properties are present, then the
 
17
 Our decision is based on the particular circumstances of this case,
and we are not required to determine the precise extent to which the
requirements of HRS Chapter 6E apply to cemetery operations. We note,
however, that the Legislature may wish to clarify its intent on this question.
 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
agency shall proceed to the next step of the review process,
 
evaluation of the significance of the historic properties[.]" 
HAR § 13-284-5(b)(4). "If the SHPD concludes an inventory survey
 needs to be done, this survey shall identify all historic
 properties and gather enough information to evaluate the
 properties' significance." HAR § 13-284-5(b)(5).
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court, in construing the "nearly 
identical" rules under HAR Chapter 13-275, stated in Kaleikinki that the SHPD may respond to the agency's request for consultation in one of three ways: 
(1) by determining that no historic properties are present;
(2) by determining that "an adequate survey exists and that
historic properties are present," which allows the agency to
proceed to "the next step in the review process, [i.e.,]
evaluation of the significance of the historic properties";
or (3) by concluding that an inventory survey needs to be
done, which must "identify all historic properties and
gather enough information to evaluate the properties'
significance."
 
Kaleikini, 128 Hawai' i at 74, 283 P.3d at 81 (brackets in 
original). In this case, the SHPD did not make either of the 
first two determinations with respect to the MPC Project. Therefore, the completion of an AIS was a necessary first step. 
The SHPD did not make the first determination described
 
in Kaleikini. While the supreme court summarized this first
 determination as "no historic properties are present," the rules
 more specifically refer to this determination as no significant
 historic sites are present or likely to be present based on
 information regarding past land disturbances or land altering
 activities. HAR § 13-284-5(b)(1), (2). HRS § 6E-43(b) provides
 that "all burial sites are significant" and that areas with
 concentration of skeletal remains are of "high preservation
 value." 
The record shows that the SHPD did not determine that
 
no significant historic properties were present or likely to be
 present due to past land disturbances or land altering activities
 with respect to the MPC Project. In its initial evaluation of
 the MPC Project, the SHPD acknowledged the potential that the MPC
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Project would disturb historic burials based on "[h]istoric 
documentation suggest[ing] that significant subsurface historic deposits including human burials were once located in this area." Accordingly, the SHPD required an AIS to be conducted prior to any ground disturbance, and the Project Eligibility Permit, which the HCDA issued to Kawaiaha' o Church on February 24, 2004, was 
conditioned on the completion of an AIS. Similarly, the Development Permit and Certificate of Appropriateness issued by the HCDA on May 4, 2005, stated that the SHPD was "requiring [Kawaiaha' o Church] to conduct an archaeological inventory survey 
with a program of subsurface testing to determine if historic sites are present." Even after the MPC Project was scaled back, the AMP submitted by Kawaiaha' o Church stated: "It would seem 
likely however that some human remains would still lie under the footprint of the proposed construction." The AMP also stated: "The project area has the potential for historic cultural deposits relating to the early history of Kawaiaha' o Church as 
well as both pre-contact and historic human burials. . . . Historic properties may be encountered anywhere within the project area." 
The SHPD did not make the second determination
 
described in Kaleikini. Defendants do not contend, and the
 record does not show, that the SHPD determined that "an adequate
 survey exists and that historic properties are present," which
 would permit proceeding to the evaluation of the significance of
 the historic properties -- the next step in the review process.
 
Accordingly, the SHPD should have determined that an 
AIS "needs to be done," and the SHPD violated its own rules in failing to require an AIS before permitting the MPC Project to go forward. Instead of requiring an AIS, the SHPD determined that an AMP submitted by Kawaiaha' o Church could be used as a 
substitute for an AIS, when it issued its "no adverse effect" letter based on the AMP. In doing so, the SHPD circumvented the sequential approach to the historic preservation review process and the requirements of the rules. 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
As the supreme court held in Kaleikini, the rules 
implementing the historic preservation review process establish a 
sequential process under which an AIS, where required, "forms part of the first step in this process" and must precede the SHPD's concurrence in a project. Kaleikini, 128 Hawai' i at 75, 
283 P.3d at 82. "The goal of the review process is to identify significant historic properties in project areas, assess any effects, and then to develop and execute plans to avoid, minimize, or mitigate adverse effects to the significant historic properties in the public interest." HAR § 13-284-1(a) (2003) (emphasis added); see Kaleikini, 128 Hawai' i at 57, 283 P.3d at 
64 (quoting parallel provision of HAR § 13-275-1(a)). The rules identify six sequential steps in the historic preservation review process: 
(1) Identification and inventory, to determine if
historic properties are present in the project'sarea and, if so, to identify and document(inventory) them; 
(2) Evaluation of significance; 
(3) Effect (impact) determination; 
(4) Mitigation commitments which commit toacceptable forms of mitigation in order toproperly handle or minimize impacts tosignificant properties; 
(5) Detailed mitigation plan, scope of work toproperly carry-out the general mitigationcommitments; and 
(6) Verification of completion of detailedmitigation plan. 
HAR § 13-284-3(b). 
Here, as in Kaleikiki, the SHPD violated its rules by
 
failing to require the completion of an AIS, part of the first
 
sequential step, before continuing in the review process. This
 was a critical error because the preparation of an AIS was
 necessary for the SHPD to properly identify and evaluate the
 significance of the historic properties present in the MPC
 Project area and to determine the impact of the MPC Project on
 significant historic properties before considering mitigation
 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
plans. By treating the AMP as a substitute for an AIS, the SHPD 
skipped the critical first step and other required sequential steps in the review process. The rules do not permit the SHPD to accept a monitoring plan as a substitute for an AIS. Monitoring plans are directed at the mitigation step of the review process. See HRS § 6E-2 (defining "[m]itigation plan" to include monitoring plans). Indeed, the AMP submitted by Kawaiaha' o 
Church described the proposed monitoring program as a "mitigation measure." One of the central purposes of the historic preservation law "is to require that the effects on historic properties be reviewed prior to the approval of a project." Kaleikini, 128 Hawai' i at 70, 283 P.3d at 77. By accepting the 
AMP as a substitute for an AIS, the SHPD skipped to the mitigation step of the review process and allowed construction on the MPC Project to commence, without identifying the significant historic properties at issue and evaluating the impact of the MPC Project on them, thereby limiting the potential options for their protection and preservation. 
Under HAR § 13-284-5, the SHPD can exercise discretion 
in determining whether an AIS is necessary because information regarding past land disturbances or land altering activities reveals that no significant historic sites are present or likely to be present, or because an adequate inventory survey already exists. However, the SHPD does not have discretion "to forego or delay an AIS when one is required" or "to opt-out of the sequential process outlined in the rules." Kaleikini, 128 
Hawai'i at 76, 283 P.3d at 83. The SHPD's action in this case 
was akin to the City and State's reliance on the Programmatic Agreement as an "interim protection plan" in Kaleikini, which the supreme court held was impermissible. As the supreme court observed, "to permit mitigation commitments to be made prior to the properties at issue being identified" would "turn the process upside down." Id. at 77-78, 283 P.3d at 84-85 (brackets 
omitted). 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
VI.
 
The Circuit Court granted summary judgment in favor of
 
Defendants on all of Hall's claims arising out of HRS Chapter 6E
 
(Counts 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, and 11) on the ground that they were
 "moot" based on the following reasoning: (1) Hall's HRS Chapter
 6E claims were invalid if the MPC Project site was a cemetery
 because the protections provided by HRS Chapter 6E and HRS
 Chapter 441 are mutually exclusive; and (2) Hall was judicially
 estopped from denying that the MPC Project site was a cemetery
 because of actions taken by her attorney in the Kaleikini
 Lawsuit. We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in relying on
 this reasoning and in granting summary judgment in favor of
 Defendants on Hall's HRS Chapter 6E claims. 
The Circuit Court erred in concluding that the 
protections provided by HRS Chapters 441 and 6E are mutually exclusive, and that only HRS Chapter 441 provides protection for human remains found in a cemetery. The fact that HRS Chapter 441 imposes requirements for cemeteries does not mean that it would be illogical or inconsistent for HRS Chapter 6E to impose additional requirements relating to historic preservation on cemeteries. See Chock v. Gov't Emps. Ins. Co., 103 Hawai' i 263, 
269, 81 P.3d 1178, 1184 (2003) ("[W]here the statutes simply overlap in their application, effect will be given to both if possible[.]" (emphasis in original)). As we have previously explained, cemeteries are not exempt from the protections provided by HRS Chapter 6E, and the MPC Project was subject to the protections provided by HRS Chapter 6E. 
In this case, the MPC Project site was subject to the
 
protections of HRS Chapter 6E, regardless of whether the site was 
considered a cemetery. Accordingly, the Circuit Court erred in
 relying on judicial estoppel to grant summary judgment on Hall's
 HRS Chapter 6E claims. 
VII.
 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that an AIS was
 
required before the SHPD could concur in the MPC Project and that
 
29
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the SHPD violated its own rules in failing to require an AIS 
before permitting the project to go forward. See Kaleikini, 128 
Hawai'i at 57, 283 P.3d at 64. We vacate the Circuit Court's 
judgment in favor of Defendants on Hall's claims arising under HRS Chapter 6E (Counts 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, and 11). 
VIII. 
We now address the Circuit Court's grant of summary
 
judgment in favor of Defendants on the non-HRS Chapter 6E counts.
 
A.
 
With respect to Count 3, Hall alleged that the use of a
 
blanket disinterment permit under HRS § 338-25.5(a) (2010),
 without any rules for the issuance of disinterment permits, to
 disinter and relocate native Hawaiian historic burials violated
 her due process rights. Hall's due process claim in Count 3 was
 premised on the assumption that the MPC Project would not be
 subject to the requirements of HRS § 6E-42 and that an AIS would
 not be required. However, we have concluded that the MPC Project
 is subject to the requirements of HRS § 6E-42 and that the State
 erred in not requiring the preparation of an AIS. 
The Circuit Court ruled that Hall lacked standing
 
regarding Court 3 because HRS Chapter 338 did not create a
 private right of action. However, as previously noted, Hall has
 standing under HRS § 6E-13 to raise claims to protect historic
 native Hawaiian burials affected by the MPC Project. Moreover,
 Hall was not seeking enforcement of any provision in HRS Chapter
 338, but was claiming a violation of her due process rights, and
 thus her due process claim did not turn on whether HRS Chapter
 338 provided a private right of action. Therefore, the Circuit
 Court's reason for granting summary judgment on Count 3 was
 erroneous. 
We vacate the dismissal of Count 3. Based on our
 
ruling that the MPC Project is subject to HRS § 6E-42 and that
 the preparation of an AIS was required prior to the SHPD's
 concurrence in the MPC Project, the resolution of Count 3 is
 premature. The application of HRS § 6E-42 to the MPC Project may
 
30
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
satisfy any due process requirements and/or render the relief 
sought in Count 3 unnecessary or redundant of claims made in other counts. See Rees v. Carlisle, 113 Hawai' i 446, 456, 153 
P.3d 1131, 1141 (2007) ("A fundamental and longstanding principle of judicial restraint requires that courts avoid reaching constitutional questions in advance of the necessity of deciding them." (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)). Accordingly, we remand the case to permit reconsideration of Count 3 based on a more fully developed record. 
B.
 
With respect to Count 7, Hall alleged that the
 
preparation of an environmental assessment (EA) was required
 pursuant to HRS §§ 343-5(a)(4) and 343-5(c) (2010), which
 provided, in relevant part: 
(a) Except as otherwise provided, an environmental
assessment shall be required for actions that:
 
. . . .
 
(4)	 Propose any use within any historic site as
designated in the National Register or Hawaii
Register, as provided for in the Historic
Preservation Act of 1966, Public Law 89-665, or
chapter 6E.
 
. . . .
 
(c) Whenever an applicant proposes an action
specified by subsection (a) that requires approval of an
agency and that is not a specific type of action declared
exempt under section 343-6, the agency initially receiving
and agreeing to process the request for approval shall
prepare an environmental assessment of the proposed action
at the earliest practicable time to determine whether an
environmental impact statement shall be required . . . .
18
 
Hall alleged that the entire Kawaiaha' o Church property is a 
historic site on "the National and Hawaii Register"; that the 
proposed use of the Kawaiaha' o Church property for the MPC 
Project triggered the requirement for an EA under HRS § 343­5(a)(4); that the DLNR's June 11, 2009, letter authorizing 
18
 Recent amendments to HRS § 343-5 provide that the agency shall
"require the applicant" to prepare the EA. 2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 312, § 2
at 1048; 2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 172, § 2 at 606. 
31
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
disinterment of burials and the DOH's October 22, 2010, letter
 
approving a blanket disinterment permit constituted discretionary
 permits or approvals; that no determination that the MPC Project
 was exempt from an EA had been made; and therefore, permits and
 approvals for the MPC Project, including the DOH's disinterment
 permit, could not be issued until an EA was prepared. Hall
 asserted that because no EA had been prepared, the State's
 authorization to disinter burials must be revoked.
 
In granting summary judgment in favor of Defendants, 
the Circuit Court found that only the Kawaiaha' o Church structure 
itself, and not the surrounding grounds where the MPC Project site was located, was designated in the National and Hawai' i 
registers of historic places. The Circuit Court therefore concluded that the need for an EA was not triggered by HRS § 343­5(a)(4). The parties disputed the issue of the scope and extent of Kawaiaha' o Church's property that was designated in the 
National and Hawai' i registers. Conflicting evidence was 
presented to the Circuit Court on this issue, and no evidence was presented from anyone responsible for maintaining the National or Hawai'i registers. The Circuit Court resolved the conflicting 
evidence by finding that only the Kawaiaha' o Church structure 
itself, and not the MPC Project site, was included in the National and Hawai' i registers.
19 We conclude that the Circuit 
Court erred in granting summary judgment on this basis because 
19
 Hall introduced as exhibits the AMP prepared by Kawaiaha' o Church's 
consultant and the Final Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement for the
Kaka'ako Community Development District, which both referred to Kawaiaha' o 
Church and its grounds as being on the National and/or Hawai' i register. In 
support of its finding, the Circuit Court noted that the nomination formssubmitted to the National Register of Historic Places for "Kawaiaha' o Church 
and Mission Houses" and the "Hawaii Capital Historic District" (which includedKawaiaha' o Church) checked the "building" rather than the "site" category in
the category classification. However, no evidence was presented regarding thesignificance of this marking or whether the building classification excludedthe surrounding grounds. In addition, the section on geographical data in thenomination form for "Kawaiaha' o Church and Mission Houses" describes the 
acreage of the nominated property as 8.8 acres and contains a boundarydescription that appears to include the grounds of Kawaiaha' o Church and the 
MPC Project site. The nomination form for the "Hawaii Capital HistoricDistrict" refers to "Kawaiahao Church/grounds" in the section describing thenominated property. 
32
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
there were genuine issues of material fact regarding whether the 
MPC Project site was included in the National and Hawai' i 
registers. See Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 56(c) 
(2000). Accordingly, we vacate the Circuit Court's dismissal of Count 7 and remand for further proceedings.
20 
C.
 
With respect to Count 8, Hall alleged that Defendants
 
failed to obtain required permits and approvals for the MPC
 Project and the disinterment of burials, and she sought
 attorney's fees and costs pursuant to HRS § 607-25(e)(1) (Supp.
 2011).
21 HRS § 607-25(e)(1) only applies to civil actions for
 
injunctive relief between private parties and does not authorize
 any relief against the State. We therefore affirm the dismissal
 of Count 8 against the State Defendants. 
In granting summary judgment in favor of Kawaiaha' o 
Church on Count 8, the Circuit Court relied on its analysis that HRS Chapter 6E did not apply to the MPC Project. Based on this analysis, the Circuit Court concluded that the required permits 
20
 We note that in its motion for summary judgment, Kawaiaha' o Church 
argued that Count 7 was barred by the statute of limitations set forth in HRS
§ 343-7(a) (2010), which provides that judicial proceedings based on the lackof an EA required by HRS § 343-5 "shall be initiated within one hundred twentydays of the agency's decision to carry out or approve the action, or, if aproposed action is undertaken without a formal determination by the agencythat a statement is or is not required, a judicial proceeding shall beinstituted within one hundred twenty days after the proposed action isstarted." Kawaiaha' o Church argued that the statute of limitation began to
run at the latest when construction began on the MPC Project in November 2007.Hall, on the other hand, argued that the statute of limitations did not beginto run until the DOH issued its letter approving a blanket disinterment permiton October 22, 2010. The Circuit Court did not address the parties' statuteof limitations arguments in ruling on Defendants' motions for summaryjudgment, and it may address the statute of limitations issue on remand. 
21 HRS § 607-25(e)(1) provides:
 
(e) In any civil action in this State where a private party
sues for injunctive relief against another private party who has
been or is undertaking any development without obtaining all
permits or approvals required by law from government agencies:
 
(1)	 The court may award reasonable attorney's fees and
costs of the suit to the prevailing party.
 
33
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
had been obtained and that Count 8 was moot. Because the Circuit 
Court's decision was based on its erroneous analysis regarding the inapplicability of HRS Chapter 6E, we vacate its dismissal of Count 8 against Kawaiaha' o Church. 
D.
 
In Count 9, Hall alleged that Defendants failed to
 
fulfill the obligations imposed on them by the public trust
 doctrine in considering Kawaiaha' o Church's development proposal. 
Hawai'i's public trust doctrine is embodied in Article XI, 
Section 1 of the Hawai' i Constitution, which provides: 
For the benefit of present and future generations, the
State and its political subdivisions shall conserve and
protect Hawai' i's natural beauty and all natural resources,
including land, water, air, minerals and energy sources, andshall promote the development and utilization of theseresources in a manner consistent with their conservation and in furtherance of the self-sufficiency of the State. 
All public natural resources are held in trust by the
State for the benefit of the people. 
See Morgan v. Planning Dept., County of Kauai, 104 Hawai' i 173, 
184 n.12, 86 P.3d 982, 993 n.12 (2004); In re Water Use Permit 
Applications, 94 Hawai' i 97, 131-32, 9 P.3d 409, 443-44 (2000) 
(hereinafter, "Waiâhole I"). The public trust doctrine is also embodied in Article XI, Section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution, 
which pertains to the State's water resources, and provides, in relevant part, that "[t]he State has an obligation to protect, control and regulate the use of Hawaii's water resources for the benefit of its people." See Waiâhole I, 94 Hawai' i at 131, 9 
P.3d at 443. In Waiâhole I, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that 
"article XI, section 1 and article XI, section 7 adopt the public trust doctrine as a fundamental principle of constitutional law in Hawai' i." Id. at 131-32, 9 P.3d at 443-44. 
The Circuit Court ruled that the public trust doctrine
 
did not apply in this case. Hall does not cite any authority
 which supports the application of the public trust doctrine, as 
34
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
set forth in Article XI, Section 1 of the Hawai' i Constitution, 
to Kawaiaha' o Church or the State Defendants under the 
circumstances of this case. We therefore affirm the Circuit 
Court's grant of summary judgment on Count 9 in favor of Defendants. 
E.
 
In Count 10, Hall alleged that Defendants failed to 
investigate and protect native Hawaiian rights. Hall does not challenge the Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment in favor of Kawaiaha' o Church on Count 10, and we therefore affirm the 
Circuit Court's dismissal of Count 10 against Kawaiaha' o Church. 
See Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7) (2010) 
("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). 
With respect to the State Defendants, Hall argues that 
Count 10 is based on Article XII, Section 7 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution, which provides: 
The State reaffirms and shall protect all rights,
customarily and traditionally exercised for subsistence,cultural and religious purposes and possessed by ahupua' a 
tenants who are descendants of native Hawaiians who inhabited the Hawaiian Islands prior to 1778, subject to theright of the State to regulate such rights. 
In granting summary judgment in favor of the State Defendants on
 
Count 10, the Circuit Court ruled that the State Defendants did
 not violate article XII, section 7. 
We have already concluded that the MPC Project was 
subject to the requirements of HRS § 6E-42 and its implementing rules. Hall does not contend that the protection provided by HRS § 6E-42 and its implementing rules is insufficient or violates article XII, section 7. Under the circumstances of this case, we conclude that Hall has failed to cite any persuasive authority that article XII, section 7 provides an independent cause of action establishing a basis for relief against the State Defendants that is separate from her HRS Chapter 6E claims. See 
State v. Hanapi, 89 Hawai' i 177, 186-87, 970 P.2d 485, 494-95 
35
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(1998) (concluding that Article XII, Section 7 of the Hawai' i 
Constitution does not authorize the exercise of traditional and 
customary native Hawaiian rights on fully developed property). Accordingly, we affirm the Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment in favor of the State Defendants on Count 10. 
IX.
 
We decline Hall's request that we enter summary 
judgment in her favor on the claims raised in her second amended complaint. With respect to the counts dismissed by the Circuit Court that we have vacated, including Hall's HRS Chapter 6E claims, Hall "sought a wide range of relief in the [C]ircuit [C]ourt, and the rationale for granting or denying that relief has not been fully developed." See Kaleikini, 128 Hawai' i at 81, 
283 P.3d at 88. The factual circumstances of this case continue to evolve, and additional information and developments, such as information obtained through the performance of an AIS and actions taken in reliance on the injunction obtained in the Kaleikini Lawsuit, may be relevant to the proper determination of this case. It is not clear what impact such additional facts or developments may have on the relief Hall seeks. Accordingly, we decline Hall's invitation to enter judgment in her favor on any of the counts dismissed by the Circuit Court that we have vacated. See id. 
CONCLUSION
 
We affirm the Circuit Court's final judgment with 
respect to the entry of judgment in favor of the State Defendants on Count 8 and in favor of the State Defendants and Kawaiaha' o 
Church on Counts 9 and 10. We vacate the final judgment with respect to the entry of judgment in favor of the State Defendants and Kawaiaha' o Church on all other counts (Counts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 
36
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
6, 7, 8 (as to Kawaiaha' o Church), and 11), and we remand the 
case for further proceedings consistent with this Opinion. 
On the briefs:
 
David Kimo Frankel
 
David Kauila Kopper
(Native Hawaiian Legal Corporation)
Isaac D. Hall
 for Plaintiff-Appellant
 
Marie Manuele Gavigan
Deputy Attorney General
for Defendants-Appellees
DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND NATURAL
 RESOURCES, BOARD OF LAND AND
NATURAL RESOURCES, WILLIAM J. AILA,
JR. and PUAALAOKALANI AIU, in their
respective official capacities,
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, LORETTA
J. FUDDY and ALVIN T. ONAKA in their
 respective official capacities
 
JAMES KAWASHIMA 
MICHAEL A. LORUSSO TRACIE M. KOBAYASHI (KAWASHIMA LORUSSO LLP)for Defendants-AppelleesKAWAIAHA' O CHURCH and WILLIAM HAOLE 
in his official capacity 
37
 