NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000025
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
GORAN PLEHO, LLC, a Hawaii Limited Liability Company
(dba Resorts Limousine Services), GORAN PLEHO,
and ANA MARIA PLEHO, Plaintiffs-Appellants/Cross-Appellees, v.
DAVID W. LACY, LACY AND JACKSON, LLLC, a Hawaii Limited
Liability Law Company, Defendants-Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
and DRAGAN RNIC, JOHN DOES 1-X, JANE DOES 1-X, and
DOE ENTITIES 1-X, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-101K)

 
AMENDED MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.) 
This appeal arises out of the sale of Resorts Limousine 
Services (RLS), a limousine service located on Hawai 'i Island, by 
Defendant/Appellee Dragan Rnic (Rnic) to Plaintiff/Appellant/ 
Cross-Appellee Goran Pleho, LLC (GPLLC), a Hawai 'i limited 
liability company. Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellant David W. 
Lacy (Lacy) provided legal representation to one or more of the 
parties in the transaction and drafted the relevant documents. 
Following the sale, Plaintiffs/Appellants/Cross-Appellees GPLCC, Goran Pleho (Goran), and Ana Maria Pleho (Maria) (collectively, 
the Pleho Parties) brought claims regarding the sale against NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Rnic, Lacy, and Lacy's law firm, Lacy and Jackson, LLLC (L&J), as
 
well as legal malpractice claims against Lacy and L&J
 
(collectively, the Lacy Parties). GPLLC's legal malpractice
 
claims eventually went to trial, resulting in a jury verdict in
 
favor of the Lacy Parties.
 
The Pleho Parties appeal from the judgment (Judgment) 
entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit
 
1
Court),  on January 9, 2012, in favor of Rnic and the Lacy
Parties on all claims asserted by the Pleho Parties. The Lacy
 Parties cross-appeal from a July 8, 2011 order denying the Lacy
 Parties' April 21, 2011 Motion in Limine No. 2, which pertained
 to the trial on GPLLC's legal malpractice claims. 
As set forth below, we affirm in part, vacate in part,
 
and remand for further proceedings.
 I. BACKGROUND
 A. The Sale of RLS
 In March or April of 2005, Rnic approached Goran, whom 
he had met in Las Vegas in 2000 or 2001, about possibly purchasing RLS. In June 2005, Goran and Maria (the Plehos) flew 
from Las Vegas to Hawai
'i to look at RLS. Rnic showed the Plehos 
the RLS office and some of the cars, and the Plehos asked Rnic 
questions about RLS. The Plehos returned to Las Vegas without purchasing RLS. Maria testified at deposition that she and Goran discussed making an offer to purchase RLS after they returned home. 
1
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presiding.
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rnic had previously talked to other potential buyers
 
for RLS, but none of them had wanted to enter into a deal until
 
the Public Utilities Commission (PUC) license for RLS was
 
transferred from Rnic to the buyer. Rnic discussed this
 
"stumbling block" with his acquaintance Donald Rullo (Rullo), and
 
Rullo offered to "act as an intermediary, purchase the company
 
for cash [from Rnic], and then resell the company six months
 later" once the PUC license had transferred. 
Although Rullo denied ever retaining Lacy to represent
 
him in connection with his interest in acquiring RLS, he
 testified that if he had gone through with the deal, he "would
 have asked [Lacy] to draft documents" as a "scribner [sic], a
 document generator." On June 16, 2005, Rnic and Rullo signed a
 purchase and sale agreement for RLS in the amount of $800,000.
2
 
This sale apparently did not close.
 
After further conversations with Rnic about RLS, the 
Plehos and their children flew back to Hawai 'i in July 2005. 
Rnic told Goran that RLS was making a lot of money, that business was booming, and that in 2005 "he's on his way to get $1.6 million gross, with about $800,000 that would be net." Rnic told Goran that RLS's cars were very clean, that there was high demand 
2 The agreement stated, in relevant part:
 
Mr. Rullo has been in contact and spoken at length
with potential buyers for RLS, including potential buyers
introduced to Mr. Rullo by [Rnic]. Mr. Rullo may or may not
have purchase commitments verbal, or in writing for the
company at substantially more money than he is offering for
the company. Mr. Rnic does not wish to enter into a listing
agreement for the company with Red Time Realty LLC. Mr.
 Rnic represents that he is interested in a "quick" sale and
is in agreement to accept substantially less than the
possible potential value of the company.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
from residential areas around the resorts, and that the
 
possibility for expansion to other islands was high. Rnic also
 gave Goran some profit and loss statements and a partial tax
 return from 2004. 
On July 11, 2005, Rnic, Lacy, Goran, and Maria met
 
regarding the sale, and Rnic introduced Lacy to the Plehos as his
 (Rnic's) attorney. Lacy testified during his deposition that he
 remembered telling Goran that he should have his own attorney,
 but Rnic said that he (Rnic) did not want a lawyer, and that Lacy
 should be Goran's lawyer. Lacy also testified:
 
And I thought about it a moment. And all of the terms
 
and conditions of the contract were already agreed upon. It
 
was a matter of actually writing out the contract. And so I
 -- I don't recall exactly how it happened, but I told Mr.
Pleho I could represent him if he wanted me to.
 
Sometime thereafter, Lacy also agreed to represent
 
GPLLC in the purchase of RLS. Goran testified at his deposition
 
that he knew that Lacy was Rnic's attorney when he retained Lacy,
 but that he did not know the extent of Lacy's representation of
 Rnic with regard to RLS. He also testified that he expected that
 Lacy would protect his and Maria's interests. 
On July 12, 2005, Lacy emailed certified public
 
accountant (CPA) Ron Dolan (Dolan) regarding the transaction:
 
I have a question for a client who may need an
accountant later (or sooner for that matter). The seller
 
owns a limousine service that does very well working the
resorts, and the buyer is a long-time friend of his from Las
Vegas. The price is $1.5M, and the problem is the PUC
license as the seller has the PUC license in his individual
 name thus he cannot transfer it without a delay of three or
four months. . . . [T]he buyer owns three rental houses in
Las Vegas that he is giving to the seller as a down payment
– the equity is about $378,000 or so in the houses. The
 remainder will be paid by monthly payments over a 5 year
period or so with security being the vehicles. The seller
 wants to leave immediately, which means in the short term
we'll need to do something creative with the buyer taking
over the company, probably by a management agreement or
 
4

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
something. On the other hand the buyer wants to transfer
the properties to the seller immediately (and the seller is
fine with this and can, I believe, even pay off the existing
mortgages, forestalling any problems with due on sale
clauses). I'm kind of struggling about how best to do all
of this with the delay in transferring the PUC license and
wanted to talk it over with you so I also don't run into tax
problems.
 
On July 14, 2005, Lacy emailed Dolan, stating that he
 
had told the Plehos that they should speak with Dolan before
 
closing the deal, and Lacy emailed Dolan again on July 15, 2005,
 stating that "[e]verybody seems to be in a hurry and [the Plehos]
 seem to be very trusting of [Rnic], who they've known for years,
 so it may be that you just give [the Plehos] some questions to
 ask [Rnic]." Lacy testified at his deposition that no appraisal
 was done before signing the Sale Agreement because "[Goran]
 didn't wish to have [an appraisal] done. He wanted to close." 
Lacy also testified that he himself did not know how much RLS was
 worth on July 25, 2005. None of the parties ever conducted an
 appraisal, and neither Lacy nor Rnic mentioned the prior
 potential sale of RLS to Rullo.
 
It appears that on February 9, 2006,3
 Goran signed, on
behalf of GPLLC, a back-dated engagement letter from L&J
 addressed to GPLLC, which described L&J's representation as
 "general representation" (Engagement Letter). Earlier, on July
 
19, 2005, GPLLC had filed its articles of incorporation. Goran
 
signed GPLLC's operating agreement as its sole member on July 26,
 2005. 
3
 The letter was dated August 9, 2005. However, the Pleho Parties
submit that Lacy did not send the Engagement Letter to Goran on August 9,
2005, but instead presented the backdated letter to Goran for his signature on
February 9, 2006. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On July 25, 2005, Rnic and GPLLC (by Goran) entered
 
into a Sale of Assets Agreement (Sale Agreement) for RLS with a
 
purchase price of $1.5 million. Under the Sale Agreement, "Goran
 
Pleho, principal of [GPLLC]" agreed to transfer three parcels of
 Las Vegas real property (Properties) worth $378,000 to Rnic. 
GPLLC also agreed to execute a Promissory Note (Promissory Note)
 for the balance, and to the placement of liens in favor of Rnic
 
on RLS's assets as security. 
The Sale Agreement provided, inter alia:
 
[Rnic] and [GPLLC] acknowledge that this Agreement
cannot close until [Rnic's] PUC license is transferred to
[GPLLC], which will take at least three to four months.
Therefore, until the transfer of [Rnic's] PUC license to
[GPLLC], all consideration in this Agreement is in exchange
for [GPLLC's] management of [Rnic's] business pursuant to
the Resorts Limousine Service Management Contract of even
date herewith.
 
Article 2.1 of the Sale Agreement provided that "[t]he
 
transfer of Assets shall take place upon transfer of [Rnic's] PUC
 
license to [GPLLC]." Thus, the transfer date would be the
 effective closing date of the sale. 
Article 7.1 provided that, as a condition precedent to

 
closing, "on or prior to the Closing Date[,]" GPLLC would have
 "completed a customary and satisfactory due diligence
 investigation." Article 11.1 provided a means for GPLLC to
 unilaterally terminate the Sale Agreement prior to the closing
 date:
 
11.1	 Termination. This Agreement may be terminated prior
to the Closing Date only:
. . . . 
 
(c)
	 By [GPLLC] if [Rnic]:
 
(i)	 Breaches any of his representations or
warranties in any material respect herein;
or
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(ii)	 [Rnic] fails to perform in any material
respect any of his covenants, agreements,
or obligations under this Agreement, and
any such breach or failure is not cured
within thirty (30) days after written
notice from [GPLLC]; or
 
(iii) [Rnic] has made one or more substantial
material and intentional
 misrepresentations in respect of the
Business or the Assets.
 
Later on July 25, 2005, Rnic and GPLLC (by Goran)
 
signed the Resorts Limousine Service Management Contract
 
(Management Contract). GPLLC (by Goran) also executed a
 
Promissory Note (Promissory Note) in favor of Rnic for the
 $1,122,000 balance of the purchase price. 
On August 4, 2005, Rnic, Goran, and Maria executed a
 
Residential Purchase Agreement (Residential Purchase Agreement)
 under which Goran and Maria agreed to sell the Properties to
 
Rnic. Both Goran and Maria were listed as "Sellers," although
 only Goran signed and initialed the document. 
On August 11, 2005, Rnic filed an application for
 
transfer of the PUC license for RLS to GPLLC. On December 6,
 2005, the PUC sent a letter to Rnic and GPLLC informing them that
 the application for transfer had been approved, but that further
 documentation needed to be submitted within 120 days, or by April
 6, 2006, in order to complete it.
 
On February 24, 2006, Rnic sent a letter to "Goran and
 
[Maria]" requesting the February 2006 payment on the Promissory
 Note, which was overdue. Goran forwarded the letter to Lacy,
 asking for advice and stating that he had discovered problems
 with RLS.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On February 28, 2006, Rnic sold one of the three
 
Properties. 
 
On February 28, 2006, Goran emailed Lacy, discussing
 
his concerns about Rnic's representations and stating:
 
[T]he buyer is looking for the contract recision [sic],
return of the down payment and damages from relocation, and
will turn the evidence to the PUC. We maybe will look into
a settlement out of court, or possible adjustment on the
purchase price, with all the leans [sic] taken off
unconditionally (seller received more then [sic] 3 times
worth of cars in the down payment thru [sic] home equity),
and all the payment [sic] are to be suspended until the
outcome is concluded.
 
On March 8, 2006, Goran sent another email to Lacy
 
raising additional concerns about RLS and Rnic. 
On March 10, 2006, Goran received written approval from
 
the PUC to "initiate [his] motor carrier service[.]" 
On March 13, 2006, Lacy sent the January 2006 principal
 
and interest payments to Rnic on behalf of GPLLC, along with a
 
letter suggesting either a rescission of the Sale Agreement or a
 renegotiation of the purchase price. This payment was apparently
 the last payment GPLLC made on the Promissory Note.
 
On March 31, 2006, Rnic's attorney sent Lacy a demand
 
letter asking for the overdue February 2006 payment. The letter
 stated, in relevant part: 
Your client did not complain about any
misrepresentations concerning the condition of the business
for over six months after he began operating it, and only
after (1) he became concerned about when the PUC would
transfer the license, and (2) he was two months behind on
his monthly payment obligations to Mr. Rnic. 
Mr. Rnic disputes any allegations that he
misrepresented the value of the vehicles, the finances of
the company, or the list of accounts. 
Mr. Pleho had a six month inspection period within
which to conduct his due diligence of the company before
committing to purchase it. . . .
 
8

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
At the time Mr. Pleho assumed responsibility for the
business:
 
1. All vehicles that were used for business purposes
were fully operational and were inspected by state
certified inspectors who issued Commercial SafetyInspection Certificates plus window stickers by theState of Hawai' i just prior to transfer; 
2. Mr. Pleho was given an accurate profit and loss
statement for the period that Mr. Rnic operated the
business, and Mr. Rnic's actual profits for 2005 were
higher than anticipated;
 
3. A list of clients was conveyed to Mr. Pleho which
accurately reflected the history of services rendered
during the time Mr. Rnic operated the business.
 
All of the above information was provided to the buyer
for the express purpose of allowing him to perform any and
all reviews during his due diligence period.
 
The letter nevertheless included an offer to reduce the
 
purchase price by $350,000 and take back possession of all RLS's
 
vehicles.
 
On April 11, 2006, in an email to Lacy, Goran stated: 
"About the six months due diligence period, I didn't know,
 because if I did, I would have certainly pull [sic] out of this
 deal." On April 14, 2006, in a letter to Lacy, Goran stated:
 
[Rnic's] letter claims that I had 6 months to change my
mind, but I looked into the contract, and I can not [sic]
find it, can you? Show me where it is, have you even red
[sic] it? If it is there, and purchase date is March 10
th
 
2006, then I have 6 months to back out of the deal.
 
Later that day, Goran again emailed Lacy: "[W]here is
 
the 6 months I had to back up? It says in the contract that I
 
have completed due diligence, but it does not say how long did I
 have." In response to this email, Lacy stated:
 
[Y]ou trusted Dragan. I know he lied to you but the fact is
that you had an opportunity to look at the vehicles and look
at the books and you chose not to. That makes a lawsuit
 more difficult from your perspective because they will
always, as they have now, come back to that unfortunate
fact. The agreement specifically states (as I recall) that
you have done due diligence. That means that it will be
 much harder to complain about the condition and value of
vehicles because you had the opportunity to check their
condition and their value.
 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lacy discouraged Goran from litigating because Goran
 
and Rnic would "both lose." 
On April 17, 2006, Lacy sent a letter to Rnic's
 
attorney stating:
 
Mr. Pleho and Mr. Rnic applied for a transfer of the license
as part of the sale, and Mr. Rnic never indicated to Mr.
Pleho that he had an option to back out of their agreement
before transfer of the PUC license. In fact, Mr. Pleho
informs me that Mr. Rnic continually pressured him in this
transaction. 
The letter rejected Rnic's offer to reduce the purchase
 
price by $350,000, and proposed that the parties either: (1)
 
have RLS valued by an expert and revise the purchase price
 accordingly; (2) mediate the dispute; or (3) rescind the
 transaction and return both parties to their former positions.
 
On April 18 and 28, 2006, Rnic completed the sales of
 
the remaining two Properties. 
Sometime before May 11, 2006, Goran released Lacy, and
 
the Pleho Parties retained new counsel.
 
B. The Pleho Parties File Suit
 On July 6, 2006, the Pleho Parties filed a Complaint
 
against the Lacy Parties and Rnic, alleging fraud in the
 inducement, intentional infliction of emotional distress (IIED),
 
unfair and deceptive trade practices under Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) Chapters 480 and 481A, legal malpractice as to the
 
Lacy Parties only, and punitive damages. On August 21, 2008, the
 
Pleho Parties filed a First Amended Complaint, to which they
 attached declarations of both Goran and Maria alleging physical
 and psychological injury. 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On January 23, 2009, the Pleho Parties filed a Second
 
Amended Complaint, which extended their existing claims (except
 
legal malpractice) to all the defendants and included Goran and
 Maria as individual plaintiffs into every claim. The Second
 Amended Complaint included the following counts: conspiracy to
 commit fraud (Count I); fraud (Count II); fraud in the inducement
 (Count III); gross inadequacy of consideration (Count IV); IIED
 (Count V); negligent infliction of emotional distress (NIED)
 
(Count VI); unfair and deceptive trade practices (Count VII);
 
legal malpractice as to the Lacy Parties only (Count VIII);
 intentional spoliation of evidence (Count IX); negligent
 spoliation of evidence (Count X); and punitive damages (Count
 XI). The Second Amended Complaint alleged that the Pleho Parties
 would not have purchased RLS had Lacy or Rnic disclosed Lacy's
 prior representation of Rullo or the Rnic's prior potential sale
 of RLS to Rullo for $800,000. The Pleho Parties did not bring
 claims against Rnic for breach of contract.
 
C. Rnic's Motion for Summary Judgment
 On February 6, 2009, Rnic answered the Second Amended
 
Complaint and filed a counterclaim against the Pleho Parties, as
 well as a claim against Anagor, LLC dba AM PM Taxi (Anagor) for,
 
inter alia, breach of contract, breach of covenant of good faith
 
and fair dealing, fraud and misrepresentation, unjust enrichment,
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and conversion.4 Rnic also cross-claimed against the Lacy
 
Parties for legal malpractice and indemnification. 
On March 27, 2009, Rnic moved for summary judgment
 
against the Pleho Parties as to the Pleho Parties' claims. On
 
April 21, 2009, the Circuit Court heard Rnic's motion and, on May
 13, 2009, the Circuit Court entered an order granting summary
 judgment in favor of Rnic. 
On May 22, 2009, the Pleho Parties filed a motion for
 
reconsideration of the May 13, 2009 order granting Rnic's motion
 for summary judgment. On July 17, 2009, the Circuit Court
 entered an order denying the motion.
 
On November 12, 2010, after conducting additional
 
discovery, the Pleho Parties filed a motion to set aside the May
 13, 2009 order granting summary judgment for Rnic. The motion
 alleged that newly discovered evidence showed that Lacy conspired
 with Rnic to sell RLS to Goran at an inflated price and to
 defraud Goran and Maria into transferring the Properties to Rnic. 
In his declaration in support of this motion, Goran stated that
 both Lacy and Rnic had represented to him that RLS was worth $2
 million, and that the business could not be appraised because it
 was such a unique business. 
On December 2, 2010, the Circuit Court heard the Pleho
 
Parties' November 12, 2010 motion to set aside. On February 14,
 2011, the Circuit Court entered an order denying the motion. 
4
 Rnic asserted that GPLLC was an alter ego, entity, trade name, or
business name used by Goran, and that Anagor was the alter ego of GPLLC and/or
Goran. It appears, however, that Anagor was not served, and thus was not a
party. 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On January 9, 2012, the Circuit Court entered a
 
Judgment in favor of Rnic "on all claims asserted" by the Pleho
 
Parties, pursuant to the May 13, 2009 order granting Rnic's
 motion for summary judgment. 
D. The Lacy Parties' Motion to Dismiss
 On February 26, 2009, the Lacy Parties filed a Hawai
'i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss 
the January 23, 2009 Second Amended Complaint, to the extent that 
the Pleho Parties sought relief against the Lacy Parties.5 After 
an April 21, 2009 hearing, on May 13, 2009, the Circuit Court entered an order granting the Lacy Parties' motion. 
On May 22, 2009, the Pleho Parties filed a motion for
 
reconsideration and clarification of the May 13, 2009 order
 granting the Lacy Parties' motion.
6 The motion argued that the
 
Lacy Parties had failed to address the Pleho Parties' claims for
 Unfair and Deceptive Trade Practices (Count VII) and Punitive
 Damages (Count XI). The Pleho Parties also argued that 
while the Lacy [Parties'] memorandum in support of their
motion argued that [the Pleho Parties'] cause of action for
legal malpractice "should be dismissed as to all parties
because the claims are not factually supported and [the
Pleho Parties] cannot establish they have any damages,
. . .," the Lacy [Parties] failed to produce any evidence to
support this argument. On the other hand, [the Pleho
Parties'] [Second Amended Complaint] clearly establishes the
basis for the damages suffered by [the Pleho Parties].
 
On July 29, 2009, the Circuit Court entered an order
 
"denying and clarifying" its May 13, 2009 order (July 29, 2009
 
5
 Although the motion was captioned as a motion to dismiss the
entire Complaint, the memorandum in support of the motion stated:
"[s]pecifically, the Lacy [Parties] are requesting dismissal of Counts I, II,
III, IV, V, VI, VIII, IX, and X[.]" 
6
 In the interim, on May 20, 2009, the Lacy Parties also answered
the Second Amended Complaint.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Order), stating that it denied the motion "because [the Pleho
 
Parties] ha[d] failed to allege new evidence or [evidence] that
 
could not have been presented in their original motion." 
The July 29, 2009 Order also stated that: claims for
 
fraud (Count II), fraud in the inducement (Count III), legal
 malpractice (Count VIII), and punitive damages (Count XI) still
 stood as brought by GPLLC; and claims for unfair and deceptive
 trade practices (Count VII) and punitive damages (Count XI) still
 stood as brought by Goran and Maria, individually.   The order
 
further clarified the Circuit Court's dismissal of several
 counts:
 
Count I for conspiracy to commit fraud falls away
because there is but one person accused and the prior co-
conspirator has been judged not liable. . . .
 
Count V and VI are properly dismissed by implication.
There is no mental distress which can be suffered by a
corporation. . . .
 
Count VII for unfair and deceptive trade practices can
not [sic] stand on behalf of the LLC, because a claim for
unfair and deceptive trade practices is reserved by statute
for consumers. . . .
 
Count VIII for legal malpractice was asked to be
dismissed as to the Plehos as individual plaintiffs, because
they had not suffered damages; they did not purchase, as
individuals, the business that is the underlying subject of
this case, and therefore did not suffer any individual
damages relating to the purchase. The Court ruled in favor
 of the Defendants; therefore Count VIII for legal
malpractice stands on behalf of the LLC alone. 
Count XI for punitive damages stands, based only on
the claims still standing for the individual Plehos and the
LLC. But because the only claim the individual Plehos can
claim punitive damages for is unfair and deceptive trade
practices, which awards double or treble damages, they
should be held to only one form of recovery[.]
 
On November 12, 2010, after conducting further
 
discovery, the Pleho Parties filed a motion to set aside portions
 
of the July 29, 2009 Order. After a December 2, 2010 hearing, on
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
January 13, 2011, the Circuit Court entered an order denying the
 
motion. 
E. The Lacy Parties' Motions for Partial Summary Judgment
 On November 9, 2010, the Lacy Parties filed an HRCP
 
Rule 56 motion for partial summary judgment on the Plehos' unfair
 and deceptive trade practices claim. On February 23, 2011, the
 Circuit Court granted the motion. 
On February 24, 2011, the Lacy Parties filed an HRCP
 
Rule 56 motion for partial summary judgment on the Plehos'
 punitive damages claim. On May 12, 2011, the Circuit Court
 granted the motion.
 
F. Settlement Agreements
 On March 10, 2011, counsel for the Pleho Parties, the
 
Lacy Parties, and Rnic appeared before the Circuit Court to place
 two settlements on the record: (1) an agreement between Rnic and
 the Lacy Parties, which had been signed by the parties on March
 9, 2011 (the Rnic/Lacy Parties Agreement); and (2) an agreement
 
between Rnic, Goran, and GPLLC (the Rnic/Goran/GPLLC Agreement). 
Goran participated by telephone.
 
Under the Rnic/Lacy Parties Agreement, the Lacy
 
Parties' insurance company agreed to pay $650,000 to Rnic. Rnic
 
broadly agreed to release GPLLC, Anagor, and their respective
 members, from any and all claims relating to or arising out of
 the July 25, 2005 Sale Agreement and Promissory Note, which were
 or could have been made in Rnic's counterclaim or a third party
 complaint. Rnic further agreed to dismiss his counterclaim
 against GPLLC and his cross-claim against Lacy with prejudice,
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and not to file a third-party complaint. The Lacy Parties and
 
Rnic would each pay their own attorneys' fees and costs. 
Under the Rnic/Goran/GPLLC Agreement, Goran and GPLLC
 
would dismiss all their claims against Rnic. In addition, "Goran
 Pleho [would] execute a settlement agreement which [would]
 contain a stipulation for an entry of judgment in the amount of
 $100,000 to be paid in twenty-five monthly installments of
 $4,000, no interest, beginning June 1, 2011." In return, Rnic
 agreed to: (1) dismiss with prejudice any and all claims against
 Goran, Maria, GPLLC, and Anagor; (2) refrain from filing or
 serving a third-party complaint against Anagor or any of its
 members; (3) disclose any and all of the terms of Rnic's
 settlement with the Lacy Parties; (4) withdraw all claims in
 bankruptcy against Goran or Maria; (5) remove any and all liens,
 if any, outstanding on the vehicles owned by GPLLC; (6) cease and
 desist from calling or going to the business premises of GPLLC
 and/or Anagor, and/or contacting any of its clientele or vendors.
 
Counsel for Rnic agreed to these terms after the Pleho

 
Parties' counsel recited them, stating: 
That's correct, your Honor. And just to make it
clear, that all claims that Anna Marie [sic] Pleho, Goran
Pleho, Goran Pleho, LLC, or Anagor, LLC, would have against
my clients are also being dismissed with prejudice. So it's
 a complete dismissal. There will be no appeal of this
matter.
 
However, the Pleho Parties' counsel objected to the
 
portion of the settlement referring to Anagor, insisting that
 
Goran did not have the authority to settle on behalf of Anagor. 
He stated that his understanding was that Anagor was not a party
 to the settlement. 
16
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court sought clarification as to the scope
 
of the Rnic/Lacy Parties settlement. After the attorneys
 
clarified the scope, they concluded:
 
[RNIC's COUNSEL]:  . . . So with that being said, the terms
placed on the record by [the Pleho

Parties' counsel] would be sufficient.
THE COURT: 
Mr. Rosdil, that clear enough?
[PLEHO PARTIES' COUNSEL]:
Clear enough. You know, it's what we
 
agreed.
 
The Circuit Court then attempted to confirm the
 
agreement with the Lacy Parties' counsel and with Goran,
 
clarifying that the agreements did not bind Maria, although
 Rnic's claims against her would be dismissed:
 
THE COURT:	 Okay. Now, on both settlements between
the Rnic and the Lacy defendants as well
as Mr. Rosdil's clients, any objection?
If there's any dispute as to the terms of
the settlement, that this Court is the
final binding arbiter? No appeal?
[RNIC's COUNSEL]: That's correct, your Honor.

[PLEHO PARTIES' COUNSEL]:
That's correct.
 
[LACY PARTIES' COUNSEL]:
Yes, your Honor.
[PLEHO PARTIES' COUNSEL]:
You want -- Mr. Pleho is -­
THE COURT: Oh, Mr. Pleho.
MR. PLEHO: Yes.
 
THE COURT: Did you hear the settlement represented?
MR. PLEHO: Yes. Except that last thing.
THE COURT: What's the last thing?
MR. PLEHO. I'm not sure.
 
THE COURT: About the Court maintaining -­
MR. PLEHO: There was something about Anagor, so I
don't know what was . . .

 
[PLEHO PARTIES' COUNSEL]:
He's referring to Anagor.
THE COURT:	 Okay. 
About Mr. Claggett's client not
filing – withdrawing all claims against
Anagor. Is that correct?
 
[RNIC's COUNSEL]: That's correct, your Honor.

THE COURT: Mr. Pleho, you heard that now?
MR. PLEHO: Yes.
 
THE COURT: You agree with that settlement in total as
stated now?
 
MR. PLEHO: Yes.
 
THE COURT: Any questions?
[RNIC's COUNSEL]: And he's -­MR. PLEHO: No.
 
[RNIC's COUNSEL]: -- just so that the record's clear, he's
agreeing -­
17

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[PLEHO PARTIES' COUNSEL]:
What did he say?
THE COURT: Do you have any questions?
MR. PLEHO: No. 
No.
 
[RNIC's COUNSEL]: He's agreeing on behalf of himself and
Goran Pleho, LLC.
THE COURT: Mr. Pleho, you're agreeing on behalf of
yourself and Goran Pleho, LLC?

MR. PLEHO: Yes.
 
[RNIC's COUNSEL]: 
And Mr. Rosdil can confirm that he has
authority from Marie [sic] Pleho, or Anna
Marie [sic] Pleho, that this settlement's
--
[PLEHO PARTIES' COUNSEL]:
Well, I don't have authority from Anna 
Marie [sic]. 
All of her claims, to my
knowledge, have been dismissed. And as
 
the individual, they've been dismissed as
to your client.
[RNIC's COUNSEL]: We still need her to sign-off on the
settlement agreement. That's my only
concern. You still have contact with her?
 
[PLEHO PARTIES' COUNSEL]:
I do. But as I've explained to you, she's
like another person out there. I don't
 think there's any problem with her
signing. But I don't have authority from
her.
 
[RNIC's COUNSEL]: Your Honor, there's -­[PLEHO PARTIES' COUNSEL]:
We didn't talk about her authority
yesterday when we did this, you know.
[RNIC's COUNSEL]: Your Honor, if there's an issue, I'll just
come to the court, and we can file a
motion, if she doesn't want to settle.
THE COURT: Well, you understand she's not here today,
so -­
[RNIC's COUNSEL]: I understand.
THE COURT: And the only parties that are here todayfor the settlement is what [Pleho Parties'

Counsel] represented and you and [Lacy
Parties' Counsel]. Nonparties who are not
part of this settlement, the Court will
not bind them.
 
At that point, the court asked what claims were
 
remaining for trial. The Lacy Parties' attorney stated that the
 
plaintiffs' claims against the Lacy Parties were left. Rnic's
 attorney confirmed that he would not be participating in the
 Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule 104 hearing.
 
G. Rnic's Motion to Enforce Settlement

 
On July 7, 2011, Rnic filed a motion to enforce the
 
Rnic/Goran/GPLLC Agreement. Rnic argued: 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Goran] made clear that he was agreeing on behalf of
himself and on behalf of [GPLLC], and as such, both are
responsible for paying under the terms of the agreement.
Moreover, it was clear that the intent of the parties was to
have the $100,000.00 obligation paid by [GPLLC], and not
[the Plehos] individually, as one of the terms of the
settlement agreement was to withdraw all claims against [the
Plehos] from the bankruptcy. Thus, the only logical [payor]
left in the settlement agreement was [GPLLC]. 
The Pleho Parties opposed the motion, arguing that the
 
settlement agreement placed on the record was an agreement to
 
make an agreement, and there was no meeting of the minds on
 essential terms. The Pleho Parties also argued:
 
Who would pay and who the stipulation for an entry of
judgment would be against was never agreed to by the
Parties, and therefore, no stipulation for an entry of
judgment was signed by the Parties. There is no evidence
 that [GPLLC] was obligated to pay [Rnic] nor that failure to
pay would result in a Judgment against [GPLLC].
 
On August 16, 2011, the parties' attorneys argued the
 
scope of the oral settlement agreement before the Circuit Court. 
The Pleho Parties argued that there was no enforceable settlement
 agreement because Goran had not signed Rnic's proposed version,
 which allegedly reflected terms to which Goran had not agreed. 
Counsel for Rnic argued that the agreement put on the record was
 a binding contract as to GPLLC:
 
And your Honor, I brought with me judgments that your
Honor can sign, both –- I have two versions, depending on
how your Honor rules, jointly against [Goran] individually
and [GPLLC]. He was clearly agreeing to the terms in his
capacity individually and as the managing member of [GPLLC],
or I have one just as to [GPLLC], which would be –- quite
frankly, either way is fine with my client.
 
The Circuit Court ruled: 
Okay. The Court's ruling is this: The settlement on
 
the record stated that the Court is the final binding
arbitrator if there's any dispute regarding settlement. At
 least the settlement contemplates the submission of written
settlement documents.
 
So [counsel for Rnic], if you have a settlement
document that is in dispute, as far as the terms of the
settlement, you submit it to the Court, and the Court will
then determine the dispute in the settlement documents. And
 then you can go from there, whatever the Court finds, if
any. 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court declined to rule orally on the issue
 
of whether GPLLC was bound by the settlement agreement. The
 
Circuit Court stayed Rnic's motion to enforce the settlement and
 asked Rnic to file another proposed settlement agreement. The
 Circuit Court also stated that it would rule on the issue when it
 received the proposed settlement and the Pleho Parties' position.
 
On October 4, 2011, the Circuit Court conducted another
 
status conference on the motion to enforce settlement, again
 taking the matter under advisement. Rnic argued that it would
 not make sense for Rnic to settle only with Goran individually
 rather than with GPLLC because Goran and Maria were in bankruptcy
 at the time, and thus "the only instrument for collection in the
 day would be [GPLLC], as a practical matter."
 
On November 14, 2011, the Circuit Court entered an
 
order granting Rnic's July 7, 2011 motion to enforce settlement. 
The Circuit Court found that "Goran Pleho agreed to bind both
 himself and [GPLLC], as reflected on page 14 line 3 of the
 Transcript of Proceedings, dated March 10, 2011."
 
H. The Lacy Parties' Motion for JMOL
 GPLLC's remaining claims against the Lacy Parties
 
proceeded to a jury trial in June of 2011. On June 22, 2011,
 after the plaintiff rested its case, the Lacy Parties moved for
 judgment as a matter of law (JMOL) under HRCP Rule 50(a),
 
challenging GPLLC's remaining claims for legal malpractice,
 
fraud, fraud in the inducement, and punitive damages. The
 Circuit Court orally denied the motion as to the legal
 malpractice claim but granted the motion as to the fraud, fraud
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in the inducement, and punitive damages claims. On July 7, 2011,
 
the Circuit Court entered a written order pursuant to its oral
 ruling on the issue.
 
I. The Trial on GPLLC's Malpractice Claims
 The Pleho Parties all alleged that Lacy had committed
 
legal malpractice in his representation of them. However,
 because Goran and Maria's claims were dismissed by the July 29,
 2009 Order, only GPLLC's legal malpractice claims went to trial. 
After the three-week trial, only GPLLC's Count VIII (legal
 malpractice) against the Lacy Parties was submitted to the jury,
 which returned a Special Verdict (Jury Verdict) on June 29, 2011,
 
finding that while Lacy breached the applicable standard of care
 
in providing legal services to GPLLC, Lacy's breach was not a
 legal cause of GPLLC's damages. Thus, the jury did not find the
 Lacy Parties liable for legal malpractice. The Pleho Parties did
 not appeal the Jury Verdict.
 
J. The Judgment
 On January 9, 2012, the Circuit Court entered a
 
Judgment that: (1) entered judgment in favor of the Lacy Parties
 on all claims asserted by Goran and Ana Maria
, pursuant to (a)
 
the May 13, 2009 order granting the Lacy Parties' motion to
 dismiss, (b) the July 29, 2009 order denying and clarifying the
 Pleho Parties' motion for reconsideration, (c) the February 23,
 2011 order granting Lacy Parties' motion for partial summary
 judgment as to unfair and deceptive trade practices claims, and
 (d) the May 12, 2011 order granting Lacy Parties' motion for 
partial summary judgment as to punitive damages; (2) entered
 
21
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judgment in favor of the Lacy Parties on all claims asserted by
 
GPLLC pursuant to (a) the May 13, 2009 order granting the Lacy
 Parties' motion to dismiss, (b) the July 29, 2009 order denying
 and clarifying the Pleho Parties' motion for reconsideration, (c)
 the July 7, 2011 order granting in part and denying in part the
 Lacy Parties' motion for JMOL, and (d) the June 29, 2011 Special
 Verdict; (3) entered judgment in favor of Rnic on all claims
 asserted by the Pleho Parties pursuant to the May 13, 2009 order
 granting Rnic's motion for summary judgment; (4) entered judgment
 in favor of Rnic against Goran and GPLLC, jointly and severally,
 for $100,000 pursuant to the November 14, 2011 order granting
 Rnic's motion to enforce settlement; (5) declared that "[a]ll
 other claims, counterclaims, and cross-claims are hereby
 dismissed;" and (6) declared that the issue of attorneys' fees
 and costs in favor of the prevailing parties would be determined
 by the Court at a later date.
 
K. Attorneys' Fees and Costs
 On September 9, 2011, the Lacy Parties filed a motion
 
for an award of attorneys' fees and costs, pursuant to the
 Circuit Court's May 13, 2009 order granting the Lacy Parties'
 February 26, 2009 motion to dismiss in part the Second Amended
 Complaint and the June 29, 2011 Special Verdict finding no legal
 malpractice.
 
On October 20, 2011, the Circuit Court entered an order
 
denying the Lacy Parties' motion. The Circuit Court based its
 denial on the fact that there was a written contract, dated
 August 9, 2005 (the Engagement Letter), which did not provide for
 
22
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
attorneys' fees, and thus the assumpsit provision in HRS § 607-14
 
did not apply.
 
On October 27, 2011, the Lacy Parties filed a motion
 
for reconsideration, which the Pleho Parties opposed. On
 
December 6, 2011, the Circuit Court heard the Lacy Parties'
 
motion for reconsideration. The Circuit Court reversed its
 earlier ruling that the case did not warrant attorney's fees
 under the assumpsit provision in HRS § 607-14 (1993), and noted
 that the dispute at that point was not whether the prevailing
 party was entitled to attorney's fees and costs, but rather who
 was the prevailing party. 
On January 9, 2012, the Circuit Court entered an order
 
granting the Lacy Parties' motion for reconsideration and
 awarding attorneys' fees of $407,013.69 and costs of $29,919.96
 to the Lacy Parties. 
L. Facts related to Evidentiary Issues
 On June 9, 2009, the Plehos filed a joint Chapter 11
 
Voluntary Petition for Bankruptcy Protection in the U.S.
 Bankruptcy Court for the District of Nevada. Under "Schedule B ­Personal Property," they did not identify any debts payable to
 themselves from GPLLC. 
On June 19, 2009, the Plehos notified the Circuit Court
 
of the Plehos' Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing. On July 30, 2009,
 
the Circuit Court recognized an automatic stay of the pending
 
action pursuant to the Plehos' bankruptcy petition. On July 8,
 2010, the Bankruptcy Court granted the Plehos' motion for relief
 from the stay to allow all parties to proceed in this action. 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On April 21, 2011, the Lacy Parties filed a motion in
 
limine to bar the Pleho Parties from pursuing claims for, or
 
introducing any evidence regarding, any alleged loan, debt, note,
 payment, advance, contract, or other asset not specifically
 declared as an asset in the Plehos' Nevada bankruptcy court
 action (Motion in Limine No. 2). On June 3, 2011, the Circuit
 
Court heard and orally denied the motion, stating, "the motion is
 
denied. Certainly it goes to credibility versus admissibility." 
On July 8, 2011, the Circuit Court entered an order denying the
 motion. 
During trial on June 21, 2011, counsel for the Pleho
 
Parties attempted to offer into evidence a check from Goran to
 GPLLC in order to prove damages. Counsel for the Lacy Parties
 objected based on a lack of relevance and foundation. The
 Circuit Court received the exhibit into evidence. 
Counsel for the Lacy Parties noted that the document
 
showed only the deposit of cash into GPLLC's account, and not the
 existence of a debt owed by GPLLC to Goran. Additionally, he
 noted that there was no evidence that the principal was ever
 repaid or that GPLLC paid any interest to Goran. Goran testified
 that it was his understanding that he would be repaid for his
 advance to GPLLC.
 
M. Appeal and Cross-Appeal
 On January 12, 2012, the Pleho Parties filed a timely
 
notice of appeal from the January 9, 2012 Judgment. 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On January 26, 2012, the Lacy Parties filed a timely
 
notice of cross-appeal from the July 8, 2011 order denying the
 
Lacy Parties' April 21, 2011 Motion in Limine No. 2. 
II.	 POINTS OF ERROR ON APPEAL
 
 
The Pleho Parties raise the following points of error:7
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred when it granted Rnic's
 
motion to enforce settlement;
 
(2) The Circuit Court erred when it granted Rnic's
 
motion for summary judgment;
 
(3) The Circuit Court erred when it granted the Lacy
 
Parties' motion to dismiss the Pleho Parties' claims for
 conspiracy, inadequate consideration, IIED, NIED, and spoliation
 of evidence, and the Plehos' claims for fraud, fraud in the
 inducement, and malpractice;
 
(4) The Circuit Court erred when it granted the Lacy
 
Parties' motions for partial summary judgment as to the Plehos'
 deceptive trade practices and punitive damages claims;
 
(5) The Circuit Court erred when it granted the Lacy
 
Parties' motion for JMOL as to GPLLC's claims for fraud, fraud in
 the inducement, and punitive damages; and
 
(6) The Circuit Court erred when it granted the Lacy
 
Parties' motion for reconsideration as to attorneys' fees and
 costs, found that malpractice sounds in assumpsit, and granted
 the Lacy Parties' fees and costs as the prevailing party;
 
7
 Appellants' points of error have been reorganized for clarity.
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Lacy Parties raise the following points of error:
 
(1) The Circuit Court abused its discretion when it
 
denied the Lacy Parties' Motion in Limine No. 2 because the court
 should have applied judicial estoppel to bar evidence of money

 
and property GPLLC claimed to have borrowed from the Plehos
 because the Plehos failed to disclose any such loans to GPLLC in
 their bankruptcy schedules; and
 
(2) The Circuit Court erred as a matter of law by
 
admitting evidence at trial of a payment made by Goran to GPLLC

 
when Goran did not disclose any such debt owed to him in the
 bankruptcy schedules because the contested evidence was
 irrelevant, not evidence of a debt, and not a proper item of
 damages.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW

 
As the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has held: 
A circuit court's ruling on a motion to dismiss is
reviewed de novo. It is well-established that [a] complaint
should not be dismissed for failure to state a claim unless
 it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can prove no set
of facts in support of his or her claim that would entitle
him or her to relief. [The appellate court] must therefore
view a plaintiff's complaint in a light most favorable to
him or her in order to determine whether the allegations
contained therein could warrant relief under any alternative
theory. For this reason, in reviewing [a] circuit court's
order dismissing [a] complaint . . . [the appellate court's]
consideration is strictly limited to the allegations of the
complaint, and [the appellate court] must deem those
allegations to be true.
 
Kealoha v. Machado, 131 Hawai 'i 62, 74, 315 P.3d 213, 225 (2013) 
(brackets and ellipsis in original, internal citations omitted,
 
format altered).
 
A motion for summary judgment is reviewed de novo,
under the same standard applied by the trial court. Summary
judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions,
answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together
with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine
issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is
 
26
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. A fact is
 
material if proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting an essential element of a cause of
action asserted by one of the parties.
 
On a motion for summary judgment, the court must view
the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving
party. The burden lies upon the moving party to show that
no genuine issue of material fact exists with respect to the
essential elements of the claim and that, based on the
undisputed facts, he is entitled to judgment as a matter of
law. Only once the moving party has satisfied its initial
burden of production does the burden shift to the non-moving
party to show specific facts that present a genuine issue
for trial.
 
Gurrobat v. HTH Corp., 133 Hawai 'i 1, 14, 323 P.3d 792, 805 
(2014) (internal citations and quotation marks omitted). 
It is well settled that a trial court's rulings on
motions for judgment as a matter of law are reviewed de
 
novo. When [the appellate court reviews] the granting of a
[motion for judgment as a matter of law], we apply the same
standard as the trial court.
 
Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawai 'i 1, 6-7, 84 P.3d 509, 514-15 (2004) 
(some brackets in original and some added, internal citations and
 
footnote omitted, format altered).
 
A motion for JMOL may be granted only when after
disregarding conflicting evidence, giving to the non-moving
party's evidence all the value to which it is legally
entitled, and indulging every legitimate inference which may
be drawn from the evidence in the non-moving party's favor,
it can be said that there is no evidence to support a jury
verdict in his or her favor.
 
Lahaina Fashions, Inc. v. Bank of Haw., 131 Hawai 'i 437, 453, 319 
P.3d 356, 372 (2014) (citation and internal quotation marks
 
omitted).
 
"Whether the parties in fact entered into an agreement
 
is essentially a question of fact." Assocs. Fin. Servs. Co. of
 
Haw., Inc. v. Mijo, 87 Hawai 'i 19, 28, 950 P.2d 1219, 1228 (1998) 
(citation omitted). We review a trial court's findings of fact
 under the clearly erroneous standard. Id.
 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"A trial court's determination regarding the
 
enforceability of a settlement agreement is a conclusion of law
 
reviewable de novo." Id. (citation omitted).
 
A motion to enforce a disputed settlement agreement is
treated as a motion for summary judgment. Miller v. Manuel,
9 Haw. App. 56, 64, 828 P.2d 286, 292 (1991), cert. denied,
72 Haw. 618, 841 P.2d 1075 (1992). A motion for summary

judgment should not be granted where there is a factual
question as to the existence, validity, and terms of the
alleged settlement agreement, and where such a dispute
exists, a trial or an evidentiary hearing to resolve the
dispute is required.
 
Gilmartin v. Abastillas, 10 Haw. App. 283, 296, 869 P.2d 1346,
 
1352 (1994).

 
[S]ummary judgment standards appl[y] to a hearing on a
motion to enforce a settlement agreement. Therefore, a
motion to enforce a settlement agreement may not be decided
summarily if there is any question of fact as to whether a
mutual, valid, and enforceable settlement agreement exists
between the parties. If there is a question of fact as to
the existence of a mutual, valid, and enforceable settlement
agreement, an evidentiary hearing must be held.
 
Moran v. Guerreiro , 97 Hawai 'i 354, 371, 37 P.3d 603, 620 (App. 
2001) (citing Miller v. Manuel, 9 Haw. App. at 64, 828 P.2d at
 
292).
 
[An appellate] court reviews a lower court's award of
attorneys' fees for abuse of discretion. The trial court
 
abuses its discretion if it bases its ruling on an erroneous
view of the law or on a clearly erroneous assessment of the
evidence. In other words, an abuse of discretion occurs
where the trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of
reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice
to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.
 
Hart v. Ticor Title Ins. Co. , 126 Hawai 'i 448, 455, 272 P.3d 
1215, 1222 (2012) (brackets, internal citations, and quotation
 
marks omitted).
 
IV. DISCUSSION

 
A. Rnic's Motion to Enforce Settlement
 The Pleho Parties argue that there was never a meeting
 
of the minds as to settlement, that Goran never intended for
 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
GPLLC to be bound to pay the resulting judgment, and that the
 
Pleho Parties did not, as Rnic argued, waive their right to
 appeal the Circuit Court's ruling or the judgment. 
We first consider whether a valid settlement agreement
 
was formed. In Dowsett v. Cashman, 2 Haw. App. 77, 83, 625 P.2d
 1064, 1068 (1981), the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) held
 
that a binding compromise agreement had been formed when the
 
parties, "in open court, entered into what appears to be a
 voluntary, well-thought-out, and previously discussed agreement
 to settle their dispute." The ICA explained:
 
Where the parties have voluntarily entered into a
stipulation which appears fair and reasonable for the
compromise and settlement of the issues of a pending cause
and where the stipulation is spread upon the record with the
consent and approval of the court, as here, the parties are
bound thereby and the court may, thereafter, properly
proceed to dispose of the case on the basis of the
pleadings, the stipulations and the admitted facts.
 
Id. at 83, 625 P.2d at 1068 (quotation marks omitted) (quoting
 
Goltl v. Cummings, 380 P.2d 556, 559 (Colo. 1963)).
 
Here, the parties to the Rnic/Goran/GPLLC Agreement
 
clearly intended to end the litigation and agreed to dismiss all
 of their claims against each other. Prior to the hearing,
 counsel for both parties had discussed the terms at length. In
 his declaration in support of Rnic's motion to enforce
 settlement, Rnic's counsel stated:
 
[D]uring the negotiations my client originally wanted
the payments to be $5,000.00 per month for 20 months,
however, Will Rosdil on behalf of Goran Pleho and [GPLLC]
stated that [GPLLC] could not afford the payments of
$5,000.00 per month and still operate, but that it could
afford $4,000.00 per month. As a result of the statements
 and request of Will Rosdil, [Rnic] agreed to the $4,000.00
per month payment for 25 months.
 
29

   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
At the beginning of the hearing at which the settlement
 
was placed on the record, counsel for the parties stated that
 
they had reached an agreement and were ready to place the terms
 on the record:
 
[RNIC'S COUNSEL]: [Pleho Parties' counsel] and I have
entered into a settlement agreement, and

[Pleho Parties' counsel] has the terms
that we'd like to put on the record. And
 we just -- the reason why we have Mr.
Pleho on the phone is just to make sure
he's canvassed and he understands the
 terms and agrees to them.
THE COURT: 
Okay.
[PLEHO PARTIES' COUNSEL]:
Our arrangement is it's subject to his

agreement with [Counsel for the Lacy
Parties]. So if you can just put your
agreement with [Lacy Parties' counsel] on
the record, please.
 
After the terms of the Rnic/Lacy Parties Agreement were
 
placed on the record, the Pleho Parties' counsel orally stated
 
the terms of the Rnic/Goran/GPLLC Agreement between Rnic and his
 clients, and Goran indicated that he had heard and agreed to all
 the terms. No essential terms were left to be determined at a
 
later date. Thus, the Circuit Court did not clearly err in
 
determining that a binding settlement agreement was formed at the
 March 10, 2011 hearing.
 
Next we turn to the question of whether GPLLC is
 
jointly liable under the Rnic/Goran/GPLLC Agreement for the
 $100,000 in payments to Rnic. The Circuit Court concluded that
 "Goran Pleho agreed to bind both himself and [GPLLC] as reflected
 on page 14 line 3 of the Transcript of Proceedings, dated March
 10, 2011." We agree. The transcript of proceedings clearly
 indicates that Goran agreed to the terms both individually and in
 his capacity as a member of GPLLC, including:
 
30
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: Do you have any questions?
MR. PLEHO: 
No. No.
 
[RNIC's COUNSEL]: He's agreeing on behalf of himself and

Goran Pleho, LLC.
THE COURT: Mr. Pleho, you're agreeing on behalf of
yourself and Goran Pleho, LLC?
MR. PLEHO: Yes.
 
Moreover, the terms of settlement benefitted GPLLC in
 
that Rnic agreed to dismiss his breach of contract claims against
 
GPLLC, remove any and all liens outstanding on vehicles owned by
 GPLLC, and cease and desist from contacting any of GPLLC's
 vendors or clients. GPLLC was the party owing the payments to
 Rnic under the terms of the Sale Agreement and Promissory Note
 and the Plehos were seeking relief from their debts in bankruptcy
 court. In addition, it appears from the record that the
 settlement payment amount was negotiated at least in part based
 on what GPLLC could afford to pay while still maintaining its
 ongoing operations. Thus, the record supports the Circuit
 Court's conclusion that the parties agreed that both Goran and
 GPLLC were obligated to make the settlement payments; there is no
 support in record, other than Goran's subsequent denial, for the
 Pleho Parties' position that Goran did not intend to bind GPLLC
 to the payment term. Thus, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 did not err in determining that the settlement agreement bound
 both Goran and GPLLC with respect to the monthly payments due to
 Rnic, which totaled $100,000.
 
Finally, the Pleho Parties argue that this court should
 
reject Rnic's contention that Goran and GPLLC waived their right
 to appeal from the Circuit Court's ruling on Rnic's motion to
 enforce settlement. We agree. The Circuit Court sua sponte
 suggested that the Circuit Court be "the final binding arbiter." 
31
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Although the attorneys responded affirmatively, there is no
 
evidence in the record that Goran and GPLLC had agreed to waive
 their right to appeal, and their counsel lacked the authority to
 bind them without such waiver. See, e.g., Bach v. Stogdell, No.
 
28652, 2009 WL 522715, at *7 (Haw. App. Feb. 27, 2009) (quoting
 First Trust Co. of Hilo v. Cabrinha, 24 Haw. 777, 785 (Haw. Terr.
 1919)) ("'To constitute a waiver otherwise than by express
 agreement there must be unequivocal acts or conduct of the vendor
 evincing the intent to waive. Nothing short of this will amount
 to a waiver.'"). Neither of the proposed settlement agreements
 contemplated waiver of the right to appeal. Rather, it appears
 undisputed that the Rnic/Goran/GPLLC Agreement, for example,
 contemplated good faith mediation prior to further litigation, as
 an uncontested part of the draft settlement agreement provided:
 
In the event that a dispute between the parties hereto
arises out of this Settlement Agreement, and/or the attached
Stipulation of Entry of Judgment, . . . [t]he parties agree
that they shall attempt in good faith to mediate the dispute
before Denise Madigan, or another mediator mutually
agreeable to the parties before commencing any litigation or
arbitration. 
Accordingly, we cannot conclude that there was an
 
enforceable waiver of the Pleho Parties' right to seek relief
 
from the Circuit Court's ruling on the settlement agreement.
 
B. Summary Judgment for Rnic on Pleho Parties' Claims
 As set forth above, the Circuit Court considered Rnic's
 
request for summary judgment with respect to the Pleho Parties'
 claims against him three times: first, in conjunction with
 Rnic's March 27, 2009 motion; second, in conjunction with the
 Pleho Parties' May 22, 2009 motion for reconsideration; and
 third, in conjunction with the Pleho Parties' November 12, 2010
 
32
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
motion to set aside. On appeal, the Pleho Parties contend that
 
the Circuit Court erred when it granted summary judgment in favor
 of Rnic on their claims for conspiracy to commit fraud (Count I),
 inadequate consideration (Count IV), IIED (Count V), NIED (Count
 VI), unfair and deceptive trade practices (Count VII), spoliation
 (Counts IX and X), punitive damages (Count XI), and with respect
 to Goran and Maria only, the claims for fraud (Count II) and
 fraud in the inducement (Count III). However, as we have
 concluded that an enforceable settlement agreement existed
 between Goran, GPLLC, and Rnic, we need only consider the Circuit
 Court's granting of summary judgment on Maria's claims against
 Rnic.
 
1. Conspiracy to Commit Fraud
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has defined civil conspiracy
as the combination of two or more persons or entities by
concerted action to accomplish a criminal or unlawful purpose, or to accomplish some purpose not in itself
criminal or unlawful by criminal or unlawful means. The 
supreme court explained that [c]ivil conspiracy does notalone constitute a claim for relief. In other words,concerted action is not enough. A civil conspiracy claimmust include either that the alleged conspirators had acriminal or unlawful purpose for their concerted action or that the alleged conspirators used criminal or unlawful means to accomplish a lawful objective. 
Miyashiro v. Roehrig, Roehrig, Wilson & Hara, 122 Hawai 'i 461, 
482, 228 P.3d 341, 362 (App. 2010) (emphases in original, 
internal citations and quotation marks omitted); see also Adams v. Dole Food Co., 132 Hawai
'i 478, 490, 323 P.3d 122, 134 (App. 
2014) ("there can be no civil claim based upon a conspiracy alone") (quoting Ellis v. Crockett, 51 Haw. 45, 57, 451 P.2d 814, 822 (1969)). 
The Second Amended Complaint alleged that both Rnic and
 
Lacy failed to disclose the extent of Lacy's involvement in the
 
33
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rnic/Rullo negotiations and that Rullo's proposed purchase price
 
was only $800,000. It was undisputed that neither Rnic nor Lacy
 mentioned the Rnic/Rullo negotiations to the Plehos. The Second
 Amended Complaint also alleged that Rnic and Lacy had
 misrepresented to Goran "that the fair market value of RLS was
 $2.0 million, and that because it was such a unique business no
 appraisal was possible, and that $1.5 million was a fair price,
 and Plaintiff GORAN PLEHO relied on same." 
However, as Rnic argued in his motion for summary 
judgment, the plaintiffs failed to allege or provide any evidence that Lacy acted in concert with Rnic to fraudulently induce them, i.e., intentionally participated with Rnic in the transaction to further a common design and purpose. "[M]ere acquiescence or knowledge is insufficient to constitute a conspiracy, absent approval, cooperation, or agreement." Tour2000 Co. v. Koreana 
Tour Serv., Inc., No. 28209, 2009 WL 3437431, at *9 (Haw. App. Oct. 23, 2009) (mem.) (quoting Robert's Haw. Sch. Bus, Inc. v. Laupahoehoe Transp. Co., 91 Hawai
'i 224, 260 n.44, 982 P.2d 853, 
889 n.44 (1999)); see also Zimmerman v. Grolle, 38 Haw. 217, 226 (Haw. Terr. 1948) ("The mere knowledge, acquiescence, or approval of the act, without co-operation or agreement to co-operate, is not enough to constitute one a party to a conspiracy. There must be intentional participation in the transaction with a view to the furtherance of the common design and purpose.") (footnote and citation omitted). At no point in the Circuit Court's consideration of the summary judgment in favor of Rnic, including 
34
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on the motion for reconsideration and the motion to set aside,
 
was such evidence brought before the court.
 
Thus, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
 
granting summary judgment as to Maria's claim of conspiracy in
 Count I.
 
2. Fraud and Fraud in the Inducement
 
While the Second Amended Complaint lists separate 
counts for "Fraud" and "Fraud in the Inducement," fraud in the inducement is simply a type of fraud which induces an action or transaction by fraudulent misrepresentation. See, e.g., Aames 
Funding Corp. v. Mores, 107 Hawai
'i 95, 103-04, 110 P.3d 1042, 
1050-51 (2005) (also defining fraud in the factum and constructive fraud). Accordingly, we address Counts II and III together. 
The elements of fraud are: (1) false representations made
by the defendant; (2) with knowledge of their falsity (or
without knowledge of their truth or falsity); (3) in
contemplation of plaintiff's reliance upon them; and (4)
plaintiff's detrimental reliance.
 
Miyashiro, 122 Hawai 'i at 482-83, 228 P.3d at 362-63 (citation 
omitted). 
[T]o constitute fraudulent inducement sufficient toinvalidate the terms of a contract, there must be (1) arepresentation of a material fact, (2) made for the purposeof inducing the other party to act, (3) known to be false
but reasonably believed true by the other party, and (4)
upon which the other party relies and acts to his or herdamage. 
Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co., 116 
Hawai'i 277, 285 n.6, 172 P.3d 1021, 1029 n.6 (2007) (citation 
omitted). "The false representation, to be actionable, must relate to a past or existing material fact, and not to the happening of future events[.]" Haw. Cmty. Fed. Credit Union v. 
35
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Keka, 94 Hawai 'i 213, 230, 11 P.3d 1, 18 (2000) (citation 
omitted). "An express averment of intent (to defraud) is not 
required, but it is sufficient if the existence of the intent can be clearly inferred from the allegations." Notley v. Notley, 23 
Haw. 724, 737 (Haw. Terr. 1917) (citation omitted). In Matsuura v. E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., 102 Hawai
'i 149, 163, 73 P.3d 
687, 701 (2003), the supreme court clarified that "under Hawai 'i 
law, to prevail on a claim of fraudulent inducement, plaintiffs must prove that their reliance upon a defendant's representations was reasonable." The court further stated that "[a]s a general principle the question of whether one has acted reasonably under the circumstances is for the trier of fact to determine. Additionally, this court has acknowledged the accepted principle that, where reasonable minds might differ as to the reasonableness of plaintiff's conduct, the question is for the jury." Id. (citations, internal quotation marks, ellipses, and 
brackets omitted). 
In his motion for summary judgment, Rnic argued that
 
Maria did not have standing to sue for fraud because she was not
 a party to the Sale Agreement or Promissory Note. Rnic further
 argued that he was entitled to summary judgment because Maria
 failed to show that she had detrimentally relied on
 representations made by Rnic to her regarding the business. 
Although we conclude that Maria had standing, we agree with
 Rnic's latter contention. 
The Sale Agreement provided that "Goran Pleho,
 
principal of [GPLLC]" would transfer the Properties to Rnic as
 
36
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
part of the sale price. However, Maria testified during her
 
deposition that she had jointly owned the Properties with Goran. 
Additionally, the Residential Purchase Agreement, which Rnic and
 the Plehos executed on August 4, 2005 to transfer the Properties,
 lists both Goran and Maria as the "Sellers." Accordingly, the
 Pleho Parties offered evidence that Maria transferred her
 interest in the Properties, as part of the consideration for the
 purchase of RLS. Thus, Maria brought forward sufficient evidence
 to avoid summary judgment for a lack of standing.
 
Rnic also argued in his motion for summary judgment
 
that Maria failed to specify any misrepresentations that Rnic
 made to her regarding RLS. The Pleho Parties offered the
 deposition testimony of Naylene Pacatang (Pacatang), who had
 
previously worked under Rnic as an "administrative assistant,
 
accountant and dispatcher" for RLS. Pacatang testified that Rnic
 had instructed her to alter profit and loss reports for January,
 February, and March of 2005 by changing certain expenses to
 "zero" in order to show "a profit of between $40,000 and $50,000
 per month." However, Pacatang could not confirm that Rnic ever
 showed the altered financial statements to any potential buyer. 
Goran testified during his deposition that Rnic gave him profit
 and loss statements during his second visit, and the Pleho
 Parties produced "Profit and Loss" statements for February to
 June 2005 in response to Rnic's first request for production of
 "[a]ny and all 'documents and other things' which enticed [the
 Pleho Parties] to seek to manage and/or purchase the 'subject
 business.'" These statements show monthly net incomes ranging
 
37
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
from $35,305.53 to $90,467.35. Rnic denied instructing Pacatang
 
to change numbers on the profit and loss sheets. However, he
 admitted that the statements contained "very, very incomplete
 numbers" that were "[n]ot at all" reliable because
 
it would take months before I can be clear on any of these
months. The only reliable thing was at the end of the year,
when I had all the bank statements, what I reported to
federal taxes, state taxes, and all the other things that I
had.
 
The Pleho Parties also presented in their interrogatory
 
responses a detailed list of problems with RLS's vehicles, about
 
which they allege Rnic failed to inform them. The responses also
 included a list of statements that Rnic allegedly made about RLS. 
While it appears that the Pleho Parties brought forward evidence
 creating a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Rnic made
 false representations to the Plehos about RLS, that is only one
 of the elements that must ultimately be satisfied.
 
With respect to Maria in particular, there is a dearth
 
of evidence that she relied on Rnic's representations, as opposed
 to relying on her husband's desire to proceed with the
 transaction. During her deposition, Maria testified that she and
 Rnic "didn't have many conversations." During the one
 conversation she remembered having with Rnic, Rnic dictated some
 terms of the deal to her and she wrote them down. She further
 testified that, while she had been present on several occasions
 when Rnic and Goran discussed the business, she could not recall
 any of the substance of these conversations because Rnic and
 Goran were speaking in Serbian, which she did not understand. 
38
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
When asked if Rnic ever told her that RLS made a
 
certain amount of money, or spoke to her about the client list or
 
the conditions of the vehicles, Maria replied "No" or "No[,] I
 don't think so." She also answered affirmatively when asked,
 
th
"prior to July 25 , 2005, [Rnic] didn't make any representations
to you as to the substance of the business, correct?" Later in
 the deposition, she mentioned that Rnic had said some things
 about RLS to both her and Goran, such as that the cars were in
 good condition, that income was great, and that RLS was a unique
 business.
 However, Maria could not remember whether Goran had

 
showed her any of the documents that he received from Rnic, and
 answered "No" when asked if Goran ever showed her a client list,
 financials, or tax returns. Most significantly, when asked, "So
 your decision to give up your equity in those three homes was not
 based on anything that Mr. Rnic had said or given to you,
 correct?", she answered, "Correct." 
Even viewing the evidence in the light most favorable
 
to Maria, the evidence was insufficient to create a genuine issue
 of material fact as to Maria's reliance on Rnic's representations
 about RLS. Thus, the Circuit Court did not err in granting
 summary judgment to Rnic on Maria's claim of fraud or fraud in
 the inducement.
 
39
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3. Gross Inadequacy of Consideration
 
In his motion for summary judgment, Rnic argued that
 
gross inadequacy of consideration is not a separate and distinct
 
cause of action recognized by Hawai 'i law. The Pleho Parties 
cite several cases in support of their argument that gross
 inadequacy of consideration constitutes a separate cause of
 action, relevant portions of which state the following:
 
Mere inadequacy of consideration is insufficient to set a
bargain aside. "If a person of ordinary understanding, on
 whom no fraud has been practiced, makes an imprudent
bargain, no court of justice can release him from it.
Inadequacy of consideration is not a substantial ground for
setting aside a conveyance of property."
 
Harbottle v. Rawlins, 11 Haw. 105, 109 (Haw. Rep. 1897) (emphasis
 
added) (quoting 1 Story's Eq. Juris., Sec. 237).

 
A sale [of land], moreover, can not be set aside for
mere inadequacy of consideration; it is only where the
price paid is so grossly inadequate as to shock the
conscience and raise a strong presumption of fraud,
that equity will relieve, the ground of relief being,
not the inadequacy, but the fraud evidenced thereby.
 
Berger v. Booth, 13 Haw. 291, 295-96 (Haw. Terr. 1912) (emphases
 
added).

 
Story, in his Equity Jurisprudence, Section 246,
says: "There may be such an unconscionableness or
inadequacy in a bargain as to demonstrate some gross
imposition, or some undue influence, and, in such
cases, Courts of Equity ought to interfere upon the
satisfactory ground of fraud. But then such
 
unconscionableness or such inadequacy should be made
out as would (to use an expressive phrase) shock the
conscience, and amount in itself to conclusive and
 
decisive evidence of fraud."
 
Kailaa v. Kaaukai , 7 Haw. 653, 658 (Haw. Kingdom 1889) (emphases
 
added) (quoting 1 Story's Eq. Juris., Sec. 246).
 
These cases, however, establish that gross inadequacy
 
of consideration may evidence fraud, rather than establish a
 
separate cause of action based on inadequacy of consideration. 
Thus, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in granting
 
40
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
summary judgment as to Maria's gross inadequacy of consideration
 
claim in Count IV.
 
4. IIED and NIED
 
As this court has previously explained:
 
Our courts have adopted the Restatement (Second) of
Torts' approach to IIED claims. [Hac v. Univ. of Haw., 102
Hawai
'i 92, 106-07, 73 P.3d 46, 60–61 (2003)]. The elements 
of an IIED claim are: "1) that the act allegedly causing the
harm was intentional or reckless, 2) that the act was
outrageous, and 3) that the act caused 4) extreme emotional
distress to another." Id. "The question whether the
actions of the alleged tortfeasor are unreasonable or
outrageous is for the court in the first instance[.]" [Ross
 v. Stouffer Hotel Co. (Haw.) Ltd., 76 Hawai' i 454, 465, 879
P.2d 1037, 1048 (1994)]. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 46cmt. d (1965) characterizes outrageous conduct as follows: 
It has not been enough that the defendant has acted
with an intent which is tortious or even criminal, or

that he has intended to inflict emotional distress, or
even that his conduct has been characterized by
"malice," or a degree of aggravation which would
entitle the plaintiff to punitive damages for another
tort. Liability has been found only where the conduct
has been so outrageous in character, and so extreme in
degree, as to go beyond all possible bounds of
decency, and to be regarded as atrocious, and utterly
intolerable in a civilized community.
 
Simmons v. Aqua Hotels & Resorts, Inc., 130 Hawai 'i 325, 332, 310 
P.3d 1026, 1033 (App. 2013); see also Young v. Allstate Ins. Co.,
 
119 Hawai 'i 403, 429, 198 P.3d 666, 692 (2008) ("The term 
outrageous has been construed to mean without just cause or
 excuse and beyond all bounds of decency. The question whether
 the actions of the alleged tortfeasor are unreasonable or
 outrageous is for the court in the first instance, although where
 reasonable people may differ on that question it should be left
 to the jury.") (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
Also, "extreme emotional distress" constitutes, among
other things, mental suffering, mental anguish, nervous
shock, and other "highly unpleasant mental reactions."
Enoka v. AIG Haw. Ins. Co., Inc.,  109 Hawai' i 537, 559, 128
P.3d 850, 872 (2006) (citations and some internal quotation
marks omitted). "[M]ental distress may be found where a
reasonable [person], normally constituted, would be unable
to adequately cope with the mental stress engendered by the
 
41

   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circumstances of the case." Shoppe v. Gucci Am., Inc., 94 
Hawai'i 368, 387, 14 P.3d 1049, 1068 (2000) (quoting
Rodrigues v. State, 52 Haw. 156, 173, 472 P.2d 509, 520
(1970)). 
Id. at 429 n.26, 198 P.3d at 692 n.26. 
Even assuming, arguendo, that all of the Pleho Parties'
 
allegations are true, reasonable people could not construe Rnic's
 
conduct in this commercial transaction as "beyond all possible
 bounds of decency." Furthermore, while Maria provided a
 declaration describing various psychological and physical
 injuries, including depression, heartburn, hair loss and acne,
 she failed to allege that Rnic's conduct in selling RLS to GPLLC
 for $1.5 million caused her emotional distress. Rather, her
 declaration made clear that her injuries were the result of the
 Plehos' attempts to run RLS after GPLLC had purchased it. Thus,
 we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in granting
 summary judgment as to Maria's IIED claim in Count V.
 
In his motion for summary judgment, Rnic argued that
 
the Pleho Parties had failed to show the elements of NIED because
 they had not established any injury to property or to themselves. 
We disagree to the extent that Maria alleged that she had
 personally suffered from, inter alia, bad acne and hair loss due
 to her stress. However, Maria failed to show that Rnic's conduct
 caused her injuries. Rather, the physical and psychological
 injuries detailed in Maria's declaration and testimony occurred,
 by Maria's own account, as a result of the Plehos' attempts to
 run RLS during the due diligence period and prior to the closing
 date in March 2006. These injuries were attributable to the
 foreseeable stress of buying and attempting to run a business
 
42
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with which the buyer is completely unfamiliar. Finally, the 
Pleho Parties do not cite to any Hawai 'i case law supporting 
recovery for NIED based entirely on a commercial transaction, and we find none. Thus, we conclude summary judgment was appropriate as to Maria's NIED claim in Count VI. 
5. Unfair and Deceptive Trade Practices 
With respect to Maria's Unfair and Deceptive Trade 
Practices claim, the Pleho Parties argue on appeal: 
While HRS Section 480-1 limits recovery to consumers,
stockholders of companies injured by deceptive tradepractices have an independent action if they can show injurydistinct from that suffered by their company. Joy McElroy
MD v. Maryl Group, 107 Hawai' i 423, 434-435, 114 P.33d [sic]
929 (App. 2005). . . . Goran and Maria conveyed $378,000worth of property to Rnic and were forced to invest $300,000of their own funds into RLS as a result of his deceptivetrade practices. 
(Format altered.) 
The Pleho Parties do not allege that they purchased,
 
attempted to purchase, or were solicited to purchase goods or
 
services. Thus, we look to whether Maria's contribution of
 personal assets toward GPLLC's purchase of RLS can be considered
 a personal investment under the definition of "consumer" provided
 by HRS § 480-1 (2008).
 
In Cieri v. Leticia Query Realty, Inc.,  80 Hawai 'i 54, 
69, 905 P.2d 29, 44 (1995), the supreme court held that "real estate or residences qualify as 'personal investments' pursuant to HRS § 480-1[,]" and thus a couple who had purchased a home through a real estate broker had standing to sue under HRS § 480­2. However, in Joy A. McElroy, M.D., Inc., 107 Hawai
'i at 435­
36, 114 P.3d at 931-42, this court considered whether "personal investments" included the contribution of personal funds for the 
43
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
construction of improvements to commercial premises leased to a
 
corporate tenant. In that case, an officer of a corporation
 executed a lease agreement on behalf of the corporation, and,
 along with another officer, signed a personal guaranty for the
 lease. Id. at 427, 114 P.3d at 933. The officers individually
 
brought claims against the lessor under HRS Chapter 480, claiming
 that they had made "personal investments" using their own funds
 to improve the leased premises in reliance on the lessor's
 misrepresentations. Id. at 434, 114 P.3d at 940. This court
 
held:
 
It is unclear how improvements to the leased commercial
 
space could be considered an investment, much less a
personal investment, where the named lessee was [the
corporation] and [the corporate officers] were only
guarantors on the Lease and officers of the corporation.
Accordingly, we hold that [the corporate officers] were not
"consumers" as defined in HRS § 480–1.
 
Id. at 436, 114 P.3d at 942.
 
Here, we cannot conclude that Maria was a "consumer"
 
based on her contribution of personal assets to facilitate
 
GPLLC's purchase and operation of RLS. RLS was clearly a
 commercial operation being acquired by GPLLC. GPLLC's
 acquisition of RLS was a commercial transaction and was not
 transformed into a consumer transaction because the corporation's
 principals provided the capital needed by GPLLC to complete the
 transaction. Extending the definition of "personal investment"
 to include money or property associated with the acquisition of a
 commercial venture – through an entity formed for the purpose of
 acquiring and operating that business – would be contrary to the
 
44
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
intent of HRS § 480-1.8 Accordingly, we conclude that Maria did
 
not have standing to bring claims under HRS § 480-2, and the
 
Circuit Court did not err by granting summary judgment as to
 Count VII.
 
Notwithstanding a reference to HRS Chapter 481A, the
 
Second Amended Complaint failed to allege that the defendants
 engaged in any of the trade practices concerning goods or
 services prohibited by and considered to be deceptive pursuant to
 HRS § 481A-3 (2008).
9 Furthermore, no evidence of such deceptive
 
8	 HRS § 480-1 was amended in 1990 with the addition of "personal" to
modify "investment." See Cieri, 80 Hawai' i at 68, 905 P.2d at 43. The 
legislative history of HRS § 480-1 does not suggest that the "personal
investment" portion of the "consumer" definition applies to the sale of a
business by one owner to the next:
 
Your Committee believes that one of the purposes for
the definition of "consumer," as formulated in Section

480–2, was to address the consumer investment fraud
situation, such as the Rewald situation. However, the
language of the definition may be overbroad and not limited
to situations of investment fraud schemes to consumers. 
Therefore, your Committee has amended the bill by inserting
the word "personal" before the word "investment" to clarify
that the provision is to protect individual consumers,
rather than businesses.
 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 716–90, in 1990 House Journal, at 1113.
 
9	 HRS § 481A-3 provides:
 
HRS § 481A-3 Deceptive trade practices. (a) A person
engages in a deceptive trade practice when, in the course of
the person's business, vocation, or occupation, the person:
(1)	 Passes off goods or services as those of
another;
(2)	 Causes likelihood of confusion or of
 misunderstanding as to the source, sponsorship,
approval, or certification of goods or services;
(3)	 Causes likelihood of confusion or of
 misunderstanding as to affiliation, connection,
or association with, or certification by,
another;
(4)	 Uses deceptive representations or designations
of geographic origin in connection with goods or
services;
(5)	 Represents that goods or services have
sponsorship, approval, characteristics,
ingredients, uses, benefits, or quantities that
they do not have or that a person has a
sponsorship, approval, status, affiliation, or
connection that the person does not have;
(continued...)
 
45
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trade practices was presented in opposition to Rnic's summary
 
judgment motion and, thus, it is clear that no genuine issue of
 material fact exists as to whether Rnic violated the statute. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court did not err by
 
granting summary judgment in favor of Rnic on Maria's unfair and
 deceptive trade practice claims in Count VII.
 
6.
	 The Spoliation of Evidence Claims
 
In Matsuura , 102 Hawai 'i at 168, 73 P.3d at 706, the 
supreme court declined to resolve whether Hawai 'i law recognizes 
spoliation of evidence as a tort, but noted in that a few other
 jurisdictions have recognized such a cause of action:
 
The few jurisdictions that recognize a cause of action
for intentional spoliation . . . of evidence require a
showing of the following elements: 
(1)	 the existence of a potential lawsuit;
(2)	 the defendant's knowledge of the potential lawsuit;
(3)	 the intentional destruction of evidence designed to
 
9(...continued)
(6)	 Represents that goods are original or new if
they are deteriorated, altered, reconditioned,
reclaimed, used, or secondhand;
(7)	 Represents that goods or services are of a
particular standard, quality, or grade, or that
goods are of a particular style or model, if
they are of another;
(8)	 Disparages the goods, services, or business of
another by false or misleading representation of
fact;
(9)	 Advertises goods or services with intent not to
sell them as advertised;
(10)	 Advertises goods or services with intent not to
supply reasonably expectable public demand,
unless the advertisement discloses a limitation
 of quantity;
(11)	 Makes false or misleading statements of fact
concerning the reasons for, existence of, or
amounts of price reductions; or
(12)	 Engages in any other conduct which similarly
creates a likelihood of confusion or of
 misunderstanding.
(b) In order to prevail in an action under this
chapter, a complainant need not prove competition between
the parties or actual confusion or misunderstanding.
(c) This section does not affect unfair trade
practices otherwise actionable at common law or under other
statutes of this State.
 
46
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disrupt or defeat the potential lawsuit;
(4)	 disruption of the potential lawsuit;
(5)	 a causal relationship between the act of spoliation
and the inability to prove the lawsuit; and
(6)	 damages. 
For a claim of negligent spoliation of evidence,
jurisdictions generally require that the plaintiff prove: 
(1)	 the existence of a potential civil action;
(2)	 a legal or contractual duty to preserve evidence
that is relevant to the potential civil action;
(3)	 destruction of that evidence;
(4)	 significant impairment in the ability to prove
the lawsuit;
(5)	 a causal relationship between the destruction of
evidence and the inability to prove the lawsuit,
and 
(6) damages. 
Id. at 166-67, 73 P.3d at 704-05 (citations omitted, format 
altered). 
Based on the above, the Matsuura court concluded that 
the plaintiffs would be unable to state a claim even if it existed in Hawai
'i. Id. at 168, 73 P.3d at 706. The court held 
that the alleged destruction of evidence did not cause the plaintiffs' inability to prove their tort claim where the plaintiffs had pointed to evidence other than the destroyed evidence in order to prove their underlying claim. Id. Thus, 
the facts alleged could not support a spoliation claim. Id. 
Here, the Pleho Parties have not alleged that Rnic 
destroyed evidence, only that he "failed and refused to produce" evidence. 
The Second Amended Complaint alleges that "[the Lacy 
Parties] and [Rnic] intentionally and/or negligently failed and refused to produce all documents and other evidence in their custody and control, to include but not limited to, agreements, drafts of agreements, correspondence, RLS financials, phone records, and emails." It further alleges that "[the Lacy Parties], and/or their employees, and/or agents, intentionally
 and/or negligently destroyed electronically relevant evidence
 
47
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contained within [Lacy's] computer hard drive[.]" Finally, it
 
alleges that "[a]s a direct and proximate result of [the Lacy
 Parties'] and [Rnic's] intentional and/or negligent destruction
 of relevant evidence as described herein, [the Pleho Parties']
 lawsuit has been and continues to be disrupted[.]"
 
In their memorandum in opposition to Rnic's motion for 
summary judgment, the Pleho Parties pointed to various exhibits that do not appear to support the Pleho Parties' purported spoliation claims. Moreover, even assuming that such causes of action were to become recognized in Hawai
'i, the Pleho Parties 
failed to allege, much less present evidence that could establish, essential elements of such claims, including that Rnic knew of a potential lawsuit and/or had a legal or contractual duty to preserve, and, importantly, a causal relationship between the alleged acts of spoliation and the inability to prove the lawsuit. Like the plaintiffs in Matsuura, the Pleho Parties pointed to evidence other than the allegedly destroyed evidence to prove their underlying fraud claims. Matsuura, 102 Hawai
'i at 
168, 73 P.3d at 706. Thus, regardless of whether Hawai 'i law 
might recognize spoliation of evidence as a tort, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in granting Rnic summary judgment as to Maria's spoliation claims in Counts IX and X. 
7. Punitive Damages
 
Because we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err
 
in granting summary judgment as to Maria's other claims against
 Rnic, we necessarily conclude that Maria cannot recover punitive
 damages against Rnic.
 
48
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C. The Lacy Parties' Motion to Dismiss
 
In its July 29, 2009 Order, the Circuit Court granted
 
the Lacy Parties' HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss certain
 
counts of the Second Amended Complaint as against the Lacy
 Parties.
10 However, in some instances, it appears that the
 
Circuit Court reviewed the "record and file of the case," which
 included written declarations, deposition transcripts, and other
 matters outside the pleading. Thus, we consider the Lacy
 Parties' motion and the subsequent ruling under the framework of
 an HRCP Rule 56 motion for summary judgment, as well as under
 HRCP Rule 12(b)(6). 
See generally Towse v. State , 64 Haw. 624,
 
647 P.2d 696 (1982). 
1. Conspiracy to Commit Fraud

 
As stated above:
 
The Hawai' i Supreme Court has defined civil conspiracy
as the combination of two or more persons or entities by
concerted action to accomplish a criminal or unlawful purpose, or to accomplish some purpose not in itself
criminal or unlawful by criminal or unlawful means. The 
supreme court explained that [c]ivil conspiracy does notalone constitute a claim for relief. In other words,concerted action is not enough. A civil conspiracy claimmust include either that the alleged conspirators had acriminal or unlawful purpose for their concerted action or that the alleged conspirators used criminal or unlawful means to accomplish a lawful objective. 
Miyashiro , 122 Hawai 'i at 482, 228 P.3d at 362 (emphases in 
original, internal citations and quotation marks omitted); see
 
also Adams, 132 Hawai 'i at 490, 323 P.3d at 134 ("[T]here can be 
10
 As clarified in the Circuit Court's July 29, 2009 Order, Counts I,
IV, V, VI, IX, and X were dismissed in their entirety with respect to the Lacy
Parties. GPLLC's fraud claims in Counts II and III, legal malpractice claim
in Count VIII, and punitive damages claim in Count XI remained. Goran and
 Maria's fraud claims in Counts II and III, as well as their legal practice
claim in Count VIII, were dismissed as to the Lacy Parties, leaving only their
claims for unfair and deceptive trade practices in Count VII and punitive
damages in Count XI.
 
49
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
no civil claim based upon a conspiracy alone.") (quoting Ellis,
 
51 Haw. at 57, 451 P.2d at 822). 
The Second Amended Complaint alleged that both Rnic and
 
Lacy failed to disclose the extent of Lacy's involvement in the
 Rnic/Rullo negotiations and that Rullo's proposed purchase price
 was only $800,000. It was undisputed that neither Rnic nor Lacy
 mentioned the Rnic/Rullo negotiations to the Plehos. The Second
 Amended Complaint also alleged that Rnic and Lacy had
 misrepresented to Goran "that the fair market value of RLS was
 $2.0 million, and that because it was such a unique business no
 appraisal was possible, and that $1.5 million was a fair price,
 and Plaintiff GORAN PLEHO relied on same." 
However, as noted above, the plaintiffs failed to
 
allege or provide any evidence that Lacy acted in concert with
 Rnic to fraudulently induce them. "[M]ere acquiescence or
 knowledge is insufficient to constitute a conspiracy, absent
 approval, cooperation, or agreement." Tour2000 Co., 2009 WL
 
3437431, at *9 (citation omitted); see also Zimmerman, 38 Haw. at
 226 ("The mere knowledge, acquiescence, or approval of the act,
 without co-operation or agreement to co-operate, is not enough to
 constitute one a party to a conspiracy. There must be
 intentional participation in the transaction with a view to the
 furtherance of the common design and purpose.") (footnote and
 citation omitted). There is no evidence in the record that the 
50
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lacy Parties intentionally participated in the sales transaction
 
with a view to the furtherance of the common design and purpose.
 
Thus, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
 
granting summary judgment as to the Pleho Parties' claim of
 conspiracy against the Lacy Parties in Count I.
 
2. Fraud and Fraud in the Inducement
 
With respect to Goran and Maria's fraud claims, the
 
Lacy Parties argued, in their motion to dismiss the Second
 Amended Complaint, that as individuals who are not parties to the
 purchase agreement, Goran and Maria are not real parties in
 interest and have no right to bring claims. In addition, the
 Lacy Parties argued that, as GPLLC was the purchaser of RLS,
 Goran and Maria could not prove that they suffered any damages
 arising from the Lacy Parties' alleged fraud. As no other
 arguments were presented, it appears that the Circuit Court
 granted the Lacy Parties' request for dismissal of Goran and
 Maria's fraud claims on these grounds.
 
While we agree that the Plehos as individuals are not 
real parties in interest as purchasers of RLS, in the Second
 Amended Complaint the Plehos alleged, inter alia, that they made
 an initial down payment of $378,000 on behalf of and for the
 benefit of GPLLC by transferring to Rnic the three Properties
 they owned as individuals. Thus, viewing the Second Amended
 Complaint in a light most favorable to Goran and Maria, we cannot
 conclude that it appears beyond doubt that the Plehos can prove
 no set of facts in support of their claim that they were real
 parties in interest and suffered damages in conjunction with,
 
51
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
inter alia, the transfer of these Properties. See, e.g., 
Kealoha, 131 Hawai 'i at 74, 315 P.3d 213 (stating the standard 
for dismissal for failure to state a claim). As the allegations 
of the Second Amended Complaint were otherwise accepted as true for the purposes of the Lacy Parties' motion to dismiss, we must conclude that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing Goran and Maria's fraud claims on the grounds that they can prove no set of facts entitling them to relief. We note, however, that our ruling is without prejudice to the Lacy Parties asserting on remand that Goran and Maria's fraud claims are barred by the jury's verdict, or that the Lacy Parties are otherwise entitled to judgment as a matter of law, on grounds other than those asserted in the motion to dismiss. 
As noted above, GPLLC's fraud claims were not dismissed
 
in the July 29, 2009 Order.
 
3. Gross Inadequacy of Consideration
 
For the reasons stated in Section IV.B.3, above, we
 
conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in granting summary
 judgment in favor of the Lacy Parties as to the Pleho Parties'
 gross inadequacy of consideration claim in Count IV.
 
4. IIED and NIED
 
In dismissing GPLLC's claims in Counts V and VI, the
 
Circuit Court observed that mental distress cannot be suffered by
 a corporation. We agree.
 
With respect to Goran and Maria's IIED claims against
 
the Lacy Parties, even assuming, arguendo, that all of the
 Plehos' allegations are true, we cannot conclude that reasonable
 
52
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
people could construe Lacy's conduct as "beyond all possible 
bounds of decency" or "utterly intolerable in a civilized community" as is required under our case law. Simmons, 130 
Hawai
'i at 332, 310 P.3d at 1033. 
With respect to Goran and Maria's NIED claims against 
the Lacy Parties, as stated above, the Pleho Parties do not cite to any Hawai
'i case law supporting recovery for NIED based 
entirely on a commercial transaction, and we find none. 
Thus, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
 
dismissing the Pleho Parties' IIED and NIED claims in Count V and
 VI against the Lacy Parties.
 
5. Unfair and Deceptive Trade Practices
 The Circuit Court properly dismissed GPLLC's unfair
 
and deceptive trade practices claims, stating:
 
Count VII for unfair and deceptive trade practices can
not [sic] stand on behalf of [GPLLC], because a claim for
unfair and deceptive trade practices is reserved by statute
for consumers. . . . A corporation is not a natural person
and does not have standing to bring a claim for unfair and
deceptive trade practices under the statute.
 
HRS § 480-13 (2008) provides, in relevant part, the
 
cause of action for violations of Chapter 480:
 
(a) Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), any
person who is injured in the person's business or property
by reason of anything forbidden or declared unlawful by this
chapter:
(1) May sue for damages sustained by the person. . . 
(b) Any consumer who is injured by any unfair or
deceptive act or practice forbidden or declared unlawful by
section 480-2:
 
(1) May sue for damages sustained by the consumer. . .
 
HRS § 480-2 (2008) provides, in relevant part (emphasis
 
added):
 
(a) Unfair methods of competition and unfair or
deceptive acts or practices in the conduct of any trade or
commerce are unlawful.
 
53
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
(d) No person other than a consumer, the attorney
general or the director of the office of consumer protection
may bring an action based upon unfair or deceptive acts or
practices declared unlawful by this section.
 
HRS § 480-1 defines "consumer" and "person" as follows:
 
"Consumer" means a natural person who, primarily for
personal, family, or household purposes, purchases, attempts
to purchase, or is solicited to purchase goods or services
or who commits money, property, or services in a personal
investment. 
. . . .

 
"Person" or "persons" includes individuals,
corporations, firms, trusts, partnerships, limited
partnerships, limited liability partnerships, limited
liability limited partnerships, limited liability companies,
and incorporated or unincorporated associations, existing
under or authorized by the laws of this State, or any other
state, or any foreign country.
 
HRS § 480-1 (emphases added). GPLLC did not have a cause of
 
action under HRS Chapter 480 because it is not a "natural
 person," and is thus not a "consumer" under HRS § 480-1 (2008).
 
6. Legal Malpractice
 
In their motion to dismiss, the Lacy Parties argued
 
that because Goran and Maria's "claim for legal malpractice
 relates to the purchase" of RLS, and Goran and Maria were not
 parties to the Sale Agreement, they suffered no damages arising
 out of the purchase, and any damages were suffered solely by
 GPLLC. Thus, the Lacy Parties contended, Goran and Maria's
 "failure to plead an essential element of their claim should
 prompt dismissal of Count VIII." As explained in the July 29,
 2009 Order, the Circuit Court agreed and, for that reason,
 dismissed the individual plaintiffs' malpractice claims and
 allowed only GPLLC's malpractice claim to stand.
 
We conclude, however, that the Circuit Court erred when
 
it dismissed Goran and Maria's legal malpractice claims against
 the Lacy Parties.
 
54
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The elements of an action for legal malpractice are:
(1) the parties had an attorney-client relationship, (2) the
defendant committed a negligent act or omission constituting
breach of that duty [to use such skill, prudence, and
diligence as lawyers of ordinary skill and capacity commonly
possess and exercise in the performance of the tasks which
they undertake], (3) there is a causal connection between
the breach and the plaintiff's injury, and (4) the plaintiff
suffered actual loss or damages.
 
Thomas v. Kidani, 126 Hawai 'i 125, 129, 267 P.3d 1230, 1234 
(2011) (citations omitted). 
First, it appears that there were genuine issues of
 
material fact as to whether Lacy formed an attorney-client
 
relationship with Goran and Maria, as well as with GPLLC. 
Although Goran signed an engagement letter with L&J on behalf of
 GPLLC for "general representation," there is evidence in the
 record that this letter was signed in February 2006 and backdated
 to August 9, 2005. Even earlier than that, however, on July 11,
 2005, Goran and Maria met with Rnic and Lacy to discuss the
 purchase of RLS. Lacy testified during his deposition that he
 remembered telling Goran that he should have his own attorney,
 but Rnic said he did not want a lawyer, and that Lacy should be
 Goran's lawyer. Lacy also testified:
 
And I thought about it a moment. And all of the terms
 
and conditions of the contract were already agreed upon. It
 
was a matter of actually writing out the contract. And so I
 -- I don't recall exactly how it happened, but I told Mr.
Pleho I could represent him if he wanted me to.
 
Goran testified at his deposition that he knew that
 
Lacy was Rnic's attorney when he retained Lacy, but that he did
 
not know the extent of Lacy's representation of Rnic with regard
 to RLS. He also testified that he expected that Lacy would
 protect his and Maria's interests. Maria also stated that she 
55
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
understood Lacy to be their lawyer and that he would protect
 
their interests.
 
In the Second Amended Complaint, the Plehos alleged,
 
inter alia, that Lacy never advised them that they should retain
 another lawyer, did not disclose the extent of his representation
 of Rnic, did not disclose that he had previously represented
 Rullo in conjunction with a possible purchase of RLS or that the
 purchase price would have been $800,000 in cash, misrepresented
 the value of RLS and said that no appraisal was possible, and
 advised them to close the purchase without an appraisal. The
 Plehos alleged that they would not have proceeded with the
 purchase if Lacy (or Rnic) had disclosed the aborted Rullo
 transaction and terms. As discussed above, Goran and Maria also
 alleged that they, as individuals, suffered damages because they
 contributed the Properties to be used as part of GPLLC's payment
 for RLS.
 
Thus, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
dismissed Goran and Maria's legal malpractice claims against the
 Lacy Parties in Count VIII. As we noted with respect to Goran
 and Maria's fraud claims against the Lacy Parties, our ruling is
 without prejudice to the Lacy Parties' asserting on remand that
 the Plehos' malpractice claims are barred by the jury's verdict,
 or that the Lacy Parties are otherwise entitled to judgment as a
 matter of law.
 
56
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
7. Spoliation of Evidence
 
The Pleho Parties failed to properly allege or provide 
any evidence that the destruction of evidence resulted in their 
inability to prove their other claims. See Matsuura, 102 Hawai 'i 
at 167, 73 P.3d at 705 ("both intentional and negligent spoliation of evidence require: (1) the destruction of evidence; (2) the disruption or significant impairment of the lawsuit; and
 (3) a causal relationship between the destruction of evidence and the inability to prove the lawsuit") (footnote omitted). Thus, regardless of whether Hawai
'i law recognizes spoliation of 
evidence as a tort, the Circuit Court did not err in entering judgment as a matter of law as to the spoliation claims in Counts IX and X. 
D. Lacy Parties' Motions for Partial Summary Judgment
 The Pleho Parties challenge the Circuit Court's
 
February 23, 2011 order granting summary judgment in favor of the
 Lacy Parties and against Goran and Maria on their unfair and
 deceptive trade practices claims in Count VII, as well as the
 Circuit Court's May 12, 2011 order granting summary judgment in
 favor of the Lacy Parties and against Goran and Maria on their
 punitive damages claims in Count XI.
 
On appeal, the Plehos appear to argue that the practice
 
of law is a "trade or commerce" to which HRS § 480-2 applies,
 contending that "a lawyer who deceives a client about the value
 of a company he wishes to purchase, has not only committed
 malpractice, but also a deceptive trade practice." This argument
 also seems to raise for the first time on appeal the allegation
 
57
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Lacy engaged in unfair or deceptive trade practices within 
the context of the practice of law as the record reflects that the Pleho Parties had previously raised their Chapter 480 claims against Lacy only within the context of his role in the commercial purchase and sale of a business. "Legal issues not raised in the trial court are ordinarily deemed waived on appeal." E & J Lounge Operating Co. v. Liquor Comm'n of City & 
Cty. of Honolulu, 118 Hawai
'i 320, 339, 189 P.3d 432, 451 (2008) 
(citation omitted). Thus, we need not address this issue. 
Moreover, we reject the Plehos' argument that Chapter
 
480 applies to Lacy's conduct in his capacity as a practicing
 attorney in the instant case. As other jurisdictions have noted,
 
The majority of jurisdictions that have addressed this issue
have held that the regulation of attorneys does not fall
within the ambit of consumer protection laws. A minority of
jurisdictions has carved out an exception for
entrepreneurial aspects of the practice of law, such as
advertising and debt collection, while recognizing that
claims which allege negligence or legal malpractice are
exempt from the consumer protection laws. 
Beyers v. Richmond, 937 A.2d 1082, 1086 (Pa. 2007) (plurality
 
opinion) (holding that the supreme court's authority to supervise
 the conduct of attorneys is "exclusive, not concurrent[,]" and
 that Pennsylvania's consumer protection law does not apply to
 conduct that is subject to the Pennsylvania Rules of Professional
 Conduct and Rules of Disciplinary Enforcement). See also Averill
 
v. Cox, 761 A.2d 1083, 1088 (N.H. 2000) (holding that the
 practice of law is exempt from New Hampshire's consumer
 protection law because regulation of the same under the court's
 professional conduct committee "is comprehensive and protects
 consumers from the same fraud and unfair practices as [the
 
58
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
consumer protection law]"); Short v. Demopolis, 691 P.2d 163, 168
 
(Wash. 1984) (holding that, while the Washington Consumer
 Protection Act (CPA) applies to certain "entrepreneurial aspects
 
of legal practice – how the price of legal services is
 
determined, billed, and collected and the way a law firm obtains,
 retains, and dismisses clients," it does not apply to claims that
 "concern the actual practice of law" and "are directed to the
 competence of and strategy employed by" attorneys); Eriks v.
 Denver, 824 P.2d 1207, 1214 (Wash. 1992) (clarifying that
 "[c]laims for malpractice and negligence are not subject to the
 CPA, since those claims go to the competence and strategy of
 lawyers, and not to the entrepreneurial aspects of practice"). 
However, as we are vacating in part the Judgment and
 
remanding the case with respect to Goran and Maria's fraud claims
 against the Lacy Parties, we also vacate in part the Circuit
 Court's order and Judgment on their claims for punitive damages
 in Count XI.
 
E. The Lacy Parties' Motion for JMOL
 As stated above, at the close of the plaintiffs' case,
 
the Circuit Court granted in part the Lacy Parties' motion for
 JMOL and entered judgment as a matter of law as to GPLLC's claims
 for fraud, fraud in the inducement, and punitive damages. 
[T]o constitute fraudulent inducement sufficient to
invalidate the terms of a contract, there must be (1) a
representation of a material fact, (2) made for the purpose
of inducing the other party to act, (3) known to be false
but reasonably believed true by the other party, and (4)
upon which the other party relies and acts to his or her
damage.
 
Exotics Hawaii-Kona, 116 Hawai 'i at 285 n.6, 172 P.3d at 1029 n.6 
(citation omitted). 
59
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A motion for JMOL may be granted only when after
disregarding conflicting evidence, giving to the non-moving
party's evidence all the value to which it is legally
entitled, and indulging every legitimate inference which may
be drawn from the evidence in the non-moving party's favor,
it can be said that there is no evidence to support a jury
verdict in his or her favor.
 
Lahaina Fashions, 131 Hawai 'i at 453, 319 P.3d at 372 (citation 
and internal quotation marks omitted). 
The Lacy Parties principally argued that, with respect
 
to the fraud claims, "there's no proof that the plaintiff was
 
damaged." As set forth in the Lacy Parties' written motion for
 JMOL, and as presented at the hearing on the motion, this
 argument was based in large part on the testimony of GPLLC's
 valuation expert, who testified on direct examination that he
 valued a 100% equity interest in RLS at $128,000, but agreed on
 cross-examination that, in order to obtain the actual value,
 which is the owner's interest in the property, it was necessary
 to take the $128,000, and add back in the $1,122,000 for the
 promissory note, which then totals $1,250,000. In addition, when
 the Lacy Parties settled with Rnic, they paid $650,000 to obtain,
 inter alia, a release of Rnic's claims against GPLLC, including
 all liability on the promissory note. Thus, GPLLC obtained a
 $1,250,000 business for $452,698 (including the $378,000 down
 payment from the Properties and $74,698 that was otherwise paid,
 according to the evidence entered at trial). In addition, the
 Lacy Parties argued that GPLLC had not otherwise offered evidence
 establishing the measure of damages necessary to put the
 plaintiff in the position it would have been had it not been
 (allegedly) defrauded – such as income projections or other
 evidence of how the business would have performed but for the
 
60
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
alleged misrepresentations – and thus the Lacy Parties were
 
entitled to judgment as a matter of law on GPLLC's fraud claims.
 
On appeal, GPLLC argues that it introduced compelling 
evidence in support of its fraud claims, but fails to cite any evidence at trial that is contrary to the above. Thus, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in granting JMOL on the fraud claims, as there was no evidence to support a jury verdict in GPLLC's favor. See Lahaina Fashions, 131 Hawai
'i at 
453, 319 P.3d at 372. 
With respect to GPLLC's punitive damages claim, the
 
Lacy Parties argued that GPLLC failed to present any evidence
 showing wanton, oppressive and/or malicious misconduct, or gross
 negligence that would warrant to imposition of punitive damages. 
The Circuit Court agreed. On appeal, GPLLC argues that "[b]y
 dismissing fraud and fraud in the inducement, Judge Ibarra cut
 the heart out of this case" and that "the same evidence
 [establishing the fraud claims] supported punitive damages"
 against the Lacy Parties "for aggravated or outrageous
 misconduct." However, as we have concluded that the Circuit
 Court did not err in entering JMOL on GPLLC's fraud claims, we
 further conclude that the court did not err in entering JMOL on
 its related claim for punitive damages.
 
F. Lacy Parties' Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs
 Regarding attorneys' fees and costs, the Pleho Parties
 
argue on appeal that the Circuit Court erred in awarding
 attorneys' fees to the Lacy Parties because the Lacy Parties were
 not the "prevailing party" as to GPLLC's legal malpractice claim. 
61
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Pleho Parties argue that "[s]ince the jury found Lacy guilty
 
of malpractice, and his insurer paid Rnic $650,000 to drop his
 counter-claims, [the Pleho Parties] were 'the successful
 part[ies] for purposes of taxing costs and attorney's fees.'" 
This argument is without merit. The jury returned a
 
verdict finding that Lacy had breached the applicable standard of
 care in providing legal services to GPLLC, but that Lacy's breach
 was not a legal cause of GPLLC's damages. Thus, the jury did not
 find Lacy liable for malpractice, and the Lacy Parties prevailed
 at trial. Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 discretion in awarding attorneys' fees and costs to the Lacy
 Parties with regard to GPLLC's legal malpractice claims.
 
However, the January 9, 2012 order awarding attorneys'
 
fees and costs held Goran and Maria jointly and severally liable
 to the Lacy Parties for the Lacy Parties' attorneys' fees and
 costs. Because we vacate in part the Judgment and remand for
 further proceedings, inter alia, as to Goran and Maria's legal
 malpractice claims against the Lacy Parties, we also vacate and
 remand the attorneys' fees and costs award, to the extent that it
 held Goran and Maria jointly and severally liable, as it is
 unclear whether the Lacy Parties will be determined the
 prevailing party against Goran and Maria, as well as GPLLC, after
 further proceedings on their remaining claims. The January 9,
 2012 order awarding attorneys' fees and costs is otherwise
 affirmed.
 
62
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
G. The Lacy Parties' Cross-Appeal
 
In the cross-appeal, the Lacy Parties request that this
 
court reverse the Circuit Court's order denying Motion in Limine
 No. 2, or, in the alternative, reverse the Circuit Court's
 admission of Exhibit 27-G(7). The Lacy Parties argue that, under
 the doctrine of judicial estoppel, the Pleho Parties should have
 been barred from offering evidence of any loan, debt, note,
 payment, advance, or other obligation allegedly owed to GPLLC by
 Goran and/or Maria because neither of the Plehos listed such
 indebtedness as assets in their bankruptcy schedules. The Lacy
 Parties contend that GPLLC was offering this evidence to
 establish certain damages for the amounts it allegedly owed the
 Plehos, but the Plehos gave sworn statements (the schedules) in
 the bankruptcy court that they were not owed money from GPLLC so
 that it would appear that the Plehos had less assets subject to
 the claims of their creditors.
 
First, we note:
 
The granting or denying of a motion in limine is
reviewed for abuse of discretion. The denial of a motion in
 
limine, in itself, is not reversible error. The harm, if
any, occurs when the evidence is improperly admitted at
trial. Thus, even if the trial court abused its discretion
in denying a party's motion, the real test is not in the
disposition of the motion but the admission of evidence at
trial. 
Kobashigawa v. Silva, 129 Hawai 'i 313, 320, 300 P.3d 579, 586 
(2013). 
This court has previously stated:
 
Most jurisdictions apply judicial estoppel when, at
minimum, the following elements are met:
 
(1)
 The party to be estopped must be asserting a
position that is factually incompatible with a
position taken in a prior judicial or administrative
proceeding;
 
63
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) the prior inconsistent position must have been
accepted by the tribunal; and
 
(3) the party to be estopped must have taken
inconsistent positions intentionally for the purpose
of gaining unfair advantage.
 
Although Hawai' i courts have not expressly adopted
those elements, our case law is generally in accord. See 
Roxas, 89 Hawai' i at 124, 969 P.2d at 1242; Rosa, 4 Haw.
App. at 220, 664 P.2d at 752 ("A party is precluded from
subsequently repudiating a theory of action accepted andacted upon by the court."). 
Langer v. Rice, No. 29636, 2013 WL 5788676, at *5 (Haw. App. Oct.
 
28, 2013) (mem.) (citations omitted). Once the requisite
 elements are met, the trial court has discretion whether to
 invoke judicial estoppel. Id. at *4.
 
It appears from the record that the Lacy Parties
 
established each of these elements as the Pleho Parties' position
 that GPLLC owes money to Goran and/or Maria is factually
 incompatible with Goran and Maria's failure to identify such
 indebtedness as an asset on its bankruptcy schedules, the
 bankruptcy court made various rulings based on the Plehos'
 assertions concerning their assets and liabilities, and GPLLC
 (and, on remand, perhaps Goran and Maria), seek to take unfair
 advantage by using evidence of this indebtedness as a measure of
 damages for its claims against the Lacy Parties.
 
It further appears, however, that the Circuit Court
 
erroneously concluded that the issue was a matter of credibility
 rather than admissibility, and did not reach the exercise of its
 discretion on whether to judicially estop the Pleho Parties from
 asserting the factually incompatible position in this case. 
Thus, we vacate the Circuit Court's ruling on Motion in Limine
 No. 2 and the admission of Exhibit 27-G(7) to allow the Circuit
 
64
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court, in the first instance, to exercise its discretion on the
 
Lacy Parties' request for judicial estoppel.
 V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, and as set forth above, we affirm in
 
part and vacate in part the Circuit Court's January 9, 2012
 Judgment. The Judgment is vacated with respect to the following: 
(1) Goran and Maria's claims in Counts II, III, VIII, and XI, for
 relief against the Lacy Parties for fraud, fraud in the
 inducement, legal malpractice, and punitive damages; (2) the
 January 9, 2012 award of attorneys' fees and costs to the Lacy
 Parties to the extent that it held Goran and Maria jointly and
 severally liable to the Lacy Parties, without prejudice to a
 renewed motion by the Lacy Parties upon disposition of Goran and
 Maria's remanded claims; and (3) the Circuit Court's ruling on
 Motion in Limine No. 2 and the admission of Exhibit 27-G(7) to
 allow the Circuit Court, in the first instance, to exercise its
 discretion on the Lacy Parties' request for judicial estoppel. 
The Circuit Court's January 9, 2012 Judgment is affirmed in all
 other respects. This case is hereby remanded to the Circuit
 Court for further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum
 Opinion.
 
65
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, August 26, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Peter Van Name Esser,
for Plaintiffs-Appellants/
Cross-Appellees. Chief Judge 
Keith K. Hiraoka,Jodie D. Roeca,Norman K. Odani,(Roeca Luria Hiraoka, LLP),for Defendants-Appellees/
Cross-Appellants. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
Robert G. Klein,
David J. Minkin,(McCorriston Miller Mukai MacKinnon),
 and
 Sean Claggett,
for Defendant-Appellee DRAGAN RNIC.
 
66
 