 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-10-0000043
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
ORI ANUENUE HALE, INC. and OPPORTUNITIES
FOR THE RETARDED, INC., Applicants-Appellants, v.
KASAN CONSTRUCTION CORP., Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS NO. 10-1-0213)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Applicants-Appellants ORI Anuenue Hale Inc. and
 
Opportunities for the Retarded, Inc. (collectively, ORI) appeal
 
from the Order Denying Applicants' Motion Filed July 6, 2010, to
 
Vacate Arbitrator's Final Award and Granting Respondents' Request
 
for Confirmation of Arbitration Award (Order), filed on August
 
31, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 Court).
1
 
ORI raises a single point of error on appeal,
 
contending that the Circuit Court erred when it failed to vacate
 
the subject arbitration award based on the public policy
 
exception to the general deference given arbitration awards.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
1
 The Honorable R. Mark Browning presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve ORI's point of error as follows:
 
The public policy exception requires a court to
determine that (1) the award would violate some explicit
public policy that is well defined and dominant, and that is
ascertained by reference to the laws and legal precedents
and not from general considerations of supposed public
interests, and (2) the violation of the public policy is
clearly shown. Hence, a refusal to enforce an arbitration
award must rest on more than speculation or assumption.
 
United Public Workers, Local 646 v. County of Hawai' i, __ Hawai' i 
__, 264 P.3d 655, 660 (App. 2011) (brackets omitted), quoting 
Inlandboatmen's Union of the Pac., Hawai' i Region, Marine Div. of 
Int'l Longshoremen's & Warehousemen's Union v. Sause Bros., Inc., 
77 Hawai‘i 187, 193–94, 881 P.2d 1255, 1261–62 (App. 1994). 
Even assuming (without determining) that the public
 
policy barring recovery by unlicensed contractors fits the
 
Inlandboatmen's Union parameters of a well-defined and dominant
 
public policy, ORI fails to clearly show a violation of that
 
public policy. 
ORI's principal argument is premised on ORI's assertion
 
that an unlicensed general contractor, Building Tech (Building
 
Tech), subcontracted with Respondent-Appellee Kasan Construction
 Corp. (Kasan), a licensed "B" contractor. ORI argues that, under
 
HRS § 444-22 (1993), all licensed or unlicensed subcontractors of
 
an unlicensed contractor are prohibited from recovering for work
 
performed. However, the arbitrator did not accept ORI's argument
 
that Kasan acted as a subcontractor for Building Tech with
 
respect to the subject work. Instead, the arbitrator found that
 
Building Tech was at all relevant times acting as and within the
 
scope of its authority as ORI's authorized agent. Thus, any
 
contract between Building Tech and Kasan was not one between a
 
contractor and a subcontractor, but rather between ORI, through
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
its agent Building Tech, and Kasan as a contractor.2 The
 
arbitrator's rejection of ORI's claim that Kasan was a
 
subcontractor of Building Tech is fatal to ORI's claim that Kasan
 
cannot obtain a mechanic's lien, or recover payment for work it 
performed within its license, because it is a subcontractor of an
 
unlicensed contractor. 
Although ORI argues, and the arbitrator found, that
 
Kasan hired unlicensed subcontractors, the record does not
 
clearly show that the arbitrator's award includes an award to
 
Kasan for work performed by unlicensed contractors (and ORI does
 
not identify any such findings in the arbitration award). In the
 
award, the arbitrator stated that the issue before him was: "How
 
much, if any, is owed to Kasan by ORI on its remaining unpaid
 
claims resulting from licensed work which Kasan performed on the
 
Project pursuant to contracts[.]" (emphasis added). 
ORI also claims that, if Kasan contracted with ORI,
 
then Kasan failed to provide disclosures required by HRS § 444­
25.5 (Supp. 2010) and, therefore, Kasan is barred from obtaining
 
a mechanic's lien. Under HRS § 444-25.5 and 808 Development, LLC
 
v. Murakami, 111 Hawai' i 349, 361, 141 P.3d 996, 1008 (2006), 
when a contractor fails to provide disclosures to a homeowner, the contractor is barred from obtaining a mechanic's lien. 
However, ORI has not identified where in the arbitration award it 
was determined to be a homeowner under HRS § 444-25.5. Under HRS 
§ 444-25.5(c), homeowner means "the owner or lessee of 
residential real property, including owners or lessees of 
condominium or cooperative units." ORI contends that it met the 
definition of a homeowner because the statute "does not limit 
homeowners to natural persons, and contemplates owners of 
multiple units and multiple dwelling units." However, having 
2
 ORI also points to a Consent Decree that specifies that Building
Tech acted as contractor without a license. However, the scope of Building
Tech's actions were not stated in the Consent Decree and the arbitrator ruled
 that the Consent Decree is not binding on Kasan. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rejected this defense to Kasan's claims, it appears that the
 
arbitrator rejected ORI's factual and/or legal arguments that it
 
was a homeowner within the meaning of HRS § 444-25.5(c).
 
In reviewing arbitration awards, the Hawai' i Supreme 
Court has stated:
 
[B]ecause of the legislative policy to encourage
arbitration and thereby discourage litigation, arbitrators
have broad discretion in resolving the dispute. Upon
submission of an issue, the arbitrator has authority to
determine the entire question, including the legal
construction of terms of a contract or lease, as well as the
disputed facts. In fact, where the parties agree to
arbitrate, they thereby assume all the hazards of the
arbitration process, including the risk that the arbitrators
may make mistakes in the application of law and in their
findings of fact.
 
Schmidt v. Pacific Benefit Srvs., Inc., 113 Hawai' i 161, 165-66, 
150 P.3d 810, 814-15 (2006) (citing Daiichi Hawai' i Real Estate 
Corp. v. Lichter, 103 Hawai' i 325, 336, 82 P.3d 411, 422 (2003)). 
Here, ORI assumed the hazards of the arbitration process, 
including the arbitrator's refusal to bar Kasan's claim for a 
mechanic's lien, based on ORI's assertion that it was a homeowner 
within the meaning of HRS § 444-25.5(c) and therefore entitled to 
the disclosures identified therein. 
For these reasons, we affirm the Circuit Court's August
 
31, 2010 Order Denying Applicants' Motion Filed July 6, 2010, to
 
Vacate Arbitrator's Final Award and Granting Respondents' Request
 
for Confirmation of Arbitration Award.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 17, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Gerald S. Clay
Scott I. Batterman (Clay Chapman Iwamura Pulice
& Nervell)
for Applicants-Appellants Chief Judge 
Associate Judge 
Steven K. Hisaka 
David H. Karlen (Hisaka Yoshida & Cosgrove)for Respondent-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
4
 