 
      NOT  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAIʻI  REPORTS  AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
 
   
 
         
 
 
 
 
  
  Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000049 30-JUL-2025 06:09 AM Dkt. 68 SO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000049 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
YUKI GLEASON, Petitioner-Appellant, 
v. 
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR OF THE COURTS, STATE OF HAWAI‘ I, 
Respondent-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DAA-22-00010) 
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and McCullen, JJ.) 
This secondary appeal challenges the district court's 
order affirming the administrative revocation of Petitioner-
Appellant Yuki Gleason's (Gleason) driver's license following an arrest for operation of a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII). We affirm.  
Gleason appeals from the January 12, 2023 "Notice of 
Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment" (Judgment)  
           
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entered by the District Court of the First Circuit (District 
Court)1 in favor of Respondent-Appellee Administrative Director 
of the Courts (Director). The Judgment was entered on the 
District Court's January 31, 2023 "Decision and Order Affirming Administrative Revocation" (Order Affirming Revocation). The Order Affirming Revocation affirmed the Director's October 31, 2022 "Findings of Fact [(FOFs)], Conclusions of Law, and Decision" (Administrative Decision), issued following an administrative hearing conducted by a hearing officer, to revoke Gleason's driver's license for one year. 
On appeal, Gleason challenges Conclusions of Law 
(COLs) 2, 4, and 6
2 in the District Court's Order Affirming 
Revocation, contending the District Court erred: (1) by ruling 
that the standardized field sobriety test (SFST) was "not an unreasonable search or seizure"; (2) by ruling that "an inference of guilt can be inferred" from Gleason's refusal to 
1 The Honorable James C. McWhinnie presided. 
2 COLs 2, 4, and 6 stated: 
2. The Court also concludes [the Director] did not 
erroneously interpret the law. [Gleason] refused to take 
the [SFST], which is not an unreasonable search or seizure, 
nor an invasion of privacy (see State v. Wyatt, 67 Haw. 
293, 303 (1984)). [Gleason]'s refusal to participate in 
the SFST could be considered as an inference of a 
"consciousness of guilt" (see State v. Ferm, 94 Haw. 17, 28 
(2000)). 
 . . . . 
4. Further, the Court concludes [the Director] did 
not abuse its discretion. 
 . . . . 
6. In conclusion, based upon the totality of the 
circumstances, and by a preponderance of the evidence, there was probable cause to arrest [Gleason] for OVUIII. 
2  
           
 
 
   
  
  
 
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
participate in the SFST because the SFST constituted a search; 
and (3) by finding that "probable cause existed to arrest 
Gleason for OVUII[.]"3 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Gleason's contentions as follows. 
The record for the Administrative Decision and its 
unchallenged findings reflect the following. On July 30, 2022, at approximately 9:45 p.m., Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer Mariah Ah Tou (Officer Ah Tou) came upon Gleason's vehicle which was traveling in the same lane, about one to two car lengths in front of the officer's vehicle; Gleason's vehicle 
was "swerving" within its lane of travel, then drove over the 
solid white line (on the left side of the vehicle) for about two to three seconds, before "jerking" the wheel to correct itself back into the original lane of travel; and Gleason's vehicle crossed over the single broken white line with both passenger side tires into the adjacent lane for about one to two seconds before "jerking" back into its own lane. FOFs 1-3. Officer Ah Tou stopped Gleason's vehicle. FOF 4. Officer Ah Tou exited her vehicle and approached Gleason's driver's side window, where she saw Gleason in the driver's seat; Officer Ah Tou asked Gleason for her driver's license, registration, and insurance; and Gleason stated that she was heading home from a graduation party. FOFs 5-7. While interacting with Gleason, Officer Ah 
Tou noted Gleason's speech was "slurred," her movement was 
"slow," her eyes were "red, watery, and glassy," and there was a 
3 Gleason's points of error have been restated and consolidated for 
clarity. 
3  
           
 
 
   
  
  
 
  
 
    
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"strong odor of a consumed alcoholic type beverage emitting from 
Gleason's breath[.]" FOF 8. 
HPD Officer Dallas Pauu (Officer Pauu) arrived shortly 
after the stop, and Officer Ah Tou instructed Officer Pauu to 
ask Gleason if she would be willing to voluntarily participate in the SFST. FOF 9. Officer Pauu complied and informed Officer Ah Tou that Gleason did not respond; Officer Ah Tou then proceeded to the driver's side of Gleason's vehicle, and Gleason told Officer Ah Tou that she did not want to participate in the SFST. FOFs 10-11. Based on the totality of the circumstances, Officer Ah Tou placed Gleason under arrest for OVUII; the officers transported Gleason to the police station; Gleason elected to take a breath alcohol concentration test at the 
station; and Gleason's alcohol concentration was 0.140 grams of 
alcohol per 210 liters of breath. FOFs 12-13, 16. 
In relevant part, the Administrative Decision 
concluded that: "There existed probable cause to believe that [Gleason] operated a vehicle while under the influence of an intoxicant"; and "by a preponderance of the evidence, [Gleason] operated a vehicle while under the influence of an intoxicant." 
Gleason sought judicial review of the Administrative 
Decision to the District Court, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-40.
4 Following a January 12, 2023 hearing, 
the District Court filed its January 31, 2023 Order Affirming Revocation, which pertinently held that the Director "did not 
4 Under HRS § 291E- 40(c) (2020), the "sole issues before the court" 
on judicial review of an administrative decision are whether the Director:  
"(1) [e]xceeded constitutional or statutory authority; (2) [e]rroneously 
interpreted the law; (3) [a]cted in an arbitrary or capricious manner; (4) 
[c]ommitted an abuse of discretion; or (5) [m]ade a determination that was 
unsupported by the evidence in the record." 
4  
           
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exceed its constitutional or statutory authority"; "[t]here was 
reasonable suspicion for [Gleason]'s stop"; the Director "did 
not erroneously interpret the law" because an SFST "is not an unreasonable search or seizure, nor an invasion of privacy"; Gleason's "refusal to participate in the SFST could be considered as an inference of a 'consciousness of guilt'"; the Director's "determination was supported by a preponderance of the evidence in the record"; and that "based upon the totality of the circumstances, and by a preponderance of the evidence, there was probable cause to arrest [Gleason] for OVUII." Gleason timely appealed. 
On a secondary appeal, we review the District Court's 
review of the Administrative Decision, to determine whether the 
District Court was right or wrong in its decision. Gray v.
Admin. Dir. of the Court, State of Hawaii, 84 Hawai‘ i 138, 144, 
931 P.2d 580, 586 (1997). 
(1) Gleason argues that the District Court "erred when 
it ruled that the [Director] did not erroneously interpret the 
law and or [sic] abuse his discretion when he ruled that SFST are [sic] not an unreasonable search or seizure nor an invasion of privacy." 
In State v. Wyatt, 67 Haw. 293, 303, 687 P.2d 544, 551 
(1984), the supreme court held that the SFST did not infringe on a "defendant's right to be secure against unreasonable searches, seizures, and invasions of privacy."
5 The Wyatt court reasoned 
5 In Wyatt, the defendant was stopped by a police officer for 
driving near midnight without lighted headlamps; the officers noticed a smell 
of liquor from her vehicle interior when they asked her to provide 
documentation. 67 Haw. at 296-97, 687 P.2d at 547-48 .  When asked if she had 
been drinking, the defendant admitted she had been; she volunteered that she had just been cited for three traffic violations a few minutes prior; the 
5  
           
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the "intrusion" of an SFST "only entailed a display of 
transitory physical characteristics associated with 
inebriation[,]" and did not involve "probing into an individual's private life and thoughts that marks . . . a search for concealed evidence of criminal activity." Id. at 305, 687 
P.2d at 553 (citation omitted). The Wyatt court explained: "In our view these facts and circumstances rendered reasonable a seizure comprehending a sobriety test, though the probable cause supporting a formal arrest may not have been present." Id.
Here, the District Court did not err by citing Wyatt 
to conclude that the SFST that Gleason refused was not an "unreasonable search or seizure[.]" The District Court was not wrong in affirming the Administrative Decision on this basis. 
See Gray, 84 Hawai‘ i at 144, 931 P.2d at 586. 
(2) Gleason argues that the District Court "erred when 
it ruled that an inference of guilt can be inferred because 
Gleason declined to voluntarily submit to a search, that is, the performance of SFST's [sic]." She asserts that "when Gleason invoked her fundamental right to not be searched, it was error for the hearing officer, and the judge, to rule that using her exercise of her right [sic] amounted to an inference of guilt." 
The District Court cited State v. Ferm, 94 Hawai‘ i 17, 
28, 7 P.3d 193, 204 (App. 2000), when it ruled that "[Gleason]'s refusal to participate in the SFST could be considered as an inference of a 'consciousness of guilt.'" 
COL 2. This 
conclusion was not erroneous. 
In Ferm
, this court considered and rejected the 
defendant's challenge that his constitutional privilege against 
officer ordered her out of the vehicle and administered the SFST, following 
which Wyatt was arrested for OVUII. Id. at 297, 687 P.2d at 548. 
6  
           
 
 
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
self-incrimination "was violated when the trial court," during 
his driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor trial, 
"weighed his refusal to take the [SFST] against him." Id. at 
27-28, 7 P.3d at 203-04. The Ferm court reasoned that "because [d]efendant's refusal to take the [SFST] was neither testimonial or compelled, the fifth amendment and article I, section 10 were not offended." Id. at 29, 7 P.3d at 205 (citation omitted). 
This court explained: "In our view, the inference of consciousness of guilt is simply that, one of many reasonable and permissible inferences from evidence of refusal. It is not testimony inherent in the refusal." Id. at 28, 7 P.3d at 204. 
"[T]o characterize refusal as testimonial confuses reasonable inferences with communication." Id. (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). To be "testimonial," a response must "convey[] information or assert[] facts." State v. Manion
, 
151 Hawai‘i 267, 275, 511 P.3d 766, 774 (2022) (citation 
omitted). 
Here, the District Court did not err by citing 
Ferm to 
conclude that "consciousness of guilt" "could be" a permissible inference from Gleason's refusal to participate in the SFST. The District Court was not wrong in affirming the Administrative 
Decision on this basis. See Gray
, 84 Hawai‘i at 144, 931 P.2d at 
586. 
(3)
 Gleason argues that: the District Court 
"performed no independent analysis of the hearing officer's 
determinations"; "[r]ed or watery eyes can be based on innocent 
reasons and even with imperfect driving are not sufficient to amount to probable cause to revoke a license"; and "there isn't enough evidence to find that probable cause existed to believe 
7  
           
 
 
   
   
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Gleason was either impaired or had a breath alcohol 
concentration above the legal limit at the time of her arrest." 
A court reviewing an agency decision does not weigh 
evidence. See Gendreau v. Admin. Dir. of Courts, No. 
CAAP-19-0000436, 2021 WL 2103753, at *3 (Haw. App. May 25, 2021) 
(SDO) (citing In re Application of Hawaiian Elec. Co.
, 81 Hawai‘i 
459, 465, 918 P.2d 561, 567 (1996)). "Probable cause exists 
when the facts and circumstances within one's knowledge and of which one has reasonably trustworthy information are sufficient in themselves to warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe that an offense has been committed. This requires more 
than a mere suspicion but less than a certainty." 
State v. 
Maganis
, 109 Hawai‘i 84, 86, 123 P.3d 679, 681 (2005) (citation 
omitted). 
Here, the Director found that Officer Ah Tou observed 
that "Gleason appeared to be moving slowly"; Gleason's speech was "slurred"; that an "odor of a possibly consumed alcoholic beverage [was] coming from Gleason"; that Gleason's "eyes were red, watery and glassy"; and Gleason was driving erratically, "swerv[ing]" and "jerk[ing]" in and out of her lane. 
Based on 
these findings, which could support a determination of probable cause that Gleason committed OVUII, the District Court was not wrong in affirming the Administrative Decision on this basis. See Nguyen v. Admin. Dir. of Courts, NO. CAAP-22-0000017, 2023 WL 2254762, at *2-*3 (Haw. App. Feb. 28, 2023) (SDO) (affirming 
license revocation and probable cause finding for OVUII without 
an SFST, where: defendant displayed erratic driving prior to the traffic stop; and the arresting officer observed defendant "was slow to respond," "had a strong odor of an alcoholic type beverage on his breath, his gaze was fixed, his eyes were red 
8  
           
 
 
   
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and watery, his neck and face were flush red, and his speech was 
garbled and slurred"); Gray, 84 Hawai‘ i at 144, 931 P.2d at 586. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the January 12, 
2023 Judgment entered by the District Court of the First 
Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘i, July 30, 2025. 
On the briefs:   
 /s/ Karen T. Nakasone Kevin O'Grady, Chief Judgefor Petitioner-Appellant.   /s/ Keith K. HiraokaChristopher J.I. Leong, Associate JudgeDeputy Attorney General,  for Respondent-Appellee. /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  Associate Judge 
  
9 