NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000425
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ANNETTE DUNG, Petitioner/Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
v.
 
DONNA LEE CHING, Respondent/Appellant/Cross-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL CASE NO. 1SS13-1-623)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
The instant appeal arises from a dispute between
 
neighbors that share a driveway. Respondent/Appellant/Cross-
Appellee Donna Lee Ching (Ms. Ching) appeals and
 
Petitioner/Appellee/Cross-Appellant Annette Dung (Mrs. Dung)
 
cross-appeals from the "Injunction Against Harassment" entered
 
February 4, 2014 in the District Court of the First Circuit1
 
(district court).
 
Ms. Ching contends the district court erred in
 
concluding that she committed harassment as defined by Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 604-10.5(a)(2) (Supp. 2014)
2
 because
Mrs. Dung failed to produce clear and convincing evidence that
 Ms. Ching's conduct served no legitimate purpose.
 
1
 The Honorable James S. Kawashima presided.
 
2
 HRS § 604-10.5(a)(2) defines "harassment" as "[a]n intentional or
knowing course of conduct directed at an individual that seriously alarms or
disturbs consistently or continually bothers the individual and serves no
legitimate purpose; provided that such course of conduct would cause a
reasonable person to suffer emotional distress."
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mrs. Dung explains that her "cross-appeal is merely
 
protective in nature." Mrs. Dung contends that "[i]f this
 
[c]ourt should vacate the Injunction Against Harassment and
 remand this matter . . . then this [c]ourt should hold that the
 [d]istrict [c]ourt erroneously excluded evidence . . . ."
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that Ms.
 Ching's appeal is without merit.
 
Ms. Ching requests this court vacate the district
 
court's Injunction Against Harassment and dismiss the case on the
basis of insufficient evidence. Ms. Ching argues the district
 court erred in granting Mrs. Dung's request for a temporary
 restraining order (TRO) and injunction because Mrs. Dung failed
 
to meet her "burden to substantiate the claims alleged in her
 
[Injunction Against Harassment] by clear and convincing
 evidence." Ms. Ching argues that she only moved objects from
 Mrs. Dung's driveway when they were obstructing her safe use of
 the easement
3
 and thus her conduct "was done for a legitimate
purpose." 
 
Ms. Ching argues the district court erred because a
 
reasonable person would not suffer emotional distress as a result
 of Ms. Ching's alleged conduct. 
Ms. Ching argues that in
 
granting Mrs. Dung's Injunction Against Harassment, the district
 court has allowed Mrs. Dung's "unreasonable reaction to [Ms.
 Ching's] legitimate use of the easement to take precedence over
 [Ms. Ching's] legal right to access the easement without
 interference." Ms. Ching argues that the video surveillance and
 photographic evidence submitted by Mrs. Dung shows that the
 "torment" she complained of consisted of "nothing more than [Ms.
 Ching] walking by [Mrs. Dung's] dog enclosure." Ms. Ching argues
 
3
 In 1944, an easement was established that provided access from Ms.
Ching's house lot to the street by traversing Mrs. Dung's house lot. The deed
 
to the easement does not specify whether it was established for pedestrian
access, vehicular access, or both, but Mrs. Dung's family did not have
vehicular access to the street until the 1970s and Ms. Ching did not have
vehicular access until 2007. The easement is about twelve feet wide and
 generally corresponds with Mrs. Dung's driveway.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that it is unreasonable for Mrs. Dung to be uncomfortable or
 
scared of Ms. Ching's visitors who use the driveway easement to
 access Ms. Ching's property. Ms. Ching implies that the district
 court erred in finding Mrs. Dung's testimony credible because
 Mrs. Dung alleged in her Injunction Against Harassment that she
 repeatedly asked Ms. Ching to slow down on the driveway but
 testified that she has not spoken to Ms. Ching since 2007.
 
Under HRS § 604-10.5(a)(2), the district court "shall" 
grant an injunction prohibiting the respondent from harassing the petitioner if "the court finds by clear and convincing evidence that" the respondent engaged in an "intentional or knowing course of conduct directed at [the petitioner] that seriously alarm[ed] or disturb[ed] consistently or continually bother[ed] the [petitioner] and serve[d] no legitimate purpose; provided that such course of conduct would cause a reasonable person to suffer emotional distress." Luat v. Cacho, 92 Hawai
'i 330, 340-41, 991 
P.2d 840, 850-51 (App. 1999). "[T]he type of harassment that the courts are mandated to restrain or enjoin under paragraph (2) [of HRS § 604-10.5(a)] involves . . . systematic and continuous intimidation that stops short of assault or threats[.]" Id., 92 
Hawai
'i at 342, 991 P.2d at 852. 
The reasonable person standard [to be applied under HRS
§ 604-10.5(a)(2)] is an objective one and a trial court's
determination regarding whether a reasonable person would
suffer emotional distress as a result of a course of conduct
 is reviewed on appeal de novo. Under the objective
standard, we are required to determine whether "a reasonable
person, normally constituted," would have suffered emotional
distress as a result of a particular course of conduct.
 
Id. at 343, 991 P.2d at 853 (citation omitted) (quoting Tabieros
 
v. Clark Equip. Co., 85 Hawai 'i 336, 362, 944 P.2d 1279, 1305 
(1997)). 
Here, the district court explained that its
 
detemination that Ms. Ching committed harassment, as defined by
 HRS § 604-10.5(a)(2), was based on the video surveillance and
 photographic evidence submitted at trial showing Ms. Ching (1)
 moving Mrs. Dung's stack of tires, potted plants, and sawhorses
 out of the easement; (2) tossing or littering the roof shingles
 into Mrs. Dung's yard; and (3) taking actions in the easement
 with intent to annoy Mrs. Dung and her family. The district
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court explained that it neither found Ms. Ching credible nor her
 
arguments compelling. The district court concluded that Ms.
 Ching's actions did not serve a legitimate purpose and "would
 cause a reasonable person to suffer emotional distress." 
Specifically, the district court found that it was wrong to toss
 the shingles over the fence into Mrs. Dung's yard and that the
 tires were not preventing Ms. Ching from using the easement.
 
Mrs. Dung established that Ms. Ching systematically and 
continuously moved Mrs. Dung's tires, potted plants, and sawhorses out of the easement; tossed roof shingles into Mrs. Dung's yard, and caused Mrs. Dung's dogs to bark by taking photos of them from the easement. The district court's determinations that Ms. Ching's actions did not serve a legitimate purpose and "would cause a reasonable person to suffer emotional distress" are supported by substantial evidence in the record and are not wrong, and therefore, the district court did not abuse its discretion in granting the Injunction Against Harassment. See In 
re Guardianship of Carlsmith, 113 Hawai
'i 211, 223, 151 P.3d 692, 
704 (2006) (holding that a TRO is reviewed for an abuse of discretion). "It is not the role of the appellate court to weigh credibility or resolve conflicting evidence." State v. Monteil, 
134 Hawai
'i 361, 368, 341 P.3d 567, 574 (2014). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Injunction Against
 
Harassment" entered February 4, 2014 in the District Court of the
 First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 25, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
David J. Minkin
 
Jesse J.T. Smith David D. Day
(McCorriston Miller Mukai
MacKinnon)
for Petitioner/Appellee/Cross-
Appellant. Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 
Dyan K. Mitsuyama
Alethea Kyoko Rebman
(Mitsuyama & Rebman)
for Respondent/Appellant/Cross-
Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
4
 