  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000546 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
SHARON SHIZUE NAKAMA, Petititoner-Appellee, v.
JORDAN RUSSELL, Respondent-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
WAILUKU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 2DSS-20-0000148) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, and Wadsworth and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Respondent-Appellant Jordan Russell (Russell) appeals 
from the Order Granting Petition for Injunction Against 
Harassment (Injunction), entered on August 10, 2020, in the 
District Court of the Second Circuit (District Court), Wailuku 
Division.1/ Following an evidentiary hearing, the District Court 
enjoined Russell, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 604-10.5 (2016),
2/ from contacting, threatening, or harassing 
1/    The Honorable Blaine J. Kobayashi presided. 
2/    HRS § 604-10.5 provides, in relevant part: 
Power to enjoin and temporarily restrain harassment. (a) For the purposes of this section: 
"Course of conduct" means a pattern of conduct
composed of a series of acts over any period of time
evidencing a continuity of purpose. 
"Harassment" means: 
. . . . NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Petitioner-Appellee Sharon Shizue Nakama (Nakama) and entering or 
visiting her residence or workplace. 
Russell raises a single point of error on appeal, 
contending that the District Court erred in finding by clear and 
convincing evidence that harassment occurred. 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm the 
Injunction. 
I. Background 
On June 5, 2020, Nakama filed a Petition for Ex Parte 
Temporary Restraining Order and for Injunction Against Harassment (Petition), pursuant to HRS § 604-10.5. Nakama's attached 
declaration stated: Russell was a former school classmate with 
whom Nakama had not spoken or had any contact since 2010. On May 25, 2020, Russell began contacting Nakama via Snapchat and "[t]ext conversations over SMS." Initial conversations were "normal" "'catching up' between classmates." However, "[t]he contact escalated on [Russell's] behalf[,]" and "[h]e made [Nakama] feel unsafe by pushing [her] to hang out with him 
(2) An intentional or knowing course of conduct
directed at an individual that seriously alarmsor disturbs consistently or continually bothersthe individual, and that serves no legitimatepurpose; provided that such course of conductwould cause a reasonable person to sufferemotional distress. 
(b) The district courts shall have the power to
enjoin, prohibit, or temporarily restrain harassment. 
(c) Any person who has been subjected to harassment
may petition the district court of the district in which thepetitioner resides for a temporary restraining order and aninjunction from further harassment. 
. . . . 
(g) . . . . 
. . . . 
If the court finds by clear and convincing evidence
. . . that harassment as defined in paragraph (2) of thatdefinition exists, it shall enjoin for no more than threeyears further harassment of the petitioner; provided thatthis paragraph shall not prohibit the court from issuingother injunctions against the named parties even if the timeto which the injunction applies exceeds a total of threeyears. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
alone." After receiving "[c]ondescending and [c]ontinuous 
[m]essages from Russell, Nakama "blocked him from Snapchat, phone, and texts[.]" Nevertheless, on May 28, 2020, Russell "show[ed] up at [Nakama's] workplace uninvited." The same day, Nakama sent Russell an outgoing text message stating, "Do not contact me[,]" and another message a minute later stating, "Never again." Russell continued to send messages to Nakama, including one stating "I love you[,]" and continued to leave her voicemails. Russell "[c]laimed in voicemails he loved [Nakama], was in love with [her], and that he could be someone to help [her] show [her] feminine side." Russell also sent messages to Nakama's partner and to one of her friends. Nakama stated in her declaration: "I fear for my life from the ongoing calls, texts, and voicemails that are unwelcome[] from . . . Russell. . . . I fear for my safety and wellbeing. I also am concerned and fear for the safety of my coworkers, family, and those I have mentioned in my text messages." 
At an evidentiary hearing on August 10, 2020, Nakama 
testified that she was "standing by the truthfulness of all of the statements . . . that [she] made in [the P]etition . . . ." She also testified about other unwelcome contacts by Russell after she filed the Petition, including two voicemails on June 7 and nine voicemails on June 8, 2020. Nakama played several of the voicemails in court without objection. Nakama stated that she was "fearful for my safety and life" and explained that "[Russell] and I have no previous relationship except being classmates in school." 
At the August 10, 2020 hearing, Russell testified that 
Respondent's Exhibit 1, a picture of his "Snapchat" application, showed that he had been "friends" with Nakama since June 10, 2020, "and in order for that to happen, you'd have to add me." However, Nakama testified that she did not physically add Russell as a "friend" at that time. She further stated: "I don't know if it's an auto add being on Snaphat, but after that I had deleted my Snapchat." 
Following the presentation of evidence and closing 
argument by Russell's counsel, the District Court stated: 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: . . . [T]he Court has listened to the
testimony of [Nakama] and [Nakama]'s witness. The Court has 
also listened to the testimony of [Russell]. 
. . . [T]he Court has also had the opportunity to
review the petition for temporary restraining order, ah,that was attached to, um, [Nakama]'s, ah, petition that wasfiled on June 5th. 
. . . Mr. Russell, you know, contrary to what your
attorney has argued to the Court this morning, . . . in theCourt's opinion . . . I don't take this and say thislightly, but I think you have some serious problems here.Um, you have some serious psychiatric problems in theCourt's opinion to be honest. 
. . . [T]he frequency of your unwanted calls to
[Nakama], the type of messages that you've left on hervoicemail, the fact that you haven't listened to herrepeated request to you to not have any contact with her,and then you actually even show up at her workplace withflowers and chocolate. 
Um, that tells the Court that you somehow have not
been able to understand and receive messages from somebodythat's telling you that they don't want contact. 
. . . I think that's probably the mistake that you're
making in your life right now is you don't listen whenpeople tell you things. 
She doesn't want any contact with you, period. But 
yet you continue to call her. 
And, you know, when I see things you call her on
June 7, leaving voicemails. You call her again thefollowing day. You leave multiple voicemails. Who does that? And who does that as a person that doesn't understandwhen somebody says that they don't want any form of contactwith them? 
So I -- I think you should get some help, Mr. Russell,
for something that you obviously have not been able to graspand understand. 
And so the Court does find [Nakama] to be credible.
[Nakama] has proven her claim or her -- her request for theinjunction by clear and convincing evidence. 
. . . [A]nd to a certain extent I agree with one
portion of your attorney's argument saying that, you know,some of these messages in and of themselves are notthreatening or harassing, but that's not what's happening inthis case. 
. . . [Nakama] has shown to the Court, um, incidents
over a period of time that reflects to the Court acontinuing course of conduct. And it's an intentional or knowing course of conduct that direct -- that's directed ather that does alarm and disturbs her and has no legitimatepurpose. And any reasonable person in her position would besuffering from emotional distress. 
And for those reasons the Court is granting the
injunction in this case. The Court is granting theinjunction for the maximum period allowed by law which isfor a period of three years. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
The District Court entered the Injunction the same day. 
This appeal followed. 
II. Standards of Proof and Review 
The District Court issued the Injunction based on the 
conclusions that Russell intentionally engaged in a course of 
conduct directed at Nakama that alarmed and disturbed her and had no legitimate purpose, causing a reasonable person in her position to suffer emotional distress, i.e., that Russell engaged in "harassment" as defined by HRS § 604-10.5(a)(2). HRS § 604-10.5(g) requires that the clear and convincing standard of proof be applied in determining whether conduct rises to the level of "harassment." "Clear and convincing evidence" is: 
an intermediate standard of proof greater than a
preponderance of the evidence, but less than proof beyond areasonable doubt required in criminal cases. It is that degree of proof which will produce in the mind of the trierof fact a firm belief or conviction as to the allegationssought to be established, and requires the existence of afact be highly probable. 
In re JK, 149 Hawai# i 400, 409, 491 P.3d 1179, 1188 (App. 2021) 
(quoting Masaki v. Gen. Motors Corp., 71 Haw. 1, 15, 780 P.2d 
566, 574 (1989)). 
"Whether there was substantial evidence to support an 
injunction against an alleged harasser is reviewed under the 'clearly erroneous standard.'" Duarte v. Young, 134 Hawai# i 459, 
462, 342 P.3d 878, 881 (App. 2014) (citing Bailey v. Sanchez, 92 Hawai#i 312, 316 n.6, 990 P.2d 1194, 1198 n.6 (App. 1999)). "A 
conclusion of law that presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard because the conclusion is dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case." Id. (quoting Bailey, 92 Hawai# i at 316 n.6, 
990 P.2d at 1198 n.6). 
We also have stated that "a trial court's 
determination as to whether a reasonable person would suffer emotional distress as a result of a course of conduct is reviewed on appeal de novo
." Luat v. Cacho, 92 Hawai# i 330, 343, 991 P.2d 
840, 853 (App. 1999) (citing State v. Trainor, 83 Hawai# i 250, 
255, 925 P.2d 818, 823 (1996)). 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
We account for the clear and convincing standard of 
proof when addressing a claim that the evidence does not support 
the court's findings made under this standard, as follows: 
When reviewing a finding that a fact has been proved by
clear and convincing evidence, the question before theappellate court is whether the record as a whole contains
substantial evidence from which a reasonable factfinder 
could have found it highly probable that the fact was true. 
In conducting its review, the court must view the record in
the light most favorable to the prevailing party below andgive appropriate deference to how the trier of fact may haveevaluated the credibility of witnesses, resolved conflictsin the evidence, and drawn reasonable inferences from theevidence. 
JK, 149 Hawai# i at 409-10, 491 P.3d at 1188-89 (quoting 
Conservatorship of O.B., 470 P.3d 41, 55 (Cal. 2020)). 
In applying this standard of review, we also recognize 
the following caution: 
[A]s in criminal appeals involving a challenge to thesufficiency of the evidence, an appellate court reviewing afinding made pursuant to the clear and convincing standarddoes not reweigh the evidence itself. In assessing how theevidence reasonably could have been evaluated by the trierof fact, an appellate court reviewing such a finding is toview the record in the light most favorable to the judgmentbelow; it must indulge reasonable inferences that the trierof fact might have drawn from the evidence; it must acceptthe factfinder's resolution of conflicting evidence; and itmay not insert its own views regarding the credibility ofwitnesses in place of the assessments conveyed by thejudgment. . . . [T]he question before a court reviewing afinding that a fact has been proved by clear and convincingevidence is not whether the appellate court itself regardsthe evidence as clear and convincing; it is whether areasonable trier of fact could have regarded the evidence assatisfying this standard of proof. 
Id. at 410, 491 P.3d at 1189 (quoting O.B., 470 P.3d at 53). 
III. Discussion 
Under HRS § 604–10.5, the district court "shall" grant 
an injunction prohibiting the respondent from harassing the 
petitioner "[i]f the court finds by clear and convincing evidencethat" the respondent engaged in "[a]n intentional or knowing course of conduct directed at [the petitioner] that seriously alarm[ed] or disturb[ed] consistently or continually bother[ed] the [petitioner], and . . . serve[d] no legitimate purpose; provided that such course of conduct would cause a reasonable  
person to suffer emotional distress." See Luat, 92 Hawai# i at 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
340–41, 991 P.2d at 850–51. "[T]he type of harassment that the 
courts are mandated to restrain or enjoin under [HRS § 604–10.5(a)(2)] involves . . . systematic and continuous intimidation that stops short of assault or threats . . . ." Id. 
at 342, 991 P.2d at 852. "The reasonable person standard [to be applied under HRS § 604–10.5(a)(2)] is an objective one," under which the court must determine "whether 'a reasonable person, normally constituted,' would have suffered emotional distress as a result of a particular course of conduct." Id. at 343, 991 
P.2d at 853 (quoting Tabieros v. Clark Equip. Co., 85 Hawai# i 
336, 362, 944 P.2d 1279, 1305 (1997)). 
Initially, Russell challenges the Injunction because 
"[t]he court's ruling was, in part, based on its own unsubstantiated psychiatric diagnosis." His argument lacks merit. Following the presentation of evidence, the District Court stated in part: "Mr. Russell, . . . I don't take this and say this lightly, but I think you have some serious problems here. Um, you have some serious psychiatric problems in the Court's opinion to be honest." Viewing this statement in the context of the District Court's entire oral ruling, however, we conclude that the District Court did not base its decision to grant the Petition, in whole or in part, on this observation. Rather, it appears that the District Court was attempting to emphasize the serious nature of Russell's conduct. The court went on to discuss the evidence presented at the hearing, including "the frequency of [Russell's] unwanted calls to [Nakama], the type of messages that [Russell] left on her voicemail, the fact that [Russell] ha[d]n't listened to [Nakama's] repeated request to [Russell] to not have any contact with her," and that Russell then "show[ed] up at [Nakama's] workplace with flowers and chocolate." Based on these findings, none of which Russell disputes, the court concluded that Russell had engaged in harassment. On this record, we conclude that any error in characterizing Russell's conduct in psychiatric terms was harmless. See Martin v. Kozuma, No. CAAP-18-0000702, 2020 WL 
3542155, at *2 (Haw. App. June 30, 2020) (SDO) (concluding that any error in precluding certain questioning was harmless, where 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[t]here [was] no indication in the record that the District 
Court granted the [HRS § 604-10.5] Petition based on [respondent's] picture-taking"). 
Russell further contends that his conduct did not 
constitute "harassment" under HRS § 604-10.5(a)(2) for two reasons. First, he argues that "a reasonable person, normally constituted[,] would not have suffered emotional distress as a result of [Russell's] course of conduct." Relatedly, he asserts that "the messages Nakama identified as those that made her uncomfortable were innocuous and her reaction to them overblown." Second, Russell contends that his conduct "serve[d] the legitimate purpose of asking Nakama to go out with him." 
Russell's argument focuses on the content of isolated 
statements made in individual text messages, while ignoring the District Court's reliance on other evidence in concluding that Nakama had established harassment by clear and convincing evidence. This evidence included the frequency of the unwanted calls to Nakama, the type of messages that Russell left on her voicemail, the fact that he did not listen to her requests for no contact, and the fact that Russell showed up at her workplace uninvited. The District Court also found that after Nakama had told Russell not to contact her again, Russell left multiple voicemails for her on June 7 and 8, 2020. These findings, none of which Russell challenges, are binding on this court. See 
State v. Rodrigues, 145 Hawai# i 487, 494, 454 P.3d 428, 435 
(2019). 
Based on these findings, the District Court concluded 
in part that Russell intentionally engaged in a course of conduct directed at Nakama, which alarmed and disturbed her. Based on our review of the record, we conclude that the District Court's findings were supported by substantial evidence from which a reasonable factfinder could have found it highly probable that such facts were true; the court's findings were thus not clearly erroneous. We further conclude that the District Court could reasonably have inferred that Russell's actions did not serve a legitimate purpose and would cause a reasonable person to suffer emotional distress. See Luat, 92 Hawai# i at 343, 991 P.2d at 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
853. Both conclusions are supported by substantial evidence in 
the record and are not wrong. Accordingly, the evidence was 
sufficient to support issuance of the Injunction. 
For these reasons, the Order Granting Petition for 
Injunction Against Harassment, entered on August 10, 2020, in the District Court of the Second Circuit, Wailuku Division, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 25, 2022. 
On the brief: 
Alen M. Kaneshiro,
for Defendant-Appellant. /s/ Katherine G. LeonardPresiding Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge 
9 