NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000191
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, AS TRUSTEE FOR
SG MORTGAGE SECURITIES ASSET BACKED CERTIFICATES,
SERIES 2006-FRE2, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KOKI NILESH KOTAK, fka KOKI BOGHRA;
NILESH KOTAK, Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
MORTGAGE ELECTRONIC REGISTRATION SYSTEMS, INC.;
PACCON CONSTRUCTION, INC.; CENTRAL PACIFIC BANK;
TROY CAPITAL, LLC, Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10; DOE ENTITIES 1-10 and
DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-2490-10)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Koki Boghra (Koki) and Nilesh
 
Kotak (Nilesh) (together, the Kotaks) appeal from the Judgment on
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting
 
Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure
 Against all Defendants on Complaint (Judgment), entered on
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
February 18, 2016, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
(Circuit Court), and in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee U.S. Bank
 
N.A. as Trustee for SG Mortgage Securities Trust 2006-FRE-2,
 
Asset Backed Certificates, Series 2006-FRE2 (U.S. Bank)1 and
 
against all defendants.2 [JIMS doc. 1]  The Kotaks also
 
challenge the Circuit Court's Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
 Law and Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment
 and Decree of Foreclosure Against all Defendants on Complaint,
 also entered February 18, 2016 (Foreclosure Decree). 
The Kotaks raise a single point of error on appeal,
 
arguing that the Circuit Court erred in granting U.S. Bank's
 January 15, 2010 Motion for Summary Judgment and Decree of
 Foreclosure Against all Defendants on Complaint (Motion for
 
Summary Judgment). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the
 relevant statutory and case law, we resolve the Kotaks' point of
 error as follows: 
The Kotaks argue that U.S. Bank failed to present any 
admissible evidence to establish that it had standing to bring this foreclosure action, relying on the Hawai' i Supreme Court's 
decision in Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai' i 361, 
390 P.3d 1248 (2017). 
1
 Pursuant to a September 9, 2015 order, U.S. Bank was substituted
for Plaintiff U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee for SG Mortgage
Securities Asset Backed Certificates, Series 2006-FRE2.
 
2
 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Reyes–Toledo, the supreme court held that in order 
to establish a right to foreclose, the foreclosing plaintiff must 
establish standing or entitlement to enforce the subject note at the time the action was commenced. 139 Hawai' i at 367–71, 390 
P.3d at 1254–58. The supreme court stated, inter alia, that a foreclosing plaintiff must typically "prove the existence of an agreement, the terms of the agreement, a default by the mortgagor under the terms of the agreement, and giving of the cancellation notice." Id. at 367, 390 P.3d at 1254 (citing Bank of Honolulu, 
N.A. v. Anderson, 3 Haw. App. 545, 551, 654 P.2d 1370, 1375
 (1982)). Furthermore, "[a] foreclosing plaintiff must also prove
 its entitlement to enforce the note and mortgage." Id.
 
(citations omitted). In concluding that the foreclosing bank
 failed to satisfy its burden as the movant for summary judgment,
 the court reasoned, "[a]lthough Bank of America produced evidence
 that it possessed the blank-indorsed Note at the time it sought
 summary judgment, a material question of fact exists as to
 whether Bank of America possessed the Note, or was otherwise the
 holder, at the time it brought the foreclosure action." Id. at
 
370, 390 P.3d at 1257. 
U.S. Bank asserts that it established standing, arguing
 
that the subject note was authenticated by a declaration of its
 custodian of record. Accordingly, we address that assertion in
 light of the supreme court's recent decisions in U.S. Bank, N.A.
 v. Mattos, 140 Hawai' i 26, 398 P.3d 615 (2017), and Wells Fargo 
Bank, N.A. v. Behrendt, 142 Hawai' i 37, 414 P.3d 89 (2018). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Mattos, 140 Hawai' i at 29, 398 P.3d at 618, summary 
judgment was granted in favor of the foreclosing bank, U.S. Bank. 
On appeal, the supreme court addressed whether relevant loan documents had been properly admitted through the declaration of an individual named Richard Work (Work), as records of regularly 
conducted activity under Hawai' i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 
803(b)(6). Id. at 28, 30–33, 398 P.3d at 617, 619–22. In his 
declaration, Work attested, inter alia, that he was a "Contract 
Management Coordinator" of OCWEN Loan Servicing, LLC (Ocwen), the 
"servicer" for U.S. Bank on the subject loan. Id. at 30–31, 398 
P.3d at 619–20. Because Work did not attest that he was the 
custodian of records for either U.S. Bank or Ocwen, the supreme court noted that "the documents attached to his declaration are admissible under the HRE 803(b)(6) hearsay exception only if he is a 'qualified witness' with respect to those documents." Id. 
at 32, 398 P.3d at 621. The supreme court applied its analysis in State v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai' i 354, 365–66, 227 P.3d 520, 
531–32 (2010) and ruled as follows: 
To the extent the ICA ruled that Work's declaration
 
established him as a "qualified witness" with respect to
Ocwen's records, we agree. To the extent the ICA opinion
concluded that Work met the requirements to be a "qualified
witness" with respect to U.S. Bank's records, however, we
disagree. Fitzwater addresses situations in which one
business receives documents created by another business and
includes them in its own records. Work's declaration does
 not indicate that U.S. Bank's Records were received by Ocwen
and incorporated into the Ocwen Records. Work's declaration
also does not establish that Work is familiar with the
 record-keeping system of U.S. Bank. Rather, Work merely
states that he has access to and is familiar with U.S.
 Bank's records. Thus Work's declaration does not satisfy 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
foundational requirements to make him a "qualified witness"
for U.S. Bank's records pursuant to Fitzwater.
 
Id. at 32–33, 398 P.3d at 621–622.
 
In light of its ruling in Reyes–Toledo, the supreme
 
court in Mattos further held that:
 
[s]ince [an] allonge was apparently used to specifically
indorse the note to U.S. Bank, admissible evidence was
needed to demonstrate that U.S. Bank was in possession of
the note and allonge at the time of the filing of this
foreclosure complaint for U.S. Bank to be entitled to
summary judgment.
 
Id. at 33, 398 P.3d at 622. The supreme court noted that Work's
 
declaration did not attest that U.S. Bank possessed the original
 note and allonge when the foreclosure complaint was filed. Id. 
The supreme court thus ruled that "Work's declaration failed to
 meet U.S. Bank's burden of establishing facts necessary for a
 grant of summary judgment." Id. 
In Behrendt, 142 Hawai' i at 40, 414 P.3d at 92, summary 
judgment was granted in favor of the foreclosing bank, Wells Fargo. Wells Fargo had attached a copy of the subject note to its unverified complaint together with an allonge indorsing the note in blank. Id. at 39-40, 414 P.3d at 91-92. The supreme 
court reviewed the admissibility of these documents under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) through a similar declaration as in Mattos attached to Wells Fargo's motion for summary judgment. Id. at 
44-45, 414 P.3d at 96-97. This declaration was made by Vanessa Lewis (Lewis), who was also a "contract management coordinator" 
for Ocwen, Wells Fargo's loan-service provider. Id. Because 
Lewis did not attest that she was the custodian of record for 
either Wells Fargo or Ocwen, the supreme court again observed that the documents attached to her declaration were admissible 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) only if her declaration demonstrated
 
that she was a "qualified witness." Id. at 45, 414 P.3d at 97
 
(citing Mattos, 140 Hawai' i at 32, 398 P.3d at 621). The supreme 
court stated the rule regarding necessary qualifications to admit
 incorporated records under Mattos and Fitzwater as follows:
 
The court in Mattos held that a witness may be
qualified to provide the testimony required by HRE Rule
803(b)(6) even if the witness is not employed by the
business that created the document or lacks direct, personal
knowledge of how the document was created. "There is no
requirement that the records have been prepared by the
entity that has custody of them, as long as they were
created in the regular course of some entity's business."
The witness, however, must have enough familiarity with the
record-keeping system of the business that created the
record to explain how the record was generated in the
ordinary course of business.
Records received from another business and
 
incorporated into the receiving business' records may in
some circumstances be regarded as "created" by the receiving
business. Incorporated records are admissible under HRE Rule
803(b)(6) when a custodian or qualified witness testifies
that the documents were incorporated and kept in the normal
course of business, that the incorporating business
typically relies upon the accuracy of the contents of the
documents, and the circumstances otherwise indicate the
trustworthiness of the document.
 
Id. (citations omitted) (citing and quoting Mattos, 140 Hawai' i 
at 32, 398 P.3d at 621). 
In holding that Lewis was not a "qualified witness"
 
under its decision in Mattos, the Behrendt court stated:
 
Here, as in Mattos, the Lewis Declaration does not
establish that the loan documents were received by Ocwen and
then incorporated into Ocwen's records. In addition,
although Lewis averred that Ocwen's records relating to the
loan were made and maintained in the regular course of
Ocwen's business, Lewis asserted only that she had "access
to and [was] familiar" with Wells Fargo's records and
documents relating to this case. The Lewis Declaration does
not establish that Lewis was familiar with Wells Fargo's
record-keeping system. It also makes no assertions as to
Lewis's familiarity with the record-keeping systems of
Funding Group or Option One, which first created the Note
and allonges. Thus, the Lewis Declaration satisfies the
foundational requirements to make Lewis a qualified witness
only with respect to Ocwen's original records about the loan
and not any records of Wells Fargo or the loan documents
themselves.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Lewis Declaration also refers only to the Note and
not the allonges that Wells Fargo asserts were used to
endorse the Note in blank. As noted, the Lewis Declaration
does not establish that Lewis was a qualified witness, and
thus she could not have satisfied the requirements of HRE
Rule 803(b)(6) with respect to the allonges. But, as with
the declaration in Mattos, the Lewis Declaration did not
attempt to admit the allonges under the business records
exception. Thus, even if the Note fell within the bounds of
HRE Rule 803(b)(6), the allonges endorsing it in blank did
not because the declaration did not provide the requisite
foundation. This is to say that the documents purporting to
allow Wells Fargo to enforce the Note were not admissible
under the business record exception. Since the documents
were not admissible as asserted, Wells Fargo did not meet
its burden of establishing facts necessary for a grant of
summary judgment.
 
Id. at 46, 414 P.3d at 98 (citations omitted) (citing Mattos, 140
 
Hawai'i at 32-33, 398 P.3d at 621-22). 
In the instant case, U.S. Bank filed an unverified
 
complaint on October 23, 2009 (Complaint). The Complaint alleged
 
that on April 7, 2006, Koki executed a promissory note in favor
 
of Fremont Investment & Loan (Fremont) for $800,000 (Note),
 
secured by a mortgage on real property executed by the Kotaks
 
which was recorded on April 7, 2006, in the Bureau of Conveyances
 (Mortgage). U.S. Bank alleged that it was the owner of the
 
Mortgage by virtue of a September 30, 2009 Assignment of
 
Mortgage, that the Kotaks were in default, that U.S. Bank "is
 also the owner of the Note," and that "[a] true and correct copy
 of the Note is attached hereto as Exhibit 1."
 
Attached to the Complaint was, inter alia, the Note
 
together with an otherwise blank piece of paper containing an
 undated indorsement stamp, apparently executed by the Vice
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
President of Fremont, which appears to specially indorse the Note
 
4
to U.S. Bank (Allonge).3
 
U.S. Bank maintains that it was the holder of the Note,
 
by virtue of a special indorsement to U.S. Bank, at the time it
 
filed the Complaint. U.S. Bank relies on the following: (1) its
 allegation in the Complaint that "Plaintiff is also the owner of
 the Note"; (2) the copy of the Note and Allonge attached to the
 Complaint; (3) a Declaration of Indebtedness executed under
 penalty of perjury on January 4, 2010, by Herman John Kennerty
 (Kennerty), "Vice President Loan Documentation" for America's
 
Servicing Company, "the servicer for [U.S. Bank]," which was
 
attached to the Motion for Summary Judgment;
5 and (4) a copy of
 
3 The stamp on the Allonge reads and appears as follows: 
U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee
Pay to the order of
without recourse.
 
[signature of Michael Koch]
Fremont Investment & Loan
 
Michael Koch
 
Vice President
 
[JROA doc. 45 at 31]
 
4 In Mattos, the supreme court noted that an allonge is "a slip of
paper sometimes attached to a negotiable instrument for the purpose of
receiving further indorsements when the original paper is filled withindorsements." Mattos, 140 Hawai 'i at 29 n.4, 398 P.3d at 618 n.4 (citation
omitted). 
5 Kennerty's Declaration of Indebtedness provided in relevant part
as follows:
 
1) I have personal knowledge of and am competent to
testify to the matters stated herein by virtue of my
position as Vice President Loan Documentation of America's
Servicing Company, the servicer for Plaintiff US BANK
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, AS TRUSTEE FOR SG MORTGAGE SECURITIES
ASSET BACKED CERTIFICATES, SERIES 2006-FRE2. My personal
knowledge is based on my review of the records and files
related to the mortgage loan which is the subject of this
foreclosure. My duties include serving as the custodian of
the records referenced herein.
 
2) For value received, Defendant KOKI NILESH KOTAK,
fka KOKI BOGHRA, as maker, made, executed and delivered to
FREMONT INVESTMENT & LOAN a certain promissory note dated
April 7, 2006, for the principal sum of Eight Hundred
(continued...)
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Note and Allonge attached to Kennerty's declaration. U.S.
 
Bank contends that the copy of the Note attached to the
 Complaint, which "appears to be identical to the copy attached to
 U.S. Bank's [Motion for Summary Judgment]," was "authenticated by
 the custodian of records for U.S. Bank's records relating to [the
 Kotaks'] loan."
 
However, there is no admissible evidence in the record,
 
including the documents and the Kennerty declaration relied upon
 by U.S. Bank, showing that U.S. Bank was the holder of the Note
 and the Allonge specially indorsing the Note to U.S. Bank at the
 initiation of the suit. Here, like in Mattos, Kennerty did not
 purport to authenticate the Allonge specifically indorsing the
 Note to U.S. Bank. See Mattos, 140 Hawai' i at 33, 398 P.3d at 
5(...continued)
Thousand and 00/100 Dollars ($800,000.00). A true and
correct copy of the Note is attached hereto as Exhibit 1.
. . . .
 4) . . . . Plaintiff is also the owner of the Note.
 . . . .
 8) All documents, memoranda, reports, records of
data compilation (hereinafter collectively "records of
acts") that are attached as Exhibits 1-5 to my Declaration,
as well as all other factual information contained herein,
represent records of regularly conducted activity because:
(1) The records of acts were and are made in
 
the course of America's Servicing Company's regularly
conducted business activity of mortgage lending and mortgage
servicing. 
(2) All herein referenced records of acts were
 
and are made at or near the time of the acts reported.
Entries into these records are made by me, as well as by
persons having personal knowledge of such event, and are
reviewed by me from time to time to ensure accuracy and
completeness, and are relied upon by Plaintiff in the
conduct of its business. 
(3) I am the custodian of all herein
 
referenced records of acts, which records and files are kept
by America's Servicing Company in a routine manner in the
ordinary course of its business in a filing and computer
system that is maintained under my custody and control.
Thus, I am qualified to introduce these records and facts
into evidence on this motion.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
622. Rather, Kennerty stated that he was "the custodian of the
 
records referenced herein," and neither the Allonge, nor any
 
indorsements, were referenced therein.6 See id. ("Work's
 
declaration refers only to the original note and makes no
 reference to the allonge. Although Exhibit 1 also contains the
 allonge, which indorses the note to U.S. Bank, the allonge was
 never authenticated. Therefore, U.S. Bank was not entitled to
 summary judgment[.]"). 
Even in Mattos, where the allonge specially indorsing
 
the note to the forclosing-bank was both (a) dated prior to the
 filing of the complaint (June 22, 2010) and (b) was filed
 together with the complaint, the supreme court nonetheless stated
 that "[e]ven if the aforementioned issues concerning the note and
 allonge did not exist, Work's declaration also does not satisfy
 the Reyes-Toledo requirement of an affirmative showing that U.S.
 Bank possessed the original note and allonge at the time of
 filing of this foreclosure complaint on July 21, 2011." Id. at
 
29, 33, 398 P.3d at 618, 622. Like in Mattos, Kennerty's
 declaration also fails to make an affirmative showing that U.S.
 Bank possessed the original Note and Allonge at the time of
 filing of the Complaint on October 23, 2009.
 
U.S. Bank also notes its attorney's affirmation, which
 
states "to the best of [the attorney's] knowledge, information,
 and belief" the Complaint contains no false statements and that
 
6
 Kennerty describes the Note as "a certain promissory note dated
April 7, 2006, for the principal sum of Eight Hundred Thousand and 00/100
Dollars ($800,000.00) made, executed, and delivered by Koki to Fremont.
Kennerty does not mention the Allonge, which was presumably added at a later
date. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
U.S. Bank has standing. However, the attorney's affirmation does
 
not satisfy U.S. Bank's burden to establish standing or
 entitlement to enforce the subject note at the time the action
 was commenced. See, e.g., U.S. Bank Trust, N.A. v. Busto, No.
 
CAAP-16-0000334, 2017 WL 2579070 (Haw. App. June 14, 2017) (SDO);
 Wilmington Sav. Fund Soc'y, FSB v. Yasuda, CAAP-17-0000433, 2018
 WL 1904909 (Haw. App. April 23, 2018) (SDO) (including a
 concurrence explaining that in Behrendt, the supreme court did
 not give any evidentiary weight to an attorney affirmation filed
 pursuant to HRS § 667-17). As U.S. Bank raises no other
 arguments about the sufficiency of its evidence, we conclude that
 U.S. Bank did not satisfy its burden to produce admissible evidence demonstrating that U.S. Bank was entitled to enforce the Note at the time this action was commenced. See Mattos, 140 
Hawai'i at 32-33, 398 P.3d at 621-22. As such, viewing the facts 
and inferences in the light most favorable to the Kotaks, as we must for purposes of a summary judgment ruling, there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether U.S. Bank was entitled to enforce the Note at the time this foreclosure action was commenced. Therefore, the Circuit Court erred in granting U.S. Bank's Motion for Summary Judgment. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit
 
Court's February 18, 2016 Judgment and Foreclosure Decree, and we
 
remand this case for further proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 15, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Gary Victor Dubin, 
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,
for Defendants-Appellants.
 Presiding Judge
Edmund K. Saffery, Lynda L. Arakawa,
(Goodsill Anderson Quinn
& Stifel),
 
and
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Steven T. Iwamura,
Robert M. Ehrhorn, Jr.,
Steven Keiji Idemoto,
Ken Ohara,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
12
 