NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000158
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
US BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, as Trustee for the Structured Asset
Securities Corporation Mortgage Loan Trust, 2006-NC1,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellant/
Cross-appellee/Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
v.
DANEFORD MICHAEL WRIGHT, ELLAREEN UILANI WRIGHT,
Defendants/Cross-Claim Defendants/Appellees/
Cross-Appellants/Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
and
COUNTY OF MAUI,
WAILUKU COUNTRY ESTATES COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION, INC.,
Defendants/Cross-claim Defendants/Appellees
and
FINANCE FACTORS, LIMITED,
Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/Cross-Claim Plaintiff/Appellee
and
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, 
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10,
DOE ENTITIES 1-10, DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-10, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0961(2))
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Leonard, Presiding Judge, Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant US Bank National Association, As
Trustee for the Structured Asset Securities Corporation Mortgage
orders filed on February 12, 2016, in the Circuit Court of the
Second Circuit ( circuit court):  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1  The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided.
2  HRCP Rule 41(b)(1) and (3) provide:
(b) Involuntary dismissal: Effect thereof.
(1) For failure of the plaintiff to prosecute or to comply
with these rules or any order of the court, a defendant may
move for dismissal of an action or of any claim against it.
(continued...)
2(1) the "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
[USBNA's] Motion to Set Supersedeas Bond For a Stay Pending
Appeal," filed on February 12, 2016; and 
(2
) the "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
[USBNA's] Motion for Reconsideration of This Court's November 18,
2015 Rulings Regarding (1) [USBNA's] Motion to Set Supersedeas
Bond For a Stay Pending Appeal and (2) Defendants Daneford
Michael Wright and Ellareen Uilani Wright's HRCP Rule 41(b)(1)
and (3) Motion for Involuntary Dismissal of [USBNA's] Complaint
and This Entire Action With Prejudice For the Bad Faith Lack of
Prosecution and For the Accompanying Disobeying of Court Orders,"
filed on February 12, 2016.1
On appeal, USBNA contends the circuit court erred when
it: (1) stayed the sale of the property involved in this judicial
foreclosure proceeding pending resolution of prior appeals in
this case, and ordered USBNA to deposit $100,000.00 into an
interest bearing account, instead of granting USBNA's request to
stay the distribution of excess sale proceeds from the
foreclosure sale; (2) granted in part and denied in part USBNA's
motion for reconsideration regarding USBNA's stay request; and
(3) denied USBNA's motion for reconsideration regarding
Defendants-Appellees Daneford Michael Wright and Ellareen Uilani
Wright's ( the Wrights ) "Motion for Involuntary Dismissal of
[USBNA's] Complaint and this Entire Action With Prejudice for the
Bad Faith Lack of Prosecution and for the Accompanying Disobeying
of Court Orders" filed pursuant to Hawai #i Rules of Civil
Procedure ( HRCP) Rule 41(b)(1) and (3)2 (HRCP Rule 41(b) Motion ).NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(...continued)2
. . . .
(3) Unless the court in its order for dismissal otherwise
specifies, a dismissal under this subdivision and any
dismissal not provided for in this rule, other than a
dismissal for lack of jurisdiction, for improper venue, or
for failure to join a party under Rule 19, operates as an
adjudication upon the merits.
3Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant legal authorities, we resolve USBNA's points
of error as follows.
In a memorandum opinion filed on May 5, 2017, this
court previously decided issues associated with this foreclosure
action and provided a detailed background of this case.   See U.S.
Bank Nat'l Ass'n for Structured Asset Sec. Corp. Mortg. Loan Tr.,
2006-NC1 v. Wright
, Nos. CAAP-15-0000401, CAAP-15-0000578, CAAP-
15-0000579, CAAP-15-0000714, 2017 WL 1829680 (Haw. App. May 5,
2017) (Mem. Op.).  
This appeal involves the two post-judgment orders filed
on February 12, 2016, which were entered after the circuit
court's order ( Order Confirming Sale ) dated September 2, 2015,
which, inter alia , ruled that USBNA's credit bid at a foreclosure
auction of the Wrights' property was approved.  In the Order
Confirming Sale, the circuit court also ruled that $73,422.01,
which amounted to the difference between the credit bid and the
amount due and owed on the Note, must be delivered and deposited
into an escrow account at least ten (10) days prior to closing.
Further, the Order Confirming Sale stated that the "Commissioner
is hereby authorized and directed to effect a closing of the sale
of the property to Purchaser or Purchaser's nominee within
thirty-five (35) days after this Order is entered, and upon
payment of the closing costs and the balance of the sale price." NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3  HRCP Rule 62(d) provides:
(d) Stay Upon Appeal. When an appeal is taken the
appellant by giving a supersedeas bond may obtain a stay
subject to the exceptions contained in subdivision (a) of
this rule. The bond may be given at or after the time of
filing the notice of appeal or of procuring the order
allowing the appeal, as the case may be. The stay is
effective when the supersedeas bond is approved by the
court.
4(1) Motion for Stay Pending Appeal
On October 28, 2015, USBNA filed a motion (Motion for
Stay) pursuant to HRCP Rules 7 and 62(d)3 in which USBNA asserted
that it was seeking: (1) to set the amount of a supersedeas bond
pursuant to HRCP Rule 62(d); and (2) for a stay of the circuit
court's previous Order Confirming Sale "only to the extent it
requires the distribution of any 'excess' sale proceeds to
lienholders of record." (Emphasis omitted.)  USBNA further
asserted that it was "not seeking a stay of the remaining
portions of the Confirmation Order, including without limitation
the closing of the sale transaction, the payment of the
Commissioner's fees and costs, and/or the discharge of the
Commissioner."  In addition, USBNA asserted that it was
requesting a stay because if it was successful in its then
pending appeals, "the amounts due and owing to [USBNA] might be
more than the amounts awarded in the Foreclosure Judgment.  To
the extent said additional amounts are secured by [USBNA's] first
priority mortgage, [USBNA] would be entitled to the payment of
the excess sale proceeds."
On February 12, 2016, the circuit court filed the order
granting in part and denying in part USBNA's Motion for Stay, in
which it ordered:  
1. The sale of the Subject Property is stayed pending
appeal, and no supersedeas bond is permitted;
2. US Bank shall deposit the disputed excess sale
proceeds of $73,422.01 into an interest bearing
account ("Account") within 10 days.  The Commissioner
may deduct from said account the amount of
Commissioner's fees and costs awarded by the Court.
3. US Bank shall deposit an additional sum of $100,000.00
("100,000.00 Fund") in the Account.
4. The Commissioner may submit to the Court on aNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5quarterly basis an ex parte motion to request further
fees and costs incurred.  Upon approval by the Court,
the Commissioner may deduct amounts for said fees and
costs from the $100,000.00 Fund.
5. The Commissioner remains responsible to pay taxes
assessed against the Subject Property and is
authorized to deduct amounts from the $100,000.00 Fund
to pay said taxes and pay for insurance for the
Subject Property.  Commissioner shall file an ex parte
motion for approval to pay any expenses other than
taxes and insurance.  Said expenses would be deducted
from the $100,000.00 Fund.
6. Finance Factors, Limited may request disbursal of
funds in the Account. 
7. US Bank shall provide proof of the above-referenced
deposits in the Account within ten (10) days after it
is accomplished, by written submission to the Court.
On appeal, USBNA contends that the circuit court abused
its discretion when it ordered a stay of the sale of the property
pending appeal and ordered USBNA to deposit $100,000.00 in an
interest bearing account.  USBNA contends that the circuit
court's order to stay the sale of the property was not supported
by any clear reasoning or legal principles. 
At the hearing on the Motion for Stay the circuit court
pointed to the fact that USBNA did not go through with the sale
within the thirty-five days required in the Order Confirming
Sale.  The circuit court stated that "now the 35 days has passed
and [USBNA is] not going to be able to close without a Court
order, but the stay is to stay the sale of the property."  The
circuit court does not appear to give any other reasoning for its
decision to stay the sale of the property.
"In judicial sales, the court is the vendor and the
confirmation of sale is the equivalent of a valid contract of
sale."  First Hawaiian Bank v. Timothy, 96 Hawai# i 348, 361, 31
P.3d 205, 218 (App. 2001) (citation and brackets omitted); 47 Am.
Jur. 2d Judicial Sales ยง 201 (2006) ("The confirmation by the
court of a judicial sale is the equivalent of a valid contract of
sale.").  
Generally, when a purchaser at a judicial sale fails to
comply with his or her bid and fulfill the terms of the
contract of purchase, several courses of action are open to
the court:
(1) it may set aside the sale, release the
purchaser, and decree a resale; (2) it mayNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6confirm the sale and permit an action at
law to be instituted against the purchaser
and its sureties, to recover the amount of
the bid, or damages; (3) it may have
recourse to the vendor's lien reserved for
the price, or to the purchase-money
mortgage or other security that may have
been given; (4) it may specifically
enforce compliance by summary proceedings
against the purchaser; and in some
jurisdictions, its successors or sureties;
or (5) it may order a resale at the
purchaser's risk, with a provision that he
or she shall be held for the deficiency
and costs of resale in case the property
brings less than the bid at the first
sale. 
First Hawaiian Bank, 96 Hawai #i at 362, 31 P.3d at 219 (citation
omitted); see 47 Am. Jur. 2d Judicial Sales  ยง 141 (2006); see
also Powers v. Shaw, 1 Haw. App. 374, 378, 619 P.2d 1098, 1102
(1980) (stating "when a purchaser at a judicial sale fails to
complete the sale, the expenses of sale including attorney's fees
may be imposed upon her").  
It appears that the circuit court's reasoning to stay
the sale of the property pending appeal was related to the fact
that USBNA did not complete the sale within the thirty-five days
as required under the Order Confirming Sale.  Given Hawai# i case
law, the circuit court had several options to address USBNA's
failure to comply with the Order Confirming Sale, including
determining appropriate damages for the delay caused by not
executing the sale or ordering a resale of the property.  Staying
the sale of the property pending appeal is not an option endorsed
by the case law.  Further, the circuit court does not appear to
indicate how staying the sale of the property relates to, or
provides any remedy for, USBNA's failure to execute the sale
within the period established in the Order Confirming Sale. 
Given these circumstances, we vacate the circuit court's order
staying the sale of the property.
In addition, the circuit court required $100,000.00 to
be deposited into an interest bearing account to pay for the real
estate taxes, insurance, and other expenses while the case wasNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4  In their HRCP Rule 41(b) Motion, the Wrights asserted that USBNA's
conduct in the case included "'deliberate delay, contumacious conduct' and
'actual prejudice[.]'"  The Wrights requested dismissal of the case with
prejudice or in the alternative an evidentiary hearing "at which time the
extent of and the true reasons for such four and one-half year contumacious
delay can be placed on the record of these proceedings under oath."
  In addressing this motion, the circuit court indicated that it would
treat the motion as a motion for sanctions for USBNA's alleged continual
delays.
7stayed pending appeal.  Because we vacate the circuit court's
order staying the sale of the property, we also vacate the
circuit court's ruling regarding the $100,000.00, subject to any
necessary orders by the circuit court on remand to address
payments that were made while this appeal was pending. 
Based on the above, the circuit court also erred in not
granting reconsideration as to staying the sale of the property
pending the prior appeals, and in requiring a deposit of the
$100,000. 
(2) The Wrights' HRCP Rule 41(b) Motion
USBNA challenges the circuit court's February 12, 2016
order granting in part and denying in part USBNA's motion for
reconsideration to the extent the order denied reconsideration
regarding the circuit court's preliminary rulings on the Wrights'
HRCP Rule 41(b) Motion.4  USBNA contends the circuit court did
not have jurisdiction to consider the Wrights' motion. 
However, we do not have appellate jurisdiction in this
appeal over the circuit court's rulings regarding the Wrights'
HRCP Rule 41(b) Motion, notwithstanding that other parts of the
order denying reconsideration are properly before the court in
this appeal.  A post-judgment order is not appealable "if the
rights of a party involved remain undetermined or if the matter
is retained for further action."  Ditto v. McCurdy , 103 Hawai #i
153, 157, 80 P.3d 974, 978 (2003) (citation omitted).
Here, the circuit court orally ruled on the Wrights'
motion that the Wrights were entitled to an evidentiary hearing
on their HRCP Rule 41(b) Motion and permitted the Wrights to
conduct two HRCP Rule 30(b)(6) depositions on a subject matter of
their choice, finding that "there is at least evidence to showNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5  On March 17, 2016, USBNA filed a motion for leave to file an
interlocutory appeal and for a stay pending appeal regarding the Wrights' HRCP
Rule 41(b) Motion.  However, the record does not contain a ruling on that
motion.
8that [USBNA] has continued to engage in a delaying pattern." 
Further, on March 8, 2016, the circuit court filed an order
which, inter alia, set an evidentiary hearing on the Wrights'
motion and allowed the Wrights to conduct the two HRCP Rule
30(b)(6) depositions.  Thus, based on the record before us in
this appeal, the parties' rights remain undetermined with respect
to the Wrights' HRCP Rule 41(b) Motion.
In short, because there is no order finally concluding
the Wrights' post-judgment HRCP Rule 41(b) Motion, this court
does not have jurisdiction to address the request for
reconsideration of preliminary rulings on that motion in this
appeal.5
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED with respect to the
following orders entered on February 12, 2016, by the Circuit
Court of the Second Circuit, that:
(1) the "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
[USBNA's] Motion to Set Supersedeas Bond For A Stay Pending
Appeal" is vacated to the extent that it stayed the sale of the
subject property pending appeal and required USBNA to deposit
$100,000 in an interest bearing account, and
(2) the "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
[USBNA's] Motion for Reconsideration of This Court's November 18,
2015 Rulings Regarding (1) [USBNA's] Motion to Set Supersedeas
Bond For a Stay Pending Appeal and (2) [the Wrights'] HRCP Rule
41(b)(1) and (3) Motion for Involuntary Dismissal of [USBNA's]
Complaint and This Entire Action With Prejudice For the Bad Faith
Lack of Prosecution and For the Accompanying Disobeying of Court
Orders" is likewise vacated to the extent that it failed to grant
reconsideration regarding the stay of the sale of the property
pending appeal and to the extent that it required USBNA to
deposit $100,000 in a client trust account.
The case is remanded to the circuit court for furtherNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition Order.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 26, 2017.
On the briefs:
Edmund K. Saffery,
(Regan M. Iwao on the briefs),
Scott K.D. Shishido,
Linda L. Arakawa, 
(Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel)
for US Bank National Association,
as Trustee for the Structured Asset
Securities Corporation Mortgage
Loan Trust, 2006-NC1.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Gary Victor Dubin,
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,
(Dubin Law Offices)
for Daneford Michael Wright, 
Ellareen Uilani Wright. 