NOT FOR PUBLICATIO N IN W EST' S HAWAI#I REP ORTS AND P ACIF IC REP ORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000291
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I
THOMAS SCHMIDT, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
GARY VICTOR DUBIN; DUBIN LAW OFFICES,
Defendants/Third-Party Plaintiffs/Third-Party Counterclaim
Defendants-Appellees,
and
JOHN AND MARY DOES 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS,
PARTNERSHIPS OR OTHER ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants,
and
GARY VICTOR DUBIN; DUBIN LAW OFFICES,
Defendants/Third-Party Plaintiffs/Third-Party Counterclaim
Defendants-Appellees,
v.
JOHN S. CARROLL,
Third-Party Defendant/Third-Party Counterclaim
Plaintiff-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-0482)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant Thomas Schmidt ( Schmidt), appearing
pro se,1 appeals from the November 8, 2018 Final Judgment
(Judgment ) entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
1After briefing was completed and this case was placed on the ready
calendar, on October 1, 2020, Samuel P. King, Jr. entered an appearance as
counsel for Schmidt. Electronically Filed
Intermediate Court of Appeals
CAAP-18-0000291
28-MAR-2024
07:57 AM
Dkt. 87 SONOT FOR PUBLICATIO N IN W EST' S HAWAI#I REP ORTS AND P ACIF IC REP ORTER
(Circuit Court ), in favor of Defendants/Third-Party
Plaintiffs/Third-Party Counterclaim-Defendants/Appellees Gary
Victor Dubin and Dubin Law Offices (collectively, Dubin).2 
Schmidt also challenges the Circuit Court's December 27, 2016
Order Granting [Dubin's] Motion for Partial Summary Judgment #1
on All Claims Based on an Alleged Debt ( Order Granting MPSJ #1 ).
Schmidt raises four points of error on appeal,
contending that:  (1) the Circuit Court erred in granting MPSJ
#1; (2) the Circuit Court erred in denying Schmidt the
opportunity to testify as to when his claims against Dubin
accrued; (3) the Circuit Court erred in not making a
determination as to when Schmidt knew or should have known he had
a cause of action against Dubin; and (4) this case should be
remanded to the Circuit Court for a determination as to when
Schmidt's claims accrued.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve
Schmidt's points of error as follows:
Schmidt's opening brief does not comply with Hawai #i
Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule 28, including the
failure to cite record references as required by HRAP Rule
28(b)(3).  However, the Hawai #i Supreme Court instructs that
pleadings prepared by self-represented litigants should be
interpreted liberally, and such parties should not be
automatically foreclosed from appellate review because they fail
2The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATIO N IN W EST' S HAWAI#I REP ORTS AND P ACIF IC REP ORTER
to comply with court rules.  Erum v. Llego, 147 Hawai #i 368,
380-81, 465 P.3d 815, 827-28 (2020).  Therefore, we have
considered the merits of Schmidt's arguments to the extent they
can be discerned.
(1, 3, & 4)  Schmidt argues that the Circuit Court
erred in entering the Order Granting MPSJ #1, which stated in
pertinent part:
Partial summary judgment is hereby entered in favor of
[Dubin], and against [Schmidt], on all of [Schmidt's] claims
for recovery of an alleged debt and/or which are premised
upon an alleged debt, because all claims for breach of
contract, in the nature of assumpsit and/or recovery of a
debt are time-barred  as a matter of law pursuant to [Hawaii
Revised Statutes ( HRS) ยง 657-1(1) (2016)].  This includes,
e.g., [Schmidt's] claims against [Dubin] for breach of
contract, financially benefitting from breach of contract,
deprivation of [Schmidt's] assets, unjust enrichment,
intentional infliction with economic advantage, retention of
economic benefit, conversion, return of money, an
accounting, fraud, fraudulent concealment, reimbursement of
attorneys' fees and costs, and any other claims by [Schmidt]
in this lawsuit, which are premised in any way upon an
alleged debt.
In addition, pursuant to HRCP 56(d) and HRE 201, the
Court takes judicial notice of the judicial admissions made
on the record by [Schmidt] in this action, that [Schmidt] is
not pursuing a legal malpractice claim against either
[Dubin] and accordingly, hereby enters partial summary
judgment in favor of [Dubin], and against [Schmidt], on all
of [Schmidt's] claims for legal malpractice, pursuant to
HRCP 54(d).
Schmidt makes no argument on appeal that the Circuit
Court erred in granting partial summary judgment on any legal
malpractice claim, and therefore, any challenge to that ruling is
waived.
Schmidt's sole argument is that the Circuit Court erred
in concluding that his breach of contract claims against Dubin
were time-barred as a matter of law.3
3Schmidt makes no argument on appeal that the Circuit Court erred
in concluding that claims other than the breach of contract claim were time-
barred.  Therefore, any challenge to the entry of summary judgment with
(continued...)
3NOT FOR PUBLICATIO N IN W EST' S HAWAI#I REP ORTS AND P ACIF IC REP ORTER
The parties agree that the statute of limitations for a
breach of contract claim is six years and that an action must be
commenced within six years after the cause of action accrued,
pursuant to HRS ยง 657-1(1).  The allegedly breached agreement was
for Dubin to provide legal services to Schmidt in a separate suit
that Schmidt had initiated pro se against Jerry A. Ruthruff
(Ruthruff Suit ).  Dubin argues that Schmidt's breach of contract
cause of action accrued in 2006, because that was when Dubin
"repudiated" Schmidt's claim that he had paid Dubin $100,000 to
represent him, and Schmidt had knowledge of the facts necessary
for him to bring a breach of contract action.  Schmidt argues
that his breach of contract claims against Dubin did not accrue
until November 18, 2013, when an order of dismissal was entered
against him in the Ruthruff Suit.  Evidence was presented that
Dubin did in fact repudiate Schmidt's claim and that a check
payable to Dubin for $25,000 was to pay for his representation of
Schmidt's son.  However, there is also evidence in the record
that Dubin "threatened" to withdraw as counsel in the Ruthruff
Suit in 2009 and that Dubin remained counsel of record until
after the Ruthruff Suit was dismissed.
Under Hawai #i law, "a right of action accrues whenever
. . . a breach of . . . contract has occurred . . . as will
give a right to then bring and sustain a suit."
Schimmelfennig v. Grove Farm Co., 41 Haw. 124, 130 (1955);
see also Waxman v. Citizens Nat. Trust & Sav. Bank of Los
Angeles, 123 Cal.App.2d 145, 266 P .2d 48, 50 (1954)
("Ordinarily, a cause of action for breach of contract
3(...continued)
respect to other claims identified in the first quoted paragraph of the
Circuit Court's Order Granting MPSJ #1 is waived.  See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). 
Similarly, Schmidt makes no arguments concerning the Circuit Court's December
27, 2016 order granting Dubin's motion for partial summary judgment #2, and
therefore any challenge to that order is waived. 
4NOT FOR PUBLICATIO N IN W EST' S HAWAI#I REP ORTS AND P ACIF IC REP ORTER
accrues on the failure of the promisor to do the thing
contracted for at the time and in the manner contracted.")
Water Comm'n of County of Hawai #i v. Nat'l Am. Ins. Co., 930
F.Supp. 1411, 1419 (1996).
Weidenbach v. Koolau Agr. Co., Ltd., No. 24315, 2009 WL 537098,
*4 (Haw. App. Mar. 3, 2009) (SDO); see also Au v. Au, 63 Haw.
210, 219, 626 P.2d 173, 180 (1981) ("Normally, the statute of
limitations begins to run on a contract when the contract is
breached.").  Nevertheless, this court has held:
However, where a duty imposed prior to a limitations
period is a continuing one, the statute of limitations is
not a defense to actions based on breaches of that duty
occurring within the limitations period[.]  Furthermore,
where a contract provides for continuing performance over a
period of time, each breach may begin the running of the
statute anew such that accrual occurs continuously.  Thus,
for the purposes of the statute of limitations, the effect
of a continuing obligation in a contract is that the cause
of action accrued anew every day for each continuation of
the wrong.
Dominguez v. Price Okamoto Himeno & Lum, No. 28140, 2009 WL
1144359, *4 (Haw. App. Apr. 29, 2009) (SDO) (citations and
quotation marks omitted).
Here, there is no ruling that an agreement existed
between Schmidt and Dubin, only that the statute of limitations
had run on any contract claims.  We make no finding concerning
the existence or terms of an agreement or contract between the
parties.  Yet, "the moment at which a statute of limitations is
triggered is ordinarily a question of fact."  Norris v. Six Flags
Theme Parks, Inc., 102 Hawai <i 203, 206, 74 P.3d 26, 29 (2003)
(citation omitted).  The Circuit Court made no determination as
to when Schmidt's alleged breach of contract cause of action
accrued.  Moreover, based on the record before the Circuit Court
and the standards applicable to summary judgment, we conclude
5NOT FOR PUBLICATIO N IN W EST' S HAWAI#I REP ORTS AND P ACIF IC REP ORTER
that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to when an
alleged breach of contract action accrued in this case. 
Therefore, the Circuit Court erred in concluding that Schmidt's
breach of contract claims against Dubin were time-barred as a
matter of law.
(2)  Schmidt makes no argument in support of his second
point of error, and therefore it is waived.  See HRAP Rule
28(b)(7).
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's November 8, 2018
Judgment is affirmed in part and vacated in part.  The Judgment
is vacated with respect to the Circuit Court's granting of
summary judgment on Schmidt's breach of contract claim(s) against
Dubin on the grounds that they were time-barred.  The Judgment is
affirmed in all other respects.  This case is remanded to the
Circuit Court for further proceedings consistent with this
Summary Disposition Order.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai #i, March 28, 2024.
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Acting Chief Judge
Thomas F. Schmidt,
Plaintiff-Appellant, Pro Se. /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
Lois H. Yamaguchi,
Jodie D. Roeca, /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
(Roeca Luria Shin LLP), Associate Judge
for Defendants/Third-Party
  Plaintiffs/Third-Party
  Counterclaim-Defendants/
  Appellees.
6