NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000300 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
WESTON W. GARCIA, Petitioner-Appellant,
v. 
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR OF THE COURTS, STATE OF HAWAI# I,
Respondent-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
HONOLULU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DAA-17-00009)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant Weston W. Garcia (Garcia) appeals 
from a Judgment on Appeal, entered on March 6, 2018, by the 
District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (district 
court)  The Judgment affirms Garcia's driver's license 
revocation by Respondent-Appellee Administrative Director of the Courts, State of 
Hawai# i (Director). 21
1 The Honorable James S. Kawashima presided. 
2 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E–1 (2007) provides:
"'Director' means the administrative director of the courts or any other
person within the judiciary appointed by the director to conductadministrative reviews or hearings or carry out other functions relating toadministrative revocation under part III [entitled 'Administrative RevocationProcess']." By virtue of this provision, the hearing officer exercises thepowers of the administrative director of the courts in conductingadministrative review hearings. See Soderlund v. Admin. Dir. of the Courts
,
96 Hawai #i 114, 115 n.1, 26 P.3d 1214, 1215 n.1 (2001). Hereinafter,
"Director" is used interchangeably to designate the Director and the hearingofficer. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we 
resolve Garcia's points of error as follows. 
A. Garcia's due process rights were not violated when the
Director stated that Garcia was subject to a one-yearlicense suspension for Operating a Vehicle While Under theInfluence of an Intoxicant (OVUII). 
Garcia argues that the district court erred in 
affirming the Director's decision to sustain his two-year 
driver's license revocation. Specifically, Garcia argues that 
the Director deprived him of his due process rights by revoking 
his license for two years despite telling Garcia "in no uncertain 
terms" at the administrative revocation hearing that "he would 
lose his license for one year, and then only as a suspension." 
Related to this argument is Garcia's contention that, in the 
district court's March 6, 2018 Decision and Order Affirming 
Administrative Revocation and Dismissing Appeal (Decision and 
Order), Finding of Fact (FOF) 7 is clearly erroneous, and 
Conclusions of Law (COLs) 3-5 are wrong. 
At the administrative revocation hearing, Garcia's 
counsel stated that Garcia did not contest his OVUII offense, but 
contested his refusal to submit to a test for blood alcohol 
concentration (BAC) on the basis that his refusal was not knowing 
and intelligent. The Director engaged Garcia in the following 
colloquy, in relevant part: 
Q. Okay. It means that you're not contesting the
DUI. Do you understand that? 
A. Yes. 
. . . . 
Q. Okay. And, you understand that A) Driving under
the Influence here requires a one year's suspension? 
A. Okay. 
Q. And, you understand that by waiving that, your
license will be suspended for one year? 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. Yes. 
. . . . 
Q. And, the only thing you're contesting today then
is the refusal of the -- the blood or breath test? 
A. Yes. 
It is undisputed that Garcia had no prior alcohol 
enforcement contact and, thus, was subject to a one-year driver's 
license revocation for the OVUII alone or a two-year license 
revocation for having been arrested of OVUII and refusing to 
submit to a BAC test. See HRS § 291E-41(b)(1) and (c) (Supp. 
2018). The Director's colloquy addressed Garcia's waiver of any challenge to his OVUII offense, for which Garcia was subject to a 
one-year driver's license revocation. The colloquy did not 
concern the penalty for Garcia's refusal to submit to a BAC test. 
Although the Director erred by referring to a license 
"suspension" rather than a revocation, the error was harmless 
where Garcia was notified by the Notice of Administrative 
Revocation form and the HPD-396B1-3 form ("Sanctions for Use of 
Intoxicants While Operating a Vehicle & Implied Consent for 
Testing") that refusing a blood or breath test would subject him 
to a two-year license revocation.
3 
3 The Notice of Administrative Revocation, which was served on
Garcia, provides, in relevant part: 
Offense Means Alcohol 
Enforcement Contact You Took a Breath or 
Blood Test And, If
Applicable, a Blood or
Urine Test You Refused to be Tested 
First Offense Within Five Years ONE YEAR TWO YEARS 
The HPD-396B1-3 form, which was read to Garcia, provides, in
relevant part: 
7. REFUSED The administrative revocation of driver's license consequences for taking or refusing totake a test are as follows: 
a. REFUSED If you refuse to take any tests and yourrecord shows no prior alcohol . . . 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The district court did not wrongly conclude that when 
the Director referred to a one-year suspension of Garcia's 
driver's license, the Director did not exceed constitutional or 
statutory authority, erroneously interpret the law, act in an 
arbitrary or capricious manner, commit an abuse of discretion, or 
make a determination unsupported by the evidence in the record. 
See HRS § 291E-40(c) (2007). 
FOF 7 is not clearly erroneous and COLs 3-5 are not 
wrong. 
B. Garcia fails to show that he preserved for appeal the issue
of whether the Director erroneously concluded that OfficerMcKee was not required to ensure Garcia understood theimplied consent law. 
After Garcia was arrested, Officer McKee read Garcia 
the HPD-396K and HPD-396B1-4 forms (collectively, implied consent 
form) informing Garcia of the implied consent law, including the 
sanctions for refusing a BAC test. At the administrative 
revocation hearing, Garcia testified that when Officer McKee read 
the implied consent form, Garcia did not understand the 
consequence for refusing a BAC test because, among other things, 
the officer failed to answer his questions about language in the 
implied consent form and the BAC testing procedure. The Director 
concluded that Garcia refused a BAC test after being lawfully 
informed of the consequences. 
Garcia argues the district court erred in affirming the 
Director's decision because the Director "refused to consider if 
Garcia actually understood the implied consent law read to him." 
Garcia asserts that the Director apparently concluded that there 
enforcement contact during the five years
preceding the date the notice ofadministrative revocation was issued, yourlicense and privilege to operate a vehiclewill be revoked for a period of two years. 
However, if you choose to take a test and
fail it, your license and privilege tooperate a vehicle will be revoked for oneyear. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was no requirement that a driver understand the implied consent 
law, and all that was required was that a police officer read the 
driver the implied consent form. The Director argues that Garcia 
waived this issue by not arguing it before the district court. 
In his December 21, 2017 Petition for Judicial Review 
(Petition), Garcia asserted that "[t]he [Director] committed an 
abuse of discretion by assuming [Garcia] made a knowing and 
intentional 'Refusal' after testimony clearly demonstrated that 
[Garcia] made multiple requests for further explanation of what 
was being read because he did not understand." However, Garcia 
did not argue this point in his Memorandum in Support of Petition 
for Judicial Review (Memo in Support of Petition), separately 
filed on January 24, 2018. There, for the first time, he raised 
his argument regarding the district court's "one-year suspension" 
remark, as we discussed in part A. In its Decision and Order, 
the district court addressed only the argument in the Memo in 
Support of Petition and not any of the points raised in the 
Petition itself. 
Garcia has the burden to provide a record adequate to 
address the issues on appeal. See
 Hawai# i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure Rule 11(a); 
Bettencourt v. Bettencourt
, 80 Hawai# i 225, 
230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995). The district court did not make 
any finding or conclusion regarding this issue in its Decision 
and Order, nor is there a transcript of the hearing on the 
Petition included in the record on appeal. There is before us no 
evidence showing whether Garcia preserved this issue by actually 
raising it to the district court during his appeal hearing. 
Hence, there is an insufficient basis in the record before us to 
address this contention. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment on
Appeal, entered on March 6, 2018, by the District Court of the
First Circuit, Honolulu Division, is affirmed.  
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 17, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Earle A. Partington, Presiding Judge
and R. Patrick McPherson,
for Petitioner-Appellant. 
/s/ Derrick H. M. Chan
Dawn E. Takeuchi-Apuna, Associate Judge
Deputy Attorney General,for Respondent-Appellee. 
/s/ Keith K. HiraokaAssociate Judge 
6 