 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-18-0000708 18-JUN-2024 07:58 AM Dkt. 111 MO 
NO. CAAP-18-0000708  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
LOY K.S. WATANABE, GERALD CARRELL, STERLING J.K. ALLEN,  
JOSEPH W. LEPINE, ANTHONY AGUIAR, MICHAEL ALMEIDA,  
STEPHEN ARRUDA, ALIKA BAJO, RON D. BODE, BRENDAN K. BUCHWACH, 
DOUGLAS BURKE, BLAKE CONANT, as Personal Representative of the 
ESTATE OF CHRISTOPHER CONANT, SHANNON HART, PHILLIP L. HOOTON, 
HAROLD K. KAULA, as Personal Representative of the ESTATE OF 
EDWARD K. KAULA, EMMETT LEE LOY, HILARY LEE LOY, LAMBERT LEE 
LOY, MALIA MARQUEZ, as Personal Representative of the ESTATE OF 
ANTHONY T. LUM, JOHN D.K. MORRIS, TODD I. RAGSDALE, CARL J. 
ROSSETTI, JOSEPH T. SOWA, KEALA WAIAU, JOHN DOE 1, JOHN DOE 2, 
DAVID W.K. AULD, WILLIAM BREWER, SCOTT HORIUCHI, JOSEPH L.K. 
JAMES, R. RONALD JAMES, fka RONALD ROI WEIR, JOHN DOE 3, 
Plaintiffs-Appellees,  
v.  
TRUSTEES OF THE ESTATE OF BERNICE PAUAHI BISHOP DBA KAMEHAMEHA 
SCHOOLS, ELLIOT  K. MILLS, in his capacity as Trustee of the 
Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop, CRYSTAL K. ROSE, in her 
capacity as Trustee of the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop, 
JENNIFER N. GOODYEAR-KA‘ ŌPUA, in her capacity as Trustee of the 
Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop, MICHELLE KA‘ UHANE, in her 
capacity as Trustee of the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop, 
ROBERT K.W.H. NOBRIGA, in his capacity as Trustee of the Estate   
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
 _______________________________ NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Bernice Pauahi Bishop,1  Defendants/Cross-claimants/Cross-claim 
Defendants-Appellees,  
and  
RICHARD D. GRONNA, as Personal Representative of the ESTATE OF 
ROBERT MCCORMICK BROWNE, Defendant-Appellee,  
and  
ST. FRANCIS MEDICAL CENTER, f/k/a ST. FRANCIS HOSPITAL, INC., 
Defendant/Cross-claim Defendant/Cross-claimant-Appellant, and JOHN DOES 1-10,  DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10,  DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, 
and DOE NON-PROFIT ENTITIES 1-10, Cross-claim Defendants,  
and  
KUAKINI HEALTH SYSTEM, formerly or also known as  
KUAKINI MEDICAL CENTER, Defendant-Appellee,  
and  
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10,  
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, DOE UNINCORPORATED  
ORGANIZATIONS 1-10, Defendants  
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT  COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO.  1CC161000086)  
DAVID W.K. AULD, WILLIAM BREWER, SCOTT HORIUCHI, JOSEPH L.K. 
JAMES, R. RONALD JAMES, fka RONALD ROI WEIR, JOHN DOE 3, 
Plaintiffs-Appellees,  
v.  
TRUSTEES OF THE ESTATE OF BERNICE PAUAHI BISHOP DBA  
KAMEHAMEHA SCHOOLS, ELLIOT  K. MILLS , in his capacity as Trustee 
of the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop, CRYSTAL K. ROSE , in her 
capacity as Trustee of the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop, 
JENNIFER N. GOODYEAR-KA‘ ŌPUA, in her capacity as Trustee of the 
Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop, MICHELLE KA‘ UHANE, in her 
capacity as Trustee of the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop, 
ROBERT K.W.H. NOBRIGA, in his capacity as Trustee of the Estate 
of Bernice Pauahi Bishop, RICHARD D. GRONNA, as Personal 
Representative of the ESTATE OF ROBERT MCCORMICK BROWNE, and 
KUAKINI HEALTH SYSTEM, aka KUAKINI MEDICAL CENTER,  
Defendants-Appellees,  
and  
ST. FRANCIS MEDICAL CENTER, Defendant-Appellant,  
and  
1 Pursuant to Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule 201 and Hawai‘i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 43(c)(1), we take judicial notice that Crystal K. 
Rose, Jennifer N. Goodyear -Ka‘ōpua, and Michelle Ka‘uhane are current Trustees 
of the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop and are automatically substituted as 
Defendants/Cross -claimants/Cross -claim Defendants -Appellees in place of 
Corbett A.K. Kalama, Micah A. Kane, and Lance Keawe Wilhelm. 
2   
 
 
  
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION  
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.)  
 
 
 
 
    
  
 
    
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, DOE 
PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, DOE UNINCORPORATED ORGANIZATIONS 1-10, 
Defendants  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT  COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO.  1CC161000786)  
This appeal arises out of an $80 million settlement 
between Defendants/Cross -claimants/Cross-claim Defendants/ 
Appellees Trustees of the Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop, dba 
Kamehameha Schools , and 32 Plaintiffs/Appellees ( Plaintiffs ). 
Defendant/Cross -claim Defendant /Cross-claimant /Appellant St. 
Francis Medical Center appeals from the Findings, Conclusions 
and Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion For Approval of Good Faith 
Settlement Pursuant to [Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS)] § 663-
15.5, Filed on June 20, 2018, entered on August 27, 2018 ( Good 
Faith Settlement Order ), by the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit ( circuit court ).2 St. Francis challenges the circuit 
court's ruling that the settlement between Kamehameha Schools 
and Plaintiffs was entered into in good faith pursuant to HRS 
§ 663-15.5 (2016). 
At the outset, we acknowledge that public policy 
favors resolution of disputes through settlement agreements and, 
here in particular, we acknowledge Plaintiffs' concerted effort 
2 The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided. 
3   
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in reaching a settlement agreement. But as explained below, we 
must vacate the circuit court's Good Faith Settlement Order and 
remand this case for further proceedings. 
I. Background 
Plaintiffs identified Dr. Robert McCormick Browne 
(Dr. Browne), formerly employed as Chief of Psychiatry at St. 
Francis, as having sexually abused them as children. Of the 32 
Plaintiffs, 28 stated they were referred to Dr. Browne by 
Kamehameha Schools, for psychiatric treatment, while they were 
students at Kamehameh a Schools. Regarding the remaining four 
Plaintiffs, three did not attend Kamehameha Schools and one was 
referred to Dr. Browne by Holy Family School. 
On June 21, 2016, in Case No. 1CC61000086 , Plaintiffs 
filed their first amended complaint (complaint ). The complaint 
named as defendants Kamehameha Schools; St. Francis; Richard D. 
Gronna, as Personal Representative of the Estate of Robert 
McCormick Browne ( Gronna); and Kuakini Health System.3 The 
complaint set forth seven counts: (1) sexual assault and 
battery; (2) breach of fiduciary duty; (3) gross negligence; 
(4) intentional infliction of emotional distress; (5) grossly 
negligent infliction of emotional distress; (6) grossly 
3 Gronna and Kuakini Health System are nominal appellees to this 
appeal. Gronna remains a non -settling defendant; in July 2018, Gronna filed 
a Statement of No Position to Plaintiffs' Motion for Approval of Good Faith 
Settlement. Kuakini Health System was dismissed without prejudice by the 
circuit court in June 2016 in 1CC161000086 . 
4   
 
 
    
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
negligent or reckless referral selection, training, retention, 
and/or supervision of Dr. Browne; and (7) grossly negligent or 
reckless credentialing and/or granting privileges to Dr. Browne.4 
Kamehameha Schools reached an agreement with all 32 
Plaintiffs to settle their claims against Kamehameha Schools, as 
memorialized in the Settlement and Release Agreement ( Settlement 
Agreement ). Plaintiffs moved for the circuit court's approval 
of a good faith settlement, pursuant to HRS § 663-15.5, such 
that all joint tortfeasors and/or joint obligors would be barred 
from asserting any claims against Kamehameha Schools for 
"contribution, indemnity based on comparative fault, common law 
indemnity, implied i ndemnity and/or joint obligation and/or 
subrogation " arising out of Plaintiffs' claims. 
Plaintiffs represented to the circuit court in their 
motion that, 
Significantly, all 32 of the Plaintiffs contractually 
agreed amongst themselves, early in the case, that they 
would only negotiate as a group, and not separately. 
Accordingly, all offers and demands were made to and from 
Plaintiffs as a group, rather than individually. This 
motion s eeks a good faith determination with respect to the 
ultimate aggregate group settlement, whereby Kamehameha 
Schools has agreed to pay a total of $80 million to settle 
the claims of all 32 Plaintiffs. This represents about 25% 
of the Plaintiffs' original d emands. 
Plaintiffs further represented to the circuit court 
that they would determine how the settlement moneys would be 
allocated. Pursuant to the Settlement Agreement, 
4 Counts 1 -3, 5, and 7 were brought, in part, against St. Francis . 
5   
 
 
  
(Emphasis added.)   The referenced spreadsheet that "indicat[es] 
the portion of the Initial Payment and Deferred Payment 
allocated  to each Plaintiff" was not made part of the record on 
appeal.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiffs have provided [Kamehameha Schools]  with a 
spreadsheet indicating the portion of the Initial Payment 
and Deferred Payment allocated  to each Plaintiff. 
Plaintiff s  shall immediately notify [Kamehameha Schools]  if 
there are any changes to the allocation depicted on the 
spreadsheet. The Settling Parties acknowledge and agree that (a) the allocation is the product of discussion among 
the Plaintiffs and their counsel without any participation 
or input from [Kamehameha Schools], (b) the allocation was 
created for the sole purpose of facilitating the 
distribution of the settlement payments hereunder among the Plaintiffs and for no other reason, and (c) said allocation 
shall not be binding on [Kamehameha Schools]  or any other 
party other than the Plaintiffs.  
The Settlement Agreement's "Cooperation by Plaintiffs" 
clause provides,  
Each Plaintiff agrees to fully cooperate with 
[Kamehameha Schools]  in its prosecution of the Plaintiffs' 
claims and [Kamehameha Schools']  claims against St. Francis 
and St. Francis's insurers in the manner determined by 
[Kamehameha Schools]  in its sole discretion. Cooperation 
shall include, but not be limited to, responding to phone 
inquiries, attending meetings and interviews, attending 
depositions, participating in independent medical exams, 
and preparing for and testifying at trial. In the event 
that a  Plaintiff does not fully comply with the Plaintiff's 
obligations under this paragraph, [Kamehameha Schools]  
shall notify the Plaintiff, through the Plaintiff's attorney, of the breach and provide a reasonable 
opportunity for the Plaintiff to cure the default. If, in 
[Kamehameha Schools']  opinion, the breach is not cured 
after reasonable opportunity, [Kamehameha Schools]  shall 
notify the Plaintiff's counsel in writing and may deduct 
the entire amount of Plaintiff's allocation of the Deferred 
Payment (inclusive of that Plaintiffs' attorneys' fees and 
costs) as compensation to [Kamehameha Schools]  for damages 
arising out of the breach. If the matter is disputed, the 
matter shall be submitted to binding arbitration 
administered by Dispute, Prevention and Resolution in 
Honolulu,
 Hawaiʻi, with one (1) neutral arbitrator. The 
decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on 
the parties. For purposes of this paragraph, "reasonable 
opportunity" means 48 hours, or some other reasonable time 
period based on  the circumstances but in no event to exceed 
6   
 
 
  
The Settlement Agreement further provides that, after
Plaintiffs determined how the moneys would be allocated,  
 
 
 
1.  Payment, subject to court approval under H.R.S. § 663 -
15.5 ("Act 300") with respect to each Plaintiff, in full satisfaction of each Plaintiff's claims against both 
[Kamehameha Schools]  and [St. Francis], as joint 
tortfeasors, with respect [sic] the claims asserted in 
the FAC, which claims form the basis for [Kamehameha 
Schools]  claims for contribution, unjust enrichment, 
and/or equitable indemnity against [St. Francis]  
(because, as to that Plaintiff, [St. Francis']  liability 
as a joint tortfeasor will be extinguished).  
 
2.  Payment to Plaintiff pursuant to a stipulated judgment 
under [Hawaiʻ i Rules of Civil Procedure ( HRCP)]  Rule 68 
with respect to each Plaintiff, which judgment will form 
the basis on which [Kamehameha Schools]  will seek 
indemnity, contribution, damages for subrogation and/or 
unjust enrichment, and/or any other available remedy 
against [St. Francis]  for the benefit of [Kamehameha 
Schools]  and each Plaintiff who benefits from this 
Settlement Agreement.  
 
3.  Payment,  as contractual subrogor under this Settlement 
Agreement and  Alamida v. Wilson , 53 Haw. 398, 403- 04 
[495 P.2d 585, 589 -90] (1972)  and Kapena v.  
Kaleleonalani , 6 Haw. 579 [(Haw. Kingdom 1885)]  with 
respect to each Plaintiff's claims against [St. Francis]  
and/or its insurers, which [Kamehameha Schools]  may 
hereafter pursue (at its sole expense and with counsel of its choosing) alone or in concert with that Plaintiff 
for [Kamehameha Schools']  sole economic benefit up to 
the amount paid to that Plaintiff, with any recovery in 
excess of that amount (net of [Kamehameha Schools']  
actual fees and costs and 10% per annum simple interest 
on all amounts paid by [Kamehameha Schools]) being paid 
to that Plaintiff. Or  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
seven (7) calendar days, for Plaintiff to cure the alleged 
default.  
 
[Kamehameha Schools] will, in its sole discretion have the 
right to characterize both the Initial Payment and the 
Deferred Payments with respect to each and all claims 
asserted in the First Amended Complaint ("FAC"), as: 
4.  An advance payment on account of each Plaintiff's claims 
against [St. Francis], which said Plaintiff s  will 
hereafter pursue, at [Kamehameha Schools']  sole expense. 
Any recovery on these claims in excess of (a) the payment  made  to that Plaintiff under this Settlement 
Agreement, and (b) the fees and costs incurred on that 
7   
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiff's behalf by [Kamehameha Schools]  (plus 10% per 
annum simple interest on all amounts paid by [Kamehameha 
Schools]), will belong to that Plaintiff.  
We refer to these four groupings as the Plaintiff 
Classifications. 
In explaining these terms to the circuit court, 
Kamehameha Schools characterized the settlement as subdividing 
Plaintiffs into three groups: (1) the 24 "full release" 
Plaintiffs , i.e., the Plaintiffs who fully released both 
Kamehameha Schools and St. Francis from all claims; (2) the four 
"subrogation" Plaintiffs , i.e., the Plaintiffs who were not 
Kamehameha Schools students and/or were not referred to Dr. 
Browne by Kamehameha Schools, with respect to whom Kamehameha 
Schools reserve s the right to pursue equi table subrogation 
claims based on implied indemnity; and (3) the four "direct 
action" Plaintiffs , i.e., the Plaintiffs who settled their 
claims with Kamehameha Schools for $750,000 each and an 
additional nonrecourse advance payment in the nature of 
litigation funding, but retained their claims against St. 
Francis.5 This "24/4/4 allocation" is not set forth in the 
5 At the hearing on Plaintiffs' motion for certification of a good 
faith settlement, Kamehameha Schools ' counsel explained the subdivision of 
Plaintiffs into three groups as follows, 
[Counsel] : . . . The 80 million dollars represents 
the full value of the 32 cases. As to 28 of those, there is 
a legitimate argument that Kamehameha Schools was a joint 
tortfeasor and --
(continued . . . ) 
8   
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5(continued . . .) 
THE COURT:   Kamehameha School students, right, those 
28?  
[Counsel]:  Yes.  
THE COURT:  Okay.  
[Counsel]:  28 students.   I'm sorry. As to those 28 
students, there is a legitimate argument that Kamehameha 
Schools was a joint tortfeasor.  As to 24 of those, we're 
settling, getting releases for the benefit of St. Francis 
and will limit the claims that we pursue to contribution -- 
not limit them. We'll pursue a contribution claim. We also 
have indemnity claims -- 
THE COURT:  Yes.  
[Counsel]: -- and so forth, and we intend to pursue 
all those claims, but principally a contribution claim. 
With respect to four of the 28, we are settling, getting a 
release for ourselves, leaving those plaintiffs free to 
pursue or leaving those plaintiffs with the ability to 
pursue St. Francis for further damages including punitive 
damages, and we've agreed to advance funds in the nature of 
litigation funding as we've described in our papers.  
THE COURT:  Okay.  And in return, those four are 
releasing any possible claims against Kamehameha Schools?  
[Counsel]:  That's correct, Your Honor.  
THE COURT:  I understand.  
[Counsel]:  That's correct.  
THE COURT:  Okay.  
[Counsel]:  And with respect to their future 
recovery, we're not saying we're going to benefit from the 
punitive damages.  You know, our benefit is limited to what 
we've advanced in the settlement.  
THE COURT:  Okay.  
[Counsel]:  With respect to the four others, as I 
said, they were strangers to Kamehameha  [Schools]  insofar 
as Dr. Browne was concerned.  And those, we're pursuing, 
principally, subrogation claims based on implied indemnity 
as Alameda  [sic]  versus Wilson  allows.  
(continued . . . ) 
9   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Settlement Agreement or any supporting attachment or 
supplemental papers within the record. 
The circuit court certified the settlement, pursuant 
to HRS § 663 -15.5, as follows, 
The Court finds that the Settlement Agreement reached 
between the 32 Plaintiffs and Kamehameha Schools  as 
described in the Plaintiffs' motion, and as more fully 
described in the joinder and the Reply Memorandum filed by 
Kamehameha Schools  is one that has been done at arm's 
length and in good faith with the purpose of resolving this 
case and allowing Plaintiffs to move forward with their 
lives with certainty. The Court accepts the factual representations set forth in Plaintiffs' moving papers as 
well as the  joinder, reply and other supporting 
documentation submitted by Kamehameha Schools, as further clarified during oral argument on the Motion. The Court 
also finds and concludes that the legal authority cited by 
Plaintiffs and Kamehameha Schools  with regard to a  good 
faith settlement is persuasive and on point, and the Court therefore also adopts that authority in this ruling.  
  Accordingly, based on these findings and conclusions, 
the Court hereby GRANTS Plaintiffs' Motion for Approval of 
Good Faith Settlement Pursuant to HRS § 663 -15.5 because 
the Settlement Agreement entered into between Plaintiffs and Kamehameha Schools  was negotiated and made at arm's 
length and in good faith, and hereby ORDERS:  
 
1. In the above- captioned matters: Kamehameha 
Schools  is discharged pursuant to H.R.S. § 663 -
15.5(a)(3) from all liability for contribution to any 
other joint tortfeasor or co -obligor; all other joint 
tortfeasors or co -obligors are barred, pursuant to 
H.R.S. § 663 -15.5(d)(1) from any further claims 
against Kamehameha Schools, except those based on a 
written indemnity agreement; and all cross -claims now 
pending against Kamehameha Schools  (none of which is 
based upon a written indemnity agreement) are dismissed with prejudice pursuant to Haw. Rev. Stat. 
§ 663-15.5(d)(2).  
5(continued . . .) 
THE COURT: Okay. 
[Counsel] : So, you know, we're --at the end of the day 
that there's an 80 -million dollar cap on our potential recovery 
based on contribution and subrogation, but we have our own 
claims. . . . 
(Emphasis added.) 
10   
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. There is no just reason for delay pursuant 
to HRCP Rule 54(b) and the Court hereby directs the 
entry of judgment dismissing the cross -claims of St. 
Francis against Kamehameha Schools in the above -
captioned matters. The Clerk of Court is directed to 
enter judgment forthwith. 
3. Except as stated herein, this ORDER is not 
intended to limit any claims against any party other 
than Kamehameha Schools or affect any claims, 
defenses and/or rights of the parties to the 
remaining claims in the above -captioned matters. 
In August 2018, the circuit court entered the Good 
Faith Settlement Order. 
II. Discussion 
HRS § 663-15.5, entitled "Release; joint tortfeasors; 
co-obligors; good faith settlement" provides, in pertinent part,  
(b) For purposes of subsection (a) ,  [setting forth 
the rights of non -settling joint tortfeasors and co -
obligors with regard to settlement agreements] any party 
shall petition the court for a hearing on the issue of good 
faith of a settlement entered into by the plaintiff . . . 
and one or more alleged tortfeasors. . . .  
 
. . . .  
 
(d) A determination by the court that a settlement 
was made in good faith shall:  
  
(1)  Bar any other joint tortfeasor . . . from any  
further claims against the settling tortfeasor 
.  .  . except those based on a written indemnity 
agreement; and  
 
(2)  Result in a dismissal of all cross -claims filed 
against the settling joint tortfeasor . . . except those based on a written indemnity 
agreement.  
 
(e) A party aggrieved by a court determination on the 
issue of good faith may appeal the determination. 
  
 
"[T]he determination of whether a settlement is in 
good faith [is left] to the sound discretion of the trial court 
in light of the totality of the circumstances surrounding the 
11   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
settlement." Troyer v. Adams, 102 Hawaiʻi 399, 427, 77 P.3d 83, 
111  (2003).  
In assessing the totality of the circumstances,  
the trial court may consider the following factors to the 
extent that they are known at the time of settlement:  
(1) the type of case and difficulty of proof at trial 
.  .  .; (2) the realistic approximation of total damages 
that the plaintiff seeks; (3) the strength of the 
plaintiff's claim and the realistic likelihood of his or 
her success at trial; (4) the predicted expense of litigation; (5) the relative degree of fault of the 
settling tortfeasors; (6) the amount of consideration paid 
to settle the claims ; (7) the insurance policy limits and 
solvency of the joint tortfeasors; (8) the relationship 
among the parties and whether it is conducive to collusion 
or wrongful conduct ; and (9) any other evidence that the 
settlement is aimed at injuring the interests of a non -
settling tortfeasor  or motivated by other wrongful purpose.  
 
Brooks v. Dana Nance & Co., 113 Hawaiʻi 406, 413, 153 P.3d 1091, 
1098 (2007) (emphasis added) (citing Troyer, 102 Hawai ʻi at 427, 
77 P.3d at 111). "The foregoing list is not exclusive, and the 
court may consider any other factor that is relevant to whether 
a settlement has been given in good faith." Id.  
St. Francis contends, among other things, that the 
Settlement Agreement "violates public policy, denies [St. 
Francis]  due process of law, and is aimed at injuring the 
interests of non-settling alleged joint tortfeasor [St. 
Francis]." Kamehameha Schools contends the settlement agreement 
was entered into in good faith, and the $80 million settlement 
amount will be divided among 24 Plaintiffs who agree to fully 
settle their claims against both Kamehameha Schools and St. 
Francis, four "subrogation" Plaintiffs on whose behalf 
12   
 
 
  
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kamehameha Schools may pursue equitable subrogation claims, and 
four "direct action" Plaintiffs who agree to release their 
claims against Kamehameha Schools but who retain their claims 
against St. Francis. 
The Settlement Agreement, however, is silent as to 
this specific 24/4/4 allocation, and does not disclose the 
amount allocated to any individual Plaintiff . Which Plaintiff 
is actually included in each of the Plaintiff Classifications, 
and the amount of the settlement payment to that Plaintiff , is 
material to the circuit court 's HRS § 663 -15.5 review because it 
relates to Kamehameha Schools' and the four " direct action " 
Plaintiffs' potential claims against St. Francis. Without this 
information, the written terms of the Settlement Agreement are 
not sufficiently certain and definite such that the agreement 
could be clearly enforced in the manner that Kamehameha Schools 
verbally described to the circuit court. Provident Funding 
Assocs., L.P. v. Gardner , 149 Hawaiʻi 288, 297, 488 P.3d 1267, 
1276(2021) (explaining "to be enforceable, a contract must be 
certain and definite as to its essential terms") (cleaned up). 
On the record before this court, it appears that the 
settlement award will not be uniformly divided among the 
Plaintiffs as some Plaintiffs will retain their claims against 
St. Francis, and Kamehameha Schools purports to be able to 
pursue certain claims against St. Francis. It also appears, 
13   
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
based on Kamehameha Schools' representation, it retains the 
right to recoup the moneys awarded to at least eight of the 
Plaintiffs through claims brought by or on behalf of these 
Plaintiffs . Kamehameha Schools' retention of these claims could 
potentially violate HRS § 663 -15.5(a)(2), given that "a 
settlement, wherein a party seeks to accomplish indirectly that 
which it is expressly barred by applicable law from 
accomplishing directly, is no t in good faith." Brooks, 113 
Hawaiʻi at 417, 153 P.3d at 1102.  
St. Francis also contends that the Settlement 
Agreement improperly assigns the claims of "subrogation" 
Plaintiffs and "direct action" Plaintiffs to Kamehameha Schools. 
St. Francis is correct that personal tort claims are generally 
non-assignable. Sprague v. California Pac. Bankers & Ins. Ltd. , 
102 Hawaiʻi 189, 198, 74 P.3d 12, 21 (2003). Moreover, "[a] 
joint tortfeasor who enters into a settlement with the injured 
person is not entitled to recover contribution from another 
joint tortfeasor whose liabilit y to the injured person is not 
extinguished by the settlement." HRS § 663 -12(c) (2016). As 
mentioned earlier, the 24/4/4 allocation that Kamehameha Schools 
verbally referenced to the circuit court was not set forth in 
the written Settlement Agreement or any supporting 
documentation. Given the lack of sufficiently certain and 
definite term s in the Settlement Agreement, we cannot determine 
14   
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
whether the Settlement Agreement manifests an improper 
assignment of any Plaintiff's claims to Kamehameha Schools.6 
Kamehameha Schools asserts that Alamida v. Wilson, 53 
Haw. 398, 495 P.2d 585 (1972), is instructive with regard to its
equitable subrogation claim vis-à-vis the four "subrogation" 
Plaintiffs. Alamida  holds that,   
Where property of one person is used in discharging an 
obligation owed by another or a lien upon the property of 
another, under such circumstances that the other would be 
unjustly enriched by the retention of the benefit thus 
conferred, the former is entitl ed to be subrogated to the 
position of the obligee or lienholder. 
Id. at 404, 495 P.2d at 590. 
We decline, on the record of this case, to conclude 
that Alamida's holding authorizes Kamehameha Schools to retain the right to step into the "subrogation" Plaintiffs' shoes to 
recoup the settlement moneys allocated to them. The issue of 
whether St. Francis and Kamehameha Schools are joint tortfeasors 
with respect to the "subrogation" Plaintiffs has not been 
resolved. It is thus unclear whether the law permits Kamehameha 
6 Assuming Plaintiffs and Kamehameha Schools agreed upon the 24/4/4 
allocatio n described by K amehameha Schools , it would be necessary for the 
parties to disclose the actual amounts allocated to each "subrogation" and 
"direct action" Plaintiff. This is important because, for example, a 
disproportionately large share of the total settlement award to these 
Plaintiffs could evidence collusion. Information regarding the allocation of 
moneys to the remaining Plaintiffs would also need to be disclosed , given 
that "[a] joint tortfeasor [e.g., Kamehameha Schools] is not entitled to a 
money judgment for contribution until the joint tortfeasor has by payment 
discharged the common liability or has paid more than the joint tortfeasor's 
pro rata share thereof." HRS § 663 -12(b). 
15   
 
 
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Schools to pursue equitable subrogation claims on behalf of the 
four "subrogation" Plaintiffs. 
III. Conclusion 
Given the lack of sufficiently certain and definite 
terms in the Settlement Agreement, the circuit court abused its 
discretion in approving the good faith settlement. Moreover, 
with no access to the complete, certain, and final settlement 
terms, St. Francis was deprived of due process. We therefore  
vacate the circuit court's August 27, 2018 Good Faith Settlement 
Order, and remand this case for further proceedings consistent 
with this memorandum opinion.  
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, June 18, 2024. 
On the briefs:  
 
Peter Van Name Esser  
Defendant/Cross-claim 
Defendant/Cross-claimant-
Appellant  
 
Nickolas A. Kacprowski  
for Defendants/Cross-
claimants/Cross-claim Defendants-Appellees   
 /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka  
Presiding Judge  
 /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
Associate Judge  
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge 
16 