NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000042
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
RODNEY Y. SATO,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
WAHIAWA-CENTRAL OAHU HEALTH CENTER, INC., a Hawai 'i non-profit
corporation, THE WAHIAWA HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION, a Hawai 'i
 
non-profit corporation, and WAHIAWA GENERAL HOSPITAL, a
Hawai'i non-profit corporation,
Defendants/Counterclaim-Plaintiffs/Appellees/Cross-Appellants
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-1087)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellant/Cross-
Appellee Rodney Y. Sato (Sato) appeals from the Circuit Court of
 
1
the First Circuit's  (circuit court):
 
(1) "Order Granting Defendants The Wahiawa Hospital
 
Association and Wahiawa General Hospital's Second (2nd) Motion in
 
Limine to Preclude [Sato] From Introducing Evidence Relating to
 Any Claim, Cause of Action or Theory of Liability Not Set Forth
 in His Complaint" (Order Granting Wahiawa Hospitals' Second
Motion in Limine) filed April 3, 2012;
 
(2) "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order"
 
(FOFs/COLs/Order) filed August 27, 2012; and
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(3) "Final Judgment" filed October 12, 2012.2
 
Defendants/Counterclaim-Plaintiffs/Appellees/Cross-
Appellants The Wahiawa Hospital Association (WHA) and Wahiawa
 
3
General Hospital (WGH)  (collectively Wahiawa Hospitals) cross-
appeals from the FOFs/COLs/Order and Final Judgment.4
 
On appeal, Sato contends the circuit court erred by: 
(1) "constraining its equitable powers contrary to the plain
 
language of [the Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP)] Rule 
15(b)(1) by failing to recognize [Sato's] right to relief under
 the theory of breach of implied contract"; and (2) "dismissing
 [Sato's] claim for his unpaid/deferred fees and unreimbursed
 expenses by applying the wrong standard of proof for damages
 under the theory of breach of implied contract."
 
On cross-appeal, Wahiawa Hospitals contends the circuit
 
court erred by: (1) finding that Sato "possibly" rendered
 services as an attorney for Wahiawa Hospitals and, relatedly,
 failing to find "that Sato (i) engaged in the practice of law
 while performing services for [Wahiawa Hospitals,] (ii) billed
 [Wahiawa Hospitals] for services including the practice of law
 
2 Sato's notice of appeal in the instant case, filed January 23,
2013, does not appeal the Final Judgment, but rather appeals the circuit
court's "First Amended Final Judgment" filed on December 26, 2012. The circuit court's First Amended Final Judgment reproduced the Final Judgment anddismissed Sato's claims against Defendant Wahiawa-Central O' ahu Health Center,
Inc. The circuit court, however, lost jurisdiction to issue the First AmendedFinal Judgment when Sato filed an appeal from the Final Judgment (CAAP-12­0000997). See TSA Int'l Ltd. v. Shimizu Corp., 92 Hawai' i 243, 265, 990 P.2d
713, 735 (1999) ("Generally, the filing of a notice of appeal divests thetrial court of jurisdiction over the appealed case."). Sato's appeal of theFinal Judgment was timely filed on November 12, 2012. 
In light of the confusion caused by the circuit court's error in
issuing the First Amended Final Judgment without the authority to do so, thiscourt is not deprived of appellate jurisdiction over Sato's appeal because "amistake in designating the judgment . . . should not result in loss of theappeal as long as the intention to appeal from a specific judgment can befairly inferred from the notice and the appellee is not misled by themistake." Ek v. Boggs, 102 Hawai' i 289, 294, 75 P.3d 1180, 1185 (2003)
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
3
 WHA and WGH are Hawai' i non-profit corporations with a parent-
subsidiary relationship. WGH provides medical services and is a wholly-ownedsubsidiary of parent corporation WHA. WHA provides WGH with "strategicsupport, funding and governance oversight management." 
4
 Wahiawa Hospitals' notice of cross-appeal appeals the circuit
court's First Amended Final Judgment, which the circuit court was without
authority to issue, as noted supra note 2, and therefore this court infers
that Wahiawa Hospitals cross-appeals the Final Judgment.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and (iii) acted in a manner that created a conflict of interest
 
between himself and [Wahiawa Hospitals]"; (2) dismissing Wahiawa
 Hospitals' counterclaim based on its conclusion that Sato "did
 not breach his duty of loyalty to [Wahiawa Hospitals] such as to
 warrant a complete disgorgement of his fees and costs as a
 consultant/adviser"; (3) concluding "that the equitable remedy of
 'complete disgorgement' was unwarranted"; and (4) awarding Sato
 $15,000 for monies owed to him for services during October 2006
 and half of November 2006.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm in part, vacate in
 
part, and remand for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. The origin of the controversy
 
Sato joined the WHA Board of Directors (WHA Board) in 
the 1990s. Between 1997 and 1999, the WHA Board discussed development of "the Pacific Health Center, a planned health care community built around a 210-acre medical campus that not only included the replacement hospital facility, but also integrated other ancillary health care providers." In 1998, Wahiawa Hospitals proposed a joint venture to Caste & Cooke Homes Hawai
'i, Inc. (Castle & Cooke) concerning the expansion of their 
health care facilities on Castle & Cooke's Koa Ridge properties, and Castle & Cooke exhibited interest in using the joint venture as a vehicle for the development of non-health related projects within its Koa Ridge Makai properties. 
In early 1999, the WHA Board accepted Sato's
 
resignation as a WHA Board member as part of a plan whereby Sato
 would become a paid adviser or consultant for the proposed
 Pacific Health Center Project, also known as the Koa Ridge
 Development Project (Koa Ridge Project). Also in 1999, the WHA
 
Board formed the Koa Ridge Committee, a committee consisting of
 
WHA executive board members Edmund S.M. Whang, M.D. (Dr. Whang),
 
chair of WGH; Randall M. Suzuka, M.D. (Dr. Suzuka), chair of
 
5
Wahiawa-Central O 'ahu Health Center (WCOHC)  and the Pacific 
5
 On February 1, 1999, WCOHC was incorporated as a nonprofit entity
with its sole member being WHA and its board members consisting exclusively of
WHA and/or WGH board members. WCOHC's purpose was to plan/design/construct
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Health Organization/Central O 'ahu Physician Organization; Rodger 
McCloskey (McCloskey), chair of both the WHA Board and Wahiawa 
Pacific Health Enterprises, Inc. Board; and Roy H. Doi (Doi), who 
served on the WHA Board and WGH Board from 1996 to 2001 and then 
again from 2004-2010. 
According to the minutes of the January 21, 1999 WHA 
Special Board meeting, Sato described a corporate structure whereby the Pacific Health Community (PHC, Inc.) would be a for-
profit entity encompassing 1,858 acres of Koa Ridge. WHA, 
"Central O
'ahu Physician Hospital Organization, Wahiawa Pacific 
Health Enterprises, and other equity partners and investors would participate in the health community development." The minutes further reflect that Sato envisioned that Wahiawa Pacific Health Enterprises, Inc. would be a for-profit entity and WCOHC would operate as a WHA-owned nonprofit entity, with PHC, Inc. serving as the overall developer entity along with several equity partners including WHA. The minutes reflect that the WHA Board passed motions supporting: (1) Wahiawa-Pacific Health Enterprises, Inc.'s development of a 190-310 acre health care center at Koa Ridge and Waiola and (2) PHC, Inc.'s development of the 1,858 acre health community at Koa Ridge and Waiola. 
The minutes of a February 25, 1999 joint meeting
 
between the WHA Executive Committee, WCOHC, WGH, and the Wahiawa
 Hospitals' Pacific Health Center Coordinating Committee (PHCCC)
6
 
reflect that Sato acknowledged his conflict of interest with
 regard to the "development/management agreement" and did not
 contribute to the discussion of or vote on WHA's agreements with
 consultants and land acquisitions related to development of the
 
5(...continued)
and operate a patient-focused facility, to acquire or lease land for the new

facility, and to acquire and install capital equipment for use in connection
with the new facility.
 
6
 According to the Pacific Health Center January 2002 Business Plan,
PHCCC was set up to coordinate between the [PHC], as the land developer,WCOHC, Pacific Health Organization/Central O' ahu Physician Hospital
Organization, WHA, WGH, and other entities, including future health providersto be located at the Pacific Health Center campus. PHCCC members included Sato, Dr. Suzuka, McCloskey, Dr. Whang, Doi, Roberts Leinau, and Hawai' i State 
Representative Marcus R. Oshiro. PHCCC was comprised of two entities, WHA andPHC, Inc. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Koa Ridge Project. The meeting minutes further reflect that
 
while Sato was excused from the meeting, the Ad Hoc Building
 Committee voted to waive Sato's conflict of interest.
 
The WHA Executive Committee subsequently approved the
 
development/management agreement with Sato, subject to terms and
 conditions to be negotiated and reviewed by WHA's attorneys.
 Wahiawa Hospitals requested a memorandum of understanding with
 Sato to address Sato's conflicts of interest, but none was ever
 signed.
 
On April 27, 1999, Sato faxed McCloskey and Dr. Whang a
 
proposal to form WCOHC as the corporate entity to enter into a
 Professional Services Agreement (PSA) with Sato. The proposed
 
PSA provided that, inter alia, 
4. 	term 5 years with automatic option to renew
for additional 5 year terms upon completion of
milestones[;]

. . . .
 
6. 	projects development of new health care facilities,

redevelopment of present hospital site and 
development of other real estate and business

opportunities[;]
 
7. goals 	 a. acquire land
b. secure health partners and

c. secure financing for Diagnostic and Treatment
Center and projects as prioritized in master
plan phasing plan[;]
. . . .
 
8. milestones a. prepare master plan/budget/timetable 
b.
 acquisition/lease of land
c. securing partners
d. securing financing
e. acquiring [government] approvals
f. construction of project
g. initiate other projects[;]
. . . .
 
9. scope of services draft, revise, adopt, implement/modify:
a. site selection/acquisition plan
b. development/master plan
c. partnering plan
d. financing plan
e. fundraising plan
f.
 community relations plan 
g.
 government relations plan
h. government approvals plan
i. communications plan
j. construction plan
k. operations plan
l. maintenance plan
m. sales & marketing plan
n. overall development costs
o.
 overall development timetable[;]
. . . .
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
10. compensation 	 $10,000 base, $20,000 cap, deferred amounts
to be paid upon project financing (plus

reimbursements of all costs and
 expenses)[;] 
[Sato] will assist in developing additional
funding sources

 
[Sato] will also receive from WCOHC certain
incentive fees . . . 
[Sato] will share 50% of all incentive fees
from [other related corporate entities].
 
The PSA also provided that Sato would prepare exhibits
 
to the PSA, including, Exhibit G, "Conflicts of Interest" that
 
would consist in:
 
1. Sato's Years on WHA Boards
 2. Sato's Past Conflict of Interest Forms
 3. Sato's Resignation
 4. Sato's Disclosure/Recusal
 5. Board's Waiver Motion
 Several drafts of the PSA were subsequently discussed
 
and exchanged. One PSA draft stated that Sato would receive a
 monthly fee of $10,000 based on a minimum of fifty hours per
 month but if Sato's time exceeded fifty hours in any given month,
 then additional compensation would be paid at the rate of
 $200/hour, and required Sato to submit detailed billings of his
 requested fees and detailed itemization of his costs.
 
While the WHA Board members alleged that they agreed to 
enter into a PSA with Sato based upon Sato's description of his qualifications as a former Deputy Attorney General for the State of Hawai
'i and General Counsel to the State of Hawai 'i Housing 
Authority, his experience working on "the development at Kapolei," and his familiarity "with the Land Use Commission [(LUC)] process and the legislative process[,]" Sato alleged 
that in early 1999, he "made very clear to [McCloskey and Dr. 
Whang] that while I am a licensed Hawai
'i attorney, I do not 
engage in the private practice of law and that WHA and WGH would have to continue to use its stable of private Hawai
'i 
attorneys . . . to advise them along the way of the various legal aspects of the development." 
On May 6, 1999, Sato filed articles of organization for
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the establishment of a limited liability company, Pacific Health
 
Care Development Company (PHC Development).
 
On November 1, 2000, PHC, Inc. was incorporated with
 
Sato as President and a board member. McCloskey, Dr. Suzuka, Dr.
 Whang, and Roberts Leinau comprised the rest of PHC, Inc.'s Board
 of Directors. According to the Pacific Health Center January
 2002 Business Plan, PHC, Inc. was created "to assist in the
 development of the 210-acre medical park at Koa Ridge" and was
 "responsible for facilitating and overseeing the organization of
 a qualified development team, the preparation of a master plan,
 the acquisition of the land, the government approvals and
 subdivision process, infrastructure development, and overall
 funding/financing of the [Koa Ridge Project]." According to the
 minutes of the October 17, 2006 WHA Special Board of Directors
 meeting, Dr. Suzuka explained that PHC, Inc. was switched from a
 non-profit to a for-profit organization in "2000/2001," with Sato
 listed as the agent, and that Sato claimed ownership of the
 company in 2006 even though it "was involuntarily dissolved in
 2004." The record includes an undated, unsigned "Independent
 Contractor Agreement" between Sato and WHA, WGH, WCOHC, and PHC,
 Inc. that states Sato holds all the shares of PHC Inc., a for-
profit corporation organized by Sato.
 
The minutes from a March 28, 2000 meeting reflect that
 
the WHA Board discussed Sato's compensation at $200/hour with a
 base of $10,000 and a cap of $20,000 per month. Meeting minutes
 also reflect that a WHA Board member expressed concern over
 whether Sato's move from his role as a unpaid WHA Board member to
 a "highly paid" consultant constituted a conflict of interest.
 Other Board members responded that they viewed Sato's work on the
 project as "satisfactory," "comprehensive," and "the best value,"
 and believed Sato was "the best person to take on this
 position . . . ." Sato responded that he
 
realized that in Hawai' i there are no developers that would
take the development process appropriately through the
government process. Locally, there is no developer who iscapable to do this. In order to find this type ofdeveloper, [WHA] would need to search outside Hawai' i. As a 
result, [WHA] would end up paying higher fees. 
The meeting minutes reflect that the WHA Board member
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
who raised the conflict of interest issue was satisfied with the
 
discussion and input regarding this issue. The minutes also
 reflect that PHCCC reviewed recommendations for the Pacific
 Health Center budget of $1.3 million, and that the WHA Board
 voted to "loan funds to the [WCOHC.]"
 
In an email addressed to "japatterson@fullbright.com"
 
and dated August 25, 2000, Sato noted that the execution of his
 PSA and "development management agreement . . . would be a big
 step to making [him] feel comfortable about what [he was] doing
 on the project[,]" give his "wife and kids some comfort[,]" and
 give his "attorney less to worry about since he feels [Sato does]
 too much on a hand shake . . . ."
 
On February 25, 2001, Sato emailed Jeffrey Bensky
 
(Bensky) of "Jones Lang LaSalle financing for JMB Associates" to
 
ask him to help him "move these documents" along, in reference to
 
the PSA, the development management agreement, and a development
 guidelines/memorandum of understanding. Sato also requested
 Bensky's assistance with obtaining opinion letters regarding the
 fairness of his proposed compensation; Sato wrote, "WHAT DO
 DEVELOPERS GET FOR DOING A PROJECT LIKE THIS."
 
On February 27, 2001, the WHA Board met and received
 
reports from PHCCC. Meeting minutes reflect that PHCCC's update
 included the following item: "PROFESSIONAL SERVICES AGREEMENT FOR
 [SATO]: The agreement is to pay [Sato] $10,000/month and
 $200/hour. Any excess time incurred has been deferred until
 after there is income from the expansion project." Despite the
 absence of a written contract, WHA agreed to pay, and did pay,
 Sato compensation in the amount of $10,000 per month (plus
 general excise tax, approximately $10,416.70 per month),
 commencing March 1999, for his services under the yet to be
 executed PSA. An undated and unsigned "Independent Contractor
 Agreement" suggests that WHA, PHC, Inc. and Sato considered
 entering into an agreement separate from the PSA to compensate
 Sato for his "development management services," proposing to
 compensate Sato at a monthly rate of $10,000 with Sato "devoting
 no less than fifty (50) hours per month to the performance of the
 development management services . . . ."
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On July 20, 2001, Castle & Cooke and WHA executed an
 
Acquisition Agreement, which provided that Castle & Cooke owned a
 
fee simple interest in the Koa Ridge property and WHA sought to
 acquire certain acreage, approximately 210 acres, for the future
 site of the Koa Ridge Project, with an eighty-acre first
 increment to be acquired and developed by WHA.
 
Sato, through PHC, Inc., prepared a Business Plan for
 
the Pacific Health Center at Koa Ridge Makai and published it in
 January 2002. The Business Plan describes Sato as chair of PHC,
 Inc. and as "an attorney with 23 years experience in real estate
 financing and development."
 
On October 14, 2003, Sato sent an email to Milton
 
Sagon, who was "WGH/WHA vice president development/fundraising"
 from 1997-2006, which stated that Sato could "put together a
 billing for all the hours" and it would take him "2 to 3 weeks
 working on it full time." Also in the email, Sato described two
 scenarios under which he would work either fifty to sixty hours
 or seventy to eighty hours per week, resulting in a deferred bill
 for 4.5 years of either $1,260,000 to $1,728,000 or $2,196,000 to
 $2,664,000.
 
On November 14, 2003, Sato entered into a "Consulting
 
Services Agreement" with Jeffrey L. Lehrich (Lehrich) in which
 
Lehrich's consulting firm agreed to prepare the Certificate of
 
Need for the Koa Ridge Project for WHA. By email dated August
 23, 2004, Sato further inquired into Lehrich's network of
 potential investors for the Koa Ridge Project.
 
In a letter dated January 27, 2004 and addressed to the
 
WHA Board, WGH's chief financial officer, John Barragan III
 (Barragan) raised serious fiscal issues in connection with the
 
Koa Ridge Project. Barragan wrote, "[s]ince virtually all
 
resources of the WHA and WGH have been dedicated to the Koa Ridge
 project, WGH has suffered both operationally and financially."
 
On June 2, 2004, Barragan wrote to Sato requesting
 
assistance with an audit and completed budget for the fiscal year
 of 2005. Barragan requested information about the expenses
 incurred and to be paid related to the Koa Ridge Project, and a
 copy of Sato's "Independent Contractor Agreement" or
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"documentation of Board minutes approving [Sato's] services" if
 
no such agreement existed.
 
"In or around July 16, 2004, suit was filed by WHA
 
against Castle & Cooke in connection with the Acquisition
 Agreement. WHA was represented by the Bays Deaver law firm[,]"
 also known as the law firm of Bays Lung Rose & Holma. The cental
 dispute concerned whether Castle & Cooke breached terms of the
 Acquisition Agreement by failing to recognize WHA's exercise of
 its option to purchase an eighty-acre parcel that was to be
 dedicated to the Koa Ridge Project.
 
In a January 17, 2005 email, Sato informed Lehrich, "we
 
need someone to take over the project now." In an email to
 Lehrich and carbon copying Dr. Suzuka and dated January 18, 2005,
 Sato informed Lehrich of his minimum requirements going forward: 
1. $10,000.00 minimum retainer (till [sic] dirt starts
moving and infrastructure construction financing is in
place)
 
2. $20,000.00 monthly cap using $200.00 an hour (deferred
till [sic] dirt starts moving and infrastructure
construction financing is in place)
 
3. all hours over the $20,000.00 monthly cap to be defered
[sic] till [sic] revenues come in from building leases
 4. all costs & expenses to be reimbursed on a monthly basis
within 10-days of billing
 5. equity interest in the entity to hold the master lease
"pacific health community, inc." and "pacific health center
land company"
 
6. equity interest in the entity to hold the development
rights "pacific health center land development company"
 7. equity interest in the entity to develop the
infrastructure "pacific health center infrastructure
company"
 
8. equity interest in the entity to lease out the building
pads "pacific health center building development company" 
9. equity interest in the entity to manage and operate the
"pacific health center"
 10. chair title in pacific health community, inc., wahiawa­
pacific health enterprises, inc., pacific health center,
pacific health network, pacific health organization until
the wahiawa hospital association/wahiawa-central oahu health
center is reimbursed for all monies spent (wha to wcohc loan
to be paid off) and the wahiawa hospital association
wahiawa-central oahu health center "new hospital" is opened
at the pacific health center
 
11. compensation package for all services rendered to all
these various entities for a 5 year + 5 year period
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
12. /compensation [sic] package/equity interest/option to
participate in other pacific health centers and in other
developments/projects that co-developer/financing entity/
investor is involved in hawaii.
 
In an email dated January 19, 2005, Lehrich advised
 
Sato that it was "too early in the process to commit to a
 
compensation package until we have all the equity partners on
 line." In reply, Sato wrote "i can only ask. and if i don't
 ask, i don't get." To which Lehrich replied, "You can shoot for
 the stars and land on the moon. I am pulling for you. Take
 care."
 
By letter dated February 5, 2005, AGS Investments, LLC
 
7
(AGS) informed Sato of AGS' intent to purchase PHC, Inc. and its
subsidiaries and then assemble "a team that will develop,

 
finance, construct, manage, operate, market, promote and lease
 the Pacific Health Center[.]" AGS stated that it had assembled
 funding sources of up to approximately $10 million to fund the
 completion of the entitlement process, which included land use
 zoning and permitting processes. Additionally, AGS (1) planned
 to replace the initial $4 million in initial purchase funds
 already provided by WHA for the first eighty acres; (2) secured
 an equity investor for an initial investment of up to $45 million
 to fund the Koa Ridge Project and several other real estate
 projects that AGS was developing; and (3) had a primary lending
 source with authority to lend up to $500 million to fund various
 parts of the Koa Ridge Project as needed.
 
The minutes from a November 15, 2005 WHA Board meeting

 
reflect Dr. Whang commenting that "no further contact with the
 attorneys" on Sato's contract had occurred in the past three
 months and emphasized the importance of securing a services
 contract with Sato. Dr. Suzuka reported for PHCCC and noted that
 Sato would publicize the Koa Ridge Request for Proposal (RFP) on
 
November 18, 2005 and "it was expected that the developer would
 
contribute $12 to $25 million with selection in the first week of
 January 2006."
 
7
 By deposition dated December 13, 2011, Lehrich declared that he,
along with other individuals, "put together" AGS as an investment vehicle for
the Koa Ridge Project.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
AGS prepared a Term Sheet, dated December 21, 2005,
 
that set forth terms and conditions for the proposed development
 
of the Koa Ridge Project. The Term Sheet reflects that Sato's
 compensation from AGS would consist in a prorated share of PHC,
 Inc. as settlement of his debt, a fee, reimbursements,
 incentives/bonuses, and benefits, all of which were "to be
 negotiated."
 
The minutes of a December 22, 2005 WHA Board meeting
 
reflect Dr. Suzuka made a motion (which WHA Board carried) to
 have the Bays Deaver law firm create the "appropriate documents
 and contracts to formalize the relationships . . . [that] might
 include: a contract between WHA and Mr. Sato; a contract between
 WHA and PHC; [and] a contract between PHC and Mr. Sato[.]"
 
In a letter of interest to Sato dated January 31, 2006,
 
AGS restated its interest in serving as the co-developer for the
 Koa Ridge Project and enclosed its Financing Plan and Development
 Plan. AGS stated that it "has its financing and development team
 in place and we are ready to move forward with the development of
 the Pacific Health Center." 
A special joint meeting of the WHA/WCOHC/PHC boards
 
convened on February 16, 2006. Sato updated the WHA Board on the
 status of the Koa Ridge RFP process and Castle & Cooke lawsuit
 mediation. Sato explained that three companies had submitted
 proposals to be co-developers of the Koa Ridge Project (AGS,
 Blanco Group, and PER Inc.) in response to the RFP. Sato
 observed that AGS submitted "the most complete financing
 proposal, but that Blanco and PER both had local ties and had a
 lot of construction experience." WHA Board members discussed
 Sato's contract and the relationship of the co-developer to Sato
 and PHC, Inc. Minutes reflect that Dr. Whang commented that Sato
 would receive $200 per hour with the outstanding balance due him
 when Koa Ridge land was conveyed to WHA. Dr. Suzuka clarified
 that Sato was the owner of PHC, Inc. and that contracts with Sato
 as consultant and the owner of PHC, Inc. would have to be
 completed before the land was conveyed. Dr. Suzuka further
 clarified that WHA's attorneys were working on the following
 agreements: (1) an Independent Contract with Sato; (2) a Master
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lease Agreement; (3) a Promissory Note (between WHA and PHC,
 
Inc.); and (4) the Memorandum of Understanding/Master Agreement.
 The WHA Board approved a non-binding, tentative contract approval
 letter of January 21, 2006 with AGS and PHC, Inc., pending legal
 review and recommendation and subject to the completion of the
 contract between Sato and WHA.
 
By email on February 16, 2006, Sato requested that
 
Karin L. Holma (Holma) of the law firm Bays Deaver, one of WHA's
 
attorneys, review AGS' letter of interest dated January 31, 2006. 
Sato further emphasized that the "signing" with AGS would be
 subject to "everything" stated in his earlier February 16, 2006
 email to Lehrich. In that February 16, 2006 email, Sato informed
 Lehrich that he would ask the WHA Board to motion to allow PHC,
 Inc. officers to sign an agreement with AGS, subject to:
 
k. subject to [Sato's] professional services
agreement/development management agreement/independent
contractor agreement going into escrow,
 
l. subject to master agreement/memorandum of understanding
between [Sato] and [WCOHC]/the [WHA] going into escrow,
 
m. subject to [Sato] final billing for fees and
reimbursements going into escrow,
 
n. subject to [PHC, Inc.]/[WCOHC]/the [WHA] final billing
for fees and reimbursements going into escrow, 
o. subject to payment of all fees and reimbursements,
 p. subject to certain monies being deposited into escrow
(exact amount of monies to be negotiated and finalized in
agreement/co-development agreement)[.]
 
The February 16, 2006 WHA/WCOHC/PHC board meeting
 
minutes reflect that a motion was carried to sign a "non-binding,
 
tentative contract approval letter of January 21, 2006 by the PHC
 ([Sato]) subject to the conditions outlined in [Sato's] summary,
 pending legal review and recommendation and subject to the
 completion of the contract between [Sato] and the WHA."
 
In a letter dated March 29, 2006, AGS' legal counsel,
 
Ronald E. Warnicke (Warnicke), wrote to Sato, Dr. Whang, and Dr.
 
Suzuka. Warnicke explained that because WHA and PHC, Inc. had
 
not produced a letter of intent nor any formal commitment, AGS
 was unable to complete their due diligence or to participate in
 mediation proceedings with Castle & Cooke to ensure that the
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
settlement would meet AGS' financial and legal requirements.8
 
Warnicke noted that WHA and PHC, Inc. "proceeded to continue to
 
shop [their] project" and had introduced a fourth group that did
 not participate in the RFP process, "the Silversword
 group . . . ." Warnicke acknowledged that AGS was still
 interested in the Koa Ridge Project and proposed that further
 discussions take place between Lehrich and "whomever your group
 empowers to take the lead for the combined entities of
 PHC/WGH/WHA" and imposed a deadline of March 31, 2006 "to move
 ahead."
 
In a separate confidential letter also dated March 29,
 
2006, Warnicke wrote to Sato: 
AGS was selected as the co-developer and your respective
Boards finally reviewed and consented to this on February
16th subject to an additional list of items, which included
the legal review/consent of the attorneys. This never
 occurred and AGS could not do its legal and financial due
diligence on the project.
 
On March 31, 2006, Lehrich emailed Sato, stating "the
 
sooner we can get our team out to conduct our due diligence and
 
work on the other pressing issues, the better" and asked Sato to
 advise him of his availability. Sato replied that he and
 "everyone else" can be available anytime.
 
Minutes from the April 11, 2006 WHA Board meeting note
 
that the contract with Sato was "still pending" and that Sato had
 written to the Bays Deaver counsel summarizing the amount Sato
 believed due him from WHA and PHC. Minutes referenced an email
 from Sato that "clearly stated the amount he was charging [WHA]
 and also identified $1.2 million to be paid by PHC[, Inc.]."
 Board member Doi "questioned the content of [WHA's] contract
 [with PHC, Inc.] and requested clarification of the services that
 [Sato] provided."
 
In an email dated April 25, 2006, Sato wrote to
 
representatives of the Silversword Development Group to inquire
 whether the group wanted to be part of the Koa Ridge Project.
 
8
 On or about May 1, 2008, a confidential settlement agreement was
reached between Castle & Cooke and WHA, with Doi and Dr. Suzuka signing on
behalf of the WHA Board. Wahiawa Hospitals and Castle & Cooke agreed that
Wahiawa Hospitals would build a new hospital building and support facilities
on a 28-acre medical campus located at Koa Ridge.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The minutes of the May 16, 2006 WHA Board meeting
 
reflect that Alan Ulrich (Ulrich), Chief Financial Officer of
 
WGH, reported that the following areas of inquiry were pending
 
for the fiscal 2005 audit: (1) Sato's liability; (2) the status
 of PHC, Inc. under Sato; and (3) Sato's justification for
 capitalized expenses for Koa Ridge.
 
At its May 16, 2006 meeting, the WHA Board received a
 
report from Dr. Suzuka concerning his meeting with Sato, Holma,
 and others regarding Sato's PSA. Dr. Suzuka summarized Sato's
 work on behalf of WHA since 1999; "[p]er verbal agreement, [Sato]
 received $10,000 per month as base pay with deferred income for
 extra hours being charged at roughly $200 per hour up to a cap of
 $20,000 per month." Dr. Suzuka also reported that Sato had been
 presented with WHA's concerns: (1) "regarding possible issues of
 private inurement[;]" (2) that Sato should provide documentation
 for any deferred hours; (3) that Sato should account for any
 extra monthly hours by June 8, 2006; and (4) that WHA's Bays
 Deaver attorneys would be required to complete Sato's PSA. WHA
 officers expressed concern that PHC, Inc. had initially been a
 nonprofit entity wholly owned by WHA but became a for-profit
 entity owned by Sato and that Sato could not structure a deal
 with a co-developer on his own behalf while he was working on
 behalf of WHA.
 
Also at the May 16, 2006 meeting, the WHA Board Finance
 
Committee noted that three developers were interested in the Koa
 Ridge Project, including "Carlton [Group] with whom PHC [Sato's
 company] had signed an exclusive agreement." The Finance
 Committee "recommended dissolving [PHCCC] because of issues of
 conflict of interest since [Sato] was both assisting in mediation
 as well as defining a development deal through his private
 corporation." Dr. Suzuka noted that these recommendations should
 be discussed with legal counsel, but that the impetus for the
 action was "PHC[, Inc.] was negotiating in its own best interest
 and had an inherent conflict of interest by being both 'judge'
 and 'contestant.'" Dr. Whang responded that PHCCC was important
 to maintaining continuity and protecting the interest of WHA.
 Thereafter, Dr. Suzuka suggested tabling the dissolution of
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
PHCCC.
 
At the July 6, 2006 WHA Finance Committee meeting, Dr.
 
Suzuka stated that correspondence sent to Sato had not clearly
 
specified the June 8, 2006 deadline for execution of his PSA and
 that he would "contact [Sato] and the attorney and give them a
 July 31, 2006 deadline for submitting invoices and finalizing the
 contract." The WHA Finance Committee approved a motion to
 establish a July 31, 2006 deadline for the signing of Sato's
 contract and his submission of documentation.
 
At the August 15, 2006 WHA Board meeting, Holma stated
 
that Sato had not submitted invoices and documentation of his
 hours as requested. Meeting minutes note that Holma completed a
 preliminary version of the PSA but had not quantified the
 liability due Sato.
 
On September 11, 2006, Holma met with Sato to discuss
 
settling his compensation "and he came up with $800,000 for
 himself, $1.2 million for PHC[, Inc.] and the rights to the
 project." After this meeting, Holma informed Drs. Suzuka and
 Whang that she had reached an impasse with Sato and that the WHA
 Board should find another attorney to draw up Sato's contract.
 
The minutes from the September 12, 2006 WHA Board
 
meeting minutes reflect that: (1) Holma met with Sato to discuss
 his contract on September 11, 2006; (2) outstanding issues on
 WHA's 2005 audit included Sato's contingent liability and
 documentation for Sato's request for compensation from PHC and
 the corporate relationship between WHA and PHC; and (3) WHA could
 request an extension beyond September 30 to obtain approval for
 the transfer of a clear land deed to WHA, at which time Sato's
 services would cease.
 
In September 2006, the State of Hawai
'i Attorney 
General's office (Attorney General) initiated investigations into 
Wahiawa Hospitals' Koa Ridge Project expenditures and PHC, Inc.'s 
role in particular in response to Ulrich lodging a complaint with the Attorney General alleging Sato was responsible for the misspending of Koa Ridge Project funds. 
By subpeona dated September 26, 2006, the Attorney
 
General commanded Sato to appear on October 5, 2006 "to be
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
examined under oath regarding an investigation of alleged
 
financial mismanagement" and bring with him "books, records,
 papers, documents, including those electronically stored, or
 other objects" relating to, inter alia, the Koa Ridge Project or
 contracts or agreements between WHA, himself or PHC, Inc. or any
 other corporation or entity in which Sato is an officer, director
 or shareholder.
 
The minutes of the October 17, 2006 WHA Special Board
 
of Directors meeting reflects that Holma summarized her review of
 all WHA Board meeting minutes from 1998 to that date concerning
 Sato's relationship to WHA Board. Per Holma's review, Sato was a
 WHA Board member who resigned to become a consultant for the Koa
 Ridge Project and WHA Board had agreed to pay Sato $10,000 per
 month for fifty hours of work and $200/hour for "anything over
 the 50 hours[,]" and payment was to be delayed to some point in
 the future when development started. Holma further summarized
 her efforts to date to finalize a contract with Sato and the
 "only problem" was Sato's compensation. The minutes also reflect
 that George Hetherington, counsel for Wahiawa Hospitals,
 instructed WHA Board members not to meet with Sato until "we find
 out what the Attorney General wants[.]"
 
By letter dated November 17, 2006 issued by WHA and
 
signed by Dr. Suzuka, Sato was notified of WHA's decision to
 "terminate its relationship with [Sato] in regards to all
 activities that [Sato was] performing for WHA in the development
 of the Koa Ridge Project." WHA cited numerous grounds, in
 relevant part:
 
WHA has made repeated attempts, including retaining several
law firms, to negotiate a written contract with you to
establish the scope of your activities, the basis for your
compensation and other terms of the engagement. These
 efforts have failed to result in a written agreement, even
though WHA throughout this process continued to fund
significant expenses incurred on the project.
 
Despite the expenditure of millions of dollars, which
has had the result of severely crippling the financial
health of [WGH], hardly any progress has been made in
developing the new hospital [and] . . . the land for the new
hospital campus has not yet been acquired[.] . . . It has
become evident that your performance has failed to reach the
requisite level of skill and care that meets commercially
reasonable standards.
 
. . . [The Attorney General's Office] has
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
characterized WHA's relationship with you as involving
potentially multifold failures of governance and breaches by
the WHA board of directors of their duties of care and
 prudence, serious conflicts of interest and private
inurement. The Attorney General has also expressed concern
that WHA has spent $9.7 million on the Koa Ridge development
without having a written agreement with you that spells out
the rights and obligations of the parties and without any
clear understanding of the roles of the multiple
corporations that were formed and dissolved by you and the
development rights surrendered or retained by WHA. . . .
 
The Attorney General has indicated that a major step
required in reforming WHA's governance failures is to
terminate its relationship with you. . . .
 
As a cconsequence of the termination of your services,
WHA has also ceased making any further payments to you as of
October 1. 2006. . . . Further, any claims for amounts
alleged due or owing to you or to any third parties retained
by you will be decided only after a full accounting and
reconciliation of all expenditures made on the Koa Ridge
[P]roject have been performed in cooperation with the
Attorney General's office . . . .
 
It is undisputed that Wahiawa Hospitals paid Sato
 
$10,000 plus general excise tax ($10,416.70) every month from
 
March 1999 to September 2006 for a total of $947,919.70, and
 reimbursed Sato for certain expenses between February 10, 1999
 and 2006, totaling $45,333.33. 
B. The circuit court proceedings
1. The pleadings
 
On May 8, 2009, Sato filed a complaint (Complaint) in
 
9
circuit court  against Wahiawa Hospitals, WCOHC, and "doe"
individuals and entities. Sato alleged that he entered into
 
negotiations with defendants in 1999 that resulted in an express
 agreement; he "duly performed all material terms and conditions"
 of the agreement "or stood, and stands, ready, willing, and able
 to so performed [sic]"; defendants breached the agreement by
 wrongfully terminating Sato by letter dated November 17, 2006; as
 a result of the breach, the defendants owe Sato "$4,682,306.65 in
 fees plus $220,284.01 in unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses"
 10 ;
and the defendants "reasonably foresaw" that Sato would rely on
 the promises they made him and that "enforcement of the promises
 
9 The case was initially assigned to the Honorable Victoria S. Marks
and was reassigned to the Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura on January 22, 2010.
 
10 Sato later revised his "Fees Summary Chart" to reflect a claim of
$4,095,429.77 (inclusive of the general excise taxes).
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . are needed to avoid injustice." On May 29, 2009, Sato
 
filed a "Notice of Dismissal Without Prejudice" as to WCOHC.
 
On June 1, 2009, Wahiawa Hospitals filed their answer
 
and a counterclaim. Wahiawa Hospitals admitted that it entered
 into a verbal agreement with Sato, and that Sato performed
 certain services in accordance with that agreement, but alleged
 that a written and signed contract never resulted, and denied
 that Sato was wrongfully terminated or owed fees and unreimbursed
 out-of-pocket expenses. Wahiawa Hospitals' counterclaim
 (Counterclaim) included the following allegations:
 
6. Despite repeated attempts by [Wahiawa Hospitals]
to negotiate a written contract, however, Sato never
actually signed an agreed-upon written agreement defining
the terms of his compensation, or any other terms of his
relationship with [Wahiawa Hospitals].
 
7. Despite the absence of a written contract, Sato
held himself out as the "Project Manager" and proceeded to
deal with third parties as the agent of [Wahiawa Hospitals].
 
8. As a managing agent, Sato owed [Wahiawa
Hospitals] the duty to act in the best interests of [Wahiawa
Hospitals], including but not limited to a duty of
reasonable care, a duty of loyalty, and a duty of
disclosure.
 
8. [sic] Sato created or assumed control of certain
corporate entities, using them for his own purposes in ways
that were not explained to [Wahiawa Hospitals]. Sato now
 claims that he, and/or entities under his control, have
certain rights with respect to the development project.
 
9. Over the period from 1999 through 2006, Sato was
actually paid by [Wahiawa Hospitals] for thousands of hours
of alleged work. In addition, Sato was reimbursed for
various expenses that he had had purportedly incurred for
the benefit of [Wahiawa Hospitals].
 
10. Over the period from 1999 through 2006, [Wahiawa
Hospitals] paid out millions of dollars in purported
expenses for the Koa Ridge [P]roject. Most of these
 expenses were incurred by Sato, who dealt with third parties
and directed them to send invoices to [Wahiawa Hospitals].
 
11. Despite the millions of dollars expended, and
the large sum paid to Sato, very little progress was
actually achieved on the Koa Ridge [P]roject, and little of
any value was accomplished by Sato. Indeed, Sato created
disputes and problems, and his actions resulted in
substantial delay, substantial costs, and serious problems
for [Wahiawa Hospitals].
 
12. Sato's actions included misrepresentations,
negligence, improper self-dealing, wasting of [Wahiawa
Hospitals'] funds, and breach of his oral agreement with
Wahiawa Hospital. The full extent of his wrongdoing is not
yet known, but [Wahiawa Hospitals] believes that Sato's
actions caused substantial damages.
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Wahiawa Hospitals' Counterclaim sought: 
1. An award of damages against Sato in an amount to
be shown at trial;
 
2. An award against Sato of all costs and expenses
incurred by Wahiawa [Hospitals] in this litigation,
including but not limited to attorneys' fees;
 
3. Awarding to [Wahiawa Hospitals] and against Sato
such other and further relief as the Court may deem proper.
 
2. Pre-trial statements
 
Sato
 
In his July 15, 2009 response to Wahiawa Hopitals'
 
"First Request for Answers to Interrogatories and Production of
 Documents," Sato listed thirteen law firms as "third parties with
 which (or whom) [Sato] negotiated while acting as the agent of
 [Wahiawa Hospitals,]" and seven attorneys as "WHA attorneys."
 
By declaration dated March 22, 2012, Sato declared that
 
he "succeeded in getting the 1999 Legislative [sic] and the
 Governor to approve extremely important bond financing. . . .
 Securing the bond financing further bolstered the credibility of
 the [Koa Ridge Project] . . . ." Sato further declared that he
 "was successful in negotiating WHA's acquistion of 210 acres of
 Castle & Cooke land at Koa Ridge."
11 Sato also declared that he
 
assisted WHA in various other ways, including but not limited to
 the coordination and management of meetings, workshops,
 conferences, developing agendas, development of videos, and
 petitioning the LUC in changing the Koa Ridge property from
 agriculture to urban.
 
Lehrich
 By deposition dated December 13, 2011, Lehrich declared 
that he traveled to Hawai
'i with his financial adviser and his 
attorney Warnicke to complete the due diligence for AGS, but that after he arrived, "[Sato] was sort of pushing us back and we didn't get to have the meetings that we were supposed to 
11
 Sato declared that his efforts resulted in the February 24, 2000
execution of the "Lease Pending Fee Purchase Agreement" between Castle & Cooke
and WHA which provided that 210 acres of unimproved, unsubdivided land owned
by Castle & Cooke on Koa Ridge would be designated as the future site of the
Pacific Health Center.
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
21have . . . and we ended up wasting our trip . . . ."  Lehrich
declared that Sato "wanted to have some stock and be a major
player in the project," but Lehrich could not make these
commitments to Sato on behalf of his investor.  Lehrich further
declared that in retrospect Sato refused to set up all the
meetings and get things going.  Lehrich declared that because
Sato insisted on securing this "major role" in the company and
refused to cooperate otherwise, and because Sato's authority to
negotiate on behalf of various entities was unclear, AGS
terminated discussions in Spring 2006.
Doi
By deposotion dated February 7, 2012, Doi declared that
the WHA Board understood that Sato's services would include
financing, coordinating the building of, "and basically
developing the Koa Ridge [P]roject or finding a developer for the
Koa Ridge [P]roject."  Doi declared that the Attorney General's
inquiry into the Koa Ridge Project and their opinion of Sato
incited the WHA Board to terminate the Koa Ridge Project and
Sato's services sometime in or around November 16, 2006.  Doi
further declared that the Koa Ridge Project was terminated
because it "was taking a very long time and didn't seem like it
was getting anywhere, and we had spent the money[.]"
By declaration dated March 6, 2012, Doi declared that
the Attorney General was "questioning why so much money had gone
into the Koa Ridge project with so little to show for it.  One of
the areas of concern was the absence of any written agreement
with Sato."
Dr. Suzuka
By declaration dated March 14, 2012, Dr. Suzuka
declared that during the initial discussions on the PSA, Sato
stated that the Koa Ridge Project could be accomplished "by
bringing in other organizations to participate, and that [Sato]
could find investors and/or lenders who would supply the
necessary funds."  Dr. Suzuka also declared that he understood
"that Sato would be using his experience in real estate
development, including his legal knowledge and experience, on
[Wahiawa Hospitals'] behalf" and that Sato's "legal knowledge andNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
experience was one of his primary qualifications for the job he
 
was expected to do." Dr. Suzuka further declared that Sato
 "never accomplished the objective of obtaining an investor or
 developer to provide outside financing for the Koa Ridge
 expansion project."
 
Dr. Suzuka further declared that the WHA Board's main
 
concerns about the Koa Ridge Project were: (1) the "substantial
 amounts paid to third parties, including . . . legal fees, travel
 expenses, and a variety of other costs and expenses incurred";
 (2) that Sato had not "accomplished the objective of obtaining an
 investor or developer to provide outside financing"; and (3)
 Wahiawa Hospitals' expenditures on the "project exceeded $9
 million dollars" while "the initial budget . . . was
 approximately $1.3 million dollars."
3. Wahiawa Hospitals' Second Motion in Limine
 
On March 19, 2012, Wahiawa Hospitals filed its "Second
 
(2nd) Motion in Limine to Preclude [Sato] From Introducing
 
Evidence Relating to Any Claim, Cause of Action or Theory of
 Liability Not Set Forth in His Complaint" (Second Motion in
 
Limine). The Second Motion in Limine states that Wahiawa
 
Hospitals "expressly withold[s its] consent to try any claim,
 
cause of action or theory of liability other than those pleaded
 in [Sato's] Complaint[,] . . . [Wahiawa Hospitals] further
 expressly oppose[s] any attempt by [Sato] to amend his Complaint,
 and asserts for the record that [Wahiawa Hospitals does] NOT
 consent to any amendment by implication." (Emphasis in
 original.) In its memorandum in support of the motion, Wahiawa
 Hospitals argues that "any evidence [Sato] may introduce that is
 relevant to both pleaded and unpleaded theories of liability
 cannot be used to imply consent to trial of unpleaded theories of
 liability." (Emphasis in original.)
 
At the March 29, 2012 hearing on Wahiawa Hospitals'
 
Second Motion in Limine, the circuit court explained that it read
 through Sato's Complaint and surmised that there were two causes
 of action - breach of contract and promissory estoppel. When
 asked by the circuit court if Sato had any opposition to the
 court's inclination to grant the motion based on its
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
identification of only two causes of action, Sato's counsel
 
responded that he did not oppose the motion.
4. Trial and the circuit court's rulings
 
The circuit court held a jury-waived trial between
 
April 2 and April 18, 2012.
 
On April 3, 2012, the circuit court granted Wahiawa
 
Hospitals' Second Motion in Limine and found that there was good
 
cause to limit Sato's claims to breach of contract and promissory
 estoppel. At the hearing on April 3, 2012, Sato testified that
 he filed a petition with the LUC which listed himself and Bill
 Yuen as the attorney for PHC, Inc., and appeared before the LUC
 in the relevant proceeding. Sato conceded that appearing before
 the LUC as an attorney for a petitioner constitutes practicing
 law, that he billed Wahiawa Hospitals for his time before the
 LUC, and that at least part of the work he did for Wahiawa
 Hospitals constituted practicing law.
 
On April 4, 2012, Sato testified that in December of
 
2005, his negotiations with AGS on Sato's desired compensation
 package "became an obstacle" to Wahiawa Hospitals' ability to
 secure AGS' investment in the project. Sato also testified that
 the amount expended on the Koa Ridge Project was approximately $4
 to $5 million.
 
Sato testified that he initially entered into an oral
 
agreement with WHA which provided that WHA owned 75% and Sato
 owned 25% of PHC, Inc. stock, and this percentage share would
 shift such that Sato would eventually own 75% of PHC, Inc. Sato
 also testified that the WHA Board later discussed divesting WHA
 from having any interest in PHC, Inc.'s for-profit development
 activities.
 
On April 10, 2012, Sato testified that AGS decided not
 
to invest in the Koa Ridge Project because WGH wanted to sell a
 skilled nursing facility to the Silversword group rather than
 AGS.
 
On April 12, 2012, the circuit court asked counsel for
 
Wahiawa Hospitals, Ronald I. Heller (Heller), to clarify the
 
damages sought by Wahiawa Hospitals' Counterclaim.
 
[HELLER]:  . . . the exact amount is $ 947,919.70. That
 
is the total amount paid to Mr. Sato as fees inclusive of

 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
general excise tax, and what we are asking for is
disgorgement and return of that amount. All of the other
 claims that we had initially talked about in terms of
seeking to recover the entire nine million that was spent on
Koa Ridge, we have decided not to pursue at this time. And
 therefore, we believe . . . the only issue is[,] is [Sato]
entitled to be paid for his hours or is he required to
disgorge what he received for his hours.
 
. . . .
 
THE COURT: [Heller], with respect to the counterclaim
seeking damages in the amount that you stated --
[HELLER]: Yes. 
THE COURT: -- is it for contractual tort? 
[HELLER]: No, Your Honor, it's based on violation of

[Sato's] ethical duties as an attorney and agent based on
his conflicts of interest, self-dealing, and --
THE COURT: Tort? 
[HELLER]: Basically, yes. 
. . . .
 
THE COURT:
 Let me turn this around so we can get to
the heart of the matter. Are you claiming that he breached
his ethical duty as an attorney, [Heller]?

 
[HELLER]: Among other things, yes.
 
THE COURT: Okay, when you say among other things,
what other things -­
[HELLER]: He breached -­
THE COURT:
 -- on the tort or contract ?

 
[HELLER]: He breached his duty of loyalty as an agent
which is independent of acting as an attorney.
 
THE COURT: Understood.
 
(Emphases added.)
 
Heller reiterated that Wahiawa Hospitals' Counterclaim
 
sought "damages in the form of disgorgement of the compensation
 
paid to [Sato]. . . . [A] total of $947,919.70."
 
On August 27, 2012, the circuit court filed its
 
FOFs/COLs/Order. The circuit court found that "during the
 project's six-year term[,]" Sato "rendered services [for Wahiawa
 Hospitals] in multiple capacities, as a consultant/adviser, as a
 co-developer, and possibly as an attorney [at a proceeding before
 the LUC] . . . ." The circuit court found that Sato "provided
 numerous services" "notwithstanding the failed negotiations by
 and between [Wahiawa Hospitals] and Castle & Cooke or [Wahiawa
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hospitals] and AGS . . . ."
 
The circuit court concluded that Sato and Wahiawa
 
Hospitals entered an oral contract whereby Sato would render
 
professional services "as a consultant/adviser to the WHA Board
 in connection with the Koa Ridge Project" and received a monthly
 compensation of $10,000. The circuit court further concluded
 that Wahiawa Hospitals' cessation of payments to Sato in
 September 2006, prior to Sato's termination in or around November
 17, 2006, constituted a breach of the parties oral contract to
 compensate Sato $10,000 per month.
 
The circuit court concluded that Sato's promissory
 
estoppel claim was without merit based on its finding that the
 discussions and negotiations that occurred between the parties as
 to other proposed terms and conditions, including deferred
 compensation and incentive fees, did not constitute a promise on
 behalf of Wahiawa Hospitals, and Sato's reliance on Wahiawa
 Hospitals' alleged promise was not reasonable.
 
In dismissing Wahiawa Hospitals' Counterclaim, the
 
circuit court concluded:
 
13. Although certain of [Sato's] activities raised
questionable self-dealing issues, [Sato] expended
considerable time and effort in his attempts to develop the
Pacific Health Center. In hindsight, [Sato] may have
undertaken a herculean project that was far more complicated
in its scope and magnitude than his professed capabilities.
WHA/WGH seeks a disgorgement of the entire amount of fees
paid to [Sato], arguing that [Sato's] negotiations with a
potential co-developer for his own compensation package
separate and apart from any consultant/advisory services to
WHA/WGH breached his duty of loyalty to WHA/WGH. [Sato]
donning multiple roles may not have been in the best
interest of all concerned; however, based upon the evidence
presented,[Sato] did not breach his duty of loyalty to
WHA/WGH such as to warrant a complete disgorgement of his
fees and costs as a consultant/adviser. Therefore, the
Counterclaim is dismissed.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
On October 12, 2012, the circuit court filed its Final
 
Judgment ordering Wahiawa Hospitals to pay Sato $15,000 for his
 
services rendered under the parties oral contract during October
 2006 and half of November 2006, denying Sato's request for other
 relief under his breach of contract claim, and dismissing Sato's
 promissory estoppel claim and Wahiawa Hospitals' Counterclaim.
 
On November 12, 2012, Sato filed a notice of appeal
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
from the circuit court's: (1) Order Granting Wahiawa Hosptials'
 
Second Motion in Limine; (2) FOFs/COLs/Order; and (3) Final
 Judgment in appellate case no. CAAP-12-0000997. This court
 dismissed this case by "Order Approving Stipulation of Voluntary
 Dismissal of Appeal" filed March 13, 2013.
 
On December 26, 2012, the circuit court filed its First
 
Amended Final Judgment, which mirrored the Final Judgment except
 that it also dismissed all of Sato's claims against WCOHC.
 
On January 23, 2013, Sato filed a notice of appeal from
 
the circuit court's: (1) Order Granting Wahiawa Hospitals'
 Second Motion in Limine; (2) FOFs/COLs/Order; and (3) First
 Amended Final Judgment.
 
On February 5, 2013, Wahiawa Hospitals filed a notice
 
of cross appeal from the circuit court's FOFs/COLs/Order and
 First Amended Final Judgment.
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Motion in Limine
 
"The granting or denying of a motion in limine is 
reviewed for abuse of discretion." Miyamoto v. Lum, 104 Hawai
'i 
1, 7, 84 P.3d 509, 515 (2004) (internal quotation marks, citation, and ellipsis omitted). An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Amfac, Inc. v. 
Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992).
B. Findings of Fact
 
"[A] trial court's FOFs are subject to the clearly 
erroneous standard of review. An FOF is clearly erroneous when, 
despite evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the Employees' Ret. Sys. 
of the State of Hawai
'i, 106 Hawai 'i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 
(2005) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Allstate Ins. Co. v. Ponce, 105 Hawai
'i 445, 453, 99 P.3d 96, 104 
(2004)). "An FOF is also clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding. . . . [S]ubstantial 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence [is] credible evidence which is of sufficient quality 
and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Leslie v. Estate of Tavares, 91 Hawai
'i 
394, 399, 984 P.2d 1220, 1225 (1999) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).
C.	 Conclusions of Law
 
A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is
freely reviewable for its correctness. [The appellate
court] ordinarily reviews COLs under the right/wrong
standard. Thus, a COL that is supported by the trial
court's FOFs and that reflects an application of the correct
rule of law will not be overturned. However, a COL that
presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed under
the clearly erroneous standard because the court's
conclusions are dependent upon the facts and circumstances
of each individual case.
 
Chun, 106 Hawai 'i at 430, 106 P.3d at 353 (internal quotation 
marks, citations, and brackets in original omitted) (quoting 
Ponce, 105 Hawai 'i at 453, 99 P.3d at 104).
D.	 Equitable Remedies
 
"The relief granted by a court in equity is 
discretionary and will not be overturned on review unless the circuit court abused its discretion by issuing a decision that clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of the appellant." Aickin v. Ocean View Invs. Co., 84 Hawai
'i 447, 453, 
935 P.2d 992, 998 (1997) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 Sato's appeal is without merit because it is based solely on
a theory of implied contract.
 
Sato contends the circuit court "erred in constraining
 
its equitable powers contrary to the plain language [of] HRCP
 
Rule 15(b)(1) by failing to recognize [Sato's] right to relief
 under the theory of breach of implied contract[,]" and implies
 that this court should vacate the circuit court's Order Granting
 Wahiawa Hospitals' Second Motion in Limine on this basis. Sato,
 however, provides no discernable argument concerning his appeal
 from the Order Granting Wahiawa Hospitals' Second Motion in
 Limine. Rather than arguing that the circuit court erred in
 granting Wahiawa Hospitals' Second Motion in Limine, Sato argues
 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Wahiawa Hospitals breached an implied contract and
 
implicitly consented to defending against Sato's breach of
 implied contract claims. Hawaii's appellate courts are "not
 obliged to address matters for which the appellants have failed
 to present discernible arguments." Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v.
 
E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co., 116 Hawai
'i 277, 288, 172 P.3d 
1021, 1032 (2007) (citing Hawai 'i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
(HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7)). HRAP Rule 28(b)(7) provides that 
"[p]oints not argued may be deemed waived." 
Even if Sato's arguments relating to his appeal of the
 
Order Granting Wahiawa Hospitals' Second Motion in Limine were
 
discernable, we decline to consider his appeal of the order
 because Sato's counsel expressly declined opposition to Wahiawa
 Hospitals' Second Motion in Limine at the circuit court's March
 29, 2012 hearing on the motion. See State v. Hoglund, 71 Haw.
 
147, 150, 785 P.2d 1311, 1313 (1990). ("Generally, the failure to
 properly raise an issue at the trial level precludes a party from
 raising that issue on appeal.").
 
Moreover, Sato's argument that the circuit court ruled
 
contrary to the plain language of HRCP Rule 15(b)(1) is without
 merit because the rule applies only when "issues not raised by
 the pleadings are tried by express or implied consent of the
 parties[.]"
12 HRCP Rule 15(b)(1) does not apply because Wahiawa
 
Hospitals expressly withheld consent to try causes of action not
 pleaded in Sato's Complaint. See Hamm v. Merrick, 61 Haw. 470,
 
473, 605 P.2d 499, 502 (1980) (holding that HRCP Rule 15(b)(1)
 "provides that issues tried by express or implied consent [s]hall
 be treated as if raised in pleadings"). 
In addition, Sato's argument that his Complaint
 
implicitly alleges the formation of an implied contract between
 the parties is without merit because with regard to the formation
 of a contract, the Complaint alleges that the parties entered
 
12
 HRCP Rule 15(b)(1) provides, in pertinent part:
 
"(b) Amendments during and after trial.
 
(1) FOR ISSUES TRIED BY CONSENT. When issues not raised by the
pleadings are tried by express or implied consent of the parties, they shall
be treated in all respects as if they had been raised in the pleadings."
 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
into negotiations that resulted in an agreement with specific 
terms and conditions, otherwise known as an express contract. See Wall v. Focke, 21 Haw. 399, 404 (Haw. Terr. 1913) (holding that express contracts are "those in which the terms of the agreement are openly uttered and avowed at the time of the making") (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). An implied contract, on the other hand, exists where the intention of the parties is not expressed, but an obligation is created by an agreement in fact that is implied or presumed from the parties' actions. Durette v. Aloha Plastic Recycling, Inc., 105 
Hawai
'i 490, 504, 100 P.3d 60, 74 (2004). 
Moreover, even assuming arguendo that Sato's complaint 
raised a claim for breach of implied contract, the circuit court's findings refuted such a claim. The circuit court found that aside from Sato's $10,000 monthly compensation, Wahiawa Hospitals "had not agreed to any other sufficiently definitive or reasonably certain form of remuneration on a deferred or incentive basis. These financial terms were the subject of on­going discussions and negotiations." We conclude that the circuit court's findings, which were based on its credibility determinations and supported by substantial evidence, were not clearly erroneous. The circuit court's findings establish that the parties' actions did not indicate or provide the basis for the formation of an implied contract as to any compensation exceeding $10,000 per month. See Durette, 105 Hawai
'i at 504, 
100 P.3d at 74. 
Accordingly, we affirm the circuit court's Order
 
Granting Wahiawa Hospitals' Second Motion in Limine limiting
 Sato's Complaint to two causes of action - breach of contract and
 promissory estoppel, and we reject Sato's remaining arguments
 based on a theory of breach of implied contract.
B. Wahiawa Hospitals' cross-appeal
1. The circuit court did not clearly err in finding that
Sato "possibly" rendered services as an attorney.
 
Wahiawa Hospitals contends the circuit court clearly
 
erred in finding that Sato "rendered services in multiple
 
capacities, as a consultant/adviser, as a co-developer, and
 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
possibly as an attorney" because "substantial evidence exists in
 
the record to support a factual finding that (i) Sato rendered
 services as an attorney to the [Koa Ridge] Project and (ii) that
 Sato billed the [Wahiawa Hospitals] for services including the
 practice of law." The circuit court did not clearly err in
 finding that Sato "possibly" rendered services as an attorney
 because although Sato rendered services in multiple capacities
 while working for Wahiawa Hospitals, and at least once billed
 Wahiawa Hospitals for services during which Sato referred to
 himself as an attorney, the record is ambiguous as to whether or
 not an attorney-client relationship existed between Sato and
 Wahiawa Hospitals.
 
The existence of an attorney-client relationship "turns
 
largely on the client's subjective belief that it exists." 
DiCenzo v. Izawa, 68 Haw. 528, 536, 723 P.2d 171, 176 (1986)
 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). See also Otaka,
 
Inc. v. Klein, 71 Haw. 376, 383, 79 P.2d 713, 717 (1990) ("Legal
 consultation occurs when the client believes that he is
 approaching an attorney in a professional capacity with a
 manifest intent to seek professional legal advice." (citation
 and internal quotation marks omitted)). 
Here, the record is ambiguous as to whether Wahiawa 
Hospitals viewed Sato as one of their attorneys who also acted as a consultant/advisor, or as an consultant/advisor with legal knowledge, skills, and experience. A draft of Sato's PSA with Wahiawa Hospitals, dated March 16, 1999, identifies Sato as a consultant on the Koa Ridge Project and specified the scope of Sato's work to encompass "consultive, non-legal, services . . . ." Sato testified that he "made it clear" that his role "was to be strictly related to the Pacific Health Center's developer and consultant [sic] and that [he] was not providing WHA and WGH any legal services." However, WHA Board member McClosky declared that the WHA Board agreed to enter into a PSA with Sato based in part upon Sato's description of his qualifications as a former Deputy Attorney General for the State of Hawai
'i and General Counsel to the State of Hawai 'i Housing 
Authority, and that they found Sato's "legal knowledge and 
30
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
experience [to be] one of his primary qualifications for the job
 
he was expected to do." The Koa Ridge Business Plan, which was
 prepared by Sato, describes Sato as chair of PHC, Inc. and "an
 attorney with 23 years experience in real estate financing and
 development." Also, Sato testified that he billed Wahiawa
 Hospitals for his time spent filing a petition with the LUC and
 appearing before the LUC as an attorney in a proceeding for the
 Koa Ridge Project. The record also suggests that Wahiawa
 Hospitals employed several attorneys from different Hawai
'i law 
firms to serve  only as attorneys  for the Koa Ridge Project.
 
Therefore, the circuit court's finding that Sato
 
"possibly" rendered services for Wahiawa Hospitals as an attorney
 is not clear error because although Wahiawa Hospitals alleges
 that it viewed Sato as one of its attorneys, the record is
 ambiguous as to whether an attorney-client relationship existed
 between Sato and Wahiawa Hospitals.
2.
	 Although complete disgorgement is not warranted, the
circuit court erred in dismissing Wahiawa Hospitals'
Counterclaim on its conclusion that Sato did not breach
 his duty of loyalty "such as to warrant" complete
disgorgement.
 
In dismissing Wahiawa Hospitals' Counterclaim in its
 
FOFs/COLs/Order the circuit court concluded:
 
12. The Counterclaim filed by [The Wahiawa
Hospitals] assert[ed] that . . . .
 
12. Sato's actions included
 
misrepresentations, negligence, improper
self-dealing, wasting of Wahiawa
[Hospitals'] funds, and breach of his oral
agreement with Wahiawa [Hospitals].
 
13. Although certain of [Sato's] activities raised
questionable self-dealing issues, [Sato] expended
considerable time and effort in his attempts to develop the
Pacific Health Center. In hindsight, [Sato] may have
undertaken a herculean project that was far more complicated
in its scope and magnitude than his professed capabilities.
WHA/WGH seeks a disgorgement of the entire amount of fees
paid to the [Sato], arguing that [Sato's] negotiations with
a potential co-developer for his own compensation package
separate and apart from any consultant/advisory services to
WHA/WGH breached his duty of loyalty to WHA/WGH. [Sato]
donning multiple roles may not have been in the best
interest of all concerned; however, based upon the evidence
presented,[Sato] did not breach his duty of loyalty to
WHA/WGH such as to warrant a complete disgorgement of his
fees and costs as a consultant/adviser. Therefore, the
Counterclaim is dismissed.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
31
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wahiawa Hospitals argues that the circuit court erred
 
by "confus[ing] the issue of whether Sato is liable to [Wahiawa
 
Hospitals] as a result of his breach of the duty of loyalty with
 the issue of whether [Wahiawa Hospitals] was entitled to the
 remedy of complete disgorgement." (Emphasis in original.)
 Wahiawa Hospitals believes that Sato created a conflict of
 interest by "trying to negotiate a deal for himself with
 potential investors or co-developers at the same time that he was
 negotiating with those same potential investors or co-developers
 as an agent of [Wahiawa Hospitals]." (Emphasis in original.)
 Wahiawa Hospitals alleges that it "wanted to have a written
 Memorandum of Understanding to address the conflict, but no such
 agreement was ever signed." Wahiawa Hospitals contends the
 record reflects that Sato's involvement "was hindering good faith
 negotiations between AGS and [Wahiawa Hospitals]." Wahiawa
 Hospitals believes complete disgorgement of Sato's compensation
 is the appropriate remedy because Sato forfeited his right to
 compensation when he breached his duty of loyalty to Wahiawa
 Hospitals. Wahiawa Hospitals argues that the circuit court, "at
 a bare minimum, was required to conclude that Sato breached his
 duty of loyalty to [Wahiawa Hospitals] and enter judgment as to
 that counterclaim in favor of [Wahiawa Hospitals] – even if the
 ultimate award was only for partial disgorgement or some form of
 nominal damages." (Emphasis in original.)
 
Sato argues "that the creation of [PHC, Inc.] merged
 
the interests of [Wahiawa Hospitals] and Sato in the Koa Ridge
 Project, and under the circumstances Sato's attempt to negotiate
 a compensation package for himself in conjunction with the sale
 of [Wahiawa Hospitals'] equity interest in [PHC, Inc.] does not
 amount to an actionable breach of loyalty or conflict of interest
 because [Wahiawa Hospitals'] effectively consented to Sato's
 potential conflict of interest." Sato alleges that from the
 earliest stages of the Koa Ridge Project, he disclosed to Wahiawa
 Hospitals the potential for his role as consultant/advisor to
 conflict with his desire to serve "as a land developer on the
 project through his company, [PHC Development]" and that Wahiawa
 Hospitals waived the potential conflict of interest during its
 
32
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
February 25, 1999 and March 28, 2000 board meetings. Sato
 
further alleges that AGS decided not to invest in the Koa Ridge
 Project because Wahiawa Hospitals "insisted on selling its
 skilled nursing operation as a separate package to another
 developer," not because Sato negotiated for a specific
 compensation package in exchange for AGS' agreement to invest.
 Sato also alleges that at "all times relevant hereto, Sato kept
 [Wahiawa Hospitals] fully informed of all of his activities and
 communications through weekly and sometimes biweekly meetings on
 the project." Sato argues that "[u]nder the circumstances,
 Sato's discussions with AGS regarding a compensation package for
 himself in conjunction with his attempt to negotiate a cash
 investment in the project to cover [Wahiawa Hospitals'] expenses
 for the project clearly served the interests of [Wahiawa
 Hospitals] as well as Sato, and was done with [Wahiawa
 Hospitals'] full knowledge and consent."
3. Sato breached his duty of loyalty to Wahiawa Hospitals.
 
The parties do not dispute that Sato agreed to act and
 
did act as Wahiawa Hospitals' agent for the Koa Ridge Project, 
and as such, Sato was required to act solely for Wahiawa
 Hospitals' benefit in all matters connected with the Koa Ridge
 Project unless otherwise agreed. See Restatement (Second) of
 
Agency § 387 (1958) ("Unless otherwise agreed, an agent is
 subject to a duty to his principal to act solely for the benefit
 of the principal in all matters connected with his agency."). 
Sato testified that in December of 2005, his negotiations with
 AGS on Sato's desired compensation package "became an obstacle"
 to Wahiawa Hospitals' ability to secure AGS' investment in the
 project. Sato breached his duty of loyalty to Wahiawa Hospitals
 by negotiating for his own benefit because the record does not
 indicate that Wahiawa Hospitals agreed to such conduct.
 
The minutes from the February 25, 1999 Joint Meeting
 
reflect that Sato acknowledged his conflict of interest with
 regard to the "development/management agreement," recused
 himself, and the Wahiawa Hospitals Ad Hoc Building Committee
 voted to waive Sato's conflict of interest. The minutes from a
 March 28, 2000 meeting reflect that a WHA Board member expressed
 
33
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
concern over whether Sato's move from his role as a unpaid WHA 
Board member to a "highly paid" consultant constituted a conflict of interest. Other Board members responded that they viewed Sato's work on the project as "satisfactory," "comprehensive," and "the best value," and believed Sato was "the best person to take on this position[.]" Sato explained that he "decided to take on [the Koa Ridge Project] 'vision'" because if he did not take the position, Wahiawa Hospitals would need to find a developer outside Hawai
'i, and "would end up paying higher fees." 
Meeting minutes reflect that the WHA Board member who raised the conflict of interest issue was satisfied with the discussion and input regarding this issue. 
The WHA Board meeting minutes do not establish that the
 
parties "otherwise agreed" that Sato could act to benefit himself
 while acting as Wahiawa Hospitals' agent when such acts had the
 potential to conflict with the interests of Wahiawa Hospitals. 
At most, the board minutes reflect that in the early stages of
 the project, the WHA Board determined that Sato was well suited
 for the consultant/advisor position even though a conflict of
 interest was identified. 
We conclude that the circuit court erred by dismissing
 
Wahiawa Hospitals' Counterclaim because Sato breached his duty of
 loyalty to Wahiawa Hospitals.
4. Wahiawa Hospitals is not entitled to disgorgement.
 
Wahiawa Hospitals' argument that disgorgement is an 
appropriate remedy in the instant case is without merit. 
"Disgorgement is an equitable remedy designed to deprive a wrongdoer of his unjust enrichment . . . ." S.E.C. v. First City 
Fin. Corp., 890 F.2d 1215, 1230 (D.C. Cir. 1989). For example, in Hawaiian Ass'n of Seventh-Day Adventists v. Wong, 130 Hawai
'i 
36, 305 P.3d 452 (2013), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that on 
remand, the plaintiff-lessor may be entitled to disgoregment damages if the fact-finder finds that the defendant-lessee earned profits in violation of the lease. Id. at 49, 305 P.3d at 465. 
Wahiawa Hospitals argues that Sato breached his duty of loyalty, not that Sato was unjustly enriched or profited from the breach. 
An agent who breaches a duty owed to his principal is
 
34
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
subject to liability for loss caused to the principal by such a
 
breach. See Restatement (Second) of Agency § 401 (1958). "Where
 
compensatory damages are not computable, although a breach of
 contract is proven, the only award that can be made is nominal
 damage." Ferreira v. Honolulu Star-Bulletin, Ltd., 44 Haw. 567,
 
578, 356 P.2d 651, 657 (1960). To recover more than nominal
 
13
damages,  the plaintiff's loss must be established "with
reasonable certainty. 
The damages must be susceptible of
 
ascertainment in some manner other than by mere speculation,
 conjecture, or surmise." 
Ferreira
, 44 Haw. at 576, 356 P.2d at
 
656. 
On remand, the circuit court shall determine whether
 
Wahiawa Hospitals is entitled to damages for Sato's breach of his
 duty of loyalty.
5.	 The circuit court did not err in awarding Sato $15,000
as monies owed to him for services during October 2006
and half of November 2006. 
Wahiawa Hospitals contends that the circuit court erred
 
in awarding Sato $15,000 for his work for Wahiawa Hospitals
 
during the month of October 2006 and half of November 2006
 because Sato's Complaint did not seek such damages. Wahiawa
 Hospitals argues that Sato's "Fee Summary Chart" "expressly
 disclaimed" these damages.
 
Sato argues that the Fee Summary Chart "is at best
 
vague and ambiguous as to whether Sato knew he was relinquishing
 his right to compensation for services rendered in October and
 November, 2006."
 
Here, it is undisputed that Wahiawa Hospitals and Sato
 
entered into an oral contract whereby Wahiawa Hospitals agreed to
 pay Sato $10,000 per month for services related to the Koa Ridge
 Project, Wahiawa Hospitals did not pay Sato after September 2006,
 and Sato received his letter of termination on November 17, 2006. 
We therefore hold that the circuit court did not abuse its
 discretion in awarding Sato $15,000 in damages for Wahiawa
 
13
 "Nominal damages are a trivial sum of money awarded to a litigant
who has established a cause of action but has not established that he is
 
entitled to compensatory damages." Restatement (Second) of Torts § 907
(1979). 
35
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hospitals' breach of the parties' oral contract.
IV. CONCLUSION
 
We vacate the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's
 
August 27, 2012 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order"
 
with respect to Conclusion of Law 13 and its October 12, 2012
 "Final Judgment" with respect to the entry of judgment in favor
 of Sato on Wahiawa Hospitals' counterclaim, and we remand this
 case for further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum
 Opinion. We affirm the circuit court in all other respects.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 17, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Eric A. Seitz
 
Della A. Belatti
 Sarah R. Devine (Law Office of Eric A. Seitz)
for Plaintiff/Counterclaim­Defendant/Appellant/Cross-
Appellee.
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Ronald I. Heller

 
Brian W. Tilker
 
(Torkildson, Katz, Moore,
Hetherington & Harris)
for Defendants/Counterclaim-Plaintiffs/Appellees/Cross-
Appellants.
 
36
 