 
 
      NOT  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAIʻI  RE PORTS  AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
  Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-20-0000430 25-SEP-2024 08:28 AM Dkt. 176 SO 
NOS. CAAP-20-0000430 AND CAAP-21-0000370 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
CAAP-20-0000430 
 
IN THE MATTER OF THE CONSERVATORSHIP AND GUARDIANSHIP OF 
SHEENA MAY WINNIE, also known as SHEENA M. WINNIE, 
also known as SHEENA WINNIE, Protected Person-Appellant 
 
 
CAAP-21-0000370 
 
IN THE MATTER OF THE CONSERVATORSHIP AND GUARDIANSHIP OF 
SHEENA MAY WINNIE, also known as SHEENA M. WINNIE, 
also known as SHEENA WINNIE, Respondent 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(C.G. 1CG191000045) 
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Nakasone, JJ.)  
 
           
 
 
   
  
  
  
  
 
   
 
   
  
  
 
   
  
   
 
 
     
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This appeal concerns the probate court's 
imposition of a constructive trust on a condominium (Property) 
without designating the matter as a "contested matter" under 
Hawai‘i Probate Rules (HPR) 19 and 20. We conclude this was 
error. 
Interested Person-Appellee/Cross-Appellant Ralph E. 
Winnie, Jr. (Ralph Jr.) cross-appeals1 from the June 22, 2020 
"Order Granting in Part the Remainder of the Petition for 
Appointment of Conservator and Guardian" (Order Granting Petition and Imposing Constructive Trust),
2 filed by the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit (Probate Court).3 
On appeal, Ralph Jr. contends the Probate Court erred 
by "refus[ing] to designate [the matter] as a 'contested matter' under [HPR] Rules 19 and 20."
4 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
1 Respondent- Appellant Sheena M. Winnie (Sheena) , Ralph Jr.'s 
mother, filed the initial appeal on June 25, 2020, which was dismissed on 
July 14, 2022, due to Sheena's death and there being no substitute. The 
dismissal order provided that the dismissal did not affect this cross- appeal 
filed by Ralph Jr. 
2 While Ralph Jr. appeals from numerous orders, he only presents 
argument as to the June 22, 2020 Order Granting Petition and Imposing 
Constructive Trust. We do not address the other orders. See Hawai‘i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (
HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7). 
3 The Honorable R. Mark Browning presided. 
4 Ralph Jr. raises six points of error (POEs) in his Opening Brief. 
In light of our disposition on Ralph Jr.'s second POE, that a "contested matter" designation was required and vacating the Order Granting Petition and 
Imposing Constructive Trust, we need not address his first POE challenging 
the imposition of the constructive trust. No discernible arguments in 
support of the remaining POEs were made, as the Opening Brief "incorporate[d] 
by reference" the POEs from Sheena's Opening Brief. These POES are waived. 
See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). 
2  
 
           
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Ralph 
Jr.'s point of error as follows, and vacate and remand. 
On August 15, 2019, Ralph Jr.'s father, Petitioner-
Appellee/Cross-Appellee Ralph Edwin Winnie (Ralph Sr.), filed a "Petition for Appointment of Conservator and Guardian" (Petition) requesting that Ralph Sr. be appointed conservator 
and guardian for Sheena. 
On December 11, 2019, the Probate Court filed an 
order, finding that Sheena was an incapacitated person and that 
there was a basis for a conservatorship or other protective proceeding, and granting the Petition in part and continuing in part. 
On June 22, 2020, the Probate Court filed the Order 
Granting Petition and Imposing Constructive Trust, in which it appointed Maximum Legal Services Corporation as guardian and conservator; imposed a constructive trust on the Property owned by Ralph Jr.; and ordered Ralph Jr. to transfer the Property to the conservator for the benefit of Sheena. 
On appeal, Ralph Jr. argues that his objections to the 
reports recommending the imposition of the constructive trust on his Property "triggered the probate court's obligation to designate the matter as [a] contested [case] under HPR [Rule] 19." In response, Ralph Sr. argues that "[a]t no time during the May 21, 2020 hearing" on the Petition "did Ralph Jr. request an evidentiary hearing or ask the matter to be transferred to the contested case calendar." Ralph Sr.'s counterargument lacks merit. 
HPR Rule 19
5 defines a "contested matter" as "any one 
in which an objection has been filed." The commentary to HPR 
5 HPR Rule 19, entitled "Definition," states: 
3  
 
           
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rule 3 explains that an "objection" is "clearly and 
unequivocally in opposition to a pleading, while a response . . . could raise additional issues related to the petition." A "response" "could be in reference to an objection." Id.
Here, the record reflects that Ralph Jr. filed a May 
4, 2020 "Objection" to the Kokua Kanawai's Supplemental Report, 
where he "disagree[d] with all of [Kokua Kanawai]'s 
recommendations." Ralph Jr. specifically objected to "the imposition of a constructive trust over the [Property]," as "[t]he [P]roperty was a gift from parents to son, which ha[d] been Ralph Jr.'s residence for the past three and a half years." On May 19, 2020, Ralph Jr. filed a "Response" to the Kokua Kanawai's Third Report, objected to the imposition of the constructive trust, and specifically requested that the "matter be designated a contested matter under [HPR] Rules 19 and 20." Thus, the record reflects Ralph Jr. filed the required objections under HPR Rule 19 to the interim reports leading up to the May 21, 2020 hearing on the Petition; opposed the 
A contested matter is any one in which an objection has 
been filed. The contested matter shall be limited to facts 
and issues in dispute, and shall not affect other issues or 
pleadings before the court with respect to the same proceeding that are not in dispute, provided that no party 
is prejudiced thereby. 
The Commentary to HPR Rule 19 provides: 
This rule sets the stage for the rules that follow. Of importance is the recognition that a contested issue can be 
separated from the normal progress of the estate, 
conservatorship, guardianship, or trust, and dealt with 
separately, while normal uncontested matters may continue to be addressed in normal course while the contested issue 
is resolved. In this way, a proceeding is not completely 
put on hold because of a dispute about one issue. 
4  
 
           
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reports' recommendations to impose a constructive trust; and 
requested a "contested matter" designation. 
Ralph Sr. argues that Ralph Jr.'s argument "relies on 
the faulty premise that Ralph Jr. is a 'party' to the proceedings who is entitled to a contested hearing." In particular, Ralph Sr. argues that HPR Rule 19 only refers to "a 
party" and that the HPR do not specify that HPR Rule 19 applies 
to an "interested person." 
HPR Rule 19 does not limit the objection as one being 
filed from "a party." HPR Rule 3(a) states in pertinent part: "Persons may file a joinder, response, or objection to a . . . Kokua Kanawai's report." (Emphases added.) HPR Rule 3(b) states in pertinent part: "Interested persons may also file awritten response to a . . . Kokua Kanawai's report . . . if they desire to raise additional issues that are related to the . . . Kokua Kanawai's report." (Emphasis added.) Thus, an "interested person" like Ralph Jr. may file an objection or response to a Kokua Kanawai's report, which would designate the matter as a "contested matter." See HPR Rules 3 and 19. 
Ralph Jr. argues that because the Probate Court failed 
to designate the matter as contested, he "was denied the ability to present evidence and testimony in an evidentiary hearing." This argument has merit. 
HPR Rule 20, entitled "Disposition of Contested 
Matters," provides: 
(a) Assignment. The court by written order may retain 
a contested matter on the regular probate calendar or may 
assign the contested matter 
  . . . . to the civil trials calendar of 
the circuit court. 
(b) Guideline for Assignment. The court may use as a 
guideline on whether to assign a contested matter to the 
civil trials calendar the expected length of the hearing 
5  
 
           
 
 
  
         
 
  
        
 
 
 
 
           
 
          
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and whether it will take more than one- half day. The court 
may also assign other matters to the civil trials calendar, 
 
  . . . . . . . . 
 . . . . (c) Effect of Assignment to Civil Trials 
Calendar. The Hawai‘ i Rules of Civil Procedure and the Rules 
of the Circuit Courts will apply to all contested matters 
assigned to the civil trials calendar. . . . 
(d) Procedures in Retained Contested 
Matters. Whenever the court retains jurisdiction of a 
contested matter as a probate proceeding, the court in the 
order of assignment may, at the request of the parties, 
designate and order that any one or more of the Hawai‘ i 
Rules of Civil Procedure and/or the Rules of the Circuit 
Courts shall be applicable in such matter. 
COMMENTARY: This rule allows the court to adopt any of the Rules of 
Civil Procedure or Rules of the Circuit Court to govern the 
conduct of the contested matter. It is anticipated that 
most, if not all, of the rules regarding discovery, summary judgment, trial testimony, and pretrial practices will be 
adopted. Currently, contested matters in probate do not 
clearly give rise to the right to discovery, and it is rare 
for the court to specifically address the issue. Other 
issues not in dispute, and regular settlement or administration of the probate, guardianship, or trust 
estate, shall continue to the extent possible without 
regard to the contested matter. 
(e) Effect on Underlying Matter. The designation 
of an issue as a contested matter and the assignment thereof to the civil trials calendar or the probate calendar shall not affect the underlying proceeding, and 
the proceeding shall continue to the extent that such 
administration is not inconsistent with the issues being 
contested. 
(g) Termination of Assignment. When the contested 
matter is finally resolved, whether by settlement, final unappealed order, or disposition on appeal, the assignment 
shall terminate and all matters relating to the proceeding shall thereafter be controlled by these rules.  . . . . 
 . . . . 
(Emphasis added.) "HPR Rule 20 (2010) provides that when a case 
is contested the probate court must, through a written order, 
6  
 
           
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
either assign the case to the circuit court or retain it."   
Matter of Elaine Emma Short Revocable Living Tr. Agreement Dated 
July 17, 1984, 147 Hawai‘ i 456, 468, 465 P.3d 903, 915 
(2020). "If the probate court assigns the case to the circuit court, the 
Hawai‘i Rules of Civil Procedure [(HRCP)] and the 
Rules of the Circuit Courts [(RCCH)] will apply to all contested 
matters assigned to the civil trials calendar." Id. (cleaned up). "Alternatively, if the probate court retains the case, the probate court in the order of assignment may, at the request of the parties, designate and order that any one or more of the [HRCP] and/or the [RCCH] shall be applicable in such matter." Id. at 468-69, 465 P.3d at 915-16 (cleaned up). 
Here, when Ralph Jr. filed his objection and response 
to the Kokua Kanawai's reports——recommending the imposition of the constructive trust, and also specifically requesting a "contested matter" designation——the Probate Court should have designated the issue as a "contested matter." See HPR Rule 
19(a); Commentary to HPR Rule 19(a) (noting that "normal 
progress" of conservatorship or guardianship may continue to be 
addressed while the "contested issue" is "separated" and "resolved"). Under HPR Rule 20(a), the Probate Court then should have determined and issued a "written order" (
Rule 20(a) 
Order) indicating whether it would retain the contested matter or assign it to a civil trial calendar. See Emma Short, 147 
Hawai‘i at 468-69, 465 P.3d at 915-16. 
We conclude the June 22, 2020 Order Granting Petition 
and Imposing Constructive Trust was erroneously entered because it was not heard and disposed of as a "contested matter" in accordance with HPR Rules 19 and 20. See Cambridge Mgmt., Inc.
v. Jadan, 149 
Hawai‘i 56, 63, 481 P.3d 63, 70 (2021) 
7  
 
           
 
 
   
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
("Interpretation of court rules 'is a question of law, which the 
appellate court reviews de novo.'" (citation omitted)). We remand for the Probate Court to enter a Rule 20(a) Order of retention or assignment of this case as a "contested matter." 
See Emma Short, 147 Hawai‘ i at 468-69, 465 P.3d at 915-16; Estate 
of Araki, Nos. CAAP-19-0000440 and CAAP-19-0000793, 2023 WL 
3736787, at *2-3 (Haw. App. May 31, 2023) (SDO) (remanding the case for the probate court to enter a written order of retention or assignment under HPR Rule 20(a), as the case was a "contested matter"). 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the June 22, 2020 
"Order Granting in Part the Remainder of the Petition for 
Appointment of Conservator and Guardian," filed by the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit, and remand for further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘ i, September 25, 2024. 
On the briefs:   
 /s/ Katherine G. LeonardSamuel P. King, Jr. Acting Chief Judgefor Protected Person-Appellant  Sheena May Winnie. /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka  Associate JudgeRex Y. Fujichaku  for Interested Person-/s/ Karen T. NakasoneAppellee/Cross-Appellant Associate JudgeRalph E. Winnie, Jr.   
Mia D. Obciana for Petitioner-Appellee/Cross-
Appellee Ralph Edwin Winnie. 
8 