NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000386 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
CARI SALAVEA also known as CARI CARVEIRO, 
Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CR. NO. 15-1-0608) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Reifurth and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Cari Salavea (Salavea
) appeals from 
the Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment
) 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit 
Court)1 on April 19, 2016. She raises three points of error: 
1. ineffective assistance of counsel; 
2. prosecutorial misconduct; and 
3. insufficiency of evidence to support a conviction. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the relevant statutory and case law, we affirm the Judgment. 
I. 
Salavea was charged with Burglary in the First Degree 
in violation of Section 708-810(1)(c) (2014) of the Hawaii 
1 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Revised Statutes (HRS).2 The offense allegedly occurred on 
March 27, 2015. The evidence presented at trial was that the 
complaining witness (CW) lived in unit 4508 of the Moana Pacific 
condominium's east tower. It was a secured building with video 
surveillance cameras at the entrance and in the elevators. A fob
3 must be scanned to enter the building and to operate the 
elevators. When a fob is used, a computer system records the date, time, location, and person to whom the fob is registered. CW lost her fob in June, 2014. She purchased a replacement fob. Moana Pacific's records, in evidence at the trial, show that CW purchased the replacement fob on June 27, 2014. Moana Pacific's security records show that between 1:33 p.m. and 1:37 p.m.
4 on 
March 27, 2015, a fob registered to unit 4508 was used to take an elevator from the lobby to the 43rd floor, from the 43rd floor to the 45th floor, and from the 45th floor to the lobby. There were no other uses of that fob during the month of March, 2015. 
CW testified that Salavea was a friend. CW had last 
seen Salavea on March 6, 2015, when they had gone gambling. CW won some money and gave "a little bit" to Salavea. Salavea "wanted more than just a little bit, . . . she wanted . . . half of my winnings." CW did not want to give Salavea half of her winnings. Some time after March 6 but before March 27, Salavea called CW to ask for money but CW refused. 
2 HRS § 708-810 provides, in relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of burglary in the first
degree if the person intentionally enters or remainsunlawfully in a building, with intent to commit therein acrime against a person or against property rights, and: 
. . . . 
(c) The person recklessly disregards a risk that the
building is the dwelling of another, and the
building is such a dwelling. 
3 A fob is a small, gray, teardrop-shaped electronic device. It 
does not bear any marks identifying it with the Moana Pacific Condominium. 
4 The custodial witness testified that the times shown on State's 
Exhibit 9 were eight minutes earlier than the actual time due to an error inthe computer system clock. The times mentioned in this opinion are thecorrected times. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On March 27, 2015, CW was home recovering from a foot 
injury she sustained at work. Salavea called CW's phone (a 
Samsung Galaxy 5) but CW did not answer. Just before 1:30 p.m. Salavea sent CW a text with the word "bitch." After receiving the text from Salavea, CW placed her phone next to her bed and went to sleep. When she woke, her phone was gone. Her Samsung Galaxy tablet and blue Roxy backpack containing her wallet, bank card, work keys, driver's license and work identification were also missing. She went downstairs to the security office and asked to see the video surveillance. She recognized Salavea in the video footage. Salavea was shown entering the lobby from the loading dock area. Salavea was shown in the elevator. Salavea had CW's blue Roxy backpack on her back. CW never recovered any of her items. She never gave Salavea permission to enter her condominium unit, or to take her phone, backpack or other personal property. 
Salavea testified at the trial. On direct examination 
by her attorney, Salavea said she went gambling with CW on March 6, 2015. CW left her keychain with her fob and front door key in the console of Salavea's car. CW called Salavea after Salavea dropped CW off, but Salavea was already on the freeway. Salavea told CW she would return her keys the next time she was in town. On March 27, 2015, Salavea called CW at noon about returning CW's key and fob. CW told her to park and come upstairs. When Salavea was downstairs she called CW to ask if her friend could use the bathroom, but CW did not answer so Salavea texted "bitch" to CW. The friend remained downstairs and Salavea went upstairs by herself, using CW's fob. She went to CW's unit and talked with CW. She returned CW's keys. She borrowed CW's slippers and Roxy backpack. She left the Moana Pacific and went to Popeye's so her friend could use the bathroom. 
On cross-examination Salavea testified: 
Q. When you used the fob, you knew it was [CW's]
fob, right? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And you went into her building, and some doors 
3 A. Standard of Review 1. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were propped open so you didn't have to use it for the
initial entry, correct? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And then you only needed to use it in the
elevator to go to her floor? 
A. 
Yes. 
Q. And then why did you go to the 43rd floor
first? 
A. Because I was on my phone, and I got off on the
wrong floor. 
Q. 
So you got off on the 43rd floor first, and
then you reused the fob again to get to her floor? 
A. Yes. Q. And that was [the] 45th floor? A. Yes. Q. And you saw the fob records. You only spent
about ten minutes inside of her apartment, correct? 
A. Yes. Q. And then you used the fob to go down? A. Yes. 
The jury found Salavea guilty as charged. 
II. 
Salavea raises three points of error: 
1. ineffective assistance of counsel; 
2. prosecutorial misconduct; and 
3. insufficiency of evidence to support a conviction. 
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance of 
counsel, an appellate court looks at whether defense counsel's assistance was within the range of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases. State v. DeLeon, 131 
Hawai# i 463, 
478, 319 P.3d 382, 397 (2014). The defendant has the burden of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel and must meet the following two-part test: (1) there were specific errors or 
4 B. Analysis NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or 
diligence; and (2) such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. Id. at 478-79, 319 P.3d at 397-98. 
General claims of ineffectiveness are insufficient to 
satisfy the first part of the test. DeLeon, 131 
Hawai# i at 479, 
319 P.3d at 398. Specific actions or omissions alleged to be error but which had an obvious tactical basis for benefitting the defendant's case will not be subject to further scrutiny. 
Id.
"[M]atters presumably within the judgment of counsel, like trial strategy, will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight." Id. (internal quotation marks and emphasis omitted) (quoting State v. Richie, 88 Hawai# i 19, 39-40, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247-48 
(1998)). 
Salavea argues that her defense counsel failed to 
establish that the CW was using illegal drugs at the time of the alleged crime. That, she contends, would have been admissible to impeach CW's memory, perception or state of mind. See, e.g., State v. Calara, 132 Hawai# i 391, 402, 322 P.3d 931, 942 (2014) 
("a defendant is entitled to cross-examine a witness concerning the witness's 'drug use and addiction at or near the time of the incident to the extent that it affected [the witness's] perception or recollection of the alleged event.'" (brackets in original and ellipses omitted) (quoting State v. Sabog, 108 Hawai# i
 102, 111, 117 P.3d 834, 843 (2005))). Indeed, on 
June 22, 2015, Salavea's original counsel  had filed a notice of 
"intention to use as evidence at trial that [CW] was in the process of using methamphetamine [at the time of the alleged burglary] in her apartment." 5
Defense counsel's failure to establish CW's alleged 
drug use at trial appears to have been a tactical judgment to 
5 Salavea was originally represented by the Office of the Public
Defender ( OPD). OPD moved to withdraw because of a conflict of interest - OPD 
was representing CW in another criminal matter. Private counsel was appointed
on August 27, 2015. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
avoid opening the door to presentation of evidence of Salavea's 
own drug use. In response to Salavea's notice of intention, the State filed a Notice of Intent to Use Evidence of Other Acts. The State identified "Defendant's drug use in 2014 and 2015" as being "admissible as probative evidence to explain why [CW], who is on HOPE probation, did not want to answer defendant's phone calls and hang out with defendant who uses drugs while with [CW], which in turn made defendant upset with [CW's] coolness toward her and provided a motive for the current crime." The State moved in limine to preclude Salavea from proffering evidence of CW's drug use, contending: 
The complainant and the defendant in this case has [sic] met
at a drug rehabilitation program, has [sic] been friends forabout 6 years and used drugs together. They are bothcurrently on probation. If the defendant is allowed to ask [CW] about [CW's] history of drug use, defendant will beopening the door for the explanation by [CW] that one of thereasons she distanced herself from defendant which in turn made defendant upset and provided a motive for the currentoffense, was that [CW] felt she was at risk of relapsingwhile in defendant's company, based on defendant's own druguse. 
Salavea moved in limine to preclude the State from proffering 
evidence about Salavea's drug use. During the hearing on motions in limine, the Circuit Court stated: 
THE COURT: Okay. Use of drugs by anybody, whether it
be the Defendant or any witness, other witness, I think is
legitimate under the case law because it goes to yourability to perceive and recall. It's up to the jury todecide whether there was an effect or not. So that's goingto come in, but it's also a two-way [sic] sword, right? 
. . . . 
[Deputy Prosecuting Attorney]: Judge, I'd also like
to point out -- I think I -- there's a portion of why I
filed Notice of Intent. If it does come out and it's prettymuch irreparable and the jury here hears Defendant'stestimony about any kind of allegations of prior drug use orwhatever that goes beyond the scope of that event, Stateshould be allowed to question Defendant and bring it up thatthey were doing it together over that period of time. 
THE COURT: Oh, yeah, it's fair Cross. Both of you
have a right to fair Cross, and credibility is always,obviously, an issue in addition to what happened that nightor that day. 
. . . . 
THE COURT: 
Okay. Defendant's drug use in 2014 and
2015, is that something you still want at this point? 
6 A. Standard of Review 2. Prosecutorial Misconduct NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Deputy Prosecuting Attorney]: Well, yes. If they
open the door through bringing up the whole history and
everything else, then it will go to -- it will go asfollows. The relevance is this. CW was trying to get awayfrom Defendant because she didn't want to gamble anymore,she didn't want to be in jeopardy with her Hope Probationbecause every time they met, she ended up using, so ifDefense brings up the history of drug use and all of that,then State will be, in my position, entitled to expand onthat and have basically an explanation why Complainant didnot want to have anything to do with the Defendant anymorebecause it was screwing up her Hope Probation. 
THE COURT: Okay. So in other words, if it becomes
relevant. 
[Deputy Prosecuting Attorney]: Yeah. 
THE COURT: Okay, so [Motion in Limine No.] 2 is on
hold. . . . . 
[THE COURT]: . . . Have we exhausted the [Hawaii Rules
of Evidence Rule] 404 matters on the part of Defendant? 
Gambling has been not objected to. Drug use if the door is opened. 
Defense counsel's decision to avoid opening the door to evidence 
about Salavea's own drug use was a tactical decision that will not be subject to further scrutiny or second-guessed by judicial hindsight. DeLeon, 131 Hawai# i at 479, 319 P.3d at 398;  Richie, 
88 Hawai# i at 39-40, 960 P.2d at 1247-48. 
We need not discuss 
the second part of the test because the elements of the two-part test for establishing ineffectiveness of counsel are inclusive, not independent. 
"Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are reviewed 
under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which requires an examination of the record and a determination of whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have contributed to the conviction." 
State 
v. Rogan, 91 Hawai# i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
7 B. Analysis NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In evaluating whether alleged prosecutorial misconduct 
amounts to harmful error, an appellate court considers: "(1) the 
nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant." Rogan, 91 Hawai# i at 412, 984 P.2d at 
1238. Misconduct requires vacating a conviction when, in light of these factors, "there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have contributed to the conviction." Id. (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Salavea claims that the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney 
(DPA
) committed misconduct by: (1)
 offering her personal opinion 
that CW had told the truth and was "credible" and that Salavea had lied; (2) suggesting that Salavea had the burden of proving 
that CW was lying; (3) suggesting that Salavea had lied simply 
because she was the defendant and had "a lot of interest what's 
at stake;" and (4) personally attacking and accusing defense 
counsel of misconduct. 
(1) Salavea cites the following statements from the 
DPA's closing argument as offering the DPA's personal opinion 
that CW told the truth and Salavea had lied:
6 
[DPA]: . . . [CW] told you the truth. [CW's]
testimony was credible. 
THE COURT: Well, the State submits. 
[DPA]: Thank you. The State submits that [CW's] testimony is credible
because it is corroborated by other evidence, because it
makes sense, and because you, as the judges of everybody'sdemeanor and looking at those factors that are given to youin the jury instructions, can assess for yourself whether itmakes sense or not. 
Now, Defendant's testimony, on the other hand, State
submits to you, is not credible, and why it's not credible?Because it doesn't make sense. When Defendant realized that [CW] was not going to give her the money voluntarily,Defendant used an opportunity of having [CW's] fob to gointo [CW's] home and steal and take it on her own and 
6 Salavea's Opening Brief incorrectly describes the DPA's closing
and rebuttal arguments by omitting ellipses and otherwise failing to indicatethat what is purported to be the DPA's closing argument is actually excerptsfrom it. The material portions of the DPA's closing argument are set forth inthis order. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
basically to help herself. When [CW] would not give her
money voluntarily and refused to give her money, Defendantwas upset. She used the fob, she used the opportunity, thechance that she had, to help herself. 
Defendant's story that she had permission to go in and
she had somehow thought it was okay and that [CW] cooperatedwith her and [CW] let her do all of that is not credible.It's not credible, it's a lie, because it doesn't make anysense. Defendant had a motive to go and commit a burglary,to burglarize [CW's] home to take the money, and it wastwo-fold. 
On the one hand, she needed the money. On the 
other hand, you heard about all the dynamics and all thebackground relationship. Her pride was hurt. She did not like the fact that [CW] was not responding to her phonecall. She was upset. In addition to that, she did have[CW's] fob. 
What's really significant here -- and this is what you
need to focus on and this is how the State submits to youthat it's proven that Defendant's story doesn't add up -- isthe whole story by Defendant that the fob was lost by [CW]on March 6th does not hold, does not hold up. 
That's a lie,
and from there, it follows that she was concealing the fob,she was deliberately holding on to that fob secretly so shecould go in her own time at her own convenience and takefrom [CW]. 
[CW] told you and she was very frank with you, she
explained in details what happened to her fob. She told youshe lost that fob as far as almost a year prior to thisincident in March, and that testimony was corroborated byRay Pavao. That testimony was corroborated by the recordsthat she got an additional fob, she got the second fob. 
And what's significant, that fob was only used once --
well, three times, but, like, at one incident at 1:23 --you'll have your exhibit -- 1:25, and then 1:29, which isexactly corresponds to when Defendant went up to the 43rdfloor, went up to the 45th floor, and went down. That was the fob that [CW] was not using because Defendant was inpossession of it. 
What does that mean? That shows you that [CW] told
you the truth. She told you she lost the fob and she gotone on June 27th. The records show that she got herreplacement fob on June 27th. That directly contradictsDefendant's story that [CW] lost it in the car, and fromthere, everything crumbles, everything the Defendant tellsyou is not true. 
(emphasis added). Salavea also cites the following statements 
from the DPA's rebuttal argument as offering the DPA's personal opinion that CW told the truth and Salavea had lied: 
[DPA]: . . . You heard the testimony of [CW's]
parents. You heard the testimony of [CW]. This was a 
violation of their privacy, this was a violation of theirhome, and this was the incident where Defendant took stufffrom [CW] without [CW's] permission and where she enteredher home using her own - [CW's] fob, without [CW's] knowing,and violating [CW's] right and safety of being in her homeand having her property intact. This is not a playful act. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Now, if you look at who is more likely to cook up a
story, that was a good suggestion, and State submits to you
that one of the guiding, multiple guiding factors are onpage 8 of your jury instructions  where Judge Ahn did read
to you the multiple factors that you may consider indetermining whether a person is telling the truth or not. 7
One of them is the witness' manner of testifying.
That is significant. You saw how [CW] testified. I don't know if calling her sophisticated is kind of anoverstatement. 
That's your judgment entirely. She may not
have looked as sophisticated as [defense counsel] isclaiming, but she was very forthright, she was veryforthright about how she felt. 
And she also told you frankly that they were close
friends. 
She was disappointed with how their relationship
went, but she also did express no bias or no reason or nonegativity towards Defendant even though I asked her hardquestions. I was kind of asking her, you know, like, howdid you feel, what was your, you know, what was your feelingtowards relapsing, gambling every time you met withDefendant. She was very, she was very mild as far as when -
THE COURT: The State submits. The State submits. 
[DPA]: 
State submits her testimony was not in any way
showing any animosity. If anything, she felt betrayed and
disappointed. 
She had nothing against [Defendant]. Even 
after this incident, she did not - she has no claim thatthere was some kind of reason for her to feel specificanimosity towards her friend.
She was also very frank and forthright how she
described what happened to her when she discovered thingswere missing. She told you in details how she was trying to 
7 The Circuit Court gave the following instruction to the jury: 
It is your exclusive right to determine whether and to
what extent a witness should be believed and to give weightto his or her testimony accordingly. In evaluating theweight and credibility of a witness's testimony, you mayconsider the witness's appearance and demeanor; thewitness's manner of testifying; the witness's intelligence;the witness's candor or frankness, or lack thereof; thewitness's interest, if any, in the result of this case; thewitness's relation, if any, to a party; the witness'stemper, feeling, or bias, if any has been shown; thewitness's means and opportunity of acquiring information;the probability or improbability of the witness's testimony;the extent to which the witness is supported or contradictedby other evidence; the extent to which the witness has madecontradictory statements, whether in trial or at othertimes; and all other circumstances surrounding the witnessand bearing upon his or her credibility. 
Inconsistencies or discrepancies in the testimony of a
witness, or between the testimony of different witnesses,may or may not cause you to discredit such testimony. In weighing the effect of inconsistencies or discrepancies,whether they occur within one witness's testimony or asbetween different witnesses, consider whether they concernmatters of importance or only matters of unimportant detail,and whether they result from innocent error or deliberatefalsehood. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
call her phone, and it went to ringing first, then
voicemail. It took her a while to figure it out. Then she went downstairs and she started checking the video. If it happened the way Defendant is telling you it happened andthey actually had these conversations and [CW] invited herto go up, why would [CW] go down and bother Ray Pavao toreview the video and check who was it that came? 
And Ray Pavao is absolutely impartial witness. You 
heard his testimony. [Defense counsel] was asking him allthese questions, whether he discussed it with someone else,whether he knew other people, and he told you he had noclue. He was just doing his job, and he saw this tenant whocame down and told him that things were stolen from her andshe wanted to see the video to figure it out who that was.She did have her suspicion because the last person whocalled her was Defendant. 
But why would she go to Ray and
look at that video to try to figure it out if in fact ithappened the way [Defendant] says it happened? [Defendant]is not a truthful witness. 
Another factor is interest, if any, in the result of
this case. Of course, every Defendant has a lot of interestin the result of the case, and that's natural, but youcannot disregard it. 
It's still there. There is interest 
and bias. Defendant has a lot of interest what's at stake,while [CW], why would [CW] go through all of this and whywould [CW] go and make up a story if it was not whathappened? There was no evidence by Defendant why is it that[CW] would do it, and there was no evidence from [CW], eventhough we pushed her, both of us, that she had any reason totell this story. She told you the truth. 
THE COURT: Well, the State submits. 
[DPA]: State submits she told you the truth. THE COURT: 
Strike that "She told you the truth." 
What is your argument? Jury will disregard that part of the argument. [DPA]: Okay. Now, another factor is the extent to which a witness
is supported or contradicted by the evidence, and that's
another factor.  When you see the evidence of Defendant
texting [CW], asking for money, admitting before then thatthey had this kind of falling out, they were pulling apart,texting her "bitch" just before going up to her or, like,sometimes before going up to her house, stealing a bag fromher, admittedly, using the fob on her own, that is evidencethat is on the video, and that tells you something. 
It's 
basically plain evidence that tells you she was using thefob, [CW] was not giving her permission. 8
8 The Circuit Court gave the following instruction to the jury: 
If you find that a witness has deliberately testified
falsely to any important fact or deliberately exaggerated orsuppressed any important fact, then you may reject thetestimony of that witness except for those parts which younevertheless believe to be true. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Now, the extent to which witness has made
contradictory statements. She testified, and you could tell
-- you heard how she was minimizing at first. She was trying to tell you it was okay we're exchanging things andwe take each other's stuff, and then at the end, she changedher position and basically admitted that, yeah, she stolethe bag. Why did she do that? Why did she do that?Because she's trying to convince you of something that didnot happen. She's trying to minimize what she did. 
State submits to you the evidence that you heard and
specifically the fact that after [CW] was not going to giveher money voluntarily and because she was in possession ofthat fob, taken in conjunction, that fob was purchased ayear ago, the replacement fob was purchased a year ago, thatshows [CW] lost it long time ago, not on March 6th, and itshows you the Defendant was concealing that fob, going inwith a criminal intent, means that she's guilty and thatState has proven she's guilty beyond a reasonable doubt ofBurglary in the First Degree, and State will ask you todeliver that verdict. 
(emphasis and footnote added). 
We initially note that Salavea did not object at trial 
to the foregoing portions of the DPA's closing or rebuttal 
arguments. Nevertheless, under the plain error doctrine, "where plain error has been committed and substantial rights have been affected thereby, the error may be noticed even though it was not brought to the attention of the trial court." State v. Miller, 122 
Hawai# i 92, 100, 223 P.3d 157, 165 (2010) (citations 
omitted). The Hawai# i Supreme Court has held that it "will apply 
the plain error standard of review to correct errors which seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings, to serve the ends of justice, and to prevent the denial of fundamental rights." Id. (citations, internal quotation marks and emphasis omitted). Therefore, despite Salavea's failure to raise the issue below, the alleged error may be corrected on appeal unless it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. 
Applying the Rogan factors, we conclude that the DPA's 
closing and rebuttal arguments, taken as a whole, did not constitute prosecutorial misconduct. Disposition of the case below depended upon whether the jury believed the testimony of CW or that of Salavea. In characterizing CW's testimony as the truth and Salavea's testimony as a "lie," the DPA described at length and in detail how the evidence adduced at trial made CW's testimony more credible than that of Salavea. The Circuit Court 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
gave numerous prompt curative instructions ("the State submits"), 
struck the DPA's statement that "She told you the truth" and instructed the jury to "disregard that part of the argument." In addition, the Circuit Court instructed the jury: 
Statements or arguments made by lawyers are not evidence.
You should consider their arguments to you, but you are notbound by their memory or interpretation of the evidence. 
The DPA's argument was supported by the evidence adduced at 
trial. We conclude it was not misconduct at the time of the trial in this case for the DPA to use the word "lie."
9 
(2) Salavea contends that the DPA improperly suggested 
that Salavea had the burden of proving that CW was lying when she argued: 
Another factor is interest, if any, in the result of
this case. Of course, every Defendant has a lot of interest
in the result of the case, and that's natural, but youcannot disregard it. It's still there. There is interest and bias. Defendant has a lot of interest what's at stake,while [CW], why would [CW] go through all of this and whywould [CW] go and make up a story if it was not whathappened? There was no evidence by Defendant why is it that[CW] would do it, and there was no evidence from [CW], eventhough we pushed her, both of us, that she had any reason totell this story. She told you the truth. 
THE COURT: Well, the State submits. 
[DPA]: State submits she told you the truth. THE COURT: Strike that "She told you the truth." What is your argument? Jury will disregard that part of the argument. 
9 Before June 29, 2018, the Hawai #i Supreme Court had never
"prohibited prosecutors from arguing in their closing arguments that the
defendant 'lied.'" State v. Austin, 143 Hawai #i 18, 43, 422 P.3d 18, 43
(2018) (Nakayama, J. writing separately). In Austin, after discussing theissue, Justice Pollack writing for the court stated: 
"In light of these considerations and the extremely minimalutility the term 'lie' and its derivatives have over moreneutral alternatives, we have little trouble determiningthat the balance of factors weighs in favor of prohibition.Accordingly, we now hold that a prosecutor's assertion that
a defendant or witness lied to the jury is improper and
should not be permitted." 
Id. at 56, 422 P.3d at 56 (emphasis added). Because Austin created a new rule, it "should be given only purely prospective application to avoidsubstantial prejudice to prosecutions and the courts." Schwartz v. State, 136Hawai #i 258, 273, 361 P.3d 1161, 1176 (2015) (citation omitted). 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(emphasis added). We disagree with Salavea's contention. The 
DPA was merely arguing that CW's credibility had not been impeached by any evidence of bias or motive to "make up a story." The Circuit Court instructed the jury: 
You must presume the Defendant is innocent of the
charge against her. This presumption remains with the
Defendant throughout the trial of this case, unless anduntil the prosecution proves the defendant guilty beyond areasonable doubt. 
. . . . 
The defendant has no duty or obligation to call any
witnesses or produce any evidence. 
We conclude that the DPA did not improperly argue that Salavea 
had the burden of proving that CW was lying.
(3) Salavea contends that the DPA improperly argued 
that Salavea had lied simply because she was the defendant in a criminal case, citing State v. Basham, 132 Hawai# i 97, 319 P.3d 
1105 (2014). 
In Basham the State began its closing argument by 
telling the jury that two complaining witnesses were "completely credible" and had "absolutely no reason to fabricate or otherwise make up the accounts that they have recited to you in explicit detail." Id. at 104, 319 P.3d at 1112. The prosecution then stated that the defendant who testified at trial had 
absolutely no reason to tell you the truth. So the 
selection or the choice before you in weighing thecredibility of the witness[es] is this. Your willingness tobelieve two people who have no reason to lie to you versusone person who has no reason to tell you the truth. 
Id. At that point in the closing argument the prosecutor had not 
yet discussed any of the testimony presented at trial or offered any reason based on the evidence for why the defendant would have no reason to tell the truth. Id. at 116, 319 P.3d at 1124. The supreme court stated that "the implication of the prosecutor's argument" was that the defendant "had no reason to tell the truth because he was a defendant in the case." Id. at 115-16, 319 P.3d at 1123-24. The court held that 
it is improper for a prosecutor in summation to make generic
arguments regarding credibility based solely upon the statusof a defendant. Walsh, 125 
Hawai #i at 285, 260 P.3d at 364
("Because fundamental rights are infringed when generic 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
tailoring arguments are made, generic tailoring arguments
are subject to plain error review."). Accordingly, aprosecutor may not argue during closing argument thatdefendants, because they are defendants, have no reason totell the truth or have the "greatest motive to lie."Apilando, 79 Hawai #i at 142, 900 P.2d at 149. 
Id. at 118, 319 P.3d at 1126. The supreme court cited to its 
decisions in State v. Walsh, 125 Hawai# i 271, 260 P.3d 350 (2011) 
and State v. Apilando, 79 Hawai# i 128, 900 P.2d 135 (1995). 
Walsh was a "generic tailoring" case.  The DPA in this case did 
not make a generic tailoring argument. In Apilando the supreme court held that it was not improper for the prosecutor to comment that, because the defendant had the highest stake in the outcome of the case, he had the greatest motive to lie. 79 Hawai# i
 at 
142, 900 P.2d at 149. The supreme court's majority opinion in Basham cited Apilando twice, without overruling it.  We 
recently attempted to reconcile this apparent inconsistency in State v. Magbulos, 141 Hawai# i 483, 413 P.3d 387 (App. 2018). 
After discussing Basham and Apilando, id. at 495-97, 413 P.3d at 399-401, we concluded: 1110
10 
"A generic tailoring argument occurs when a prosecutor
states that the defendant was able to sit through the trialand hear the testimony of other witnesses, thereby allowingthe defendant the opportunity to shape his or her testimonyto fit that of other witnesses, even when there is noevidence that defendant has actually done so." 
Walsh, 125 Hawai #i at 282, 260 P.3d at 361 (internal quotation marks omitted).
Generic tailoring arguments are subject to plain error review because theyinfringe on the defendant's fundamental rights to confrontation, to a fairtrial, to testify on his or her own behalf, and to be present at each criminalproceeding. Id. at 284–85, 260 P.3d at 363–64. 
11 A "but see" citation to Apilando appears in the Basham majority
opinion in the following context: 
It is well-established "under Hawai #i case law that 
prosecutors are bound to refrain from expressing theirpersonal views as to a defendant's guilt or the credibilityof witnesses." [State v. Clark, 83 
Hawai #i 289, 304, 926
P.2d 194, 209 (1996)] (citations omitted). See State v. Marsh, 68 Haw. 659, 660, 728 P.2d 1301, 1302 (1986); Statev. Cordeiro, 99 Hawai #i 390, 424–25, 56 P.3d 692, 726–27
(2002); [State v. Tuua, 125 Hawai #i 10, 14, 250 P.3d 273,
277 (2011)]. But see State v. Apilando, 79 Hawai #i 128,
142, 900 P.2d 135, 149 (1995) (prosecutor's comment thatdefendant "had the greatest motive to lie" because he hadthe "highest stake in the outcome of the case" waspermissible attack on defendant's credibility). 
Basham, 132 Hawai #i at 115, 319 P.3d at 1123. 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Basham should be read narrowly to only preclude the
prosecutor from making the generic argument regarding thedefendant's interest in the outcome of the case, and not toprevent the jury from considering the defendant's interestin the outcome of the case in evaluating his or hercredibility.  Interpreting Basham in this manner, we
conclude that the prosecutor's Basham error was harmless anddid not prejudice Magbulos' right to a fair trial. 
12
Id. at 497, 413 P.3d at 401 (emphasis and footnote added). 
Similarly, in this case we conclude that the DPA's argument was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt and did not prejudice Salavea's right to a fair trial because, as discussed above, the DPA also described how the evidence adduced at trial made CW's testimony more credible than that of Salavea. We do not believe the DPA sought to usurp the jury's role to make credibility determinations. Since the DPA's argument was supported by the strength of the evidence adduced at trial, her argument was not misconduct. 
(4) Salavea contends that the DPA personally attacked 
and accused defense counsel of trying to manipulate the jury. Salavea's counsel stated in closing argument: 
If I may leave you with a suggestion of evaluating the
evidence in this case, it would be this. You recall that 
just before our lunch break, [Salavea] went on the witnessstand, and the Deputy Prosecutor asked her whether shedidn't take the Roxy bag without permission and whether thatwasn't indeed theft, and [Salavea] broke down, she was intears, and that's, I suggest -
[DPA]: Objection, Your Honor. This is not in 
evidence, and it's personal statement. 
THE COURT: Overruled. 
[Defense Counsel]: And that's because it probably
didn't even occur to her that that playful little act might
be viewed by the law as a theft. Now, the Government wouldhave you believe that [Salavea], being that type of person,would take all of her friend's valuables, and it's just notborne out by the evidence. 
Something occurred between these
two women, but it wasn't a burglary. 
Thank you. 
12 The Circuit Court gave the following instruction to the jury: 
In evaluating the weight and credibility of a
witness's testimony, you may consider . . . thewitness's interest, if any, in the result of thiscase[.] 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Then, in rebuttal, the DPA stated: 
Ladies and gentlemen, what Defense Counsel was just
doing was trying to appeal to your sense of pity or some
kind of sense, you know, for Defendant, and that's improper.You are given an instruction that you should not beinfluenced by that. 
The Circuit Court had instructed the jury: "You must not be 
influenced by pity for the Defendant or by passion or prejudice against the Defendant." The DPA simply reminded the jury about the Circuit Court's instruction in response to what could reasonably have been interpreted as defense counsel's attempt to have the jury take pity on Salavea. We conclude there was no misconduct. 
3. Sufficiency of Evidence 
A. Standard of Review 
When reviewing the sufficiency of evidence on appeal, 
we apply the following deferential standard of review: 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellatecourt passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence tosupport a conviction; the same standard applies whether thecase was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is notwhether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, butwhether there was substantial evidence to support theconclusion of the trier of fact. 
State v. Kalaola, 124 Hawai# i 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010) 
(citations omitted). "'Substantial evidence' as to every 
material element of the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Id. (citation omitted). 
B. Analysis 
Salavea contends there was no substantial evidence she 
entered CW's apartment unlawfully, or that she entered CW's apartment with intent to commit therein a crime against a person or against property rights. 
The evidence adduced at trial, 
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution, was substantial enough to support the jury's verdict. The evidence 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
showed that the fob used by Salavea to gain access to CW's 
condominium unit on March 27, 2015 had been misplaced by CW in June of 2014 – not on March 6, 2015, as stated by Salavea – because CW purchased a replacement fob on June 27, 2014. There was no evidence to establish what happened to the lost fob between June 27, 2014 and March 27, 2015, but Salavea admitted using the lost fob on March 27, 2015, after CW had refused to give Salavea more of CW's gambling winnings. On that date, Salavea called CW's mobile phone but CW did not answer. Salavea texted "bitch" to CW's phone. CW did not respond. The jury could have inferred that Salavea did this to try to determine whether CW was home. The jury could then have inferred that at 1:33 p.m., with the intent to commit a crime against CW's property rights, Salavea used CW's lost fob to take the Moana Pacific elevator to CW's unit on the 45th floor. Salavea admittedly took CW's Roxy backpack without CW's consent. Salavea did not return the fob, as she stated was her intent, but used it to take the elevator from the 45th floor to the lobby, carrying CW's Roxy backpack on her back. Salavea then went to Popeye's. She admitted to never returning CW's property. Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the jury was presented with substantial evidence as to every material element of burglary in the first degree, of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion that Salavea was guilty of that offense. 
[REMAINDER OF PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK] 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. 
Based on the foregoing, the Amended Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence of the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
entered on April 19, 2016, is affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 4, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Randall K. Hironaka,
(Miyoshi & Hironaka, LLLC)for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Sonja P. McCullen,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
19 