FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--–
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
LESTER S. TSUJIMURA, Defendant-Appellant
 
CAAP-14-0001302
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
'EWA DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-14-00512)
 
JANUARY 27, 2016
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Lester S. Tsujimura (Tsujimura) with 
operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1) and FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(a)(4) (Supp. 2015).1 Prior to trial, the State informed the
 
2
District Court of the First Circuit (District Court)  that it was
only proceeding on the HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) portion of the charge. 
After a bench trial, the District Court found Tsujimura guilty of
 OVUII, in violation of HRS § 291E-61(a)(1). 
The District Court
 
sentenced Tsujimura to a fine of $300, revoked his driver's
 license for one year, required him to obtain a substance abuse
 assessment and complete a fourteen-hour substance abuse
 rehabilitation program, and imposed various fees and assessments. 
The District Court entered its Judgment on October 21, 2014.
 
On appeal, Tsujimura contends: (1) the OVUII charge was
 
deficient for failing to define the term "alcohol"; (2) the
 District Court erred in admitting Officer Thomas Billins'
 testimony regarding Tsujimura's performance on standardized field
 sobriety tests; (3) Officer Billins' testimony that Tsujimura did
 not say he would have difficulty exiting the car due to his prior
 leg injury constituted an impermissible comment on Tsujimura's
 assertion of his right to remain silent; (4) there was
 insufficient evidence that Tsujimura had consumed "alcohol" as
 defined by HRS § 291E-1 (2007) because the State did not prove
 that any alcohol he consumed was the product of distillation; and
 (5) there was insufficient evidence that Tsujimura was under the
 
1HRS § 291E-61(a) provides:
 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates or
assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 
(1)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an amount
 sufficient to impair the person's normal mental
faculties or ability to care for the person and guard
against casualty; 
(2)	 While under the influence of any drug that impairs the
person's ability to operate the vehicle in a careful
and prudent manner;
 
(3)	 With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two hundred ten
liters of breath; or
 
(4)	 With .08 or more grams of alcohol per one hundred
milliliters or cubic centimeters of blood.
 
2The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair his 
normal mental faculties or ability to care for himself and guard
 against casualty. We affirm. 
BACKGROUND
 
Officer Billins was on duty in a "blue-and-white"
 
police vehicle when he observed Tsujimura driving on the Moanalua
 Freeway. Officer Billins was following Tsujimura's vehicle, a
 white SUV, which was in the right-most lane of the highway. 
Officer Billins observed Tsujimura's SUV enter the right shoulder
 of the highway, straddle the solid white line that divides the
 shoulder from the right lane so that the white line was in the
 middle of Tsujimura's SUV, then return to the right lane. 
Officer Billins saw Tsujimura's SUV engage in such action several
 times. Officer Billins activated his strobe lights and then used
 several types of sirens in an attempt to get Tsujimura to pull
 over. When Tsujimura did not respond to the strobe lights and
 sirens, Officer Billins used his PA system to verbally direct
 Tsujimura to pull over. Tsujimura eventually slowed down and
 stopped his vehicle on the right shoulder of the road. 
Upon approaching and speaking with Tsujimura, Officer
 
Billins observed that Tsujimura had "a very flush red face[,]"
 his speech was slurred, he had red, watery eyes, and an odor of
 an alcoholic type beverage was being emitted from his breath and
 his vehicle. Officer Billins administered a series of field
 sobriety tests to Tsujimura. Prior to participating in the
 tests, Tsujimura informed Officer Billins that Tsujimura had an
 old injury to his left knee, "[s]omething about his ACL and it
 was a bad knee[,]" and that he was taking medication for high
 blood pressure and diabetes. Officer Billins did not see
 Tsujimura "limping or anything like that" when Tsujimura exited
 his SUV.
 
While administering the horizontal gaze nystagmus test,
 
Officer Billins noticed that Tsujimura swayed slightly from left
 to right. During the walk-and-turn test, Tsujimura twice failed
 to maintain the initial heel-to-toe stance; stepped off line five
 times; failed to walk in a heel-to-toe fashion on all steps;
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
raised his arms contrary to Officer Billins' instructions; and in
 
making his turn, stumbled backwards and had to raise his arms for
 balance. During the one-leg stand test, Tsujimura was unable to
 keep his foot six inches above the ground; he put his foot down
 on several occasions in the first ten seconds; he did not raise
 his foot off the ground in the last ten seconds; he did not
 follow Officer Billins' instruction to count after several
 prompts to begin counting; and "he was unable to maintain his
 hands down at his side."
 
DISCUSSION
 
We resolve Tsujimura's arguments on appeal as follows:
 
I.
 A.
 
We reject Tsujimura's claims that: (1) the OVUII charge
 
was deficient for failing to define the term "alcohol" and (2) 
there was insufficient evidence that Tsujimura had consumed
 "alcohol" as defined by HRS § 291E-1 (2007). Both claims are
 based on the same erroneous premise -- that the definition of
 alcohol for purposes of HRS Chapter 291E only includes alcohol
 that is the product of distillation, such as distilled liquor,
 and does not include beer or wine, which are not produced through
 distillation. Contrary to Tsujimura's contention, the statutory
 definition of alcohol is not limited to alcohol that is the
 product of distillation, but also specifically includes ethyl
 alcohol, which is "the intoxicating agent in beer, wine and other 
fermented and distilled liquors[.]" Webster Dictionary,
 http://www.webster-dictionary.net/definition/ethyl alcohol (last
 accessed Jan. 26, 2016).
 
As used in HRS Chapter 291E, unless the context
 
otherwise requires, the term "alcohol" is defined as follows:
 
"Alcohol" means the product of distillation of any fermented
liquid, regardless of whether rectified, whatever may be the
origin thereof, and includes ethyl alcohol, lower aliphatic
alcohol, and phenol as well as synthetic ethyl alcohol, but
not denatured or other alcohol that is considered not
 potable under the customs laws of the United States.
 
HRS § 291E-1 (emphasis added). The plain language of HRS 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
§ 291E-1 defines the term alcohol to specifically include "ethyl
 
alcohol." "Ethyl alcohol" (also known as "ethanol") is defined
 as "the organic compound C2H5OH, which is the intoxicating agent
 in beer, wine, and other fermented and distilled liquors[.]" 
Webster Dictionary, http://www.webster-dictionary.net/definition/
 ethyl alcohol (last accessed Jan. 26, 2016); 
see Dictionary.com,
 
http://dictionary.reference.com//browse/alcohol (stating that
 "alcohol" is also called "ethyl alcohol" and "ethanol" and
 defining "alcohol" as "the active principle of intoxicating
 drinks . . . Formula: C2H5OH[;] [and] . . . a drink or drinks
 containing this substance" (British Dictionary definition)) (last
 accessed Jan. 26, 2016). Accordingly, Tsujimura's claim that the
 definition of alcohol is restricted to alcohol produced by
 distillation, and does not include beer or wine, is without
 merit.
 
Moreover, Tsujimura's interpretation of the statutory 
definition of "alcohol" as excluding beer and wine would lead to absurd results. 
The obvious purpose of the Legislature "in 
making it a crime to drive while impaired by alcohol was to prevent and deter deaths, injuries, and property damage caused by drunk drivers." State v. Turping, 136 Hawai
'i 333, 337, 361 P.3d 
1236, 1240 (2015), cert. denied, No. SCWC-13-0002957 (May 20, 2015); see State v. Cummings, 101 Hawai
'i 139, 146, 63 P.3d 1109, 
1116 (2003) (Moon, C.J., dissenting) (noting that the obvious purpose of drunk driving statutes is "to prevent people from driving unsafely due to an alcohol-induced diminished capacity" (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Given this purpose, it would make no sense to exclude drivers who became drunk as the result of consuming beer or wine from the scope of the prohibition against drunk driving. We decline to interpret the statutory definition of alcohol (as advocated by Tsujimura) in a manner that would undermine the Legislature's purpose and lead to the absurd result that drivers who became drunk as the result of consuming beer or wine would not be subject to prosecution. See State v. McKnight, 131 Hawai
'i 379, 389-90, 319 
5
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
P.3d 298, 308-90 (2013) (construing a criminal statute in a 
manner that avoided an absurd result); Keliipuleole v. Wilson, 85 Hawai
'i 217, 221–22, 941 P.2d 300, 304–05 (1997) ("[A] rational, 
sensible and practical interpretation of a statute is preferred to one which is unreasonable or impracticable, because the legislature is presumed not to intend an absurd result, and legislation will be construed to avoid, if possible, inconsistency, contradiction, and illogicality." (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted); State v. 
Ogata, 58 Haw. 514, 518, 572 P.2d 1222, 1225 (1977) ("[E]ven where there is no ambiguity, a departure from the literal application of statutory language will be justified if such literal application will lead to absurd consequences."); HRS § 1-15(2) (2009) ("When the words of a law are ambiguous: . . . (2) The reason and spirit of the law, and the cause which induced
 the legislature to enact it, may be considered to discover its
 true meaning.").
3
 
B.
 
We conclude that the statutory definition of "alcohol," 
which includes "ethyl alcohol" (also known as "ethanol"), "is consistent with the commonly understood meaning of the term ["alcohol"], especially in the context of an offense directed at prohibiting people from driving after consuming alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair their ability to drive." Turping, 
136 Hawai
'i at 339; 361 P.3d at 1242. "The statutory definition 
of 'alcohol' encompasses and is consistent with the common meaning of 'alcohol' as '[(a)] ethanol [(also called ethyl alcohol)] esp[ecially] when considered as the intoxicating agent 
3Tsujimura's interpretation would undermine the entire administrative
and criminal statutory scheme set forth in HRS Chapter 291E by essentially
requiring proof of the specific type of alcoholic beverage a drunk driver
consumed before administrative or criminal penalties could be imposed. It is
 not clear whether it is even possible to distinguish between alcohol that is
the product of distillation and alcohol from beer or wine in determining the
alcohol concentration in a person's breath or blood. If such distinction
 cannot be made, then Tsujimura's claim, if taken to its logical conclusion,
would mean, that the State could not establish a violation of HRS § 291E­
61(a)(3) or HRS § 291E-61(a)(4) by the results of a breath or blood test.
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in fermented and distilled liquors[;] [and (b) a] drink . . .
 
containing ethanol[.]'" Id. (some brackets in original; footnote
 
omitted) (quoting Merriam–Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 27
 (10th ed. 2000) (definition of "alcohol")); see Dictionary.com,
 http://dictionary.reference.com//browse/alcohol (defining
 "alcohol" as "the active principle of intoxicating drinks . . .
 Formula: C2H5OH[;] [and] . . . a drink or drinks containing this
 substance" (British Dictionary definition)) (last accessed Jan.
 26, 2016). Accordingly, there was no need for the State to
 define the term "alcohol" in the OVUII charge in order to give
 Tsujimura fair notice of the charge against him, and we reject
 Tsujimura's claim that his OVUII charge was deficient for failing
 to define the term "alcohol." 
We also reject Tsujimura's claim that there was
 
insufficient evidence to prove that he consumed alcohol as
 defined by HRS § 291E-1. As noted, this claim is based on
 Tsujimura's erroneous interpretation of the statutory definition
 of alcohol, which Tsujimura believes required the State to prove
 that he was under the influence of a particular type of alcohol,
 namely, alcohol that was the product of distillation. However,
 the statutory definition of alcohol encompasses and permitted the
 State to prove that Tsujimura was under the influence of ethyl
 alcohol, the intoxicating agent in beer, wine, and other
 fermented and distilled liquors and the active principle in
 intoxicating drinks. Tsujimura does not contend that there was
 insufficient evidence to prove that he was under the influence of
 ethyl alcohol. Among other things, the State introduced evidence
 that there was an odor of an alcoholic type beverage being
 emitted from Tsujimura's breath and SUV and that he exhibited
 other signs of being under the influence of alcohol, including
 slurred speech; red, watery eyes; impaired driving;
 inattentiveness; and difficulty performing field sobriety tests. 
When viewed in the light most favorable to the State, see State
 v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998), we 
7
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
conclude that there was sufficient evidence that Tsujimura had
 
consumed alcohol as defined by HRS § 291E-1.
 
II.
 
Tsujimura contends that the District Court erred in
 
admitting Officer Billins' testimony regarding Tsujimura's
 performance on standardized field sobriety tests. We disagree.
 
The District Court did not permit Officer Billins to
 
testify about Tsujimura's performance on the horizontal gaze
 nystagmus (HGN) test, sustaining Tsujimura's lack of foundation
 objection to such testimony.
4 The District Court also did not
 
mention any testimony by Officer Billins regarding Tsujimura's
 performance on the HGN test in support of its verdict. Thus,
 Tsujimura's claim that the District Court erred with respect to
 any testimony by Officer Billins regarding his administration of
 the HGN test is without merit.
 
In State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawai
'i 409, 23 P.3d 744 (App. 
2001), this court distinguished between an officer's testimony on a defendant's performance on the HGN test and an officer's testimony on a defendant's performance on psychomotor field sobriety tests (FSTs), namely, the walk-and-turn and one-leg­stand tests. We noted that it is generally recognized that "the foundational requirements for admission of psychomotor FST evidence differ from the foundational requirements for admission of HGN evidence." Ferrer, 95 Hawai
'i at 425, 23 P.3d at 760. We 
explained that "[b]ecause the evidence procured by administration of psychomotor FSTs is within the common experience of the ordinary citizen, the majority of courts that have addressed the issue generally consider psychomotor FSTs to be nonscientific 
4Officer Billins was permitted to testify that he noticed that Tsujimura
swayed slightly from left to right while Officer Billins was administering the
HGN test. This testimony did not refer to Tsujimura's performance on the HGN
test, but rather Officer Billins' observations of Tsujimura's physical
movements.
 
8
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
evidence." Id. 5 We quoted with approval, the following
 
statement set forth in State v. Meador, 647 So.2d 826, 831 (Fla.
 
Dist. Ct. App. 1996):
 
A defendant's ability to perform these simple psychomotor
tasks is within a juror's common experiences and
understanding. There are objective components of the field
sobriety exercises, which are commonly understood and easily
determined, such as whether a foot is on the line or not.
Jurors do not require any special expertise to interpret
performance of these tasks. Thus, evidence of the police
officer's observations of the results of defendant's
 performing the walk-and-turn test [and] the one-leg[-]stand
test . . . should be treated no differently than testimony
of lay witnesses (officers, in this case) concerning their
observations about the driver's conduct and appearance.
 
Ferrer, 95 Hawai 'i at 426-27, 23 P.3d at 761-62 (brackets and 
ellipsis points in original). 
In Ferrer, we concluded that because "psychomotor FSTs
 
are nonscientific in nature[,] . . . an arresting officer may be
 
permitted to testify as to his or her physical observations about
 a[n OVUII] arrestee's performance on such tests and to give an
 opinion, based on such observations, as to whether the arrestee
 was intoxicated when arrested." Id. at 427, 23 P.3d at 762. In
 
other words, an officer, based on the officer's personal
 observations, can testify about an OVUII arrestee's performance
 on psychomotor FSTs and can provide a lay opinion about the
 arrestee's sobriety based on the officer's observations. 
Although we permitted such testimony regarding the officer's
 observations of an OVUII arrestee's performance on the
 psychomotor FSTs, we further concluded that "an arresting officer
 may not, without a proper foundation being laid, testify that, 
5In contrast, we recognized that "HGN testing is based on a scientific
principle not generally known by lay jurors," and we required that before HGN
test results can be admitted into evidence, the State must lay a foundation
that (1) the officer administering the test was duly qualified to conduct the
test and grade the test results and (2) the test was administered properly.
Ferrer, 95 Hawai' i at 422-23, 23 P.3d at 757-58. 
9
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in his or her opinion, a[n OVUII] arrestee 'failed' the FSTs." 
Id. 6
 
Here, Officer Billins did not testify or render an
 
opinion that Tsujimura failed the psychomotor FSTs. Instead,
 Officer Billins testified about his personal observations of
 Tsujimura's actions and movements in performing the psychomotor
 FSTs. Officer Billins' testimony regarding Tsujimura's
 performance on the psychomotor FSTs was the type of testimony we
 held in Ferrer was permissible based on an officer's personal
 observations. We conclude that District Court did not err in
 allowing this testimony.
 
III.
 
Tsujimura's claim that the District Court permitted
 
testimony by Officer Billins that constituted an impermissible
 comment on Tsujimura's assertion of his right to remain silent is
 without merit.
7
 
Because an accused has the constitutional right to 
remain silent, the government may not use the accused's exercise of this privilege against him or her. State v. Mainaaupo, 117 
Hawai
'i 235, 252, 178 P.3d 1, 18 (2008). Thus, a prosecutor 
cannot use the defendant's exercise of his or her right to remain silent to imply that the defendant is guilty, i.e., that an innocent person would not have remained silent. See id. at 253­
55, 178 P.3d at 19-21. 
6In order for an officer to testify that the arrestee "failed" FSTs, the
State is required to lay a foundation which includes that the officer had
received specific training in the administration of the procedures for theFSTs and the grading of their results. See State v. Toyomura, 80 Hawai' i 8,
26, 904 P.2d 893, 911 (1995). 
7We note that Officer Billins' testimony that Tsujimura challenges
refers to Officer Billins' pre-arrest interaction with Tsujimura. "[C]ourtsare divided on whether the government may comment on a defendant's pre-arrestsilence[,]" State v. Mainaaupo, 117 Hawai' i 235, 252 n.9, 178 P.3d 1, 18 n.9
(2008), and Hawai' i has apparently not yet decided this issue. We need not 
reach this issue because even assuming arguendo that the government may notcomment on a defendant's pre-arrest silence, Officer Billins did not commenton Tsujumua's exercise of his right to remain silent. 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The standard for determining whether the prosecution 
has impermissibly commented on the defendant's failure to testify 
at trial is "whether the language used was manifestly intended or was of such character that the jury would naturally and necessarily take it to be a comment on the failure of the accused to testify." State v. Padilla, 57 Haw. 150, 158, 552 P.2d 357, 
362 (1976) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). In State v. Smith, 106 Hawai
'i 365, 375, 105 P.3d 242, 252 (App. 
2004), we applied the same test in determining whether questioning by the prosecution constituted an impermissible comment on the defendant's exercise of his right to remain silent after being arrested and advised of his Miranda rights. 
In accordance with Smith, we apply the test set forth
 
in Padilla to evaluate Tsujimura's claim. The question therefore
 becomes whether the prosecutor's redirect examination of Officer
 Billins that Tsujimura challenges "was manifestly intended or was
 of such character that the [District Court] would naturally and
 necessarily take it to be a comment on [Tsujimura's exercise of
 his right to remain silent]." Padilla, 57 Haw. at 158, 552 P.2d
 at 362 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Clearly,
 the answer to this question is "No."
 
The context of Officer Billins' testimony is as
 
follows. On direct examination, the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
 (DPA) asked Officer Billins about whether Tsujimura had provided
 any information that would raise questions about Tsujimura's
 ability to perform the field sobriety tests. Officer Billins
 testified that Tsujimura informed Officer Billins that Tsujimura
 had an old injury to his left knee, "[s]omething about his ACL
 and it was a bad knee[,]" and that he was taking medication for
 high blood pressure and diabetes. Officer Billins further
 testified that he did not "see any bandages on [Tsujimura]" and
 that he did not see Tsujimura "limping or anything like that"
 when Tsujimura exited his SUV. On cross-examination, defense
 counsel questioned Officer Billins about Tsujimura's knee injury,
 suggested that the ACL tear may have been to a different knee
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
than the old left knee injury, and obtained Officer Billins'
 
concession that he had no idea whether Tsujimura's knee injury or
 ACL injury affected Tsujimura's ability to perform the field
 sobriety tests. 
On redirect examination, the DPA elicited the following
 
testimony:
 
[DPA]: Q. . . . You testified that when the
 
defendant left the car he didn't have any difficulty exiting
the car.
 
[Officer Billins]: A. Yes.
 
[DPA]: Q. So did the defendant at that time explain
to you he couldn't get out of the car because of an ACL
injury?
 
[Defense Counsel]: Objection, Your Honor. It
 
comments on defendant's right to remain silent.
 
THE COURT: It's overruled. Let's see if the
 
statement comes out.
 
Go ahead and answer the question.
 
[DPA]: Q. Do you recall if the defendant indicated
to you he would have difficulty exiting the car because of
his previous leg injury?
 
[Officer Billins]: A. No statements were made.
 
Contrary to Tsujimura's contention, Officer Billins'
 
testimony that "No statements were made" by Tsujimura about 
Tsujimura having difficulty exiting the car because of his
 previous leg injury did not constitute an impermissible comment
 on Tsujimura's assertion of his right to remain silent. Indeed,
 there was no comment at all by Officer Billins about Tsujimura's
 assertion of the right to remain silent. Examined in context,
 the DPA's question and Officer Billins' answer were directed at
 whether there was any indication that Tsujimura's prior knee
 injury affected his ability to perform the field sobriety tests. 
The DPA's question and Officer Billins' answer had nothing to do
 with Tsujimura's exercise of the right to remain silent. There 
was no attempt to suggest that Tsujimura had refused to answer
 questions or had sought to invoke the right to remain silent. 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
There was also no attempt to imply that an innocent person in
 
Tsujimura's position would have spoken. Thus, it is clear that
 the challenged exchange between the DPA and Officer Billins was
 not "manifestly intended or was of such character that the
 [District Court] would naturally and necessarily take it to be a
 comment on [Tsujimura's exercise of his right to remain silent]." 
See Padilla, 57 Haw. at 158, 552 P.2d at 362 (internal quotation
 marks and citation omitted).
 
Furthermore, this was not a jury trial, but a bench
 
trial. "It is well established that a judge is presumed not to
 be influenced by incompetent evidence." State v. Antone, 62 Haw.
 
346, 353, 615 P.2d 101, 107 (1980). There is no indication that
 the District Court was unaware of or ignored the well-established
 prohibition against drawing negative inferences from a
 defendant's exercise of his or her right to remain silent. 
IV.
 
Tsujimura contends that there was insufficient evidence
 
to show that he was under the influence of alcohol in an amount
 sufficient to impair his normal mental faculties or ability to
 care for himself and guard against casualty. We disagree.
 
Viewed in the light most favorable to the State, the
 
evidence showed that Tsujimura's driving was impaired by alcohol
 in that he was unable to keep his SUV within its lane, and 
instead entered the right shoulder of the highway and straddled
 the solid line separating the lane from the shoulder on several
 occasions; Tsujimura was inattentive and did not notice several
 different attempts by Officer Billins to have Tsujimura pull
 over; Tsujimura's eyes were red and watery, his speech was
 slurred, and his breath and SUV emitted an odor of alcohol; and
 Tsujimura had difficulty performing the psychomotor field
 sobriety tests. We conclude that the State introduced
 substantial evidence to support Tsujimura's OVUII conviction. 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the District
 
Court's Judgment.
 
On the briefs:
 
Alen M. Kaneshiro
 
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Sonja P. McCullen
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
14
 