NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000446
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BRIAN UNDERWOOD, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 14-1-00622)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Brian Underwood (Underwood) appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence (Judgment)
 
issued on May 27, 2015, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
(circuit court).1
 Underwood was convicted by a jury of: Count I,
 
Unlawful Imprisonment in the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-722 (2014);
2
 and Count III, Abuse of
1 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2 At the time of the incident in this case, HRS § 707-722 provided in
pertinent part:
 
§707-722 Unlawful imprisonment in the second degree.  (1) A
person commits the offense of unlawful imprisonment in the second
degree if the person knowingly restrains another person.
 
. . . . 
(4)
 Unlawful imprisonment in the second degree is a misdemeanor.
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Family or Household Member in violation of HRS § 709-906(1) and
 
(5) (Supp. 2013).3
 
On appeal, Underwood asserts the following points of
 
error: (1) there was no substantial evidence to support his
 convictions; and (2) the deputy prosecuting attorney (DPA)
 
committed misconduct during closing argument.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the
 relevant legal authorities, we resolve Underwood's points of
 error as follows and we affirm.
  
(1) Sufficiency of the evidence.  Underwood argues that
 
there was not sufficient evidence to support his convictions.
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
2(...continued)
Additionally, HRS § 707-700 (2014) provided, in relevant part: 
"Restrain" means to restrict a person's movement in such a manner
as to interfere substantially with the person's liberty:
(1) By means of force, threat, or deception[.]
 
3 At the time of the incident in this case, HRS § 709-906(1) and (5)
provided:
 
§709-906 Abuse of family or household members; penalty. (1)
It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in concert, to
physically abuse a family or household member or to refuse
compliance with the lawful order of a police officer under
subsection (4). The police, in investigating any complaint of
abuse of a family or household member, upon request, may transport
the abused person to a hospital or safe shelter.
For the purposes of this section, "family or household
member" means spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, former spouses
or reciprocal beneficiaries, persons in a dating relationship as
defined under section 586-1, persons who have a child in common,
parents, children, persons related by consanguinity, and persons
jointly residing or formerly residing in the same dwelling unit.
 
. . . .
 
(5) Abuse of a family or household member and refusal to
comply with the lawful order of a police officer under subsection
(4) are misdemeanors . . . .
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai 'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) 
(citation omitted). "Substantial evidence as to every material 
element of the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Id. (citation and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
Underwood argues that "in order for [his] convictions 
to stand on appeal, the evidence supporting that conviction must be credible evidence." Underwood asserts that the testimony of the complaining witness (CW) and her sister (Sister) were not 
credible and thus his convictions should be vacated. However, as 
is often expressed, "[t]he jury, as the trier of fact, is the sole judge of the credibility of witnesses or the weight of the evidence." State v. Wagner, 139 Hawai
'i 475, 485, 394 P.3d 705, 
715 (2017) (quoting State v. Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117 (1981)). 
In this case, there was sufficient evidence to support
 
Underwood's convictions based on the CW's testimony and the
 testimony of Sister. With regard to the Abuse of Family or
 Household Member offense, the CW testified that at the time of
 the incident on April 5, 2014, she was living in Underwood's
 apartment, had been dating him for about ten months, and had been
 living with him for about three months. The day before the
 incident, the CW testified that she received texts and Facebook
 messages from two women who claimed to have been having phone,
 text, and Facebook conversations with Underwood. Over the course
 of the early morning hours on April 5, 2014, the CW had further
 communications with one of the women and ultimately confronted
 Underwood about the situation, which led to them arguing and
 deciding that the CW and her Sister (who was visiting) would move
 out of the apartment in the morning. Subsequently, while
 Underwood was sleeping, the CW made numerous printouts of
 messages between Underwood and the other women and placed them
 all over their bedroom. According to the CW, when Underwood
 awoke, he and the CW began to argue, Underwood threw a box of her
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
belongings out the door and onto the front lawn, and told the CW
 
to take off the sweatpants she was wearing because they belonged
 to him. The CW gave the sweatpants to Underwood and was left
 wearing only a t-shirt.
 
Subsequently, the CW testified that she somehow ended
 
up on the ground, that Underwood grabbed her ankles and began to
 pull her to the front door. When Underwood opened the front
 door, the CW was able to get free and crawled under a kitchen
 table. Underwood grabbed the CW's legs again and began to pull
 her toward the door, and the CW called for Sister. The CW
 testified that she felt pain in her head and legs as Underwood
 pulled her toward the door. After Sister came downstairs, the CW
 put on another pair of sweatpants and went outside to pick up her
 belongings on the lawn. As the CW was picking up her belongings,
 she felt something hit her head, turned around, and saw that
 Underwood was throwing bottles of Gatorade at her. The CW
 testified she believed Underwood threw at least four Gatorade
 bottles at her and her head felt sore from being hit with the
 bottles.
 
The evidence in the record is sufficient to support the
 
jury's finding that Underwood committed the offense of Abuse of
 Family or Household Member.
 
With regard to the offense of Unlawful Imprisonment in
 
the Second Degree, the CW's written statement given to the police
 on the day of the incident states, in pertinent part, that:
 Underwood had a gun in his hand and pushed the CW to the couch,
 that "[h]e held the gun to my head on the side and front", "I
 begged to leave", "[h]e pushed the gun firmly upon my head", and
 "[w]hen he had the gun to my head, I kept asking to go, but he
 said I couldn't go." According to the CW's written statement,
 Sister was ringing the door bell but Underwood would not answer
 it. Further, Sister testified that Underwood had allowed Sister
 and the CW to return to the apartment to retrieve their
 belongings. As they were leaving, Sister walked out of the door
 and heard the door slam and the CW was no longer behind her. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
After a few minutes, Sister began to persistently ring the door
 
bell, and the CW eventually came running out of the house looking
 scared. The CW told Sister that Underwood had a gun and was
 going to kill the CW. The CW further told Sister that Underwood
 had put the gun in her face.
 
At trial, the CW testified that she did not recall
 
parts of the incident when she was on the couch. However, she
 also testified that since the incident in April 2014, she and
 Underwood had been in contact at certain points trying to work
 things out, and that they had been in contact up to about
 February or March of 2015.
4 The contact included texts, phone
 
calls and face-to-face visits. The CW was living on Maui, but
 had come to Oahu a number of times to see Underwood, who had
 helped to pay for some of the CW's flights. During her contact
 with Underwood, they had discussed her testifying and although
 she did not recall what he said about it, she testified that "I
 know I wanted the best thing for him." The CW further testified
 that she was no longer in a relationship with Underwood, that she
 still loved him, and that she still wanted what is best for him.
 
In her testimony at trial, the CW could not recall
 
details about Underwood holding a gun or when she was on the
 couch. However, given the totality of the evidence, the jury
 could have discounted the CW's trial testimony in this regard and
 relied on her written statement given to police on the day of the
 incident and Sister's testimony. The evidence in the record is
 sufficient to support the jury's finding that Underwood committed
 the offense of Unlawful Imprisonment in the Second Degree.
(2) Prosecutorial misconduct.  Underwood contends that
 
the DPA committed misconduct during closing argument when she
 argued that "[t]he defense attorney tried to get [the CW] to make
 up some story about how she tried to kick the defendant and she
 fell back[]" and further, when she argued that "the defense
 attorney tried to push [the CW] on cross-examination; tried to
 
4
 Trial started on March 16, 2015.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
get her to say or admit that she tried to kick the defendant." 
The defense cross-examination of the CW included the
 
following:
 
Q. [Defense counsel] Why do you care if he's having
relationships with other women?
 
A. [CW] Because I'm in a relationship with him. I'm
 
living with him, and we've talked about it before. He
 said he wasn't having any relationships.
 
Q. And that angered you?
 A. I was upset about it. I was hurt.
 Q. You went downstairs, right?
 A. Yes.
 Q. And you began talking to Mr. Underwood,
right?
 
A. I don't remember what was said.
 Q. But you -- my question was you began talking
to Mr. Underwood, correct?
 
A. Yes.
 Q. And there was a conversation going on, right?
 A. Yes.
 Q. And you became angry at him, right?
 A. I wasn't angry at him.
 Q. Then at some point you came up to him and got
in his face, correct?
 
A. No.
 Q.
 And then at some point you kicked him?
  
A. No.
 Q. Correct? You attempted to kick him, correct?
 A. No.
 Q. At some point you fell down on the ground,
correct?
 
A. I was on the ground. I'm not sure how I got
there.
 
Q. Well, he didn't push you down, right?
 A. I don't remember how I got to the ground.
 Q. Well, if he had pushed you down, you would
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
certainly remember it, right?
 
A. I'm not sure.
 Q. In any event, you got to the ground somehow?
 
A. That's correct.
 
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
In light of this cross-examination, as well as the 
evidence in the record that the CW had numerous contacts with 
Underwood since the incident, that the CW had discussed testifying with Underwood, and her testimony that she still loved him and wanted the best for him, it was fair for the DPA to argue in closing that defense counsel had "tried to push the CW on cross-examination" and "tried to get [the CW] to say or admit that she tried to kick the defendant." 
However, we have concerns 
about the DPA's comment that "defense attorney tried to get [the CW] to make up some story about how she tried to kick the defendant and she fell back." The DPA's comment that defense counsel "tried to get [the CW] to make up some story" can be read as an attack on the integrity of defense counsel, and in that regard cannot be condoned. However, we disagree with the defense that it is similar, at least in degree, to the prosecutor's comments in State v. Klinge, 92 Hawai
'i 577, 593, 994 P.2d 509, 
525 (2000).5 Rather, unlike the very direct and lengthier attack 
on defense counsel in Klinge, the comment here is brief and somewhat indirect.
 We note that, although there was an objection by
 
defense counsel to this comment, it was overruled and there was
 
5 In Klinge, the defendant alleged several acts of misconduct by the 
prosecutor, including that the prosecutor stated during closing argument: "The
defense lawyer did not tell you that like he's taking everything out ofcontext like he's not going to give you the whole story. He's not going togive you the whole picture because he has a duty [to] get his client off." 92 Hawai'i at 593, 994 P.2d at 525. The supreme court determined that the
statement constituted misconduct. However, because the trial court hadsustained defense counsel's objection, ordered the statement stricken from therecord, and advised the jury that "statements or remarks made by counsel arenot evidence," and in light of the strength of the evidence against thedefendant, the supreme court held that the remark was not so prejudicial as tohave denied the defendant a fair trial. Id. at 595, 994 P.2d at 527. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
no curative instruction. During jury instructions, however, the 
circuit court did instruct the jury that "[s]tatements or remarks made by counsel are not evidence. You should consider their arguments to you, but you are not bound by their recollections or interpretations of the evidence." Thus, given the entirety of the record, that the arguably offending comment was a one-time brief remark, that the circuit court gave the above instruction to the jury about statements made by counsel, and given the strength of the evidence against Underwood in this case, we conclude that there is no reasonable possibility that the DPA's comment might have contributed to Underwood's convictions. Klinge, 92 Hawai
'i at 584, 994 P.2d at 516. Thus, we disagree 
with Underwood's contention that his convictions must be vacated based on the DPA's challenged statements. 
Therefore, the Judgment of Conviction and Probation
 
Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on May
 27, 2015, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 10, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Jon N. Ikenaga,
Deputy Public Defender,Office of the Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
8
 