NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-14-0000923 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
LS, OBO MINOR CHILDREN, Petitioner-Appellee,
v. 
SH, Respondent-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(FC-DA NO. 14-1-039K) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Respondent-Appellant SH (
Mother) appeals from the Order 
for Protection entered by the Family Court of the Third Circuit 
(
Family Court)1 on March 21, 2014, and the Order Denying 
Respondent's Motion for Reconsideration Filed on March 31, 2014, 
(Order Denying Reconsideration) entered by the Family Court on 
June 27, 2014. Mother raises three points of error:2 
1. the Family Court erred in issuing the Order for 
Protection; 
2. the Family Court erred in denying Mother's motion 
for reconsideration; and 
3. the Family Court erred in limiting the time for 
Mother to examine witnesses during the March 21, 2014 evidentiary 
hearing. 
1 The Honorable Aley K. Auna, Jr. presided. 
2 Mother's opening brief fails to comply with Hawai #i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure ( HRAP ) Rule 28(b)(4). 
We have restated the points of
error for purposes of clarity. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the 
relevant statutory and case law, we affirm the issuance of the 
Order for Protection but vacate the Order Denying Reconsideration 
and remand to the Family Court for an evidentiary hearing on the 
Motion for Reconsideration. 
I. 
Mother and Petitioner-Appellee LS (Father) divorced in 
2010. In February, 2014, they shared custody of their children LH1 (then age 8) and LH2 (then age 6). On February 6, 2014, 
Father obtained a Temporary Restraining Order (TRO) prohibiting 
Mother from contacting Father, LH1, or LH2. According to 
Father's petition, LH1 reported that Mother "choked him against 
the hall way [sic] wall and threw him to the ground twice" on 
February 4, 2014. The TRO set a hearing date of February 18, 
2014, on an order to show cause (OSC) why an order for protection 
should not be issued against Mother. 
On February 14, 2014, Mother filed a motion to modify 
the TRO and for sanctions against Father. Mother's motion was 
supported by a letter from LH1's therapist, Nancy M. Sallee 
(Sallee).  The Family Court set Mother's motion for hearing on 
February 24, 2014. 
According to the Family Court's minutes, the court 
referred the case to the State Department of Human Services (DHS) on February 6, 2014, but DHS's report had not been submitted by 
the time the OSC was heard on February 18, 2014. The Family 
Court continued the OSC hearing from February 18, 2014, to 
February 24, 2014 (the hearing date for Mother's motion to modify 
the TRO), and ordered the DHS representative, Denise McAndrews 
(McAndrews), to submit a written report before the hearing. 
On February 24, 2014, according to the Family Court's 
minutes, DHS's counsel appeared and informed the Family Court 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that McAndrews had been sick for the past week. DHS was unable 
to locate a report. The Family Court continued both hearings 
until March 3, 2014. 
McAndrews' report was submitted on February 28, 2014. 
The report stated that DHS's Child Welfare Services section (CWS) 
had received reports concerning abuse of LH1 on separate 
occasions by Father, Father's wife, and Mother. CWS noted being 
aware that LH1 "has violent tendencies, formerly [sic] stabbing a 
teacher with a pencil." CWS's investigation "unconfirmed" the 
allegations against Father and Father's wife. The investigation 
concerning allegations against Mother was continuing; the 
Children's Justice Center (CJC) had interviewed LH1 and LH2, 
Mother had also been interviewed, and CWS had requested police 
assistance with the case. 
On March 3, 2014, Mother filed with the Family Court 
objections to DHS relying upon the CJC or Hawai# i County Police 
Department interviews of LH1 and LH2. The objections were supported by a declaration and letter from Sallee (the therapist 
for LH1 and LH2). 
On March 3, 2014, according to the Family Court's 
minutes, the parties appeared and the court set a contested case 
hearing for March 21, 2014, and also set prehearing deadlines. 
On March 7, 2014, McAndrews filed another report with 
the Family Court. McAndrews concluded that "mother's actions 
were appropriate discipline under the circumstances" and reported 
that CWS was closing its file on the case. 
Mother filed her witness list on March 18, 2014. She 
listed twelve witnesses including herself, Father, McAndrews, 
Sallee, and Dr. Elodie S. Imonen (a child and adolescent 
psychiatrist) (Dr. Imonen). Father also filed his witness list 
on March 18, 2014. He listed seven witnesses including Mother 
and a number of police officers. 
The evidentiary hearing took place on March 21, 2014. 
According to Mother, the Family Court limited each side's 
examination of witnesses to thirty minutes. Father called five 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
witnesses: himself, his wife, a custodian of medical records, 
and two police officers. Officer Brett Winther (Officer Winther) 
testified that he interviewed LH1 on February 5, 2014. Father 
was present during the interview. LH1 "stated something to the 
effect that his mother choked him." Officer Winther noticed 
bruising on the side of LH1's face, under his lower jaw area, and 
on his left forearm. Father's wife authenticated three 
photographs of LH1 taken on February 6, 2014. Father testified 
that he picked up LH1 and LH2 on February 5, 2014. LH1 said, 
"Mom had choked me" and LH2 "confirmed the story." Father saw 
bruising on LH1's left wrist and cheeks and on the back of LH1's 
neck. Father took LH1 and LH2 to the police station. The 
children were interviewed by Officer Winther, separately, with 
Father present. LH1 told Officer Winther that "he was choked in 
the hallway, and he had a hard time breathing." LH2 also told 
Officer Winther that Mother had choked LH1. After the police 
station, Father took the children to the emergency room. LH1 
"told the doctor that his mom had choked him." On cross-
examination, Father admitted that LH1 had a history of "Mental 
deficits, psychological problems." Father admitted receiving 
reports from LH1's school that LH1 had been aggressive or 
violent. 
Father's Exhibit 4 was LH1's medical records from Kona 
Community Hospital. According to the records, LH1 was admitted 
to the emergency room at 10:10 p.m. on February 5, 2014, 
accompanied by Father. LH1's vital signs were within normal 
limits. At 10:35 p.m. LH1 told a nurse "that mother 'grabbed arm 
and drug him' and 'grabbed neck[.]'" He denied any pain. The 
nurse observed a "[s]mall oval bruise to left wrist[.]" LH1 was 
seen by a doctor at 12:05 a.m. on February 6, 2014. LH1 stated 
"that his mother 'choked' him" two days ago. Bruising was 
observed on the front and back of his neck and on his left 
forearm. X-rays of his neck were normal. The clinical 
impression was "possible physical abuse[.]" He was released from 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the emergency room in stable condition at 1:23 a.m. on 
February 6, 2014. 
Father presented his case in just over twenty-five 
minutes and Mother spent four minutes cross-examining Father's 
witnesses. Mother called four witnesses: herself, her husband, 
McAndrews, and Dr. Imonen. McAndrews testified that she works 
for DHS as an assessment worker. She had originally been 
assigned to investigate a report CWS received in mid-2013 
involving alleged sexual abuse of LH1 by Father, and Father's 
threat of sex abuse to LH2. LH1's 2014 report of being choked by 
Mother was logged into the case already being handled by 
McAndrews. McAndrews interviewed LH1 and LH2 at the CJC. LH1 
described "his mother restraining him[.]" McAndrews had driven 
LH1 and LH2 to the CJC for their interviews. "In the back seat 
of the car, [LH1] was attempting to coach [LH2] on the event that 
was coming up." This caused her to "have a certain amount of 
suspicion about the interview that was going to be coming[.]" 
Mother's Exhibit H was McAndrews' letter dated March 7, 2014, 
stating that "CWS has concluded its investigation and has 
unconfirmed [sic] allegations of abuse of [LH1] by his mother[.]" 
The letter summarized: "DHS believes mother's actions were 
appropriate discipline under the circumstances." McAndrews 
testified that based upon her investigation, she concluded that 
Mother had restrained LH1 to prevent him from harming himself. 
In response to a question by the Family Court, McAndrews 
testified that her conclusion was based "in totality, the whole 
history of the case, everything that I know about the child, his 
behavior, and the dynamics with the children." On cross-
examination, McAndrews was asked about LH1's injuries. She 
testified that Mother said LH1 had been "acting out" that week. 
Climbing underneath bathroom stalls. The scrape on
the back of his neck, it was kind of almost a place where a
collar would be. There's like a line there. It did not appear to me to be thumb bruising or those kind of things.It looked like it could have easily been gotten crawlingunder a bathroom stall, like a child would have to ducktheir head down and crawl under in a . . . straight line. 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mother testified that LH1 had after-school karate class 
on February 4, 2014. LH1's gi3 was filthy. Mother found a red 
mark on LH1's chest and a red mark on his inner-left forearm. 
Mother also testified that she was a high school special 
education teacher with training in behavior principles and 
management, Asperger's syndrome4 and high-functioning autism, and 
interventions for oppositional defiant and anger issues. She stated that LH1: 
suffers from autism spectrum disorder, oppositional defiant
ADHD, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder.Occasionally he has meltdowns which cause impulsivebehaviors, violence, aggression, self-harm, and he can cause–- those types of behaviors can cause harm to himself orthose around him. 
Mother physically restrains LH1 "if he's causing self-harm or 
harm on [sic] others." On the evening in question, LH1 became 
violent because he did not want to take a bath. He swung his 
fist toward Mother. Mother described what she did to restrain 
him until "his body relaxed." She then "released him as part of 
the de-escalation phase." In response to another question by the 
Family Court, Mother said that she did not inform Father of this 
because Father "has requested that [she] not speak to him during 
drop-offs, so there's no communication." On cross-examination, 
Mother explained that she held LH1's shoulders down with her 
forearms, cupped her hands behind his head and held his cheek 
muscles with her thumbs. She does this because LH1 "stimms.5 
He's autistic . . . [Then] he starts stimming in different 
3 A "gi" is a martial arts uniform. 
4 Asperger's syndrome is one of a group of neurological disorders
known as autism spectrum disorders. Asperger's syndrome is considered to be
on the mild end of the spectrum. See Asperger's Syndrome, Healthline,https://www.healthline.com/health/ asperger-syndrome (last visited Feb. 2,2019). 
5 "Stimming" refers to self-stimulating behaviors, usually involving
repetitive movements or sounds, that are part of the diagnostic criteria forautism. See Stimming: Causes and Management, Healthline,https://www.healthline.com/health/autism/stimming (last visited Jan. 30,2019); DSM-5 Criteria, Autism Speaks,https://www.autismspeaks.org/dsm-5-criteria (last visited Jan. 30, 2019). 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
limbs." Mother has specific training in this because she is a 
special-education teacher. Mother was in the process of 
explaining herself to Father's attorney when Father's attorney 
exceeded the time allotted to him by the Family Court. 
Mother still had nine minutes left so she called her 
husband (Husband) to testify. Husband was home on the evening in 
question and testified about the events in question. His 
testimony was consistent with that of Mother. After he heard 
Mother twice say to LH1, "just because you're autistic, doesn't 
mean you can act this way[,]" LH1 "calmed down[.]" Father was 
unable to cross-examine Husband because Father was out of time. 
Mother still had two minutes so she called Dr. Imonen 
(LH1's psychiatrist). Dr. Imonen testified that she had 
instructed Mother on the need to physically restrain LH1 "in case 
he was as aggressive at home as he had proven to be at school, 
that she would likely need to restrain him at home to protect 
himself or anyone else around." 
After hearing closing arguments the Family Court 
announced its findings and conclusions: 
[We] have statements made by [LH1] to a police officer, to a
doctor, to the father, and to the social worker, fourdifferent times. Now, if he is lying, that's pretty good,making the same statements four different times to fourdifferent individuals. And [LH2] confirming to both thepolice officer, to the father, to the social worker what hehad seen. 
Now, I can understand where children will make up
stories. Mother believes that he lied. But there are justtoo many of the same statements made that I cannot discountthat. 
. . . . 
Frankly, I find it hard to believe that social worker
would put unconfirmed with all of this information there.
That's just beyond me. But she opined what she did. And so with the protective order, I'm just going to say that theprior custody will continue. The prior exchange ofvisitations will continue. 
And the Court will order [Mother] not to use the
constraints that she's been invited to do, but she's got to–- she's an expert in the area. She knows how to deal with children. But there's got to be another way to take care ofthat. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
[J]oint legal and physical custody . . . [is] going to
continue. It's just that [Mother], you do not lift a handon your child. There's got to be an alternative way. 
The Family Court apparently recognized the difficulty of the 
situation; after Mother indicated that she did not understand the 
court's ruling, Mother's counsel asked: 
She's not to threaten or use physical force. Does 
that mean she's supposed to ignore the instructions of the
psychiatrist? 
THE COURT: I didn't say that. I said she's not to 
threaten, physically abuse, or psychologically abuse. Okay? 
[MOTHER'S COUNSEL]: With the caveat that she is 
allowed to use such physical restraint as necessary? 
THE COURT: Well, if the doctor's telling her that's
what she should do, then I suppose she ought to follow the–- but she's got to be very cautious that it doesn't rise towhat I call physical abuse. Okay? 
The Order for Protection was filed on March 21, 2014. 
On March 31, 2014, Mother filed her Motion for Reconsideration. 
The motion was supported by Mother's affidavit. The affidavit 
stated that the day after the Family Court hearing, LH1 was 
extremely affectionate to Mother.6 When Mother asked why, LH1 
"broke down and confessed that he had lied about the 'choking' event[.]" Mother called the police to report that LH1 had 
recanted. A police officer went to Mother's home and interviewed 
LH1 and LH2 outside of Mother's presence. The officer informed 
Mother that LH1 said he had lied about being choked, and that he 
got his injuries from a bathroom incident at karate practice and 
at school climbing on the monkey bars. The Motion for 
Reconsideration was also supported by a declaration of Sallee 
(LH1's therapist) that authenticated two letter reports she had 
written to the Family Court. The letter dated March 26, 2014, 
states that during a therapy session that day (five days after 
6 The Family Court allowed Mother to take custody of LH1 and LH2
after the evidentiary hearing because she had no contact with the children for
the previous forty-four days. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the evidentiary hearing), LH1 told Sallee "he had been in trouble 
at school, in A+ and in his karate class." He told Sallee that 
Mother did not choke him on February 4, "she held his face in her 
hands to help him quiet down when he was upset." The letter 
reports that during LH2's therapy session that day, LH2 confirmed 
that both of them had lied about Mother choking LH1, and that LH1 
"was climbing around in the bathroom stall during karate and 
. . . got into trouble for it." 
Father's memorandum in opposition to the Motion for 
Reconsideration was filed on April 8, 2014. Father argued that 
there had already been "an extensive evidentiary hearing whereby 
the parties had a full and complete opportunity to present 
witnesses and evidence[,]" and that reconsideration was not 
appropriate because Mother was re-litigating an old matter "that 
'could or should' have been raised at the original hearing." 
Mother's reply memorandum was filed on April 14, 2014. 
It argued that the evidentiary hearing was not extensive and 
Mother was not afforded a full and complete opportunity to 
present witnesses or evidence because the Family Court restricted 
each party to thirty minutes. Due to the time limitation she was 
not able to call a number of witnesses, including Dr. Sylvia Ross 
(a neuropsychologist who had evaluated LH1) (Dr. Ross), Sallee 
(LH1's therapist), the principal and student services coordinator 
of LH1's school, and LH1's karate instructor.7 It also argued 
that LH1's and LH2's recantations were new evidence because the children had not admitted lying until after the evidentiary 
hearing. 
By order entered on June 27, 2014, the Family Court 
denied Mother's Motion for Reconsideration. This appeal 
followed. 
7 The principal, student services coordinator, and karate instructor
were in fact identified on Mother's witness list. Dr. Ross was not. 
9 A. The Family Court Did Not Clearly Err
in Entering the Order for Protection NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. 
A trial court's label of a finding of fact or a 
conclusion of law is not determinative of the standard of review. 
Crosby v. Dep't of Budget & Fin., 76 Hawai# i 332, 340, 876 P.2d 
1300, 1308 (1994). 
We review findings of fact under the "clearly 
erroneous" standard. A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when 
the record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding or 
when, despite some evidence to support the finding, we are left 
with the definite and firm conviction in reviewing all of the 
evidence that a mistake has been committed. Birano v. State, 143 
Hawai# i 163, 181, 426 P.3d 387, 405 (2018) (citations and 
quotation marks omitted). "Substantial evidence" is "credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to 
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." 
In re Grievance Arbitration Between State of Haw. Org. of Police 
Officers, 135 Hawai# i 456, 462, 353 P.3d 998, 1004 (2015) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). We review conclusions of law under the "right/wrong" standard. Estate of 
Klink ex rel. Klink v. State, 113 Hawai# i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 
523 (2007). A conclusion of law that is supported by the trial court's findings of fact and reflects an application of the 
correct rule of law will not be overturned. Id. When a 
conclusion of law presents mixed questions of fact and law, we 
review it under the "clearly erroneous" standard because the 
court's conclusions are dependent on the facts and circumstances 
of each individual case. Id. 
The testimony presented during the Family Court's 
evidentiary hearing was conflicting. The Family Court announced 
its findings and conclusions after it weighed the credibility of 
the witnesses and all of the evidence. Assessing the credibility 
of witnesses is the province of the trial court. Fisher v. 
Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) ("It is 
10 B. The Family Court Abused its Discretion in
Denying Mother's Motion for Reconsideration NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues 
dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of 
evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact.") (citation 
omitted). Although the Family Court discredited Mother's 
testimony and McAndrews' specific findings, the court's findings 
of fact were supported by substantial evidence, and the court 
applied the correct rule of law to the facts it found. The 
Family Court's issuance of the Order for Protection is affirmed. 
The purpose of a motion for reconsideration is to allow the
parties to present new evidence and/or arguments that couldnot have been presented during the earlier adjudicatedmotion. Reconsideration is not a device to relitigate oldmatters or to raise arguments or evidence that could andshould have been brought during the earlier proceeding. We review a trial court's ruling on a motion for
reconsideration under the abuse of discretion standard. An 
abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearlyexceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules orprinciples of law or practice to the substantial detrimentof a party litigant. 
Tagupa v. Tagupa, 108 Hawai# i 459, 465, 121 P.3d 924, 930 (App. 
2005) (underscoring added) (internal quotation marks, citations, 
ellipsis, and brackets omitted). 
Mother's Motion for Reconsideration presented evidence 
that did not exist at the time of the Family Court evidentiary 
hearing – LH1's and LH2's admissions of lying and recantations of 
the "choking" allegations. 
The admissions and recantations were 
made not only to Mother, but to a police office and to the children's therapist, Sallee. The Family Court imposed tight 
time restrictions during the original evidentiary hearing. It 
did not receive testimony from LH1 or LH2; its decision was based 
upon Father's and Officer Winther's testimony about what LH1 and 
LH2 said, and upon the emergency room notes of the history 
related by LH1. Because of the time restrictions, the Family 
Court did not receive evidence from Sallee, from the principal 
and student services coordinator of LH1's school, or from LH1's 
11 C. Mother Waived Her Objection to
the Time Limit Placed by the Family
Court on the Evidentiary Hearing NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
karate instructor, each of whom could have corroborated what LH1 
and LH2 later told Sallee: that LH1 "had been in trouble at 
school, in A+ and in his karate class," and "was climbing around 
in the bathroom stall during karate and . . . got into trouble 
for it." Under these circumstances, we hold that the Family 
Court abused its discretion when it denied the Motion for 
Reconsideration. Cf. Doe v. Doe, 98 Hawai# i 144, 155, 44 P.3d 
1085, 1096 (2002) (where family court limited child custody evidentiary hearing to three hours, denial of motion for new 
trial "resulted in the exclusion of testimony of witnesses 
bearing upon the issue of family violence" was abuse of 
discretion). We vacate the Order Denying Reconsideration and 
remand to the Family Court for an evidentiary hearing on the 
Motion for Reconsideration. 
Mother's third point of error is that the Family 
Court's time limit on the evidentiary hearing deprived her of her right to a fair trial under the 
Hawai# i Constitution and the 
United States Constitution. She did not object or otherwise preserve the alleged error for appeal – for example, by making an 
offer of proof of what evidence would be adduced if the Family 
Court allowed her to call additional witnesses. "In the absence 
of such an objection at trial there cannot be error, absent plain 
error." Doe, 98 Hawai# i at 154, 44 P.3d at 1095. As to plain 
error, the Hawai# i Supreme Court has stated: 
The plain error doctrine represents a departure from the
normal rules of waiver that govern appellate review, and, assuch, . . . an appellate court should invoke the plain errordoctrine in civil cases only when justice so requires[.] As such, the appellate court's discretion to address plainerror is always to be exercised sparingly. 
Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai# i 450, 458, 
40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002) (brackets, quotation marks, and citations 
omitted). 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although the family court has "discretion to set 
reasonable time limits for trial," AC v. AC, 134 Hawai# i 221, 
229, 339 P.3d 719, 727 (2014), in cases involving children and 
allegations of domestic violence especially, the "time limits 
[must] reflect an informed analysis of the time necessary to 
afford each party a full and fair opportunity to present their 
case." Id. at 231, 339 P.3d at 729; see also, Doe, 98 Hawai# i
 at 
156, 44 P.3d at 1097 ("[A]dherence to a time schedule must be tempered by the circumstances of the proceeding as it unfolds, 
since such circumstances cannot always be accurately predicted 
ahead of time"). Because we are remanding this case for an 
evidentiary hearing on Mother's Motion for Reconsideration, we 
decline to apply the plain error doctrine to Mother's third point 
of error. 
III. 
Based upon the foregoing, we affirm the Family Court's 
issuance of the Order for Protection but vacate the Order Denying 
Respondent's Motion for Reconsideration and remand to the Family 
Court for an evidentiary hearing on Mother's Motion for 
Reconsideration. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 6, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
LS,
Petitioner-Appellee, Pro Se. 
Presiding Judge
Gerald W. Scatena,for Respondent-Appellant. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
13 