 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0003629
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KIMBERLY A. PASCO, Petitioner-Appellant, v. BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF
THE EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-3294)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
In this secondary appeal, Petitioner-Appellant
 
Kimberly A. Pasco (Pasco) appeals from the September 17, 2013
 
"Decision and Order Affirming the Final Decision of Respondent-
Appellee Board of Trustees of the Employees' Retirement System of
 the State of Hawaii [(ERS)] and Dismissing [Pasco's] Appeal"
 (Decision and Order) and the September 17, 2013 "Final Judgment"
 entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
1
Court) affirming the ERS's December 19, 2012 "Final Decision"
denying Pasco's application for service-connected disability retirement. 
This case arises out of an injury that developed 
while Pasco worked as a Public Health Educator IV for the Department of Health of the State of Hawai
'i (DOH). 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pasco appears to argue2
 before this court that the ERS
clearly erred when it adopted the April 23, 2012 Hearing
 
Officer's and August 19, 2009 Medical Board's findings and
 conclusions denying her service-connected disability retirement
 on the basis that Pasco had failed to carry her burden of proving
 that her permanent incapacitation was the natural and proximate
 result of an accident at some definite time and place. 
Specifically, she argues the ERS erred because (1) it failed to
 
3
apply Myers v. Bd. of Trs.,  in concluding there was no
"accident" as defined in Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 6­22-2 causing Pasco's injury because the injury was caused by
 overuse over a period of time and therefore did not occur at a
 specific time and place and (2) the overuse of Pasco's arms in
 typing long hours and transporting heavy materials did not
 constitute an "unlooked for mishap or untoward event occurring at
 some definite time and place" and therefore did not constitute an
 accident" for the purposes of HAR § 6-22-2.
 
I.

 
In Pasco's April 13, 2009 "Application(s) for
 
Disability Retirement; Hybrid Plan" (Application), she requested
 
2
 Pasco's Opening Brief is in violation of Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28 in many respects, most notably that it
lacks conforming citations to the record insofar as it fails to identify thevolume number for its page citations, HRAP Rule 28(b)(3), and lacks a pointson appeal section as required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). Pasco does include a section entitled "Statement of the Clearly Erroneous Acts" but, as hercitations to the record suffer from the same defects as her other citations bynot identifying the document to which she is referring, this section also doesnot substantially satisfy the requirements of HRAP Rule 28(b)(4). "[S]uchnoncompliance offers sufficient grounds for the dismissal of the appeal."Housing Fin. & Dev. Corp. v. Ferguson, 91 Hawai' i 81, 85, 979 P.2d 1107, 1111
(1999). See also Schefke v. Reliable Collection Agency, Ltd.
, 96 Hawai' i 408,
420, 32 P.3d 52, 64 (2001);  Bettencourt v. Bettencourt,  80 Hawai' i 225, 228,
909 P.2d 553, 556 (1995). Counsel is cautioned that future violations of the rules may result in sanctions. 
Nevertheless, we recognize that our appellate courts have
"consistently adhered to the policy of affording litigants the opportunity tohave their cases heard on the merits, 
where possible," Schefke, 96 Hawai' i at 
420, 32 P.3d at 64 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted; emphasisadded), and in several instances have addressed the merits of an appeal,noncompliance with the appellate rules notwithstanding. See, e.g., Housing 
Fin. & Dev. Corp., 91 Hawai' i at 85-86, 979 P.2d at 1111-12; O'Connor v.
Diocese of Honolulu, 77 Hawai' i 383, 386, 885 P.2d 361, 364 (1994).
Therefore, we will endeavor to do so here, where possible. 
3
 68 Haw. 94, 704 P.2d 902 (1985).
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"service-connected disability retirement" and designated
 
April 17, 2007 as the date of the accident and "State of
 Hawaii/Dept. of Health (Kauai)" as the place of the accident. 
She described the accident as follows:
 
During April 2007 I was required to do extensive and
unreasonable amounts of typing up to 7 hrs a day to meet
project deadlines. A support staff including a clerk was
not given so I injured bi-lateral elbow, arm, hand. Also
 materials to train DOH/DOE staff were carried inter-island
and this contributed to extensive injury.
 
In June 2009, the DOH responded to the ERS's inquiry regarding
 
Pasco's Application by way of an "Employer's Statement Concerning
 Service-Connected Disability" form that stated (1) Pasco was on
 duty at the time of the accident, (2) the accident was not the
 result of Pasco's own negligence, (3) Pasco appeared to have
 suffered a disability as "the actual and proximate result of such
 accident," (4) the disability rendered Pasco incapable of
 continued employment in her present grade, class or position, and
 (5) although Pasco had returned to work for short periods, as of
 June 30, 2008, she was no longer working in her position.
4
 
On August 19, 2009, the Medical Board to the ERS
 
(Medical Board) reported on Pasco's Application. Pertinent to
 the issues presented in the appeal before this court, the Medical
 Board summarized the various statements by Pasco and DOH
 
4
 DOH also noted that as Pasco was appointed to her position for a
limited term, her term was not extended due to her inability to do the work.
 
In its April 25, 2007 Report of Industrial Injury (WC-1) regarding
the April 17, 2007 accident, DOH described the accident as follows:
 
During the past three weeks, [Pasco's] job has required
extensive amounts of typing and computer work of up to seven
hours a day to meet project deadlines. In addition, the
time spent keyboarding has been greater without a clerk.
Working extensively on a laptop from Feb. - April 2007 due
to her office not being operational put further strain and
stress on her right arm, wrist, and hand.
 
DOH described the nature of Pasco's injury as follows:
 
Starting April 17 [Pasco] noticed following the work day
that her right arm, wrist, and hand were fatigued and
painful. That night the pain was so severe that she did not
sleep. She continued to experience pain, weakness and
difficulty in using her right arm and hand to do her work.
Physican [sic] has directed her to not use right arm while
working.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
regarding the accident as described above, summarized the medical
 
records submitted, and concluded,
 
The findings of the [Medical Board] are that [Pasco] is
permanently incapacitated for the further performance of
duty, but that such incapacity is not the natural and
proximate result of an accident that occurred while in the
actual performance of duty at a specific place and time, 04­17-07, and not as the cumulative result of an occupational
hazard as explained above.
 
We recommend that [Pasco] be denied Service-Connected
Disability Retirement.
 
At the December 14, 2009 meeting of the ERS, it adopted the
 
Medical Board's recommendation "to preliminarily deny service-
connected disability retirement . . . thereby permitting said
 individual[] to appeal the Board's adverse decision[.]"
 
Pasco appealed this decision to the ERS, because

 
The decision to deny my service-related disability
retirement claim was made without a thorough review of all
my medical records pertaining to work injury on 4-17-07.
Records from Dr. Shawn O'Driscol, M.D. and Douglas Katz P.A.
from the Mayo Clinic, Dr. Jeffrey Wang M.D., and recent
records from Dr. Raymond Martinez D.O. were not included. I
 receiving [sic] the most advanced medical diagnostic and
treatment available which proved the work injury on 4-17-07.
I am permanently disabled due to work injury as determined
by [the Social Security Administration].
 
A contested case hearing was assigned to Hearing
 
Officer Junell Y.K. Lee, Esq. (Hearing Officer), who conducted
 
the hearing on September 12, 2011 and heard the testimony of
 Patricia Chinn, M.D. of the Medical Board, Raymond Martinez, M.D.
 on behalf of Pasco, Pasco, and her husband, Erik Pasco.
 
On April 23, 2012, pursuant to HAR § 6-23-17, the
 
Hearing Officer issued a Recommended Decision. The Hearing
 Officer saw the issue in this case as "whether [Pasco's]
 permanent incapacitation for the further performance of duty as a
 Public Health Educator IV is or is not the natural and proximate
 result of an accident occurring while [Pasco] was in the actual
 performance of duty at some definite time and place, or the
 cumulative result of some occupational hazard." In the
 Recommended Decision, the Hearing Officer made the following
 relevant findings of fact:
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
31. On August 19, 2009, the Medical board certified
that [Pasco] was permanently incapacitated for the further
performance of duty, but such incapacity was not the natural
and proximate result of an accident· that occurred while in
 
the actual performance of duty at a specific place and time
(April 17, 2007) and not as the cumulative result of an
occupational hazard. The significant incapacitating
diagnosis was myofascial pain syndrome of the arms. (Med.
Bd. Exh. P).
 
32. [Pasco] did not have pre-existing injuries of her
elbow, arm and hands prior to the alleged accident of
April 17, 2007. (Med. Bd. Exh. M at 5).
 
. . . .
 
39. Overuse of [Pasco's] arm in typing long hours and
transporting heavy materials does not constitute an unlooked
for mishap or untoward event occurring at some definite time
and place.
 
40. There was no accident as defined under HAR
 
§ 6-22-2 that resulted in [Pasco's] permanent incapacity.
 
41. Typing long hours and transporting heavy
materials are not dangers or risks that are unique to
[Pasco's] job and do not constitute an occupational hazard.
 
. . . .
 
44. [Pasco] is permanently incapacitated for the
further performance of duty as a Public Health Educator IV.
 
45. The significant incapacitating diagnosis for
[Pasco's] permanent incapacity is complex regional pain
syndrome, left upper extremity greater than right upper
extremity, and not myofascial pain syndrome.
 
46. [Pasco's] permanent incapacity is not the natural
and proximate result of an accident for purposes of
disability retirement under Chapter 88, HRS.
 
The Hearing Officer made the following conclusions of
 
law:
 
2. [Pasco] has proved by a preponderance of the
evidence that she is permanently incapacitated for further
performance of duty as a Public Health Educator IV and that
her permanent incapacity is not the result of wilful
negligence on her part.
 
3. [Pasco] has proved by a preponderance of the
evidence that her significant incapacitating diagnosis is
complex regional pain syndrome, not myofascial pain
syndrome.
 
4. [Pasco] has failed to prove by a preponderance of
the evidence that an accident, as used in retirement law
context, occurred on April 17, 2007.
 
5. [Pasco] has failed to prove by a preponderance of
the evidence that an occupational hazard, as used in
retirement law context, existed with respect to her job.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
6. [Pasco] has failed to prove by a preponderance of
the evidence that her permanent incapacity for further
performance of duty was (a) the natural and proximate result
of an accident which occurred at some definite time and
 place, or (b) the cumulative result of an occupational
hazard, as required by HRS § 88-336.
 
7. [Pasco] is not entitled to service-connected
disability retirement.
 
On June 22, 2012, the ERS issued a Proposed Decision
 
that adopted the Recommended Decision.
 
On July 6, 2012, Pasco filed her Exceptions to Proposed
 
Decision. Pasco's exceptions were limited to contending that she
 
had met her burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence
 that her permanent incapacity was the result of an accident
 occurring while in the actual performance of duty at some
 definite time and place.
 
On December 19, 2012, the ERS issued a Final Decision
 
that affirmed its Proposed Decision, adopted the Recommended
 Decision, and denied Pasco's application for service-connected
 disability retirement.
 
On December 26, 2012, Pasco filed a timely appeal from 
ERS's December 19, 2012 Final Decision in the Circuit Court and
 on September 17, 2013, the Circuit Court issued a "Decision and
 Order Affirming the Final Decision of [ERS] and Dismissing
 [Pasco's] Appeal" (Decision and Order) and a Final Judgment. The
 Circuit Court's Decision and Order found and concluded, in
 relevant part, the following:
 
4. As part of the Final Decision, [ERS] adopted
[Hearing Officer's] Recommended Decision, dated April 23,
2012, including the Hearing Officer's findings and
conclusions that [Pasco] had failed to prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that an accident, as used in
the retirement law context, occurred on April 17, 2007, and
that [Pasco] had failed to prove by a preponderance of the
evidence that her permanent incapacity for the further
performance of duty was the natural and proximate cause
[sic] of an accident which occurred at some definite time
and place, as required by HRS § 88-336.
 
. . . .
 
12. Whether an "accident" occurred within the
 
meaning of HRS § 88-336 and HAR § 6-22-2 is a fact intensive
inquiry, including determining when and how [Pasco's] injury
or permanent incapacity occurred.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
13. [Pasco's] descriptions in her applications for
service-connected disability retirement and workers
compensation benefits and her medical records regarding when
and how her injury and permanent incapacity occurred provide
reliable, probative, substantial, and persuasive evidence to
support the Final Decision.
 
A. In her application for service-connected
disability retirement, [Pasco] described her alleged
accident as:
 
During April 2007 I was required to do extensive
and unreasonable amounts of typing up to 7 hrs a
day to meet project deadlines. A support staff
including a clerk was not given so I injured
bi-lateral elbow, arm, hand. Also materials to
 train DOH/DOE staff were carried inter-island
and this contributed to extensive injury.
 
See Record on Appeal ("ROA") 6.
 
B. In the WC-l Employer's Report of Industrial
Injury, dated April 25, 2007, [Pasco's] alleged accident was
described as:
 
During the past three weeks, [Pasco's] job has
required extensive amounts of typing and
computer work of up to seven hours a day to meet
project deadlines. In addition, the time spent
keyboarding has been greater without a clerk.
Working extensively on a laptop from Feb.-April
2007 due to her office not being operational put
further strain and stress on her right arm,
wrist, and hand.
 
See ROA 275.
 
C. In a Kauai Hand Therapy Daily Note regarding
[Pasco], dated 5/14/2007, it states:
 
Patient reports elbow was a cumulative trauma
due to typing at work for 7 hours straight 5
days per week.
 
See ROA 282.
 
D. In a progress note, dated August 6, 2007,
Surendra Rao, M.D., reports:
 
Thank you very much for asking me to consult on
[Pasco], a 36 yr old female delightful patient
for the chief complaints of persistent pain in
both elbows with repetitive stress injury
. . . .
 
See ROA 284.
 
. . . .
 
15. The use of the words "repetitive stress,"
"cumulative trauma," and extensive or excessive typing or
keyboarding, whether over weeks or months, to describe the
cause of [Pasco's] injury or permanent incapacity does not
describe or constitute an "accident" within the meaning of
HRS § 88-336 and HAR § 6-22-2, nor do they describe or
constitute an "accident occurring while in the actual
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
performance of duty at some definite time and place" within
the meaning of HRS § 88-336.
 
16. [ERS's] findings that [Pasco] had failed to
prove by a preponderance of the evidence that an accident,
as used in the retirement law context, occurred on April 17,
2007, and that [Pasco] had failed to prove by a
preponderance of evidence that her permanent incapacity for
the further performance of duty was the natural and
proximate cause [sic] of an accident which occurred at some
definite time and place, as required by HRS § 88-336, were
not clearly erroneous, not arbitrary or capricious, and not
an abuse of discretion.
 
17. [Pasco] has not claimed nor shown that [ERS's]
Final Decision is affected by any error of law.
 
Pasco timely appealed from the Circuit Court's Final Judgment.
 
II.
 
As best as we can ascertain, Pasco is arguing it was
 
error for the Hearing Officer to rule and for the Circuit Court
 
to affirm, that a "repetitive stress injury over a period of time
 leading to permanent disability after [the date of the accident]"
 
5
 was not an "accident" which is defined as "an unlooked for
mishap or untoward event occurring at some definite time and
 place."
 
In 
Panado v. Bd. of Trs. Emps.' Ret. Sys. , 134 Hawai 'i 
1, 332 P.3d 144 (2014), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court considered 
whether the ERS correctly construed the "some definite time and
 place" requirement of HRS § 88-79 to deny Panado's application
 for disability retirement benefits. Relying on the plain
 language of the statute there, as supported by the dictionary
 
5
 Pasco cites to "HRS Section 88-77(a)" for the statutory definition
of "accident." However, HRS § 88-77 (1985) was repealed in 1998. See Act 151
 
§ 13, 1998 Session Laws of Hawaii at 545. For Class H public employees, this
provision was replaced by HRS § 88-336 (2004). Neither provision contains a
definition of the term "accident."
 
We presume Pasco refers to the definition contained in HAR § 6-22­
2, which provides,
 
"Accident" means an unlooked for mishap or untoward
event which is not expected or designed, occurring while in
the actual performance of duty at some definite time and
place.
 
Hawaii Administrative Rules, Title 6, Department of Budget and Finance,
Employees' Retirement System, Chapter 22, Certification and Findings of the
Medical Board, which may be found at
http://budget.hawaii.gov/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/Chapter-22.pdf (last
accessed June 4, 2016).
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
definition of "definite," the supreme court rejected the notion
 
that the exact moment of injury need be identified and concluded
 that "Panado satisfied the provision's requirement that an
 accident occurred 'while in the actual performance of duty at
 some definite time and place' by establishing that she was
 injured during her October 8-9, 2004 work shift." Id. at 13, 332
 P.3d at 156. The supreme court also examined the legislative
 history of HRS § 88-79 and concluded that the legislature "was
 concerned with whether an accident occurred during work, not with
 whether the employee could pinpoint the exact moment of injury." 
Id. at 14, 332 P.3d at 157. Finally, the supreme court
 identified other reasons for rejecting the restrictive reading of
 the statute by the ERS, including that such an interpretation
 "unreasonably excludes those service-connected disabilities in
 which symptoms do not manifest at the exact moment of the
 accident." Id.
 
Turning to the circumstances underlying Pasco's claim, 
and in light of the Hawai
'i Supreme Court's interpretation of the 
analogous and identical language of HRS § 88-79, we conclude that the Hearing Officer and the Circuit Court erred by construing the "definite time and place" language in HRS § 88-336 to disqualify Pasco because her injury did not occur in one particular incident or on one particular date. Pasco described her injury as resulting from extensive keyboarding that was required at her job as the cause of her disability. She could point to the period of time, "April 2007" when this activity intensified, leading up to the point, on April 17, 2007, that the pain from her injury was so severe that it caused her to seek medical attention. Her employer, DOH, did not contest these assertions. Thus, Pasco was able to identify a "definite" time and place of her work-related injury. 
III.
 
Therefore, we vacate the September 17, 2013 "Decision
 
and Order Affirming the Final Decision of Respondent-Appellee
 Board of Trustees of the Employees' Retirement System of the
 State of Hawaii and Dismissing Petitioner-Appellant Kimberly
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pasco's Appeal" and the September 17, 2013 "Final Judgment" and
 
remand this case to the Circuit Court of the First Circuit with
 directions to vacate the Board of Directors of the Employees'
 Retirement System's denial of disability retirement to Pasco and
 for further proceedings consistent with this memorandum opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 17, 2016 
On the briefs:
 
Edmund L. Lee, Jr.,
for Petitioner-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Patricia Ohara and
 
Brian P. Aburano,
Deputy Attorneys General
for Respondent-Appellee. 
10

 