NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000126

IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ZACHARY K. MANIPON-SILVA, also known as Zachary Silva,
Defendant-Appellant

APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

(CR. NO. 10-1-0764)

SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER

(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Zachary K. Manipon-Silva (Manipon-
Silva) timely appeals from the final judgment and sentence, which

was entered on January 31, 2011 in the Circuit Court of the First

1
Circuit (circuit court),  convicting him of three counts of
 
Sexual Assault in the First Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised

2
Statutes (HRS) § 707-730(1)(b) (Supp. 2011)  and one count of
 
Sexual Assault in the Third Degree in violation of HRS § 707­
732(1)(b
) (Supp. 2011).3 Manipon-Silva challenges the final

1

The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.

2

HRS § 707-730(1)(b) states, "(1) A person commits the offense of
sexual assault in the first degree if . . . (b) [t]he person knowingly engages
in sexual penetration with another person who is less than fourteen years
old."

3

HRS § 707-732(1)(b) states, "(1) A person commits the offense of
sexual assault in the third degree if . . . (b) [t]he person knowingly
subjects to sexual contact another person who is less than fourteen years old
or causes such a person to have sexual contact with the person."

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judgment and sentence on the grounds that (1) the circuit court

gave a confusing and erroneous limiting instruction to accompany

a videotaped interview of the investigating detective questioning

Manipon-Silva and (2) there is insufficient evidence to support

his conviction because two pieces of physical evidence do not

conclusively establish his guilt.

Upon careful review of the record and the briefs

submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to

the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the

relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Manipon-Silva's

points of error as follows:

(1) Manipon-Silva must overcome the presumption that 
the unobjected-to jury instruction was correct.4 Nichols, 111 
Hawai'i at 337 n.6, 141 P.3d at 984 n.6. To this, Manipon-Silva 
argues that the circuit court's limiting instruction to the 
State's Exhibits 22 (the videotaped interview) and 23 (a 
transcript of the interview) was confusing and erroneous because 
of an alleged logical inconsistency. 
Manipon-Silva observes that the exhibits included

statements by the detective that were his personal opinion as

well as recitations of statements made by other witnesses. 
 
Manipon-Silva contends that the statements of the detective were

not evidence and the jury should have clearly been instructed as

such. Manipon-Silva further argues that the limiting instruction

was confusing because the jury is told that the "recording is

evidence" but is also instructed that the detective's personal

opinions and his recitations of the other witnesses' statements

cannot be used to prove the truth of the matters asserted.

4

"[A]n appellate court will reverse for plain error in jury
instructions where the error cannot be said to be harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt (i.e., considering the record as a whole, there is a reasonable
possibility that the error contributed to the defendant's conviction)." State

v. Nichols, 111 Hawai' i 327, 329, 141 P.3d 974, 976 (2006). In making this
determination, the "error is not to be viewed in isolation and consideredpurely in the abstract" but "must be examined in the light of the entireproceedings and given the effect which the whole record shows it to beentitled." Id. at 334, 141 P.3d at 981. 
2

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In its context, the circuit court's statement was not

confusing. The circuit court's statement that the "recording
 
itself is the evidence in the case" was sandwiched by the circuit

court's repeated admonition that the transcript of the recording

was not evidence. Given this juxtaposition, it is clear that the

focus of the circuit court's initial statement was the transcript

and that the circuit court's statement was designed to convey

that the transcript of the recording was not to be relied upon by

the jurors as evidence.

Moreover, the recording itself was evidence -- just

evidence providing context to Manipon-Silva's out-of-court

statements -- and the challenged instruction clearly explained

this limitation. Both before and after the record was played,

the circuit court explained to the jury that the detective's

statements -- including his opinions and his recitations of the

statements of others -- were only to be taken as providing

context necessary for the jury to assess the credibility of

Manipon-Silva's out-of-court statements. Courts in other

jurisdictions have widely acknowledged this use of statements

made by a third party in a taped interview, see Washington v.
 
Demery, 30 P.3d 1278, 1283 n.5 (Wash. 2001) (collecting cases),

and Manipon-Silva provides no legal authority to the contrary.

Manipon-Silva urges a mechanical analysis that

juxtaposes certain statements against each other but ignores both

the context of the cherry-picked statements and common

constructions of language that support the conclusion that the

instruction was not confusing. Even if this court was willing to
 
entertain Manipon-Silva's argument that there were logical

inconsistencies within the circuit court's limiting instruction,

the purported inconsistencies were not substantively erroneous

because the "record itself" was evidence and the various uses of

its components were stressed to the jury.

(2) Manipon-Silva asserts that there was insufficient
 
evidence to sustain his convictions but he never specifies which

3

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
elements were not established.5 Instead, Manipon-Silva states

that the physical evidence -- specifically, the presence of his

semen on the minor complainant's underwear and the lack of injury

to the minor complainant's genitalia -- does not conclusively

demonstrate his guilt. In his reply brief, Manipon-Silva argues
 
that the minor complainant's testimony was insufficient to

support his conviction but, once more, does not identify any

specific elements that were not established by the testimony, if

it were credited. In effect, Manipon-Silva appears to be arguing

several interrelated points: (1) the physical evidence does not
 
prove his guilt; (2) the physical evidence establishes his

innocence, and; (3) the physical evidence renders the minor

complainant's testimony incredible.

The relevance of Manipon-Silva's argument that the 
physical evidence does not prove his guilt is unclear. 
Controlling precedent establishes that the testimony of a single 
witness may constitute sufficient evidence to support a 
conviction. Eastman, 81 Hawai' i at 141, 913 P.2d at 67. Here, 
the minor complainant testified and Manipon-Silva does not argue that this testimony, if credited, is insufficient to support his 
convictions. Accordingly, the physical evidence is merely 
corroborative and its presence, vel non, does not undercut the 
conclusion that the State's other evidence -- particularly the 
testimony of the minor complainant -- is sufficient to support 
Manipon-Silva's convictions. 
Turning to the specific physical evidence at issue,

Manipon-Silva asserts that a person of reasonable caution could

5

The sufficiency of the evidence is reviewed in the light most
favorable to the prosecution. State v. Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d
1115, 1117 (1981). "The test on appeal is not whether guilt is establishedbeyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence tosupport the conclusion of the trier of fact." State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19,
33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) (quoting State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai' i 128, 145,
938 P.2d 559, 576 (1997)). "'Substantial evidence' . . . is credible evidencewhich is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Id. at 33, 960 P.2d at 1241
(quoting State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai' i 131, 135, 913 P.2d 57, 61 (1996)). The 
jury, not the appellate court, determines the credibility of witnesses and the
weight of the evidence. Tamura, 63 Haw. at 637-38, 633 P.2d at 1117. 
4

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
not conclude that a sexual assault occurred where the presence of

Manipon-Silva's semen on the minor complainant's underwear failed

to conclusively establish a sexual encounter between Manipon-
Silva and the minor complainant. He explains the presence of his
 
semen on the minor complainant's underwear by asserting that he

might have used the minor complainant's underwear for post-
masturbation cleaning purposes. But Manipon-Silva does not
 
explain why his non-culpable explanation affirmatively

demonstrates his innocence when, at most, the explanation is

merely consistent with his innocence - that is, as a matter of

physical necessity, his explanation does not prove that the

alleged incident did not occur.

Likewise, Manipon-Silva argues that a person of

reasonable caution could not conclude that a sexual assault

occurred where the doctor testified that the minor complainant

did not exhibit the injuries typically present after a sexual

assault. But Manipon-Silva acknowledges that the doctor opined

that the absence of any injury could still be consistent with

penetration. Thus, the fact that signs "often" (as opposed to
 
"always") associated with sexual assault were not present does

not prove that the alleged penetration and other conduct did not

occur.

In considering whether sufficient evidence exists to

support Manipon-Silva's convictions, the court reviews the

evidence is viewed in the light most favorable to the

prosecution. Tamura, 63 Haw. at 637, 633 P.2d at 1117. Here,
 
the presence of Manipon-Silva's semen on the minor complainant's

underwear can be viewed as supporting the State's contention that

Manipon-Silva had a sexual encounter with the minor complainant

during which the semen contaminated the underwear. Additionally,
 
as noted by both parties, the doctor testified that the absence

of physical injuries to the minor complainant's genitalia does

not affirmatively demonstrate that the minor complainant was not

sexually assaulted. Accordingly, both pieces of physical
 
evidence are susceptible to a reasonable interpretation that does

5

NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not call into question the convictions. It is only by viewing
 
the physical evidence in the light most favorable to Manipon-
Silva that the physical evidence can be interpreted as

establishing that he did not assault the minor complainant. Such

an interpretation would turn the standard of review on its head.

Therefore,

IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the January 31, 2011 Final

Judgment and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the First

Circuit is affirmed.

DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 26, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Karen T. Nakasone and 
Summer K.K. Kupau,Deputy Public Defendersfor Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6

