   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000867
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KONDAUR CAPITAL CORPORATION, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
LEIGH MATSUYOSHI, Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10,
DOE CORPORATIONS, 1-10, DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
ALL PERSONS RESIDING WITH AND ANY PERSONS
 
CLAIMING BY AND THROUGH OR UNDER THEM, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0185)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant–Appellant Leigh Matsuyoshi (Matsuyoshi)
 
appeals from the September 18, 2012 "Judgment on Order Granting
 
Plaintiff Kondaur Capital Corporation's Motion for Summary
 Judgment Against All Defendants on Complaint Filed June 5, 2012"
 
1
entered in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (circuit 
court) in favor of Plaintiff–Appellee Kondaur Capital Corporation 
(Kondaur). Matsuyoshi contends the circuit court erred by 
granting Kondaur's motion for summary judgment, and by 
subsequently denying Matsuyoshi's motion to set aside the judgment under Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 
60(b). 
1
 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In a memorandum opinion (MO) entered March 7, 2014,
 
this court held that: (1) it lacked jurisdiction to review the
 
circuit court's order denying Matsuyoshi's HRCP Rule 60(b) motion
 because Matsuyoshi's appeal of the order was not timely filed;
 and (2) the circuit court erred in granting summary judgment in
 favor of Kondaur because an October 17, 2012 declaration of
 Matsuyoshi attached to her motion to set aside judgment, alleges
 material facts that raise genuine issues as to the validity of
 Matsuyoshi's Mortgage. This court therefore declined to address
 Matsuyoshi's other arguments on mootness grounds.
 
Kondaur filed an application for a writ of certiorari 
(Application), which the Hawai
'i Supreme Court accepted. In a 
published opinion entered October 23, 2014, the supreme court concluded "that the [Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA)] erred 
in relying upon a post-judgment motion as a basis to find 
disputed facts with regard to a motion for summary judgment," and therefore vacated the MO and remanded "the case to the ICA for a review of the other issues raised by the parties that were not considered by the ICA . . . ." Kondaur Capital Corp. v. 
Matsuyoshi, No. SCWC–12–0000867, 2014 WL 5420003, at *1 (Haw. Oct. 23, 2014). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that
 Matsuyoshi's appeal is without merit.
 
On appeal to the ICA, Matsuyoshi raises two points of
 
error: (1) whether the circuit court erred in granting Kondaur's
 June 29, 2012 "Motion for Summary Judgment Against All Defendants
 on Complaint filed June 5, 2012" (MSJ), and (2) whether the
 
circuit court erred in denying Matsuyoshi's Rule 60(b) motion to
 
set aside the judgment on the order granting Kondaur's MSJ (Rule
 
60(b) Motion).
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Summary judgment in favor of Kondaur was appropriate.
 
To maintain an ejectment action, a party must prove 
ownership and title to the property at issue. State by Price v. 
Magoon, 75 Haw. 164, 175, 858 P.2d 712, 718-19 (1993); see also 
Carter v. Kaikainahaole, 14 Haw. 515, 516 (Haw. Terr. 1902) (holding that an action of ejectment is the remedy at law for a "complainant who has the title to and right of possession of certain land and from whom possession is unlawfully withheld by another"). Kondaur submitted admissible evidence of ownership and title to the property in Lihu
'e, Kaua 'i (Property) in the form 
of exhibits attached to its MSJ, which included a certified copy of its quitclaim deed and Ann Pham's affidavit.
2 See Maui Land & 
Pineapple Co. v. Infiesto, 76 Hawai 'i 402, 407, 879 P.2d 507, 512 
(1994) (holding "that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in considering the recitals in [a] deed pursuant to [Hawaii Rules of Evidence] Rule 803(b)(15)"). 
Matsuyoshi makes two arguments as to why Kondaur's
 
title to the Property is invalid: (1) the foreclosure sale was
 held in a county other than where the Property is located and
 thus is void for being conducted in an unreasonable manner; and
 (2) the foreclosure sale is rendered void by technical
 violations. Matsuyoshi's arguments are without merit.
 
The statutory provision applicable to non-judicial
 
foreclosures, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 667-5 (Supp. 2008)
 
provides, in pertinent part:
 
§667-5 Foreclosure under power of sale; notice;
affidavit after sale.  (a) When a power of sale is contained
in a mortgage, and where the mortgagee . . . desires to
foreclose under power of sale upon breach of a condition of
the mortgage, the mortgagee . . . shall be represented by an
attorney who is licensed to practice law in the State and is
physically located in the State. The attorney shall:
 
(1)	 Give notice of the mortgagee's . . . intention
to foreclose the mortgage and of the sale of the
mortgaged property, by publication of the notice
once in each of three successive weeks (three
publications), the last publication to be not
less than fourteen days before the day of sale,
 
2
 In her affidavit, Ann Pham stated that she was an asset manager
for Kondaur and a custodian of Kondaur's records.
 
3
  
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in a newspaper having a general circulation in
the county in which the mortgaged property lies;
and
 
(2)	 Give any notices and do all acts as are
authorized or required by the power contained in
the mortgage.
 
(b)	 Copies of the notice required under subsection
(a) shall be:
 
(1)	 Filed with the state director of taxation; and
 
(2)	 Posted on the premises not less than twenty-one
days before the day 1 of sale.
 
. . . .
 
(d) . . . The mortgagee within thirty days after
selling the property in pursuance of the power, shall file a copy
of the notice of sale and the mortgagee's affidavit, setting forth
the mortgagee's acts in the premises fully and particularly, in
the bureau of conveyances.
 
(e) The affidavit and copy of the notice
shall be recorded and indexed by the registrar, in the manner
provided in chapter 501 or 502, as the case may be.
 
When a mortgagee violates the "requirements of HRS
 
§ 667–5, whether those violations are grievously prejudicial or
 
merely technical," the subsequent foreclosure sale is void. In
 
re Kekauoha-Alisa, 674 F.3d 1083, 1089 (9th Cir. 2012). A
 foreclosure sale can also be rendered void if the mortgagee fails
 to "exercise reasonable diligence to secure the best possible
 prices [sic] upon the foreclosure sale of the property to be
 sold." Ulrich v. Sec. Inv. Co., 35 Haw. 158, 172 (Haw. Terr.
 
1939).
 
Additionally, if a party who moves for summary judgment
 
on an action for ejectment submits credible evidence establishing
 ownership and title to the property at issue, the adverse party
 may not base its opposition on mere argument, but "must set forth
 specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." 
HRCP Rule 56(e). In other words, parties seeking or opposing
 summary judgment must comply with HRCP Rule 56 (e), which
 provides:
 
Rule 56. SUMMARY JUDGMENT.
 
. . . .
 
(e) Form of affidavits; further testimony; defense
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
required. Supporting and opposing affidavits shall be made on
personal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as would be
admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that the
affiant is competent to testify to the matters stated therein.
Sworn or certified copies of all papers or parts thereof referred
to in an affidavit shall be attached thereto or served therewith. 
The court may permit affidavits to be supplemented or opposed by
depositions, answers to interrogatories, or further affidavits.
When a motion for summary judgment is made and supported as
provided in this rule, an adverse party may not rest upon the mere
allegations or denials of the adverse party's pleading, but the
adverse party's response, by affidavits or as otherwise provided
in this rule, must set forth specific facts showing that there is
a genuine issue for trial. If the adverse party does not so
respond, summary judgment, if appropriate, shall be entered
against the adverse party.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
In the instant case, Matsuyoshi's argument that the 
foreclosure sale is void for being held on O 'ahu is without merit 
because nothing in HRS § 667-5 requires a foreclosure sale be 
held in the county where the subject property is located, and nothing in the record indicates that the mortgagee failed to fulfill its duty to exercise reasonable diligence to secure the best price for the Property by holding the sale on O
'ahu rather 
than on Kaua 'i. Matsuyoshi submitted no evidence to support her 
contention that the mortgagee breached its duty to exercise reasonable diligence to secure the best price when it sold the Property for $416,900.20. 
Matsuyoshi's argument that the foreclosure sale is void
 
for technical violations is without merit because Matsuyoshi
 failed to submit any credible evidence to support her
 contentions.
 
(2) Matsuyoshi did not appeal the order denying her HRCP
Rule 60(b) Motion (Post-Judgment Order).
 
This court lacks jurisdiction to address Matsuyoshi's
 
second error raised on appeal because Matsuyoshi did not appeal
 the November 14, 2012 Post-Judgment Order denying her HRCP Rule
 60(b) Motion. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the September 18, 2012
 
"Judgment on Order Granting Plaintiff Kondaur Capital
 Corporation's Motion for Summary Judgment Against All Defendants
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
on Complaint Filed June 5, 2012" entered in the Circuit Court of
 
the Fifth Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 19, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Joe P. Moss 
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Jonathan W.Y. Lai Thomas J. Bergerfor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
6
 