SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000818
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ASIBAYA YOUNG, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 11-1-0153)
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Asibaya Young appeals from the
 
September 26, 2012 "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" entered
 
in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 (circuit court). 
Young was convicted of attempted sexual assault in the first
 degree pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 705-500
 
(1993) and 707-730(1)(a) (Supp. 2012) and robbery in the second
 
degree pursuant to HRS § 708-841(1)(a) (Supp. 2012). On appeal
 
Young contends there was insufficient evidence identifying him as
 
complaining witness's (CW) assailant, and therefore the circuit
 
court erred in denying his motion for judgment of acquittal and
 
the jury wrongfully convicted him of attempted sexual assault and
 
robbery.
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Young's
 
appeal is without merit.
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution
when the appellate court passes on the legal
sufficiency of such evidence to support a conviction;
the same standard applies whether the case was before
a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not whether
guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998)
(quoting State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai' i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576
(1997)). "'Substantial evidence' as to every material element ofthe offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficientquality and probative value to enable a person of reasonablecaution to support a conclusion." Richie, 88 Hawai' i at 33, 960
P.2d at 1241 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
The standard to be applied by the trial court in
ruling upon a motion for a judgment of acquittal is whether,
upon the evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the
prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the
trier of fact, a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt. An appellate court employs the
same standard of review.
 
State v. Keawe, 107 Hawai' i 1, 4, 108 P.3d 304, 307 (2005)
(brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Pone, 78 Hawai' i 262, 265,
892 P.2d 455, 458 (1995)). 
State v. Bayly, 118 Hawai' i 1, 6, 185 P.3d 186, 191 (2008). 
The testimonies of the witnesses described the physical
 
appearance of CW's attacker. CW said he was:
 
Kind of stocky build; maybe, like, 190 pounds to 200
pounds; somewhere between 5-9 and 5-11; dark-skinned African
American. He had a T-shirt -- I'm fairly certain it was
white [she "thought it had" a pattern] -- and dark jeans and
a baseball hat.
 
CW said the man was "taller" and "[q]uite a bit bigger" than her
 
and he was "kind of like larger, you know, wasn't skinny." Dale
 
Krupa (Krupa), a taxi driver, witnessed an "African American
 
male" attacking CW and he described him as being a "[b]lack
 
male";"late twenties or early thirties[]"; "like, 6 foot tall
 
[considerably taller than [CW] . . . 210 pounds[;]" and wearing
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[b]lue jeans, white T-shirt, [and] a blue baseball cap." Krupa
 
also said, "[h]e was strong, strong in the arms, like a large,
 
kind of strong fellow, muscular, but strong-looking[.]"
 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Officer Alan Brissette
 
was sent "to the Kapahulu Library/Ala Wai Golf Course[] area" on
 
a "call of a [b]ack male assaulting a [w]hite female". The male
 
was described as "[a]pproximately 5-9 to 6-2, 190 pounds, white
 
T-shirt, blue jeans, a blue ball cap" and who reportedly fled
 
"[t]owards the Ala Wai Golf Course." While searching for the
 
man, Officer Brissette came upon Tye Taketa (Taketa), a
 
groundskeeper at Ala Wai Golf Course, and "informed him why HPD
 
was at the Ala Wai Golf Course, and [] gave him a description of
 
the male." Officer Brissette also told Taketa the male "possibly
 
might have taken off some clothing."
 
Taketa testified that at "[a]bout 3:45" in the morning,
 
he "came down the green, [and] saw somebody [facing the Ala Wai]
 
standing next to a tree." Taketa thought the man matched the
 
description he received from the police; i.e., a "[b]lack male
 
without a shirt and a dark-colored pants." Taketa testified the
 
"[b]lack male [was] without a shirt and [had] . . . dark-colored
 
pants." Taketa watched the man for a "few minutes[,]" and said,
 
"[a]fter a while, he crouched down, he stood up, took a couple of
 
steps one way, came back, and turned around, then looked back
 
across the Ala Wai."
 
There was evidence that Young was on the golf course
 
toward which CW's attacker was seen fleeing. CW testified her
 
attacker ran toward the golf course. Krupa said CW's attacker
 
"got . . . something from her, . . . turned around and 
ran, . . . towards the golf course area." The evidence showed
 
Young's physical characteristics and clothing were similar to
 
those in the description of CW's attacker, and that her attacker
 
fled towards the golf course where Young was found. Taketa's
 
testimony that he observed Young "crouching" down could suggest
 
Young was attempting to evade detection. Officer Brissette's
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
testimony that "[o]ften the suspects will remove clothing to make
 
it more difficult for [the police] to locate them" supports a
 
reasonable inference that Young took off his shirt to facilitate
 
his attempt to evade detection. HPD Officer Daniel Del Toro
 
testified that Young "appeared to be out of breath" when arrested
 
which, provided further support for the inference that in his
 
attempt to evade detection he was moving in and around the many
 
trees, "shrubs and bushes" on the golf course.
 
It was not unreasonable for the circuit court and
 
jurors to reject, as an improbable coincidence, that at
 
approximately 4:00 in the morning, Young who shared physical
 
characteristics and clothing with that of CW's attacker, would be
 
out of breath and acting suspiciously on the very golf course
 
towards which witnesses saw her attacker flee and not be her
 
attacker. We conclude there was substantial evidence that Young
 
was CW's attacker, the sole point on appeal.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the September 26, 2012
 
"Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" entered in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 18, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Phyllis J. Hironaka
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 Donn Fudo 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
4
 