 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-21-0000310 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI#I 
IN THE INTEREST OF H CHILDREN 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-S NO. 21-00041) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Appellant Mother (Mother) appeals from the Orders 
Concerning Child Protective Act (Foster Custody Order), filed on 
April 22, 2021, in the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family 
Court).1 
Mother contends the Family Court erred by granting 
Petitioner-Appellee State of Hawai# i, Department of Human 
Services (
DHS), foster custody of her three children because the 
children's physical or psychological health or welfare was not 
subject to imminent harm, harm, or threatened harm by the acts or omissions of the children's family. At the time the Foster Custody Order was issued, the children were ten, eight, and four years old, respectively. 
On May 26, 2021, the Family Court issued Findings of 
Fact and Conclusions of Law in support of its Foster Custody 
1 The Honorable John C. Bryant, Jr. presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Order. Mother challenges Findings of Fact (FOF) Nos. 19, 22, 25, 
38, 66, and 68, but she does not provide any specific argument as 
to why those findings are clearly erroneous.  Instead, Mother 
argues generally that: the Family Court "erred in finding that it is more probable than not that the three children suffered substantial impairment in their ability to function or that there is a foreseeable and substantial risk of harm" by Mother; no 2
2 The challenged FOFs are as follows: 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
. . . . 
19. Mother did not maintain contact with DHS. 
. . . . 
22. DHS has a supervised visitation plan for Mother, but
she has refused visits. 
. . . . 
25. When the children cannot reach Mother by phone or seeher in person, they misunderstand and think the lackof contact is their fault. 
The children have 
outbursts, cry and are in general distress over theirlack of contact with Mother. The children really missMother and wish she would contact them. 
. . . . 
38. The DHS tried to work with Mother for a month and a half to prevent the need for removal of the childrenfrom the family home before filing the Petition onFebruary 13, 2021. 
If Mother had given [maternal
aunt] a power of attorney to act as her attorney-in-fact, the DHS may not have been forced to intervene toensure the safety of the children. 
. . . . 
66. Mother's failure to visit with the children before and after the DHS' involvement is threatened psychologicalharm to the children. 
. . . . 
68. Mother's failure to stay in contact with [maternalaunt] and her failure to provide [maternal aunt] witha Childcare Power of Attorney to act as her attorney-in-fact to register the children in school and getthem basic medical care is neglect and threatenedneglect to the children. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
expert psychological testimony was presented regarding 
psychological harm or threat of harm; there was no evidence of abuse and neglect, or impairment to the children's ability to function; and Mother anticipated the children would remain with maternal aunt only temporarily and Mother did not abandon them. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Mother's points of error as follows and we affirm. 
"Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion 
in making its decisions and those decision[s] will not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion." Fisher v. 
Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) (citation 
omitted). 
We review the Family Court's findings of fact under 
the clearly erroneous standard and its conclusions of law under the de novo standard. Id. 
FOFs 19, 22, 25, and 38:
 Each of these findings deal 
with part of the underlying facts of this case. As noted, although Mother challenges these findings, she provides no argument on these findings and does not point to any evidence or the record to show why these findings are clearly erroneous. We therefore reject Mother's challenge to these findings.
FOF 66: In FOF 66, the Family Court found that 
"Mother's failure to visit with the children before and after the DHS' involvement is threatened psychological harm to the children." (emphasis added). FOF 25 sets out the distress the children experienced because they could not get in contact with Mother. Based on the record and applicable statutes, and the broad discretion the Family Court has in these matters, we conclude FOF 66 is not clearly erroneous. 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 587A-28 (2018) 
provides, in relevant part: 
§587A-28 Return hearing. 
. . . 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(d) At the return hearing, the court shall decide:
(1) Whether the child's physical or psychological health
or welfare has been harmed or is subject to threatenedharm by the acts or omissions of the child's family;
(2) Whether the child should be placed in foster custodyor under family supervision; and
(3) What services should be provided to the child'sparents.
(e) If the court finds that the child's physical or
psychological health or welfare has been harmed or issubject to threatened harm by the acts or omissions ofthe child's family, the court:(1) Shall enter a finding that the court hasjurisdiction pursuant to section 587A-5;
(2) Shall enter a finding regarding whether, before thechild was placed in foster care, the department madereasonable efforts to prevent or eliminate the need toremove the child from the child's family home;
3) Shall enter orders: (A) That the child be placed in foster custody ifthe court finds that the child's remaining inthe family home is contrary to the welfare ofthe child and the child's parents are notwilling and able to provide a safe family homefor the child, even with the assistance of aservice plan; or
(B) That the child be placed in family supervisionif the court finds that the child's parents arewilling and able to provide the child with asafe family home with the assistance of aservice plan; 
(Emphasis added). 
Further, HRS Chapter 587A-4 provides applicable 
definitions, including: 
"Harm" means damage or injury to a child's physical orpsychological health or welfare, where:(1) The child exhibits evidence of injury, including, butnot limited to: (A) Substantial or multiple skin bruising;
(B) Substantial external or internal bleeding;
(C) Burn or burns;
(D) Malnutrition;
(E) Failure to thrive;
(F) Soft tissue swelling;
(G) Extreme pain;
(H) Extreme mental distress;
(I) Gross degradation;
(J) Poisoning;
(K) Fracture of any bone;
(L) Subdural hematoma; or
(M) Death;
and the injury is not justifiably explained, or thehistory given concerning the condition or death is notconsistent with the degree or type of the condition ordeath, or there is evidence that the condition ordeath may not be the result of an accident; 
. . . . 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) The child's psychological well-being has been
injured as evidenced by a substantial impairmentin the child's ability to function;
(4) The child is not provided in a timely mannerwith adequate food; clothing; shelter;supervision; or psychological, physical, ormedical care[.] 
HRS § 587A-4 (emphasis added). Moreover, "[t]hreatened harm 
means any reasonably foreseeable substantial risk of harm to a child." HRS § 587A-4 (emphases added). 
Here, in FOF 66, the Family Court did not clearly err 
in finding "threatened harm," or in other words, that there was "reasonably foreseeable substantial risk of harm" such as either extreme mental distress or that the children's psychological well-being would be injured as evidenced by a substantial impairment in the children's ability to function. See HRS 
§ 587A-4. 
Mother does not challenge a number of the Family 
Court's findings, and unchallenged findings are binding on this court. In re Doe
, 99 Hawai#i 522, 538, 57 P.3d 447, 463 (2002). 
It is uncontested that in December 2020, Mother and children had to leave a shelter in Wai# anae when Mother tested positive for 
COVID-19, they lived temporarily with children's maternal grandmother, and then began living with the children's maternal cousin (referred to as maternal aunt) on December 26, 2020. FOFs 
15-16. Although Mother had opportunities to move back into the 
Wai#anae shelter and another shelter, she did not take the steps 
needed for those opportunities. FOF 17-18. Mother then moved out of maternal aunt's residence "due to disagreements," left the children behind, and stopped contacting maternal aunt in January 2021. FOF 20. On February 16, 2021, a police officer assumed protective custody of the children, protective custody was then transferred to DHS and DHS assumed temporary foster custody. FOF 
40. Proceedings were held in the Family Court on February 23, 
2021, March, 22, 2021, and April 21, 2021. 
FOF 43, 49, 50. As 
of the date of trial on DHS' foster custody petition held on April 21, 2021, Mother had not visited the children in person 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
since January 2021; and the children try to call Mother but she 
does not answer the phone. FOF 21, 24. 
The findings in FOF 25 indicate the effect on the 
children due to being unable to reach Mother or to see her in person. The Family Court found, inter alia, that "[t]he children have outbursts, cry and are in general distress over their lack of contact with Mother." FOF 25. 
Moreover, Mother failed to provide for schooling or any 
medical care for her children. It is uncontested that Mother was home schooling the children during 2020, but did not follow through with required testing for the children so they could advance to the next grade. FOF 30. Mother left the children with maternal aunt but refused to give maternal aunt power of attorney or any other authority to care for the children. FOF 31. As of January 2021, the children were not registered in any 
school and because she did not have power of attorney to act as Mother's attorney-in-fact, maternal aunt could not register them for school. FOF 33-34. Further, without a power of attorney, maternal aunt could not consent to regular medical and dental care for the children. FOF 35. 
Given this record, FOF 66 is not clearly erroneous.FOF 68: In FOF 68, the Family Court found that Mother's 
failure to be in contact with maternal aunt and to provide maternal aunt with a power of attorney for the children to register them in school and provide basic medical care is neglect and threatened neglect. FOF 68 is not clearly erroneous, although HRS § 587A-28 does not use the word "neglect." 
In any event, Mother does not challenge FOF 65, in 
which the Family Court found the children's physical "health or welfare are subject to imminent harm, has been harmed, or is subject to threatened harm by the acts or omissions of Mother[.]" FOF 65. The Family Court did not find any physical abuse, but harm is also defined as "[t]he child is not provided in a timely manner with adequate food; clothing; shelter; supervision; or psychological, physical, or medical care." HRS § 587A-4. In 
6  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
this case, the physical welfare of the children was subject to 
threatened harm because there was a reasonably foreseeable substantial risk Mother would not provide adequate supervision, or physical or medical care. 
Given the record, the Family Court did not err by 
awarding DHS foster custody based on threatened harm to the children from Mother's acts or omissions. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Orders 
Concerning Child Protective Act," filed on April 22, 2021, in the Family Court of the First Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai#i, February 11, 2022. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate JudgeHerbert Y. Hamada,for Mother-Appellant 
Gay M. Tanaka,
Julio C. Herrera, Deputies Attorney General, Department of the AttorneyGeneral, for Appellee 
7 