  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000200
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CAROLYN UYEDA and JAY UYEDA, Petitioners-Appellees, v.
EVAN SCHERMER, Respondent-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
NORTH AND SOUTH KONA DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 3SS 15-1-153K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise and Leonard, JJ.,
with Nakamura, C.J., dissenting)
 
Respondent-Appellant Evan Schermer (Schermer) appeals
 
from the February 25, 2016 Judgment entered by the District Court
 
of the Third Circuit, North and South Kona Division1
 (District
Court), in favor of Petitioners-Appellees Carolyn Uyeda (Carolyn)
 and Jay Uyeda (Jay) (collectively, the Uyedas).
 
On appeal, Schermer argues that the District Court
 
erred in granting the Uyedas' motion for summary judgment (MSJ);
 erred in denying his MSJ (1) based on Schermer's breach of the
 parties' confidential Mutual Settlement and Release Agreement
 (Settlement Agreement), which impermissibly allowed the Uyedas to
 bypass the requirements of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 604­10.5 (2016),
2
 and (2) based on HRS § 604-10.5 where there was
1
 The Honorable Margaret K. Masunaga presided.
 
2
 HRS § 604-10.5, Power to enjoin and temporarily restrain
harassment, provides, in relevant part:
 
(continued...)
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
insufficient evidence that Schermer committed harassment; and
 
abused its discretion by denying his motion for new trial because
 the District Court considered (1) testimony presented in Civil
 No. 3RC15-1-639K (Case 639) despite ruling the same was
 irrelevant, and (2) the allegations in dismissed case Civil
 No. 3SS14-1-134K (Case 134).
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Schermer's points of error as follows:
 
2(...continued)
 
"Harassment" means:
 
. . . . 
(2) An intentional or knowing course of conduct
directed at an individual that seriously alarms or disturbs
consistently or continually bothers the individual and
serves no legitimate purpose; provided that such course of
conduct would cause a reasonable person to suffer emotional
distress.
 
(b) The district courts shall have the power to
enjoin, prohibit, or temporarily restrain harassment.
 
(c) Any person who has been subjected to harassment
may petition the district court . . . for . . . an
injunction from further harassment.
 
(d) A petition for relief from harassment shall be in
writing and shall allege that a past act or acts of
harassment may have occurred or that threats of harassment
make it probable that acts of harassment may be imminent;
and shall be accompanied by an affidavit made under oath or
statement made under penalty of perjury stating the specific
facts and circumstances for which relief is sought.
 
. . . . 
(g) . . . . 
The parties named in the petition may file or give
oral responses explaining, excusing, justifying, or denying
the alleged act or acts of harassment. The court shall
 receive all evidence that is relevant at the hearing and may
make independent inquiry.
 
If the court finds by clear and convincing evidence
that harassment as defined in paragraph . . . (2) of that
definition exists, it shall enjoin for no more than three
years further harassment of the petitioner, provided that
this paragraph shall not prohibit the court from issuing
other injunctions against the named parties even if the time
to which the injunction apples exceeds a total of three
years.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Schermer argues that Finding of Fact (FOF) 3,3
 in the
District Court's "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order
 
Granting [the Uyedas' MSJ]," entered in the instant case, is
 clearly erroneous because it reflects that the District Court
 improperly judicially noticed evidence filed in separate cases. 
Schermer contests the District Court's decision to
 
judicially notice the "parties, pleadings, and holdings" in Case
 134 to the extent it indicates that the court based its Judgment
 in the instant case on allegations against Schermer underlying
 the petition in Case 134.
4 Any error on the part of the District
 
Court in this regard is harmless because (1) while the court did
 take judicial notice of the parties pleadings and holdings,
 Schermer has not identified how he was prejudiced by the court's
 taking notice of the parties and pleadings in that case, and
 there were no "holdings" as Case 134 was dismissed with prejudice
 and (2) as we state below, we hold there was sufficient evidence
 from other sources to support the Judgment in this case.
 
Schermer also contests the District Court's taking
 
judicial notice of its findings of fact and the parties'
 testimony in Case 639, a separate case involving the same
 parties, in which the Uyedas prevailed on their breach-of­contract claim for damages against Schermer for his violation of
 the private Settlement Agreement. Schermer appears to be
 challenging only the District Court's taking notice of the mixed
 finding of fact and conclusion of law contained in finding of
 
3
 FOF 3 provides:
 
The Court has reviewed, and pursuant to Rule 201 of the
Hawaii Rule of Evidence, has taken judicial notice of the
parties, pleadings and holdings in [Case 134] and [Case
639], along with the testimony introduced at the trial of
[Case 639] and the content of [the Settlement Agreement] . .
. filed with the Petition in this case.
 
4
 It is undisputed that in Case 134, the Uyedas filed a petition for
ex parte temporary restraining order and for injunction against harassment,
against Schermer which was dismissed with prejudice after the parties entered
into the Settlement Agreement. The Settlement Agreement was never filed in
Case 134, but was filed, under seal, in this case as an exhibit to the
Petition.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5
fact paragraph 3 in Case 639  that Schermer breached the
Settlement Agreement by placing the 
West Hawaii Today 
advertisements and sending Facebook messages to Carolyn and her 
brother-in-law Flavio Nucci (Nucci). The District Court's conclusion there, that Schermer breached the Settlement Agreement, was a proper subject of judicial notice here.
6 See 
Rule 201(b) and (d) of the Hawai 'i Rules of Evidence ("Judicial 
notice"); State v. Akana, 68 Haw. 164, 165, 706 P.2d 1300, 1302 (1985) (trial court may take judicial notice of its own records in interrelated proceeding with same parties); Fujii v. Osborne, 67 Haw. 322, 329, 667 P.2d 1333, 1338 (1984) (court may take judicial notice of findings of fact issued in separate case); State v. Kotis, 91 Hawai
'i 319, 984 P.2d 78 (1999) (finding in 
separate case may be judicially noticed for its truth if it finally resolves an issue, which the parties are collaterally estopped from relitigating). 
As to Carolyn, the District Court did not err by
 
granting the Uyedas' MSJ and denying Schermer's MSJ. The
 following is undisputed. In the Settlement Agreement, the
 parties agreed to cease contacting each other, directly or
 indirectly, "in any fashion or manner whatsoever." Schermer
 nevertheless indirectly contacted Carolyn through the Happy
 Birthday ad, on August 7-9, 2015, and directly contacted her
 through Facebook on October 4, 2015, and later indirectly
 
5
 Finding of Fact 3 read,
 
The Court finds that [Schermer] has breached the
Settlement Agreement by: (1) indirect contact with the
[Uyedas] by placing an advertisement in the West Hawaii
 Today newspaper on August 7, 8 and 9, 2015, containing the
picture of [Carolyn] with the caption "Happy Birthday
Carolyn!!! Wishing you a great day!!!; (2) direct contact
with [the Uyedas] by sending two (2) Facebook messages to
[Carolyn] on October 4, 2015, one at 1:45 a.m. (HST) and one
at 2:25 a.m. (HST); and (3) communication by [Schermer] with
a third-party, Flavio Nucci, through a Facebook message on
November 2, 2015.
 
Plaintiffs Carolyn Uyeda and Jay Uyeda's Findings of Fact and Conclusions of
Law, and Judgment in Favor of Plaintiffs Carolyn Uyeda and Jay Uyeda and
Against Defendant Evan Schermer on the Complaint filed October 27, 2015,
contained in CAAP-16-0000-79 doc. 1 at 7-8, of which we take judicial notice.
 
6
 Moreover, Schermer concedes that he would be collaterally estopped
from "relitigating the facts or issues in [Case 639]" and in any event, does
not dispute that he did violate the Settlement Agreement.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
communicated with her through another Facebook message to Nucci
 
on November 2, 2015, for the purpose of reconnecting with her.
 
The Uyedas submitted authenticated copies of the
 
foregoing communications to the District Court in this case. In
 his Facebook messages, Schermer stated, "I would do anything to
 be close to you again" and "Miss you so much. I wake up every
 night thinking you are there. And my dreams never come true. 
I'll never give up." In the November 2, 2015 Facebook message
 Schermer sent to Nucci, he ended by saying, "I love Carolyn and
 the girls. We need a meeting. This is not going away by
 ignoring me. We all have to talk."
 
Based on the foregoing evidence alone, there was no 
genuine issue as to whether Schermer intentionally and knowingly engaged in a course of conduct directed at Carolyn for an illegitimate purpose and, as a result, a reasonable person in Carolyn's position would have been consistently disturbed or continually bothered and emotionally distressed. See Luat v. 
Cacho, 92 Hawai
'i 330, 345, 991 P.2d 840, 855 (App. 1999) (the 
"reasonable person" standard is objective). Therefore, FOF 2 is not clearly erroneous. Consequently, Conclusion of Law 1 is not wrong as to Carolyn. 
However, the District Court erred by denying Schermer's 
MSJ and granting the Uyedas' MSJ as to Jay, because there was a genuine issue as to whether Schermer harassed Jay, as defined in HRS § 604-10.5. The Happy Birthday ad and Facebook messages were not "directed at" Jay. See HRS § 604-10.5(a). The Facebook 
message Schermer sent to Nucci, apparently in an attempt to persuade the Uyedas to withdraw the instant Petition, was arguably also directed at Jay and a reasonable person in Jay's position may have been distressed by it. However, the message was a single act and, thus, could not constitute a "course of conduct." See Duarte v. Young, 134 Hawai
'i 459, 464, 342 P.3d 
878, 883 (App. 2014) ("a single act--even if it disturbs, alarms, bothers, or intimidates an individual--does not constitute a series of acts so as to meet the definition of 'course of 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conduct.'"). Thus, Conclusion of Law 1 is wrong and FOF 4 is
 
clearly erroneous as to Jay.7
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the February 25,
 
2016 Judgment, and the Injunction Against Harassment dated
 January 19, 2016 entered by the District Court of the Third
 Circuit, North and South Kona Division, are vacated as to Jay. 
We remand for the entry of an amended judgment and injunction
 consistent with this summary disposition order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 29, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Todd Eddins 
for Respondent-Appellant. 
Lisa Strandtman 
(Rush Moore)for Petitioners-Appellees. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7
 Although not raised on appeal, we note that the January 19, 2016
Injunction covered the Uyedas' children as well. Because there was no
 
evidence of harassment directed at these children, it was also error for the
District Court to include them in the Injunction.
 
6
 