 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000452
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
JEREMY SALVADOR, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Respondent-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(SPP NO. 10-1-0047 (CR NOS. 96-0152 AND 96-0725))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Jeremy Salvador (Salvador), 
representing himself, appeals from the "Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Petition for Post-Conviction Relief" (Order Denying Petition) that was filed on May 24, 2011, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 Salvador requested that the Hawai' i Paroling Authority 
(HPA) redetermine his minimum term of incarceration based on Coulter v. State, 116 Hawai' i 181, 172 P.3d 493 (2007), a 
decision of the Hawai' i Supreme Court that had recently been 
decided. The HPA agreed that under Coulter, Salvador was entitled to a new hearing to reset his minimum term. After holding the new hearing, the HPA increased Salvador's minimum term from forty years to fifty years. 
1
 The Honorable Randall K.O. Lee presided over the proceedings relevant
to this appeal.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Salvador challenged the HPA's decision to increase his 
minimum term of incarceration by filing a "Petition for Post-
Conviction Relief" (Petition) pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Penal 
Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 (2006). The Circuit Court denied the Petition without a hearing, and issued the Order Denying Petition. 
The crux of Salvador's appeal is that the Circuit Court 
erred in denying his Petition without a hearing because he raised a colorable claim that the HPA violated his rights in increasing the minimum term on his second-degree murder conviction from forty to fifty years without justification. As explained below, pursuant to this court's decision in Fukusaku v. State, 126 Hawai'i 555, 273 P.3d 1241 (App. 2012), we conclude that the 
Circuit Court erred in denying Salvador's Petition without a hearing. We vacate the Order Denying Petition and remand the case for a hearing on Salvador's Petition and further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition Order.
2 
I.
 
Salvador was convicted of second-degree murder and
 
criminal solicitation. The Circuit Court sentenced Salvador in
 April 1997 to concurrent terms of life imprisonment with the
 possibility of parole on his second-degree murder conviction and
 twenty years of imprisonment on his criminal solicitation
 conviction. In July 1997, the HPA held a hearing to determine
 Salvador's minimum terms of incarceration and set his terms at
 forty years for the second-degree murder and twenty years for the
 criminal solicitation, with the minimum terms to be served
 concurrently. The HPA's order fixing Salvador's minimum terms
 did not specify Salvador's level of punishment and the
 
2
 Salvador claims on appeal that his counsel was ineffective for failing
to file an appeal of the HPA's new minimum term determination. We conclude 
that he is not entitled to relief on that claim. Salvador has been able to challenge the HPA's new minimum term determination through his Petition underHRPP Rule 40, which is an appropriate means for a prisoner to challenge theHPA's minimum term determination. Coulter, 116 Hawai' i at 184, 172 P.3d at
496.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
significant criteria upon which his minimum terms were based, as
 
required by HPA's "Guidelines for Establishing Minimum Terms of
 Imprisonment" (HPA's Guidelines). In 2004, Salvador filed a
 petition for post-conviction relief (Prior Petition), challenging
 his forty-year minimum term on his second-degree murder
 conviction. The Circuit Court denied the Prior Petition, and
 Salvador's appeal was dismissed for failure to file an opening
 brief. 
In 2007, the Hawai' i Supreme Court decided Coulter. In 
Coulter, as in Salvador's case, the HPA's order setting Coulter's minimum term of incarceration did not specify the level of punishment and significant criteria on which the HPA's minimum term decision was based, as required by the HPA's Guidelines. Coulter, 116 Hawai' i at 182, 185, 172 P.3d at 494, 497. The 
supreme court held that the HPA's deviation from the HPA's Guidelines, without explanation, constituted arbitrary or capricious action that violated Coulter's right to uniform determination of his minimum term. Id. at 185, 172 P.3d at 497. 
The supreme court remanded the case with directions that required the HPA to hold a new hearing to determine Coulter's minimum term. Id. at 187, 172 P.3d at 499. 
Salvador subsequently submitted a letter to the HPA
 
which cited Coulter and requested a new minimum term hearing. 
The HPA responded by sending a letter to Salvador notifying him
 that, in light of Coulter, the HPA would hold a new minimum term
 hearing. The HPA's letter further stated that "[a]t this
 hearing, the [HPA] will have the option of determining if the
 current minimum term is appropriate or a greater or lesser term
 should be imposed."
 
On July 15, 2009, the HPA held a new minimum term
 
hearing for Salvador. After the hearing, the HPA issued an order
 which increased the minimum term for Salvador's second-degree
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
murder conviction from forty to fifty years.3 The HPA's order
 
states that the level of punishment is "Level III" and describes
 
the significant factors in identifying the level of punishment as
 "(1) Nature of Offense; [and] (2) Degree of Loss to Person." 
Salvador filed the instant Petition challenging the
 
HPA's decision to increase his minimum term by ten years. The
 Circuit Court concluded that Salvador failed to raise a colorable
 claim for relief and denied the Petition without a hearing. This
 appeal followed. 
II.
 
On appeal, Salvador argues that the HPA increased his
 
minimum term from forty to fifty years without justification and
 that the Circuit Court erred in denying his Petition without a
 hearing on the ground the he failed to raise a colorable claim
 for relief. We conclude that Salvador presented a colorable
 claim for relief that the HPA violated his rights by increasing
 his minimum term of incarceration by ten years without adequate
 justification. We therefore conclude that the Circuit Court
 erred in denying Salvador's Petition without a hearing.
 
A.
 
A petition filed pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 is an
appropriate means for a prisoner to challenge a minimum term
of imprisonment set by the HPA. Coulter v. State, 116 
Hawai'i 181, 184, 172 P.3d 493, 496 (2007). With respect to
HPA decisions establishing a minimum term, "judicialintervention is appropriate where the HPA has failed toexercise any discretion at all, acted arbitrarily andcapriciously so as to give rise to a due process violation,or otherwise violated the prisoner's constitutional rights."Williamson v. Hawai' i Paroling Auth., 97 Hawai' i 183, 195, 35
P.3d 210, 222 (2001) (emphasis added). 
We review a trial court's denial of an HRPP Rule 40 
petition without a hearing for failure to present a
colorable claim de novo. Dan v. State, 76 Hawai' i 423, 427,
879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994). 
3 The HPA's order did not refer to or set a new minimum term for
 
Salvador's criminal solicitation conviction. Salvador's appeal does not
present any argument concerning the original twenty-year minimum term on his
criminal solicitation conviction, and we do not address the validity of the
minimum term on this conviction. 
4
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
As a general rule, a hearing should be held on a
Rule 40 petition for post-conviction relief where the
petition states a colorable claim. To establish a
 colorable claim, the allegations of the petition must
show that if taken as true the facts alleged would
change the [outcome of the challenged proceeding],
however, a petitioner's conclusions need not be
regarded as true. Where the examination of the record
 of the trial court proceedings indicates that the
petitioner's allegations show no colorable claim, it
is not error to deny the petition without a hearing.
The question on appeal of a denial of a Rule 40
petition without a hearing is whether the trial record
indicates that Petitioner's application for relief
made such a showing of a colorable claim as to require
a hearing before the lower court.
 
Id. (emphasis omitted) (quoting State v. Allen, 7 Haw.App.
89, 92–93, 744 P.2d 789, 792–93 (1987)); see State v.
Bowers, 192 Ariz. 419, 966 P.2d 1023, 1026 (Ariz. Ct.
App.1998) ("In order to receive an evidentiary hearing, the
Petitioner must present a 'colorable claim' -- one which, if
true, would have changed the outcome of the proceeding.").
 
Fukusaku, 126 Hawai' i at 559-60, 273 P.3d at 1245-46 (brackets in 
original; footnote omitted).4
 
B.
 
In Fukusaku, the HPA increased Fukusaku's aggregate
 
minimum term of incarceration from forty to fifty years after he
 
successfully challenged portions of his court-imposed sentence. 
Fukusaku, 126 Hawai' i at 558-59, 273 P.3d at 1224-45. We stated: 
[I]t would be arbitrary and capricious for the HPA to impose
an increased minimum term based on the same information it had when it imposed the original (lower) minimum term beforethe successful challenge. Based on the policies and dueprocess concerns underlying HRS § 706–609 and [NorthCarolina v.] Pearce[, 395 U.S. 711 (1969)], and the statutesand guidelines applicable to the HPA's establishment of aminimum term of incarceration, we conclude as follows: TheHPA "act[s] arbitrarily and capriciously so as to give riseto a due process violation[,]" Williamson, 97 Hawai' i at 
195, 35 P.3d at 222, when it increases a defendant's minimumterm of incarceration after a resentencing occasioned by thedefendant's successful appeal of a conviction or 
4 HRPP Rule 40(f) (2006) provides in relevant part:
 
(f) Hearings. If a petition alleges facts that if proven
would entitle the petitioner to relief, the court shall grant a
hearing which may extend only to the issues raised in the petition
or answer. However, the court may deny a hearing if the
petitioner's claim is patently frivolous and is without trace of
support either in the record or from other evidence submitted by
the petitioner. . . . 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
court-imposed sentence, without affirmatively justifying the
increase in the record by identifying new objective
information or changed circumstances not presented at the
time the original minimum term was determined. The
 requirement that the HPA's justification for the increased
minimum term appear in the record is necessary to permit
meaningful judicial review of the HPA's decision, to further
the legislative goal of uniformity in minimum term
determinations, to protect the expectations arising from the
original minimum term determination, to protect the
defendant's exercise of his or her rights to challenge a
conviction or sentence, and to avoid unfairly chilling a
defendant from exercising such rights.
 
Id. at 564-65, 273 P.3d at 1250-51 (footnote omitted) (some
 
brackets in original).
 
In Fukusaku, we noted that the HPA's order that
 
increased Fukusaku's aggregate minimum term from forty to fifty
 years did not justify the increased minimum term by identifying 
any new objective information or changed circumstances that had
 not been presented to the HPA when it originally set Fukusaku's
 aggregate minimum term at forty years. Id. at 565, 273 P.3d at
 
1251. The HPA's order only identified the "Nature of Offense" as
 the justification for its decision, even though there was no
 indication in the existing record that the nature of Fukusaku's
 offenses, or the HPA's information concerning the nature of those
 offenses, had changed in any manner detrimental to Fukusaku since
 the HPA's original minimum term determination. Id.
 
Under the circumstances presented, we concluded that 
Fukusaku's HRPP Rule 40 petition "presented a colorable claim that the HPA 'acted arbitrarily and capriciously so as to give rise to a due process violation,' Williamson, 97 Hawai' i at 195, 
35 P.3d at 222, by increasing Fukusaku's aggregate minimum term without providing an adequate justification." Fukusaku, 126 
Hawai'i at 565, 273 P.3d at 1251 (brackets omitted). We also 
concluded that "given the lack of pertinent evidence in the record regarding the HPA's justification for the increased aggregate minimum term, Fukusaku's [petition] presented a colorable claim of actual vindictiveness." Id. We held that the 
circuit court had erred in denying Fukusaku's petition without a hearing, and we remanded the case for a hearing. Id. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C .
 
We conclude that Fukusaku controls our decision in this 
case. Although Salvador's new minimum term hearing was not the 
result of a successful appeal by Salvador, the HPA agreed to Salvador's request for a new minimum term hearing because, in Coulter, the Hawai' i Supreme Court had invalidated the HPA's 
minimum term determination on facts almost identical to Salvador's case. The same concerns expressed in Fukusaku regarding uniformity in minimum term determinations and avoiding unfairly chilling a defendant's exercise of his or her rights apply to Salvador's case. The HPA's new minimum term order for Salvador's second-degree murder conviction cites only Nature of Offense and Degree of Loss to Person as the factors supporting its new minimum term decision. But, as in Fukusaku, there is no indication that these factors, or the HPA's information regarding these factors, had changed in any manner detrimental to Salvador since the HPA's original minimum term determination. 
Based on Fukusaku, we conclude that Salvador has
 
presented colorable claims that the HPA acted arbitrarily and
 capriciously so as to give rise to a due process violation and
 was motivated by actual vindictiveness, by increasing Salvador's 
minimum term from forty to fifty years without providing an
 adequate justification. See id. Accordingly, the Circuit Court
 
erred in denying Salvador's Petition without holding a hearing on
 these claims. On remand, the Circuit Court shall hold a hearing
 to determine whether the HPA acted arbitrarily and capriciously
 or was motivated by actual vindictiveness in increasing
 Salvador's minimum term of imprisonment. In making this
 determination, the Circuit Court shall ascertain whether the HPA
 affirmatively justified its decision to increase Salvador's 
minimum term in the record by identifying new objective
 information or changed circumstances that were not presented to
 the HPA at the time it made the original minimum term
 
7
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
determination. See id. at 566, 273 P.3d at 1252.5 The Circuit
 
Court shall also consider whether there is evidence that the
 
HPA's decision to increase Salvador's minimum term was motivated
 by an intent to punish Salvador for requesting a new minimum term
 determination based on Coulter. See id. On remand, the parties
 
shall have the opportunity to present transcripts of the HPA's
 original and new minimum term hearings and any other pertinent
 evidence to the Circuit Court.
6 See id.
 
III.
 
We vacate the Order Denying Petition, and we remand the
 
case for further proceedings consistent with this Summary
 Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 30, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Jeremy Salvador
Petitioner-Appellant Pro Se
 
Chief Judge
Lisa M. Itomura
 Diane K. Taira
 Deputy Attorneys General
for Respondent-Appellee 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
5
 The relief we grant to Salvador based on Fukusaku is substantially the
 
same as that available where the presumption of vindictiveness applies under
North Carolina v. Pearce, 395 U.S. 711 (1969), and its progeny. Therefore, we
need not decide whether the presumption of vindictiveness applies under the
circumstances of this case. 
6
 In light of our decision to remand the case for a hearing, we do not
resolve the merits of Salvador's challenges to the Circuit Court's rulings
beyond those specifically addressed in our decision. On remand, the parties
and the Circuit Court will have the opportunity to address the claims raised
in Salvador's Petition on a more fully developed record. 
8
 