NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000070 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
TOBY J. STANGEL, Petitioner-Appellant
v. 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Respondent-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. S.P.P. 16-1-0029) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Self-represented Petitioner-Appellant Toby J. Stangel 
appeals from the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order 
Dismissing Petitioner Toby J. Stangel's Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Illegal Judgment and Sentence Through a Writ of Habeas Corpus Pursuant to HRPP Rule 40" (Order Denying Rule 40
Petition
) entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  on 
December 29, 2017. For the reasons explained below, we affirm. 1
On June 3, 2011, beginning at about 12:30 a.m.,
Stangel fired several shots at motorists stopped at the
intersection of Kapiolani Boulevard and Waialae Avenue.Stangel shot at Michael Pagdilao three times. Stangel shotand killed Tammy Nguyen in front of her teenaged daughter,Cindy Nguyen, discharging nine shots. Stangel drove ontothe H–1 Freeway in a westbound direction and, near theLikelike offramp, shot at Amie Lou Ascuncion three times,hitting her once in the back. Stangel shot Samson Naupoto,who attempted to help Amie Lou Ascuncion, once in the leg.Proceeding further west on the Moanalua Freeway by the H-loff-ramp, Stangel fired four or five shots at HPD OfficersRobertson and Ogasawara, who were supporting a traffic stop. 
1 The Honorable Christine E. Kuriyama presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Stangel was eventually apprehended near the Kaamilo Street
overpass on the H-l Freeway. 
State v. Stangel, No. CAAP-13-0003941, 2015 WL 836928 (Haw. App. 
Feb. 26, 2015) (mem.) (Stangel I), cert. denied, No. SCWC-13-
0003941, 2015 WL 4167543 (Haw. July 9, 2015), overruled by State 
v. Lavoie, 145 Hawai# i 409, 433 n.43, 453 P.3d 229, 253 n.43 
(2019) (holding that place to keep firearm can be a continuing offense). 
After a jury trial, Stangel was convicted of Murder in 
the Second Degree (Count 4) and two counts of Attempted Murder in the Second Degree (Counts 5 and 7), among other offenses. For Counts 4, 5, and 7, Stangel was sentenced to three terms of life imprisonment with the possibility of parole, with a mandatory minimum of 20 years for each count, to be served consecutively, and restitution totaling $20,386.69.
2 
Stangel appealed. We summarized his arguments: 
On appeal, Stangel argues that the Circuit Court erred
because it (1) precluded the expert testimony of hisforensic psychologist [Marvin W. Acklin , Ph.D.] who would
have testified regarding Stangel's defense of penalirresponsibility and pathological intoxication; (2) failedto instruct the jury on merger on firearms charges andmandatory minimum sentences; (3) failed to include, in thespecial interrogatories given to the jury, the requisitestate of mind for possession, threat to use, or use of afirearm as an element of an aggravated offense;(4) considered Stangel's suppressed statement at sentencing;and (5) considered uncharged alleged misconductunsubstantiated by the record when sentencing Stangel toconsecutive terms of imprisonment. 
Stangel I, 2015 WL 836928, at *6. 
In Stangel I we held that the sentencing judge 
considered uncharged and unsubstantiated illegal conduct by 
Stangel to support the imposition of consecutive sentences. We vacated the part of Stangel's sentence that imposed consecutive terms of incarceration for Counts 4, 5, and 7, and remanded for resentencing before another judge. The August 14, 2013 judgment of conviction and sentence was affirmed in all other respects. 
2 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided over the trial and sentencing. 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On remand, the circuit court3 resentenced Stangel to 
life imprisonment with the possibility of parole, with a 
mandatory minimum of 20 years, on each of Counts 4, 5, and 7, to be served consecutively, and restitution totaling $20,386.69. An Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence was entered on March 23, 2016. An order granting the State's motion for consecutive terms of imprisonment, containing findings of fact and conclusions of law, was entered on April 25, 2016. Stangel did not appeal from his amended sentence. 
Stangel filed his "Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or 
Correct Illegal Judgment and Sentence Through a Writ of Habeas Corpus Pursuant to HRPP Rule 40" (Rule 40 Petition) on 
November 29, 2016. The Rule 40 Petition argued: (1) Stangel 
received ineffective assistance of counsel because trial counsel 
did not move for change of venue or appeal from the trial court's rulings on the State's motions in limine; (2) the trial court 
erred by not allowing opinion testimony from Dr. Acklin; (3) the 
trial court erred by granting the State's motion in limine and by 
failing to give various jury instructions; (4) the trial court 
erred by imposing consecutive sentences; and (5) the trial court 
erred by increasing the amount of restitution. The first three 
arguments were, or could have been, made in Stangel's direct appeal. The last two arguments could have been made in a direct appeal from the amended sentence. 
The State's answer was filed on December 20, 2016. 
Stangel contends he never received a copy of the State's answer. 
The circuit court entered the Order Denying Rule 40 
Petition on December 29, 2017, without conducting a hearing. 
This appeal followed.
4 
3 The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided over the resentencing. 
4 The State contends that Stangel's notice of appeal was untimely.
The "notice of appeal is deemed filed for purposes of Hawai #i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure ( HRAP ) Rule 4(a) on the day it is tendered to prison
officials by a [self-represented] prisoner." Setala v. J.C. Penney Co., 97
Hawai #i 484, 485, 40 P.3d 886, 887 (2002) (cleaned up). In this case, HRAP
Rule 4(b) provides the controlling time period rather than HRAP Rule 4(a).
(continued...) 
3 4(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We review a circuit court's denial of a Hawai# i Rules 
of Penal Procedure (
HRPP) Rule 40 petition without a hearing de 
novo, under the right/wrong standard. Dan v. State, 76 Hawai# i 
423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994). 
As a general rule, a hearing should be held on a Rule 40
petition for post-conviction relief where the petitionstates a colorable claim. To establish a colorable claim,the allegations of the petition must show that if taken astrue the facts alleged would change the verdict, however, apetitioner's conclusions need not be regarded as true.Where examination of the record of the trial court proceed-ings indicates that the petitioner's allegations show nocolorable claim, it is not error to deny the petitionwithout a hearing. The question on appeal of a denial of aRule 40 petition without a hearing is whether the trialrecord indicates that Petitioner's application for reliefmade such a showing of a colorable claim as to require ahearing before the lower court. 
Id. (citation omitted). 
Stangel's opening brief makes four arguments: 
1. "The circuit court erred by not recognizing theviolation of [Stangel]'s right to 'Notice' and'Confrontation' by [the State]'s failure to adhere toHRPP Rule 49(a)&(b)." 
2. "The circuit court erred by not recognizing appellatecounsel's [ineffective assistance of counsel] andtaking appropriate action for rememdy [sic]." 
3. "The circuit court erred in not recognizing the plainerror of the trial court." 
4. "The circuit cour[t] erred in not recognizing thebrightline exception of 'illegal sentence' to the'Inapplicability' of HRPP Rule 40(a)(3)." 
(Underscoring omitted.) 
Stangel is a self-represented prisoner. 
Although the electronic filing date
of Stangel's notice of appeal is February 6, 2018, the back of the envelopeappears to have a handwritten signature and date of "1/24/18," which ispresumably the date the envelope was tendered to prison officials for mailing.Under the holding in Setala the effective date of Stangel's notice of appealis January 24, 2018, within thirty days after entry of the Order Denying Rule40 Petition on December 29, 2017. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Stangel's first argument is based upon the State's 
alleged failure to serve him with a copy of its answer to his 
Rule 40 Petition, in violation of HRPP Rule 49. 5
The certificate of service appended to the State's 
answer is dated December 20, 2016 (the date of filing), and states "a copy of the foregoing will be served on the following party(ies) by U.S. Mail or personal delivery: Toby J. Stangel" (underscoring added). The record does not contain a certification by the State that the State's answer was served on Stangel.  Even if Stangel was never served with the State's 
answer, he has not shown resultant prejudice; i.e., that the circuit court erroneously denied his Rule 40 Petition based on something contained in the State's answer. 
6
Stangel argues that if he had been served with the 
State's answer, he could have amended his Rule 40 Petition to address the circuit court's "confusion caused by the lack of 
5 HRPP Rule 49 provides, in relevant part: 
(a) Service: When required.  All written submissions 
to the court . . . shall be served upon each of the parties
promptly after filing, unless otherwise ordered by thecourt. 
(b) Service: How made.  . . . 
. . . . 
(2) SERVICE OF OTHER DOCUMENTS . . . . [S]ervice of
documents other than complaint, indictment, information,bench warrant, summons or subpoena shall be made . . . (b)by mailing it to the attorney or party at the attorney’s orparty’s last known address[.] 
. . . . 
(c) Proof of service.  . . . Proof of service of 
documents other than the complaint, indictment, information,bench warrant or summons may be made by writtenacknowledgment of service, by affidavit or declaration ofthe person making service, or by any other proofsatisfactory to the court, unless otherwise provided by law. 
6 Stangel attached a copy of his "Inmate Mail History" to his
opening brief. The document purports to show that Stangel received no mailfrom the Office of the Prosecuting Attorney after December 20, 2016. We disregard the document because it is not part of the record. HRAP Rule 28((b)(10) ("Anything that is not part of the record shall not beappended to the brief[.]"). 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
clarity in the Petition regarding which counsel — trial or 
appellate — [Stangel] was lodging his [ineffective assistance of counsel] claims against, and why." The circuit court appears to have understood that Stangel was alleging ineffective assistance of his trial counsel. The circuit court concluded: 
11. As to [Stangel]'s first claim for ineffective
assistance of counsel, [Stangel] has waived this issuebecause he was represented by different counsel ondirect appeal to the ICA, failed to raise this issueat the time of appeal, and has failed to demonstrateextraordinary circumstances justifying his failure todo so. See HRPP Rule 40(a)(3). See Ruiz v. State,
184 P.3d 839, 2008 Haw. App. LEXIS 288 [2008 WL2225666] (May 30, 2008). See also Findings of Fact
("FOF") #20, 22, and 31. Thus, [Stangel] had arealistic opportunity to raise the issue ofineffective assistance of counsel, but failed to do so. See Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 848 P.2d 966,
1993 Haw. LEXIS 23 (1993). 
(Footnote omitted.) The referenced findings of fact state: 
20. On August 15, 2013, counsel for [Stangel], John Schum,filed a Motion to Withdraw and Substitute Counsel. 
. . . . 
22. On September 12, 2013, the court filed an OrderGranting Mr. Schum's Motion to Withdraw as Counsel for[Stangel]. 
The Order referred [Stangel] to the Office
of the Public Defender for appointment. 
. . . . 
31. On October 13, 2015, Mr. Schum entered an appearancefor [Stangel] and sought an Order from the court toallow the Office of the Public Defender to withdraw as counsel for [Stangel]. 
The Office of the Public Defender was appointed counsel for 
Stangel effective September 19, 2013. Stangel's notice of appeal was filed on October 11, 2013, by the Office of the Public Defender. Stangel's trial counsel re-appeared for Stangel on October 13, 2015, after we issued Stangel I. 
Stangel argues his Rule 40 Petition actually claimed 
his deputy public defender appellate counsel was ineffective for failing to argue in his direct appeal that his privately retained trial counsel was ineffective. Stangel did not serve the Office 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the Public Defender with his Rule 40 Petition. HRPP Rule 40 
provides, in relevant part: 
(f) Hearings.  . . . 
. . . . 
Where the petition alleges the ineffective assistance
of counsel as a ground upon which the requested relief
should be granted, the petitioner shall serve written noticeof the hearing upon the counsel whose assistance is allegedto have been ineffective and said counsel shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
Stangel's failure to serve the Office of the Public Defender with 
the Rule 40 Petition precluded the circuit court from considering any claim by Stangel that his appellate attorney was ineffective.
(2) Stangel also argues on appeal that the circuit 
court should have recognized — on its own — that Stangel's appellate counsel was ineffective in Stangel's direct appeal, because appellate counsel did not argue that trial counsel's failure to file a motion to change venue constituted ineffective assistance of counsel. Stangel did not serve the Office of the Public Defender with his opening or reply briefs. Hawai# i Rules 
of Appellate Procedure (
HRAP) Rule 28 provides, in relevant part: 
Rule 28. BRIEFS. 
(a) Format, service, and page limitation . . . . If a 
brief raises ineffective assistance of counsel as a point of
error, the appellant shall serve a copy of the brief on theattorney alleged to have been ineffective. 
Stangel's failure to serve the Office of the Public Defender with 
his opening brief or reply brief precludes us from considering his claim that he received ineffective assistance of counsel from the Office of the Public Defender on his direct appeal.
(3) Stangel next argues that "the circuit court should 
have recognized the trial court's plain error in its decisions to: 1) Grant the Prosecution's Motions in Limine that eliminated Appellant's entire witness list and therefore his opportunity to present a substantial defense; 2) Not give [extreme mental or emotional disturbance] instructions to the jury, knowing there 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was evidentiary support for such a mitigating defense; and, 3) 
Issue consecutive sentences based on unsubstantiated claims." 
HRPP Rule 40(a) provides: 
(3) I NAPPLICABILITY . Rule 40 proceedings shall not be
available and relief thereunder shall not be granted where
the issues sought to be raised have been previously ruled
upon or were waived . Except for a claim of illegal
sentence, an issue is waived if the petitioner knowingly and
understandingly failed to raise it and it could have beenraised before the trial, at the trial, on appeal , in a
habeas corpus proceeding or any other proceeding actuallyconducted, or in a prior proceeding actually initiated underthis rule, and the petitioner is unable to prove the
existence of extraordinary circumstances to justify thepetitioner’s failure to raise the issue . There is a 
rebuttable presumption that a failure to appeal a ruling orto raise an issue is a knowing and understanding failure. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The trial court's alleged error in granting the State's 
motion in limine was at issue in Stangel I. We held that the 
trial court did not err when it excluded the testimony of Stangel's expert psychologist Dr. Acklin. Id. at *6-8. To the 
extent the State's motion in limine pertained to witnesses other than Dr. Acklin, any alleged error could and should have been raised in Stangel's direct appeal. The circuit court was not wrong to deny the Rule 40 Petition on that issue. 
The trial court's alleged error in failing to give a 
jury instruction on extreme mental or emotional disturbance could and should have been raised on direct appeal. Stangel has not proven the existence of extraordinary circumstances to justify his failure to challenge jury instructions on his direct appeal, nor has he rebutted the presumption that his failure to appeal that issue was a knowing and understanding failure. The issue is waived; the circuit court was not wrong to deny the Rule 40 Petition on that issue. 
The trial court's imposition of "consecutive sentences 
based on unsubstantiated claims" was addressed in Stangel I. We agreed with Stangel that the trial judge erred by considering uncharged and unsubstantiated illegal conduct by Stangel to 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
support the imposition of consecutive sentences.7 Id. at *13-14. 
We vacated the part of Stangel's sentence that imposed 
consecutive terms of incarceration for Counts 4, 5, and 7, and remanded for resentencing before another judge. 
On remand, a different judge resentenced Stangel to 
life imprisonment with the possibility of parole, with a mandatory minimum of 20 years, on each of Counts 4, 5, and 7, to be served consecutively, and restitution totaling $20,386.69 (the same amount as the original sentence). We initially note that Stangel failed to include the transcript of the resentencing hearing in the record on appeal. See State v. Hoang, 93 Hawai# i 
333, 336, 3 P.3d 499, 502 (2000) (noting, in case alleging the State's failure to properly charge the criminal defendant, that "[w]ithout the relevant transcript, there is insufficient evidence to review the alleged error, and [appellant] carries the burden of demonstrating the alleged error in the record."). 
The judge who resentenced Stangel entered an order 
granting the State's motion for consecutive terms of imprison-ment. That order contained written findings addressing the sentencing factors set forth in Hawaii Revised Statute (HRS) 
§ 706–606. The judge then concluded: 
7. The nature and circumstances of the offenses,
the history and the characteristics of the Defendant; and
the need for the sentence imposed to reflect the seriousnessof the offenses, to promote respect for the law, to providejust punishment for the offenses, afford adequate deterrenceto criminal conduct, to protect the public from furthercrimes of the Defendant; and to avoid unwarranted sentencedisparities among defendants with similar records who havebeen found guilty of similar conduct require thatDefendant's sentence in counts IV, V and VII runconsecutively. 
Thus, the judge who resentenced Stangel properly "consider[ed] 
the factors set forth in HRS § 706–606 'in determining whether the terms imposed are ordered to run concurrently or 
7 The trial court stated, during Stangel's original sentencing
hearing, " I think it's safe to infer that he's been illegally carrying around
a handgun for years . You add those two things together, years of severe
substance abuse and carrying a gun around, and what you've essentially got is
a lethal time bomb just waiting to go off." Stangel I, at *13. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consecutively[.]'" State v. Barrios, 139 Hawai# i 321, 333, 389 
P.3d 916, 928 (2016) (citing HRS § 706–668.5(2)). 
The judge who 
resentenced Stangel did not impose "consecutive sentences based 
on unsubstantiated claims," as alleged by Stangel. The circuit court was not wrong to deny the Rule 40 Petition on that issue.
(4) Finally, Stangel argues that his sentence for 
restitution is illegal because the victim restitution statute is an ex post facto law that unconstitutionally increased his restitution obligation. 
The statute at issue is HRS § 353-22.6. When Stangel 
committed his crimes in June 2011, the statute read: 
The director of public safety shall enforce victim
restitution orders against moneys earned by the prisonerwhile incarcerated. The amount deducted and paid onceannually to the victim shall be ten per cent of the
prisoner's annual earnings . This section shall not apply to
moneys earned on work furlough pursuant to section 353–17. 
HRS § 353-22.6 (1993) (emphasis added). 
The statute was amended before Stangel was convicted. 
Effective July 1, 2012, HRS § 353-22.6 provided: 
The director of public safety shall enforce victimrestitution orders against all moneys earned by the inmateor deposited or credited to the inmate's individual accountwhile incarcerated. The amount deducted shall be twenty-
five per cent of the total of all moneys earned, newdeposits, and credits to the inmate's individual account . 
The moneys intended for victim restitution shall be deductedmonthly and paid to the victim once the amount reaches $25,or annually, whichever is sooner. This section shall not apply to moneys earned on work furlough pursuant to section353–17. 
HRS § 353-22.6 (Supp. 2012) (emphasis added). 
Stangel argues the 25% statutory deduction amount is 
unconstitutional as applied to him because the deduction amount 
was only 10% when he committed his crimes. Stangel's argument is without merit. When he committed his crimes he was not under a sentence of restitution; he was never subject to the 10% deduction amount. 
When Stangel was originally sentenced on August 14, 
2013, it was to pay restitution of $20,386.69, and the 25% 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statutory deduction amount applied. When he was resentenced on 
March 23, 2016, the amount of restitution remained the same, and the statutory deduction amount also remained the same. 
For the foregoing reasons, the Order Denying Rule 40 
Petition entered by the circuit court on December 29, 2017, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 6, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Presiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate JudgeToby J. Stangel, Self-representedPetitioner-Appellant. 
Donn Fudo,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, City and County of Honolulu, for Respondent-Appellee. 
11 