NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-22-0000278 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
THOMAS R. VITTI, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
KANEOHE DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DCW-20-0002158) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Thomas Raymond Vitti (Vitti
) 
appeals from the March 17, 2022 Notice of Entry of Judgment 
And/Or Order (J
udgment) entered by the Honolulu Division of the 
District Court of the First Circuit (District Court).1 
On August 12, 2020, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i 
(State
) filed a complaint (Complaint) alleging that on August 11, 
2020, Vitti committed the offense of Terroristic Threatening in 
1 The Honorable Timothy E. Ho presided.     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Second Degree (Terroristic Threatening Second) in violation 
of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-717(1) (2014).2 A bench 
2 HRS § 707-717 provides: 
§ 707-717 Terroristic threatening in the second
degree. (1) A person commits the offense of terroristic
threatening in the second degree if the person commits
terroristic threatening other than as provided in section707-716. 
(2) Terroristic threatening in the second degree is
a misdemeanor. 
HRS § 707-716 (2014) provides: 
§ 707-716 
Terroristic threatening in the first
degree.  (1) A person commits the offense of terroristic
threatening in the first degree if the person commits
terroristic threatening:
(a) By threatening another person on more than oneoccasion for the same or a similar purpose;
(b) By threats made in a common scheme againstdifferent persons;
(c) Against a public servant arising out of theperformance of the public servant's officialduties. 
For the purposes of this paragraph,
"public servant" includes but is not limited toan educational worker. "Educational worker" has the same meaning as defined in section 707-711;
(d) Against any emergency medical services providerwho is engaged in the performance of duty. 
For 
purposes of this paragraph, "emergency medicalservices provider" means emergency medicalservices personnel, as defined in section321-222, and physicians, physician's assistants,nurses, nurse practitioners, certifiedregistered nurse anesthetists, respiratorytherapists, laboratory technicians, radiologytechnicians, and social workers, providingservices in the emergency room of a hospital;
(e) With the use of a dangerous instrument or asimulated firearm. For purposes of thissection, "simulated firearm" means any objectthat: (i) Substantially resembles a firearm;
(ii) Can reasonably be perceived to be a
firearm; or
(iii) Is used or brandished as a firearm; or
(f) By threatening a person who:(i) The defendant has been restrained from, byorder of any court, including an ex parteorder, contacting, threatening, orphysically abusing pursuant to chapter 586; or
(ii) Is being protected by a police officerordering the defendant to leave thepremises of that protected person pursuant
(continued...) 
2 2(...continued) 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial was held on March 17, 2022. The complaining witness (CW) 
was the only witness. The District Court found Vitti guilty as 
charged. 
Vitti raises two points of error on appeal, arguing 
that: (1) the District Court erred in denying Vitti's motion to dismiss the Complaint;
3 and (2) the District Court abused its 
discretion in sentencing Vitti to a six-month jail sentence. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Vitti's points of error as follows: 
(1) Vitti contends that the Complaint was fatally 
defective under State v. Thompson, 150 Hawai# i 262, 267, 500 P.3d 
447, 452 (2021), because the Complaint was not supported by the complainant's signature, or a declaration in lieu of signature pursuant to HRS § 805-1 (2014).
4 
to section 709-906(4), during the
effective period of that order.
(2) Terroristic threatening in the first degree is a
class C felony. 
3 The Honorable Summer Kupau-Odo presided. 
4 HRS § 805-1 has since been amended. However, at all relevant
times, HRS § 805-1 provided: 
§ 805-1 Complaint; form of warrant.  When a complaint
is made to any prosecuting officer of the commission of anyoffense, the prosecuting officer shall examine thecomplainant, shall reduce the substance of the complaint towriting, and shall cause the complaint to be subscribed bythe complainant under oath, which the prosecuting officer ishereby authorized to administer, or the complaint shall bemade by declaration in accordance with the rules of court.
(continued...) 
3 4(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Complaint, which is signed by the deputy 
prosecuting attorney identified therein, states: 
The undersigned Deputy Prosecuting Attorney of the
City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawai #i charges: 
On or about August 11, 2020, in the City and County of
Honolulu, State of Hawai #i, THOMAS RAYMOND VITTI threatened,
by word or conduct, to cause bodily injury to [CW], in
reckless disregard of the risk of terrorizing said personthereby committing the offense of Terroristic Threatening inthe Second Degree, in violation of Section 707-717(1) of theHawai #i
 Revised Statutes. The threat must be objectively
capable of causing fear of bodily injury in a reasonableperson at whom the threat was directed and who was familiarwith the circumstances under which the threat was made, and:(1) the threat on its face and in the circumstances in whichit was made must be so clear, unconditional, immediate, andspecific as to the person threatened, that the threatcommunicated a seriousness of purpose and an imminentlikelihood of being carried out; or (2) THOMAS RAYMOND VITTIpossessed the apparent ability to carry out the threat, suchthat the threat was reasonably likely to cause fear ofbodily injury in [CW]. 
The relative attributes of THOMAS 
RAYMOND VITTI and [CW] must be taken into consideration indetermining whether the threat, under the circumstances, wasobjectively capable of causing fear of bodily injury in areasonable person. Relative attributes may include, but arenot limited to, size, weight, occupation, training, andstatus of THOMAS RAYMOND VITTI and [CW]. 
I, Matthew M. Kajiura, declare under penalty of law
that the foregoing is true and correct to the best of myknowledge and belief. 
If the original complaint results from the issuance of atraffic summons or a citation in lieu of an arrest pursuantto section 803-6, by a police officer, the oath may beadministered by any police officer whose name has beensubmitted to the prosecuting officer and who has beendesignated by the chief of police to administer the oath, orthe complaint may be submitted by declaration in accordancewith the rules of court. 
Upon presentation of the written
complaint to the judge in whose circuit the offenseallegedly has been committed, the judge shall issue awarrant, reciting the complaint and requiring the sheriff,or other officer to whom it is directed, except as providedin section 805-3, to arrest the accused and to bring theaccused before the judge to be dealt with according to law;and in the same warrant the judge may require the officer tosummon such witnesses as are named in the warrant to appearand give evidence at the trial. The warrant may be in theform established by the usage and practice of the issuingcourt. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court clarified its holding in 
Thompson in State v. Mortensen-Young, 152 Hawai# i 385, 526 P.3d 
362 (2023). 
In Mortensen-Young
, the supreme court held that HRS 
§ 805-1 applies only to criminal complaints used to obtain a 
penal summons or arrest warrant. Id. at 397, 526 P.3d at 374. In 
other cases, Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 7 
provides the proper framework to analyze the sufficiency of complaints. Id. at 399, 526 P.3d at 376. The supreme court held 
that each of the appellees was properly charged by a complaint signed by the prosecutor, pursuant to HRPP Rule 7(d), which does not require that a "'charging instrument in a misdemeanor case be signed by anyone other than a prosecutor'" or be "'subscribed under oath or made by declaration in lieu of an affidavit by anyone.'" Id. 
Here, as in Mortensen-Young, HRS § 805-1 is 
inapplicable because the Complaint was not used to obtain a penal summons or arrest warrant. The Complaint set forth a concise and definite statement of the essential facts, was signed by a prosecutor, and referenced the statute that Vitti allegedly violated, as required by HRPP Rule 7(d). The Complaint is a charging instrument that was sufficient to initiate the subject prosecution, and Vitti's contention is without merit. The District Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Vitti's motion to dismiss. 
5  § 706-606 Factors to be considered in imposing a
sentence.  The court, in determining the particular sentence
to be imposed, shall consider:NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) Vitti contends that the District Court abused its 
discretion in sentencing him to a six-month jail term because the
court considered uncharged prior acts as an aggravating factor indetermining Vitti's sentence.   
As noted by the parties, HRS § 706-606 (2014) sets 
forth the sentencing factors that the District Court was required to consider: 
(1) The nature and circumstances of the offense and 
the history and characteristics of thedefendant;
(2) The need for the sentence imposed:(a) To reflect the seriousness of the offense,to promote respect for law, and to providejust punishment for the offense;
(b) To afford adequate deterrence to criminalconduct;
(c) To protect the public from further crimesof the defendant; and 
(d) To provide the defendant with needededucational or vocational training,medical care, or other correctionaltreatment in the most effective manner;
(3) The kinds of sentences available; and
(4) The need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities among defendants with similarrecords who have been found guilty of similarconduct. 
Vitti also points to State v. Nunes, 72 Haw. 521, 824 
P.2d 837 (1992). In Nunes, the supreme court described the 
circumstances of that case as follows: "In essence, the judge imposed a sentence for uncharged crimes—either intimidating a witness or tampering with a witness. In our minds this raises serious constitutional questions." Id. at 526, 824 P.2d at 840. 
The court then held, in relevant part: 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
While a court has broad discretion in imposing a
sentence, and can consider the candor, conduct,
remorse and background of the defendant as well as thecircumstances of the crime and many other factors, ajudge cannot punish a defendant for an uncharged crimein the belief that it too deserves punishment. 
Id. 
Here, the District Court found Vitti guilty of 
Terroristic Threatening Second based on its finding that the 
words Vitti spoke to CW on August 11, 2020, constituted terroristic threatening.  The District Court then asked: "As to 
5
5 On direct examination, [CW] was asked to describe what happened
between him and Vitti on August 11, 2020. He testified: 
A. Okay. I was in the back corner of my backyard, at
the back corner of my house, and I was watering my plants
which are along like the wall line of my house, and I hearda door slam, and that was like the door on the back of Mr.Vitti's house, and I looked up and he came onto his backporch. And he looked directly at me and he made deaththreats to me. 
Q. Okay. 
A. From his back porch. 
. . . . 
A. He said, "Die. 
Die. Die. Die, motherfucker.
I'm not going to take your shit anymore. I'm going to killyou." 
Q. Okay. 
A. "Fuck." 
Q. When -- when you heard that, what was your
reaction? 
A. Oh. I was extremely alarmed. And I knew that he 
meant it. And therefore I quickly walked around my housewith my watering jug and went back into my house. Well,actually I saw my neighbor on the other side and for asecond I spoke to him and then I went in my house and Icalled 911. 
. . . . 
Q. Okay. 
Let's see. And what -- did anything else
happen between you and the defendant on August 11, 2020?
(continued...) 
7  5(...continued)  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sentencing?" The State responded by asking to have CW address 
the court at sentencing, which the court allowed. After being directed to speak into a microphone, CW stated: 
You know, I have to admit, sir, I'm not a person that
understands the dynamics of everything that goes on here.
But I do believe that a person should have to be accountablefor their actions, and this being the case, the way thechoices and behaviors that Mr. Vitti made towards my family,they're -- they're severe. They had effects that, you know,I'm not a person who's used to being threatened. I've gonethrough life to make friends and to be kind. And it's a situation where I'm feeling that if a person isn't heldaccountable for the way that they harm other people that itonly encourages them to cause further harm. 
And, you know, I -- also, in my heart I don't wish
this man to be harmed. I would hope that he is able to dealwith his aggression and to get a hold of his anger and tosomehow have a good life. Somehow. But even more so, Ineed him to, you know, stay away from causing harm to peopleand, in particular, my family and myself. 
Vitti does not raise any challenge related to the 
above. However, the District Court then questioned CW, after the 
close of evidence and the determination of guilt, including the following: 
THE COURT: Okay. What happened on -- on the 12th?
What happened the day after this incident happened? With 
you -- you were about to say something about August 12th onthe stand. 
[CW]: August 12th? 
THE COURT: Yes. [CW]: Oh, I'm -- I'm sorry, I --THE COURT: Did you mean August 2nd? [CW]: I -- when we were talking earlier? THE COURT: So -- so -- yes, so after you called the
police --
[CW]: After I called the police, sir? 
A. No, sir. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Did you have any other interaction with
Mr. Vitti? 
[CW]: No. He was taken into custody, sir. 
THE COURT: I see. Okay. So -- so when you were
talking about him assaulting you, you were not talking about
after the -- the --
[CW]: That was --
THE COURT: -- incident? [CW]: -- on August 2nd, sir. 
The prosecutor then directed CW to his seat and said 
that the State was asking for one year jail as the sentence. 
Noting that one year was the maximum sentence allowed by law, the District Court asked why the State was asking for one year. The prosecutor responded: 
[Prosecutor]: The State would argue the circumstances
of this case and the harm done to the victim in this case 
are -- show more criminality than in similar cases. 
Your honor, [CW] had to move his family because he was
so scared and there was a long period of disruptive behaviorbefore that. And -- he didn't want to come to court today.He wanted the case continued to a Monday 'cause of his workschedule, and I told him that means, you know, the defendantwill probably get released if we continue it to a datethat's convenient for you. So he said, no, he'll -- he'llfind a way to come today, on Thursday. So it's a serious matter for him. 
The District Court then replied: "But that doesn't 
mean I should be imposing a year in jail because it's 
inconvenient to [CW] to appear in court." The court repeatedly asked why the case was deserving of the maximum punishment that the law allows. After rejecting the prosecutor's responses, the court said: "You can say to me whatever you know about this case which -- which -- which you believe deserves a year in jail[,]" followed by, "Tell me about why – why [CW] needed to get a -- a 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
TRO[.]" The prosecutor responded that the TRO (temporary 
restraining order) was based on an August 2, 2020 incident and the court interjected, "I take it it's not the first incident though?" The prosecutor responded that the other incidents were not so serious, Vitti playing music too loud, driving too fast, staring at [CW's] family in a way that was uncomfortable, and then described an August 2nd incident involving Vitti "violently pushing" at CW's gate, which was not charged in this case, but which was the basis for a TRO. As the prosecutor continued to describe the August 2nd incident, the District Court said, "I'm going to ask [CW] to come back up . . ." 
The State then asked CW to "tell the judge about the 
August 2nd, 2020 incident[.]" CW's detailed response was interspersed with multiple questions from the court about the August 2, 2020 incident, with follow up questions from the court about "did anything happen" between that day and the day of the charged conduct. 
No objection was made by defense counsel. Instead, 
defense counsel pointed out that Vitti has no record of other convictions, any other pending cases were dismissed, that Vitti was not a "good fit" for that neighborhood, and asked that Vitti be sentenced to a term of probation with credit for the time he already served. Vitti declined to make a statement. 
The court then asked the prosecutor about the cases 
that were dismissed, whether the State was intending to refile 
10   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
them (not likely), the nature of the charges (disorderlies, 
harassment), and when they occurred (late 2020, early 2021). The court asked defense counsel about what Vitti would do if released (work construction, good friend support system). 
The District Court then sentenced Vitti as follows: 
THE COURT: Okay. Well, you know what? This -- this 
is what I'm struggling with, right? I can sentence Mr. 
Vitti to a jail term today and he can be released with -- I-- if I give him the full year in jail, he will serve theyear, the full year with credit for time served, but when heis released there is no supervision. There will be no requirement for him to avail himself of anger managementclasses, substance abuse monitoring, and the like. He would just be released. And he may be harboring more angerbecause of the incarceration. 
You know, I -- I don't take [CW's] statements lightly.
So that -- that's what -- but the court also doesn't want to put someone on probation if he's not going to -- he's justnot going to show up for his probation. But -- but I am concerned. I'm concerned that if he serves the full year injail without any rehabilitation he -- he would just bepunished without any hope of -- of perhaps understanding whyhe -- he did what he did and how -- how to get better. And so this is what I'll do. 
I'll sentence -- Mr. Vitti, please stand. 
. . . . 
. . . I'm going to sentence you to six months in jail,
okay, and one year on probation. And as a special conditionof -- the mandatory conditions will be you -- you are not tocommit another federal or state crime or engage in criminalconduct in any foreign jurisdiction under -- or undermilitary jurisdiction that would constitute a crime underHawaii law. 
And you -- you will report to a probation officer as
directed by the court or the probation officer; 
that you remain within this jurisdiction -- the
jurisdiction of the court unless granted permission to leaveby the court or a probation officer; 
that you notify your probation officer prior to any
change of address or employment; 
that you notify a probation officer promptly if
arrested or questioned by a law enforcement officer; 
that you permit your probation officer to visit you at
your home or elsewhere as specified by the court; and that 
11   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
you make restitution for any losses suffered by the victim,
if the court has ordered restitution. 
I'm not going to order any restitution. 
As far as discretionary conditions, it will be to
serve a jail term of six months. 
Another discretionary condition is to stay away from
[CW] or any member of his family. 
Refrain from the use of alcohol or any narcotic drugs
or controlled substances without a prescription. 
Refrain from possessing a firearm, ammunition,
destructive device, or other dangerous weapon. 
Undergo a mental health assessment and treatment,
including the assessment and treatment for substance abuse
dependency and remain in a specified facility if requiredfor that purpose. 
And the final one would be to seek and maintain -- I'm 
sorry, successfully complete the anger management program asdirected by your probation officer. 
Vitti argues that, while the District Court may have 
considered the HRS § 706-606 factors, it erred and acted 
unconstitutionally in considering, inter alia, the uncharged, alleged incident on August 2, 2020, recalling CW to testify about 
the uncharged, alleged incident, in effect acting as an advocate on behalf of the State after the State allegedly failed to deliver a satisfactory justification for imposing a sentence of 
imprisonment. The State argues, inter alia, that Vitti waived these arguments by failing to raise them in the trial court, that 
a victim has a right to be heard concerning the defendant's disposition before a sentence is imposed, and that it was permissible for the District Court to use prior conduct for the purpose of establishing propensity of dangerousness in the future. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We conclude that the District Court plainly erred and 
abused its discretion in its sentencing of Vitti when it not only 
permitted CW to make a statement, but also extensively questioned the prosecutor and CW about prior incidents, further incidents, dismissed charges, and possible uncharged incidents. The District Court went beyond the permissible bounds of evaluating applicable sentencing factors when it conducted further examination of the complaining witness in this manner after the close of evidence. While an explanation of sentencing factors considered is not required in every instance, here, the District Court gave no explanation of the extent of its own post-trial inquiry into uncharged conduct and stated no limitation of its consideration of the further statements elicited by the court from CW and the prosecutor. As stated in Nunes: 
[w]hile a court has broad discretion in imposing
a sentence, and can consider the candor, conduct,
remorse and background of the defendant as well as thecircumstances of the crime and many other factors, ajudge cannot punish a defendant for an uncharged crimein the belief that it too deserves punishment. 
72 Haw. at 526, 824 P.2d at 840. 
We further conclude that the District Court's 
impermissible reliance on uncharged conduct as a basis for its 
sentence was unconstitutional and requires that Vitti's sentence be vacated and this case be remanded for resentencing. 
For these reasons, the District Court's March 17, 2022 
Judgment is affirmed in part and vacated in part. The District Court's conviction of Vitti for Terroristic Threatening Second is 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
affirmed. Vitti's sentence is vacated, and this case is remanded 
for resentencing before another judge. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, July 26, 2023. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate JudgeRachel K.X. Murakami, Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Brian Vincent,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, City and County of Honolulu, for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
14 