 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-18-0000382 28-JUN-2024 07:52 AM Dkt. 161 SO 
NO. CAAP-18-0000382 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI 
ANELA SAN NICOLAS, INDIVIDUALLY,
AND AS NEXT FRIEND OF H.M., A MINOR,
AND AS PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ESTATE OF LOUIS MARTIN;
DEBRA ANN N. MAIOHO-POHINA, INDIVIDUALLY,
AND AS NEXT FRIEND OF N.M., A MINOR, Plaintiffs-Appellees, v.
EMBASSY HOUSE, LLP, Defendant/Cross-Claim Plaintiff/
Cross-Claim Defendant-Appellee, and STRUCTURAL SYSTEMS, INC.,
Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/Cross-Claim Plaintiff-Appellee,
and JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, AND DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants. 
 
STRUCTURAL SYSTEMS, INC., Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
COLOR DYNAMICS, INC., Third-Party Defendant-Appellant, and
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, AND DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
Third-Party Defendants. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 1CC151001768) 
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
  Third-Party Defendant-Appellant Color Dynamics,  Inc. 
(or CDI), appeals from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's  1
1 The Honorable Keith K. Hiraoka presided.  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
April 18, 2018 Amended Judgment and various orders. On appeal, 
Color Dynamics raises ten points of error ( POE), challenging the 
circuit court's: (1) evidentiary rulings (POE 2-7) ; (2) jury 
instructions (POE 1) ; (3) indemnification ruling (POE 8); 
(4) award of attorney's fees (POE 9); and (5) denial of a new trial (POE 10).  
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve the points of error as discussed below, and affirm. 
Embassy House, a multi-story building in Honolulu, 
contracted with Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellee Structural 
Systems,  Inc. (or SSI) to make repairs on the building. 
Structural Systems subcontracted with Color Dynamics to do some of the repairs and painting. During the course of the project, Color Dynamics' employee, Louis Martin, fell to his death from 
the roof of Embassy House. 
Martin's Estate filed a wrongful death complaint 
against Embassy House and Structural Systems. Structural 
Systems in turn filed a third-party complaint against Color 
Dynamics for indemnification under the subcontract. 
Martin's Estate settled with Embassy House and 
Structural Systems, which the circuit court determined was a good faith settlement. Only Structural Systems' third-party complaint against Color Dynamics for contractual indemnification remained. 
Following a trial, the jury returned a special verdict 
apportioning negligence for Martin's death as follows: 
Structural Systems - 50%
Color Dynamics - 48%
Martin - 2% 
2  
 
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court ordered Color Dynamics to indemnify Structural 
Systems for $768,979.59. The circuit court also awarded Structural Systems $113,179.00 in attorneys' fees. Color Dynamics timely appealed. 
(1)  First, Color Dynamics challenges various 
evidentiary rulings (POE 2-7),  but we conclude only POE 3 has 
merit. In POE 3, Color Dynamics argues "the circuit court erred when it disallowed photographs and testimony of the safety guardrails built on the day after the incident[.]" 2
Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence ( HRE
) Rule 407 states: 
When, after an event, measures are taken which, if
taken previously, would have made the event less likely to
occur, evidence of the subsequent measures is notadmissible to prove negligence or culpable conduct inconnection with the event. This rule does not require theexclusion of evidence of subsequent measures when offered
for another purpose, such as proving dangerous defect in
products liability cases, ownership, control, orfeasibility of precautionary measures, if controverted, orimpeachment. 
In Ranches v. City & County of Honolulu, 115 Hawaiʻi 462, 467-68, 
168 P.3d 592, 597-98 (2007), the Hawai ʻi Supreme Court held the 
HRE Rule 407 exclusion applies to "remedial" measures that 
respond to an accident or event. 
Here, two days prior to Martin's fall, Structural 
Systems' superintendent instructed its foreman to construct guardrails next to Embassy House's rooftop entrances. 
The day 
after Martin's fall, Structural Systems' foreman installed the guardrails. Based on this evidence, installation of the guardrails was not a "remedial" response to Martin's fall. 
2 Color Dynamics argues the circuit court erred by: limiting CDI's
cross examination of SSI's expert witness (POE 2); excluding evidence of a
post-accident guardrail (POE 3); excluding evidence of a post-accident
guardrail after its feasibility was contested at trial (POE 4); excluding
lay-witness Stephen Loo from testifying (POE 5); making "inconsistentrulings" favoring SSI and prejudicing CDI (POE 6); and limiting lay witnesstestimony from Jan Kim and Daniel Chun (POE 7). 
3  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, the circuit court's exclusion of the pictures and 
testimony of the erected guardrails was improper. 
But the record shows Color Dynamics was not foreclosed 
from asserting Structural Systems' negligence as to worksite safety precautions. 
At trial, evidence was adduced as to the 
instruction to build the guardrail, SSI's control over the 
accident's location, a guardrail's efficacy in preventing the 
accident, and Structural Systems' obligation to erect the guardrail. Thus, the circuit court's error does not demand a 
new trial. See 
Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 641-2 (2016) 
("No judgment, order, or decree shall be reversed, amended, or 
modified for any error or defect, unless the court is of the 
opinion that it has injuriously affected the substantial rights 
of the appellant."); Hawai ʻi Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 61 
("No error in either the admission or the exclusion of evidence 
. . . is ground for . . . disturbing a judgment or order, unless refusal to take such action appears to the court inconsistent with substantial justice."). 
(2)
 Color Dynamics contends, "[w]ithout [its] proposed 
jury instruction on controlling employers, the jury instructions were prejudicially insufficient since there was no other instruction that set forth the standards in OSHA CPL-2.0.124," an OSHA regulation concerning a "controlling employer's" responsibilities. Without an instruction referencing OSHA CPL-2.0.124, Color Dynamics argues Structural Systems' legal 
authority and legal obligations were insufficiently defined for 
the jury. 
Jury instructions are "read and considered as a whole" 
on review to determine if "the instructions given [were] prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or 
misleading." 
Nelson v. Univ. of Hawaiʻi
, 97 Hawaiʻi 376, 386, 38 
4  
 
 
 
   
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.3d 95, 105 (2001) (quoting Hirahara v. Tanaka, 87 Hawaiʻi 460, 
462, 959 P.2d 830, 832 (1998)). "Erroneous instructions are 
presumptively harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial." Id. (citation omitted). 
Color Dynamics' proposed jury instruction defines 
"controlling employers" as being established by contract, with the "power to correct safety and health violations itself or require others to correct them." 
The instructions provided to the jury cited Hawai ʻi 
Administrative Rule § 12-110-2 and contained standards of care that apply to "all employers with employees doing business in 
the State." 
It defined "prime contractor," stating "the prime 
contractor assumes all obligations prescribed as employer 
responsibilities under the law, whether or not any part of the work is subcontracted." Further, it stated a prime contractor "shall ensure compliance with the requirements of the standards of part 3 of this title from the contractor's own employees as 
well as from all subcontractor employees on the project." 
(Emphasis added.) Finally, the jury instructions stated "[w]here joint responsibility exists, both the prime and subcontractors are subject to the enforcement provisions of the law[.]" 
Comparing Color Dynamics' proposed instruction with 
the final jury instructions, the inclusion of OSHA CPL-2.0.124 
would not have materially changed the instructions regarding 
Structural Systems' or Color Dynamics' obligations to the employees at the Embassy House worksite. The provided instructions as a whole were not prejudicially insufficient or erroneous, and therefore the circuit court did not err by excluding Color Dynamics' appealed instruction. 
5  
 
 
 
   (3) Color Dynamics contends it "should not need to 
indemnify SSI for the 2% comparative negligence attributed to Louis Martin because SSI would not have been liable for those damages." (Emphasis added.) Color Dynamics cites HRS § 663-31 (2016) and argues "the court must, by operation of law, reduce [Color Dynamics'] damages in direct proportion to the amount of 
negligence attributable to Mr. Martin." (Emphasis added.) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We review the order denying Structural Systems' motion 
for partial summary judgment on indemnification de novo.  See 
Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai ʻi 92, 104, 
176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008). 3
As relevant to this case, HRS § 663-31 requires the 
jury to determine the degree of each party's negligence, and 
also requires damages be reduced in proportion to the deceased's degree of negligence: 
§ 663-31 Contributory negligence no bar; comparative
negligence; findings of fact and special verdicts. 
(a) . . . [A]ny damages allowed shall be diminished in
proportion to the amount of negligence attributable to the
person for whose injury, damage or death recovery is made. 
(b) In any action to which subsection (a) of this section
applies, the court, in a nonjury trial, shall make findings
of fact or, in a jury trial, the jury shall return aspecial verdict which shall state: 
(1) The amount of the damages which would have beenrecoverable if there had been no contributorynegligence; and 
(2) The degree of negligence of each party
expressed as a percentage. 
(c) Upon the making of the findings of fact or return of
a special verdict, as is contemplated by subsection (b)
above, the court shall reduce the amount of the award in 
proportion to the amount of negligence attributable to the 
3 While the circuit court's August 15, 2017 order denied SSI's motion
for partial summary judgment, it did so to the extent that "CDI's liability
to SSI under the indemnity agreement is contingent upon a determinationwhether CDI or any of its employees (including Martin) was negligent,"otherwise determining the subcontract's indemnity scope. 
6  
 
 
 
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
person for whose injury, damage or death recovery is
made[.] 
(Formatting altered and emphases added.) 
The subcontract's indemnification clause required 
Color Dynamics to indemnify Structural Systems: 
[A]gainst claims, damages, losses and expenses, includingbut not limited to attorney's fees, arising out of orresulting from performance of [CDI's] Work under this
Subcontract, provided that any such claim, damage, loss or
expense is attributable to bodily injury, sickness, diseaseor death, . . . but only to the extent caused by thenegligent acts or omissions of [CDI], . . . anyone directlyor indirectly employed by them or anyone for whose acts
they may be liable, regardless of whether or not such
claim, damage, loss or expense is caused in part by a partyindemnified hereunder. 
Based on HRS § 663-31 and the subcontract's 
indemnification clause, the circuit court divided Color 
Dynamics' indemnification obligations into two types – damages 
(settlement amount) and "losses and expenses" (attorneys' fees). The circuit court categorized the settlement amount as damages under HRS § 663-31, attributable to the Estate's wrongful death tort claim. The circuit court then categorized attorneys' fees and costs incurred reaching the settlement as "losses and 
expenses" "[b]ecause SSI was obligated to defend itself against 
[Estate's] lawsuit whether or not Martin was ultimately found 51% or more at fault[.]" 
The circuit court found "[t]he amount of the 
settlement paid by SSI represents the amount of 'damages' – after reduction for Martin's comparative negligence – for which CDI is potentially obligated to indemnify SSI." 
Color Dynamics 
does not expressly challenge this finding. Hawai ʻi Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4); Okada Trucking Co., Ltd. v. 
Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawaiʻi 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002) 
(explaining findings of fact "not challenged on appeal are 
binding on the appellate court"). Based on this finding, the 
7  
 
 
 
   
  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court did not impute Martin's negligence to Color 
Dynamics with respect to Structural Systems' damages. 
In its reply brief, Color Dynamics appears to abandon 
its challenge regarding indemnification of damages, stating instead that it "is appealing the circuit court's August 15, 2017 Order which states that CDI is liable for Mr. Martin's 
share of negligence as to 'losses and expenses SSI incurred.'" 
We do not reach this issue. In re Hawaiian Flour Mills, Inc.
, 
76 Hawaiʻi 1, 14 n.5, 868 P.2d 419, 432 n.5 (1994) (explaining 
arguments raised for the first time in the reply brief on appeal will be deemed waived). 
(4)
 Color Dynamics contends the circuit court erred in 
awarding prevailing party attorneys' fees to Structural Systems because "the circuit court should have taken into account Island Insurance's payments (on behalf of their insured CDI) to SSI[.]" Color Dynamics further argues that these awarded fees exceed the statutory maximum allowable under HRS § 607-14 (2016). 
The attorneys' fees and costs before the court in 
Structural Systems' post-trial motion were temporally limited to 
after the settlement's certification. 
Island Insurance's 
payment of Structural Systems' legal fees occurred pre-trial, 
within the context of Structural Systems' settlement with the Estate. Since Island Insurance's payments were unrelated to the fees incurred post-settlement, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion by not considering these payments when 
considering SSI's motion for attorneys' fees under HRS § 607-14. 
Kamaka, 117 
Hawaiʻi at 105, 176 P.3d at 104 ("The trial court's 
grant or denial of attorneys' fees and costs is reviewed under 
the abuse of discretion standard.") (cleaned up). 
HRS § 607-14 limits recoverable fees to "twenty-five 
per cent of the judgment." 
This judgment amount is "assessed on 
8  
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the amount of the judgment exclusive of costs and all attorneys' 
fees obtained by the plaintiff[.]" HRS § 607-14. The attorneys' fees awarded to Structural Systems under HRS § 607-14 by the circuit court totaled $113,179.00. Structural Systems' indemnity award exclusive of attorneys' fees and costs was $768,979.59. Therefore, the attorneys' fees awarded to 
Structural Systems did not exceed the statutory maximum. 
(5) Finally, Color Dynamics contends "the circuit 
court also abused its discretion when it denied CDI's Motion For 
a New Trial." Color Dynamics relies on POE 1 through 9 to support this contention and proffers no further argument. As discussed above, the points raised do not require a new trial in this case and, thus, the circuit court did not abuse its 
discretion in denying Color Dynamics' motion for a new trial. 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court's 
April 18, 2018 Amended Judgment. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai ʻi, June 28, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
 Acting Chief Judge
Randall Y. Yamamoto,  
Jeffrey Hu, /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
(Yamamoto Kim) Associate Judge
for Third-Party Defendant-  
Appellant Color Dynamics, /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Inc. Associate Judge 
  
Wesley H.H. Ching,
Sheree Kon-Herrera,
(Fukunaga Matayoshi Ching &Kon-Herrera)
for Third-Party Plaintiff-
Appellee Structural Systems,
Inc. 
9 