NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000048
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KEITH MITCHELL, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 08-1-1475)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Keith Mitchell (Mitchell) appeals
 
from the September 14, 2010 judgment of the Circuit Court of the
 
1
First Circuit (circuit court),  entered upon a jury verdict
convicting him of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree,
 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1243 (Supp.
 
2011), and one count of Promoting a Harmful Drug in the Fourth
 
Degree, in violation of HRS § 712-1246.5 (1993).
 
On appeal, Mitchell contends that the circuit court
 
erred by not instructing the jury that the existence of a
 
prescription for the controlled substances was a defense to the
 
charges. He also contends his public defender provided
 
ineffective assistance at trial.
 
Mitchell testified that he had a prescription for
 
oxycodone but not for the carisoprodol at the time of his arrest. 
The State concedes on appeal that the circuit court's failure to
 
1
 The Honorable Michael A. Town presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
instruct the jury on the prescription defense offered by HRS
 
2
§ 712-1240.1 (Supp. 2011)  was erroneous, because Mitchell's
testimony was sufficient to raise that defense. The circuit 
court itself noted that a prescription is a "perfect defense" to 
drug possession charges. 
We agree that Mitchell was entitled to 
the instruction, because the prescription was a defense to the Promotion of a Dangerous Drug charge. See State v. Kikuta, 125 
Hawai
'i 78, 90, 253 P.3d 639, 651 (2011). However, given that 
Mitchell testified that he did not have a prescription for 
carisoprodol on the date of his arrest but rather had been given 
the tablets by a friend, he was not entitled to the instruction 
as it related to the Promoting a Harmful Drug charge. See HRS § 
701–115(2) (1993) ("[n]o defense may be considered by the trier of fact unless evidence of the specified fact or facts has been 
presented"). 
We next consider "whether the court's failure to 
instruct on [the defense] was harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt." State v. Stenger, 122 Hawai' i 271, 281, 226 P.3d 441, 
451 (2010). The State concedes that it cannot make a good faith argument that the lack of the instruction was harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt as to the Promoting Dangerous Drug count. After 
a careful review of the record, we conclude that the failure to 
instruct on the defense could reasonably be deemed to have 
contributed to Mitchell's conviction on that count, and therefore 
the lack of instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt. We vacate his conviction for Promotion of a Dangerous 
Drug in the Third Degree and remand for new trial and as a result 
2
 HRS § 712-1240.1 (1), currently reads, as it did at the time of
the offenses charged:
 
It is a defense to prosecution for any offense defined in
this part that the person who possessed or distributed the
dangerous, harmful, or detrimental drug did so under
authority of law as a practitioner, as an ultimate user of
the drug pursuant to a lawful prescription, or as a person
otherwise authorized by law.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
need not address Mitchell's ineffective assistance of counsel
 
claim as to this count.
 
However, we must address Mitchell's claims of 
ineffective assistance of counsel as they relate to the Promotion 
of a Harmful Drug charge. A party claiming ineffective 
assistance of counsel must point to "specific errors or omissions 
reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence" and 
demonstrate those errors "resulted in either the withdrawal or 
substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai' i 504, 514, 78 P.3d 317, 327 (2003) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). "General claims of errors or omissions are not sufficient to trigger review." 
State v. Uyesugi, 100 Hawai' i 442, 464, 60 P.3d 843, 865 (2002). 
Mitchell fails to allege specific objections that trial
 
counsel should have made to the State's arguments, testimony, or
 
evidence. He offers no legal basis to suppress the evidence
 
obtained at the scene or Mitchell's statements to police. He
 
fails to demonstrate that trial counsel's conduct during cross-
examination showed a lack of skill, judgment, or diligence. He
 
fails to demonstrate that trial counsel's decision to waive
 
opening statements was something other than a tactical one, which
 
we will not second-guess in hindsight. See State v. Gutierrez, 1
 
Haw. App. 268, 270, 618 P.2d 315, 317 (1980). 
Contrary to Mitchell's argument, the record indicates
 
that trial counsel did "follow up" with the subpoena of a
 pharmacy's records, but that subpoena produced no records. To
 
the extent that Mitchell alleges that trial counsel should have
 
further investigated to locate Mitchell's doctor or a
 
prescription, we can infer that such investigation would have
 
been fruitless where Mitchell admits that he had no prescription
 
for carisoprodol at the time of his arrest. Furthermore, trial
 
counsel's failure to request an instruction on the prescription
 
defense did not cause the withdrawal or substantial impairment of
 
a potentially meritorious defense to the Promotion of a Harmful
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Drug charge, because Mitchell failed to adduce evidence to
 
support such a defense.
 
Because Mitchell did not meet his burden of proof, his
 
ineffective assistance of counsel claim fails as to the Promoting
 
a Harmful Drug charge.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Circuit Court of the
 
First Circuit's September 14, 2010 judgment is affirmed in part
 and vacated in part. We affirm Mitchell's conviction of
 
Promotion of a Harmful Drug in the Fourth Degree, vacate the
 
conviction of Promotion of a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree,
 
and remand for proceedings consistent with this Summary
 
Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 13, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Tae Won Kim,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
 
Sonja P. McCullen,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
4
 