 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000527
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
MALISA COPPERFIELD, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
MICHAEL MCDONALD, M.D., Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
DOES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-0269(1))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
 
This appeal arises out of a medical malpractice suit
 
brought by Plaintiff-Appellant Malisa Copperfield (Copperfield)
 
against her physician, Defendant-Appellee Michael McDonald, M.D.
 (Dr. McDonald). Copperfield appeals from the "Final Judgment,"
 entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (circuit
 court)
1 on June 7, 2017, which granted Dr. McDonald's motion to
 
dismiss Copperfield's complaint and denied Copperfield's
 subsequent motion for reconsideration.
 
On appeal, Copperfield contends that the circuit court
 
committed reversible error when it:
 
(1) granted Dr. McDonald's motion to dismiss because a)
 
Copperfield's complaint was not barred by the statute of
 limitations, and b) Dr. McDonald should have been judicially
 estopped from taking inconsistent positions regarding the
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I. L. Loo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
applicable date on which the statute of limitations began to run;
 
and
 
(2) denied Copperfield's motion for reconsideration of
 
the circuit court's order granting Dr. McDonald's motion to
 dismiss.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we vacate and remand
 for further proceedings.
 
We first address Copperfield's assertion that the
 
circuit court erred by granting Dr. McDonald's motion to dismiss
 because the complaint was not barred by the statute of
 limitations for medical malpractice actions, which provides that
 
[n]o action for injury or death against a . . . physician or
surgeon, physical therapist, podiatrist, psychologist, or
veterinarian duly licensed or registered under the laws of
the State, or a licensed hospital as the employer of any
such person, based upon such person's alleged professional
negligence, or for rendering professional services without
consent, or for error or omission in such person's practice,
shall be brought more than two years after the plaintiff
discovers, or through the use of reasonable diligence should
have discovered, the injury, but in any event not more than
six years after the date of the alleged act or omission
causing the injury or death. This six-year time limitation
shall be tolled for any period during which the person has
failed to disclose any act, error, or omission upon which
the action is based and which is known to the person.
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 657-7.3 (emphasis added). Under 
HRS § 657-7.3, "a cause of action does not accrue, and the limitations period therefore does not begin to run, until the plaintiff knew or should have known of the defendant's negligence." Hays v. City and County of Honolulu, 81 Hawai' i 
391, 393, 917 P.2d 718, 720 (1996) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Put another way, "the statute of limitations in effect [begins] to run the moment the plaintiff's cause of action accrues-that is, under HRS [§] 657-7.3, the moment plaintiff discovers or should have discovered the negligent act, the damage, and the causal connection between the former and the latter." Yamaguchi v. Queen's Med. Ctr., 65 Haw. 
84, 90, 648 P.2d 689, 693–94 (1982) (citation omitted). 
In granting Dr. McDonald's motion to dismiss, the
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court found that the statute of limitations began to run
 
on May 1, 2012, the date Copperfield discovered that she was
 pregnant, because "[Copperfield] had knowledge of [Dr.
 McDonald's] allegedly negligent misdiagnosis on [this] date . . .
 ." Finding May 1, 2012 to be the date on which the statute of
 limitations began to run, the circuit court concluded that, as a
 matter of law, the statute of limitations had expired before
 Copperfield filed her complaint on May 20, 2015, and accordingly
 granted Dr. McDonald's motion to dismiss. On appeal, Copperfield
 argues that her complaint was filed timely within the statutory
 period imposed by HRS § 657-7.3 because the date upon which the
 statute of limitations began to run was not May 1, 2012, as found
 by the circuit court, but rather "long after" May 21, 2012, the
 date she gave birth."
 
In evaluating the propriety of the circuit court's 
determination of the date upon which the statute of limitations began to run and its consequent granting of the motion to dismiss, we first note that "a motion seeking dismissal of a complaint is transformed into a Hawai' i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 56 motion for summary judgment when the circuit court considers matters outside the pleadings." Buscher v. Boning, 114 
Hawai'i 202, 212, 159 P.3d 814, 824 (2007) (citing Au v. Au, 63 
Haw. 210, 213, 626 P.2d 173, 176 (1981)). In the instant case, the circuit court articulated that it reviewed and considered matters outside the pleadings––the motion to dismiss, opposition, reply, and oral arguments–-in rendering its decision to grant the motion to dismiss. Therefore, Dr. McDonald's motion to dismiss transformed into a motion for summary judgment, necessitating the circuit court to treat it as such. 
Summary judgment is appropriate "if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." HRCP Rule 56(c). Because the statute of limitations trigger date is a material fact in the instant case, see Norris v. Six Flags Theme Parks, Inc., 102 Hawai' i 203, 206, 74 P.3d 26, 29 (2003) (holding that 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the date upon which a statute of limitations is triggered is a
 
question of fact), any genuine issue as to this date would
 preclude summary judgment. See Jacoby v. Kaiser Found. Hosp., 1
 
Haw. App. 519, 525-26, 622 P.2d 613, 617 (1981) (holding that
 factual issues concerning when the patient and her husband
 discovered, or through the use of reasonable diligence should
 have discovered, damage, violation of duty, and causal connection
 between violation of duty and damage precluded summary judgment
 against the patient and her husband).
 
In his motion to dismiss, Dr. McDonald argued that
 
Copperfield's May 20, 2015 complaint was not filed within the
 two-year statute of limitations because i) the statute of
 limitations began to run "on or before May, 2012 when she
 discovered that she was pregnant [or] by May 21, 2012 at the very
 latest"; and ii) the statute of limitations period was not tolled
 for one year pursuant to HRS § 671-18.
2 In Copperfield's
 
memorandum in opposition to the motion, she argued that the
 statute of limitations period was in fact tolled for one year
 pursuant to HRS § 671-18, and therefore, her May 20, 2015
 complaint was timely filed less than three years after the
 discovery of her claims. In other words, Copperfield argued that
 the date she "discovered" her claims––and thus, the date the
 statute of limitations began to run on her claims––was on or
 after May 20, 2012. In Dr. McDonald's subsequent reply
 
2 HRS § 671-18 provides:
 
§ 671-18 Statute of limitations tolled.  The filing of the
inquiry with the medical inquiry and conciliation panel or
with an approved or agreed upon alternative dispute
resolution provider shall toll any applicable statute of
limitations, and the statute of limitations shall remain
tolled until sixty days after the termination of the panel
or the notification of completion from the approved or
agreed upon alternative dispute resolution provider is
mailed or delivered to the parties. If panel proceedings are
not completed within twelve months, or the alternative
dispute resolution process is not completed within twelve
months, the statute of limitations shall resume running and
the party filing the inquiry may commence a suit based on
the circumstances related to the inquiry in any appropriate
court of this State. The panel or the approved or agreed
upon alternative dispute resolution provider shall notify
all parties in writing of this provision.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
memorandum, he conceded that the statute of limitations period
 
was tolled for one year pursuant to HRS § 671-18, but argued that
 the statutory period instead began on May 1, 2012––the date
 Copperfield discovered she was pregnant––and therefore, the
 May 20, 2015 complaint was not timely filed within three years of
 the statute of limitations trigger date. However, there is a
 genuine issue of material fact as to when Copperfield discovered
 or should have discovered Dr. McDonald's alleged negligent act,
 the damage Copperfield allegedly incurred, and the causal
 connection between the former and the latter, because whether
 Copperfield discovered or should have discovered the foregoing in
 conjunction with the May 21, 2012 birth of her child, as opposed
 to May 1, 2012, when she learned she was pregnant, is a question
 of fact. See Jacoby, 1 Haw. App. at 527, 622 P.2d at 618.
 
Accordingly, we conclude that the motion and its
 
subsequent opposition and reply memoranda show a genuine issue as
 to the date upon which the statute of limitations began to run.
 Therefore, summary judgment was inappropriate, and the circuit
 court erred in granting Dr. McDonald's motion.
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the "Final Judgment,"
 
entered by the circuit court on June 7, 2017, and remand the case
 for further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition
 Order.
3
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 10, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
Anthony L. Ranken,
(Anthony Ranken & Associates),for Plaintiff-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Kelvin H. Kaneshiro,and Kristi L. Arakaki,(O'Connor Playdon Guben &Inouye LLP),for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3
 Because we are vacating and remanding the case based on Copperfield's
first point of error, we need not address her remaining points of error.
 
5
 