NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0004373
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CAROLINE MICHELLE TORTORELLO,
now known as CAROLINE MEYERS, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
DAVID LYNN TORTORELLO, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 11-1-1898)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
In this post-divorce child-custody proceeding,
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Caroline Michelle Tortorello nka Caroline
 
Myers ("Mother") appeals from (1) the September 24, 2013 Order
 re: Trial/Extended Hearing ("Order"), which granted a motion for
 post-decree relief filed by Defendant-Appellee David Lynn
 Tortorello ("Father"), and (2) the August 27, 2013 Order Denying
 Plaintiff's Motion for New Trial Filed July 31, 2013. Both
 orders were entered in the Family Court of the First Circuit
 ("Family Court").
1 We affirm.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Mother and Father have two children together—a daughter
 
("Daughter") and a son (collectively, the "Tortorello Children"). 
Mother filed for divorce (thereby initiating the "Divorce Case"),
 
1
 The Honorable William J. Nagle presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and on January 26, 2012, the Family Court entered a Decree
 
Granting Absolute Divorce and Awarding Child Custody ("Divorce
 Decree"). The Divorce Decree awarded Mother sole physical
 custody of the Tortorello Children, subject to Father's rights of
 reasonable visitation, and ordered Father to pay child support. 
Mother subsequently married Stepfather, whose two
 
children from a previous marriage ("Stepchildren") also lived
 with them. Father also subsequently married SH who had physical
 custody of two children from her previous marriage. 
On August 9, 2012, the State of Hawai
'i, Department of 
Human Services ("DHS") received a report of possible child abuse involving Mother and Stepfather's treatment of Daughter, based on observations made at the Hickam Air Force Base Child Development Center and Tripler Army Medical Center. The Tortorello Children moved in with Father the same day.
2 Mother subsequently provided 
Father with a notarized document allowing him to be the temporary guardian and legal caregiver of the Tortorello Children. 
On September 4, 2012, DHS filed a Child Welfare
 
Services Petition for Family Supervision ("Petition") with the
 
3
family court ("CWS Court")  in connection with the Tortorello
Children (thereby initiating the "CWS Case"). DHS filed a
 similar petition in connection with the Stepchildren, who were
 placed in foster custody thereafter. 
A hearing regarding the CWS Case was held on January 7,
 
2013. At the outset, Mother and Father "knowingly and
 voluntarily stipulated to jurisdiction, adjudication of the
 [P]etition, foster custody, and the service plan dated 8-31-12." 
The CWS Court entered Orders Concerning Child Protective Act, in
 
which it stated that "DHS agrees that the bruises on [Daughter']s
 
buttocks [were] due to a spanking by [Mother,] which she has
 admitted . . . may have been excessive . . . . [Mother] agrees
 
2
 Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 587A-9 provides that "[w]hen
[DHS] receives protective custody of a child from the police, the department
shall . . . [a]ssume temporary foster custody of the child if, in the
discretion of the department, the department determines that the child is
subject to imminent harm while in the custody of the child's family[.]" Haw.
 Rev. Stat. § 587A-9(a)(1) (Supp. 2010).
 
3
 The Honorable Lanson Kupau presided.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
there is a basis for jurisdiction. [Mother's] position [is that]
 
it was for disciplinary reasons." DHS was awarded foster custody
 over the Tortorello Children. Subsequently, the CWS Court
 awarded temporary physical custody of the children to Father,
 revoked foster custody, and terminated jurisdiction. A separate
 order confirming the custody arrangement was filed that same day
 in the Divorce Case. 
Meanwhile, in the Divorce Case, Father had filed
 
Defendant's Motion and Declaration for Post Decree Relief
 ("Motion for Post-Decree Relief") on November 8, 2012, asking
 that he be awarded sole physical and legal custody of the
 Tortorello Children and that he receive child support. The
 Family Court heard the Motion for Post-Decree Relief on May 31,
 2013 and June 7, 2013. Testifying witnesses included Father, SH,
 Mother, Stepfather, and Dr. Gregory K. Yim, a pediatric physician
 testifying as an expert on child medical health and
 identification and/or treatment of child abuse and neglect. 
The Family Court made several initial oral findings
 
summarizing the CWS Case's procedural history, concluding that
 there was no material change in circumstances to support the
 Motion for Post-Decree Relief, and opining that any physical
 custody award to either Mother or Father would be consistent with
 the Tortorello Children's best interests. Specifically, the
 Family Court stated:
 
[A]t some point DHS, after filing the petition for family
supervision, concluded that [Stepfather and Mother] could
 
provide a safe family home for the children who resided
 
there, not only [the Tortorello Children] but also [the
Stepchildren] and returned [the Stepchildren] to the
residence, . . . and closed the case awarding Mr. Tortorello
temporary physical custody of [the Tortorello Children].
The court notes that the Department of Human Services did
not adjudicate the allegations in the petition and the
allegations in the petition remain unproved.
 
. . . .
 
[T]he movant is required to show for a change of
physical and legal custody that there has been a material
change in circumstances. As the court has noted, the
allegations in the motion refer to DHS's petition which was
closed without findings. And, . . . as a practical matter,
. . . there has been no evidence of abuse for which the
 court can find a material change in circumstances.
 
[A]ddressing the issue of whether . . . a change in
 
custody is . . . in the best interest of the children, the
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court would simply note that both families in this case
obviously love the children. . . . [A]nd very frankly the
court is -- the court simply notes that these children have
been blessed by the number of people who love them, care for
them, and . . . with either set of parents the children will
do fine.
 
(Emphases added.) On the basis of those findings, the Family
 
Court denied the Motion for Post-Decree Relief.
 
Father's attorney objected to the Family Court's
 
statements that DHS neither adjudicated nor proved the
 allegations in the Petition before closing the CWS Case. He
 pointed to findings in the Orders Concerning Child Protective Act
 in the CWS Case, which stated that Mother and Father had
 knowingly and voluntarily stipulated to jurisdiction and
 adjudication of the Petition, and acknowledged Mother's admission
 that she had used excessive force in spanking Daughter. In
 response, Mother's attorney claimed that Mother and Father had
 stipulated only to the family court's jurisdiction over the
 matter, but that the actual adjudication did not occur because
 the stipulation was on the eve of trial, and DHS chose to close
 the case instead of having trial. Unconvinced, the Family Court
 sided with Father and announced that its initial oral finding was
 made in error, and called a recess to further consider the issue. 
Returning from recess, the Family Court modified its
 
initial ruling, noting that it had erred "in saying that there
 was no adjudication because clearly the order concerning the
 
4
Child Protective Act does reflect that [Stepfather  and Mother]
stipulated to adjudication and they stipulated to . . . the

 
jurisdiction of the [CWS] Court." The Family Court, however,
 also found that DHS could not have terminated jurisdiction and
 subsequently returned Stepchildren to the home without finding
 that Mother and Stepfather could provide a safe family home. As
 such, the Family Court reinstated its earlier finding that there
 had not been a material change in circumstances and re-awarded
 sole physical custody of the Tortorello Children to Mother. 
4
 We assume that the Family Court's reference to Stepfather was
inadvertent. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On June 18, 2013, and before any written order could 
issue regarding the Motion for Post-Decree Relief, Father filed a 
motion for reconsideration of the June 7, 2013 oral ruling under Hawai
'i Family Court Rules ("HFCR") Rule 59(e). In the 
declaration attached to the motion, Father's attorney argued that there had been a material change in circumstances, both because Father was moving away from Hawai
'i and because Mother had been 
"charged with child abuse and had stipulated to jurisdiction and adjudication of the [P]etition filed by the DHS[.]" As such, the declaration contended that the custody dispute is governed by HRS § 571-46 which specifically states that: 
a determination by the court that family violence has been
committed by a parent raises a rebuttable presumption that
it is detrimental to the child and not in the best interest
 of the child to be placed in sole custody, joint legal
custody, or joint physical custody with the perpetrator of
family violence.
 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 571-46(a)(9) (2006) ("Rebuttable Presumption"). 
On July 22, 2013, the Family Court issued a minute
 
order granting Father's motion for reconsideration because Mother
 
had failed to overcome the Rebuttable Presumption. Accordingly,
 Father was awarded sole legal and physical custody of the
 Tortorello Children, subject to Mother's visitation rights. 
Consistent with the July 22, 2013 ruling, the Family Court
 entered an order granting the motion for reconsideration on
 August 27, 2013, and subsequently issued the September 24, 2013
 Order, which forms now the basis for this timely appeal. 
The Family Court entered its Findings of Fact and
 
Conclusions of Law and Order ("FOF/COL") on December 23, 2013,
 determining that the Rebuttable Presumption applied because
 Mother had committed acts of "family violence" against Daughter,
 and that Mother had failed to rebut the presumption. 
Specifically, the court found that Mother's act of spanking
 Daughter so excessively as to cause bruising constituted "family
 violence" under HRS § 571-2. This disposition follows.
 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
Mother contends that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion by (A) granting Father's motion for reconsideration
 
5
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
because Father presented no new evidence or argument that could
 
not have been raised at the hearing; and (B) modifying child
 custody in accordance with Father's Motion for Post-Decree Relief
 because (1) Father failed to establish a material change in
 circumstances, (2) the Family Court violated Mother's
 constitutional rights, (3) the Rebuttable Presumption did not
 apply since there was no determination of family violence, and
 (4) if it did apply, Mother had successfully rebutted the
 presumption. 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Constitutional Questions - Civil
 
The appellate court "answer[s] questions of 
constitutional law by exercising [its] own independent judgment 
based on the facts of the case. Thus, [the appellate court] review[s] questions of constitutional law under the 'right/wrong' standard." Cnty. of Kauai v. Baptiste, 115 Hawai
'i 15, 25, 165 
P.3d 916, 926 (2007) (quoting City & Cnty. of Honolulu v. Sherman, 110 Hawai
'i 39, 49, 129 P.3d 542, 552 (2006)) (internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
Family Court Rulings
 
Generally, we review a family court's ruling on a 
motion for post-decree relief, or a motion for reconsideration, for an abuse of discretion. See Lowther v. Lowther, 99 Hawai
'i 
569, 577, 57 P.3d 494, 502 (App. 2002). We afford the family court much discretion: 
The family court possesses wide discretion in making
its decisions and those decisions will not be set aside
 
unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Under the
 abuse of discretion standard of review, the family court's
decision will not be disturbed unless the family court
disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
substantial detriment of a party litigant and its decision
clearly exceeded the bounds of reason.
 
In re Doe, 77 Hawai 'i 109, 115, 883 P.2d 30, 36 (1994) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, brackets, and ellipsis 
omitted). 
Findings of Fact/Conclusions of Law 
Findings of fact are reviewed on appeal under the 
clearly erroneous standard. In re Doe
, 101 Hawai 'i 220, 227, 65 
6

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
P.3d 167, 174 (2003). On the other hand, appellate courts review
 
conclusions of law de novo under the right/wrong standard. Id. 
 
However, a conclusion of law that "presents mixed questions of
 fact and law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard
 because the court's conclusions are dependent upon the facts and
 circumstances of each individual case." Estate of Klink ex rel.
 
Klink v. State, 113 Hawai
'i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 523 (2007). 
Motion for Reconsideration

 
"The trial court's ruling on a motion for reconsideration is
reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard." Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100
Hawai'i 97, 110, 58 P.3d 608, 621 (2002) (citation omitted).
An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rulesor principles of law or practice to the substantial
detriment of a party litigant." Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26
(1992) (citation omitted). 
Cho v. State, 115 Hawai 'i 373, 381, 168 P.3d 17, 25 (2007). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
A. Motion for Reconsideration
 Mother argues that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion in granting Father's motion for reconsideration
 
because Father presented no new evidence or argument that could
 not have been raised at the hearing. And, indeed, it is well
 established that "[t]he purpose of a motion for reconsideration
 is to allow the parties to present new evidence and/or arguments
 that could not have been presented during the earlier adjudicated
 motion." Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw.
 
85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 27 (1992). Ordinarily, in accordance with
 Mother's arguments, then, "[a] motion for reconsideration is not
 [the] time to relitigate old matters." Id. (quoting Briggs v.
 
Hotel Corp. of the Pac., 73 Haw. 276, 287 n.7, 831 P.2d 1335,
 1342 n.7 (1992)) (original brackets omitted). However, these
 general principles do not apply here. 
Instead, we agree with Father, who contends that the
 
Family Court had authority to alter its initial oral ruling on a
 motion for reconsideration where the court has an objective basis
 to do so. Father's motion for reconsideration relates to an
 
7
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
interlocutory oral ruling, so the standards ordinarily applicable
 
to an HFCR Rule 59 motion for reconsideration of a final order or
 judgment do not apply.
5
 
Instead, a trial court "has inherent power to 
reconsider interlocutory orders." Cho v. State, 115 Hawai 'i 373, 
383, 168 P.3d 17, 27 (2007). And "[i]f a court determines that it made a mistake in [its own earlier] oral ruling, upon review of persuasive legal authorities, it is not an abuse of discretion for [that] court to reconsider its decision." Ass'n of Home 
Owners of Kai Nui Court v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 118 Hawai
'i 
119, 123, 185 P.3d 867, 871 (App. 2008). Therefore, we do not disturb the Family Court's response to Father's motion for reconsideration and Mother's first point of error fails. 
B.	 Motion for Post-Decree Relief
 
1.	 The Family Court did not err in concluding that
there was a material change of circumstances.
 
Mother alleges that Father did not establish that there
 
was a "material change in circumstances" to support his Motion
 
for Post-Decree Relief to modify the Tortorello Children's
 custody arrangement.
6 We disagree with Mother.
 
"Whether a substantial and material change has been
 
presented is reviewed under the right/wrong standard." Hollaway
 
v. Hollaway, 133 Hawai 'i 415, 421, 329 P.3d 320, 326 (App. 2014) 
(citing Davis v. Davis, 3 Haw. App. 501, 506, 653 P.2d 1167, 1171 (1982)). Since the initial custody determination was made in the 
5
 Even if we were to consider the motion for reconsideration as if 
it is governed by HFCR Rule 59(e), we could not conclude that the Family Court
"clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles oflaw or practice to the substantial detriment" of Mother when the court
reconsidered its initial oral ruling. Cho v. State, 115 Hawai' i 373, 381, 168
P.3d 17, 25 (2007). For the reconsideration standards are "not intended . . . 
to inflexibly bind the hands of a judge who determines that he or she has made
an error." Ass'n of Home Owners of Kai Nui Court v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu,
118 Hawai' i 119, 121, 185 P.3d 867, 869 (App. 2008). To disturb the sound 
discretion of the Family Court would be particularly unwarranted in this case
because the order in question was an oral order, making reconsideration of
questions of law less objectionable. Id. at 122-23, 185 P.3d at 870-71. 
6
 We understand Father and Mother to be arguing about whether Father
demonstrated changed circumstances from the custody awarded in the Divorce
Decree (and not from the "temporary" custody awarded as a result of the
Petition filed in the CWS Case).
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Divorce Decree: (1) DHS filed the Petition; (2) Mother stipulated
 
to the jurisdiction of the CWS Court over the Petition and a 
Family Service Plan was filed; (3) the Tortorello Children were
 transferred to the temporary physical custody of Father and had
 been living with him for almost ten months by the time the Motion
 for Post-Decree Relief was heard; and (4) Father had been
 reassigned to a new duty station on the mainland. Moreover, at
 the time that the temporary award of custody was entered, it
 appears that the CWS Court expected that the custody issue would
 be reconsidered in the Divorce Case. When the Divorce Decree was
 entered, none of the parties could have anticipated that these
 events would occur. Cf. Nadeau v. Nadeau, 10 Haw. App. 111, 120­
21, 861 P.2d 754, 759 (1993) (holding that parents' relocation to
 the mainland was not a material change in circumstances where the
 family court had addressed the issue in its initial divorce
 decree). These events constitute a sufficient material change in
 circumstances to support the Motion for Post-Decree Relief, so
 the Family Court did not err in proceeding to consider what
 custody arrangement was in the best interests of the Tortorello
 Children under HRS § 571-46.
 
2.	 The Family Court has not violated Mother's
constitutional rights.
 
Mother argues that the Family Court violated her
 
constitutional rights (a) by depriving her of custody of her
 
children where "the CWS Court made no finding of 'family
 violence,'" and where Father had failed to establish a material
 change in circumstances warranting the change in custody; (b) by
 failing to afford her an opportunity to be heard before awarding
 Father sole physical custody of the children via a motion for
 reconsideration without holding a new hearing; and (c) by
 presuming that her acts were "family violence" rather than
 protected parental discipline. 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a.	 There were both changed circumstances and
explicit findings.
 
As to the first argument, we reject the contention that
 
Father failed to establish a material change in circumstances for
 
the reasons explained above. Furthermore, even if we accept it
 as fact that the CWS Court made no explicit finding of "family
 violence," it is of no independent significance if the Family
 Court made the same finding or reached the same conclusion in the
 Divorce Case.
 
b.	 Regardless of whether she argued the merits
of a statutory presumption before the Family
Court applied it, Mother was accorded
sufficient process to do so.
 
As to the second argument, the Family Court did not 
violate Mother's constitutional rights when it granted Father's 
motions without holding an additional hearing. The law says that parents are entitled to certain procedural due process protections, including notice and an opportunity for an appropriate hearing, in proceedings that involve protected liberty interests, such as the parental interest in controlling the upbringing of one's own child. Doe v. Doe, 120 Hawai
'i 149, 
169, 202 P.3d 610, 630 (App. 2009) ("[D]ue process generally requires that notice and an opportunity for an appropriate hearing be afforded before deprivation of the protected liberty interest . . . ."). Here, however, Mother has enjoyed procedural protections significantly greater than the litigants in other Hawai
'i cases finding that a due process-based entitlement to a 
hearing has been impermissibly withheld. See, e.g., id.; 
Medeiros v. Medeiros, No. CAAP-13-0002023, 2014 WL 2007513, at *7 (Haw. Ct. App. May 14, 2014) (holding that father's parental rights were substantially affected when the family court did not allow him to testify or cross-examine mother regarding her alleged treatment of their child). Significantly, the Family Court held a two-day evidentiary hearing on the custody issue, which Mother attended; furthermore, Mother filed a written opposition to Father's motion for reconsideration. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Indeed, procedural due process, at its core, requires 
notice and opportunity to be heard. State v. Bani, 97 Hawai 'i 
285, 293, 36 P.3d 1255, 1263 (2001). And, in this case, Mother 
received both. Therefore, although the issue of the Rebuttable Presumption was not raised until Father filed his motion for reconsideration, the timing of the argument provides no basis—due to constitutionally-protected liberty interests or otherwise—on which to require a further hearing. That is, the party's failure to specifically address a particular statutory provision despite the opportunity to do so in opposition filings, for instance, does not require the court to hold an additional hearing before it may apply the provision. Consequently, we conclude that Mother had no, and the Family Court did not violate any, constitutional right to another hearing before the Family Court could apply the Rebuttable Presumption. 
c.	 The Family Court's findings sufficiently
negate Mother's attempted parental-discipline
defense and support its determination that
"family violence" occurred.
 
As to the third argument, the Family Court justified
 
its application of the Rebuttable Presumption with its earlier
 
finding that Mother had committed "family violence." 
Specifically, in FOF 38, the court found that Mother
 "acknowledged that the spanking admistered to [Daughter] was
 excessive," in FOF 41, it found that "[t]he actions of [Mother]
 in spanking [Daughter] excessively and causing bruising
 constituted 'family violence' as that term is defined in HRS
 § 571-2," and, in COL 3, it explicitly concluded that "[Mother]
 has committed acts of 'family violence' to [Daughter] by causing
 harm to [Daughter] and/or placing [Daughter] in fear of physical
 harm." From this, we conclude that the Family Court made its own
 finding of "family violence" before applying the Rebuttable
 Presumption. Accordingly, we need not determine whether Mother's
 stipulation to jurisdiction in the CWS Case constituted a
 "determination by the court that family violence has been
 committed". Haw. Rev. Stat. § 571-46(a)(9). 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Mother also challenges COL 3 by arguing that her
 
actions toward Daughter constitute "protected parental
 
discipline." However, we conclude that the Family Court's
 finding that Mother's actions were excessive was sufficient to
 negate the parental discipline defense. See, e.g., J.P. v.
 
S.V.B., 987 So.2d 975, 981–82 (Miss. 2008) (holding that although
 trial court "did not specifically refer in writing to all the
 factors enumerated in [its] judgment," it made "sufficient,
 specific findings to support [its] conclusion that the [parents]
 did not provide evidence to rebut the presumption" in a similar
 statute). Although HRS § 571-2 contains no reference to
 "parental discipline" as a defense to a court's finding of
 
7
"family violence,"  we addressed this issue in Rezentes v. 
Rezentes
, where we held that "family violence" under HRS § 571-2 
"would not extend to force used to discipline a child as allowed by HRS § 703-309(1)." 88 Hawai
'i 200, 201, 965 P.2d 133, 134 
(App. 1998). 
The fact that a parent's actions may have been

 
disciplinary in nature does not satisfy the HRS § 703-309(1)8
 
7	 "Family violence" is defined as follows:
 
"Family violence" means the occurrence of one or more
of the following acts by a family or household member, but
does not include acts of self-defense:
 
(1)	 Attempting to cause or causing physical harm to
another family or household member;
 
(2)	 Placing a family or household member in fear of
physical harm; or
 
(3)	 Causing a family or household member to engage
involuntarily in sexual activity by force,
threat of force, or duress.
 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 571-2 (2006).
 
8
 HRS § 703-309(1) states, in relevant part that:
 
The use of force upon or toward the person of another
is justifiable under the following circumstances:
 
(1)	 The actor is the parent, guardian, or other person
similarly responsible for the general care and
supervision of a minor, or a person acting at the
request of the parent, guardian, or other responsible
person, and:
 
(continued...)
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
defense if the amount of force used was excessive. The statute
 
requires that the force is "employed with due regard for the age
 and size of the minor and is reasonably related to the purpose of
 safeguarding or promoting the welfare of the minor, including the
 prevention or punishment of the minor's misconduct." Haw. Rev.
 Stat. § 703-309(1) (emphasis added). Here, the Family Court's
 finding that Mother engaged in family violence by spanking
 Daughter excessively and causing bruising established that Mother
 used excessive force and thus served to negate a claim that the
 force employed by Mother was reasonable with due regard for the
 age and size of the minor. The Family Court's finding was
 supported by evidence that Daughter was three years old at the
 time and by the significant bruising depicted in photographs
 taken of Daughter's injuries. The Family Court's finding
 regarding Mother's use of excessive force was sufficient to
 negate the parental discipline defense, and no additional
 findings on that defense were necessary.
 
3.	 Because the Family Court's "family violence"
determination is supported by its findings, the
HRS §571-46(a)(9) rebuttable presumption that
placement with the perpetrator would be
detrimontal to the child applies.
 
Mother contends that the Family Court erred in applying
 
the Rebuttable Presumption either because, pursuant to her
 
previous argument, there was no determination of family violence,
 or because she rebutted the presumption. 
As to the contention that there was no determination of
 
family violence, insofar as Mother argues that the Family Court
 
8(...continued)
(a)	 The force is employed with due regard for the
age and size of the minor and is reasonably
related to the purpose of safeguarding or
promoting the welfare of the minor, including
the prevention or punishment of the minor's
misconduct; and 
(b)	 The force used is not designed to cause or known
to create a risk of causing substantial bodily
injury, disfigurement, extreme pain or mental
distress, or neurological damage.
 
Haw. Rev. Stat. § 703-309(1) (1993).
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
mischaracterized her acts as "family violence" when, she claims, 
those acts constitute justified parental discipline, we have disagreed above. Furthermore, insofar as Mother argues that the CWS Court failed to find "family violence" and that the Rebuttable Presumption should therefore not apply, we note that Hawai
'i law authorizes such an application whenever there is "a 
determination by the court that family violence has been committed by a parent . . . ." Haw. Rev. Stat. § 571-46(a)(9). Nothing requires that the determination be made by the judge considering the CWS Case. Here, the Family Court's determination in the Divorce Case, explicitly stated in FOF 41, is sufficient. Consequently, a determination of family violence was entered, the finding involved a mixed question of fact and law and was not clearly erroneous, and the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in applying the Rebuttable Presumption accordingly. 
As to the contention that the Family Court erred in
 
determining that Mother failed to rebut the presumption, we
 disagree. Mother claims that she rebutted the presumption
 because (i) spanking was permissible parental discipline, (ii)
 she and Stepfather had never before abused Daughter, (iii) both
 she and Stepfather completed a group parenting class, and (iv) 
DHS had already closed the CWS Case by the time that the Family
 Court considered Father's Motion for Post-Decree Relief. 
In order to rebut the HRS § 571-46(a)(9) presumption, 
Mother "had to demonstrate [that] she posed no threat to [the children], and that placing them in her care and custody would not be detrimental to their best interests." AC v. AC, 134 
Hawai
'i 221, 232, 339 P.3d 719, 730 (2014). The Family court 
determined that Mother had failed to overcome the presumption. As the trier of fact, the Family Court is entitled to deference in its evaluation of the weight and credibility of the evidence. Based on our review of the record, we cannot say that the Family Court erred in determining that Mother failed to rebut the presumption.
9 
9
 Mother argues that the Family Court abused its discretion in
denying her motion for new trial for the same reasons that it abused its
(continued...)
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm (1) the
 
September 24, 2013 Order re: Trial/Extended Hearing, and (2) the
 
August 27, 2013 Order Denying Plaintiff's Motion for New Trial
 Filed July 31, 2013. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 23, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Rebecca A. Copeland
(Law Office of Rebecca A.
Copeland LLC)
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Francis T. O'Brien

 
for Defendant-Appellee. 
9(...continued)
discretion in granting Father's motion for reconsideration and his Motion for

Post-Decree Relief. Since we find no error with the orders granting the
latter two motions, we find no abuse of discretion with regard to the former.
Mother is not entitled to a new trial.
 
15
 