  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000962
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
LETITIA HARTER, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-1063)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Letitia Harter (Harter) appeals
 
from an October 11, 2012 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
Court).1
 
After a jury trial, the Circuit Court convicted Harter
 
on one count each of: (1) assault against a law enforcement
 
officer in the second degree in violation of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) § 707-712.6 (Supp. 2012); (2) resisting arrest in
 
violation of HRS § 710-1026(1)(a) (1993 & Supp. 2012); and (3)
 
disorderly conduct in violation of HRS § 711-1101(1)(c) (1993 &
 Supp. 2012).
 
On appeal, Harter contends that: (1) the Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion in denying Harter's motion for withdrawal
 and substitution of counsel; (2) the Circuit Court abused its
 discretion in failing to hold, sua sponte, a hearing to determine
 Harter's competence to stand trial; and (3) Harter was not
 afforded effective assistance of trial counsel for counsel's
 
1
 The Honorable Edward H. Kubo, Jr., presiding.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
failure to object, based upon lack of foundation, to an officer's
 
testimony that Harter was on drugs. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant rules, statutes, and case law, we resolve
 Harter's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Although a criminal defendant has a constitutional 
right to effective assistance of counsel, it is not absolute. State v. Torres, 54 Haw. 502, 504, 510 P.2d 494, 496 (1973) (citations omitted). "[C]ertain restraints must be put on the reassignment of counsel lest the right be manipulated so as to obstruct the orderly procedure in the courts or to interfere with the fair administration of justice." State v. Soares, 81 Hawai
'i 
332, 354, 916 P.2d 1233, 1255 (App. 1996) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted), overruled on other grounds by State v. Janto, 92 Hawai
'i 19, 986 P.2d 306 (1999). Thus, a trial court's 
decision will only be overturned on appeal if "there was an abuse of discretion that prejudiced the defendant by amounting to an unconstitutional denial of the right to effective assistance of counsel." Torres, 54 Haw. at 505, 510 P.2d at 496. This court 
looks to whether the Circuit Court protected Harter's right to effective representation of counsel by conducting a "penetrating and comprehensive examination" that was "sufficient to enable the court to determine if there is good cause to warrant substitution of counsel." State v. Kossman, 101 Hawai
'i 112, 119, 63 P.3d 
420, 427 (App. 2003) (citation omitted). In assessing whether there was good cause, the Circuit Court may not simply consider the defendant's subjective perception but must apply an objective standard. Id. at 120, 63 P.3d at 428. 
Here, the Circuit Court thoroughly examined the basis
 
for Harter's request, counsel's readiness for trial, and other
 facts and circumstances, including that the request was made on
 the eve of trial, a month after defense counsel confirmed her
 readiness to proceed to trial. The court engaged in an in-depth
 dialogue with both Harter and her appointed counsel about
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Harter's complaints about an insufficient number of in-person
 
2
meetings  and counsel's purported failure to return phone calls,
counsel's ability to effectively represent Harter, and whether
 
Harter and her counsel could engage in effective communication in
 aid of her defense. Based on the record of this case, we
 conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 determining there was not good cause to warrant a (further)
 substitution of counsel in order to protect Harter's right to
 effective representation of counsel.
 
(2) Harter argues that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in failing to hold, sua sponte, a hearing to determine
 Harter's competence to stand trial. 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has long held that, pursuant 
to the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, "it is the duty of the trial court to order sua sponte a hearing on competency when what is before it sufficiently indicates that the defendant may be incompetent to stand trial." State v. Tyrrell, 60 Haw. 17, 22, 586 P.2d 1028, 
1032 (1978) (citation omitted). In State v. Castro, 93 Hawai
'i 
454, 461, 5 P.3d 444, 452 (App. 2000) (Acoba, J., concurring) (Castro I), in a concurrence subsequently approved and adopted in 
its entirety by the supreme court in State v. Castro, 93 Hawai
'i 
3
424, 427, 5 P.3d 414, 417 (2000) (Castro III),  Judge Acoba
emphasized that physical and mental competence at the time of 
trial are central to the due process of law. See also State v. 
Tierney, 127 Hawai 'i 157, 171, 277 P.3d 251, 266 (2012) (citing 
Castro I). The statutory criteria applicable to determining incompetence is set forth in HRS § 704-403 (1993): 
No person who as a result of a physical or mental disease,
disorder, or defect lacks capacity to understand the
proceedings against the person or to assist in the person's
 
2
 Defense counsel confirmed that, with the exception of courthouse
discussions at the time of appearances (and telephone discussions), she and
Harter had only a single in-person meeting, which lasted approximately one
hour.
 
3
 Castro II was a memorandum opinion of the Intermediate Court of 
Appeals that post-dated Castro I and pre-dated Castro III. See Castro III, 93 
Hawai'i at 425, 5 P.3d at 415. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
own defense shall be tried, convicted, or sentenced for the
commission of an offense so long as such incapacity endures.
 
Pursuant to HRS § 704-404 (Supp. 2012), "[w]henever
 
. . . there is . . . reason to doubt the defendant's fitness to
 
proceed, or reason to believe that the physical or mental
 disease, disorder, or defect of the defendant will or has become
 an issue in the case, the court may immediately suspend all
 further proceedings in the prosecution" and order an examination
 and report upon the defendant's physical and mental condition. 
As explained by Judge Acoba in Castro I:
 
While the term "may" suggests that discretion inheres
in the trial court as to whether to appoint examiners, the
balance of the pertinent statutory language suggests that
only some rational basis for convening a panel is necessary
to trigger the court's appointive power. Absolutely no
burden of proof is placed upon the defendant in requesting a
panel evaluation. The filing of a notice aside, what would
seem to be the most minimal of standards—that there is
 "reason" to doubt fitness, or to believe that the
defendant's physical or mental responsibility will or has
become an issue in the case—invokes the exercise of the
 
court's discretion. Hence, the court is duty bound to sua
 sponte convene such a hearing if it itself has or is
presented with rational basis for believing that the
physical or mental defect of a defendant will become an
issue on the question of fitness or responsibility.
 
93 Hawai 'i at 462, 5 P.3d at 452. 
In State v. Janto, 92 Hawai 'i 19, 29, 986 P.2d 306, 316 
(1999), the supreme court held that "the trial court's 
determination that a defendant is competent to stand trial will be reviewed under an abuse of discretion standard." In this case, however, the question of Harter's competency to stand trial was never raised in the trial court and, therefore, was not addressed. Cf. State v. Soares
, 81 Hawai 'i 332, 916 P.2d 1233 
(1996)4
 (defendant filed a notice of intent to rely on mental
defense and request for order appointing medical examiners); Janto, 92 Hawai
'i at 24, 986 P.2d at 311 (defendant filed motion 
for appointment of examiners to determine fitness to proceed and penal responsibility). 
4
 Soares was overruled in part by Janto with respect to the 
applicable appellate standard of review. Janto, 92 Hawai' i at 29, 986 P.2d at
316.
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(b) 
states that "[p]lain errors or defects affecting substantial 
rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the court." The appellate court "will apply the plain error standard of review to correct errors which seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings, to serve the ends of justice, and to prevent the denial of fundamental rights." State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai
'i 
327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006) (quoting State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai
'i 325, 330, 966 P.2d 637, 642 (1998)); see also, e.g., 
United States v. Marks, 530 F.3d 799, 814 (9th Cir. 2008) ("we review a [trial] court's decision not to sua sponte order a competency hearing for plain error"). 
The United States Supreme Court has described the right
 
not to stand trial while incompetent as a fundamental right and
 emphasized "[c]ompetence to stand trial is rudimentary, for upon
 it depends the main part of those rights deemed essential to a
 fair trial, including the right to effective assistance of
 counsel, the rights to summon, to confront, and to cross-examine
 witnesses, and the right to testify on one's own behalf or to
 remain silent without penalty for doing so." Cooper v. Oklahoma,
 
517 U.S. 348, 354 (1996) (citations and internal quotation marks
 omitted). The Court has further noted "the right not to stand
 trial while incompetent is sufficiently important to merit
 protection even if the defendant has failed to make a timely
 request for a competency determination." Id. at 354 n.4
 
(citation omitted).
 
We conduct our plain error review in this context. In 
addition, we are particularly cognizant of the fact that no determination of Harter's competency was made by the Circuit Court and, if such determination had been made, it would have been subject to an abuse of discretion review of the trial court's assessment of the expert testimony and the court's observations of the defendant. Janto, 92 Hawai
'i at 29, 985 P.2d 
at 316 (overruling Soares). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Although in Janto the supreme court rejected the 
standard of review adopted by this court in Soares, some of the 
competency-related observations of the Soares court would appear to have continued vitality in evaluating the Castro I analysis, i.e., whether the Circuit Court had "reason to doubt [Harter's] fitness, or to believe that [her] physical or mental responsibility will or has become an issue," thus "forming a rational basis" for believing that a mental defect would become an issue, and triggering the trial court's duty to sua sponte convene a fitness examination and hearing. Castro I, 93 Hawai
'i 
at 462, 5 P.3d at 452. 
The Soares court observed:
 
The fact that a defendant has been diagnosed as
mentally ill or emotionally unstable to some degree does not
necessarily mean that the defendant is incompetent to stand
trial. . . . Similarly, a defendant's agitated behavior or
verbose, rambling, and inappropriate remarks at trial do not
automatically raise doubts as to the defendant's competence
to stand trial.
 
Soares, 81 Hawai 'i at 350, 916 P.2d at 1251 (citations omitted). 
Under similar circumstances, where the issue of
 
competency was raised for the first time on appeal, the Ninth
 
Circuit Court of Appeals has described the appellate court's task
 as consideration of whether "the evidence of incompetence was
 such that a reasonable judge would be expected to experience a
 genuine doubt respecting the defendant's competence. . . . Among
 the factors we consider to determine whether there was sufficient
 evidence of incompetence are the defendant's irrational behavior,
 his demeanor in court, and any prior medical opinions on his [or
 her] competence." Marks, 530 F.3d at 814 (citations and internal
 
quotation marks omitted).
 
A significant issue in this case is the lack of any 
(known) prior medical opinions concerning Harter's mental health. In addition, Harter's counsel, who was in the best position to observe Harter's ability to participate in her defense, did not raise any concerns about Harter's competence. See Castro I, 93 
Hawai
'i at 462, 5 P.3d at 452 ("Judges must depend to some extent 
on counsel to bring questions of fitness to stand trial to the 
6
  
 DEFENDANT HARTER: Yeah. I've only had one
meeting with her, and every month multiple times a month
I've asked to schedule another meeting just to know what's
been going on with my case, if anything. Because before we 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
court's attention.") (citation and internal quotation marks
 
omitted). On this appeal, Harter relies on numerous statements
 that she made in the course of the trial proceedings.
 
At a trial call held on January 23, 2012, Deputy Public
 
Defender (DPD) Beau Bassett (Bassett), who appears to have been
 
Harter's second DPD, orally moved to withdraw as counsel. In
 
support of this motion, Harter stated to the court:
 
There was a conflict of interest, and I've tried to hire
another attorney. He told me I have to ask you first if
there's a court-appointed attorney outside of the public
defender's office that's free. Because [Bassett is] the
seventh public defender, and I tried to set up an interview
and I've tried and tried. And then finally when I did, I
was telling him that I have a new job as an MTV assistant
  
casting director, and he said, You're crazy. And I was
 like, Excuse me? Like, every single thing I've said he
tried to put me down about.
 
The motion was granted and thereafter a private
 
attorney, Te-Hina Ickes (Ickes), was appointed as Harter's
 
counsel. After various additional trial calls, on August 13,
 
2012, which was the final trial call and the eve of the trial,
 Ickes appeared on behalf Harter and made an oral motion to
 withdraw as counsel. That hearing on Ickes's oral motion to
 withdraw included, inter alia, the following exchanges:
 
MS. ICKES:  Also, Judge, just -- just to keep the
record clear or just to make my record, I believe that if
the Court -- and I understand the Court's inclination. We
 discussed it. If the Court is inclined not to grant this
motion, another reason I think it might impede Ms. Harter's
right to a fair trial is that there's that communication
breakdown between the two of us. She doesn't -- I believe
 that she no longer trusts me, you know. 
The defendant has a right to testify in his or
her own defense. It's really going to impede my ability to
prepare her or advise her regarding her potential or her
rights to testify in her own defense and not testify -- or
not testify, my ability to actually sit down with her and
prepare her for potential cross-examination. I -- I think
that would infringe on her right to a fair trial, her right
to testify on her own behalf if -- if she doesn't trust me,
and at this point I believe that she -- the -- that's -­that's key and that's how she feels.
. . . .
  
THE COURT: Ma'am, I will hear from you now. You
may stand and address the Court.
 
7
  
 
 DEFENDANT HARTER: Because I know no contest, but
I've -- I've filed reports with her, with the Court, with
the police commission saying what my side is. So no contest
is not no contest already because I file -- I've said my
side of the story –
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
had nothing, and I file -- I told her what had
happened and how I didn't have any understanding of
what was going on.
 And I've actually also filed a report with the
police commission where it's if an officer does something,
you report it, and then I was told that if they decide to
drop the case or whatever, that then the -- then the case
would be dropped. I guess I was under the wrong impression,
but it's still been over five months that they've responded.
And so we've been waiting this whole time for them to even
respond back. Also seeing whether or not he is worthy of
having this case stand is what I was under the impression,
but I don't know.
 
And like I've said, I've never been contacted
whatsoever about my case, and I've just asked for any
knowledge or a meeting or anything. And there was only the
initial one, and then I was just told that there was an
offering. If I plead no contest to assault, that the other
two things would be dropped, but I haven't done anything
whatsoever, so I -- I was a little bit offended, you know,
that I didn't do anything and, you know, my own lawyer is
telling me this. So –
 
THE COURT: Okay. I -- I understand where you're
coming –
 

THE COURT: I understand.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: -- instead of saying no
contest and all my stuff gets scratched out. No, I don't
want to do that, and I feel –
 
THE COURT: Any –
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: -- that it's completely
retarded. This case has been going on almost two years. I've
never waived the Rule 48. Never. No one ever asked me to
 waive it, and I never needed it. I've been here every single
time on time. There was one where I was like an hour late,
and then it was rescheduled. And for that I had a bench
 warrant, and I was in jail for two months when my court was
scheduled one day later. And I never did anything.
 
THE COURT: And that was August 15th of last
year?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: Yeah. And the court date was
 
scheduled for like the 18th while I was picked up between
that time because I don't know what reason. And it held -­even when I had to go to court when I was in jail, it held
that I was picked up for that reason when the court date was
already scheduled and they said that that was ignore -- that
time that I missed was ignored already.
 
THE COURT: Okay.
 
8
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
DEFENDANT HARTER: So I've been going through all
this stuff. I never did anything in the first place. I
called the police because I was assaulted. Then they came,
and then they assaulted me also –
 
THE COURT: Did you do a Rule 48 calculation?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: -- while people -- the crowd
of people laughed at the police. Not at me. They laughed at
the police because they were saying how Waikiki is the
streets. And I said no, it's not, sir. This is Waikiki.
 
THE COURT: Okay.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: And then he attacked me.
 THE COURT: Mr. Prosecutor –
 MR. VAN ACKER: Yes, you Honor.
 
. . . .
 
At the close of the August 13, 2012 hearing, the
 
Circuit Court informed Harter that he believed she and Ickes
 
could work together and prepare for trial the next day. He said,
 "I want both of you – you and your attorney to talk outside, and
 tomorrow morning at 8:30 I want you guys back here for further
 status hearing. . . . As of right now, this case is going to
 trial at 9:30 tomorrow morning."
 
At the hearing the next morning, August 14, 2012, there
 
was a further discussion:
 
THE COURT:  Ms. Harter, please stand. The Court
yesterday ordered you to talk to your attorney as soon as
court was completed today -- yesterday.
Did you do so?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:  No.
 
THE COURT: Why not?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:  I didn't hear you say that I
needed to talk to my attorney.
 
THE COURT:  I made myself very clear yesterday to
you.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:  I didn't hear it. It was not
 
very clear to me.
 
THE COURT: Is that the reason why you didn't
show up for your arraignment and plea on August 15th last
year, because you didn't hear the Court tell you to be there
for arraignment and plea?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:  No. I had called my lawyer and
said I would be there but I was running late.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: Tone down -- tone down your voice.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: I lived in North Shore.
 THE COURT: Tone down –
 DEFENDANT HARTER: Yes, sir, it is –
 
THE COURT:
 -- your voice.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: -- it is toned down.
 THE COURT: You better lower that volume. Otherwise,
you're going to –
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: I lived in North Shore, and when I
was running late, I had called my lawyer. He said don't worry
about it. It's rescheduled already for Monday or whatever the next
day was.
 
THE COURT: Well, you -- you better start learning that
when the Court says something, the Court means something.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: That was over a year ago; correct?
 
THE COURT: Oh, so that means there's a statute of
limitations on things like that?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: I don't know what you're saying. I'm
just -­
THE COURT: Well, that's exactly why you should learn.
 DEFENDANT HARTER: -- like I've been attending all
these court dates.
 
THE COURT: I'm telling you to -- to –
 DEFENDANT HARTER: And there was supposed to be a Rule
48 –
 
THE COURT: Don't cut me off.
 DEFENDANT HARTER: -- back in November too.
 MS. ICKES: You shouldn't interrupt him.
 THE COURT: Don't cut me off.
 MS. ICKES: He's going to call the sheriff. Don't
interrupt him. Don't tell him –
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: I wasn't interrupting.
 THE COURT: Don't ever cut me off.
 DEFENDANT HARTER: He was interrupting me.
 MS. ICKES: Letitia, I'm –
 THE COURT: I was interrupting you?
 DEFENDANT HARTER: When I was speaking, you were
telling me that I was very loud.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: I'm talk -- whenever I'm talking, I have
the floor.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:  Okay.
 
THE COURT:  Okay. Now we got each other straight;
correct?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:  Correct.
 
THE COURT:  Okay. Now, when the Court orders you
to do something, you do it. I've been notified now by you
that you did not stay around to meet with your attorney.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:  I went to the Office of
 
Disciplinary Counsel.
 
THE COURT:  I didn't ask you why. I didn't ask
you why.
 
Today, when you arrived, did you talk to your
attorney?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:  Yes.
 
THE COURT: Okay. And what was the results of
that conversation?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:  I had already pled not guilty,
and she wanted to know if I'd change my plea to say no
contest, that there would be some kind of deal arranged. But
then she said that there would be no way to appeal or
address this case in any way, and there's already an
investigator on this case from yesterday. And he said it's a
hate crime. To get another lawyer because it's a hate crime.
 
THE COURT: Who said it's a hate crime?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:  The other investigator because
the people -- when all the police showed up and stuff, they
were saying that I was a white haole bitch and a tourist,
and when -- as soon as I told them that I had lived here for
 16 years, that's when the courts actually let me out of jail
three days later.
 
THE COURT:
 Okay.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:  Because they thought I was a
tourist the whole time.
 
THE COURT: What's the current status of your
employment with your attorney?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:  I don't know what you're
asking.
 
THE COURT:  Well, I can tell you that she has
done her homework. She has represented to the Court that she
did get the discovery. She has reviewed the discovery.
By the way, the Court will obtain a copy of the
police reports and seal it so that any appellate court
reviewing this matter will know how small the discovery is,
and my guesstimate is that only nine pages of substance are
actually typewritten of which it's divided between three
witnesses who saw the same thing. And so you're only really 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
talking about three -- three pages of police report of
really true substance about the facts of this case.
I would determine that going over that police
report, analyzing it is a matter of an hour, maybe two hours
of which the defense attorney has indicated to the Court
that it has. Defense attorney on behalf of you declared
ready which told the Court that she was ready for trial and
able to represent you at trial on June [sic] 16th of this
year.
 
And I know that your sole or the focal point of
your -- your position is you cannot work with her because
she doesn't return your phone calls. Is -- is that what
happened last week, that she didn't return your phone calls,
and that's why you're -- you're -- there's been this falling
out?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: Actually, since the very
beginning I had one meeting with her, and every -- at least
every month to every two weeks I was giving her a call
saying that I needed her to call me. I needed to set up
another interview or meeting of some sort. I have papers to
give you. If you could give me a call back or send me an e­mail, anything. I never once received a phone call or an e­mail or any of the sort, and I've left messages with her
office -­
THE COURT:
 On July 16th, how come you didn't bring
that up to the Court?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:  -- and paperwork I actually had to
deliver to her.
 
THE COURT: My question to you is on July 16th, the
last time you appeared, when you heard your attorney declare that
you guys were ready for trial, how come you didn't bring that up
at that time?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:  I was never addressed in court. I
 
just would stand here and not say anything this whole time. And
now that I've started to say something, I've been threatened with
the sheriff.
 
THE COURT:  So you -- so you're -- all of a sudden
you're -- you're saying something? I mean, it would have appeared
to me that when you appeared to me on February, in April, in May,
in -- in July, you should have said something to me at that time.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:  From April until now, we were still
waiting to hear back from the Honolulu Police Commission because
my report was never put into the paperwork as part of the police
reports, which is what I was trying to do. And it's been 5 1/2
months instead of six weeks, which is -- is as long as it takes.
 
THE COURT:  Well, this case has been hanging around
long enough, and I'm not going to let any more cobwebs collect on
this case.
 
Is it your determination that you can work with your
attorney?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: Well, also before when the -­
I guess the Rule 48 was waived, I was never asked if I
wanted to waive the Rule 48. Like, again, I was never
addressed and asked that question. Just like everybody else
has been asked since I've been sitting here all this time, I
was never asked if that was okay.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
THE COURT:  This is my options that I'm giving
you because at this time your motion to request a new
attorney. And I will find that you are a person who is
declared an indigent. In other words, you can't afford your
attorney. You've been with the public defender's office. And
as a result of them -- their withdraw, you have new counsel.
And, therefore, as of right now, that's still your status.
Your motion was -- was untimely coming yesterday.
The second prong is as to the test given to us
by United States v. John Doe
, which is 272 F.3d 161, 272
F.3d 116, excuse me, Second Circuit, 2001, USA v. John Doe.
 There's factors which this Court must consider. Number 1,
whether Defendant made a timely motion requesting new
counsel. This is the eve of trial. As of yesterday, in fact,
we were scheduled to even do motions in limine.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:
 I never knew -­
THE COURT: I find that the motion is untimely.
Number two, whether the trial court adequately
inquired into the matter. Yesterday I did a searching and
probing inquiry into the defendant which has carried over in
today. 
Number three, whether the conflict between the
defendant and her attorney was so great that it resulted in
-- in a total lack of communication preventing an adequate
defense. That is what I'm trying to find out right now.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:
 Yeah, there was such a lack of
communication, I didn't even know it was the eve of trial.
 
THE COURT:  Okay. Well, then the fourth factor is
whether the defendant substantially and unjustifiably
contributed to the breakdown in the communication, and I
also find that. When the Court ordered you to -- to talk to
your attorney yesterday, and you walked out of here and kept
on going despite the fact that the Court told you to talk to
your attorney -­
DEFENDANT HARTER:  I didn't hear it. I just told
you that.
 
THE COURT: -- and yesterday I told you to be
back at 8:30 and you didn't. And now I find out that -- that
you were outside with -- with your voice enraged at your
attorney. You don't do that.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:  No, she was yelling at me. I
wasn't yelling at her.
 
THE COURT:  It doesn't -- it doesn't matter. When
 
this arguments happen like this, you know, I -- yesterday
when you left here, you were responsible for the breakdown,
and I think the record is quite clear from my colloquy with
you that, you know, a relationship as far as an attorney-
client relationship with you you need to understand cannot
be one-sided.
 
Now, your -- the question is whether your
attorney is properly prepared to go to trial, which she says
she has, whether or not she has done the proper work for
you, which she says she has. Is she ample and ready to
defend your interest zealously, and I find yes, she has
based on not only our conversations in court, but
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
conversations in chambers where she has fought for your
rights in looking at this case.
In this particular case, if you feel that there
is good cause to discharge your counsel, I'm obliged to
inform you under State v. Soares, 81 Hawaii 332, ICA 1996 -­State v. Soares, 81 Hawaii 332, ICA 1996, if I find that
there's good cause existing for Defendant to discharge her
attorney, it should be appoint -- it should appoint
substitute counsel.
 
However, if no valid reason for the discharge
appears, and I so find, the trial court should advise the
defendant that the Court is not required to appoint
substitute counsel to represent the defendant. If after
being so advised the defendant continues to demand
substitution of another counsel, the trial court may in its
discretion discharge counsel and require the defendant to
proceed to trial without representation.
Do you understand that?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: I was call -- I was speaking
to an attorney last night.
 
THE COURT: That's not my question to you, young
lady. Do you understand what I have told you?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: Not really.
 THE COURT: Okay. Let me break it down for you.
If I find that there is good grounds for you to fire your
attorney and if I find that there is no valid reason for
discharging your attorney, and I'm finding that, I have to
advise you that either you're going to keep her, or you're
going to proceed to trial this morning by yourself.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: I don't wanna go by myself.
 
THE COURT: Then you are obligated to talk to her.
 DEFENDANT HARTER: I was trying to.
 THE COURT: Okay. Then I will give you that
opportunity.
This Court will be in recess for half an hour.
 
Call downstairs and subject to call, which means that I may
call this case earlier.
 
Counsel for defense, actually I want your -- I
want you to be back at -- in -- at your seats in 20 minutes.
 
MS. ICKES: Yes, Judge.
 
THE COURT: Okay. You may go outside and confer
about this case. If the defendant still wishes to have you
represent her, I will keep you. If she doesn't, you're -- I
will take the proper steps.
 
MS. ICKES: Thank you, Judge.
 
THE COURT: And she will go to trial alone, by
herself, without an attorney, but we're going to trial this
morning.
 
Court's in recess.
 
14
  And number two, it's important that whatever you
tell your attorney is in confidence, and when you speak
louder than what is normal, the prosecutors can hear, and
you don't want your opponents to hear what you're saying.
And so I ask that you tone down -- you know, just have the
conversation between you and your attorney. I've been using
this white noise to -- to keep -- you know, to at least do
the static noise to keep your conversation with your
attorney as private as can, but just know that whatever you
say, if you say it a little louder than normal, the other
side will hear, and you don't want that. Okay.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 THE COURT:  Okay. Well, he has testified as to
one thing, and that's why you need to discuss this matter 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At the end of the first day of trial, August 14, 2012,
 
after the testimony of the complaining witness, the following
 
dialogue took place on the record:
 
[COURT:] Let the record reflect the presence of
all counsel, Ms. Harter, outside the presence of our jury.
 
Ms. Harter, I -- I know that you've been talking
to your attorney, actively speaking with her about this case
and giving her advice or information to try to -- you know,
to give her more information during her cross-examination.
And -- and I applaud you for that, and I know that you're -­you're zealous in what you're doing. But whenever you stand
up, the -- the jury stops listening to what your attorney is
saying, and they start looking at you. And so you don't want
to distract the jury from what your attorney is trying to
accomplish.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: Yeah.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Okay. Is there anything else
that we need to discuss today?
 
MR. VAN ACKER: No, your Honor. Thank you.
 MS. ICKES: Nothing, your Honor.
 THE COURT: Then let's talk about jury
instructions. . . . and we're going to start at nine. Yes,
ma'am?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: I actually believe this is a
case of mistaken identity. Like, I was there –
 
MS. ICKES: We'll talk about it.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER:
 -- that night, and there was
something that happened. But I don't recognize him, and I
don't think he recognizes me. Like honestly, there were
police when I was there. He was not one of them. There was
an old man who -- with gray hair and a mustache who
handcuffed me.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Well –
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: But he was not there. It was
 
maybe not even the right time. Like, I don't -- he doesn't
really remember anything and –
 
15
  
 
 
--
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
with your attorney, especially after court today,
because your attorney is -- is your spokesperson in
court.
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: Okay.
 
THE COURT:  And if it's one of mistaken identity
and that's the way you want to talk, you know, as far as
what you're thinking, that's why I'm glad that you're
talking to your attorney and letting her know of these
potential issues. Okay?
 
DEFENDANT HARTER: Okay.
 
On appeal, Harter also points to her own August 14,
 
2012 trial testimony as indicating a need for an inquiry into her
 
competence. Her testimony included the following excerpts:
 
Q. (BY MS. ICKES) What happened after you got
the job application?
 
A. I went back in. And Chris was sitting at the
first stage still, and somebody had taken my chair. So right
to the right of the entrance, there's stairs in front of the
bathrooms, and there's a whole bunch of chairs. So I went to
go grab one. And there's actually a pole holding the stairs
up off the stages, and I stood and I leaned on the pole. And
I was looking at all three stages in front of me seeing,
like, oh, my goodness. This is where I'm going to work. And
. . . .
 
Q. (BY MS. ICKES) You're standing at the pole.
What happens?
 
A. As I'm reaching -- or then I'm reaching down
to grab a chair, and a guy comes walking over from across
the back of the bar. Well, the guy is a bouncer. And –
. . . .
 
Q. (BY MS. ICKES) The bouncer gets to you?
 
A. And he says –
 Q. Not what he says.
 A. Oh.
 
Q. But what happens when the bouncer gets to
 
you?
 
A. He -- he starts a conversation, and he wants
me to move away from the pole on the ground.
 Q. Okay.
 
A. And I said, okay, yeah, I'm going to sit down
with my boyfriend, I'm grabbing a chair. And as I do that,
he puts his hand on my back. He's -- he pats my back and
says, you do that. Okay? And I tell him, oh, it hurts when
you do that. Like I'm not trying to be very mean, but he's
like seven feet tall and 500 pounds, hitting a skinny girl.
It hurt to my fingertips and my toes, and I was just like,
ah, like it was crippling pain just him patting my back.
 
16
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q. Okay. Did he touch you in any other way?
 A. Yes. After I told him that it hurt me, he did
it again as I was bending over to grab a chair, and I said,
please get off of me. Well, he grabs both of my wrists, and
instead of moving my body how it's supposed to move, he just
does it, and he dangles me like this, dangles me, and calls
me a whore and –
 
Q. (Indiscernible.)
 
A. -- starts shouting at me.
 Q. Ms. Harter, not -- I'm not interested in what
 
he says.
 A. Oh.
 
Q. Just what -- how he -- how he touched you.
And for the record, just so the record is clear, he had both
your right and left arms directly above your head with the ­-the –
 
A. He was –
 
Q. -- (indiscernible).
 A. -- holding me with one hand.
 Q. Okay. Because this is recorded, so the
recorder can't see your motion. So just for the record.
Now, after this –
 
MR. VAN ACKER: And I'm sorry to interrupt. Your
Honor, if the Court could just please note a running
objection on behalf of the State as to relevance.
 
THE WITNESS:  The sex assault?
 
THE COURT:  No, at this time, I'm going to want
you to object from here on in.
 
MR. VAN ACKER:  The State will object.
 
THE COURT:  Thank you. Now with that
clarification, let's move on to the next question.
 
Q.
 (BY MS. ICKES) What did you do after the
bouncer did that?
 
A. Then he was pushing me into the lobby, and
when I got to the lobby, I asked to speak to a manager,
because I had just grabbed a job application. I didn't even
get to sit back down. And I was very hurt, because I wanted
a job.
 
Q. Okay.
 
A. And I asked to speak to someone in charge.
 Q. Okay. Now, at some point, you called 911;
 
right?
 
A. Yes, ma'am.
 
17
  
-- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q. And this was because the bouncer touched you
 
A. And I was -­Q. -- on your back?
 A. -- not allowed to speak to someone in charge
 
that night.
 
Q. So you called 911?
 A.
 Yes, ma'am.
 
(Some of State's objections omitted.)
 
Harter's direct testimony regarding her encounter with
 
the police appeared, at some points, to be confused.
 
Q. Okay. Now, did you feel like HPD didn't help
you when they first got there?
 
A. Yes. The first officer came up and spoke to
me, and he introduced himself, and I introduced myself. And
then somebody comes out from the club and goes right up to
us, instead of one of the seven -- other seven officers,
comes right up to us, and he doesn't even excuse himself,
goes into the club with that somebody. And then that happens
three more times. So as -- four officers come up. He was the
only one to introduce himself. The other three, somebody
comes out from the club, and he leaves. And then the next
guy comes up. Somebody comes out from the club, and he just
leaves without excusing himself.
 
Q. Okay. So –
 
MR. VAN ACKER: Your Honor, the State is going to
object as to the vague response here.
 
THE COURT: Objection is sustained. Responses are
vague and ambiguous.
 
THE WITNESS:  Because I said "somebody"?
 
Q.
 (BY MS. ICKES) Just listen. I'll ask
questions and you –
 A. Yes.
 Q. -- just respond to my questions.
 THE COURT: Okay. We're –
 Q. (BY MS. ICKES) If the judge says "sustained"
or if there's an objection, you stop talking. Okay?
. . . .
 Q. Was that Officer Uno who took your ID card?
 A. No. It was an old man with gray hair and a
gray mustache, who's very short.
 Q. Okay.
 
A. And old.
 
18
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q. Did you push Officer Gonzales?
 
A. No. I didn't touch anybody that night.
 Q. My specific question is: Did you push Officer
 
Gonzales?
 
A. No. I've never seen him before.
 
. . . .
 . . . So I'm face down on the ground with two
officers on each arm. And then the officer's behind me, and
he's saying, give me your right arm, give me your right arm.
And I can't because there's a grown man on my arm.
 
Q. Did they eventually pull your arms behind
 
your back?
 
A. They -- no. He was saying, stop resisting
arrest, stop resisting arrest. And so the guy gets up and
hands him my right arm. And he says, give me your left arm,
and he starts laughing. He's laughing that I'm resisting,
because somebody is holding me down, and I cannot move, who
is an officer. And so I move my arm and get it into
handcuffs.
 
By this time, my shirt is completely off. My
pants are falling down. And I'm -- I have my clothes on
underneath, but I was completely exposed in front of 40-plus
people in front of 939.
 
Q. Okay. Ms. Harter, so –
 
A. By the time I had handcuffs.
 Q. -- your arms get pulled -- eventually get
pulled behind your back?
 
A. Yes, ma'am.
 Q. At this point, are you on your knees or are
you flat on the ground?
 
A. Flat on the ground.
 
On cross-examination:
 
Q. [MR. VAN ACKER] Has your height changed
between May 1st, 2011, and today?
 
A. Possibly. I think -- I think I might be
shorter, because my calves are -- have been in pain and my
feet, too, so . . .
 
Q. So you shrunk?
 
A. I -- probably. My muscles are contracted
instead of relaxed, so it puts pressure on my height and my bones and stuff.
 
Q. Okay. So you've gotten -- so yes or no,
you've gotten shorter?
 
A. Yes.
 . . . .
 
19
  
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q. Now, this person you said pats you on the
 
back; right?
 A. Yes.
 
Q. And you felt crippling pain; right?
 
A. Yes, sir.
 Q. You were extremely hurt; right?
 A. Yes. I had never -- I hadn't been touched for
 
about six months because I had just gotten out of
engagement, and I didn't -- I especially didn't feel pain,
so I didn't know how extreme someone just doing that was. I
was in shock because of how bad it hurt too.
 
. . . .
 
Q. And so you counted the number of -- of
officers, right, that showed up?
 
A. Yes, sir.
 Q. But none of the officers that testified here
today, except for maybe Officer Uno, were the officers that
were at the scene; right?
 A. Correct.
 
Q. So these guys were just –
 
A. Stand-ins –
 Q. -- showing up –
 A. -- or something, yeah.
 Q. Okay. So they're just –
 A. I've never seen. Especially the first two
officers, I hadn't seen them before.
 Q. Okay.
 
A. I can pretty much describe almost every
officer who was there, and there's a possibility that Mr.
Uno was there, but inside of the club –
 
Q. But the other three officers –
 
A. Oh, no, no -- Bir -- Bir -- I think it was
 
Mr. Uno.
 Q. Birgado?
 
A. No, it -- Mr. Birgado and Gonzales were -- I
hadn't seen them before.
 
Q. And so what you're saying today is they're
stand-ins; right? That's what you said?
 
A. Either that or they have the case confused
with another incident that happened, 'cause I know that
there's something within the week with another girl.
. . . . 
20
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q. And how were you behaving prior to arrest?
 A. Prior to arrest, I was standing, and I
actually had another officer, the old man, and he was
talking to me, and he was -- wanted to see how I talked, and
he was very -- like kind of looked, like, just adoring,
like, looking at me, I want to say. I don't know how to
explain it, like -- because I was out with a pro surfer that
night. It was like our first -- one of our first nights out,
and I was getting a job, like I was pretty well-behaved.
And, like, I don't believe in hurting someone or anything
like that. So . . .
 Q. Okay.
 
A. I used to have a daycare. And –
 Q. Okay.
 
A. -- I was a business lady.
 
MR. VAN ACKER: Objection. Nonresponsive again.
 THE COURT: Okay.
 THE WITNESS: How was I behaving?
 THE COURT: Hang on. The objection is sustained.
The answer is nonresponsive.
. . . .
 Q. And so the police placed you under arrest
while you were doing nothing; correct?
 
A. No, because they -- there was a conversation
between one of the officers, and after -- he said, oh, I'm
charging you with disorderly conduct, and I said, but I
haven't done anything disorderly. And he was like, I'm
charging you with disorderly conduct. And I said, you can't.
And he said, I can do whatever I want. We run these streets.
And –
 
MR. VAN ACKER: Objection. Hearsay objection.
Nonresponsive.
 
A. -- so I said, Waikiki is not the streets.
It's one of the top ten tourist destinations of the world.
And at that point, the crowd gets up -- riled up, like,
yeah, and they start cheering. And so he feels that there's
-- they -- they're starting to put themselves and separate
the officer from me, because for ten minutes of this
conversation, he was walking around me in a circle and
talking to me and seeing, like, what I would say and how I
was responding to it.
 
Q. (BY MR. VAN ACKER) Who was doing this?
 
A. It was the old officer with the gray hair -­Q. Okay. So one of the -­A. -- and the mustache. None of the officers
 
here.
 
21
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q. Okay. So please just listen to my questions
and answer them. Okay?
 
A. Okay.
. . . .
 
After she was found guilty as charged, Harter failed to
 
show up for her initially-scheduled sentencing hearing. At the
 
continued hearing for sentencing, and a defense motion for
 judgment notwithstanding the verdict, the prosecutor summarized
 the trial testimony including that, on the night of her arrest,
 Harter was "raging out of control" and that a "large crowd
 gathered around as a result of this out-of-control behavior. The
 language was abusive -- beyond abusive, really." On several
 occasions during the hearing, Harter interrupted the prosecutor,
 as well as her own lawyer. At sentencing, for the first time,
 defense counsel suggested that Harter might respond to "a special
 condition that she obtain and complete mental health treatment." 
When offered an opportunity to address the court,
 
Harter stated:
 
THE DEFENDANT: Well, yeah, I also had written a
letter that I used to have like $20 million, and I just lost
my family and my fiancé. And during this, I had lost three
businesses, I believe, because I had to stop and participate
in the case and the things that I had to stop doing for my
businesses.
 
And, yeah, I think that there's definitely been
a lot of stress. I would like to get some mental health
done. But I don't think that I need to be in captivity
anymore, because I've -- I always do everything that I think
is right. And this was definitely –
 
THE COURT: Including not showing up for Court -­
THE DEFENDANT: -- a misunderstanding. I'm trying
to get –
 
THE COURT: -- when I tell you to show up the
next morning? What happened?
 
THE DEFENDANT: I was actually -- had to go and I
was talking to investigators. And that's what happened. I
just -- I was talking with -- started talking with the FBI
and other investigators, also, with the case. And I had to
miss meetings because of the apprehension on Pearl Harbor,
because somebody stole my phone. It was Pearl Harbor, not
Hickam. But I know they're joint bases.
And the only reason why he said that is because
I told him that I was going to go speak to the commander of
the base, because he's my friend. And he got freaked out
that I was going to tell on the police officer. And I was
like, why would I talk about him?
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
But -- yeah, so I was -- I -- I don't disagree
with going to get checked out, because there has been a lot
of stuff that I've been through, and this has just put so
much stress on me. But I'm fully capable of working. I'm
nice. I get along with everybody, usually. And it's just
hard to hear things about me that didn't happen.
And like I said, those three guys, I never
recognized any of them. And my boyfriend, whose dad is
a Supreme Court justice, he was -- he -- his statement
said that the police officer said he was -- he hurt
his chin a week earlier from a different girl. But he
wasn't here to testify. And I have drink records that
prove I didn't drink that night.
And there's so much more evidence that can be
 
brought. That's why I really want to appeal. And I wouldn't
be able to do that if I was in jail for a year. I'm the only
one who has my stuff, and it's in storage. And I could lose
everything, you know. And I feel like what's already
happened to me, and it doesn't need to keep happening to me.
 
THE COURT:
 Is there anything else you think I
should know? Because you still haven't answered my question.
 
THE DEFENDANT:  What was your question?
 
THE COURT:  How come you didn't show up for
sentencing the next day?
 
THE DEFENDANT:  Because I felt that I didn't need
 
to be sentenced, that it was so absurd that everything that
I went through, I never even got to finish my statement. I ­
-and the three guys weren't even there the night that I was
there. It was a completely mistaken identity.
I -- so I was going to show up, but I was so
freaked out, like I went and -- I was -- I even got ready
for court and everything, and I just couldn't do it, like I
thought it was so crazy. And I was terrified that something
bad was going to happen to me.
Because even the judge before at District Court
was threatening me when I just walked in, before I even -­we never even had trial. It was just the first preliminary
where I met my public defender and everything. And he, like,
screamed over everybody that was in the court and said, I'm
going to fry you, da, da, da. I'm pushing it to the limit.
You're going to be in jail for three years, da, da, da. And
I was like, I'm -- I'm going to go to trial, because this is
so crazy.
 
So I've been so freaked out because of all of
 
this. And everyone's been so rough on me, when I tried to
get help because I was sexually assaulted, and my -- it was
a foot and a half away from my boyfriend the whole time.
And then they -- they -- the police had -- got my
Alabama ID when I called, and they're like, ho, she's not even
from Hawaii, like, we're this -- they even said they're a gang,
like they're doing all this stuff to me.
And then when they found out that I was from
Hawaii, then I was out last time in three days. So they
thought that I was a tourist this whole time. That's –- that
was, like, their goal. And they thought I was a rich
tourist, which turned out, no, I'm somebody who's local.
I'm trying to do everything. I've been trying to
go to -- I want to go to school and have that done by
Christmas. And like I said, I already have plans to be a
missionary, and anyone would -- could vouch for that, I
guess. But . . .
 
23
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: Okay. Anything –
 
THE DEFENDANT: I'm real -- I'm really sorry I
didn't show up. I don't know what to say. I don't believe
 
that there's an answer, but I just don't believe that it's
fit at all.
 
THE COURT: Okay. Thank you very much.
 
After the Circuit Court sentenced Harter to, inter
 
alia, one year in jail, mittimus forthwith, and Ickes renewed her
 
motion to withdraw as counsel, the hearing closed with:
 
THE COURT: Is that true? You wish to pursue an
appeal?
 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, sir. And –
 
THE COURT: Okay. Your motion is granted, then. A
new attorney will be appointed for her.
 
MS. ICKES: Thank you.
 THE DEFENDANT: I have questions. So do I have
jail time to serve?
 
THE COURT: Your new attorney will -- will
discuss that with you.
This matter's concluded.
 
THE DEFENDANT: I also wanted to –
 THE LAW CLERK: All rise.
 THE DEFENDANT: -- ask to go to state hospital,
sir.
 
THE LAW CLERK: Court is in recess.
 
As discussed above, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court has 
observed that "only some rational basis for convening a panel is 
necessary to trigger the [trial] court's . . . power to stay the proceedings and, thereafter, to appoint examiners." Castro III, 
93 Hawai
'i at 427, 5 P.3d at 417 (internal quotation marks 
omitted). Where there is a rational basis to doubt a defendant's fitness to proceed and to believe defendant is suffering from a physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect that had affected his ability to assist in his own defense, the court must sua sponte order a competency hearing. Castro I, 93 Hawai
'i at 462, 
5 P.3d at 452. Where a question of fitness to stand trial is raised, it is best resolved at the pretrial stage because 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[s]uch a practice removes from trial the concern that
incapacity which is not readily apparent to lay
observation will surface during trial proceedings or,
much worse, after trial has ended. Obviously, if a
defendant is found fit to proceed based upon expert
testimony in the record, the question of whether an
examination should have been judicially ordered or not
is largely removed from judicial re-examination.
 
Castro I, 93 Hawai 'i at 462, 5 P.3d at 452. 
In this case, however, the question was not raised
 
before or during trial. Unlike many cases where fitness is an
 
issue, there is no information in the record confirming whether
 or not Harter has a history and/or diagnosis of mental disease,
 disorder, or defect. As noted above, Harter's counsel did not
 raise any concern about Harter's ability to participate in her
 defense based on competence, but Ickes did argue that substitute
 counsel should be appointed because Harter did not trust her, and
 candidly admitted she had only met with her client privately
 once, for about an hour. By the time of sentencing, however,
 there apparently was sufficient indication of a potential problem
 for defense counsel to suggest mental health evaluation and
 treatment as part of Harter's sentence. No record was made as to
 the reason for that suggestion. 
The transcripts give us a glimpse of Harter's conduct
 
and demeanor, without the benefit of the trial court's ability to
 observe her actions, expressions, voice tone, volume, and
 inflection, body language, and/or the myriad of other bits of
 information that could contribute to the court's unprompted
 impressions concerning whether or not there was, at any time
 during the proceedings, a rational basis to doubt Harter's
 fitness to proceed. The record reflects a mixed bag of
 appropriate behavior, where Harter appears to sometimes
 understand even fine nuances and details of the proceedings, and
 inappropriate, irrational, and potentially self-defeating – and
 perhaps delusional – behavior and statements. 
Examples of the latter are seen at the time of DPD
 
Bassett's withdrawal, where Harter stated that he was her seventh
 DPD, that she had a new job as an MTV casting director, that
 Bassett said she is crazy and "tried to put [her] down." There
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
could be some factual basis to these statements, they could
 
reflect mere hyperbole or a sense of drama, or they could be
 early indications that Harter might be mentally impaired.
 
Harter's conduct on the eve of trial followed in this 
vein. Her statements to the court were somewhat incoherent, but reflected her potentially legitimate concerns about her case. Her rambling on about "no contest" and "Rule 48" and the "crowd of people" that "laughed at the police" were seemingly out-of­context and possibly irrational given that the issue was whether a further withdrawal substitution of counsel would be allowed. On the other hand, "agitated behavior or verbose, rambling, and inappropriate remarks do not automatically raise doubts as to the defendant's competence to stand trial." Soares, 81 Hawai
'i at 
350, 916 P.2d at 1251. 
The start of the pre-trial the next morning is also
 
open to differing interpretations. Harter's overly loud and
 argumentative posture with the court might simply reflect poor
 behavior, resentment, and/or a rational fear of going to trial. 
Or, they could be construed as part of a mental health problem. 
Likewise, Harter's statements such as that "there's already an
 investigator on this case from yesterday [a]nd he said it's a
 hate crime" seem to evidence a disassociation from the actual
 events taking place at that time, but might have had some basis
 in reality. Harter's claim not to have heard the judge order her
 to consult with her lawyer, and her apparent refusal to discuss
 the case with her lawyer (instead reportedly "outside with []
 your voice enraged at your lawyer"), might simply have been
 obstinance or willful defiance of the court's instruction. Or,
 it might have been an indication of a mental health issue. On
 the other hand, she was observed by the court to working with her
 lawyer during voir dire.
 
More troubling, perhaps, is Harter's apparently
 
inappropriate conduct before the jury, which the court described
 as standing up during the proceedings, and speaking louder than
 normal to her attorney, so that the prosecutor could hear, and
 the jury was distracted. On the other hand, that behavior might
 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
simply reflect poor self-awareness or poor judgment about her
 
conduct. Similarly, Harter's unprompted statements at the end of
 the day about mistaken identity, and her assertions that the
 complaining witness was not present at the time of her arrest,
 might have simply been an inappropriate attempt to argue her
 case.
 
Finally, Harter's testimony concerning her encounter
 
with the bouncer could be construed as evidencing her
 disconnection with reality, a mere tendency to exaggerate,
5 or an
 
unskillful attempt to lie her way out of a conviction. Her
 vagueness, to the point of incoherence, would be unremarkable in
 isolation. Her stance that she had never seen the complaining
 witness before, that he was a "stand-in", or confused her with
 another girl, could be viewed as simply an unsuccessful attempt
 to create reasonable doubt or reflective of a state of
 inebriation or intoxication at the time of her encounter with the
 police.
6 Her statement that her height had changed since the
 
time of her arrest because her muscles were "contract instead of
 relaxed" might be indicative of nothing more than an
 argumentative response to the prosecutor's inquiry. In response
 to the prosecutor's inquiry, her exaggerated explanation of the
 shocking pain caused by the bouncer might simply have been an
 attempt to elicit sympathy. Her other seemingly irrational and
 nonresponsive interjections of testimony about formerly having a
 daycare and having been a business lady might have been intended
 to bolster her image, but seemed odd at least.
 
Finally, although the trial was over, Harter's rambling
 
statement at sentencing – including wild assertions about having
 had $20 million dollars, losing her family and fiancé, losing
 three businesses, and dating the son of a supreme court justice –
 could simply have reflected feeble attempts at avoiding
 imprisonment. Likewise, Harter's apparent lack of understanding
 
5
 On cross-examination, she volunteered that her description of the
bouncer was an exaggeration.
 
6
 Two officers testified that Harter smelled of alcohol and had
 
glassy and watery eyes, which they associated with intoxication.
 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of her sentence could have been feigned or reflective of self-
denial. However, it also could have been indicative of
 compromised mental health, which she alluded to when she said she
 "would like to get some mental health done" and asked to go to
 the state hospital.
 
On the record before us, we cannot conclude that the 
Circuit Court plainly erred in failing to sua sponte hold a competency hearing. Nevertheless, we will affirm Harter's conviction without prejudice to her raising and further developing the issue of her fitness to stand trial in a petition for post-conviction relief filed pursuant to HRPP Rule 40. In addition, Harter shall not be foreclosed from raising this issue or issues stemming from HRS § 704-402(1), which affords an affirmative defense for "physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect excluding responsibility," in conjunction with her ineffective assistance of counsel contentions. See, e.g., 
Tierney, 127 Hawai
'i at 173, 277 P.3d at 267. 
(3) Harter's argument that she received ineffective
 
assistance of counsel is denied without prejudice to her raising
 it in a petition for post-conviction relief filed pursuant to
 HRPP Rule 40, as the competency issue may also have bearing on
 Harter's apparent intoxication.
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's October 11, 2012
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence is affirmed, without
 prejudice to the filing of an HRPP Rule 40 petition, as discussed
 
above. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, January 28, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Alen M. Kaneshiro 
for Defendant-Appellant
 Chief Judge
James M. Anderson
 Deputy Prosecuting Attorney City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
28
 