 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000433
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
HOKU LELE, LLC, a Hawaii limited liability
company; DONN EISELE, Plaintiffs-Appellants, v.
CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU,
a Hawaii Municipal corporation, Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
DOES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-1448)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Hoku Lele, LLC and Donn Eisele
 
(collectively, Hoku Lele) appeal from the May 2, 2016 Final
 
Judgment and challenge the March 17, 2016 Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order Granting the City and
 County of Honolulu's Motion for Summary Judgment Filed November
 18, 2015 (Order Granting Summary Judgment), both entered in favor
 
of Defendant-Appellee City and County of Honolulu (the City) and
 Doe Defendants, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
(Circuit Court).
1
 
1
 The Honorable Judge Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hoku Lele's complaint (Complaint) sought money damages
 
and equitable relief arising out of the City's response to Hoku
 
Lele's request for confirmation that certain property was
 compliant with applicable zoning ordinances.  The City's response
 
stated, in short, that the two buildings in question were not
 
lawful dwelling units because they were "constructed" contrary to
 the zoning regulations in effect at the time the buildings were
 moved to the site, notwithstanding that building permits had been
 issued. The Complaint alleged, inter alia, that the City's
 response violated Hoku Lele's right to due process because the
 City failed to afford it "adequate predeprivation notice and an
 opportunity to be heard." The Circuit Court granted summary
 judgment in favor of the City, and concluded, inter alia, that
 (1) Hoku Lele's due process rights were not violated and (2) the relief requested by Hoku Lele for the alleged violation of its due process rights under the Hawai' i Constitution, money damages, 
was unavailable as a remedy for the injuries alleged. 
For the reasons stated below, we affirm.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Hoku Lele is the former owner a 1.05 acre property in
 
Waimanalo (Waimanalo Property), which includes four structures
 
referred to by the City as Buildings A, B, C, and D. Buildings C
 
and D, the buildings in dispute, were built in 1954 in Waikiki. 
In 1963, two building permits (Building Permits) were
 
issued by the City for the relocation of Buildings C and D from
 Waikiki to the Waimanalo Property. At the time of the
 relocation, the Waimanalo Property was classified as a "Rural
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Protective District," which permitted the building of only one
 
dwelling unit per acre of land. Despite the apparent violation
 of the zoning rules in place at the time, the City issued the
 Building Permits. In 1972 and 1975, City inspectors issued
 certain documents that discussed the Waimanalo Property's
 compliance with the zoning ordinances, neither of which described
 a violation; the November 17, 1972 report stated that Buildings C
 and D were existing nonconforming structures on the Waimanalo
 Property, and the January 16, 1975 report stated that the
 buildings were "legal, nonconforming structures." However, as
 discussed below, in late 2005, the City disagreed with these
 conclusions, saying that it appeared that the inspectors
 overlooked the fact that the site was formerly within an
 Agricultural Subdivision.
 
Hoku Lele purchased the Waimanalo Property in July of
 
2005.  Hoku Lele submitted a "zoning verification" request
 
(Verification Request) to the City's Department of Planning and
 Permitting (DPP) on November 2, 2005. The Verification Request
 sought confirmation of the Waimanalo Property's compliance with
 
the zoning ordinances and sought confirmation that the existing
 structures could be rebuilt. In response, Hoku Lele received a
 letter from the director of the DPP (Director), dated November
 
21, 2005 (November Zoning Verification Letter), stating in part:
 
Neither Building C nor Building D is a lawful dwelling
unit. This is because they were constructed
(relocated onto the property) contrary to the
underlying zoning district regulations in effect in
1963, despite obtaining the necessary permits.
 
To be legally established, a use must have been
allowed by the zoning code at the time it was
constructed. The 1.05–acre site was located in an
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Agricultural Subdivision in 1963, when the building
(relocation) permits were issued for Buildings C and
D. As noted above, the zoning code at that time
stated that no dwelling unit in excess of one (1) unit
per acre of land could be built in an Agricultural
Subdivision. Buildings C and D were thus not
established in accordance with the zoning regulations
then in effect, and the relevant building permits
appear to have been issued in error. Therefore, our
conclusion is that Building C and Building D were not
legally established.
 
The letter further stated that it was based on limited
 
information and the DPP had not checked the actual site, the site
 
plans, or the building permit history for the Waimanalo Property
 in developing its response. The November Zoning Verification
 Letter encouraged Hoku Lele to provide the DPP with additional
 information or to apply for a variance.
 
Hoku Lele submitted additional information that was
 
reviewed by the Director, and the Director responded in a letter
 dated December 20, 2005 (December Zoning Verification Letter),
 
that the DPP could not recognize that Buildings C and D were
 
legally constructed nonconforming dwelling units. The Director
 explained that to so qualify, the units are required to have been
 legally established, which means that the buildings must have
 been allowed by the zoning ordinances at the time the units were
 constructed or begun. The Director again suggested that Hoku
 Lele seek a variance through the appropriate processes.
 
Hoku Lele sought two additional building permits from
 
the DPP that were approved as the requested permits pertained to
 repairing damage to the doors, windows, roof, walls, floors,
 electrical and plumbing work on the existing structures. Hoku
 Lele was never denied a building permit for work on the Waimanalo
 Property. The DPP did not suspend or revoke the Building Permits
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and did not issue any citation for a violation on the Waimanalo
 
Property. No action was taken by the City with respect to the
 Building Permits. Hoku Lele never sought a variance from the DPP
 
with respect to the two structures.
 
On July 2, 2010, Hoku Lele filed its Complaint in the 
Circuit Court. The Complaint sought declaratory relief and money 
damages, asserting claims of equitable estoppel, vested rights, and a violation of Hoku Lele's right to due process under the Hawai'i Constitution and the United States Constitution. The 
City filed a motion to dismiss, granted by the Circuit Court, on the basis that the court lacked subject matter jurisdiction because Hoku Lele had not exhausted its available administrative remedies. See Hoku Lele, LLC v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 129 
Hawai'i 164, 296 P.3d 1072 (App. 2013) (Hoku Lele I). This court 
vacated the Circuit Court's decision in Hoku Lele I and held that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing the Complaint because Hoku Lele was not required to exhaust administrative remedies because the Director's response to a zoning verification request did not qualify as an "action[] of the director" and thus did not come within the jurisdiction of the City's Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA). Id. at 168-69, 296 P.3d at 1076-77. The case was 
remanded to the Circuit Court. Id. at 169, 296 P.3d at 1077. 
Sometime before September 10, 2015, Hoku Lele sold the
 
Waimanalo Property to an unidentified third-party. On November
 18, 2015, the City filed a Motion for Summary Judgment (Motion
 
for Summary Judgment) arguing, inter alia, that Hoku Lele's
 claims for equitable/declaratory relief were rendered moot by the
 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sale of the Waimanalo Property and were also unripe. In
 
addition, the City argued that money damages are not an available
 remedy for an alleged due process violation with respect to Hoku
 Lele's claims. After a hearing, the Circuit Court granted the
 
Motion for Summary Judgment. In its Order Granting Summary
 
Judgment, the court found that there were no genuine issues of
 material fact and that (1) the equitable/declaratory relief
 sought by Hoku Lele was moot, (2) Hoku Lele's due process rights
 were not violated, and (3) as a matter of first impression and as
 a matter of law, money damages were not an available remedy for
 the injuries alleged by Hoku Lele.
 
On appeal, Hoku Lele does not contest that its
 
equitable/declaratory relief claims are now moot. However, Hoku
 Lele argues that money damages should be available as a remedy
 for the City's alleged violations of its due process rights,
 namely, the City's failure to provide it "adequate predeprivation
 notice and an opportunity to be heard" with respect to the
 issuance of the November Zoning Verification Letter and December
 Zoning Verification Letter (collectively, Zoning Verification
 
Letters).
 II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
Hoku Lele contends that the Circuit Court erred in the 
Order Granting Summary Judgment, when it concluded in Conclusions 
of Law (COLs) 1, 2, and 8, that: (1) Hawai' i case law does not 
recognize the award of money damages as a remedy for the type of injuries alleged by Hoku Lele's Complaint; (2) as a matter of first impression, money damages are not an available remedy for 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the injuries alleged by Hoku Lele's Complaint; and (3) the City
 
did not violate Hoku Lele's due process rights by issuing the
 Zoning Verification Letters.
 
Hoku Lele further contends that the Circuit Court erred
 
in entering judgment against it based on the Order Granting
 Summary Judgment.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
"Appellate courts review an award of summary judgment 
de novo under the same standard applied by the circuit court." Salera v. Caldwell, 137 Hawai' i 409, 415, 375 P.3d 188, 194 
(2016) (citation omitted). The Hawai' i Supreme Court has 
articulated this standard as follows: 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law.
 
This court must review the evidence and inferences in
 
the light most favorable to the non-moving party.
 
Id. (citation omitted; format altered).
 
A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is
freely reviewable for its correctness. [The appellate
court] ordinarily reviews COLs under the right/wrong
standard.
 
Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the Emps.' Ret. Sys. of the State of 
Hawai'i, 106 Hawai' i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). IV. DISCUSSION
 
In COL 8, the Circuit Court concluded that the City did
 
not violate Hoku Lele's right to due process by issuing the
 Zoning Verification Letters. The due process clauses of the 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and 
article I, section 5 of the Hawai' i Constitution guarantee, inter 
alia, that no person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. The Hawai' i Supreme Court, 
in construing the parameters of these rights, has explained: 
[d]ue process is not a fixed concept requiring a specific
procedural course in every situation. Rather, due process
is flexible and calls for such procedural protections as the
particular situation demands. The basic elements of
 procedural due process of law require notice and an
opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a
meaningful manner.
 
Price v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals of City & Cty. of Honolulu, 77 
Hawai'i 168, 172, 883 P.2d 629, 633 (1994) (citations omitted). 
Generally, 
a claim of a due process right to a hearing requires a two
step analysis: (1) is the particular interest which the
claimant seeks to protect by a hearing "property" within the
meaning of the due process clauses of the federal and state
constitutions, and (2) if the interest is "property" what
specific procedures are required to protect it.
 
Id. (citation omitted).
 
Thus, we first consider whether the particular interest 
which Hoku Lele seeks to protect by a hearing is "property" 
within the meaning of the due process clauses of the federal and Hawai'i constitutions. Id. Regarding property interests 
afforded the protections of due process, the Hawai' i Supreme 
Court has explained that "'[t]hese interests—property interests—may take many forms' because courts have long recognized that 'property interests protected by procedural due process extend well beyond actual ownership of real estate, chattels, or money.'" In re Application of Maui Elec. Co., 141 
Hawai'i 249, 260, 408 P.3d 1, 12 (2017)(quoting Bd. of Regents v. 
Roth, 408 U.S. 564, 571–72, 576 (1972)). The claimed property 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interest need not be tangible; rather, a protected property
 
interest exists in a benefit to which a party has a "legitimate
 claim of entitlement." Id. (citation omitted). 
The legitimate claims of entitlement that constitute
property interests are not created by the due process
clause itself. Instead, "they are created and their
dimensions are defined by existing rules or
understanding that stem from an independent source
such as state law—rules or understanding that secure
certain benefits and that support claims of
entitlement to those benefits."
 
Id. (quoting In re ' Iao Ground Water Mgmt. Area High-Level Source 
Water Use Permit Applications, 128 Hawai' i 228, 241, 287 P.3d 
129, 142 (2012)). Therefore, we must look to Hawai' i law, 
including the relevant City regulations and ordinances, to
 
determine whether a "legitimate claim of entitlement" exists in
 the property interest claimed by Hoku Lele. Id.
 
In the Complaint, Hoku Lele alleged the following with
 
respect to its claimed property interest:
 
47.	 [Hoku Lele] possesses a constitutionally recognized
and protected property interest as set forth in the
Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States
 Constitution; article I, section 5; and article I,
section 20 of the Hawaii Constitution in that it has
 legitimate claims of entitlement to Building Permit
Nos. 205919 and 205920.
 
48.	 By treating Building Permit Nos. 205919 and 205920 as
illegal without first providing [Hoku Lele] adequate
predeprivation notice and an opportunity to be heard,
the City has effectively revoked Building Permit Nos.
205919 and 205920 and deprived [Hoku Lele] of property
without due process of law.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Thus, Hoku Lele alleged, in the first instance, that it
 
had a protected property interest in the Building Permits
 
themselves.2 The City argues that Hoku Lele has no "legitimate
 
2
 As discussed below, on appeal, Hoku Lele argues a somewhat
different property interest.
 
9
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
claim of entitlement in the Building Permit(s)" because they were
 
issued in violation of the zoning ordinances in effect at the
 time and a number of jurisdictions have found no property
 interest protected by due process in improperly-issued building
 permits. See, e.g., Gunkel v. City of Emporia, Kan., 835 F.2d
 
1302 (10th Cir. 1987) (no property right under Kansas law in
 invalidly-issued building permit and permit may be revoked
 without notice or a hearing); see also City of Jackson v.
 Kirkland, 276 So.2d 654 (Miss. 1973).
 
As a preliminary matter, we reject the City's argument. 
The City's position would allow it to determine that a building
 permit, in which the holder otherwise has a due process property
 interest, could be unilaterally declared invalid by the City and
 the permit holder has no right to contest that decision because
 the City has made that decision. Such a position would allow the
 City to arbitrarily revoke a permit, on the basis that it was
 invalidly issued, without any process whatsoever. In addition,
 we note that there are procedures that must be followed to
 suspend or revoke a building permit that the DPP believes was
 issued in error. Accordingly, it appears that a permit holder
 has a legitimate claim of entitlement protected by due process in
 a building permit that the City later considers to have been
 issued in error. See Revised Ordinances of Honolulu (ROH) §
 
18-5.4(d)-(e) (1997).
3
 
3
 ROH § 18-5.4(d)-(e) state, in relevant part:
 (d) Suspension or Revocation for Noncompliance.
(1) The building official may issue a notice to
suspend or revoke a permit pursuant to the 
(continued...)
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
However, Hoku Lele is not arguing in this appeal that
 
the Building Permits themselves are the property of which they
 
were deprived. Rather, Hoku Lele argues that "the Building
 Permits themselves are not the property of which Hoku Lele was
 deprived, but rather Hoku Lele was deprived of the rights which
 the Building Permits represented." Hoku Lele further argues that
 the City "essentially declared the buildings themselves to be
 illegal structures which rendered the Building Permits void as a
 practical matter." However, this argument disregards our
 decision in Hoku Lele I, in which we ruled in favor of Hoku Lele.
 
In Hoku Lele I, the City argued that the Zoning
 
Verification Letters should be considered as decisions on an
 application pursuant to the Land Use Ordinance (LUO) and as a
 
determination that Buildings C and D were not lawful
 
nonconforming dwelling units. 129 Hawai' i at 167, 296 P.3d at 
1075. However, this court held, in sum, that a zoning
 verification request is not tantamount to an application pursuant
 to the LUO or a petition for a declaratory ruling regarding a
 
3(...continued) 
requirements of Section 18-5.4(e) whenever the permit
is issued under the provisions of this chapter:
(A)	 In error;
(B)	 On the basis of incorrect information 
supplied; or
(C)	 In violation of any provision of the
building, electrical or plumbing codes or
any other code, ordinance or regulation.
. . . .
 
(e)
 Notice of Suspension or Revocation of Permit.
(1) The building official shall issue to the
permittee a written notice to show cause why the
building permit should not be suspended or revoked and
set forth specific grounds for the suspension or
revocation of the permit. The notice shall state that
 the permittee may apply in writing for a hearing
before the building board of appeals; that such
application shall be submitted within 10 working days
of receipt of the notice.
 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
nonconforming use. Id. at 168-69, 296 P.3d at 1076-77. A
 
response to a zoning verification request is, therefore, in
 
effect advisory. 
Hoku Lele's argument that the City "essentially
 
declared the buildings themselves to be illegal structures" and
 that therefore Hoku Lele can't "fix up the structures already
 existing on the property" is not supported by the record in this
 case. As stated above, Hoku Lele sought two additional building
 permits from the DPP that were approved as the requested permits
 pertained to repairing damage to the doors, windows, roof, walls,
 floors, electrical and plumbing work on the existing structures. 
Hoku Lele was never denied a building permit for work on the
 Waimanalo Property. The DPP did not suspend or revoke the
 Building Permits and did not issue any citation for a violation
 on the Waimanalo Property. No action was taken by the City with
 respect to the Building Permits. Hoku Lele never sought a
 
variance from the DPP with respect to the two structures or filed
 
a petition for a declaratory ruling. Thus, while we recognize
 that Hoku Lele has a property interest in the Building Permits
 themselves for due process purposes, the Zoning Verification
 Letters did not constitute a decision or determination on the
 Building Permits and we reject Hoku Lele's nebulous assertion of
 "rights that the Building Permits represented." In effect, a
 zoning verification request response serves as an informal
 advisory opinion regarding the status of the property with
 respect to the zoning ordinances.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The parties have not identified any statutes,
 
ordinances, or any other regulations regarding the procedure to 
be employed by the Director regarding zoning verification requests. We explained before that "nothing in the [Revised Charter of the City and County of Honolulu], the LUO, or the DPP's Rules of Practice and Procedure (DPP Rules) (1999) expressly addresses or even mentions the director's ability to render decisions on requests for a zoning verification." Hoku 
Lele I, 129 Hawai' i at 167, 296 P.3d at 1075. The informality of 
the procedure utilized by the Director in assessing zoning verification requests is also made evident in the November Zoning Verification Letter issued by the Director, which states: "Please note that we did not check the actual site, site plans or the building permit history for the site, which may reveal unique circumstances and conditions associated with the property." 
The only effect of a response by the Director to a
 
zoning verification request is an informal opinion from the
 Director providing or withholding current acknowledgment of
 compliance with the applicable statutes, ordinances, or rules. 
Critically, no adverse action was taken against Hoku Lele
 regarding the Building Permits. In contrast, a formal procedure
 is available to the Director to suspend or revoke a building
 permit because it was either issued in error, on the basis of
 incorrect information, or because it was issued in violation of,
 inter alia, the applicable building codes. See ROH § 18­
5.4(d)(1). The procedure for the suspension or revocation of a
 permit is provided in detail in the ROH. The ordinances state:
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[t]he building official shall issue to the permittee a
written notice to show cause why the building permit should
not be suspended or revoked and set forth specific grounds
for the suspension or revocation of the permit. The notice
shall state that the permittee may apply in writing for a
hearing before the building board of appeals; that such
application shall be submitted within 10 working days o§f
receipt of th ne o tice.
 
ROH § 18-5.4(e)(1). The permittee is entitled to a hearing in
 
front of the ZBA before the permit may be suspended or revoked,
 the procedure for which is governed by Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) Chapter 91. See ROH § 18-5.4(f)(3). 
Having completed the zoning verification request
 
process, in the absence of any further action by the Director to
 suspend or revoke the Building Permits, Hoku Lele was still not
 without further recourse. In the Zoning Verification Letters,
 Hoku Lele was invited to initiate a formal procedure with the
 City if it wished to proceed, e.g., apply for a variance. As we
 explained in Hoku Lele I, 
the case law illustrates that the proper courses of director
action on a nonconformity are to render decisions on
petitions for a variance or a declaratory ruling or to issue
enforcement orders, all of which are specific "actions of
the director" appealable to the ZBA pursuant to the ZBA
Rules. 
129 Hawai' i at 168, 296 P.3d at 1076; see also Revised Charter of 
the City and County of Honolulu § 6–1516 (2001); ZBA Rules §§ 
21–1, 22-1 (1998). 
Even assuming, arguendo, that the Zoning Verification 
Letters could be construed to be a deprivation of a property interest protected by due process, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has 
recognized that meaningful post-deprivation review can be sufficient to satisfy due process so long as certain conditions are satisfied. Due process is not a fixed concept and the 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
procedures required for the protection of due process are 
flexible. See Price, 77 Hawai' i at 172, 883 P.2d at 633. 
In Price, the petitioner was fined by the City for what
 
was alleged to be an impermissible commercial eating
 establishment in an area where such establishments were
 prohibited. Id. at 169-70, 883 P.2d at 630-31. One of the
 
claims made on appeal by the petitioners was that the assessment
 of a daily fine for violating a zoning ordinance offended due
 process because they were entitled to a hearing before being
 assessed a fine. Id. at 172-73, 883 P.2d at 633-34. The supreme
 
court rejected this argument and found that the petitioners were
 afforded an adequate opportunity to challenge the assessed fines
 at the administrative and judicial levels before incurring an
 obligation to pay the fine. Id. at 174-75, 883 P.2d at 635-36.
 
Describing the procedures available to the petitioners, the
 supreme court explained: 
Herein, the procedure . . . provide[s] for due
process. . . . A notice [was] served. The effect of the
 notice [was] somewhat similar to the effect of service of
summons in a civil action. The person[s] served [were]
given a period of . . . days within which to request a
hearing before the [administrative agency]. In the interim,
the collection of the [assessed] fine [did] not take place,
and the collection [was] deferred until after [finality].
There [was], thus, no deprivation, even temporarily, without
a hearing. . . . There [was] adequate opportunity to be
heard.
 
Id. at 174, 883 P.2d at 635 (citation omitted); see also In re 
Tax Appeal of Hawaiian Flour Mills, Inc., 76 Hawai' i 1, 8-9, 868 
P.2d 419, 426-27 (1994) (due process satisfied in tax collection where State provides "meaningful backward-looking relief" which includes a fair opportunity to challenge the accuracy and legal validity of tax obligation and a clear and certain remedy). 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although the instant case does not involve the collection of
 
taxes, these cases are instructive as they illustrate that
 meaningful backward-looking relief and process can be sufficient
 to adequately safeguard due process rights. 
In this case, no adverse action has been taken against
 
Hoku Lele or the Building Permits as a result of the zoning
 verification process. Rather, Hoku Lele requested and the City
 provided an advisory opinion regarding the compliance of the
 Waimanalo Property with the zoning ordinances. Moreover, formal
 procedures were available to Hoku Lele to have official action
 taken with respect to the Waimanalo Property, applying for a
 variance or seeking declaratory relief. These procedures provide
 meaningful due process and remedies and, therefore, the City did
 not offend Hoku Lele's due process rights by issuing its advisory
 opinion without a hearing. 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in COL
 
8, as Hoku Lele's due process rights were not offended. 
Therefore, it is unnecessary for the court to address the issue
 of whether money damages were an available remedy for the due
 process violations alleged by Hoku Lele and the Circuit Court did
 not err in entering judgment in the City's favor.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's May 2, 2016
 
Final Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 21, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Robert H. Thomas, 
(Damon Key Leong Kupchak
Hastert),
for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Brad T. Saito,
Krishna F. Jayaram,
Deputies Corporation Counsel,City and County of Honolulu, for Defendant-Appellee.
 

Associate Judge
17
 