              
             
            
              
            
               
              
             
           
              
           
        
                
              
         NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000717 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I  
EASTER SEALS HAWAII, a Hawaii non-profit Corporation,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
JAMES BEARDMORE,
Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. RC-16-1-0319) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant James Beardmore (Beardmore), self-
represented, appeals from the Judgment entered on September 29, 
2016,  by the District Court of the Fifth Circuit (district 
court).  Beardmore also challenges: the August 15, 2016 "Order 21
1 Beardmore did not designate the Judgment entered on September 29,
2016, in his Notice of Appeal, but attached a copy thereto. Although noncompliant 
with Rule 3(c)(2) of the Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) governing the
r
equired content of a notice of appeal, we consider the Judgment a part of the
appeal because: (1) "a mistake in designating the judgment should not result inloss of the appeal as long as the intention to appeal from a specific judgment canbe fairly inferred from the notice and the appellee is not misled by the mistake,"Ek 
v. Boggs , 102 Hawai #i 289, 294, 75 P.3d 1180, 1185 (2003) (internal quotation
m
arks, citations, and ellipses omitted); (2) it can be fairly inferred from
Beardmore's attachment of a copy of the Judgment to his Notice of Appeal that heintended to appeal from it; and (3) Plaintiff-Appellee Easter Seals Hawaii (EasterSeals) does not assert that it has been misled. 
2 The Honorable Joe P. Moss (Judge Moss) presided over the hearing on
the motion and the trial on September 9, 2016. The Honorable Trudy K. Senda(Judge Senda) signed the Judgment on behalf of Judge Moss.               
             
      
                
        
                
             
                
            
                  
  
              
            
          
                
            
             
           
             
           
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Denying Defendant's Motion to Set Aside Default Judgment Filed 
Herein on July 25, 2016" (Order Denying Motion to Set Aside 
Default);3 the August 15, 2016 "Order Denying Defendant's 
Emergency Motion to Stay Writ of Possession Based On Emergency Filed Herein on August 3, 2016" (Order Denying Motion to Stay 
Writ of Possession);
4 the September 28, 2016 "Order Denying 
Defendant's Motion to Seek Determination On Remaining Issue RE: 4564 Ola Road, Waimea, HI 96796, Filed August 24, 2016" (Order 
Denying Motion to Seek Determination);
5 the September 28, 2016 
"Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion to Dismiss Counterclaim Filed September 2, 2016" (Order Dismissing Counterclaim);
6 the order 
granting Easter Seals' motion to strike Beardmore's Proposed Order re: Motion to Dismiss Counterclaim (Order Striking Proposed 
Order);
7 and the district court's denial of his Demand for Jury 
Trial (Jury Demand).8, 9
3 The Honorable Sarah L. Silverman (Judge Silverman) presided over the
hearing on the motion. The Honorable Jonathan J. Chun (Judge Chun) signed and
filed the order on August 15, 2016. 
4 Judge Silverman presided over the hearing on the motion. Judge Chun 
signed and filed the order on August 15, 2016. 
5 Judge Moss presided over the hearing on the motion. Judge Senda
signed and filed the order on behalf of Judge Moss on September 28, 2016. 
6 Judge Moss presided over the hearing on the motion. Judge Senda signed
and filed the order on behalf of Judge Moss on September 28, 2016. 
7 Judge Senda signed the order on October 5, 2016 and it was filed on
October 6, 2016. 
8 Beardmore also purports to challenge a document entitled "Challenge to
Costs Re: Attorney Fees & Costs Claims of Opposing Counsel Charles S. O'Neill,Jr." We construe this as a challenge to the Judgment. 
9 Although "[a]n appeal from a final judgment brings up for review all
interlocutory orders not appealable directly as of right which deal with issues inthe case[,]" Ueoka v. Szymanski , 107 Hawai #i 386, 396, 114 P.3d 892, 902 (2005)
( 
citation and internal quotation marks omitted), we also note that points not
argued in an appellant's Opening Brief may be deemed waived. HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).Therefore, we will only review the district court orders for which Beardmoreprovides argument in his briefs. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments they advance and the issues they raise, as well as 
the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Beardmore's 
points of error as follows. 
I. The district court did not abuse its discretion in its Order 
Denying Defendant's Motion to Set Aside Default. 
Beardmore first argues that there was a valid basis for 
the district court to set aside the default judgment. 
The district court's Order Denying Motion to Set Aside 
Default appears to stem from its prior ruling on a Motion for 
Partial Summary Judgment on Possession (MPSJ) filed by Easter 
Seals. The minutes for the July 18, 2016 hearing on the MPSJ 
reflect that the district court noted Beardmore's absence from 
the hearing and failure to file an opposition to the MPSJ. The 
district court and the parties subsequently treated the July 26, 
2016 "Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary 
Judgment on Possession" (Order Granting MPSJ) as a default 
judgment. However, based on our review of the record, there was 
no entry of default or motion for default judgment in this case. 
See District Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP) Rule 55. 
Further, the record shows that Beardmore appeared with his legal 
counsel, Anthony P. Locricchio (Locricchio), on June 20, 2016, 
and entered a general denial in the summary possession 
proceedings, which otherwise constituted the act of defending in 
this case. See DCRCP Rule 8(b) ("In summary possession 
proceedings . . . , a defendant may defend by . . . making an appearance without written answer on the return day specified by 
Rule 12(a) which shall be deemed to constitute a general denial 
of the truth of the facts stated in the complaint."); DCRCP Rule 
55(a). Further, in entering its Order Granting MPSJ, the circuit 
court expressly held that there were no genuine issues of 
material fact as to the issue of possession. Therefore, it 
3            
         
          
        
       
         
         
          
       
 
 
              
           
           
              
          
            
              
             
           
            
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appears that the MPSJ was granted pursuant to DCRCP Rule 56(e)10 
and not DCRCP Rule 55. 
In light of the above, we construe Beardmore's "Motion 
to Set Aside Default Judgment," which sought to set aside the 
Order Granting MPSJ, as a motion for reconsideration of an 
interlocutory order  pursuant to DCRCP Rule 54(b).  See Cho v. 
State, 115 Hawai# i
 373, 383, 168 P.3d 17, 27 (2007) (stating that
the trial court has inherent power to reconsider interlocutory 
orders); see also DCRCP Rule 54(b) (providing that interlocutory 
orders or other forms of decision that resolve fewer than all 
claims are "subject to revision at any time before the entry of 
judgment adjudicating all the claims and the rights and 
liabilities of all the parties"). We therefore review the Order 
Denying Defendant's Motion to Set Aside Default for abuse of 
discretion. 12 11
 
It is well-recognized that the trial court's inherent power
to reconsider interlocutory orders . . . any time beforefinal judgment is not without restrictions. Although thepower of reconsideration is committed to the sounddiscretion of the trial court, a motion for reconsideration 
10 DCRCP Rule 56(e) provides, in relevant part: 
When a motion for summary judgment is made and supported
as provided in this rule, an adverse party may not restupon the mere allegations or denials of the adverseparty's pleading, but the party's response, by affidavitsor as otherwise provided in this rule, must set forthspecific facts showing that there is a genuine issue fortrial. If the adverse party does not so respond, summary
judgment, if appropriate, shall be entered against theadverse party . 
(Emphasis added.) 
11 DCRCP Rule 56(c) provides, in relevant part: "A summary judgment,
interlocutory in character, may be rendered on the issue of liability alonealthough there is a genuine issue as to the amount of damages." 
12 Although the Order Granting MPSJ involved a judgment of possession
that was immediately appealable under the Forgay doctrine, Beardmore was permitted
to wait until the Judgment entered on September 29, 2016, awarding damages, whichwas the final judgment in this case, to appeal the issue of possession. See 
Ciesla v. Reddish , 78 Hawai #i 18, 21, 889 P.2d 702, 705 (1995) ("The immediate
a 
ppeal of the judgment for possession under the Forgay doctrine being untimely,
Reddish must await final resolution of all claims in the case before challengingthe judgment for possession."). Therefore, the Order Granting MPSJ was interlocutory. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is limited in scope: 
[T]he purpose of a motion for reconsideration is to
allow the parties to present new evidence and/orarguments that could not have been presented duringthe earlier adjudicated motion. Reconsideration is not a device to relitigate old matters or to raisearguments or evidence that could and should have beenbrought during the earlier proceeding. 
Cho, 115 Hawai# i at 384, 168 P.3d at 28 (citations omitted). 
On appeal, Beardmore argues that he and Locricchio's 
failure to oppose the MPSJ and appear at the hearing were due to 
Locricchio's paralegal being ill and unable to change the hearing 
date, and that he had not been properly served with the MPSJ. 
Beardmore also asserts that Locricchio was unable to respond to 
the MPSJ due to being "incapacit[ated] after a major seizure that 
left him paralyzed and stopped breathing[.]" Despite Beardmore's 
latter contention, his Motion to Set Aside Default Judgment does 
not cite Locricchio's incapacity as a basis for their failure to 
oppose the MPSJ and the record indicates that Locricchio's 
purported seizure occurred on July 28, 2016, after the deadline 
to oppose the MPSJ under DCRCP Rule 56(c) had already passed. 
Further, our review of the record indicates that Beardmore, 
through his counsel, was properly served with the MPSJ pursuant 
to Rule 5(b) of the Rules of the District Courts of the State of 
Hawai# i, and DCRCP Rules 5(b) and 56(c), as Easter Seals' counsel 
certified that service was made via mail to Locricchio on June 29, 2016, and submitted the receipt from the Lihu
#e Post 
Office as proof thereof. The district court deemed Easter Seals' submissions to be satisfactory proof of service and we agree. 
Moreover, Beardmore does not provide a discernible 
argument as to how Locricchio's paralegal's illness prevented 
either he or Locricchio from filing and serving an opposition to 
the MPSJ at least seventy-two hours prior to the July 18, 2016 
hearing. See Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 Hawai# i 126, 144 n.16, 
276 P.3d 695, 713 n.16 (2012) (noting that this court may disregard a contention where there is no discernible argument in 
5              
 
       
        
        
       
       
      
      
         
          
        
       
 
               
             
        
               
        
           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
support of it); DCRCP Rule 56(c), (e). Based on the foregoing,
the district court did not abuse its discretion in denying 
Beardmore's motion to set aside the Order Granting MPSJ. See 
Cho, 115 Hawai# i at 384, 168 P.3d at 28.  
II. The district court did not err in dismissing Beardmore's
counterclaims and related jury demand. The district court erred 
in granting Easter Seals' motion to strike Beardmore's ProposedOrder. 
DCRCP Rule 13(b) states that "[a] pleading shall state 
as a counterclaim any claim against an opposing party but the 
relief shall not exceed the jurisdictional limitations of the 
court."  Although Beardmore appeared and made a general denial 
in the summary possession proceedings, the record does not indicate that Beardmore filed a pleading containing his 
counterclaims or otherwise asserted them in response to Easter 
Seals' complaint. As a result, Beardmore's counterclaims would 
only have been permissible if filed with leave of court under 
DCRCP Rule 13(e)
  or (f) . The record does not reflect that 
Beardmore sought or obtained leave of court prior to filing his counterclaims in the document entitled "Counterclaim Plaintiff 15 1413
13 Furthermore, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 604-5(a) provides, in
relevant part: 
Except as otherwise provided, the district courts shall
have jurisdiction in all civil actions where the debt,amount, damages, or value of the property claimed doesnot exceed $40,000, except in civil actions involving
summary possession or ejectment, in which case the
district court shall have jurisdiction over anycounterclaim otherwise properly brought by any defendantin the action if the counterclaim arises out of and refers to the land or premises the possession of which isbeing sought, regardless of the value of the debt,amount, damages, or property claim contained in thecounterclaim . 
(Emphases added.) 
14 DCRCP Rule 13(e) provides: "A claim which either matured or was
acquired by the pleader after serving its pleading may, with the permission of thecourt, be presented as a counterclaim by supplemental pleading." 
15 DCRCP Rule 13(f) provides: "When a pleader fails to file a
counterclaim through oversight, inadvertence, or excusable neglect, or whenjustice requires, the pleader may by leave of court file the counterclaim." 
6               
           
         
              
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
James Beardmore Verified Complaint Seeking Payment of Damages for 
Violation of Contract and Other Claims" (Counterclaim) on 
September 2, 2016, three months after the original Complaint was 
filed, and after the district court had already entered Judgment 
for Possession in favor of Easter Seals. 
In the Counterclaim, Beardmore also alleged claims 
against the "Board of Directors" and "Administrative Staff" of 
Easter Seals, who were not parties in this action. The district 
court determined that the claims against the Board of Directors 
and Administrative Staff were not properly asserted 
counterclaims, as the additional parties were not properly joined 
in this action under DCRCP Rules 19 or 20. Based on our review 
of the record, we agree that the counterclaims were not properly 
asserted as to those parties because they had not been joined at 
that point under either DCRCP Rules 19 or 20. Thus, it appears 
that Beardmore, in substance, was filing a third-party complaint. 
The district court dismissed Beardmore's third-party 
complaint against the Board of Directors and Administrative Staff 
for not seeking leave of court prior to filing and serving the 
third-party complaint.16 The record does not reflect that 
Beardmore sought or obtained leave of court to file and serve the third-party complaint and therefore, it was non-compliant with 
DCRCP Rule 14. The district court did not err in dismissing 
Beardmore’s third-party complaint. 
Beardmore's Jury Demand was filed in connection with 
his counterclaims and third-party complaint. Because the 
counterclaims were not properly filed and Beardmore had not 
properly filed and served the third-party complaint, the district 
court did not err in denying Beardmore's Jury Demand. 
16 The record does not indicate that Beardmore actually served those
entities or individuals prior to the district court issuing its Order Dismissing
Counterclaims. Rather, Beardmore apparently served Easter Seals' counsel, whoconveyed to the district court at the hearing that he did not represent the addedentities or individuals. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On September 21, 2016, Beardmore filed "Defendant James 
Beardmore's Proposed Order Re: Motion to Dismiss Counterclaim" 
(Proposed Order). The district court then entered its Order 
Dismissing Counterclaims on September 28, 2016, without 
incorporating any of the language contained in Beardmore's 
Proposed Order. Subsequent to the district court entering its 
order, Easter Seals filed a motion seeking to strike Beardmore's 
Proposed Order on the grounds that Beardmore's counsel had not 
signed the document, in violation of DCRCP Rule 11. Easter Seals 
also sought to recover attorney’s fees and costs incurred in 
relation to filing the motion. The district court granted this 
motion. Beardmore subsequently re-filed his Proposed Order with 
his attorney's signature ex officio on October 12, 2016. 
On appeal, Beardmore argues that the district court 
erred in granting Easter Seals' motion to strike the Proposed 
Order and award relating to attorneys' fees and costs. The 
record indicates that the district court effectively declined to 
incorporate Beardmore's Proposed Order prior to Easter Seals' 
motion to strike the Proposed Order. Therefore, any issue 
regarding Beardmore's Proposed Order was moot. State v. 
Nakanelua, 134 Hawai# i 489, 501-02, 345 P.3d 155, 167-68 (2015) 
("The duty of this court, as of every other judicial tribunal, is 
to decide actual controversies by a judgment which can be carried 
into effect, and not to give opinions upon moot questions or 
abstract propositions, or to declare principles or rules of law 
which cannot affect the matter in issue in the case before it." 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Wong v. Bd. of 
Regents, Univ. of Haw., 62 Haw. 391, 394-95, 616 P.2d 201, 204 
(1980)). 
Furthermore, Beardmore's purported violation of DCRCP 
Rule 11 in the Proposed Order was a lack of signature, rather 
than an improper signature, which necessitates striking of the 
filing "unless it is signed promptly after the omission is called 
8           
          
         
         
          
          
        
        
          
        
        
       
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to the attention of the pleader or movant." DCRCP Rule 11.17 
Beardmore submitted an amended Proposed Order with a signature 
shortly after Easter Seals' motion to strike the Proposed Order. 
Based on the foregoing, the district court erred in awarding 
attorney's fees and costs to Easter Seals in its Order Striking 
Defendant's Proposed Order. 
III. Appeal of the Order Denying Motion to Stay Writ of
Possession. 
In the "Emergency Motion to Stay Writ of Possession 
Based on Emergency" (Motion to Stay Writ of Possession) filed on 
August 3, 2016, Beardmore moved to stay the enforcement of the 
writ of possession issued by the district court on July 26, 2016, 
and served on Beardmore on July 30, 2016, until: (1) August 15, 
2016, and continue the Motion to Set Aside Default Judgment that 
was scheduled to be heard on August 8, 2016; or alternatively, 
(2) until the district court entered an order on the Motion to 
Set Aside Default Judgment after the August 8, 2016 hearing. The 
district court issued its Order Denying Motion to Set Aside 
Default on August 15, 2016. Beardmore does not assert, and there 
is nothing in the record to suggest, that the writ of possession 
was enforced prior to this date. Therefore, we conclude that 
Beardmore's contention that the District Court erred in denying 
his motion to stay is without merit. 
17 DCRCP Rule 11 provides, in part: 
If a pleading, motion, or other paper is not signed , it
shall be stricken unless it is signed promptly after the
omission is called to the attention of the pleader ormovant. If a pleading, motion, or other paper is signed
in violation of this rule, the court, upon motion or uponits own initiative, shall impose upon the person whosigned it, a represented party, or both, an appropriatesanction, which may include an order to pay to the otherparty or parties the amount of the reasonable expensesincurred because of the filing of the pleading, motion,or other paper, including a reasonable attorneys' fee. 
(Emphases added.) 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. The district court did not err in denying Defendant's Motion
to Seek Determination on Remaining Issue RE: 4564 Ola Road,
Waimea, HI 96796. 
The "Motion to Seek Determination on Remaining Issue 
RE: 4564 Ola Road, Waimea, HI 96796" sought an order that 
would: (1) prohibit demolition of the subject property "until 
review by State of Hawaii and County of Honolulu Historical 
Preservation agencies to determine historical status of said 
property"; and (2) permit Beardmore to paint the property in the 
interim. This appears to be a petition for preliminary 
injunctive relief. 
The district court concluded, in relevant part, that: 
(1) Beardmore did not have standing given the district court's 
disposition of the issue of possession; (2) under HRS § 604-5, 
the district court did not have jurisdiction to issue an order to
stay the demolition of the property; and (3) Beardmore had not 
shown that he was likely to prevail on the merits, that the 
balance of irreparable damage favored the issuance of a temporary
injunction, and that the public interest supported granting an 
injunction.  
 
On appeal, Beardmore asserts that the district court 
erred by ruling "summarily . . . without sufficient required 
rulings to do so[,]" "ignoring the fact that [Easter Seals] was 
going to demolish the historic property." Beardmore also recites 
the district court's oral ruling on the motion, which is 
substantially the same as the district court's order. To the 
extent we can discern, it appears Beardmore argues that the 
district court did not have a sufficient basis for its rulings. 
"A plaintiff without standing is not entitled to invoke 
a court's jurisdiction." Sierra Club v. Hawaii Tourism Auth. ex 
rel. Bd. of Directors, 100 Hawai# i 242, 250, 59 P.3d 877, 885 
(2002) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Mottl v. 
Miyahira, 95 Hawai# i 381, 388, 23 P.3d 716, 723 (2001)). 
In deciding whether the plaintiff has the requisite
interest in the outcome of the litigation, we employ a 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
three-part test: (1) has the plaintiff suffered an
actual or threatened injury as a result of thedefendant's . . . conduct; (2) is the injury fairlytraceable to the defendant's actions; and (3) would afavorable decision likely provide relief forplaintiff's injury. 
Id. (citations omitted). 
At the time that Beardmore filed this motion, the 
district court had already issued a judgment for possession and a 
writ of possession in favor of Easter Seals. Therefore, at the 
time Beardmore sought this remedy, he had already been found to 
have been in wrongful possession of the subject property and was 
divested of any interest he had therein as a tenant. See HRS § 
666-13 ("Whenever a writ is issued for the removal of any tenant, the contract for the use of the premises, if any exists, and the 
relation of landlord and tenant between the parties, shall be 
deemed to be canceled and annulled."). Moreover, Beardmore had 
not shown that he otherwise had an interest in the subject 
property. See Sierra Club, 100 Hawai# i at 250, 59 P.3d at 885 
("Petitioner must establish its standing for this court to exercise jurisdiction over this case."). Accordingly, Beardmore 
would not have suffered an injury as a result of Easter Seals' 
alleged demolishment of the property or failure to upkeep the 
property. See id. Based on the foregoing, we agree with the 
district court that at the point Beardmore petitioned the district court for preliminary injunctive relief, he did not have 
standing. In light of our determination, we need not address the 
other two parts of the standing test or the remainder of the 
district court's conclusions. 
V. The district court did not err in the Judgment. 
As mentioned supra
, in footnote 8, Beardmore purports 
to appeal from a document entitled "Challenges to Costs Re: 
Attorney Fee & Costs Claims of Opposing Counsel Charles S. 
O'Neill, Jr." However, the record is devoid of such a document. 
We construe this point of error as an assertion that the district 
court erred in awarding attorneys' fees and costs to Easter Seals 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in the Judgment. Despite Beardmore's contention and the 
"Declaration of Charles S. O'Neill, Jr. Regarding Fees and Costs" 
requesting attorney's fees and costs, the Judgment entered on 
September 29, 2016, does not provide for attorney's fees. 
Rather, the Judgment left the amount of attorney's fees blank, 
while providing for damages in the amount of $700.00, as well as 
filing fees, service fees, mileage for service, and other costs 
in an amount of $391.84, for a total judgment of $1,091.84. 
Beardmore's contention is thus without merit, as the Judgment 
indicates that the district court did not award Easter Seals 
attorney's fees. Because Easter Seals has not cross-appealed the 
issue, we need not address it further. 
Beardmore also argues that the district court erred in 
its Judgment pertaining to damages by awarding Easter Seals 
additional rent for the holdover tenancy in the amount of 
$700.00. The basis for Beardmore's argument appears to be that 
he was wrongfully evicted by Easter Seals. Insofar as we have 
determined above that the district court did not err in declining 
to set aside the MPSJ on the issue of possession, we decline to 
address Beardmore's argument. 
VI. Conclusion 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the district court's 
"Order to Strike Defendant James Beardmore's Proposed Order Re: 
Motion to Dismiss Counterclaim" and otherwise affirm the Judgment 
entered on September 29, 2016. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 15, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Alexa D. M. Fujise
Presiding Judge
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge
/s/ Derrick H. M. Chan
Associate Judge
12 James Beardmore,Self-Represented,Defendant-Appellant. 
Dennis E. W. O'Connor, Jr.,O'Connor Playdon Guben &Inouye LLP,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 