NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001135
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE MATTER OF BCI COCA-COLA BOTTLING
 
COMPANY OF LOS ANGELES, INC.,
Respondent/Appellant/Appellee/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
LEONARD HOSHIJO, in his official capacity as the Director,
Department of Labor and Industrial Relations, STATE OF HAWAI' I;
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS, STATE OF HAWAI' I,
Appellees/Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
and
 
TAMMY L. JOSUE,
Complainant/Appellee/Appellant/Cross-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-1817-06)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant-Appellee-Cross-Appellee BCI Coca-
Cola Bottling Company of Los Angeles, Inc. (BCI) is the former
 
employer of Complainant-Appellee-Appellant-Cross-Appellee Tammy
 
L. Josue (Josue). Josue and Appellees-Appellees-Cross-Appellants
 
the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations (DLIR),
 
represented by its Director Leonard Hoshijo1 (the Director),
 
1
 Leonard Hoshijo is the current Director of the DLIR and thus is
automatically substituted as a party in this appeal. See Hawai 'i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure ( HRAP), Rule 43(c).  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(collectively, Appellees), appeal from the August 28, 2014 "Final 
Judgment" filed by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
(Circuit Court),2 and challenge the underlying "Order Reversing 
Department of Labor and Industrial Relations, State of Hawai' i's 
Decision and Order Dated June 5, 2013" (the Circuit Court's 
Order), filed on August 19, 2014.
I. Background
 
Josue suffered a work injury while employed by BCI and
 
was placed on disability leave. After Josue was on disability
 leave for over ten months, BCI hired a permanent replacement for
 Josue's pre-work-injury position. Josue later sought to return
 to her pre-work-injury position at BCI, but BCI refused to
 reinstate her to her former position because it had been filled. 
BCI offered a number of other positions to Josue, but Josue
 declined because she believed that those positions were
 downgrades or positions for which she was not qualified. 
Josue filed a complaint (Complaint) with the DLIR on
 
September 15, 2010. BCI filed a Motion to Dismiss on the grounds
 that Josue's Complaint was untimely pursuant to Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) § 378-33(b) (2015). The DLIR Hearing Officer
 
issued a "Recommended Decision on Motion to Dismiss Complaint,"
 
which denied BCI's motion and stated that:
 
[t]he evidence reveals that [BCI] . . . failed to return
[Josue] to her usual and customary duties . . . after she
was released to return to full work duty, no restrictions on
September 1, 2010. Therefore, based on the evidence
presented, it is clear that [Josue] filed her Complaint well
within the time allowed by [HRS § 378-33(b)].
 
On August 1, 2011, after an evidentiary hearing, the DLIR Hearing
 
Officer issued a recommended decision (Recommended Decision) on
 
Josue's Complaint, determining that BCI had discriminated against
 
Josue in violation of HRS § 378-32(a)(2)(2015).3 The findings of
 
2
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 
3
 HRS § 378-32 states, in relevant part:
 
§378-32 Unlawful suspension, barring,
discharge, withholding pay, demoting, or
discrimination. (a) It shall be unlawful for any
 
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fact and conclusions of law in the Recommended Decision were
 
adopted in full in the Director's Decision and Order (Final
 
Decision). BCI appealed to the Circuit Court.
 
The Circuit Court, after reviewing the briefs and
 
hearing arguments, issued its Order reversing the decision of the
 
DLIR. The Circuit Court's Order determined that: (1) the DLIR
 erred when it denied BCI's Motion to Dismiss on the basis that
 Josue's Complaint to the DLIR was untimely; (2) the DLIR's
 interpretation of "discrimination" in HRS § 378-32(a)(2), by
 relying upon a standing committee report published upon the
 amendment of that statute to add discrimination as a prohibited
 act, without looking at any other references as to what
 constitutes discrimination, was "untenable"; and (3) the refusal
 by BCI to return Josue to her pre-work-injury position did not
 constitute discrimination.
 
On August 28, 2014, the Circuit Court entered Final
 
Judgment pursuant to its Order. Josue and the DLIR now appeal
 
3(...continued)
employer to suspend, discharge, or discriminate
against any of the employer's employees:
 
. . . .
 
(2)
 Solely because the employee has suffered a
work injury which arose out of and in the
course of the employee's employment with
the employer and which is compensable
under chapter 386 unless the employee is
no longer capable of performing the
employee's work as a result of the work
injury and the employer has no other
available work which the employee is
capable of performing. Any employee who
is discharged because of the work injury
shall be given first preference of
reemployment by the employer in any
position which the employee is capable of
performing and which becomes available
after the discharge and during the period
thereafter until the employee secures new
employment. This paragraph shall not apply
to any employer in whose employment there
are less than three employees at the time
of the work injury or who is a party to a
collective bargaining agreement which
prevents the continued employment or
reemployment of the injured employee;
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
from the Circuit Court's Final Judgment and underlying Order and
 
challenge each of the Circuit Court's rulings set forth above.
II. Josue's Complaint Was Timely
 
The Circuit Court erroneously determined that the
 
Hearing Officer erred in denying BCI's Motion to Dismiss Josue's
 
Complaint as time-barred by HRS § 378-33(b). HRS § 378-33
 provides:
 
(a) Any employee aggrieved by an alleged
unlawful suspension, discharge, or discrimination may
file with the department of labor and industrial
relations a complaint in writing, stating the name and
address of the employer alleged to have committed the
unlawful suspension, discharge, or discrimination, and
shall set forth the particulars thereof and other
information as may be required by the department.
 
(b) No complaint shall be filed after the
expiration of thirty days after the alleged act of
unlawful suspension, discharge, or discrimination, or
after the employee learns of the suspension or
discharge, except that a complaint for an alleged act
of unlawful discharge under section [378-32(a)(2)]
occurring while the aggrieved employee is still
physically or mentally incapacitated and unable to
work also may be filed before the expiration of thirty
days after the date the aggrieved employee is able to
return to work. 
HRS § 378-33 (emphasis added). Therefore, pursuant to HRS § 378­
33(b), Josue had a period of "thirty days after the alleged act
 of unlawful . . . discrimination" in which to file her Complaint.
 
BCI argues, as apparently found by the Circuit Court,
 
that the alleged act of unlawful discrimination occurred in April
 of 2010, when BCI hired another employee on a permanent basis to
 replace Josue. Josue and DLIR argue that the alleged act of
 discrimination did not occur until September 1, 2010, when Josue
 was released to work by her doctor, informed BCI she was released
 to work, and was refused reinstatement to her pre-work-injury
 position by BCI.
 
We agree with the DLIR and Josue that Josue's Complaint
 
was timely filed under HRS § 378-33(b). While BCI had filled
 Josue's pre-work-injury position in April of 2010, Josue was not
 then able to return to her position due to her work injury. 
Prior to Josue's release to return to work and her attempted
 return on September 1, 2010, it was possible that (1) her pre­
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
work-injury position would become available again, (2) a position
 
at BCI would become available for which Josue was qualified and
 was not a downgrade from her previous position, or (3) it could
 have been determined that Josue would be unable to return to her
 pre-work-injury position. Had Josue filed her complaint in April
 of 2010, BCI would have been able to argue there was no
 discrimination against Josue at that time because she had not
 been released to work. Thus, such a claim would have been
 premature. 
In addition, the DLIR's Final Decision considered the
 
various positions BCI had referred to Josue and found that the
 positions were downgrades from her former position, or earned a
 lower wage, or had some other attribute that made the positions
 unsuitable for her. We infer from these findings that had a
 position been offered to Josue by BCI (1) for which Josue was
 qualified, and (2) was not a downgrade or reassignment to duties
 at a lower rate of pay or otherwise discriminatory in working
 conditions or terms of employment, then BCI would not have been
 found to have committed a discriminatory act against Josue. This
 is indeed the position of the DLIR on appeal. Neither BCI nor
 Josue could have known whether such a position meeting those
 specifications was available until Josue was able to return to
 work on September 1, 2010.
 
We are not persuaded by BCI's claim that the Hearing
 
Officer mistakenly relied upon the provision in HRS § 378-33(b)
 that increases the time in which to file a complaint for an
 employee who has been unlawfully discharged. In the case of an
 unlawful discharge of an employee who is "physically or mentally
 incapacitated and unable to work[,]" the employee is granted
 thirty days to file her complaint after she is able to return to
 work. HRS § 378-33(b). As explained above, the DLIR found that
 the alleged act of discrimination did not occur until September
 1, 2010, and did not rely upon the extension of time provided
 under HRS § 378-33(b) to discharged and incapacitated employees.
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We are also mindful of the Hawai' i Supreme Court's 
instruction that the time limits established under HRS § 378­
33(b) "should be liberally construed to accomplish the humanitarian objective of the legislation." Puchert v. Agsalud, 
67 Haw. 25, 36, 677 P.2d 449, 457 (1984). Accordingly, we agree with the DLIR and Josue that the Circuit Court erred when it determined that the DLIR should have dismissed Josue's Complaint as time barred, because the Complaint was timely filed.
III. The Circuit Court Was Correct That BCI Did Not Violate
 
HRS § 378-32 (a)(2) 
The Circuit Court did not err in determining that BCI
 
did not discriminate against Josue solely because she had
 
suffered a work injury and, therefore, did not violate HRS § 378­32(a)(2). 
HRS § 378-32(a)(2) provides, in relevant part, that it
 
is unlawful for an employer to "discriminate against" an employee
 
[s]olely because the employee has suffered a work
injury which arose out of and in the course of the
employee's employment with the employer and which is
compensable under chapter 386 unless the employee is
no longer capable of performing the employee's work as
a result of the work injury and the employer has no
other available work which the employee is capable of
performing.
 
The DLIR determined that in failing to return Josue to
 
her pre-work-injury position, BCI "discriminated against her
 
solely because of a compensable work injury" (emphasis added).
 BCI argued, and the Circuit Court concluded, that BCI did not
 discriminate against Josue solely because of a work injury, but
 rather BCI "refused to return Ms. Josue to her pre-work-injury
 position because Ms. Josue's pre-work-injury position had been
 filled, and that refusal did not constitute discrimination"
 (emphasis added). The underlying facts are not in dispute. 
Rather, it appears that the difference between the Appellees' and
 BCI's positions relates to the causation required by the statute. 
The disagreement is whether, consistent with HRS § 378-32(a)(2),
 Josue's work injury was the sole cause of BCI's decision not to
 reinstate Josue to her pre-work-injury position.
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In order to resolve this dispute, we must construe the
 
statute. In construing statutes,
 
our foremost obligation is to ascertain and give
effect to the intention of the legislature, which is
to be obtained primarily from the language contained
in the statute itself. And we must read statutory
language in the context of the entire statute and
construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose.
 
When there is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or
indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an expression used
in a statute, an ambiguity exists. . . .
 
In construing an ambiguous statute, "[t]he meaning of
the ambiguous words may be sought by examining the
context, with which the ambiguous words, phrases, and
sentences may be compared, in order to ascertain their
true meaning." HRS § 1–15(1) [(1993)]. Moreover, the
courts may resort to extrinsic aids in determining
legislative intent. One avenue is the use of
 legislative history as an interpretive tool.
 
This court may also consider "[t]he reason and spirit
of the law, and the cause which induced the
legislature to enact it . . . to discover its true
meaning." HRS § 1–15(2) (1993). "Laws in pari
materia, or upon the same subject matter, shall be
construed with reference to each other. What is clear
 
in one statute may be called upon in aid to explain
what is doubtful in another." HRS § 1–16 (1993).
 
In re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai' i 97, 144, 9 P.3d 
409, 456 (2000) (internal citations omitted). If we determine
 
based upon the above principles that the legislature has
 unambiguously spoken, our inquiry ends. Id. If, however, we
 
determine that the "the legislative intent is less than clear," 
this court will observe the well established rule of
 
statutory construction that, where an administrative
agency is charged with the responsibility of carrying
out the mandate of a statute which contains words of
 broad and indefinite meaning, courts accord persuasive
weight to administrative construction and follow the
same, unless the construction is palpably erroneous.
 
Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). This rule of judicial
 
deference "reflects a sensitivity to the proper roles of the
 political and judicial branches, insofar as the resolution of
 ambiguity in a statutory text is often more a question of policy
 than law." Id. at 145, 9 P.3d at 457 (internal quotation marks
 
and citation omitted). Such deference is not afforded "when the
 agency's reading of the statute contravenes the legislature's
 manifest purpose." Id. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 378-32(a)(2) provides it is unlawful for an
 
employer to "discriminate against" an employee "[s]olely because
 
the employee has suffered a work injury . . . unless the employee
 is no longer capable of performing the employee's work as a
 result of the work injury and the employer has no other available
 work which the employee is capable of performing." HRS § 378­32(a)(2). The second half of the statute, providing the
 exception for employees no longer capable of performing the work,
 is not relevant here as we have accepted that the alleged
 discriminatory act did not occur until after Josue was released
 to work without restrictions, fully capable to perform her pre­work-injury position. Therefore, the first question is whether
 the statutory language itself, read in the context of the statute
 as a whole, provides a clear and unambiguous answer as to whether
 BCI (1) discriminated against Josue (2) solely because she
 suffered a work injury. 
None of the relevant terms above are defined explicitly
 
by statute and the DLIR has issued no regulation providing more
 precise definitions regarding its interpretation of the statute. 
"Discriminate," while sometimes a term of art, in its standard
 sense means "fail[ing] to treat all persons equally when no
 reasonable distinction can be found between those favored and
 those not favored." Discrimination, Black's Law Dictionary 566
 
(10th ed. 2014). Looking more broadly at the context in which
 HRS § 378-32(a)(2) appears, we note that Chapter 378 of the HRS
 governs a variety of unlawful employment practices. HRS § 378-2
 sets forth a number of adverse employment actions that qualify as
 "[d]iscriminatory practices," citing specific actions that are
 prohibited for specific reasons, such as making it unlawful to
 refuse to hire an employee because of the employee's sex, gender
 identity or expression, age, etc. See HRS § 378-2(a). However,
 the term as used in HRS § 378-32 is arguably ambiguous as the
 actions that constitute "discrimination" are left unenumerated. 
Thus, we turn to the legislative history of that section for
 clarity. 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 378-32 was amended by the legislature in 1981 to
 
make it an unlawful employment practice to "discriminate" against
 
an employee because of a work injury. The House and Senate
 Standing Committees issued reports containing similar statements
 regarding the purpose of the amendment. The House Standing
 Committee report explained: 
Current law prohibits suspension or discharge of an
employee who has suffered from a work injury or has
filed for bankruptcy or because the employer was
summoned as a garnishee. However, an employee can be
downgraded, reassigned to other duties at a lower rate
of pay, or otherwise be discriminated against in
condition or terms of employment under the above
conditions without violating the law. This bill
 provides further protection to the employee in such
cases by making such discrimination unlawful.
 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 580, in 1981 House Journal, at 1179; see
 
also S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 782, in 1981 Senate Journal, at
 1249 (collectively, Standing Committee Reports). Therefore, as
 
relevant to this case, the reports provide that the purpose of
 
including "discriminate" in the statute was to make it an
 unlawful employment practice for an employer to downgrade,
 reassign to other duties at a lower rate of pay, or otherwise
 discriminate in conditions or terms of employment against an
 employee who has suffered from a work injury. Consequently, to
 "discriminate," as used in HRS § 378-32, means generally to take
 an adverse employment action against an employee because the
 employee has suffered a work injury and not for a legitimate and
 reasonable cause. 
Next we must consider the causation requirement set
 
forth in HRS § 378-32(a)(2), that the discrimination must be
 "solely because" the employee has suffered a work injury. Again,
 the DLIR has not defined the term for the purposes of HRS § 378­32(a)(2). "Solely," as commonly understood, means "to the
 exclusion of alternate or competing things." Solely, Webster's
 
Third New International Dictionary (1981). Looking beyond the
 statute and into the other provisions of Chapter 378, HRS
 § 378-2 lists numerous unlawful employment practices, but none of
 the prohibitions therein contain the language adopted by the
 legislature in HRS § 378-32(a)(2) that forbids an employment
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
practice "solely because" of some protected class or activity.4
 
This is also true of other statutes within the chapter. See HRS
 
§ 378-2.3 (2015) ("No employer shall discriminate between
 
employees because of sex . . .") (emphasis added); HRS § 378­26.5(6) (2015) (stating that it is unlawful for an employer to
 discriminate against an employee "because such person has filed a
 complaint, testified, or assisted in any proceeding respecting
 the unlawful practices prohibited under this part") (emphasis
 added). Therefore, the various other prohibitions listed in
 Chapter 378 help illustrate that the language used by the
 legislature in HRS § 378-32(a)(2) is more precise and more
 restrictive than found elsewhere in the chapter.
5 The Standing
 
Committee Reports cited above do not indicate any intent other
 than what the language of the statute clearly requires: the work
 injury must be the sole cause of the adverse employment action to
 run afoul of the statute.
 
This conclusion is consistent with the one case, 
identified by the parties and this court, that has considered the causation required by HRS § 378-32(a)(2). In Fergerstrom v. Datapoint Corp., the United States District Court for the District of Hawai' i considered a claim by a terminated employee 
that he was discriminated against solely because he suffered a 
4 See e.g., HRS § 378-2(a)(1) (2015) (employer may not take a number of
employment actions "[b]ecause of race, sex including gender identity or
expression, sexual orientation, age, religion, color, ancestry, disability,
marital status, arrest and court record, or domestic or sexual violence victim
status") (emphasis added); HRS § 378-2(a)(2) (it is an unlawful discriminatory
practice "[f]or any employer, labor organization, or employment agency to
discharge, expel, or otherwise discriminate against any individual because the
individual has opposed any practice forbidden by this part or has filed a
complaint, testified, or assisted in any proceeding respecting the
discriminatory practices prohibited under this part") (emphasis added); HRS
§ 378-2(a)(5) (it is an unlawful discriminatory practice "[f]or any employer
to refuse to hire or employ or to bar or discharge from employment any
individual because of assignment of income for the purpose of satisfying the
individual's child support obligations as provided for under section 571-52")
(emphasis added).
 
5
 HRS § 386-142 (2015) in large part mirrors the language of HRS
§ 378-32(a)(2) and pertains to the employment rights of injured employeesunder Hawai 'i's Workers' Compensation Law, providing that it is unlawful for
an employer to suspend or discharge an employee "solely because the employeesuffers any work injury. . . ." 
10
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
work injury and who asserted a violation of the same statute, HRS
 
§ 378-32(a)(2). 680 F.Supp. 1456 (D. Haw. 1988). In that case,
 the employee suffered a back injury while working for the
 employer, was unable to work, and received workers' compensation
 benefits for a period longer than ninety days. Id. at 1457. The
 
employer had a policy that any employee who was on a leave of
 absence for any reason for more than ninety days would have his
 or her employment administratively terminated and would be given
 the right of preferential reemployment, provided a position was
 available and the employee was qualified. Id. Pursuant to the
 
policy, the employee was terminated because he had been on leave
 for a period of more than ninety days because he had suffered a
 work injury. Id. at 1457. The District Court found that the
 
employer had not violated the statute, in part, because the
 employee was not terminated solely because of his work injury but
 because he was incapacitated for a period longer than ninety
 days. Id. at 1458. The District Court concluded that "[s]ince
 
Section 378-32(2) itself expressly limits its application to
 circumstances in which the compensable injury is the sole reason
 for the employer's action, it is not for the courts to expand
 this limited policy by judicial instruction." Id. at 1459.
6
 
6 In an unpublished decision, Zhang v. State of Hawai 'i, Dep't of Land
and Nat. Res., the Hawai 'i Supreme Court considered the same causation
requirement in HRS § 386-142, which states that an employer cannot suspend or
discharge an employee "solely because" he or she has suffered a work injurycompensable under the Workers' Compensation Law. See No. SCWC-11-0001106, 2016WL 4182511 (Haw. Aug. 8, 2016) (mem. op.); see also HRS § 386-142. In Zhang,the employee claimed that her employer had discriminated against her anddischarged her for filing a grievance against her employer and because shefiled a workers' compensation claim. 2016 WL 4182511 at *6. Pursuant to HRS 386-142, it is unlawful for an employer to suspend or discharge an employee"solely because the employee suffers any work injury" compensable under thatchapter, the Workers' Compensation Law. HRS § 386-142. In a related lawsuit brought by the employee, the circuit court had made a finding that theemployee was terminated because the employer had an "incorrect but actualbelief" that the employee had failed to submit documentation necessary toextend her work authorization. Zhang, 2016 WL 4182511 at *14. The Supreme
Court held that the employee was collaterally estopped from claiming that "shewas discharged 'solely' because she filed this workers' compensation claim"because the circuit court found a reason other than her filing of the workers'compensation claim for her discharge. Id. The Supreme Court, recognizing
that at least one other cause for the discharge had been established as afact, concluded that the employee could not establish that her filing of aworkers' compensation claim was the sole reason for her termination. Id. 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We hold that the statute is not ambiguous and requires
 
that the work injury be the sole cause of the adverse employment
 
action to run afoul of HRS § 378-32(a)(2). It should, of course,
 be recognized that employment decisions are often complicated and
 making determinations regarding causation in cases alleging
 discrimination always requires the fact-finder to closely
 interrogate the facts and make judgments regarding the genuine
 motivations in alleged discriminatory behavior. Pre-textual
 reasons for an adverse employment action cannot provide a defense
 to a discrimination claim. 
BCI maintains that it did not run afoul of HRS § 378­
32(a)(2) because Josue was unable to return to her pre-work­injury position due to her prolonged absence from work, which
 created a business hardship that required BCI to fill the
 position before Josue was able to return to work. The DLIR
 concluded, on the other hand, that BCI did discriminate against
 Josue solely because she suffered a work injury. 
Whether BCI refused to reinstate Josue to her pre-work­
injury position solely because she suffered a work-injury, and thus satisfied the statute's causation requirement, presents mixed questions of law and fact.
7 Therefore, the agency's 
determination of that question must be upheld unless it was clearly erroneous. See Surfrider Foundation v. Zoning Bd. of 
Appeals, 136 Hawai' i 95, 107, 358 P.3d 664, 676 (2015). Although 
the Circuit Court did not explicitly find erroneous the DLIR's conclusion that Josue's work injury was the sole cause of her inability to return to her pre-work-injury position, it implicitly made that finding when it determined that the reason Josue was not able to return to her pre-work-injury position was not Josue's work injury but rather that BCI had already filled her position when Josue was released to return to work. 
We agree with the Circuit Court that the DLIR's
 
conclusion that Josue was not returned to her pre-work-injury
 
7
 BCI challenged the Hearing Officer's finding that Josue's work injury
was the sole cause of the failure of BCI to reinstate Josue to her former
 
position in its Exceptions to the Hearing Officer's findings.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
position solely because of her work injury was clearly erroneous. 
The evidence showed that Josue suffered her work injury on May
 29, 2009, resulting in her taking a leave of absence. Pursuant
 to BCI's Disability Leave Policy, Josue could continue to receive
 plan benefits from BCI for a period of twelve months. After
 Josue did not return to full-time work after the end of twelve
 months, which occurred in June of 2010, BCI could, pursuant to
 the Disability Leave Policy, terminate her employment. Between
 her injury on May 29, 2009 and April of 2010, BCI had two other
 supervisors cover for Josue's absence by learning her position
 and arriving to work two hours earlier than normal to perform her
 job in addition to their own duties. Josue provided to BCI
 several updates from her doctor regarding her status, pursuant to
 BCI's policies, but neither Josue's doctor nor Josue could
 determine or communicate when or if Josue would ever be able to
 return back to work. BCI decided to replace Josue with a
 permanent employee because Josue's prolonged absence was creating
 a hardship for the department, over ten months after Josue went
 out on leave. BCI did not learn until late August 2010 -- about
 fifteen months after Josue's injury -- that Josue was released to
 work as of September 1, 2010. By that time, Josue's pre-work­injury position had been filled. 
There is no finding by the Hearing Officer that
 
indicates in any way that BCI's business hardship justification
 for filling Josue's position was pretextual. The Hearing Officer
 found that "[a]lthough [HRS § 378-32(2)] does not require [BCI]
 to keep [Josue's] position open indefinitely" it was
 discriminatory to fail to return her "to work full duty, no
 restrictions to the position occupied at the time of injury." 
The Hearing Officer found that "[BCI] knew or should have known
 that [Josue] could return to work without restrictions one day,
 and that with this knowledge in mind, should have filled
 [Josue's] position with a replacement that was subject to
 [Josue's] right to return to her pre-work injury position."
 (emphasis added). The Director agreed and in the Final Decision
 stated that while BCI "should not be required to hold [Josue's]
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
position open indefinitely, in this instance, [BCI] could have
 
met its business concerns and the requirements of [HRS § 378-32]
 by filling the position with a replacement that was subject to
 [Josue's] return rights." Therefore, the DLIR determined that
 despite the legitimate business concerns faced by BCI, HRS § 378­32(a)(2) affords "return rights" to Josue that apparently exist
 for so long as the employer does not affirmatively know that
 Josue will never be able to return to her former position. 
We hold that this position asserted by the DLIR goes
 
beyond the protection intended by HRS § 378-32(a)(2). As
 explained above, HRS § 378-32(a)(2) only precludes taking an
 adverse employment action against an employee solely because of a
 work injury. The statute does not preclude BCI from determining,
 as it did here, that Josue's prolonged absence from work caused
 such a hardship that leaving her pre-work-injury position
 unfilled was no longer feasible. Neither the language of the
 statute nor its legislative history suggest that employers are
 required to go to the lengths determined by the DLIR in this
 case, requiring that employers either leave a vacated position
 open or hire temporary employees to replace an injured employee
 who may be unable to return to their previous employment for
 lengthy periods of time. Interpreting HRS § 378-32(a)(2) to
 mandate this result is not consistent with the plain language of
 the statute or its legislative history. 
We thus hold that the DLIR's conclusion that BCI did
 
not return Josue to her pre-work-injury position solely because
 she suffered a work injury was clearly erroneous. The DLIR
 acknowledged that business necessity was also a reason for BCI's
 actions and there is no indication that the justification was
 pretextual. To the contrary, the evidence showed that BCI waited
 over ten months before replacing Josue, at a time when neither
 BCI nor Josue could determine whether Josue would ever be able to
 return to her pre-work-injury position without restrictions. The
 DLIR's conclusion that Josue's work injury was the sole cause of
 BCI's refusal to return her to her pre-work-injury position was
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
clearly erroneous. The Circuit Court did not err in reversing
 
the DLIR on this issue.
 
Although the Circuit Court erred when it concluded that
 
Josue's Complaint was untimely filed, the error was harmless
 given that the Circuit Court correctly concluded that Josue's
 claim of discrimination under HRS § 378-32(a)(2) fails on the
 merits. 
IV. Conclusion
 
Based on the above, the "Final Judgment" entered on
 
August 28, 2014, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, is
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 28, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Anna Elento-Sneed,
Malia E, Kakos,
for Respondent/Appellant/ Appellee/Cross-Appellee.
 
Chief Judge
Frances E.H. Lum,
Adam S. Rosenberg, Deputy Attorneys General,
Department of the Attorney General,
for Appellees/Appellees/
Cross-Appellants. Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
Ronald T. Fujiwara,
for Complainant/Appellee/
Appellant/Cross-Appellee.
 
Robert H. Thomas,
Christopher J.I. Leong,
on the amicus curiae brief for
 National Federation of Independent
Business Small Business Legal Center. 
Nathalie S. Pettit,
on the amicus curiae brief for
 Society of Human Resource
Management Hawaii.
 
15
 