FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI# I  
---o0o---
STATE OF 
HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
TIANA F.M. SAGAPOLUTELE-SILVA, Defendant-Appellee 
CAAP-19-0000491 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(HONOLULU DIVISION)
(CASE NO. 1DTA-18-01227) 
JUNE 8, 2020  
LEONARD, PRESIDING JUDGE, CHAN AND WADSWORTH, JJ. 
AMENDED OPINION OF THE COURT BY KATHERINE G. LEONARD, J. 
This case involves the well-established constitutional 
principle that the prosecution may not use statements, whether 
exculpatory or inculpatory, stemming from the custodial interrogation of a defendant unless the defendant has first been advised of his or her 
Miranda rights. 
This rule applies in all 
criminal matters, even when the alleged crime is a misdemeanor traffic offense. That said, whether the questioning of a FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defendant constitutes a custodial interrogation is dependent on 
the totality of the circumstances and, in many instances, persons who are temporarily detained pursuant to a traffic stop are not in custody for the purposes of 
Miranda. In addition, the right 
against self-incrimination is not necessarily implicated whenever a person suspected of criminal activity is compelled in some way to cooperate in developing evidence which may be used against him or her, such as when a defendant has performed a field sobriety test and testimony regarding the defendant's physical characteristics of coordination is offered against the defendant. 
The defendant in this case was arrested for Excessive 
Speeding and Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant. Under the totality of the circumstances in this case, we hold that the defendant was in custody almost immediately after she was stopped by a police officer because, inter alia, the officer had probable cause to arrest her for the criminal offense of Excessive Speeding when he initially stopped her, and she was not free to leave from the time she was stopped. Upon approaching the defendant's vehicle, after briefly speaking with the defendant, the officer had a reasonable suspicion that she was intoxicated, but not probable cause, so the investigation proceeded to a field sobriety test. We hold that the defendant's physical performance on that test was not testimonial, and the defendant's responses to whether she would participate in the test and whether she understood the instructions were attendant to legitimate police procedures, and should not have been suppressed. We further hold, however, that the medical rule-out 
2  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
questions posed by the officer were reasonably likely to elicit 
an incriminating response, and that the District Court did not err in suppressing those statements. Finally, for the reasons stated below, we conclude that a statement made by the defendant in response to being informed of the reason that she was stopped was not the result of custodial interrogation and should not have been suppressed, but that a statement made by the defendant after she was arrested was fruit of the poisonous tree. We affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand. 
Plaintiff-Appellant the State of Hawai# i (State) 
appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, filed on June 7, 2019 (
Judgment), and Amended 
Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, filed on August 26, 2019 (Amended Judgment), in the District Court of 
the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court),
1/ which 
granted Defendant-Appellee Tiana F.M. Sagapolutele-Silva's 
(Sagapolutele-Silva) Motion to Suppress Statements.  The State 
also challenges Conclusions of Law (COLs) 7, 10, 13, and 16 through 21, of the District Court's July 11, 2019 Findings of 
Fact and Conclusions of Law and Order Granting Defendant's Motion to Suppress Statements (Suppression Order). 
I. BACKGROUND 
On March 31, 2018, at about 2:50 a.m., Honolulu Police 
Department (HPD) Officer Franchot Termeteet (Officer Termeteet) was conducting speed enforcement, when Sagapolutele-Silva's 
1/ The Honorable Summer Kupau-Odo presided. 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
vehicle passed him.2/ Sagapolutele-Silva appeared to be traveling 
at a high rate of speed, so he used his LIDAR and measured her 
speed at 77 miles per hour in a 45-mile-per-hour zone. Officer Termeteet also observed Sagapolutele-Silva's vehicle drift between lanes and change lanes without a signal. Sagapolutele-Silva passed at least two 45-mile-per-hour speed limit signs. Officer Termeteet pulled her over to the shoulder of the road. 
When Officer Termeteet approached Sagapolutele-Silva's 
driver's side window, he noticed the smell of alcohol coming from her breath and from within the vehicle, which held three other passengers. Although not noted in the District Court's FOFs, Officer Termeteet testified that he also observed that Sagapolutele-Silva had red, watery, and glassy eyes. Officer Termeteet asked Sagapolutele-Silva if she would be willing to participate in a standardized field sobriety test (SFST) and she 
agreed to participate. Sagapolutele-Silva was not free to leave 
while she waited for a second officer, HPD Officer Bobby Ilae (Officer Ilae), to arrive. 
When Officer Ilae arrived on the scene, Officer 
Termeteet apprised him of his observations, and Officer Ilae took over the investigation. Officer Ilae also asked Sagapolutele-Silva if she would be willing to participate in an SFST and she again agreed. Prior to administering the SFST, Officer Ilae asked Sagapolutele-Silva eight preliminary questions, which are known as medical rule-out questions: Do you have any physical 
2/ The background facts are taken from the District Court's Findings
of Fact ( FOFs ), which are set forth in the Suppression Order, and which are
not challenged on appeal. 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defects or speech impediments; are you taking medication; are you 
under the care of a doctor or dentist for anything; are you under the care of an eye doctor; are you epileptic or diabetic; do you have an artificial or glass eye; do you wear corrective lenses; and are you are blind in either eye. 
Sagapolutele-Silva answered 
no to all of these questions, which are intended to see if there is a medical reason that might cause a person to perform poorly on the SFST, if an impairment is medically related, or if there is a medical emergency. 
The SFST consists of three tests and prior to 
administering them, Officer Ilae gave Sagapolutele-Silva instructions, asked her if she understood the instructions, and asked her if she had any questions. Sagapolutele-Silva was not advised of her Miranda rights at any point. At the conclusion of the SFST, Sagapolutele-Silva was arrested, and she told Officer Ilae that she had been drinking beers, but her friends were more impaired. 
Sagapolutele-Silva filed, inter alia, a motion to 
suppress statements and a motion in limine. The District Court granted Sagapolutele-Silva's motion in limine to suppress her breath test results. At the hearing on the motion to suppress statements, Officers Termeteet and Ilae testified. After the hearing concluded, in addition to the above, the District Court found (and concluded) that Officer Termeteet had probable cause to arrest or cite Sagapolutele-Silva for the petty misdemeanor 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . offense of Excessive Speeding  as soon as he stopped her vehicle, 
Sagapolutele-Silva was also the focus of an Operating a Vehicle 
Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII) investigation, and 
even prior to her exiting her vehicle, she was not free to leave. 
The District Court's challenged COLs state: 3/
7. At the time that Defendant was sitting in her vehicle,
prior to the administration of the SFST, she was notfree to leave, she was the focus of an OVUIIinvestigation and officers had probable cause toarrest [h]er for at least Excessive Speeding. Officer Termeteet and Ilae did not need the results of the SFST to arrest and/or cite Defendant for ExcessiveSpeeding. Legal custody had attached. 
. . . . 
10. Asking Defendant if she was willing to participate inthe SFST constituted custodial interrogation becauseshe was not free to leave, she was the focus of anOVUII investigation and officers had probable cause toarrest her. 
Asking a person if they would be willing
to participate in a SFST is reasonably likely toelicit an incriminating response. For example,refusing to participate in the SFST can be used attrial to show consciousness of guilt pursuant to Statev. Ferm, 94 Haw. 17 (2000). 
. . . . 
13. The MRO questions in this case constituted custodialinterrogation and were reasonably likely to elicitincriminating responses. 
By answering "no" to all the
MRO questions, the State will likely use the responsesto establish that Defendant did not have any physicalor medical ailments that could have affected the results of the SFST. Hence, all of the results of theSFST were caused by impairment by an intoxicant. 
3/ Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 291C-105 (year) provides, in
relevant part: 
§ 291C-105 Excessive speeding.  (a) No person shall
drive a motor vehicle at a speed exceeding:(1) The applicable state or county speed limit by thirtymiles per hour or more; or
(2) Eighty miles per hour or more irrespective of theapplicable state or county speed limit.
.  .  .  . 
(c) Any person who violates this section shall
be guilty of a petty misdemeanor[.] 
6  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
16. Officer Ilae's questioning during the SFST as to
whether Defendant understood the instructions was reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response.For example, if answered "no," it would be commentaryon her mental faculties and ability to understand theinstructions. If Defendant answered "yes," and didnot perform the test as instructed, her "yes" responsecould be used against her at trial to show her mentalfaculties were impaired. 
17. Defendant's agreement to take the SFST is suppressedand all evidence obtained after the agreement is fruitof the poisonous tree. 
18. Defendant's responses to the MRO questions aresuppressed and all evidence obtained by HPD after theMRO questions are suppressed as fruit of the poisonoustree. 
19. Defendant's answer that she understood the instructions during the SFST is suppressed and theSFST is suppressed as fruit of the poisonous tree. 
20. Defendant's statements while she was still in the vehicle in response to Termeteet's statement as to whyshe was being stopped is suppressed. 
21. Defendant's statements to Officer Ilae after the SFST is suppressed as fruit of the poisonous tree. 
The State timely filed a notice of appeal. 
II. POINT OF ERROR ON APPEAL 
The State raises a single point of error on appeal, 
contending that the District Court erred in the challenged COLs 
and the Suppression Order because Sagapolutele-Silva was not in custody or seized until after she took the SFST and was arrestedfor OVUII, in violation of HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2018).
  4/ 
4/ HRS § 291E-61(a) states, in relevant part: 
§291E-61 Operating a vehicle under the influence of
an intoxicant.  (a) A person commits the offense of
operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if
the person operates or assumes actual physical control of avehicle: 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair the person's normalmental faculties or ability to care for theperson and guard against casualty[.] 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. 
APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
The proponent of the motion to suppress has the burden of
establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that thestatements or items sought to be excluded were unlawfullysecured and that his or her right to be free fromunreasonable searches or seizures was violated under the fourth amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, section 7 of the Hawai #i Constitution. 
State v. Estabillio, 121 Hawai# i 261, 269, 218 P.3d 749, 757 
(2009) (citations omitted). 
A ruling on a motion to suppress is reviewed de novo, 
and the appellate court must look at the entire record on appeal 
to determine whether the ruling was right or wrong. State v. 
Joseph, 109 Hawai# i 482, 493, 128 P.3d 795, 806 (2006). The 
District Court's COLs are also reviewed 
de novo. See id. 
IV. DISCUSSION 
The State primarily contends that the District Court 
erred in suppressing Sagapolutele-Silva's responses to the medical rule-out questions because she was not in custody or interrogated before the SFST had been administered and she was arrested for OVUII. 
In State v. Wyatt, 67 Haw. 293, 687 P.2d 544 (1984), 
the Hawai# i Supreme Court analyzed, inter alia, whether the 
roadside questioning of a defendant who had been stopped for a traffic violation constituted a custodial interrogation for the purposes of applying Miranda
: 
"The government seeking to punish an individual must
produce the evidence against her by its own independent
labors, rather than by the cruel, simple expedient ofcompelling it from her own mouth." Miranda v. Arizona, 384
U.S. 436, 460 (1966); State v. Russo, 67 Haw. 126, 131–32,681 P.2d 553, 558 (1984). And the rule that "the prosecution may not use statements, whether exculpatory orinculpatory, stemming from custodial interrogation of thedefendant unless it demonstrates the use of proceduralsafeguards effective to secure the privilege against 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
self-incrimination," Miranda, 384 U.S. at 444 (emphasis
added), applies even where the object of the prosecution isto establish the commission of "a misdemeanor traffic offense." Berkemer v. McCarty, 468 U.S. 420, 429 (1984). 
Whether interrogation was carried on in a custodial
context is dependent on the totality of circumstancessurrounding the questioning, State v. Paahana, 66 Haw. 499,503, 666 P.2d 592, 595 (1983); State v. Melemai, 64 Haw.479, 481, 643 P.2d 541, 544 (1982). 
The relevant 
circumstances, we have said, include "the time, place andlength of the interrogation, the nature of the questionsasked, [and] the conduct of the police at the time of the
interrogation." Paahana, supra . But the ultimate test is 
whether the questioning was of a nature that would
'subjugate the individual to the will of his examiner' andthereby undermine the privilege against compulsoryself-incrimination. Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291,299 (1980) (quoting Miranda, 384 U.S. at 457–58, 86 S.Ct. at1618–19). 
Wyatt, 67 Haw. at 298, 687 P.2d at 549 (citations edited;
footnote and brackets omitted).  
In Wyatt, after the defendant's vehicle was stopped for 
a traffic violation and she was briefly detained, a police officer asked her if she had been drinking. Id. at 297, 687 P.2d at 548. Although the stop and resulting brief detention constituted a seizure within the meaning of the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments, the seizure was not unreasonable. Id. at 300, 687 P.2d at 549. Nothing in the record suggested that the question was posed in a coercive or custodial setting. Id. at 301, 687 P.2d at 550. Under the circumstances, the supreme court concluded that Miranda warnings were not required before the defendant was asked if she had been drinking. Id.; see also State v. Ah Loo, 94 
Hawai# i 207, 211, 10 P.3d 728, 732 (2000) (a 
defendant is not in custody merely before he or she has been seized in conjunction with a traffic stop).
 The supreme court 5/
5/ In Ah Loo, the supreme court reiterated that "when an officer
lawfully 'seizes' a person in order to conduct an investigative stop, the
officer is not required to inform that person of his or her Miranda rights
(continued...) 
9 5/(...continued)FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in Wyatt further concluded that the SFST that the defendant 
performed was not constitutionally infirm because the test sought only an exhibition of her physical characteristics of coordination, rather than communications or testimony, even though its purpose was to gather evidence of criminal conduct. Wyatt, 67 Haw. at 302-03, 687 P.2d at 551. 
In State v. Kaleohano
, 99 Hawai# i 370, 56 P.3d 138 
(2002), the supreme court examined whether the defendant in that case was entitled to 
Miranda warnings when she was questioned by 
an officer after her vehicle was stopped because the officer suspected that the driver was impaired. The court first observed that the defendant was not in custody for the purposes of Miranda simply due to the valid traffic stop. Id. at 376, 56 P.3d at 
144. The court noted, however, that if probable cause to arrest 
or sustained and coercive questioning were present, then questions posed by the police could amount to custodial interrogation. Id. at 377, 56 P.3d at 145. The supreme court 
then considered whether there was probable cause to arrest the defendant for driving while impaired, i.e., whether "the facts and circumstances within the knowledge of police officers and of which they had reasonably trustworthy information were sufficient in themselves to warrant a man or woman of reasonable caution to believe that a crime was being committed." Id. (citation 
omitted). Although the officer had observed the defendant's car 
before posing questions that are reasonably designed to confirm or dispel—as
briefly as possible and without any coercive connotation by either word orconduct—the officer's reasonable suspicion that criminal activity is afoot."94 Hawai #i at 212, 10 P.3d at 733. 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
swerve within its lane and cross the dividing line, and her eyes 
were red and glassy, the supreme court noted that imperfect driving and red eyes, particularly in light of defendant's claim that it was late and she was tired, were consistent with innocent activity and were insufficient to support a finding of probable cause. Id. Because there was no probable cause to arrest the 
defendant, and in light of the fact that the officer did not subject the defendant to sustained and coercive questioning, the supreme court concluded that the officer was not required to give her a 
Miranda warning prior to asking her if she had been 
drinking. Id. at 377-78, 56 P.3d at 145-46. 
Turning to the case before us, we must examine whether, 
under the totality of the circumstances here, Sagapolutele-Silva's suppressed statements stemmed from custodial interrogation. Sagapolutele-Silva was not in custody merely because she was seized in connection with a traffic stop. Ah 
Loo
, 94 Hawai# i at 211, 10 P.3d at 732. To determine whether an 
interrogation is custodial, the totality of the circumstances analysis focuses on "'the place and time of the interrogation, the length of the interrogation, the nature of the questions asked, the conduct of the police, and [any] other relevant circumstances[.]'" 
Id. at 210, 10 P.3d at 731 (citing State v. 
Melemai, 64 Haw. 479, 481, 643 P.2d 541, 544 (1982)); see also State v. Kazanas
, 138 Hawai# i 23, 35, 375 P.3d 1261, 1273 (2016) 
(reiterating same). In this regard, the supreme court has acknowledged that "no precise line can be drawn" between "custodial interrogation," on the one hand, and "permissible 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
general on-the-scene questioning," on the other. Ah Loo
, 94 
Hawai# i at 210, 10 P.3d at 731 (citing 
State v. Patterson, 59 
Haw. 357, 362, 581 P.2d 752, 755-56 (1978)) (brackets omitted). 
Custodial interrogation is comprised of two components, "interrogation" and "custody." Kazanas
, 138 Hawai# i at 35, 375 
P.3d at 1273. The totality of the circumstances test applies to custodial interrogation, "in the sense that the defendant is deprived of his or her freedom of action in any significant way." 
Id. In contrast, "the touchstone in analyzing whether 
'interrogation' has taken place is whether the police officer 'should have known that his or her words and actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the defendant.'" Id.
 at 38, 375 P.3d at 1276 (internal brackets and 
citation omitted). 
Here, we first consider whether the District Court 
erred by finding that there was probable cause to arrest Sagapolutele-Silva for Excessive Speeding when she was initially stopped. 
For the offense of excessive speeding, the prosecution must
prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant "[drove]a motor vehicle at a speed exceeding: (1) The applicablestate or county speed limit by thirty miles per hour ormore; or (2) [e]ighty miles per hour or more irrespective ofthe applicable state or county speed limit. HRS § 291C–105(a) (brackets added). 
State v. Assaye , 121 Hawai# i 204, 216, 216 P.3d 1227, 1239 
(2009). 
Excessive Speeding is a criminal offense for which the 
State must prove a defendant acted intentionally, knowingly, or 
recklessly. State v. Gonzalez
, 128 Hawai# i 314, 324, 288 P.3d 
788, 798 (2012). 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Probable cause to arrest without a warrant exists when the 
arresting officer has reasonable grounds to believe, fromfacts and circumstances personally known to him, or of whichhe has trustworthy information, that the person arrested hascommitted or is committing an offense. State v. Barnes, 58
Haw. 333, 568 P.2d 1207 (1977). 
State v. Lloyd, 61 Haw. 505, 509, 606 P.2d 913, 916 (1980). 
In this case, Officer Termeteet testified that 
Sagapolutele-Silva was traveling 77 miles per hour based on the 
speed reading from his LIDAR, the incident occurred in a 45-mile-per-hour zone, and there were multiple 45-mile-per-hour speed limit signs in the area, with one sign right before his location near an on-ramp, where Sagapolutele-Silva passed him. Sagapolutele-Silva acknowledged that she was speeding in response to being informed of the reason she was stopped. Thus, we conclude that there was probable cause to arrest Sagapolutele-Silva for Excessive Speeding when she was initially stopped by Officer Termeteet. 
That said, there is no requirement for the police to 
arrest a suspect once probable cause is established. Lloyd, 61 
Haw. at 514, 606 P.2d at 919. Indeed, the police need not halt an investigation the moment they have the minimum evidence to establish probable cause because it may fall short of evidence necessary to support a criminal conviction. Id. (citing Hoffa v. 
United States, 385 U.S. 293, 310 (1966)). Nevertheless, "[a]n individual in police custody may not be subjected to interrogation without first being advised of his Miranda rights." Melemai, 64 Haw. at 481, 643 P.2d at 543. 
Under the totality of the circumstances in this case, 
Sagapolutele-Silva was in custody for Excessive Speeding. Id. at 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
481, 643 P.2d at 544. 
Officer Termeteet had probable cause to 
arrest Sagapolutele-Silva for Excessive Speeding when he 
initially stopped her. Sagapolutele-Silva admitted to speeding after she was informed she was stopped for speeding. As discussed below, upon his initial observations of Sagapolutele-Silva, Officer Termeteet had a reasonable suspicion that she was driving while intoxicated. Officer Termeteet stated Sagapolutele-Silva was not free to leave from the time she was stopped. Under the totality of the circumstances, the District Court did not err in COL 7 in concluding, inter alia, that legal custody had attached. Sagapolutele-Silva should have been given Miranda warnings prior to any interrogation. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the investigation for 
OVUII in this case constituted a separate and distinct investigation, albeit related to the initial traffic stop, and it required an independent reasonable suspicion. See generally Estabillio
, 121 Hawai# i at 273, 218 P.3d at 761. There was 
reasonable suspicion that Sagapolutele-Silva was operating a vehicle while intoxicated based upon her driving; her red, watery, and glassy eyes; and the smell of alcohol. 
State v. 
Barrickman
, 95 Hawai# i 270, 274-77, 21 P.3d 475, 479-82 (App. 
2001) (there was reasonable suspicion to investigate driving while intoxicated based on defendant's glassy eyes and smell of alcohol on breath). However, red and glassy eyes alone and imperfect driving are insufficient to establish probable cause to arrest a person for OVUII. 
Kaleohano
, 99 Hawai# i at 377-78, 56 
P.3d at 145-46. 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As noted by the supreme court in 
Kernan v. Tanaka, 75 
Haw. 1, 38 n.23, 856 P.2d 1207, 1226 n.23 (1993): 
Usually, the police administer a field sobriety test
consisting of specific procedures when a driver has been
stopped as a DUI suspect. If a driver does not exit voluntarily, the police must order him or her out of thevehicle even though probable cause to arrest may not havebeen established. Should the suspect fail the test, anarrest will ensue. Thus, it is the test failure thatprovides the police with probable cause to arrest. We do not require the police to have probable cause to arrestprior to the administration of the field sobriety testbecause such a requirement unduly burdens law enforcement. 
"Field sobriety tests are designed and administered to 
avoid the shortcomings of casual observation." Wyatt, 67 Haw. at 
302, 687 P.2d at 551. Here, Officer Termeteet did not initially 
have probable cause to arrest Sagapolutele-Silva for OVUII based upon noticing she had red, watery, and glassy eyes, and an odor of alcohol about her. And, the right against self-incrimination is not necessarily implicated whenever a person suspected of criminal activity is compelled in some way to cooperate in developing evidence which may be used against her, such as when a driver is asked to participate in a SFST. Id. As discussed 
above, the Wyatt court held that since performance on an SFST was neither communication nor testimony, the trial court did not err by refusing to suppress the officer's SFST observations. Id. at 
301-03, 687 P.2d at 550-51. 
In addition, in Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 U.S. 582, 
605 (1990), the United States Supreme Court rejected the contention that Miranda warnings are required prior to an inquiry as to whether a defendant understood SFST instructions, because the "focused inquires were necessarily 'attendant to' the police procedure held by the court to be legitimate." Accordingly, 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
asking Sagapolutele-Silva whether she understood the instructions 
to the SFST did not implicate her right to self-incrimination. Thus, we conclude that the District Court erred by suppressing Sagapolutele-Silva's response to whether she would participate in the SFST, whether she understood the instructions to the SFST, and the officer's observations of her performance on the SFST. Therefore, COLs 10, 16, 17, and 19 are wrong. 
However, due to Sagapolutele-Silva being in custody for 
Excessive Speeding, the medical rule-out questions, which were asked in relation to the OVUII investigation here, constituted interrogation. 
As other courts have observed, the failure to 
provide a Miranda warning when required for one crime will taint a subsequent interrogation even if the interrogation relates to a different crime for which Miranda warnings were not yet required, if a defendant is still in custody. See Mathis v. United States, 
391 U.S. 1, 2, 4-5 (1968) (noting that there is "nothing in the Miranda opinion which calls for a curtailment of the warnings to be given persons under interrogation by officers based on the reason why the person is in custody"); see also, e.g., People v. Bejasa, 140 Cal. Rptr. 3d 80, 91 (Cal. Ct. App. 2012); State v. Lawler, No. L-96-223, 1997 WL 77511, **1-2 (Ohio Ct. App. Feb. 21, 1997); State v. Lien, No. 32443-5-III, 2016 WL 4267689 
(Wash. Ct. App. Aug. 11, 2016). Here, Officer Ilae testified that Sagapolutele-Silva was not free to leave during his encounter with Sagapolutele-Silva in connection with his investigation into OVUII, and there was nothing to indicate Sagapolutele-Silva was free to go about her business before being 
16 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
questioned about OVUII. 
Sagapolutele-Silva was in custody for 
Excessive Speeding when the medical rule-out questions were 
posed. 
"[T]he touchstone in analyzing whether interrogation 
has taken place is whether the police officer should have known that his [or her] words and actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response from the defendant." Kazanas
, 
138 Hawai# i at 38, 375 P.3d at 1276 (citation and quotation marks 
omitted). Relying upon 
Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 
Kazanas reiterated that "interrogation consists of any express question - or, absent an express question, any words or conduct -that the officer knows or reasonably should know is likely to elicit an incriminating response." Id. (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). An incriminating response is any response, either inculpatory or exculpatory. Innis, 446 U.S. at 
301 n.5. In contrast, a physical inability to articulate words in a clear manner due to lack of muscular coordination of the tongue and mouth is not testimonial evidence for purposes of self-incrimination. Muniz, 496 U.S. at 590-91. 
We note that in Gibson v. Commonwealth, 706 S.E.2d 541, 
545 (Va. App. 2011), a defendant claimed that his response to a question whether he had any physical problems prior to administration of a SFST amounted to custodial interrogation for which he should have received Miranda warnings. The Gibson court held that the question fell under the necessarily-attendant-to-a-legitimate-police-procedure exception in Muniz, because the "physical problems" question was sufficiently analogous to asking 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
whether the defendant understood the instructions as to how each 
part of the SFST was to be performed, was meant to assure the validity of the test, and was not to elicit an incriminating response. Id. We decline to adopt and apply this reasoning to 
the medical rule-out questions at issue here. 
In this case, the District Court's FOFs 15 and 16 
identified the medical rule-out questions posed to Sagapolutele-Silva as follows: 
i. Do you have any physical defects or speech
impediments?
ii. Are you taking any medications?
iii. Are you under the care of a doctor or dentistfor anything?
iv. Are you under the care of an eye doctor?
v. Do you have an artificial or glass eye?
vi. Are you epileptic or diabetic?
vii. Are you blind in either eye?
viii. Do you wear corrective lenses? 
Based on, inter alia, our review of Muniz, we conclude 
that the medical rule-out questions posed to Sagapolutele-Silva 
were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response and, therefore, constituted interrogation. As held in Muniz, "[a]n accused's communication must itself, explicitly or implicitly, relate a factual assertion or disclose information" in order to be testimonial. Muniz, 496 U.S. at 594 (citation omitted). The 
privilege against self-incrimination is "to spare the accused from having to reveal, directly or indirectly, his knowledge of facts relating him to the offense or from having to share his thoughts and beliefs with the Government." Id. at 595. In 
Muniz, an officer asked a defendant if he knew the date of his sixth birthday to which the defendant responded: "No, I don't." Id. at 586. The Muniz court held the question constituted 
18 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interrogation because it required a testimonial response. 
Id. at
600. The Muniz court stated:  
In contrast, the sixth birthday question  in this case 
required a testimonial response. When Officer Hosterman 
asked Muniz if he knew the date of his sixth birthday andMuniz, for whatever reason, could not remember or calculatethat date, he was confronted with the trilemma. Byhypothesis, the inherently coercive environment created bythe custodial interrogation precluded the option of
remaining silent, see n. 10, supra. Muniz was left with the
choice of incriminating himself by admitting that he did not
then know the date of his sixth birthday, or answeringuntruthfully by reporting a date that he did not thenbelieve to be accurate (an incorrect guess would beincriminating as well as untruthful). The content of his truthful answer supported an inference that his mentalfaculties were impaired, because his assertion (he did notknow the date of his sixth birthday) was different from theassertion (he knew the date was (correct date)) that thetrier of fact might reasonably have expected a lucid personto provide. Hence, the incriminating inference of impairedmental faculties stemmed, not just from the fact that Munizslurred his response, but also from a testimonial aspect ofthat response.  
Id. at 598-99. 
Here, although Officer Ilae stated that the purpose of
the medical rule-out questions was to assist him in evaluating 
Sagapolutele-Silva's physical performance on the SFST, which is non-testimonial evidence, his subjective intent is not relevant.Kazanas, 138 Hawai# i at 40, 375 P.3d at 1278 (notwithstanding the
officer's subjective intent to conduct small talk, asking defendant how his night went in order to calm him down constituted interrogation because the question was likely to elicit an incriminating response after being arrested). 
The 
medical rule-out questions required a testimonial response that disclosed facts relating to the offense of OVUII and that was reasonably likely to assist the police in determining whether Sagapolutele-Silva was under the influence of an intoxicant by either admitting or denying there were other causes that could  
 
 
19 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
explain her actions. 
A negative response to all of the questions 
is testimonial, and combined with physical characteristics of 
impairment, supports an incriminating inference of impairment. Similarly, a positive response to whether a defendant is taking any medicines, in some instances, may constitute an incriminating statement. 
Where an individual is being subjected to custodial
interrogation, he may not be asked any questions without hisfirst being advised of his right to remain silent, thatanything he says can and will be used against him, that hehas the right to have his attorney present, and that if hecannot afford counsel, one will be appointed for him priorto any interrogation. Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436,
467-474 (1966); State v. Santiago, 53 Haw. 254, 492 P.2d 657(1971). "Custodial interrogation" means "questioninginitiated by law enforcement officers after a person hasbeen taken into custody or otherwise deprived of his freedomof action in any significant way." 384 U.S. at 444. 
State v. Kalai, 56 Haw. 366, 368, 537 P.2d 8, 11 (1975). 
Sagapolutele-Silva was in custody. She had not been 
given Miranda warnings. The medical rule-out questions 
constituted interrogation. Thus, we conclude that her responses to those questions should have been suppressed and the District Court did not err in so concluding in COLs 13 and 18. 
We next turn to whether the District Court erred by 
suppressing Sagapolutele-Silva's other statements to Officers Termeteet and Ilae. The FOFs and COLs contained in the Suppression Order do not specifically identify what statements Sagapolutele-Silva made "while still in the vehicle in response to [Officer] Termeteet's statement as to why she was being stopped," or "Defendant's statements to Officer Ilae after the SFST." However, it appears from the record that the only statement Sagapolutele-Silva made to Officer Termeteet in response to him informing her she was being stopped for speeding 
20  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was an acknowledgment she was speeding. After the SFST was 
complete and Officer Ilae informed Sagapolutele-Silva she was under arrest, Sagapolutele-Silva admitted to drinking a few beers. 
Generally, informing a defendant of the reason for 
being stopped or arrested does not constitute custodial interrogation likely to elicit an incriminating response. See, 
e.g., United States v. Benton, 996 F.2d 642, 643-44 (3d Cir. 1993); see also, e.g., State v. Ikaika, 67 Haw. 563, 565, 698 P.2d 281, 283 (1985) (spontaneous admissions, made in the absence of any police questioning, were admissible); cf. Kazanas
, 138 
Hawai# i at 38, 375 P.3d at 1276 (asking the defendant how his 
night was going, under the circumstances of his detainment, was reasonably likely to elicit his incriminating response and therefore constituted interrogation).
6/ Without more, simply 
informing a person of the reason for his or her arrest does not constitute interrogation. Officer Termeteet informed Sagapolutele-Silva that he stopped her for speeding as soon as he approached her vehicle, and Sagapolutele-Silva responded by spontaneously admitting she was speeding. Even under the circumstances of this case, where there was probable cause to 
6/ Interrogation does not include "words or actions on the part of
the police [that are] normally attendant to arrest and custody." Innis, 446
U.S. at 301. "[W]hen an officer informs [a suspect] of [the] circumstances"
of his arrest "or explain[s] . . . evidence against him," "this informationmay be considered normally attendant to arrest and custody." United States v.Moreno-Flores, 33 F.3d 1164, 1169 (9th Cir. 1994) (quoting United States v.Crisco, 725 F.2d 1228, 1232 (9th Cir. 1984)); see also id. ("[I]nterrogationis not so broad as to capture within Miranda's reach all declaratorystatements by police officers concerning the nature of the charges against thesuspect and the evidence relating to those charges." (alteration in original)(quoting United States v. Payne, 954 F.2d 199, 202 (4th Cir. 1992))." United 
States v. Berckmann, 2018 WL 1527824, *14 (D. Haw. Mar. 28, 2018) (Order). 
21 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  arrest Sagapolutele-Silva for Excessive Speeding, Officer 
Termeteet informing her that she was stopped for speeding would, at most, be comparable to informing Sagapolutele-Silva she was being arrested for Excessive Speeding. 
It did not constitute 
interrogation. Therefore, COL 20 is wrong. 
The District Court's suppression of Sagapolutele-
Silva's statement to Officer Ilae after administration of the SFST was based upon the fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine. As the District Court recognized, "[t]he fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine prohibits the use of evidence at trial which comes to light as a result of the exploitation of a previous illegal act of the police." State v. Fukusaku
, 85 Hawai# i 462, 475, 946 P.2d 
32, 45 (1997) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted; emphasis added). 
With respect to the basis for the District Court's 
ruling, the illegal act committed by the police in this case was asking the medical rule-out questions, after Sagapolutele-Silva was in custody, without first advising her of her 
Miranda rights, 
as discussed above. As the supreme court discussed in State v. Trinque
, 140 Hawai# i 269, 282, 400 P.3d 470, 483 (2017), the 
common thread in its jurisprudence regarding what constitutes exploitation that taints subsequently obtained evidence is that the "prior illegality contributed in the subsequent obtainment of evidence, statements, or confessions", i.e., that the State failed to show "that the discovery of the challenged evidence was not a benefit derived from the prior illegality." The State presented no evidence that Sagapolutele-Silva's statements to 
22 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Officer Ilae were attenuated by a lapse of time or intervening 
circumstances. See id. at 281, 400 P.3d at 482.7/ Although there 
is nothing in the record to suggest that the officer's misconduct was purposeful or flagrant, we cannot conclude that the District Court erred in concluding that Sagapolutele-Silva's spontaneous admission that she had been drinking, in response to being told she was under arrest for OVUII, shortly after the medical rule-out questions were posed, constitutes fruit of the poisonous tree. Therefore, we conclude that the District Court did not err in COL 18 and 21.
8/ 
V. CONCLUSIONS 
For these reasons, the June 7, 2019 Judgment and the 
August 26, 2019 Amended Judgment are affirmed in part and vacated in part. This case is remanded to the District Court for further proceedings. On the briefs: Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Alen M. Kaneshiro,
for Defendant-Appellee. /s/ Katherine G. LeonardPresiding Judge 
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
7/ Hawai #i appellate courts have repeatedly held that "whether a
confession is sufficiently attenuated from the illegality depends on the factsof a particular case, and factors relevant to the analysis include (1) thetemporal proximity between the official misconduct and the subsequentlyprocured statement or evidence, (2) the presence of intervening circumstances,and (3) the purpose and flagrancy of the official misconduct." 
Trinque
, 140
Hawaii at 281, 400 P.3d at 482 (citations omitted). 
8/ As set forth above, COL 21 refers to Sagapolutele-Silva's
"statements to Officer Ilae after the SFST" as being suppressed as fruit ofthe poisonous tree. To be clear, our conclusion that COL 21 is not wrong isbased on the fact that this time period is also the time period after themedical rule-out questions were posed and not based on any infirmity with theSFST itself. 
23 