NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000986
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
THOMAS A. RUSSO, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
WAILUKU DIVISION
 
(2DCW-12-0000873)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise and Ginoza, JJ., with Nakamura, C.J.,
concurring and dissenting separately.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellee Thomas A. Russo (Russo) with the wilful 
failure or refusal to comply with the lawful order of a police officer (Failure to Comply With Lawful Order), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291C-23 (2007).
1 The District 
Court of the Second Circuit, Wailuku Division (District Court)2 
dismissed this charge with prejudice on the ground that there was no probable cause to support it. The District Court ruled that HRS § 291C-23 only applies to the operation of vehicles upon a highway, and because the conduct underlying Russo's charge did not involve his operation of a vehicle on a highway, there was no probable cause for the charge. 
1
 HRS § 291C-23 provides:
 
It shall be a petty misdemeanor for any person to wilfully
fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any
police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control,
or regulate traffic.
 
2
 The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State appeals from the District Court's July 9,
 
2014 Judgment that dismissed the charge of Failure to Comply With
 
Lawful Order with prejudice.3 The State argues that the District
 
Court erred in dismissing this charge because the District Court
 misconstrued the application of HRS § 291C-21 to § 291C-23 in
 this case. The State also argues that, given the District
 Court's findings, there was probable cause for this charge.
 
As explained below, we conclude that the District Court
 
erred in its basis for dismissing this charge. Contrary to the
 District Court's interpretation, HRS § 291C-23 is not limited to
 the operation of vehicles on the highway. In addition, based on
 the District Court's findings of fact, there was probable cause
 for the offense of Failure to Comply With Lawful Order.
 
I.
 
On the date in question, Maui Police Department (MPD)
 
officers were involved in a traffic enforcement operation along
 Haleakala Highway. As part of this operation, officers standing
 on the side of the highway were directing vehicles with observed
 traffic law violations, such as those relating to lifted vehicles
 or window tints, to pull over. Russo was not directed by the
 officers to pull over, but did so on his own. Russo parked his
 car off the road, on a grassy shoulder of Haleakala Highway, got
 out of the car, and approached two MPD officers who were involved
 in the traffic enforcement operation. Russo's interaction with
 the officers was captured on a video recording he took with his
 cellular phone. The video recording was stipulated by the
 parties into evidence at the hearing on Russo's motion to
 dismiss.
 
II.
 
The District Court's dismissal of the Failure to Comply
 
With Lawful Order charge against Russo was based on its
 interpretation of HRS § 291C-21 (2007), which provides:
 
3
 The District Court also dismissed a disorderly conduct charge
against Russo arising out of the same incident for lack of probable cause.
The State does not challenge the District Court's dismissal of the disorderly
conduct charge on appeal, and the State concedes that the District Court "was
right" in dismissing that charge. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[§ 291C-21]  Provisions of Parts III to XIV refer
 
to vehicles upon the highways; exception. The provisions of
parts III to XIV relating to the operation of vehicles refer
exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon highways
except, where a different place is specifically referred to
in a given section.
 
The District Court interpreted HRS § 291C-21 to mean that Parts
 
III to XIV of HRS Chapter 291C only apply to the operation of
 vehicles upon highways, except where a different place is
 specifically referred to in the particular section. Based on
 this reading of HRS § 291C-21, the District Court concluded that
 because HRS § 291C-23 (which defines the Failure to Comply With
 Lawful Order offense) is in HRS Chapter 291C, Part III, HRS
 § 291C-23 only applied where the person who failed or refused to
 comply with a lawful order of a police officer was operating a
 vehicle upon a highway.
 
We conclude that the District Court's interpretation of 
HRS § 291C-21 was wrong. As the State points out, HRS
 Chapter 291C Parts III to XIV include provisions imposing
 restrictions on pedestrians, such as numerous provisions in Part
 VII (Pedestrians' Rights and Duties) and including HRS § 291C­71(a) which requires pedestrians to obey traffic control devices. 
Reading HRS § 291C-21, as the District Court did, to mean that
 the provisions in Parts III to XIV only apply to persons involved
 in the operation of vehicles upon highways would preclude
 enforcement of provisions imposing restrictions on pedestrians. 
Viewed in context and in light of the plain meaning of its terms,
 we conclude that HRS § 291C-21 means that where the provisions of
 HRS Chapter 291C Parts III to XIV relate to the operation of
 vehicles, only the operation of vehicles upon highways is covered
 unless a different place is specifically referred to in the
 provision.
4
 
4
 We note that under HRS § 291C-1, the term "highway" is defined
broadly to mean
 
the entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained and those private streets, as defined in
section 46-16, over which the application of this chapter
has been extended by ordinance, when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular
travel.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In the context of this case, HRS § 291C-23 applies to
 
Russo as a pedestrian and prohibits the wilful failure or refusal
 
to "comply with any lawful order or direction of any police
 officer invested by law with authority to direct, control, or
 regulate traffic." Therefore, the District Court erred in
 construing HRS § 291C-21 to limit HRS § 291C-23 to persons
 involved in operating a vehicle on a highway. 
Here, the officers were engaged in directing,
 
controlling, or regulating traffic when they interacted with
 Russo. Accordingly, the District Court erred in dismissing the
 charge on the basis that HRS § 291C-23 did not apply because
 Russo was not operating his vehicle on a highway when he
 interacted with the officers.
 
III.
 
The State also argues that there was probable cause for
 
the offense of Failure to Comply With Lawful Order. The District
 Court found that Russo (1) was informed by the officers involved
 in traffic enforcement that he was in their area of operations
 and in danger of being struck by a vehicle; (2) was told multiple
 times to step back out of the area of operations by two officers;
 and (3) did not comply with the officers' instructions. Based on
 these findings, we conclude that there was probable cause to
 support the charge of Failure to Comply With Lawful Order.
 
IV.
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the District Court of
 
the Second Circuit, Wailuku Divsion's July 9, 2014 order of
 dismissal and remand this case for further proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 31, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Artemio C. Baxa,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Benjamin E. Lowenthal and

Samuel G. MacRoberts,
for Defendant-Appellee.
 
4
 