FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
#I 
---o0o---
E. KALANI FLORES, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
SUSAN BALLARD in her capacity as Chief of Police
of the City and County of Honolulu;
PAUL FERREIRA in his capacity as the Chief of Police
o
f the County of Hawaii Police Department;
TIVOLI FAAUMU in his capacity as Chief of Police
of Maui County, Defendants-Appellees,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-100, JANE DOES 1-100, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-100,
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-100, DOE ENTITIES 1-100,
and RICHARD ROES 1-100, MARY ROES 1-100,
ROE CORPORATIONS 1-100, ROE PARTNERSHIPS 1-100,
ROE ENTITIES 1-100, Defendants 
NO. CAAP-19-0000841 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3CC191000190) 
JANUARY 27, 2021 
GINOZA, CHIEF JUDGE, HIRAOKA AND NAKASONE, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY HIRAOKA, J. 
With one exception, each county in 
Hawai# i has its own 
police department.  This case presents the issue of whether the 
police chief of one county can utilize police officers from 1
1 The County of Kalawao, commonly known as the Kalaupapa Settlement
on the island of Moloka #i, is under the jurisdiction and control of the Hawai #i  
Department of Health. Hawaii Revised Statutes § 326-34. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
another county to enforce the law in the chief's county. 
We 
hold: (1) the temporary assignment of police officers from one 
county to another is authorized by Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 78-27 (2012); and (2) HRS Chapter 52D and the Hawai# i County 
Charter authorize the chief of the Hawai# i
 County Police Depart-
ment (HCPD) to appoint and supervise police officers from other counties temporarily assigned to Hawai
#i County. 
BACKGROUND 
This case arises from the controversy surrounding the 
construction of the Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT
) at the summit of 
Mauna Kea, located on Hawai# i Island. Mauna Kea (lit., white 
mountain) is the highest mountain in the state, rising 13,796 
feet above sea level. Mary Kawena Pukui, Samuel H. Elbert & Esther T.
 Mo#okini, Place Names of Hawai# i 148-49 (Univ. of Haw. 
Press 1976). Almost all of the land above the 12,000-foot elevation comprises the Mauna Kea Science Reserve, which consists of a 10,763-acre cultural and natural preserve and a 525-acre Astronomy Precinct. In re Conservation Dist. Use Application 
(CDUA) HA-3568, 143 Hawai# i 379, 385, 431 P.3d 752, 758 (2018), 
as amended (Nov. 5, 2018 & Nov. 30, 2018), recon. granted in part, denied in part, 143 Hawai# i 327, 430 P.3d 425 (Table) 
(2018), and recon. denied sub nom. In re Contested Case Hearing re Conservation Dist. Use Application (CDUA) HA-3568, 143 Hawai# i 
328, 430 P.3d 426 (Table) (2018) (In re TMT CDUA). 
The Hawai# i Board of Land and Natural Resources (BLNR) 
leased the Mauna Kea Science Reserve to the University of 
Hawai# i 
in 1968. Flores v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 143 Hawai# i 114, 
117, 424 P.3d 469, 472 (2018) (Flores I
). The lease allows the 
University to use the land "as a scientific complex, including . . . an observatory, and as a scientific reserve being more specifically a buffer zone to prevent the intrusion of activities inimical to said scientific complex." Id. As of mid–2010, 
13 astronomical facilities were located on Mauna Kea. Mauna Kea 
Anaina Hou v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 136 Hawai# i 376, 381, 363 
P.3d 224, 229 (2015). 
According to the University, observatories 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
are attracted to Mauna Kea "principally because of the superb 
viewing conditions that its high-altitude/mid-oceanic location provides[.]" Id. 
In 2014 the University asked for BLNR's consent to 
sublease a portion of the Mauna Kea Science Reserve to TMT International Observatory LLC for construction of the TMT. Flores I
, 143 Hawai# i at 116, 424 P.3d at 471. BLNR consented to 
the sublease on April 9, 2015. Id. at 118, 424 P.3d at 473. 
BLNR's consent was challenged. The Hawai# i Supreme Court 
validated the consent in Flores I. 
In September 2017, BLNR issued a conservation district 
use permit for the TMT. In re TMT CDUA, 143 Hawai# i at 384, 431 
P.3d at 757. 
The permit was challenged. In November 2018, the 
supreme court affirmed BLNR's issuance of the permit. Id. at 
409, 431 P.3d at 782. 
Thus, construction of the TMT — which had 
been delayed for years by legal challenges to the sublease and to the conservation district use permit – was allowed to proceed. 
At some point before July 16, 2019, a great number of 
people assembled at Pu# u Huluhulu, near the road leading to the 
Mauna Kea summit. They gathered to protest construction of the TMT by, among other things, blocking access to construction equipment and vehicles. 
The large scale of the protest strained 
HCPD's resources. The chief of HCPD, Defendant-Appellee Paul Ferreira (Chief Ferreira), asked Defendants-Appellees Susan 
Ballard (Chief of the Honolulu Police Department (HPD)) (Chief 
Ballard) and Tivoli Faaumu (Chief of the Maui County Police 
Department (MPD)) (Chief Faaumu) to support HCPD operations 
relating to the TMT construction project. 
On Tuesday, July 16, 2019, HPD and MPD officers arrived 
on Hawai# i Island to provide the requested support. The next day 
Plaintiff-Appellant E. Kalani Flores (F 
lores) filed a "Complaint 
for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief" with the Circuit Court of 
the Third Circuit, challenging the presence and legal authority of non-Hawai# i-County law enforcement personnel on Hawai# i Island. 
Flores's complaint named Chief Ballard, Chief Faaumu, and Chief Ferreira (collectively, the Chiefs of Police) as defendants. 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
Complaint Allegations 
Flores's complaint made the following allegations: 
Flores is a Native Hawaiian.2 He lives on Hawai# i Island. He 
holds Mauna Kea — an important site for Native Hawaiians to 
conduct traditional and customary cultural practices — to be sacred.
3 He has performed traditional Native Hawaiian ceremonies 
on Mauna Kea for a number of years. 
On July 13, 2019, Flores and others assembled at Pu# u 
Huluhulu to express reverence for Mauna Kea and opposition to construction of the TMT. Flores claims that the government prevented him and other members of the public from accessing Mauna Kea, while permitting telescope employees to travel to the summit. As described by Flores's complaint, there "was a heated day of standoffs and negotiations between authorities and opponents of the Thirty Meter Telescope." 
Although the day ended 
on "relatively peaceful terms," the news media reported on a statement issued by HPD: 
HPD officers will be going to Hawaii Island at the request
of the Hawaii Police Department. They will assist Hawaiipolice officers in keeping roadways clear for the movementof construction equipment and vehicles. 
Flores's complaint alleged that HPD and MPD officers 
went to Hawai# i Island to exercise police power in violation of 
HRS § 52D-5: 
43. Defendants have violated HRS § 52D-5. 
44. Based upon the above, the Honolulu Police
Officers assisting the Hawaii County Police as described 
2 The term "Native Hawaiian" refers to one "whose ancestors were 
natives of the Hawaiian Islands prior to 1778, without regard to bloodquantum[.]" In re TMT CDUA, 143 Hawai #i at 384 n.1, 431 P.3d at 757 n.1
(citations omitted). 
3 In Mauna Kea Anaina Hou, the Hawai #i Supreme Court effectively
recognized that the interest of Native Hawaiians in pursing traditional andcustomary cultural practices on Mauna Kea constitutes a property interest forpurposes of triggering constitutional due process protections. Flores I, 143
Hawai #i at 126, 424 P.3d at 481. 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
above have no lawful authority as police officers on Hawai #i 
Island. The same is true of Maui County Police officers. 
45. Thus, Defendants, and all those acting under the
color of Defendants' authority, lack the same authority that
Hawaii County Police officers have on Hawaii [sic] Islandto: 
a. Make arrests 
b. Investigate; and c. Conduct traffic control 
and any other "police" related business. 
. . . . 
49. In addition to the apparent police activity in
contradiction of HRS §54D-5 [sic] as noted above, there is
potential that the "off island" county police officers [sic]police presence will create confusion and unrest as ordinarycitizens will question said officers' authority. 
Flores sought a judgment declaring that the Chiefs of Police 
failed to comply with HRS § 52D-5, a temporary restraining order, and preliminary and permanent injunctions prohibiting the Chiefs of Police from violating the statute. 
Motion to Dismiss and Joinders 
Chief Ballard filed a motion to dismiss Flores's 
complaint (MTD) under Rule 12(b)(6) of the Hawai# i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (
HRCP).4 She argued: (1) there is no private right of 
action for alleged violation of HRS § 52D-5; and (2) Flores's 
claim was moot because HPD officers were no longer on Hawai# i 
Island for any purpose relating to the TMT. 
Chief Faaumu joined in Chief Ballard's MTD. He agreed 
with the no-private-right-of-action argument, and that Flores's claim was moot because MPD officers were no longer on Hawai# i 
Island for any purpose relating to the TMT. 
4 HRCP Rule 12 provides, in relevant part: 
(b) How presented.  . . . [T]he following defenses may
at the option of the pleader be made by motion: . . .
(6) failure to state a claim upon which relief can begranted[.] 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Chief Ferreira also filed a joinder. He agreed with 
the no-private-right-of-action argument, but took no position on 
the mootness argument because it did not apply to him as Chief of HCPD. 
Flores's Opposition 
Flores filed a memorandum in opposition to Chief 
Ballard's MTD. He argued: (1) there was an implicit or implied 
private right of action for violation of HRS § 52D-5; and (2) exceptions to the mootness doctrine applied. Attached to the memorandum were declarations by Flores and by Flores's counsel, and eight exhibits. 
Chief Ballard's Reply 
Chief Ballard filed a reply memorandum. She objected 
to the declarations and exhibits submitted by Flores. She also 
made the new argument that HRS § 52D-5 was not triggered at all, because HRS § 78-27 authorized the actions taken by HPD. 
Flores's Supplemental Filing 
Flores filed an ex parte motion for leave to file a 
supplemental declaration and three additional exhibits in 
opposition to Chief Ballard's MTD, copies of which were appended to the ex parte motion. The circuit court granted Flores's ex parte motion by order entered on September 19, 2019. 
Hearing, Order, and Judgment 
Chief Ballard's MTD and the other chiefs' joinders were 
heard on September 20, 2019.
5 Flores responded to the argument 
about HRS § 78-27 raised in Chief Ballard's reply memorandum. 
After hearing argument, the circuit court ruled: 
So the Court concludes that there is no private right
of action pursuant to HRS Section 52D-5. Therefore, the
motion to dismiss is granted. 
5 The Honorable Henry T. Nakamoto presided. 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The circuit court did not rule on Chief Ballard's objections to 
Flores's original declarations and exhibits. 
None of the Chiefs 
of Police objected to the declaration and exhibits attached to Flores's ex parte motion to supplement. 
On November 12, 2019, the circuit court entered its 
"Order Granting Defendant Susan Ballard's Motion to Dismiss" (Order Granting MTD).  The Order Granting MTD stated, in relevant 
part: 
4. The Court concludes, accordingly, that there is
no private right of action pursuant to Haw. Rev. Stat.
§ 52D-5. 
The Order Granting MTD did not contain a ruling on Chief 
Ballard's evidentiary objections or otherwise exclude the declarations or exhibits presented by Flores. 
Also on November 12, 2019, the circuit court entered a 
Judgment in favor of the Chiefs of Police and against Flores. 
Flores filed this appeal. We affirm, but for reasons other than 
those stated by the circuit court. 
STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
Motion to Dismiss Converted 
to Motion for Summary Judgment 
A circuit court's order granting an HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) 
motion to dismiss is reviewed de novo, using the same standard 
applied by the circuit court: 
[A] complaint should not be dismissed for failure to
state a claim unless it appears beyond doubt that theplaintiff can prove no set of facts in support of[their] claim that would entitle [them] to relief.The appellate court must therefore view a plaintiff'scomplaint in a light most favorable to [them] in orderto determine whether the allegations contained thereincould warrant relief under any alternative theory.For this reason, in reviewing a circuit court's orderdismissing a complaint the appellate court's consider-ation is strictly limited to the allegations of thecomplaint, and the appellate court must deem thoseallegations to be true. 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 143 Hawai# i 249, 256-57, 428 
P.3d 761, 768-69 (2018) (cleaned up)6. 
In this case, however, Flores opposed Chief Ballard's 
MTD by presenting matters outside the pleadings. Under such 
circumstances HRCP Rule 12(b) provides, in relevant part: 
If, on a motion asserting the defense numbered (6) to
dismiss for failure of the pleading to state a claim uponwhich relief can be granted, matters outside the pleadingare presented to and not excluded by the court, the motionshall be treated as one for summary judgment and disposed ofas provided in Rule 56, and all parties shall be givenreasonable opportunity to present all material madepertinent to such a motion by Rule 56. 
The circuit court did not exclude the declarations or exhibits 
presented by Flores. Accordingly, we apply the standard of review applicable to a motion for summary judgment under HRCP Rule 56. 
The grant or denial of summary judgment is reviewed de 
novo. Nozawa v. Operating Engineers Local Union No. 3, 142 
Hawai# i 331, 338, 418 P.3d 1187, 1194 (2018). Summary judgment 
is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions, answers to inter-rogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. Id. at 342, 418 P.3d at 1198. A fact is material 
if proof of that fact would have the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. Id. 
Chief Ballard did not submit declarations or exhibits 
with her reply memorandum, nor did she file her own motion for summary judgment. When a plaintiff converts a defendant's HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss into a motion for summary judgment by presenting matters outside the pleadings that are not 
6 The "cleaned up" parenthetical tells readers that extraneous
material (e.g., internal brackets, ellipses, quotation marks, citations, foot-
note reference numbers, and changes in capitalization) was removed from aquotation for readability, and that none of it mattered for understanding thequotation or evaluating its weight. See Jack Metzler, Cleaning Up Quotations,
18 J. App. Prac. & Process 143, 147 (2017). 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
excluded by the circuit court — without filing a counter-motion 
for summary judgment — and the moving defendant submits no matters outside the pleadings in response, the court views the facts alleged in the complaint 
and the evidence presented by the 
plaintiff (and the inferences to be drawn therefrom) in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. Andrade v. County of Hawai# i, 
145 Hawai# i 265, 270, 451 P.3d 1, 6 (App. 2019). "The court need 
not, however, accept conclusory allegations concerning the legal effect of the facts the party has alleged or presented." Id. at 
270 n.6, 451 P.3d at 6 n.6 (citation omitted). "When an asser-tion in an affidavit expresses an inference without setting forth the underlying facts on which the conclusion is based or states a conclusion that is not reasonably drawn from the underlying facts, the assertion is considered conclusory and cannot be utilized in support of or against a motion for summary judgment." Id. (cleaned up) (quoting Nozawa, 142 Hawai# i at 339, 418 P.3d at 
1195). 
If the court concludes (based on the factual 
allegations in the complaint and the evidence presented by the plaintiff) that the moving defendant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, the court should grant summary judgment in favor of the defendant; if not, the court should deny the defendant's motion. Andrade, 145 Hawai# i at 270-71, 451 P.3d at 6-7. Where 
the plaintiff does not file their own motion for summary judgment, the defendant's failure to controvert the evidence presented by the plaintiff in opposition to an HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss does not constitute a concession or admission. Id. at 271 n.8, 451 P.3d at 7 n.8. 
Statutory Interpretation 
"Interpretation of a statute is a question of law which 
we review de novo." Reyes-Toledo, 143 Hawai# i at 257, 428 P.3d 
at 769 (citations omitted). 
The fundamental starting point of statutory inter-
pretation is the language of the statute itself, and where
the statutory language is unambiguous, our duty is to giveeffect to its plain and obvious meaning. To effectuate a 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statute's plain language, its words must be taken in their
ordinary and familiar signification, and regard is to be hadto their general and popular use. In conducting a plainmeaning analysis, [a] court may resort to legal or otherwell accepted dictionaries as one way to determine theordinary meaning of certain terms not statutorily defined. 
It is also a canon of construction that statutes that 
are in pari materia may be construed together. Thus, lawsin pari materia, or upon the same subject matter, shall beconstrued with reference to each other. What is clear in one statute may be called upon in aid to explain what isdoubtful in another. 
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Omiya, 142 Hawai# i 439, 449–50, 420 
P.3d 370, 380–81 (2018) (cleaned up). 
DISCUSSION 
Flores's complaint specifically alleged that the Chiefs 
of Police violated HRS § 52D-5. The Order Granting MTD was 
specifically based upon the circuit court's conclusion "that there is no private right of action pursuant to Haw. Rev. Stat. § 52D-5." On appeal Flores asserts a number of legal theories under which a private right of action for violation of HRS § 52D-5 could be recognized. As we explain below, HRS § 52D-5 is an enabling statute that was never properly implicated based upon the evidence in the record. Because the circuit court correctly disposed of the case, however, the result will not be disturbed on the ground that the circuit court gave the wrong reason for its ruling. See, e.g., Tauese v. State, Dep't of Labor & Indus. 
Relations, 113 Hawai# i 1, 15 n.6, 147 P.3d 785, 799 n.6 (2006) 
(citing cases). 
In our de novo review we "may affirm a grant of 
summary judgment on any ground appearing in the record, even if the circuit court did not rely on it." Id. (citations omitted). 
But we must first address Chief Ballard's and Chief 
Faaumu's arguments that Flores's claims are moot because HPD and MPD officers are no longer present on Hawai# i Island to exercise 
police power. 
Although it did not form the basis for the circuit 
court's decision and (as Flores points out) the Chiefs of Police do not argue mootness in their joint answering brief, "mootness is an issue of subject matter jurisdiction." Hamilton ex rel. 
Lethem v. Lethem, 119 Hawai# i 1, 4, 193 P.3d 839, 842 (2008). 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Every court must determine "as a threshold matter whether it has
jurisdiction to decide the issue presented." Pele Def. Fund v. Puna Geothermal Venture, 77 Hawai# i 64, 67, 881 P.2d 1210, 1213 
(1994) (citation omitted).  
Flores's claims are moot, but two
exceptions to the mootness doctrine apply. 
The mootness doctrine is said to encompass the circumstancesthat destroy the justiciability of a suit previously suit-able for determination. Put another way, the suit mustremain alive throughout the course of litigation to themoment of final appellate disposition. Its chief purpose isto assure that the adversary system, once set in operation,remains properly fueled. The doctrine seems appropriatewhere events subsequent to the judgment of the trial courthave so affected the relations between the parties that thetwo conditions for justiciability relevant on appeal —adverse interest and effective remedy — have beencompromised. 
Hamilton, 119 Hawai# i at 5, 193 P.3d at 843 (citations omitted). 
The parties do not dispute that the HPD and MPD officers who had
been supporting HCPD's TMT protest response have left Hawai# i 
Island. 
That makes Flores's appeal moot; the Chiefs of Police 
are no longer doing anything that a court could enjoin. But there are exceptions to the mootness doctrine — the "capable of repetition, yet evading review" exception and the "public interest" exception — that apply here.  See id. 
7 
The phrase, "capable of repetition, yet evading review,"
means that "a court will not dismiss a case on the groundsof mootness where a challenged governmental action wouldevade full review because the passage of time would preventany single plaintiff from remaining subject to therestriction complained of for the period necessary tocomplete the lawsuit." 
Id. (citation omitted). The "capable of repetition, yet evading 
review" exception applies because Chief Ballard and Chief Faaumu both declined to give the "assurance" requested by Flores's counsel that HPD or MPD would not return to Hawai# i Island in the 
future. Although TMT construction has paused because of the 
7 A third exception, the "collateral consequences" exception, was
adopted by the supreme court in Hamilton but is not applicable here. See 
generally 119 Hawai #i at 7-10, 193 P.3d at 846-48. 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
COVID-19 pandemic and the TMT protesters have withdrawn from Pu# u 
Huluhulu, there is no indication in the record that the situation 
could or would not be repeated once construction resumes. 
When analyzing the public interest exception, [a] court
looks to (1) the public or private nature of the questionpresented, (2) the desirability of an authoritative deter-mination for future guidance of public officers, and (3) thelikelihood of future recurrence of the question. 
Id. at 6-7, 193 P.3d at 844-45 (cleaned up). All the elements of 
the "public interest" exception are present in this case. We have jurisdiction to decide this appeal. 
HRS § 52D-5 is not implicated by the
facts alleged in Flores's complaintor established by Flores's evidence. 
HRS § 52D-5 (2012) provides: 
The chief of police of each county and any duly authorized
subordinates shall have and may exercise all powers,privileges, and authority necessary to enforce the laws ofthe State, in a county other than the county in and forwhich the chief has been appointed, if: 
(1) The exercise of such power, privilege, andauthority is required in the pursuit of anyinvestigation commenced within the county in andfor which the chief has been appointed; and 
(2) The concurrence of the chief of police of thecounty in which the power, privilege, andauthority sought to be exercised is obtained. 
(Underscoring added.) The statute enables a police chief to ask 
a police chief in another county to allow the requesting chief to exercise police authority in the other chief's county to pursue an investigation originating in the requesting chief's county. 
We need not decide whether there is a private right of 
action for an alleged violation of HRS § 52D-5 because the statute was not violated. As Flores correctly points out, this case does not involve an "investigation commenced within the county in and for which" Chief Ballard or Chief Faaumu were appointed. HRS § 52D-5 does not authorize Chief Ballard or Chief Faaumu, even with the concurrence of Chief Ferreira, to send HPD or MPD officers to Hawai# i Island to exercise police power in 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
response to the TMT protest on Hawai# i Island. But that does not 
mean any of the Chiefs of Police violated HRS § 52D-5. 
The police action of which Flores complained did not 
arise because Chief Ballard or Chief Faaumu asked Chief Ferreira 
for permission to send officers to Hawai# i Island to respond to 
TMT protesters. 
It was Chief Ferreira who asked the other chiefs 
to send officers to Hawai# i Island to assist HCPD in handling 
matters on Hawai# i Island that strained HCPD's resources. 
Neither Chief Ballard nor Chief Faaumu purported to exercise police authority in the County of Hawai# i "in the pursuit of any 
investigation commenced within" the City and County of Honolulu or the County of Maui. Viewing the allegations and facts in the light most favorable to Flores, HRS § 52D-5 was never implicated, much less violated. It was thus appropriate for the circuit court to dismiss Flores's complaint based upon the alleged violation of HRS § 52D-5 by the Chiefs of Police, whether or not a private right of action for violation of the statute exists. 
HRS § 78-27 authorizes temporary assignment
of police officers from one county to another. 
The Chiefs of Police contend that their respective 
actions were taken pursuant to materially identical inter-
departmental assignment agreements (
Agreements), one signed by 
Chief Ferreira and Chief Ballard and the other by Chief Ferreira and Chief Faaumu. Flores presented both Agreements in opposition to Chief Ballard's MTD. The Agreements were not excluded by the circuit court. The Agreements are properly before us on this appeal. 
The Agreements contained the following recitals: 
WHEREAS, HCPD desires the services of [HPD/MPD]
personnel and [HPD/MPD] has agreed to the temporary
assignment of [HPD/MPD] personnel and [sic] to support andmanage police operations in conjunction with the ThirtyMeter Telescope Project ("TMT Project") and any otherassignment as deemed necessary by the HCPD Chief of Policeor his designee with the approval of [HPD/MPD]; and 
WHEREAS, this employment is a temporary inter-
departmental assignment and this employment is made underthe provisions of Hawaii Revised Statutes [§] 78-27(a-d). 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 78-27 (2012) provides: 
Temporary inter- and intra-governmental assignments and
exchanges . (a) With the approval of the respective
employer, a governmental unit of this State may participatein any program of temporary inter- or intra-governmentalassignments or exchanges of employees as a sending orreceiving agency. "Agency" means any local, national, orforeign governmental agency or private agency withgovernment sponsored programs or projects. 
(b) As a sending agency, a governmental unit of this
State may consider its employee on a temporary assignment orexchange as being on detail to a regular work assignment oron leave of absence without pay from the employee'sposition. The employee on temporary assignment or exchangeshall be entitled to the same rights and benefits as anyother employee of the sending agency. 
(c) As a receiving agency, a governmental unit of
this State shall not consider the employee on a temporaryassignment or exchange who is detailed from the sendingagency as its employee, except for the purpose of disabilityor death resulting from personal injury arising out of andin the course of the temporary assignment or exchange. The employee on detail may not receive a salary from thereceiving agency, but the receiving agency may pay for orreimburse the sending agency for the costs, or any portionof the costs, of salaries, benefits, and travel andtransportation expenses if it will benefit from theassignment or exchange. 
(d) An agreement consistent with this section and
policies of the employer shall be made between the sendingand receiving agencies on matters relating to the assignmentor exchange, including but not limited to supervision ofduties, costs of salary and benefits, and travel andtransportation expenses; provided that the agreement shallnot diminish any rights or benefits to which an employee ofa governmental unit of this State is entitled under thissection. 
(e) As a receiving agency, a governmental unit of
this State may give the employee of the sending agency on atemporary assignment or exchange an exempt appointment andgrant the employee rights and benefits as other exemptappointees of the receiving agency if it will benefit fromthe assignment or exchange. 
(Underscoring added.) 
Flores acknowledges that Act 253 of the 2000 legis-
lative session, which resulted in the enactment of HRS § 78-27,
mentions "police" three times.  HRS § 78-27 thus contemplates 
the police department of one county, as a "sending agency," 8 
8 Section 74 refers to workers compensation benefits for police
officers. Section 96 refers to a collective bargaining unit for police
officers. Section 100 refers to resolution of labor grievances involving thepolice officers' collective bargaining unit. 2000 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 253. 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
temporarily assigning officers to the police department of 
another county, as the "receiving agency"; the statute protects the temporarily assigned police officers' civil service, col-lective bargaining, workers' compensation, and other employment rights and benefits during the temporary assignment. 
The Agreements contained the following provisions 
consistent with HRS § 78-27(d): 
3. It is the understanding of the parties that the
State Attorney General's Office has agreed to pay for and/or
reimburse the Sending Agency for the costs, any portion ofthe costs, overtime, benefits, and travel and transportationexpenses on behalf of the Receiving Agency. However, HCPDshall ultimately be responsible for said costs and expensesshould the State Attorney General's Office fail to pay forand/or reimburse the Sending Agency for any expendituresrelated to the TMT Project and any other assignment asdeemed necessary by the HCPD Chief of Police or his designeewith the approval of [HPD/MPD]. Such expenses may be paidfor or reimbursed to the [HPD/MPD]. 
4. The [HPD/MPD] personnel are to carry out and
observe all lawful instructions and orders issued by theappointing authority or designee relative to employment. 
5. The [HPD/MPD] personnel shall perform all of the
work under the supervision of an immediate supervisor in theSending Agency or any other person in the Receiving Agencywho has the authority to supervise the activities. 
. . . . 
9. This employment will be subject to all laws,
ordinances, and rules and regulations having the effect oflaw governing employment of public employees; and 
10. Any and all collective bargaining agreements
pertinent to [HPD/MPD] personnel's regular positions withthe [HPD/MPD] shall apply, including but not limited tosalary. 
The Chiefs of Police are correct that the temporary assignment of 
HPD and MPD officers to Hawai# i Island to support HCPD's TMT-
related operations was authorized by HRS § 78-27. But HRS § 78-27 itself does not authorize a police officer sworn in one county to exercise police power in another county. For that proposition we must look to other applicable law. 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Chief Ferreira was authorized to delegate
police power to HPD and MPD officers whowere temporarily assigned to HCPD. 
Flores agrees that HRS Chapter 78 "concerns employee 
benefits, rights, [and] exchange of public employees" and 
acknowledges that police officers are mentioned in the law, but explains that his "lawsuit was not about mutual aid agreements." He maintains that "[t]he gravamen of [his] lawsuit is that the ability to detain and/or arrest someone is a distinct power and authorization conferred upon an individual by the government." He argues — correctly — that nothing in HRS Chapter 78 or its legislative history specifies that "the law was created to allow police officers of the respective counties to exercise their police powers beyond their home counties." 
This requires us to 
examine whether Chief Ferreira had the authority to grant police powers to HPD and MPD officers temporarily assigned to HCPD. 
The Agreements each include a "Delegation of Police 
Authority" signed by Chief Ferreira (Delegations).  They state: 
Under the authority of the Chief of Police, of Hawai #i 
County Police Department, the following officers of the
[HPD/MPD] (please see attached list), are granted fullpolice officer power, privilege and authority, under HRS [§]52D-5. 
The purpose of this delegation of authority, while
assigned to Hawai #i county will be to support and manage
police operations in conjunction with the Thirty MeterTelescope project and any other assignment as deemednecessary by the Hawai #i County Police Chief or his
designee. This delegation of Police authority shall beeffective from July 16, 2019 until the end of policeoperations for this project as deemed necessary by theHawai #i County Chief of Police. 
The citation to HRS § 52D-5 was inapt. As discussed above, HRS 
§ 52D-5 does not apply to the circumstances described by the Delegations. But that does not mean Chief Ferreira's delegation of police powers within Hawai# i County to HPD and MPD officers 
was not authorized. 
Chief Ferreira is the Chief of HCPD. His authority as 
chief of police is conferred by state statute and county charter. HRS § 52D-3 (2012) provides: 
16 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The chief of police shall have the powers and duties as
prescribed by law, the respective county charter, and asprovided by this chapter. 
Chapter 2 of the Hawai# i County Charter (2018)  provides, in
relevant part: 9 
Section 7-2.1. Organization. 
There shall be a police department consisting of a
police commission, a chief of police, a deputy chief ofpolice, and the necessary staff. 
. . . . 
Section 7-2.4. 
Powers, Duties, and Functions of the Chief
of Police. 
The chief of police shall be the administrative head
of the police department and shall: 
(a) Be responsible for the preservation of thepublic peace, prevention of crime, detection andarrest of offenders against the law, protectionof the rights of persons and property, andenforcement and prevention of violations of alllaws of the state and ordinances of the countyand all regulations made in accordancetherewith. 
(b) Train, equip, maintain, and supervise the forceof police officers and employees. 
(c) Promulgate rules and regulations for theorganization and administration of the policeforce. 
(d) Make periodic reports to the police commissionabout the activities of the police departmentand about actions taken on cases investigated bythe police commission. 
(e) Have such other powers, duties, and functions asmay be required by the police commission orprovided by law. 
(Underscoring added.) HRS § 52D-6 (2012) provides: 
The chief of police may appoint officers and otheremployees under such rules and at such salaries as areauthorized by law. Probationary appointment,suspension, and dismissal of officers and employees ofthe police department shall be as authorized by law. 
9 Although the 2020 Hawai #i County Charter is now in effect, there
were no substantive amendments to the sections discussed in this opinion. See 
Charter of the County of Hawai #i §§ 7-2.1, 7-2.4 (2020),
https://records.hawaiicounty.gov/weblink/DocView.aspx?dbid=1&id=109506&cr=1. 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Underscoring added.) 
HRS § 78-27 is a law that authorizes Chief Ferreira to 
temporarily receive police officers from another county's police 
department to support HCPD operations on Hawai# i Island. HRS 
§ 78-27 also authorizes Chief Ballard and Chief Faaumu to tempo-rarily assign police officers from their respective departments to another county's police department. The Hawai# i County 
Charter and HRS Chapter 52D authorize Chief Ferreira to appoint and supervise police officers in the County of 
Hawai# i, including 
those temporarily assigned to Hawai# i Island from Honolulu and 
Maui counties. Applying the plain language of HRS §§ 52D-3, 52D-6, and 78-27, and Chapter 2 of the Hawai# i County Charter, in 
pari materia, we hold that execution and performance of the Agreements and the Delegations by the Chiefs of Police in this case was authorized by law. 
CONCLUSION 
The presence of HPD and MPD police officers on Hawai# i 
Island to support HCPD's TMT-related operations, at the request and under the supervision of the Chief of the HCPD, was a valid exercise of police power under the 
Hawai# i County Charter, HRS 
Chapter 52, and HRS § 78-27. The Order Granting Defendant Susan Ballard's Motion to Dismiss and the Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit on November 12, 2019, are affirmed. 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate JudgeOn the briefs: 
Peter S.R. Olson, for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Ernest H. Nomura, 
Robert M. Kohn, Nicolette Winter,Deputies Corporation Counsel,for Defendant-AppelleeSusan Ballard. 
18 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Peter A. Hanano,
Deputy Corporation Counsel,for Defendant-AppelleeTivoli Faaumu. 
Laureen L. Martin,
Deputy Corporation Counsel,for Defendant-AppelleePaul Ferreira. 
Richard F. Nakamura,
Steven L. Goto,Alan D. Cohn, pro hac vice,Jason E. Meade, pro hac vice,for Amicus Curiae International Municipal Lawyers Association, Inc. 
19 