NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-21-0000557 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN THE INTEREST OF KY 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(FC-S NO. 18-1-0150)  
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: 
Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and McCullen, JJ.) 
Intervenors-Resource Caregivers-Appellants SY and EY 
(collectively Maternal Grandparents) appeal the Family Court of 
the Second Circuit's September 30, 2021 "Findings of Fact Conclusions of Law, Decisions and Orders Following Evidentiary Contested Hearing on [Department of Human Services' (
DHS)] Motion 
to Terminate Parental Rights and Establish a Permanent Plan, Filed July 27, 2020" (Order).
 1
In denying DHS' motion to terminate parental rights and 
establish a permanent plan recommending adoption by Maternal Grandparents, the family court ordered DHS to instead prepare a 
1 The Honorable Adrianne N. Heely presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
permanent plan that recommends a legal co-guardianship between 
Maternal Grandparents and Paternal Grandparents. The family court then ordered that grandparents share equal time with KY, suggesting a week on and week off schedule. 
As DHS' proposed permanent plan states, and is evident 
from the record, KY "is a very loved child by both Paternal and Maternal Families." But the family court here failed to address all the elements of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 587A-33 
(2018) and, thus, abused its discretion. 
I. Background 
A. Foster Custody 
KY was born in 2016. This case started when KY 
ingested his father's "detox medication" while at Paternal 
Grandparents' home. On December 21, 2018, DHS filed a Petition for Temporary Foster Custody "due to maternal and paternal substance abuse that led to threatened abuse and neglect of" KY. KY was then placed with Maternal Grandparents. 
On January 11, 2019, Mother and Father stipulated to 
awarding DHS temporary foster custody of KY. Father also stipulated to the family court's jurisdiction. The court awarded DHS foster custody of KY and noted KY entered foster care on January 8, 2019. About a month later, Mother stipulated to the family court's jurisdiction and the court continued DHS' foster custody of KY. 
On January 9, 2020, the family court entered an Order 
Continuing Foster Custody, Continuing the Service Plans dated 1/29/19 and 4/16/19 and Setting a Permanency Hearing, stating 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Father stipulates that he could not meet his burden of proof at 
an order to show cause and why the case should not be set for permanent planning." 
On February 10, 2020, Paternal Grandmother filed a 
Motion to Intervene. 
On February 12, 2020, the family court entered an Order 
Continuing Foster Custody, Continuing the Service Plans dated 1/29/19 and 4/16/19 and Setting a Permanency Hearing, stating "Mother stipulates that she would be unable to meet her burden at an OSC and agrees to permanency." 
On April 27, 2020, Maternal Grandparents filed a Motion 
to Intervene and Acquire Party Status, which the family court granted. 
B. Motion To Terminate Parental Rights 
On July 27, 2020, DHS filed a Motion to Terminate 
Parental Rights pursuant to HRS §§ 587A-4, -32, and -33 (2018). 
With the motion, DHS' social worker, Danielle Egeberg (Egeberg), 
opined that there was clear and convincing evidence: 
a. That the child's legal mother, legal father . . . are not
presently willing and able to provide the child with asafe family home, even with the assistance of a serviceplan; 
b. That it is not reasonably foreseeable that the child'slegal mother, legal father . . . will become willing andable to provide the child with a safe family home, evenwith the assistance of a service plan, within areasonable period of time; and 
c. The proposed permanent plan, dated July 23, 2020 which isincluded in Exhibit "A" and which nominates the DHS as the proposed permanent custodian, is in the bestinterests of the child[.] 
(Some formatting altered.) 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Attached to the Motion, the July 23, 2020 proposed 
permanent plan's (Permanent Plan's) goal was to "[m]aintain 
family, culture and community connections with both paternal and 
maternal families." The objective was for KY to be "[a]dopted by Maternal Grandparents and maintain visit[s] with Paternal Grandmother and Step Grandfather." The Permanent Plan explained that 
DHS/CWS will continue supporting visits with all family
members that are appropriate. Once adoption is completed,visits with [sic] be set up through adoptive party. This SW has spoken with Maternal Grandparents . . . who have statedif they are able to adopt, they will continue to supportappropriate visits with other family members of [KY]. 
DHS' assessment and recommendation stated that it "is 
recommending adoption with [Maternal Grandparents]. DHS believes 
that adoption is in the best interest for [KY]. Adoption provides a stable setting for [KY] to be able to grow up in a loving home and not have to worry if he has [sic] going to be moved again." 
On August 28, 2020, Paternal Grandmother filed a Motion 
for Establishment of Proposed Permanent Plan. Attached to the motion was a "Memorandum in Support of Motion and in Opposition to DHS Proposed Permanent Plan," a Petition for Appointment of Conservator and Guardian, and a Proposed Long-Term Visitation Plan. Paternal Grandmother stated there was "no reasonable basis" to oppose her having "equal involvement in [KY]'s life" and claimed adoption was not in KY's best interests because, if he was adopted by Maternal Grandparents, he would "undoubtedly lose all contact with the paternal side of the family," as they opposed involvement of Father and his family in Mother's and KY's life. Paternal Grandmother noted Maternal Grandparents refused 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to discuss visitation until after adoption occurred or agree to 
maintain the current timesharing schedule. Paternal Grandmother believed "granting [her] guardianship (or adoption) of [KY] is in his best interests," because she was committed to involving both sides of KY's family on a regular and consistent basis. 
Paternal Grandmother claimed "adoption and the 
imbalance of power that adoption affords just one side of his family (maternal), will result in detrimental emotional and psychological impact to [KY]," and 
although one party may claim they are willing to maintain a
relationship between [KY] and both sides of [KY]'s family,there will be no legal recourse for the rebuffed family ifthose prove to be empty. However, if the guardianship pathproposed by [Paternal Grandmother] is employed, theinterested party may intervene in the event that theguardianship proves not to be in [KY]'s best interest. 
Paternal Grandmother petitioned to be appointed as KY's guardian 
pursuant to HRS §§ 560:5-106 (2018) and 560:5-108(a) (2018), before parental rights were terminated, stating "[KY] should be determined to be in a safe family home and there is no further need for this child welfare proceeding." 
Paternal Grandmother's Proposed Long-Term Visitation 
Plan included a time-sharing plan for KY up to sixth grade and from sixth grade until KY was no longer a minor. Specifically, the long-term plan detailed custody for each day of the week, and explained details of exchanges between Paternal and Maternal Grandparents, extracurricular activities, holidays, special occasions, school breaks, and vacations. Part II of the document provided rules about communication between the parties and party conduct. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Trial commenced on February 5, 2021, with numerous 
witnesses testifying: Egeberg (DHS/CWS Social Worker); Yukari 
Murakami (Murakami) (Guardian Ad Litem (GAL)); Maternal 
Grandparents; KY's Aunty; Dr. Heather Wittenberg (expert in child 
psychology); Dr. Santo Triolo (expert in child psychology); Paternal Grandmother; Jennifer Purcell (expert in field of Marriage/Family therapy and professional visitation supervisor); Paternal Step-Grandfather; and Father. 
The family court denied DHS' motion to terminate 
parental rights of mother and father and establish a permanent plan recommending adoption, found that it was in KY's best interests to have a legal co-guardianship, and ordered DHS to prepare a revised permanent plan that calls for a legal co-guardianship between Maternal Grandparents and Paternal Grandparents: 
1. The Motion to Terminate Parental Rights filed July 27,
2020 and Establish the Permanent Plan of Adoption isDENIED. The court finds that the elements of H.R.S. §587A-33(a)(3) and (4) and DHS' Permanent Plan callingfor adoption to [Maternal Grandparents], have not beenproven by clear and convincing evidence. Further, sincethe elements of §587A-33 have not all been met, the courtalso DENIES the DHS' request to terminate parental rightsof Mother and Father. 
2. The court further finds that [Paternal Grandparents] havemet the burden of challenging the Permanent Plan callingfor adoption to the [Maternal Grandparents], by the legalstandard preponderance of the evidence. 
3. Pursuant to H.R.S. §587A-32 and §587A-33; the court findsit in the best interest of the child that a legal co-guardianship be adopted for [KY]. Further, DHS shallprepare revised permanent plan which calls for a legalco-guardianship and prepare a petition for co-guardianship naming [Maternal and Paternal Grandparents]as joint legal and joint physical co-guardians, with[Maternal Grandparents] having tie breaking authority asit relates to educational decisions to be made for [KY],and [KY] shall remain in [Maternal Grandparents'] home. . . . As co-guardians, [Maternal and PaternalGrandparents], for as long as the parents are unable toprovide for [KY], shall act in the best interest of [KY]and be familiar with the duties, rights and immunities of 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Guardians, if an emergency decision needs to be made, the
guardian with physical custody of [KY] shall make saiddecision with consultation with the treating professionaland update the non-custodial guardian and parent as soonas practicable. 
4. Effectively [sic] immediately, pending the legal co-guardianship, [Maternal and Paternal Grandparents] shallequally share time with [KY], with a suggested week onweek off schedule, and exchange day on Sundays 5 p.m.,unless [Maternal and Paternal Grandparents] reach abetter day for exchange; so that the co-guardian mayready [KY] for [KY's] preschool/weekly activities. The court is also suggesting that the co-guardians shareequally Holidays/Vacations and School Breaks (i.e. FallBreak/Winter Break) with [Maternal Grandparents] havingthe first half and [Paternal Grandparents] having thesecond half of those school breaks. 
5. Pursuant to H.R.S. §587A-33(h)(3)/(4), the court furtherorders the parties: DHS; Mother; Father; [MaternalGrandparents]; [Paternal Grandparents] along with theircounsel and [KY's] [GAL] to appear for a permanentplan/review/permanency hearing in six months. At this hearing, the court shall be presented with the parties'proposed parenting plans with specifictimesharing/holiday schedule, and status updates onFather and Mother's progress. 
(Emphases added.) Maternal Grandparents timely appealed. 
II. Standards of Review 
A. Family Court Decisions 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion inmaking its decisions and those decision[s] will not be setaside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,we will not disturb the family court's decisions on appealunless the family court disregarded rules or principles oflaw or practice to the substantial detriment of a partylitigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds ofreason. 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(quoting In re Doe, 95 Hawai# i 183, 189-90, 20 P.3d 616, 622-23 
(2001)). 
B. Statutory Interpretation 
"Statutory interpretation is a question of law 
reviewable de novo." In re R Children, 145 Hawai# i 477, 482, 454 
P.3d 418, 423 (2019) (citation omitted). 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. Discussion 
On appeal, Maternal Grandparents contend in their 
points of error that the family court erred in denying DHS' 
motion to terminate parental rights and establish a permanent plan of adoption.
2 Maternal Grandparents argue that adoption is 
preferred and the family court incorrectly applied the law.3 
Maternal Grandparents explain, "[s]ince both Father and 
Mother had stipulated to the first two elements needed in order to terminate their parental rights, the issue before the Court during the trial was whether there was clear and convincing evidence that the Permanent Plan prepared by the DHS was in [KY's] best interests." Maternal Grandparents point out that Mother and Father have not been able to provide KY with a safe home for over two years, and that "there was clear and convincing evidence that the Permanent Plan for adoption was in [KY's] best interests because it would provide that closure and stability." 
HRS § 587A-33(a) governs the termination of parental 
rights, providing in part: 
At a termination of parental rights hearing, the court
shall determine whether there exists clear and convincing evidence that: 
2 Maternal Grandparents raise two more points of error challenging
Conclusions of Law ( COL) numbers 1-28 and Findings of Fact ( FOF) numbers 62,
63, 65, 67, and 69. They, however, do not provide a corresponding legalargument as to each COL and FOF they challenge. Rules Expediting ChildProtective Appeals Rule 11(a)(4) (explaining that the opening brief shallinclude a "[c]oncise legal argument about each point of error with citation tolegal authority"). Instead, they appear to challenge these COL and FOF in thecontext of their challenge to the family court's denial of the motion toterminate parental rights. We address these COL and FOF in the same manner. 
3 In support of their point of error, Maternal Grandparents also argue
that the family court (1) failed to provide a compelling reason forguardianship, (2) violated their due process rights, and (3) usurped DHS'right to prepare its own permanent plan by ordering DHS to prepare a permanentplan for legal co-guardianship. But, we need not reach these arguments inlight of our decision to vacate the September 30, 2021 Order and remand thiscase for further proceedings. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) A child's parent whose rights are subject
to termination is not presently willingand able to provide the parent's childwith a safe family home, even with theassistance of a service plan; 
(2) It is not reasonably foreseeable that thechild's parent whose rights are subject totermination will become willing and ableto provide the child with a safe familyhome, even with the assistance of aservice plan, within a reasonable periodof time, which shall not exceed two yearsfrom the child's date of entry into fostercare; 
(3) The proposed permanent plan is in the bestinterests of the child. In reaching thisdetermination, the court shall: 
(A) Presume that it is in the best 
interests of the child to be promptly and permanently placed withresponsible and competent substituteparents and family in a safe andsecure home; and 
(B) Give greater weight to thepresumption that the permanent planis in the child's best interest,the younger the child is upon thechild's date of entry into fostercare; and 
(4) The child consents to the permanent planif the child is at least fourteen yearsold, unless the court consults with thechild in camera and finds that it is in the best interest of the child to proceedwithout the child's consent. 
(Emphases added.) Clear and convincing evidence is defined as 
the "degree of proof that will produce in the mind of the trier of fact a firm belief or conviction that the fact sought to be proved is true. This measure falls between the preponderance standard of typical civil cases and the beyond-a-reasonable-doubt standard of criminal cases." HRS § 587A-4. 
Here, the family court denied the motion to terminate 
parental rights and establish a permanent plan of adoption because HRS § 587A-33(a)(3) and (4) were not proven by clear and convincing evidence. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We first note that Mother and Father stipulated to 
subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2). We next note that KY was not "at 
least fourteen years old" so subsection (a)(4) was inapplicable to this case. HRS § 587-33(a)(4). Thus, by citing DHS' failure to prove subsection (a)(4) as a basis for denying DHS' motion to terminate parental rights and establish a permanent plan of adoption, the family court abused its discretion. 
Turning to subsection (a)(3), the family court was 
tasked with determining whether the Permanent Plan was in KY's best interests. See HRS § 587A-33(a)(3)(A). In so doing, the 
family court was required to presume that it was in KY's best interest "to be promptly and permanently placed with responsible and competent substitute parents and family in a safe and secure home[.]" HRS § 587A-33(a)(3)(A). 
Egeberg, DHS' social worker, testified that this case 
started when KY "ingested detox medication in December 2018 while being supervised by" Paternal Grandparents. She further testified that Maternal Grandparents have provided KY with a stable setting and can take care of KY. Maternal Grandparents made clear that KY was their focus. The family court found this testimony credible. 
Murakami, KY's GAL, testified in support of the 
Permanent Plan and adoption by Maternal Grandparents. She also testified that Paternal Grandparents are an important part of KY's life and she recommends continued visitation with them. The family court found this testimony credible. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The family court then concluded that Maternal 
Grandparents "are responsible, competent individuals able to 
provide [KY] with a safe, secure home." Based on § HRS 587A-33(a)(3)(A), the family court was required to "[p]resume that it is in the best interests of [KY] to be promptly and permanently placed with responsible and competent substitute parents and family in a safe and secure home." 
The family court was also required to "[g]ive greater 
weight to the presumption that the permanent plan is in the child's best interest, the younger the child is upon the child's date of entry into foster care." HRS § 587A-33(a)(3)(B). KY was about two years and four months old when he entered foster care. Thus, the family court should have given great weight to the presumption that the proposed permanent plan recommending adoption was in KY's best interests. 
Based on the evidence, the family court's denial of 
DHS' motion to terminate parental rights and establish a permanent plan recommending adoption does not align with the mandatory presumption and the greater weight accorded in determining whether the permanent plan is in KY's best interests. And the family court made no findings or conclusions to explain this divergence. 
The family court thus abused its discretion by denying 
DHS' motion to terminate parental rights and establish a permanent plan recommending adoption without explaining how the 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statutory presumptions and weight factored into its analysis, and 
how they were rebutted. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the family court's 
September 30, 2021 Order and remand this case for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 24, 2023. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate JudgeFrancis T. O'Brien,for Intervenors-Resource Caregivers-Appellants, Maternal Grandparents. 
Erin Lea Lowenthal, 
for Intervenor-Appellee,Paternal Grandmother. 
Adriel C.S. Menor and 
Julio C. Herrera,Deputy Attorneys General,for Petitioner-Appellee,Department of Human Services. 
Renata Foster-Au,
for Mother-Appellee. 
Nicole Forelli,
for Father-Appellee. 
12 