NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-15-0000881
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
In the Interest of K Children
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 14-00205)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)

 
Father-Appellant (Father) appeals from the "Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights" (Order) filed on October 29, 2015,
 
by the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).1 The
 
Order terminated the parental rights of Father over the five
 children (Children) involved in this case, terminated the
 parental rights of the Children's mother (Mother), and appointed
 the Director of the Department of Human Services as permanent
 custodian of the Children. 
On appeal, Father contends that the Family Court erred
 
in issuing the Order because he claims that there was
 insufficient evidence to support the termination of his parental
 rights.
2 Father also challenges the Family Court's findings of
 
fact and conclusions of law "as a whole as clearly erroneous,"
 
1The Honorable Bode A. Uale presided.
 
2Mother has not appealed from the Order.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and he lists numerous findings of fact and conclusions of law
 
which he claims are erroneous. We affirm.
 
I.
 
The Department of Human Services (DHS) has a history of
 
involvement with Father dating back to 2003, including
 involvement with Father in eight separate child welfare cases. 
In four of these eight cases, the DHS confirmed that Father's
 children "were subject to threat of abuse, threat of neglect,
 abuse and/or neglect." The safety concerns causing the DHS's
 involvement in Father's prior child welfare cases were related to
 substance abuse issues, domestic violence issues, and
 inappropriate parenting issues.
 
In 2004, Father and Mother's parental rights were
 
terminated over two older siblings of the Children. In that
 case, Father did not participate in court ordered services, and
 the Family Court found that he was not willing and able to
 provide a safe family home for the two older siblings.
 
The DHS's involvement in the current case began on
 
September 26, 2014, when the DHS received a report alleging
 threat of abuse and threatened neglect of the Children due to
 Mother's substance abuse, domestic violence between Mother and
 Father, and the lack of a consistent caretaker for the Children. 
Following its investigation, the DHS confirmed the threat of
 abuse and threat of neglect of the Children. The Honolulu Police
 Department took protective police custody of the Children, and
 the DHS thereafter assumed temporary foster custody of the
 Children.
 
Father began using marijuana and drinking alcohol at a
 
young age, began using cocaine when he was twenty-one, and has a
 long history of methamphetamine use. Father's relationship with
 Mother has been marked by violence. In September 2014, Mother
 and Father argued about Mother's boyfriend, and Mother attempted
 to stab Father with a steak knife in their home while the
 Children were in the home or nearby. In October/November 2014,
 Mother and Father had an argument and Mother hit Father in the
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
head with a flashlight. In October/November 2014, Father and
 
Mother's boyfriend got into a physical altercation, and Mother
 repeatedly hit Father in the head with a baseball bat.
 
The DHS presented evidence that Father has a criminal
 
history that includes charges of abuse of a family or household
 member, terroristic threatening, and burglary, probation
 revocations, and at least one conviction for abuse of a family or
 household member. Father was released from incarceration at the
 end of September 2014, but was again incarcerated in February
 2015. From February 2015 through the October 29, 2015, hearing
 on the DHS's motion to terminate Father's parental rights, Father
 was incarcerated and held on a charge of assault against a law
 enforcement officer in the first degree. If convicted of this
 charge, Father could be sentenced to up to five years in prison.
 
Father was incarcerated during the majority of time
 
that this case was pending before the Family Court. During the
 four months that he was not incarcerated, Father failed to
 participate in any services recommended by the DHS and failed to
 remain in contact with the DHS. During the pendency of this case
 before the Family Court, Father did not participate in random
 urinalysis tests or complete any substance abuse treatment
 programs; did not participate in a psychological evaluation; and
 did not participate in comprehensive counseling and support
 services, or anger management, domestic violence, or parenting
 classes. Prior to the DHS's involvement in this case, Father had
 not been caring for the Children, and Mother had been the primary
 caregiver. In addition, during the pendency of this case before
 the Family Court, Father only had contact with the Children on
 three occasions.
 
II.
 
We resolve the arguments raised by Father on appeal as
 
follows:
 
1. Father contends that there was insufficient
 
evidence to support the termination of his parental rights. In
 particular, Father argues that incarceration does not per se
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
result in the forfeiture of parental rights and that failure to
 
complete services does not "equate to proving" that he cannot
 provide a safe family home.
 
While a parent's incarceration does not mandate per se 
forfeiture of parental rights, a parent's incarceration and the consequences of that incarceration are relevant factors for the Family Court to consider in evaluating whether a parent can provide a safe family home. See In re Doe, 100 Hawai
'i 335, 345, 
60 P.3d 285, 295 (2002). Similarly, a parent's failure to complete services is a relevant factor for the Family Court to consider in determining whether a parent can provide a safe family home. 
Here, the record does not indicate that the Family
 
Court believed or ruled that Father's incarceration required it
 on a per se basis to terminate Father's parental rights. The
 record also does not indicate that the Family Court improperly
 considered Father's failure to complete services. Rather, the
 record reflects that the Family Court considered Father's
 incarceration and failure to complete services as relevant
 factors, along with other circumstances in Father's case, in
 rendering its decision. We therefore reject Father's claim that
 the Family Court improperly evaluated his incarceration and
 failure to complete services in terminating his parental rights. 
Based on our review of the record, we conclude that there was
 sufficient evidence to support the Family Court's termination of
 Father's parental rights and its findings by clear and convincing
 evidence that: (1) Father is "not presently willing and able to
 provide [the Children] with a safe family home, even with the
 assistance of a service plan" and (2) "[i]t is not reasonably
 foreseeable that . . . [Father] . . . will become willing and
 able to provide [the Children] with a safe family home, even with
 the assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable period of
 time[.]" See Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 587A-33(a)(1) and
 
(a)(2) (Supp. 2015).
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. We reject Father's challenge to the Family Court's
 
findings of fact and conclusions of law. Father apparently
 
challenges the Family Court's finding that he has a long history
 of methamphetamine use by asserting that he has never admitted to
 using crystal methamphetamine. However, a DHS social worker
 testified that Father told her that he has a long history of
 using crystal methamphetamine, and the Family Court found that
 the social worker's testimony was more credible than Father's
 contrary testimony. Although Father lists numerous other
 findings of fact he claims are erroneous, he does not make
 specific arguments relating to these findings or cite evidence in
 the record demonstrating that these findings are clearly
 erroneous. In any event, the findings of fact which Father
 claims are erroneous are supported by substantial evidence and
 are not clearly erroneous. With respect to the enumerated
 conclusions of law challenged by Father on appeal, Father
 provides no valid argument to support his claim that these 
conclusions are erroneous. We conclude that Father's challenge
 to these conclusions is without merit.
 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Family Court's
 
Order Terminating Parental Rights. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 2, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Tae Chin Kim

 
for Appellant-Father Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Lianne L. Onishi

 
Mary Anne Magnier
Deputy Attorneys General for Petitioner-Appellee
Department of Human Services
 
5
 