NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000490
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JACK ROBERTS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 14-1-0429)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Jack Roberts (Roberts) with robbery in the
 
second degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 708-841(1)(a) (2014).
1 The complaining witness was Gideon Gurr
 
1HRS § 708-841(1)(a) provides, in relevant part:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of robbery in the
second degree if, in the course of committing theft . .
.:
 
(a) The person uses force against the person of
anyone present with the intent to overcome
that person's physical resistance or physical
power of resistance[.]
 
HRS § 708-842 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
An act shall be deemed "in the course of
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Gurr), a loss prevention officer for Times Super Market. After
 
a jury trial, Roberts was found guilty as charged. The Circuit
 
2
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  sentenced Roberts to
four years of probation with a special condition that he serve a

 
term of imprisonment equal to credit for time already served.
 
On appeal, Roberts contends that there was insufficient

 
evidence to support his conviction because the State did not
 establish that he acted with the intent "to overcome anyone's
 resistence." We affirm.
 
When viewed in the light most favorable to the State, 
see State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 
(1998), we conclude that there was sufficient evidence to support Roberts' conviction. The second-degree robbery charge against Roberts required proof that in the course of committing theft, he used "force against the person of anyone present [(namely, Gurr)] with the intent to overcome that person's physical resistance or physical power of resistance[.]" HRS § 708-841(1)(a). For purposes of second-degree robbery, an act is in the course of committing theft "if it occurs in an attempt to commit theft . . ., in the commission of theft . . . , or in the flight after the attempt or commission." HRS § 708-842. 
Here, the State presented substantial evidence that
 
Roberts acted with the intent to overcome Gurr's physical
 resistence or physical power of resistence while fleeing after
 stealing steaks and a bottle of shoyu from Times Super Market. 
The evidence showed that Roberts concealed steaks under his
 clothes and put a bottle of shoyu in his pocket and then exited
 the market without paying. Gurr testified that he stopped
 Roberts when Roberts was about ten feet outside of the door. 
Gurr held Roberts' left arm, and Gurr pulled out his badge,
 
committing a theft . . ." if it occurs in an attempt to
commit theft . . ., in the commission of theft . . . ,
or in the flight after the attempt or commission.
 
2The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
informed Roberts that he was part of the market's security, and
 
asked Roberts to accompany Gurr back into the market. In
 response, Roberts attempted to break free from Gurr. Among other
 things, Gurr testified that Roberts elbowed Gurr in the shoulder,
 kicked Gurr in the knee causing "[a] lot of pain[,]" hit Gurr in
 the head, and kneed Gurr in the shoulder in an attempt to get
 away from Gurr. 
When viewed in the light most favorable to the State,
 
there was substantial evidence to show that Roberts used force
 against Gurr with the intent to overcome Gurr's physical
 resistance or physical power of resistance, while Roberts was
 fleeing after commission of a theft.
3 Accordingly, we affirm the
 
Circuit Court's Judgment.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 26, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Sandra D. Lynch
(Lynch Law Offices LLLC)for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3To the extent that Roberts contends that there was
 
insufficient evidence to disprove his claim of self-defense, we
also reject that contention.
 
3
 