 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001060
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JOHN G. SCALERA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
KANE'OHE DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-13-02681)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant John G. Scalera (Scalera) appeals
 
from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and

 
Plea/Judgment, filed on July 22, 2014, in the District Court of
 
the First Circuit, K ane'ohe Division (District Court).1  
Scalera was convicted of Operating a Vehicle Under the
 
Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii
 
2
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2013)  and Refusal
to Submit to a breath, blood, or urine test, in violation of HRS
 
1
 The Honorable Michael Marr presided.
 
2
 HRS § 291E-61 provides in pertinent part:
 
§291E-61 Operating a vehicle under the influence of an
intoxicant.  (a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount 
sufficient to impair the person's normal mental
faculties or ability to care for the person and
guard against casualty[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
§ 291E-68 (Supp. 2013).3
 
On appeal, Scalera contends: (1) the District Court 
erred when it did not rule upon a portion of Scalera's Motion to 
Suppress Evidence (Motion to Suppress) prior to trial, which claimed that evidence was obtained in violation of Scalera's rights under article I, section 7 of the Hawai
'i Constitution and 
the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution; and (2) the District Court erred when it denied Scalera's Motion to Suppress because it found that Scalera was not interrogated and therefore did not have a right to counsel. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Scalera's points of error as follows and affirm.
 
On July 1, 2013, Scalera was charged with OVUII and
 
refusal to submit to a breath, blood, or urine test. 
On December 13, 2013, Scalera filed a Motion to 
Suppress. Scalera sought to "preclud[e] from use at trial evidence obtained in violation of [Scalera's] rights under: (1) Article I, Section 7 of the Hawai
'i State Constitution; (2) the 
Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution; and (3) Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") §§ 291E­11(b), 291E-15, and 803-9." 
The District Court held a hearing on Scalera's Motion
 
to Suppress on February 11 and 25, 2014.
4 On direct examination,
 
Officer Lordy Cullen (Officer Cullen) testified that Scalera was
 stopped on June 28, 2013, around 11:00 p.m. Officer Cullen's
 attention was drawn to Scalera's vehicle because it was weaving,
 crossing over the solid white line twice and then over a broken
 white line. After stopping the vehicle, Officer Cullen noticed a
 
3
 HRS § 291E-68 provides: Except as provided in section 291E-65,
refusal to submit to a breath, blood, or urine test as required by part II is
a petty misdemeanor."
 
4 The Honorable James Ashford presided over the Motion to Suppress.
 
2
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
strong odor of an alcoholic beverage on Scalera's breath and
 
Scalera was red. On cross examination, Officer Cullen testified
 that Scalera was in the lane closest to the median when Scalera
 crossed over the solid white line in the median twice, and then
 crossed over the broken white line on the right. 
Officer Michael Krekel (Officer Krekel) testified that
 
he administered field sobriety tests to Scalera. After Scalera
 was arrested and transported to the Kailua Police Station,
 Officer Krekel read the Implied Consent form (HPD Form 396K) to
 Scalera. Officer Krekel also read the form that informed Scalera
 of potential sanctions if he refused to participate in a blood,
 breath, or urine test. Scalera did not take a test.
 
The District Court held that Scalera was not
 
interrogated so there was no violation of HRS § 803-9 (2014),
 Scalera voluntarily took the field sobriety tests and was not
 coerced or intimidated into taking them, and Scalera understood
 his rights or the consequences of his decision. The District
 Court denied the Motion to Suppress. 
After a two-day trial, Scalera was found guilty as
 
charged.
1. Ruling on Motion to Suppress.
 
Scalera contends the District Court committed 
reversible error under Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) 
5
Rule 12(e)  when it failed to rule on part of his Motion to
Suppress, specifically with regard to his claim that evidence was obtained in violation of his rights under article I, section 7 of the Hawai
'i Constitution and the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments 
5
 HRPP Rule 12(e) provides:
 
(e) Ruling on motion.  A motion made before trial
 
shall be determined before trial unless the court orders
 
that it be deferred for determination at the trial of the
 general issue or until after verdict; provided that a motion
to suppress made before trial shall be determined before
trial. Where factual issues are involved in determining a
motion, the court shall state its essential findings on the
record.
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the United States Constitution. Scalera apparently argues
 
that evidence related to the OVUII charge was improperly obtained
 as a result of an illegal traffic stop. 
In his opening brief, Scalera recognizes he failed to
 
raise this argument to the District Court. However, Scalera
 contends that he did not waive this argument because: (1) he
 specifically listed article I, section 7 and the Fourth and
 Fourteenth Amendments in his Motion to Suppress; (2) the main
 reason for Officer Cullen's testimony was to establish that the
 stop was lawful; and (3) there were several discrepancies in
 Officer Cullen's testimony. Thus, Scalera contends that the
 matter was properly brought to the attention of the court.
 
Although Scalera included article I, section 7 of the 
Hawai
'i Constitution and the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments of 
the United States Constitution in the introduction of his Motion to Suppress, Scalera did not include any supporting statements regarding a constitutional violation in the motion itself or the Memorandum in Support of Motion. In addition, during the hearings held regarding the Motion to Suppress on February 11 and 25, 2014, Scalera never referenced the above constitutional provisions or that the traffic stop was unlawful. Thus, the 
record does not support his claim that the District Court should 
have addressed whether to suppress evidence based on an unlawful traffic stop. 
Therefore, the District Court did not fail to rule on
 
part of Scalera's Motion to Suppress because Scalera's argument
 asserted on appeal was not properly brought before the District
 Court. 
In the alternative, Scalera contends that, if the
 
matter was not properly brought to the District Court's
 attention, the District Court's "failure to address Officer
 Cullen's credibility was not a harmless violation of Scalera's
 constitutional rights." Scalera contends that Officer Cullen's
 testimony contained discrepancies in how Officer Cullen described
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the traffic stop. Scalera attacks testimony regarding the
 
observation of his vehicle crossing lane markings, calling into
 question how many times his vehicle actually crossed over the
 median. 
However, "an appellate court will not pass upon issues 
dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trial judge." State v. 
Buch, 83 Hawai
'i 308, 321, 926 P.2d 599, 612 (1996) (citation and 
quotation marks omitted). Scalera does not claim that there is no evidence that he crossed the solid white line at least once. See HRS § 291C-38(c)(3) (2007) ("A solid white line may be crossed only in unusual circumstances and then only with great care.") and HRS § 291C-38(c)(6) (2007) ("The crossing of a solid yellow line by vehicular traffic is prohibited except when the crossing is part of a left turn movement."). Officer Cullen testified that he observed three traffic infractions when Scalera crossed lane markings three times. Scalera claims that inconsistencies in the evidence show that Scalera only crossed lane markings twice and that the color of the lane markings were different. Yet, Scalera failed to challenge that he was observed to have committed at least one traffic infraction, and as noted above, assessing the credibility of witness testimony is the province of the trial court. After Scalera's vehicle was stopped, Officer Cullen smelled an odor of an alcoholic beverage on Scalera's breath, which provided reasonable suspicion that Scalera had committed OVUII and prompted further investigation into Scalera's faculties with the field sobriety tests. 
Scalera fails to establish that his stop was unlawful.
 
Therefore, it was not plain error for the District Court to deny
 Scalera's Motion to Suppress.
2. Right to Counsel.
 
On appeal, Scalera contends the District Court erred
 
when it denied his Motion to Suppress based on the conclusion
 that Scalera was not interrogated and therefore not entitled to
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counsel. He also argues that his Miranda rights were violated.
 
In his Motion to Suppress and at the hearing on the
 
Motion to Suppress, Scalera argued he was denied his right to
 
counsel under HRS § 803-9. Scalera did not preserve an argument
 before the District Court that evidence should be suppressed
 because of a violation of his 
Miranda rights. Therefore, Scalera
 
waived this argument on appeal. State v. Moses, 102 Hawai 'i 449, 
456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003) ("As a general rule, if a party does
 not raise an argument at trial, that argument will be deemed to
 have been waived on appeal; this rule applies in both criminal
 and civil cases."). 
Scalera contends that he was denied his right to
counsel under HRS § 803-9. HRS § 803-9 provides:
  

 
§803-9 Examination after arrest; rights of arrested
person.  It shall be unlawful in any case of arrest for
examination:
 
(1)
 To deny to the person so arrested the right of
seeing, at reasonable intervals and for a
reasonable time at the place of the person's
detention, counsel or a member of the arrested
person's family;
(2) To unreasonably refuse or fail to make a
reasonable effort, where the arrested person so
requests and prepays the cost of the message, to
send a telephone, cable, or wireless message
through a police officer or another than the
arrested person to the counsel or member of the
arrested person's family;
(3) To deny to counsel, (whether retained by the
arrested person or a member of the arrested
person's family) or to a member of the arrested
person's family the right to see or otherwise
communicate with the arrested person at the place
of the arrested person's detention (A) at any time
for a reasonable period for the first time after
the arrest, and (B) thereafter at reasonable
intervals and for a reasonable time;
(4) In case the person arrested has requested that the
person see an attorney or member of the person's
family, to examine the person before the person
has had a fair opportunity to see and consult with
the attorney or member of the person's family;
(5) To fail within forty-eight hours of the arrest of
a person on suspicion of having committed a crime
either to release or to charge the arrested person
with a crime and take the arrested person before a
qualified magistrate for examination. 
In its oral ruling denying Scalera's Motion to
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Suppress, the District Court stated that it 
viewed the motion as at least in large part based upon
Hawaii Revised Statutes 803-9 regarding defendant's right to
counsel. As far as that portion of the argument goes, I do
not find that this was an interrogation situation, and I do
not find that there was a violation of 803-9.
 
This court recently cited to Deering v. Brown, 839 F.2d 
539 (9th Cir. 1988) in which the Court of Appeals for the Ninth 
Circuit held that, where a defendant was convicted of both driving while intoxicated and refusal to take a breathalyzer test, the defendant's refusal to take a breathalyzer test was nontestimonial. State v. Won, 134 Hawai
'i 59, 70-71, 332 P.3d 
661, 672-73 (App. 2014) (citing Brown, 839 F.2d at 544), vacated on other grounds by State v. Won, 2015 WL 10384497, No. SCWC-12­0000858 (Nov. 25, 2015). Because the refusal to submit to testing is nontestimonial, the police inquiry into whether an OVUII suspect will submit to testing does not constitute interrogation. See Won, 134 Hawai
'i at 71, 332 P.3d at 673. 
Therefore, the District Court did not err in determining that Scalera was not interrogated. 
Further, even if there was a violation of HRS § 803-9, 
Scalera was not entitled to suppression of evidence in connection to his refusal to submit to testing. "'Generally, where evidence has been obtained in violation of a statute, that evidence is not inadmissible per se in a criminal proceeding unless the statutory violation has constitutional dimensions,' or the defendant can demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence, a connection between the statutory violation and the evidence to be suppressed." Won, 134 Hawai
'i at 74, 332 P.3d at 676 (brackets 
omitted) (citing (State v. Edwards, 96 Hawai 'i 224, 237-39, 30 
P.3d 238, 251-53 (2001)). 
Scalera does not claim that the statutory violation has
 
constitutional dimensions. In addition, Scalera has not
 demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that any failure
 to permit him to consult with counsel led to his refusal to
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
submit to testing. In fact, in his Opening Brief, Scalera states
 
that he "is not appealing the lower court's denial of the motion
 to suppress evidence of his refusal on the grounds that he did
 not understand what was in the 396K or that he did not understand
 the consequences of his refusal."
 
THEREFORE, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of Entry of 
Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, filed on July 22, 2014, in the District Court of the First Circuit, K
ane'ohe Division is 
affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 29, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
William H. Jameson, Jr.,
Deputy Public Defender,Office of the Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
James M. Anderson,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,  
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8
 