NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000121
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MARZIE VALDEZ, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAII, DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS OFFICE, ADULT PROTECTIVE
SERVICES, STEVEN W. ROYAL, in his official capacity as
Administrative Appeals Hearing Officer, Defendants-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-0163)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
In this secondary appeal, Appellant Marzie Valdez
 
("Valdez") appeals from the "Findings of Fact and Conclusions of
 
Law; Order Affirming Administrative Hearing Decision Dated
 April 13, 2011," entered on February 1, 2012 in the Circuit Court
 
1 2
of the Third Circuit  ("Circuit Court").  The Circuit Court
 
decided in favor of Appellee State of Hawai 'i, Department of 
Human Services, Administrative Appeals Office, Adult Protective
 Services ("DHS"), and affirmed the decision of a DHS hearing
 officer, which found that Valdez abused a vulnerable adult, a 65­year old female resident-patient ("Patient") of the Hilo Medical
 Center, Extended Care Facility ("Facility").
 
On appeal, Valdez contends that the Circuit Court erred
 
in failing to conclude that: (1) the notice of her DHS hearing
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
 
2
 In the caption to her opening brief, Valdez appears to contend
that she appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment Filed February 1, 2012,
although the document was neither attached to nor referenced in her notice of
appeal. The requirement that the notice of appeal designate the judgment
appealed from, however, is not jurisdictional. City & Cnty. of Honolulu v.
 
Midkiff, 57 Haw. 273, 275, 554 P.2d 233, 235 (1976). Therefore, we proceed as
though Valdez had appealed from the judgment.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
violated Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 91-9(b); (2) the
 
administrative hearing procedures violated Valdez's right to dueprocess; and (3) the administrative hearing officer's findings
 regarding physical and psychological abuse were clearly
 erroneous.
3
   

 
Upon careful review of the records and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments they advance and the issues they raise, we resolve
 Valdez's points of error as follows and affirm:
 
(1) 	Valdez contends that the DHS plainly erred because
 
its October 21, 2010 Notice of Videoconferencing Hearing
 ("Notice") and subsequent notices of hearing referred to HRS
 chapter 91 and Hawaii Administrative Rules ("HAR") § 17-1402, but
 did not mention HAR § 17-2. She argues that the Notice violated
 
4
HRS § 91-9(b)  because it did not specify what statutes or rules
would be "involved" in the hearing. Thus, Valdez contends that
 she did not know which procedures to follow prior to the DHS
 
3
 Valdez raises four points of error, but we have re-organized for
clarity, addressing the first and second points together.
 
4
 HRS § 91-9(b) provides that, concerning reasonable notice for a
contested case hearing:
 
(b)	 The notice shall include a statement of:
 
(1)	 The date, time, place, and nature of hearing;
 
(2)	 The legal authority under which the hearing is to be
held;
 
(3)	 The particular sections of the statutes and rules
involved;
 
(4)	 An explicit statement in plain language of the issues
involved and the facts alleged by the agency in
support thereof; provided that if the agency is unable
to state such issues and facts in detail at the time
 the notice is served, the initial notice may be
limited to a statement of the issues involved, and
thereafter upon application a bill of particulars
shall be furnished;
 
(5)	 The fact that any party may retain counsel if the
party so desires and the fact that an individual may
appear on the individual's own behalf, or a member of
a partnership may represent the partnership, or an
officer or authorized employee of a corporation or
trust or association may represent the corporation,
trust, or association.
 
H
AW. REV. STAT. § 91-9 (2012).
 
2
  
 
   
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
hearing and, more specifically, that she did not know that she
 
could subpoena witnesses.
 
We agree that the DHS erred in referencing HAR § 17­
1402, where the "right to a hearing" is described as applying to
 an "applicant for or recipient of public assistance." H
AW. ADMIN.
 
R. § 17-1402-4. Valdez was plainly not a "claimant" to whom the
 
hearing rules would apply. H AW. ADMIN. R. § 17-1402-5.  We
 
consider whether Valdez's substantial rights were prejudiced by
 the Notice's deficiency.
 
To the extent that Valdez was misdirected to HAR § 17­
1402, that misdirection appears not to have prejudiced Valdez.
 Specifically, HAR § 17-1402-5 states that the claimant shall have
 the opportunity to "question or refute any testimony or evidence,
 and to confront and cross-examine any witness." H
AW. ADMIN. R.
 
§ 17-1402-5. HAR § 17-1402 does not preclude a claimant from
 asking to subpoena a witness; rather, it says nothing about the
 subject either way. When Valdez was informed at the hearing that
 Patient and Daughter would not appear, nothing in HAR § 17-1402
 prevented her from objecting and asking for the opportunity to
 "question or refute any testimony or evidence" as HAR § 17-1402-5
 provided. On that basis, we conclude that Valdez's substantial
 rights were not affected by the deficient notice and that her
 failure to raise an objection constituted a waiver of her right
 to subsequently complain about the absence of the witnesses.
5
 
See, e.g., Waikiki Resort Hotel, Inc. v. City & Cnty. of
 Honolulu, 63 Haw. 222, 250, 624 P.2d 1353, 1372 (1981) (holding
 that the principle that "an appellate court will consider only
 such questions as were raised and reserved in the lower court
 applies on review by courts of administrative determinations
 [and] preclude[s] from consideration questions or issues which
 were not raised in administrative proceedings."); see also,
 
5
 Valdez does not identify any witnesses whom she might have wanted
to subpoena or explain how their presence might have mattered. Valdez was
 
unable to cross-examine Patient and Daughter by the fact that they did not
attend the hearing, but we hesitate to find on appeal that a party's
substantial rights were prejudiced when, represented by counsel, the party
fails to object to the failure of witnesses to appear in person when those
witnesses might have presented testimony at the hearing that placed the party
in a weaker position than if the witnesses had not testified.
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
United States v. L. A. Tucker Truck Lines, Inc., 344 U.S. 33, 37
 
(1952) ("[O]rderly procedure and good administration require that
 objections to the proceedings of an administrative agency be made
 while it has opportunity for correction in order to raise issues
 reviewable by the courts.").
 
(2) Valdez argues that the administrative hearing
 
deprived her of her right to due process, because "[w]hile Valdez
 was afforded a hearing, the rules and procedures that she
 followed pursuant to [HAR § 17-1402] failed to adequately
 safeguard her right to due process, thus violating the same." 
According to Valdez, HAR § 17-1402-5 left her with "no practical
 ability to contact or even identify the adverse or percipient
 witnesses" so that she was "left to rely upon mainly character
 witnesses[,]" and "no reasonable ability to independently
 investigate [her] claim." Valdez also argues that the
 
6
confidentiality provisions of HRS § 346-225  denied her a fair
hearing because those provisions "caused [DHS] to redact the name
 and any identifying information for any witness or individual
 interviewed [during its] investigation" and, as a result, "denied
 Valdez any real opportunity to re-interview individuals contained
 in the [DHS] investigation, [or] to secure the parties[']
 presence for testimony at hearing." We disagree.
 
The basic elements of procedural due process of law

 
require both notice and an opportunity to be heard at a
 meaningful time and in a meaningful manner. Sandy Beach Def.
 
Fund v. City Council of the City & Cnty of Honolulu, 70 Haw. 361,
 378, 773 P.2d 250, 261 (1989). However, due process is not a
 fixed concept requiring a specific procedural course beyond these
 basic elements in every situation. Id. Rather, due process is
 
flexible, calling for such procedural protections as the
 particular situation demands. Id. (quoting Morrissey v. Brewer,
 
6
 HRS § 346-225 provides, in relevant part:
 
Confidentiality of reports. A report made pursuant to this
part, including the identity of the reporting person and all
records of the report, shall be confidential and any person
who makes an unauthorized disclosure of a report or records
of a report shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
 
H
AW. REV. STAT. § 346-225 (Supp. 2013) .
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
408 U.S. 471, 481 (1972)).
 
Indeed, in Pila 'a 400, LLC v. Board of Land & Natural 
Resources, 132 Hawai 'i 247, 320 P.3d 912 (2014), the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court held that a notice of hearing that omitted 
"involved" statutes and rules under HRS § 91-9(b) did not violate due process. Id. at 270–73, 320 P.3d 935–38 (citations omitted) 
(holding that because the record demonstrated that appellant was "fully apprised of all relevant issues that were to be determined in the contested case hearing" and was "able to present a complete and vigorous defense" to the charges, appellant could not complain of faulty notice under HRS § 91-9(b)). 
In Hawai
'i, courts focus their due process inquiries on 
"whether notice ha[s] actually been provided, which [may] be determined by looking to other communications between the parties." Id. at 272, 320 P.3d at 937. Accordingly, a hearing 
notice satisfies the requirements of both due process and HRS § 91–9(b) when the party served "had a meaningful opportunity to be heard and to contest the [administrative agency's] ultimate decision." Id. at 273, 320 P.3d at 938. 
Valdez was provided multiple notices of the contested
 
case hearing and had a meaningful opportunity to be heard and
 present evidence and argument at the DHS hearing. She was able
 to present her own witnesses and to cross-examine DHS's witnesses
 who were present at the administrative hearing. And although
 Patient and her daughter ("Daughter") were absent from the
 hearing, Valdez acknowledged that she was able to identify them
 from the administrative report. Moreover, just as Valdez had the
 opportunity to raise procedural objections at the hearing, she
 also had the opportunity to inquire about absent persons and to
 request action by the hearing officer to produce them. But
 Valdez, who was represented by counsel at the hearing did not do
 so. See Sharma v. State, Dep't of Land & Natural Res., 66 Haw.
 
632, 641, 673 P.2d 1030, 1036 (1983) (holding that due process
 was not violated when appellant had the opportunity to
 demonstrate his defenses to the trial court); Bailey v. Blount
 Cnty. Bd. of Educ., 303 S.W.3d 216, 237-38 (Tenn. 2010) (holding
 that due process rights were not violated when appellant failed
 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
to raise timeliness issue regarding an agency contested case
 
hearing both before and during the hearing). Therefore, because
 Valdez had notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard, and
 raised no objection to the notice and/or procedures, we cannot
 conclude that her due process rights were violated.
 
(3) Valdez contends that the administrative hearing
 
officer's findings that Valdez physically and psychologically
 abused Patient are clearly erroneous. We disagree.
 
7
Valdez argues that, under HRS § 91-12,  the findings
are inadequate. She also contends that an agency "must make its findings reasonably clear" and that "[t]he parties and the court should not be left to guess . . . the precise finding of the agency[,]" citing Rife v. Akiba, 81 Hawai
'i 84, 87, 912 P.2d 581, 
584 (App. 1996) in support. However, Rife is inapposite.8 
Physical abuse finding
 
Valdez argues that the administrative hearing officer's
 
findings regarding the confirmation of physical abuse were
 clearly erroneous because "[t]he officer's expansion of physical
 abuse to merely rough handling was improper." In support, Valdez
 points out that Patient's original complaint, which was supported
 by Daughter, was that her pain was caused when Valdez grabbed her
 arm "where it was broken," between the thumb and forefinger, but,
 in fact, it was Patient's pinky finger that was fractured. 
Valdez also contends that the hearing officer did not properly
 weigh either her own testimony or the testimony given by her
 witnesses at the hearing, including several nurses who testified
 that patient discomfort is unavoidable when performing dressing
 changes. Valdez's argument, however, lacks merit.
 
7
 HRS § 91-12 provides, in relevant part:
 
Decisions and orders.  Every decision and order adverse to a
party to the proceeding, rendered by an agency in a
contested case, shall be in writing or stated in the record
and shall be accompanied by separate findings of fact and
conclusions of law. 
H
AW. REV. STAT. § 91-12 (2012).
 
8
 Contrary to Rife, the decision in this case includes both findings
of fact and conclusions of law and, as discussed below, the findings support
the conclusions reached.
 
6
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
The pain caused by Valdez's treatment falls within the
 
definition of "physical abuse." The hearing officer correctly
 
stated that the definition of "physical abuse" in HRS § 346-222
 requires "the non-accidental infliction of pain, including but
 not limited to hitting, slapping, causing burns or bruises,
 poisoning, or improper physical restraint." This definition does
 not require that pain be the result of action directed at a
 particular location, such as an area of the forearm or a
 particular digit. Moreover, the hearing officer included in the
 Findings of Fact section of the Notice of Administrative Hearing
 Decision (the "decision") the statements by Patient and Valdez
 regarding the location where Valdez grabbed Patient's arm. Thus,
 the hearing officer did not exclude those findings, and we are
 not left to "guess" at the facts behind the decision, as Valdez
 suggests.
 
Furthermore, substantial evidence in the record
 
supports the decision. "An agency's findings, if supported by
 reliable, probative and substantial evidence, will be upheld." 
In re Hawaii Elec. Light Co., 60 Haw. 625, 630, 594 P.2d 612, 617
 (1979) (citing HRS § 91-14(g) (1976)).  Here, the
 administrative hearing officer found the Patient, Daughter, and
 nurse Staci Okano ("Okano") interviews conducted during the DHS
 investigation to be consistent and credible. In fact, the
 hearing officer determined that Patient's and Daughter's
 statements provided "ample evidence" that Valdez's actions were
 intentional. Furthermore, the hearing officer afforded "very
 little weight" to the testimony of Valdez's witnesses because
 none of them were working or present at the Facility at the time
 of the incident. 
As a reviewing court, we decline to re-weigh the 
evidence presented to a hearings officer, or credibility determinations made by an agency. See In re Hawaiian Elec. Co., 
81 Hawai
'i 459, 465, 918 P.2d 561, 567 (1996). Instead, we 
generally defer to the agency's expertise and experience rather than "substitut[ing our] own judgment for that of the agency." Igawa v. Koa House Rest., 97 Hawai
'i 402, 406, 38 P.3d 570, 574 
(2001) (quoting Dole Hawai 'i Division-Castle & Cooke, Inc. v. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Ramil, 71 Haw. 419, 424, 794 P.2d 1115, 1118 (1990)) (internal
 
quotation marks omitted). Because we are not convinced that the
 hearing officer's findings were clearly erroneous, DHS did not
 clearly err in finding physical abuse.
 
Psychological abuse finding
 
Valdez contends that the administrative hearing officer
 
erred by confirming that psychological abuse occurred,
 specifically contesting the hearing officer's finding that Valdez
 was "intimidating." Valdez argues that the alleged statement, "I
 just did it" from Valdez to Patient, "is neither reported nor
 attributed to [Patient] or Daughter, but is instead attributed to
 Staci Okano." Valdez's argument, however, lacks merit.
 
Okano testified as to the statement in question at the 
administrative hearing. Moreover, Okano's testimony was consistent with her report regarding the incident. As stated above, we decline to re-weigh the evidence and pass on the hearing officer's determination of credibility. See Hawaiian 
Elec. Co., 81 Hawai
'i at 465, 918 P.2d at 567. Accordingly, the 
administrative hearing officer did not clearly err in finding psychological abuse. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Findings of Fact and
 
Conclusions of Law; Order Affirming Administrative Hearing
 Decision Dated April 13, 2011, and the Judgment, both filed on
 February 1, 2012 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit, are
 affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 17, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Brian J. De Lima and 
Francis R. Alcain (Crudele & De Lima)for Plaintiff-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Heidi M. Rian and Candace J. Park Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Defendants-Appellees. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8
 