NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001077 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
WILLIE JAMES JONES, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P.
 NO. 13-1-0033 (CR. NO. 95-1384))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Willie James Jones (Jones) appeals
 
from the "Order Denying Petitioner Willie James Jones' Petition
 
for Post-Conviction Relief Without a Hearing" (Order Denying
 Fourth Petition) filed on July 30, 2014, in the Circuit Court of
 the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1/ We affirm.
 
I.
 A.
 
In his underlying criminal case, a jury in 1995 found 
Jones guilty of first-degree sexual assault and kidnapping. The State of Hawai
'i (State) moved for extended terms of imprisonment 
pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 706-662(4) (1993) on the grounds that Jones was a "multiple offender whose criminal actions were so extensive that a sentence of imprisonment for an extended term is necessary for protection of the public." The 
1/ The Honorable Edward H. Kubo, Jr., presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court2/ granted the State's motion, and it sentenced 
Jones to concurrent extended terms of life imprisonment with the 
possibility of parole for his first-degree sexual assault conviction and twenty years of imprisonment for his kidnapping conviction. The Circuit Court entered its Judgment on August 19, 1996. Jones filed a direct appeal from his Judgment, and on June 9, 1997, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court issued a summary disposition 
order affirming the Judgment. 
On November 5, 1998, Jones filed a petition for 
post–conviction Relief (First Petition) pursuant to Hawai 'i 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40. On June 7, 2000, the Circuit Court
3/ filed an order denying the First Petition. On 
May 17, 2002, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court issued a summary 
disposition order affirming the Circuit Court's order denying the First Petition. 
On October 18, 2005, Jones filed a second petition for
 
post–conviction relief (Second Petition). On March 15, 2006, the
 Circuit Court
4/ filed an order denying the Second Petition.
 
On October 29, 2009, Jones filed a third petition for
 
post-conviction relief (Third Petition). On February 16, 2011,
 the Circuit Court
5/ filed an order denying the Third Petition. 
On February 29, 2012, this court issued a summary disposition
 order affirming the Circuit Court's order denying the Third
 Petition.
 
B.
 
On November 8, 2013, Jones filed a fourth petition for
 
post-conviction relief (Fourth Petition), which is at issue in
 this appeal. Jones asserted the following grounds for relief:
 Ground 1 -- the Circuit Court violated his right to due process
 by denying him a full judicial hearing before imposing an
 
2/ The Honorable Melvin K. Soong presided.
 
3/ The Honorable Victoria S. Marks presided.
 
4/ The Honorable Michael A. Town presided.
 
5/ The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
extended term sentence; Ground 2 -- the Circuit Court violated
 
his constitutional rights by imposing an enhanced sentence based
 on "pending unconvicted criminal charges"; Ground 3 -- the
 Circuit Court violated his privilege against self-incrimination
 by imposing an enhanced sentence based on his refusal to admit
 guilt for the offenses for which he was sentenced; Ground 4 -- he
 was denied effective assistance of counsel in his appeal of the
 order denying his First Petition; Ground 5 -- he was denied
 effective assistance of counsel in his direct appeal of the
 Judgment; and Ground 6 -- he was denied effective assistance of
 counsel in his First Petition, Second Petition, and Third
 Petition and in the petition for writ of habeas corpus he filed
 in federal court.
 
The Circuit Court denied Jones' Fourth Petition without
 
a hearing, ruling that the issues raised in the Fourth Petition
 had been previously ruled upon, were waived, or were without
 merit. The Circuit Court filed its Order Denying Fourth Petition
 on July 30, 2014, and this appeal followed.
 
II.
 
On appeal, Jones contends that the Circuit Court erred
 
in denying his Fourth Petition. He challenges conclusions of law
 entered by the Circuit Court in support of its denial of Grounds
 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 of his claims for relief. As explained below,
 we affirm the Circuit Court's Order Denying Fourth Petition.
 
We resolve the issues Jones raises on appeal as
 
follows:
 
1. The Circuit Court did not err in denying Jones'
 
claim that it violated his right to due process by denying him a
 full judicial hearing before imposing an extended term sentence. 
We conclude that in imposing Jones' extended term sentence, the
 Circuit Court complied with the legal requirements applicable to
 Jones' sentencing and did not violate Jones' right to due
 process. See State v. Huelsman, 60 Haw. 71, 588 P.2d 394 (1979)
 
(describing a two-step process for extended term sentencing). We
 also conclude that Jones' claim was previously ruled upon. See
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRPP Rule 40(a)(3) (2006) ("Rule 40 proceedings shall not be
 
available and relief thereunder shall not be granted where the
 issues sought to be raised have been previously ruled upon or
 were waived."). Jones argued that his extended term sentence
 violated his due process rights on direct appeal, and the Circuit
 Court, in denying Jones' Third Petition, ruled that "[Jones']
 extended [term] sentencing process met the procedure required at
 the time of sentencing." 
2. The Circuit Court did not err in denying Jones'
 
claim that it violated his constitutional rights by imposing an
 enhanced sentence based on "pending unconvicted criminal
 charges." This claim was previously ruled upon. In his opening
 brief in his direct appeal, Jones cited his objection at
 sentencing to the Circuit Court's consideration of pending
 charges, and he asserted in his points of error that "[t]he court
 based its finding of 'necessity' only on hearsay evidence of
 prior convictions and on untried charges and allegations, not on
 the 'extent' of the offenses for which [Jones] was being
 sentenced, denying [Jones] his right to due process of law." In
 its order denying Jones' Third Petition, the Circuit Court
 described Jones' first claim, which it rejected, as including the
 claim that Jones' extended sentence was unconstitutional because
 "the sentencing court's finding of necessity was based only on
 hearsay evidence of prior convictions and untried charges and
 allegations."
 
3. The Circuit Court did not err in denying Jones' 
claim that it violated his privilege against self-incrimination by imposing an enhanced sentence based on his refusal to admit guilt for the offenses for which he was sentenced. In State v. Kamana
'o, 103 Hawai 'i 315, 82 P.3d 401 (2003), the Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court applied the following three-factor analysis 
in ascertaining whether a sentencing court had erroneously
relied on a defendant's refusal to admit guilt in imposing a
sentence:
 
(1) the defendant's maintenance of innocence after
conviction, (2) the judge's attempt to get the
defendant to admit guilt, and (3) the appearance that,
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
had the defendant affirmatively admitted guilt, his
sentence would not have been so severe.
 
Kamana 'o, 103 Hawai 'i at 323, 82 P.3d at 409 (brackets omitted) 
(quoting the factors set forth in People v. Wesley, 411 N.W.2d 
159, 162 (Mich. 1987)). 
While Jones satisfied the first factor, the record does
 
not show that the sentencing judge attempted to get Jones to
 admit guilt or that it appeared that Jones' sentence would have
 been less severe if he had affirmatively admitted his guilt. We
 conclude that the Circuit Court properly ruled that Jones' self-
incrimination claim was without merit. We further conclude that
 Jones waived this claim by failing to previously raise it. See
 
HRPP Rule 40(a)(3). 
4. The Circuit Court did not err in denying Jones'
 
claims that he received ineffective assistance of counsel in his
 direct appeal, his First Petition, and his Third Petition.
6/
  
Jones' claim that he received ineffective assistance on direct
 appeal was ruled upon in his First Petition, Second Petition, and
 Third Petition, and even if it had not been ruled upon, this

 
claim would have been waived for failing to previously raise it. 
See HRPP Rule 40(a)(3). Jones' claim that he received
 ineffective assistance of counsel in his First Petition was
 waived for failing to previously raise it. See id. Jones' claim
 
that he received ineffective assistance in his Third Petition was
 based on his contention that his counsel was ineffective for
 failing to raise Grounds 1, 2, and 3 of his Fourth Petition. 
However, as we have previously concluded, the claims raised in
 Grounds 1, 2, and 3 were previously ruled upon on direct appeal,
 ruled upon in the Third Petition, waived, or without merit, and
 
6/ Jones also argues on appeal that he received ineffective assistance
of counsel at sentencing. However, he did not raise this claim in his Fourth
Petition and therefore did not preserve this claim for appeal. See Hawai' i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4) (2010); State v. Moses
, 102 Hawai' i 
449, 455-56, 77 P.3d 940, 946-47 (2003);  State v. Hoglund, 71 Haw. 147, 150­
51, 785 P.2d 1311, 1313 (1990). Jones asserted in his Fourth Petition that he received ineffective assistance of counsel in his appeal of the order denyinghis First Petition, in his Second Petition, and in the petition for writ ofhabeas corpus he filed in federal court, but he does not challenge the CircuitCourt's denial of these claims in this appeal. 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
therefore, Jones' claim that he received ineffective assistance
 
of counsel in his Third Petition is without merit. 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Order Denying
 
Fourth Petition. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, April 27, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Donald L. Wilkerson 
Te-Hina Ickes (Law Offices of Donald L.Wilkerson)for Petitioner-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Respondent-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6

 