 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000386
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
PAUL J. BAILEY, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 12-1-0237(4))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Paul J. Bailey (Bailey) appeals
 
from the Judgment; Conviction and Probation Sentence; Notice of
 
Entry filed October 30, 2013 (Judgment) by the Family Court of
 
the Second Circuit (Family Court).1
 
Bailey pled no contest to two counts of Assault in the 
Second Degree (Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-711 (Supp. 2013)), as part of a plea agreement with Plaintiff-Appellee State 
of Hawai
'i (State). Bailey moved for a deferred acceptance of 
his no contest plea (DANC), which was denied. He was convicted 
and sentenced to five years of probation with additional Special 
Terms and Conditions (Conditions) that included, inter alia, one 
year of imprisonment. 
Bailey raises three points of error on appeal: (1) he
 
was provided ineffective assistance of counsel when the Deputy
 
1
 The Honorable Richard T. Bissen Jr. presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Public Defender assigned to Bailey's case, James Rouse (Rouse), 
failed to timely file a notice of appeal and thus, Bailey's 
current appeal should not be dismissed as untimely; (2) the Family Court abused its discretion by denying Bailey's motion for a DANC, sentencing Bailey to a year in jail, and denying his Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 35 motion to 
reconsider sentence; and (3) the Family Court abused its discretion when it imposed the conditions listed as J, K, L, M, N, and P in Bailey's Sentence. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Bailey's points of error as follows:
 
(1) The Family Court twice extended Bailey's time to 
file a notice of appeal, finally setting a deadline at thirty days after January 17, 2014, which, as calculated under Hawai
'i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 26(a), would be February 
17, 2014. Although the time to file a notice of appeal in a 
criminal case ordinarily expires thirty days after entry of the judgment, a court may extend the time to file a notice of appeal but only up to an additional thirty days after the time to appeal has expired. HRAP Rule 4(b)(1), (5). Thus, the Family Court could only have permissibly extended Bailey's time to appeal to sixty days after the October 30, 2013 judgment. As Bailey's notice of appeal was filed on January 28, 2014, it was clearly untimely under HRAP Rule 4(b). 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has previously stated: 
As a general rule, compliance with the requirement of
timely filing of a notice of appeal is jurisdictional, and
we must dismiss an appeal on our motion if we lackjurisdiction. However, we have permitted belated appealsunder certain circumstances, namely, when . . . defensecounsel has inexcusably or ineffectively failed to pursue adefendant's appeal from a criminal conviction in the firstinstance. 
State v. Knight, 80 Hawai 'i 318, 323, 909 P.2d 1133, 1138 (1996) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
Both Bailey and the State agree that Rouse inexcusably failed to timely appeal Bailey's conviction and that this court should hear 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the merits of Bailey's appeal in the interests of justice. 
Rouse himself admitted to "dropping the ball." We conclude that
 
Rouse's failure to timely appeal was inexcusable and deprived
 
Bailey of effective assistance of counsel; thus, we will decide
 Bailey's appeal on the merits.
 
(2) As a preliminary matter, we consider Bailey's 
eligibility for a DANC under Hawai
'i law. HRS Chapter 853 
establishes when and how a court may defer acceptance of a defendant's guilty or no contest plea under HRS § 853-1, but such deferrals "are constrained by HRS § 853-4, which sets out the circumstances under which chapter 853 'shall not apply.'" State 
v. Sakamoto, 101 Hawai
'i 409, 412, 70 P.3d 635, 638 (2003). 
Bailey was initially charged with four counts of Sexual Assault in the Third Degree, an offense for which a DANC is expressly not available. HRS § 853-4(a)(13)(P) (Supp. 2013). ("This chapter shall not apply when . . . [t]he offense charged is . . . Sexual assault in the third degree[.]"). However, the charges were later changed to two counts of Assault in the Second Degree, to which Bailey pled no contest. 
Assault in the Second Degree is defined in HRS § 707­
711 and is a Class C felony. The record does not specify to
 which subsection of HRS § 707-711 Bailey pled no contest. 
However, subsections (1)(c) - (h) are clearly inapplicable to the
 facts in this case.
2 Thus, Bailey's no contest plea was made
 
2	 HRS § 707-711 (Supp. 2013) provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 707-711 Assault in the second degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the second degree if:
 
(a) 	The person intentionally or knowingly causes
substantial bodily injury to another;
(b) 	The person recklessly causes serious or
substantial bodily injury to another;
(c) 	The person intentionally or knowingly causes
bodily injury to a correctional worker . . .;
(d) 	The person intentionally or knowingly causes
bodily injury to another with a dangerous
instrument;
(e) 	The person intentionally or knowingly causes
bodily injury to an educational worker . . .;
(f) 	The person intentionally or knowingly causes
bodily injury to any emergency medical services
(continued...)
 
3
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
pursuant to HRS § 707-711(1)(a) or (b). Under these subsections: 
"A person commits the offense of assault in the second degree if:
 (a) The person intentionally or knowingly causes substantial
 bodily injury to another; [or] (b) The person recklessly causes
 serious or substantial bodily injury to another[.]" HRS § 853­4(a)(2)(A) (Supp. 2013) provides that chapter 853 will not apply
 when the offense charged is "a felony that involves the
 intentional, knowing, or reckless bodily injury, substantial
 bodily injury, or serious bodily injury of another person[.]
"
  
Thus, chapter 853 does not apply and Bailey was not eligible for
 a DANC under HRS § 853-1.
3
  
2(...continued)
 
provider . . . ;
(g) 	The person intentionally or knowingly causes
bodily injury to a person employed at a
state-operated or -contracted mental health
facility. . . .;
(h) 	The person intentionally or knowingly causes
bodily injury to a person who:
(i) 	The defendant has been restrained from, by
order of any court, including an ex parte
order, contacting, threatening, or
physically abusing pursuant to chapter
586; or
(ii) 	
Is being protected by a police officer
ordering the defendant to leave the
premises of that protected person pursuant
to section 709-906(4), during the
effective period of that order; or
(i) 	The person intentionally or knowingly causes
bodily injury to any firefighter or water safety
officer who is engaged in the performance of
duty. . . .
 
(2) Assault in the second degree is a class C felony.
 
3 We note that, in 2003, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that an
earlier version of HRS § 853-4 did not preclude a DANC plea in a Second DegreeAssault case. Sakamoto, 101 Hawai' i at 412-13, 70 P.3d at 638-39. In 
Sakamoto, the defendant had been charged with Assault in the Second Degree for"intentionally or knowingly caus[ing] substantial bodily injury" to another.Id. at 410, 70 P.3d at 636. However, the version of HRS § 853-4 in effect atthe time did not remove felonies which involved "substantial bodily injury"from the purview of chapter 853, only those which involved "serious bodilyinjury" or mere "bodily injury". Id. at 410, 412, 70 P.3d at 636, 638. The 
court held that because HRS § 853-4 did not foreclose felonies that involved"substantial bodily injury", "the plain and unambiguous language of thestatute [did] not exclude the offense at issue in this case." Id. at 413, 70 
P.3d at 639. Despite the State's argument that such an interpretation wouldlead to the absurd result that a defendant charged only with causing "bodily
(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We nevertheless conclude that the Family Court erred
 
when it denied Bailey's request for no jail time based on his
 
refusal to admit guilt.
 
As a preliminary matter, we reject the State's
 
assertion that Bailey waived his privilege against self-
incrimination when he pled no contest. See Mitchell v. U.S., 526
 
U.S. 314, 322-27 (1999) ("Where the sentence has not yet been imposed a defendant may have a legitimate fear of adverse consequences from further testimony. . . . Any effort by the State to compel the defendant to testify against his will at the sentencing hearing clearly would contravene the Fifth Amendment.") (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted); State v. Kamana
'o, 103 Hawai 'i 315, 320-21, 82 P.3d 401, 
406-07 (2003). 
In Kamana 'o, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court adopted the 
following three factor test from the Michigan Supreme Court to determine whether the sentencing court impermissibly relied on the defendant's refusal to admit guilt in imposing the enhanced sentence: "(1) the defendant's maintenance of innocence after conviction, (2) the judge's attempt to get the defendant to admit guilt, and (3) the appearance that, had the defendant affirmatively admitted guilt, his sentence would not have been so severe." 103 Hawai
'i at 323, 82 P.3d at 409 (quoting People v. 
3(...continued)
injury" would be foreclosed from a DANC, but a defendant who caused
"substantial bodily injury" would not, the court held that it was bound by the
language of the statute. Id. The court concluded by noting that "the
legislature has had ample and numerous opportunities to amend the DAG
[deferred acceptance of guilty plea]/DANC statute to exclude felony offenses
that cause 'substantial bodily injury' from the possibility of deferral, but
has failed to do so." Id.
 at 414, 70 P.3d at 640.
About a year after Sakamoto, HRS § 853-4 was amended to cover felonies
involving "the intentional, knowing, or reckless bodily injury, substantial
 
bodily injury, or serious bodily injury of another person". 2004 Haw. Sess.
 
Laws, Reg. Sess., Act 85, at 340-341. The legislature made clear that the
purpose of this change was to preclude the acceptance of DAG or DANC pleas for
offenses involving substantial bodily injury. Conf. Comm. Rep. No 36-04, in
2004 Senate Journal, at 1017; S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 3093, in 2004 Senate
Journal, at 1546; H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 200-04, in 2004 House Journal, at
1489. 
With the addition of "substantial bodily injury" to the statute, HRS
§ 853-4(a)(2) now precludes a DANC plea from any charge of Second Degree
Assault brought under HRS § 707-711(1)(a) or (b). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wesley, 411 N.W.2d 159, 162 (Mich. 1987)) (brackets omitted). 
Notably, the Michigan case and the other cases relied on by the
 supreme court did not involve enhanced sentencing; rather they
 concluded that the defendant's refusal to admit guilt cannot be
 the sole reason for imposing a harsher sentence, such as
 incarceration versus probation. Id. at 321-23, 82 P.3d at 407­
09. Thus, we conclude that the Kamana
'o factors are applicable 
to this case. 
The first factor articulated in Kamana 'o is the 
defendant's maintenance of innocence after conviction. 103 Hawai
'i at 323, 82 P.3d at 409. Although a no contest plea 
functions much like a guilty plea, "a defendant, by pleading guilty, admits to having unlawfully engaged in the charged criminal conduct, whereas, by pleading no contest, he or she neither admits to nor denies having done so, but rather chooses not to contest the charge to which the plea is entered." State 
v. Merino, 81 Hawai
'i 198, 217, 915 P.2d 672, 691 (1996). Thus, 
Bailey did not admit guilt by entering his no contest plea. At sentencing, although "tak[ing] responsibility for the pain and suffering that [his] actions may have caused," Bailey maintained that he did not molest MD and only accidentally touched her breast. 
As to the second factor, the Family Court did not
 
attempt to get Bailey to admit guilt. The court's repeated
 references to Bailey's refusal to admit guilt or responsibility
 came after Bailey was allowed to speak and immediately before the
 court imposed the sentence.
 
However, with respect to the final factor, it appears
 
from the record that Bailey's sentence would have been less
 severe had he admitted guilt. At the October 30, 2013 sentencing
 hearing, the court made the following statements:
 
You know, this sentencing in one way would have been
 
easier to pronounce had you come clean. On the other hand,
by your insistence and excuses, which I find contradicted by
the report and the statements given, not only by you and
your daughter, but by all the statements made by her Mom and
Mom's parents that night, as well as the statement provided
by your wife, Michelle, points to the fact that you are not
 accepting responsibility.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
And it's difficult for the Court to, first off, even
 
consider you a deferred acceptance and your request for no
 
jail based on the fact that you have not accepted
 responsibility.
 
You say you have and you say you're sorry, but as I
see this case, Mr. Bailey, I don't see that. 
I just don't
see it. 
. . . . 
And instead of 
coming clean to vindicate her so that
 
she does not leave a dispute, you will, as they say, go down
 
swinging.  You will stick to this explanation that somehow
she made this up on the spur of the moment now, because she
reported immediately to her Mom when she walked through the
door. . . .
 
. . . . 
You do not have an ounce of concern about your
 
daughter, because you're not accepting the responsibility.
 
You're saying the things you're saying because you
hope it's going to convince somebody like me to give you an
out. You don't deserve an out.
 
The Family Court clearly violated Kamana 'o's admonition 
that, while a court may consider a defendant's lack of remorse in 
assessing the likelihood of successful rehabilitation, it may not infer a lack of remorse from a defendant's refusal to admit guilt. 103 Hawai
'i at 321, 82 P.3d at 407. For instance, at the 
sentencing hearing, the court made the finding that "rehabilitation will be a challenge based on the defendant's current denial".
4 This conclusion is very similar to the 
sentencing court's improper inference in Kamana 'o that 
"[defendant's] refusal to acknowledge his criminal behavior 'negate[d] any reasonable expectation of his rehabilitation[.]'" 103 Hawai
'i at 324, 82 P.3d at 410. And, at the December 3, 2013 
hearing on Summit's Motion to Withdraw as Counsel, the court made the following statements which also indicated that it inferred a lack of remorse and poor rehabilitative prospects from Bailey's refusal to admit guilt: 
4
 The court's reasoning was likely influenced by the Sentencing
Recommendation, which recommended sex offender treatment and incarceration
because "the defendant continues to deny what he did and fails to acknowledge
that he may have a problem, rehabilitation might be a challenge."
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I found that your client was showing no remorse
 
because he was blaming the victim. . . . And that's why I
found he did not deserve . . . the DANC. . . . 
. . . .
 
So for him to come to my courtroom and stand in front
of me and say that the daughter lied about all of this, why
would I give a deferral to someone like that? Now, if he
 
came in here with his head in his hand and said, I'm sorry
 
for the foolish mistake I made, I should never have done
 this to my daughter, I might have considered it. But he
 
wants it all. He wants his reputation and he wants to not
go to jail and get a DANC.
. . . . 
But the Court has to make the basis that he's unlikely
to reoffend, and for people to not reoffend, they have to be
 
subject, open to rehabilitation. I think your client has a
 
problem and it's an unadmitted and unaddressed problem.
 
Why would I give a DANC to that person? I don't know
 
why anyone would. He didn't come here apologizing for his
 
wrongdoing. He came here hoping to have this all go away.
 
And finally, during the February 19, 2014, hearing on
 
the Motion to Reconsider Sentence, the court stated "I looked at
 
everything else that has happened, including, at the time, his
 lack of remorse." Although these statements were made primarily
 in relation to the DANC request, it clearly appears that, had
 Bailey affirmatively admitted guilt, his sentence would not be so
 severe.
 
Weighing the Kamana
'o factors, we conclude that in 
denying Bailey's request for no jail time and imposing a one year imprisonment condition as part of his probation, the Family Court was improperly influenced by Bailey's refusal to admit guilt. 
(3) HRS § 706-624(2) (Supp. 2013) provides that the 
court may exercise its discretion in imposing certain conditions as part of a sentence of probation "to the extent that the conditions are reasonably related to the factors set forth in section 706-606 and to the extent that the conditions involve only deprivations of liberty or property as are reasonably necessary for the purposes indicated in section 706-606(2)[.]" A court may not exercise its discretion to impose additional conditions pursuant to HRS § 706-624(2) without some factual basis in the record. State v. Kahawai, 103 Hawai
'i 462, 462-63, 
83 P.3d 725, 725-26 (2004). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bailey contests the conditions of his probation listed
 
as J, K, L, M, N, and P in the court's October 30, 2013 Judgment,
 
arguing that these conditions are not supported by sufficient
 facts in the record and/or that they are not reasonably related
 to the factors in HRS § 706-606 (1993).
 
Condition J: Satisfactory participation in the Hawaii 
Sex Offender Treatment Program (HSOTP). In adopting this 
condition, the Family Court referenced State v. Solomon, 107 
Hawai
'i 117, 111 P.3d 12 (2005). Bailey argues that, unlike the 
defendant in Solomon, he did not plead guilty, he did not have a criminal record, and "[t]he record in this case is completely devoid of the types of information that the family court in Solomon had when it sentenced Solomon to complete the sex offender treatment program." Although the defendant in Solomon had a more extensive history of sexual misconduct than Bailey, notwithstanding the no contest plea to a non-sexual offense, Bailey's alleged conduct involved inappropriate touching of a minor, MD's statements were corroborated by others, and the court stated that it believed the incident occurred "exactly the way [MD] reported it, immediately." Thus, the imposition of the HSOTP condition had a rational basis in the facts in the record. State v. Kahawai, 103 Hawai
'i 462, 467, 83 P.3d 725, 730 (2004). 
This is not a case where there is no evidence of a propensity towards improper sexual behavior, and thus, no basis for sex offender treatment. See State v. Holt, 116 Hawai
'i 403, 421-22, 
173 P.3d 550, 568-69 (Haw. App. 2007). 
Further, the HSOTP condition was rationally related to
 
the factors in HRS § 706-606, specifically, HRS § 706-606(2)(c)
 and (d), which relate to the need for the sentence imposed to
 protect the public from further crimes by the defendant and to
 provide the defendant with needed correctional treatment in the
 most effective manner. The court noted that it reflected on the
 HRS § 706-606 factors in imposing the HSOTP condition, that sex
 offender treatment was included in the Sentencing Recommendation,
 and that it believed Bailey had demonstrated the ability to
 commit sex offenses against a minor. Thus, it is clear that the
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court meant for the HSOTP treatment to rehabilitate Bailey and
 
keep him from reoffending. 
Therefore, because Condition J was reasonably related
 
to the HRS § 706-606 factors and based on facts in the record, we
 conclude that the Family Court did not abuse its discretion when
 it imposed this condition. 
Condition K: Refraining from purchasing, possessing, or
 
accessing inappropriate audio or visual materials. This
 
condition is impermissibly vague as it fails to give Bailey
 adequate notice as to what types of conduct would be a violation
 of the terms of his probation. See, e.g., U.S. v. Guagliardo,
 
278 F.3d 868, 872 (9th Cir. 2002) ("A probationer . . . has a
 separate due process right to conditions of supervised release
 that are sufficiently clear to inform him of what conduct will
 result in his being returned to prison.); State v. Martinez, 59
 Haw. 366, 374, 580 P.2d 1282, 1287 (1978) ("The standard of
 specificity to be applied to the condition [of probation] under
 appellant's facial challenge is whether there are any conceivable
 circumstances to which the condition applies with sufficient
 clarity to give appellant fair warning that her conduct may be in
 violation."). There is no common understanding as to what kinds
 of audio or visual material are "inappropriate" and "[w]ithout
 further clarification, the term, 'inappropriate' is 'too vague to
 put [the probationer] on notice of what material is prohibited.'" 
U.S. v. Begay, 556 Fed. App'x. 581, 583 (9th Cir. 2014).
5 This
 
vagueness cannot be cured by giving Bailey's therapist the
 authority to interpret the meaning of "inappropriate" because
 reasonable people could differ as to what "inappropriate" means,
 
5
 We note that, in some cases, courts have upheld conditions which
prohibit a probationer from possessing "sexually stimulating" or "sexually
oriented" materials which are deemed inappropriate by probation
officers/treatment providers. E.g., U.S. v. Hobbs, 710 F.3d 850, 855 (8th
Cir. 2013) (A condition against possessing any "sexually stimulating or
sexually oriented" material "deemed inappropriate by the U.S. Probation
Officer in consultation with the treatment provider" was not
unconstitutionally vague), U.S. v. Bee, 162 F.3d 1232, 1234-35 (9th Cir. 1998)
(upholding a condition that probationer "not possess any sexually stimulating
or sexually oriented material as deemed inappropriate by [his] probation
officer and/or treatment staff").
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and thus, the therapist "could well interpret the term more
 
strictly than intended by the court or understood by [Bailey]." 
Guagliardo, 278 F.3d at 872. Further, because of the vagueness
 of the condition itself, we cannot determine whether it is
 otherwise reasonable. Id. Additionally, prohibiting Bailey from
 
frequenting any place where he may access inappropriate material,
 including via the internet, could be interpreted to include book
 stores, libraries, or in fact anywhere he might have access to a
 computer, smartphone, or other device with internet access. Such
 an overly broad provision is not reasonably necessary to
 accomplish the purposes of HRS § 706-606(2), i.e., punishment,
 deterrence, protection of the public, or rehabilitation. U.S. v.
 
Dog, 493 Fed. App'x. 898, 900 (9th Cir. 2012).
 
Condition L: Curfew, travel, and leisure time
 
restrictions as imposed by the probation officer. Supervision by
 
a probation officer in lieu of incarceration and restrictions on
 one's actions after release are essential aspects of the sentence
 of probation. State v. Fields, 67 Haw. 268, 277, 686 P.2d 1379,
 
1387 (1984). Condition L is therefore related to the need to
 provide just punishment for the offense. HRS § 706-606(2)(a). 
Additionally, two other conditions of Bailey's probation, as
 mandated by statute, were that he not commit another crime while
 on probation and that he remain within the jurisdiction of the
 court unless granted permission to leave by the court or his
 probation officer. Condition L is meant to ensure that Bailey
 complies with these mandatory terms of his probation. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Family Court did not abuse its
 discretion in imposing Condition L.
 
Condition M: Restriction against hitchhiking or picking
 
up hitchhikers. Bailey correctly notes that there are no
 
allegations he committed a crime involving hitchhiking. We note,
 however, a California case involving a similar condition supports
 the proposition that the court did not abuse its discretion in
 imposing Condition M. In People v. Moses, 131 Cal. Rptr. 3d 106,
 111 (Cal. Ct. App. 2011), a condition prohibiting hitchhiking or
 picking up hitchhikers was held reasonable as to a defendant who
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
was charged with committing a lewd or lascivious act upon a minor
 
because "it is reasonable to restrict him from opportunities to
 be in a car alone with a minor; preventing defendant from
 hitchhiking or giving rides to hitchhikers furthers this goal." 
Similarly, given that Bailey was accused of sexually touching MD
 while alone with her in a car, it is reasonable to impose
 Condition M so as to limit his opportunities to be alone in a car
 with a minor. Thus, as this condition has a factual basis and is
 reasonably necessary for deterrence and the protection of the
 public (HRS § 706-606(2)(b), (c)), the court did not abuse its
 discretion by imposing it.
 
Condition N: Restriction against contacting, directly
 
or indirectly, a minor or residing with a minor without
 permission of probation officer. Bailey argues that a
 
restriction against contacting or residing with any minor child
 does not have a factual basis in the record because the
 allegations against him involve only his daughter. However, the
 record supports a restriction against unpermitted contact with
 minors in general, not just MD. First of all, the court
 recognized that Bailey's actions "demonstrated the . . . ability
 to commit sex offenses against a minor." Additionally, the
 presentence report indicated that "[t]he victim was particularly
 vulnerable, due to young or old age[.]" Similar prohibitions
 against contacting minors have been upheld against defendants who
 have viewed child pornography but were not charged with actually
 touching a child. U.S. v. Levering, 441 F.3d 566, 569-70 (8th
 
Cir. 2006) (citing to a number of Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals
 cases where prohibitions against contacting minors were upheld
 against child pornography defendants). Here, Bailey was
 convicted of assaulting a minor, and thus his danger to minors is
 at least as severe as the danger posed by a child pornography
 defendant. Thus, there are sufficient facts in the record to
 support a finding that Condition N is reasonably necessary to
 protect members of the public, specifically, minor children, from
 further crimes by Bailey. HRS § 706-606(2)(c).
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Condition P: Requirement that Bailey pay for and submit
 
to electronic monitoring as deemed appropriate by his probation
 
officer. Bailey contends that this condition has no factual
 
basis because he "complied at all stages of the proceedings" and
 "has no prior history that would suggest that electronic
 monitoring may be necessary to gain [his] compliance with the
 terms of his probation." Like Condition L, Condition P is
 supported by the fact that Bailey has demonstrated the ability to
 sexually abuse a minor and is reasonably related to the need to
 provide just punishment for the offense, to deter criminal
 conduct, and to protect the public from further crimes by the
 defendant. HRS § 706-606(2)(a)-(c). Thus, imposing this
 condition was not an abuse of discretion.
 
For these reasons, we affirm the Family Court's denial
 
of Bailey's motion for a DANC, vacate his sentence, and remand
 for resentencing before a different judge.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 30, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Kirstin Hamman 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Peter A. Hanano Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
13
 