NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000444
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JOHN E. KNIGHT, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE CIRCUIT CIRCUIT
 
(SPECIAL PROCEEDING PRISONER NO. 14-1-0023 (CR. NO. 91-2108))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant John E. Knight (Knight) appeals
 
from the "Order Denying [Knight's] Petition for Post-Conviction
 
Relief Without a Hearing" entered on May 8, 2015 in the Circuit
 
1
Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).
 
On appeal, Knight contends the circuit court erred in 
denying his Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 
Petition without a hearing.
I. BACKGROUND
 
On March 2, 1994, Knight was convicted of murder in the
 
second degree. The Hawaii Paroling Authority (HPA) set Knight's
 
minimum term of imprisonment at thirty-five years.
 
On January 22, 2009, Knight requested, from the HPA, a 
new minimum-term hearing based on the Hawai 'i Supreme Court's 
decision in Coulter v. State, 116 Hawai 'i 181, 172 P.3d 493 
(2007).2 There is no information in the record pertaining to a 
1 The Honorable Edward H. Kubo, Jr. presided.
 
2 Knight's request is not contained in the record on appeal, but
Respondent-Appellee State of Hawai' i does not dispute this fact. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hearing on the new minimum-term hearing or to the information the
 
HPA considered in setting a new minimum-term, and there is no
 
transcript of the hearing in the record. The HPA issued a
 
"Notice of Order of Fixing Minimum Term(s) of Imprisonment" on
 July 15, 2009, setting Knight's minimum-term at thirty-five
 years. The HPA determined that Knight's crime warranted "Level
 III" punishment, and identified the "Nature of the Offense" and
 "Degree of Loss to Person" as significant factors in determining
 the punishment level of Knight's crime.
 
On October 2, 2009, Knight filed a writ of habeas
 
corpus with the circuit court (Non-Conforming Petition). The
 
circuit court entered an order designating the motion as a non­
conforming petition for post-conviction relief under HRPP Rule 40
 and directed Knight to supplement the petition by January 4,
 2010. Knight's Non-Conforming Petition was dismissed because
 Knight failed to comply with the order. Knight v. State, No.
 
CAAP-11-0000472 at *1 (App. Dec. 7, 2012) (SDO)
 
On September 13, 2010, Knight filed an HRPP Rule 40
 
petition (2010 Rule 40 Petition), which the circuit court denied
 
on May 27, 2011. Id. This court affirmed the circuit court's
 
denial. Id.
 
On September 23, 2014, Knight filed a "Petition to
 
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Illegal Sentence Through a Writ of
 
Habeas Corpus Pursuant to HRPP Rule 40" (2014 Rule 40 Petition).
 
In his 2014 Rule 40 Petition, Knight describes the issues
 
warranting relief:
 
1) Whether the HPA, in using the criteria "Nature of
Offense" and "Degree of Loss to Person" to justify

[Knight's] Level III punishment, violated [Knight's] right
to due process under the constitutions of the State of
Hawaii and the United States by using what are in fact
"elements of the offense" without a unanimous finding by a
jury;
 
2) Whether such failure to provide due process is

contrary to, or an unreasonable application of; clearly
established federal law, as determined by the U.S. Supreme
Court;
 
3) Whether the HPA's habitual, and specific to

[Knight], use of inappropriate criteria to justify Level III
punishment is unconstitutional; 
4) Whether the HPA violated [Knight's] due process

rights by setting his minimum term far above the normal
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
range for similarly-situated offenders whose crimes had
similar or more heinous circumstances;
 
5) Whether the HPA violated [Knight's] rights by not
disclosing to him all of the adverse material in his HPA
file prior to his minimum term hearing;

 
6) Whether the HPA violated [Knight's] rights by not
disclosing to him prior to his hearing what criteria and
Level of Punishment would be used to finalize his sentence;

 
7) Whether individually or cumulatively, the
violations of [Knight's] rights were contrary to, or an

unreasonable application of, clearly established federal
law, as determined by the U.S. Supreme Court and the Hawaii
Supreme Court and deserve habeas relief.
 
(Format altered.)
 
On May 8, 2015, the circuit court entered its "Order
 
Denying Petitioner John E. Knight's Petition for Post-Conviction
 
Relief Without a Hearing." Knight filed a notice of appeal from
 the order on May 28, 2015.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
Denial of HRPP Rule 40 Petition
 
The standard of review in determining whether a court
erred in denying a petition for post-conviction relief
without a hearing is  de novo. Dan v. State, 76 Hawai' i 423,
427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994). Under de novo review, "the
appellate court steps into the trial court's position,
reviews the same trial record, and redecides the issue,"
determining whether the court's decision was right or wrong.
Id. This court has held that de novo review is appropriate
because a denial of a petition for post-conviction relief
presents a question of law. Id. As this court has said,
 
as a general rule, a hearing should be

held on [an HRPP] Rule 40 petition for
post-conviction relief where the petition
states a colorable claim. To establish a
 colorable claim, the allegations of the
petition must show that if taken as true
the facts alleged would change the
verdict, however, a petitioner's
conclusions need not be regarded as true.
Where examination of the record of the
 trial court proceedings indicates that the
petitioner's allegations show no colorable
claim, it is not error to deny the
petition without a hearing. The question
on appeal of a denial of [an HRPP] Rule 40
petition without a hearing is whether the
trial record indicates that a petitioner's
application for relief made such a showing
of a colorable claim as to require a
hearing before the lower court.
 
Id. (quoting State v. Allen, 7 Haw. App. 89, 92-93, 744 P.2d
789, 792-93 (1987)) . . . .
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hutch v. State, 107 Hawai 'i 411, 414, 114 P.3d 917, 920 (2005) 
(brackets and emphases omitted).
 
With respect to HPA decisions establishing a minimum
term, this court has stated that "judicial intervention is
appropriate where the HPA has failed to exercise any
discretion at all, acted arbitrarily and capriciously so as
to give rise to a due process violation, or otherwise
violated the prisoner's constitutional rights."
 
Fagaragan v. State, 132 Hawai 'i 224, 234, 320 P.3d 889, 899 
(2014) (quoting Coulter, 116 Hawai 'i at 184, 172 P.3d at 496. 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Relief under HRPP Rule 40 is not available where
 
the issues sought to be raised have been previously ruled
upon or were waived. Except for a claim of illegal
sentence, an issue is waived if the petitioner knowingly and
understandingly failed to raise it and it could have been
raised before the trial, at the trial, on appeal, in a
habeas corpus proceeding or any other proceeding actually
conducted, or in a prior proceeding actually initiated under
this rule, and the petitioner is unable to prove the
existence of extraordinary circumstances to justify the
petitioner's failure to raise the issue. There is a
 rebuttable presumption that a failure to appeal a ruling or
to raise an issue is a knowing and understanding failure.
 
HRPP Rule 40(a)(3). A court may deny the petitioner a hearing
 
"if the petitioner's claim is patently frivolous and is without
 trace of support either in the record or from other evidence
 submitted by the petitioner." HRPP Rule 40(f). 
Knight argued in his 2014 Rule 40 Petition that the
 
issues he raised were not waived for failure to raise them in his
 previous petitions because the issues are based on rules
 announced in cases decided after his Non-Conforming Petition and
 2010 Rule 40 Petition. Knight's 2014 Rule 40 Petition can be
 summarized as raising three distinct issues. First, Knight
 contended that "Nature of Offense" and "Degree of Loss to Person"
 are elements of the underlying claim that are required to be
 submitted to a jury under the United States Supreme Court's
 decision in Alleyne v. United States, 133 S.Ct. 2151 (2013).
 However, Knight does not raise this issue on appeal. 
Second, Knight claimed the HPA insufficiently justified
 
a Level III punishment under St. Clair v. State, No. CAAP-11­0000359 at *5 (App. Dec. 20, 2013) (mem.) by stating simply
 "Significant factors identified in determining level of
 punishment: (1) Nature of Offense; (2) Degree of Loss to Person."
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Under the Degree of Injury/Loss to Person or Property
 
criteria, the standard for a Level III level of punishment is met
 
if the injury or loss suffered by the victim(s) was more than
 those experienced by similarly situated victims." St. Clair,
 
mem. op. at *5 (brackets and internal quotation marks omitted).
 In St. Clair, we held that where a defendant was convicted of
 vehicular manslaughter and the victim was killed almost
 instantaneously, the HPA erroneously relied on the "Degree of
 Injury/Loss to Person" because the victim did not suffer any loss
 greater than other manslaughter victims. Id. at *6. This court
 
explained, "for purposes of applying the Degree of Injury/Loss to
 Person criteria to St. Clair's manslaughter conviction,
 ['similarly situated victims'] are not victims of drunk driving
 in general where the underlying offense is less serious than
 manslaughter, but refer to manslaughter victims." Id. St. Clair
 
is of no help to Knight. Knight's Level III argument was
 available before St. Clair was decided. Knight's challenge to
 his minimum-term of imprisonment was previously ruled upon or
 waived.
 
Third, Knight argued that the HPA violated his rights 
by not providing him with adverse material prior to the minimum-term hearing as required by De La Garza v. State, 129 Hawai
'i 
429, 302 P.3d 697 (2013). In De La Garza, the Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court held that due process under the Hawai 'i Constitution 
"requires that the prisoner have timely access to all of the adverse information contained in the HPA file. The HPA must disclose such information 'soon enough in advance' that the inmate has a 'reasonable opportunity to prepare responses and rebuttal of inaccuracies.'" De La Garza, 129 Hawai
'i at 442, 302 
P.3d at 710 (quoting Labrum v. Utah State Bd. of Pardons, 870 P.2d 902, 909 (Utah 1993)). Knight has failed to rebut the presumption that his failure to previously raise this argument constituted a knowing and understanding failure and to demonstrate the existence of extraordinary circumstances to justify his failure to raise the argument. Since this argument was not previously raised by Knight, it was waived. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Therefore, the "Order Denying Petitioner John E.
 
Knight's Petition for Post-Conviction Relief Without a Hearing"
 
entered on May 8, 2015 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 16, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Jeffrey A. Hawk
(Hawk Sing & Ignacio)for Petitioner-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Diane K. Taira Lisa M. Itomura Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Respondent-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 

6
 