NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000802
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
SAMUEL C. McFADDEN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 13-1-0357)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
After a jury trial, Defendant-Appellant Samuel C.
 
McFadden (McFadden) was found guilty of Sexual Assault in the
 
Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 707-731(1)(a) (2014), and sentenced to a term of five years
 
probation including fifteen months in jail with credit for time
 served. McFadden appeals from the April 3, 2014 Judgment, Guilty
 Conviction and Probation Sentence (Judgment) entered by the
 
Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (Circuit Court).
1
 
I. BACKGROUND FACTS
 
On August 20, 2013, Plaintiff-Appellee the State of 
Hawai'i (State) charged McFadden with one count of Sexual Assault 
in the Second Degree in violation of HRS § 707-731(1)(a). The 
jury trial began on November 18, 2013 with McFadden being represented by a Deputy Public Defender. 
1
 The Honorable Randal Valenciano presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Complainant testified during trial. She stated 
that she had come to Kaua 'i from Oregon in August of 2013 and 
ended up camping at Anini Beach with her friend Sasha and Sasha's 
children. She met McFadden as he was also camping nearby. McFadden talked to her about the "energy healing" services or "Reiki" that he performed, which Sasha thought could help Complainant. Complainant eventually agreed to cut McFadden's hair in exchange for his Reiki services. She went to McFadden's tent, where he had a blowup mattress to lie down on. Complainant lay down on the mattress on her back and McFadden began to give her what she described as a massage. At this time, Complainant was wearing her bikini, as she had been tanning outside. McFadden asked her to remove her bikini top because "sometimes it can constrict your chest from expanding[.]" 
At some point, Complainant needed to take a break to
 
use the bathroom. When she got back, McFadden asked her to lie
 down on her stomach. She stated that McFadden began to massage
 her neck and back. McFadden told her that she could touch him if
 she wanted to, but Complainant did not want to. McFadden had one
 hand near her neck and upper back and one hand near her hips and
 buttocks. McFadden then began touching Complainant under her
 bikini in the area in between her anus and vagina. Complainant
 testified that she was confused, but McFadden told her to relax. 
Complainant testified that she was not relaxed, that it was
 apparent that she was not relaxed, and that she was not okay with
 him putting his hands in that area. However, she did not tell
 him not to touch her there or to stop. Complainant then realized
 that McFadden had put his fingers inside of her anus. At that
 point, she pushed up and said "I don't like this. I'm done. I
 want to leave. I don't like to be touched," before grabbing her
 belongings and leaving. McFadden did not say anything.
 Complainant testified that McFadden had never asked her if it was
 okay for him to touch her private area or put his finger inside
 her anus. She estimated that the time he was touching her in
 between her anus and vagina and the time he was touching the
 inside of her anus was less than a minute total.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Complainant told her friends what happened later that
 
day and they called the police. She described being upset,
 
confused, and embarrassed and cried when she told her friend
 Sasha what had happened.
 
McFadden also testified at trial. He stated that when
Complainant came into his tent, he told her "I would be
 addressing all of her organs, including her sexual organs, and if
 she was okay with that." When Complainant returned to the tent
 after her bathroom break, he told her "imagine yourself being
 able to levitate, and if I could grab your pubic bone and
 tailbone and shake your whole skeletal so as to relieve the
 tension. This is what I'm going to be doing[.]" He stated that
 he did massage the area between Complainant's anus and vagina and
 penetrated her anus. Specifically, he put the middle finger of
 his right hand into her anus. He stated that:
 
 
I was explaining to her, oh, your perineum has a knot there
too.
 
And I started working it. . . . And then the knot in
the perineum released, and I said "Do you notice any
difference?" 
And she goes, "Yeah, I could feel the energy releasing
there."
 
And I said, "Let me know if you feel anything else."
And after a little bit of time, she goes "Yeah, I can
feel my abdominal, something going on there."


So I had finished both of her arms all the way down to
her hands with the other arm, and I was up in her shoulders,

and at least ten times I kept on saying, because I could
feel she was getting in touch with something deep within
her, but she wasn't coming out with words.
And I said, you know, this is the time to speak. This
 
is really, you know - this is the time to say anything
because somebody now is listening.
And so I - at least ten times I encouraged her to
speak, speak, speak. And then finally, she said, "I don't
want to be touched, and I withdraw myself."
And I said, "Okay. What would you like to do?"
And then she says, "I think I want to go out and have

a cigarette."
And I said, "Okay." And she went out and I got
cleaned up, and then I went outside[.]
 
McFadden said that Complainant let him take a drag of the
 
cigarette she was smoking, that she told him "I think I'm done
 now[,]" and then got her things out of his tent.
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court's instructions to the jury contained
 
the following:
 
In the Complaint, the Defendant, SAMUEL C. McFADDEN,
is charged with the offense of Sexual Assault in the Second
Degree.
A person commits the offense of Sexual Assault in the
Second Degree if he knowingly subjects another person to an
act of sexual penetration by compulsion.
There are three material elements of the offense of
 
Sexual Assault in the Second Degree, each of which the
prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
These three elements are:
 1
. That, on or about the 17th day of August, 2013, in
the County of Kauai, State of Hawaii, the Defendant, SAMUEL
C. McFADDEN subjected another person to an act of sexual
penetration; and

2.
 That the Defendant SAMUEL C. McFADDEN did so by
compulsion; and
3. That the Defendant SAMUEL C. McFADDEN did so
 
knowingly.
 
This instruction was submitted as the State's Instruction No. 1
 
which had been given over McFadden's counsel's objection.2
 
The court also gave the following instruction:
 
"'Compulsion' means absence of consent." This instruction was
 submitted as the State's Instruction No. 4 which was not objected
 to. The court also instructed that: "Consent signifies
 voluntary agreement or concurrence." This had been submitted as
 the Court's Supplemental Jury Instruction No. 1. McFadden's
 counsel objected to this instruction as it was "vague" and "not
 complete" and entered at the last minute.
 
The jury found McFadden guilty of Sexual Assault in the
 
Second Degree. The court entered its Judgment on April 3, 2014. 
McFadden was sentenced to five years of probation with fifteen
 months in jail, was ordered to pay a $205 Crime Victim
 Compensation Fee and a $150 Probation Services Fee, was ordered
 
2 Counsel's objection was specifically:
 
Under where it says these three elements are, colon, I
object to the way this is laid out. Basically, I think
knowingly should go along with the sentence that has
compulsion in it. And knowingly should also go along with
the sentence or with the clause, rather, that it is
subjected another person to an act of sexual penetration so
that that's clear.
 
And I disagree that the state of mind knowingly
applies to the date or to the County of Kauai, State of
Hawaii.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to attend and complete the HOPE Probation Program, and was
 
ordered to register as a sex offender.
 
McFadden timely filed a notice of appeal on May 5,
 
2014.
 II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
McFadden raises the following points of error on
 
appeal:
 
(1) The Circuit Court erred when it failed to give a
 
jury instruction on the defense of consent or implied consent;
 
(2) The Circuit Court erred when it failed to give a
 
jury instruction on the defense of ignorance or mistake; and
 
(3) McFadden was denied effective assistance of counsel
 
at trial.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
The standard of review for jury instructions that were
not objected to at trial was clarified in  State v. Nichols , 111
 
Hawai'i 327, 141 P.3d 974 (2006), where the Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
held that
 

 
although as a general matter forfeited assignments of error
are to be reviewed under [Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP)] Rule 52(b) plain error standard of review, in thecase of erroneous jury instructions, that standard of reviewis effectively merged with the HRPP Rule 52(a) harmlesserror standard of review because it is the duty of the trialcourt to properly instruct the jury. As a result, onceinstructional error is demonstrated, we will vacate, withoutregard to whether timely objection was made, if there is areasonable possibility that the error contributed to the
defendant's conviction, i.e., that the erroneous jury
instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Id. at 337, 141 P.3d at 984 (footnote omitted). Thus, the 
appellant must first demonstrate instructional error by rebutting the "presumption that unobjected-to jury instructions are correct." Id. at 337 n.6, 141 P.3d at 984 n.6; accord State v. 
Eberly, 107 Hawai
'i 239, 250, 112 P.3d 725, 736 (2005). If the 
appellant is able to rebut this presumption, the burden shifts to the State to prove that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt because 
[e]rroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and are a
ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears from the
record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial.
However, error is not to be viewed in isolation and
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
considered purely in the abstract. It must be examined in
 
the light of the entire proceedings and given the effect
which the whole record shows it to be entitled.
 
Nichols, 111 Hawai 'i at 334, 141 P.3d at 981 (brackets in 
original omitted) (quoting State v. Gonsalves, 108 Hawai 'i 289, 
293, 119 P.3d 597, 601 (2005)). 
In State v. Taylor, 130 Hawai 'i 196, 197-98, 307 P.3d 
1142, 1143-44 (2013), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court clarified Nichols 
and held that, in the case of an unrequested mistake of fact jury 
instruction, the alleged error is to be reviewed first for plain error, i.e., "whether the defendant, at trial, had met his or her initial burden to adduce credible evidence of facts constituting the defense (unless those facts are supplied by the prosecution's witnesses)." Then, "[i]f the omission of the unrequested mistake of fact jury instruction constitutes plain error, it shall be a basis for reversal of the defendant's conviction only if an examination of the record as a whole reveals that the error was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." Id. at 198, 307 P.3d at 
1144. The Taylor court clarified that "[t]his is so, because a defense like mistake of fact is capable of negativing the state of mind required to establish an element of the offense, thus capable of avoiding conviction." Id. at 207, 307 P.3d at 1153 
(citation, internal quotation marks, and footnote omitted). IV. DISCUSSION
 A. Instruction on the Defense of Implied Consent
 McFadden argues that the Circuit Court erred by failing
 
to instruct the jury on the defenses of consent and implied
 consent. By statute, "[i]n any prosecution, the victim's consent
 to the conduct alleged, or to the result thereof, is a defense if
 the consent negatives an element of the offense or precludes the
 infliction of the harm or evil sought to be prevented by the law
 defining the offense." HRS § 702-233 (2014). Further, the
 offense of sexual assault in the second degree requires
 compulsion, which can either be manifested as a lack of consent
 or a threat. "A person commits the offense of sexual assault in
 the second degree if: (a) The person knowingly subjects another
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
person to an act of sexual penetration by compulsion[.]" HRS 
§ 707-731(1)(a). "'Compulsion' means absence of consent, or a threat, express or implied, that places a person in fear of public humiliation, property damage, or financial loss." HRS § 707-700 (2014). Further, "[c]onsent signifies voluntary agreement or concurrence . . . . Consent may be expressed or implied[.]" State v. Adams, 10 Haw. App. 593, 605, 880 P.2d 226, 
234 (1994), cert. denied, 77 Hawai
'i 373, 884 P.2d 1149 (1994). 
As discussed, the supreme court recently clarified the 
two-step process to be used when evaluating a trial court's failure to instruct on the mistake of fact defense. Taylor, 130 
Hawai
'i at 207-08, 307 P.3d at 1153-54. Inasmuch as the defense 
of consent, like the defense of mistake of fact, negates the state of mind necessary for conviction, we conclude that Taylor's two-part test for whether reversal is required when a trial court fails to give an unrequested mistake of fact jury instruction is also applicable to a case where the trial court fails to give an unrequested consent instruction. See id. ("Failure to give the 
mistake of fact jury instruction [when credible evidence constituting the defense is put forth at trial] constitutes plain error . . . because a defense like mistake of fact is capable of negativing the state of mind required to establish an element of the offense, thus capable of avoiding conviction.") (citations, internal quotation marks, brackets, and footnote omitted). 
In the present case, the jury instructions specifically
 
provided that: (1) sexual assault in the second degree requires
 sexual penetration by compulsion; (2) "compulsion" means the
 absence of consent; and (3) consent signifies voluntary agreement
 or concurrence. However, there was no instruction that consent
 could either be expressed or implied. 
This court has previously held that "[i]f there is any
 
rational basis in the evidence which would support a finding of
 implied concurrence in the charged act(s), the jury should be
 instructed that consent may be expressed or implied." State v.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Jones, 97 Hawai 'i 23, 31, 32 P.3d 1097, 1105 (App. 1998).3 Here, 
there is credible evidence in the record to support a finding of 
implied consent. On direct examination, McFadden testified that he told Complainant he "would be addressing all of her organs, including her sexual organs, and if she was okay with that." McFadden was asked: "Did you tell her that you would be working inside her sexual organs?" McFadden replied: "That would be depending upon if it called for it. But I was letting her know ahead of time that it would be involved." McFadden also testified that as he was massaging the area between Complainant's anus and vagina he told her that he felt a "knot of energy" in her perineum, that he felt it "release," that he asked her if she noticed any difference and she replied: "Yeah, I could feel the energy releasing there", that he then told her to let him know if she felt anything else, and that "after a little bit of time" she told him "I can feel my abdominal, something going on there." 
This testimony could be viewed by a rational juror as 
evidence that Complainant impliedly consented to McFadden touching her private areas and putting his finger in her anus as part of his "energy healing" practice. Thus, McFadden was entitled to an instruction explaining that consent, as a defense to sexual assault in the second degree, could be either expressed or implied. 
Jones, 97 Hawai 'i at 31, 32 P.3d at 1105; see also 
State v. Ancheta, 108 Hawai 'i 467, 468-69, 121 P.3d 932, 933-34 
(App. 2005) (vacating and remanding judgment as to certain sexual assault convictions where the defendant contended that the sex was impliedly consented to as "make up sex" but the jury instructions did not mention implied consent at all); State v. 
3
 The State argues that Jones does not support McFadden's position 
because in Jones, the Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) vacated and remanded
the case on other grounds. 97 Hawai' i at 31, 32 P.3d at 1105. However, the
ICA in Jones was clearly instructing the trial court that on remand, a juryinstruction on implied consent should be added if it found that there was areasonable basis to support such an instruction. Id. Further, this court has
relied on the proposition in Jones, cited above, to vacate and remand a casewhere an implied consent instruction was not given despite the existence of arational basis for such a defense in the evidence. State v. Ancheta, 108 
Hawai'i 467, 469, 121 P.3d 932, 934 (2005). Thus, we disagree with the
State's argument that Jones does not support the argument that the CircuitCourt erred when not providing an instruction on implied consent. 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Shabazz, 98 Hawai 'i 358, 385, 48 P.3d 605, 632 (App. 2002) ("we 
agree with [the defendant] that a jury instruction defining both 
express and implied consent would be particularly appropriate on the record of this trial, in which the only real question before the jury was whether Complainant consented to the sexual acts, either expressly or impliedly"). 
The State argues that the error was harmless because no
 
reasonable juror would believe that Complainant implicitly gave
 her consent. However, the supreme court has previously stated
 that: 
Though the evidence might appear to the trial court to be
simply overwhelming on an issue, so long as there was some
evidence relevant to the issue, the credibility and force of
such evidence must be for the jury, and cannot be a matter
of law for the decision of the court. And we are obliged to
construe the evidence in the case in a light most favorable
to the appellant in determining whether or not the
instruction should have been given. 
State v. Lira, 70 Haw. 23, 30, 759 P.2d 869, 873 (1988)
 
(citations, internal quotation marks, brackets, and ellipsis
 omitted). We reject the State's argument that no reasonable
 juror could find that Complainant implicitly gave her consent. 
Although the record in this case supports a finding that
 Complainant did not consent (e.g., inserting one's finger into
 another person's anus during a massage is more than extremely
 unusual, McFadden's statement about touching Complainant's sex
 organs did not necessarily imply that he would be touching the
 inside of her body, and the Complainant's testimony that she was
 not okay with the touching of her private areas). However, a
 jury would also be entitled to believe McFadden's testimony that
 he spoke with Complainant as he was touching the area near her
 anus and that he received feedback. This could reasonably be
 taken as evidence that Complainant was aware of how McFadden was
 touching her and impliedly consented by giving him positive
 feedback. This construction of the evidence is arguably
 supported by both McFadden's and Complainant's testimony that he
 stopped once she told him she no longer wanted to be touched. 
In a similar case, where the defendant admitted to
 
vaginally penetrating the complainant with his finger during a
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
massage while the complainant was undressed, this court 
recognized that the absence of physical or verbal resistance on the part of the complainant "may be considered by the jury in determining whether the alleged victim impliedly consented." Adams, 10 Haw. App. at 607, 880 P.2d at 235. Thus, we cannot say that the failure to instruct the jury regarding implied consent was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See Nichols, 111 Hawai
'i 
at 340, 141 P.3d at 987 ("[W]e are unwilling to speculate as to what the jury would have done had it been given a proper 'relevant attributes' instruction. . . . Based upon our review of the record as a whole, we thus conclude that there is a reasonable possibility that the jury might have weighed the evidence differently had it been properly instructed."). Therefore, we must vacate the Circuit Court's Judgment against McFadden and remand for a new trial. Id. at 337, 141 P.3d at 984 
("[O]nce instructional error is demonstrated, we will vacate, without regard to whether timely objection was made, if there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the defendant's conviction, i.e., that the erroneous jury instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.") (footnote omitted). 
B. Instruction on the Defenses of Ignorance and Mistake
 HRS § 702-218 (2014) provides:
 
In any prosecution for an offense, it is a defense that the
accused engaged in the prohibited conduct under ignorance or
mistake of fact if:
 (1) The ignorance or mistake negatives the state of mind
required to establish an element of the offense; or
(2) The law defining the offense or a law related thereto
provides that the state of mind established by such
ignorance or mistake constitutes a defense.
 
In a prosecution for sexual assault in the second
 
degree, ignorance or mistake as to the victim's lack of consent
 
is a defense as it negatives the state of mind of awareness of
 the lack of consent. Adams, 10 Haw. App. at 605-07, 880 P.2d at
 
234-35. 
In the present case, the jury instructions did not
 
address the defense of ignorance or mistake. The instructions
 did, however, make clear that a conviction of sexual assault in
 the second degree required that the jury find that McFadden
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
knowingly subjected Complainant to an act of sexual penetration
 
by compulsion. Nevertheless, the supreme court has held that,
 even where a jury is instructed on the state of mind necessary to
 convict a defendant, an instruction on the defenses of ignorance
 and mistake is still required.
 
The Hawai' i legislature premised the enactment of HRS
§ 702-218 on the proposition that, "if a person is ignorant
or mistaken as to a matter of fact . . . , the person's
ignorance or mistake will, in appropriate circumstances,
prevent the person from having the requisite culpability
with respect to the fact . . . as it actually exists. . . ."
See Commentary to HRS § 702-218 (1993). Consequently, the
legislature intended that a jury consider, separate and
apart from the substantive elements, whether a defendant's
mistaken belief should negate the requisite culpability for
the charged offense. That being the case, insofar as
ignorance or mistake of fact is a statutory defense in
Hawai'i, we deem the reasoning of the jurisdictions
entitling the defendant to a separate instruction to be the
more compelling and, thus, now hold that, where a defendant
has adduced evidence at trial supporting an instruction on
the statutory defense of ignorance or mistake of fact, the
trial court must, at the defendant's request, separately
instruct as to the defense, notwithstanding that the trial
court has also instructed regarding the state of mind
requisite to the charged offense. We believe that to hold
 otherwise would render HRS § 702-218(1) nugatory.
Inasmuch as the jury was not given the opportunity
expressly and separately to consider [the defendant's]
defense of ignorance or mistake of fact at trial, "there is
a reasonable possibility that [the circuit court's] error
may have contributed to [the defendant's] conviction." 
See
 
Hironaka, 99 Hawai' i at 204, 53 P.3d at 812 (quoting
Valentine, 93 Hawai' i at 203, 998 P.2d at 483). Thus, the
ICA's opinion gravely erred in holding that the circuit
court's error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
State v. Locquiao , 100 Hawai 'i 195, 208, 58 P.3d 1242, 1255 
(2002). As noted above, the supreme court has recently held
 
that:
 
[Hawai'i appellate courts] may notice as plain error
the omission of a mistake of fact jury instruction if it
appears that the defendant has come forward with credible
evidence going to the defense that the jury should have been
able to consider, as such an error "seriously affects the
fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial
proceedings," and it would "serve the ends of justice" and
"prevent the denial of fundamental rights" to address such
an omission. In such an instance, where the omission of the
mistake of fact jury instruction constitutes plain error, it
shall be a basis for reversal of the defendant's conviction
 only if an examination of the record as a whole reveals that
the error was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
Taylor, 130 Hawai 'i at 207-08, 307 P.3d at 1153-54 (citation and 
footnote omitted).
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In the present case, there was credible evidence to
 
reasonably support the defense of ignorance or mistake as to
 
Complainant's lack of consent. McFadden testified that he
 communicated with Complainant as he was touching near her anal
 area and that she gave him feedback as he was doing so. 
Complainant's failure to initially object to McFadden touching
 her anal area could be construed by reasonable jurors to have
 caused McFadden to reasonably believe that he had her consent. 
See Adams, 10 Haw. App. at 607-08, 880 P.2d at 235. The fact
 that they both testified that McFadden stopped once she told him
 she no longer wanted to be touched could also be construed as
 evidence that until she told him to stop, McFadden believed he
 had her consent to continue. 
The State points to the weakness in McFadden's evidence 
regarding mistake or ignorance, and the strength of the evidence against him, to argue that the absence of an instruction on mistake or ignorance was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. However, we reject the State's argument that there was no evidence that McFadden reasonably believed that he had Complainant's consent. As there is a reasonable possibility that the jury may have weighed the evidence differently had it been properly instructed on ignorance and mistake as a defense to sexual assault in the second degree, we cannot hold that the Circuit Court's failure to provide such an instruction was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Taylor, 130 Hawai
'i at 208, 
307 P.3d at 1154. 
C. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
 As we are vacating McFadden's conviction based on the
 
Circuit Court's failure to instruct on the defenses of implied
 consent and ignorance or mistake, there is no need to address the
 ineffective assistance of counsel argument, which is grounded in
 counsel's failure to request such instructions. See State v.
 
Yue, No. 29141, 2010 WL 3705983 at *1 (Sept. 23, 2010) (declining
 to reach the issue of whether the defendant's trial counsel was
 ineffective in failing to request a jury instruction on the
 protection of property defense where the ICA decided to vacate
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and remand based on the court's failure to sua sponte give the
 
jury instruction at issue).
 V. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit
 
Court's April 3, 2014 Judgment and remand for a new trial.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 21, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Donna E. Richards 
Mark R. Zenger
(Richards & Zenger)
for Defendant-Appellant
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Tracy Murakami

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Kauai
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
13
 