NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000482
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
BRANDON K. HILLIS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 13-1-1781)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Brandon K. Hillis (Hillis) appeals
 
from a June 23, 2015 Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
Court) Judgment of Conviction and Sentence.1 After a jury trial,
 
the Circuit Court convicted Hillis of: (1) Ownership or
 Possession Prohibited of Any Firearm or Ammunition by a Person
 Convicted of Certain Crimes, in violation of Hawai
'i Revised 
2 3
Statutes (HRS) § 134-7(b) and (h)  (2011) (Counts 1-6) (Felon in
Possession); (2) Possession of Prohibited Detachable Ammunition
 
1 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 
2
 HRS § 134-7(b) provides, in relevant part:
 
No person who is under indictment for,
or has waived indictment for, or has been bound over to the
circuit court for, or has been convicted in this State or
elsewhere of having committed a felony, or any crime of
violence, or an illegal sale of any drug shall own, possess,
or control any firearm or ammunition therefor.
 
3
 HRS § 134-7(h) provides, in relevant part:
 
Any person violating subsection (a) or (b) shall
be guilty of a class C felony; provided that any felon
violating subsection (b) shall be guilty of a class B
felony. Any person violating subsection (c), (d), (e),
(f), or (g) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Magazine, in violation of HRS § 134-8(c) (2011) (Counts 7-8);
 
(3) Methamphetamine Trafficking in the First Degree, in violation
 of HRS § 712-1240.7(1)(a) (2014) (Count 9); (4) Promoting a
 Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, in violation of HRS
 § 712-1243 (2014) (Count 10); and (5) Unlawful Use of Drug
 Paraphernalia, in violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a) (2010)
 (Count 11).
 
On appeal, Hillis maintains that (1) the Circuit Court

 
erred in denying the defense's motion to dismiss Counts 1-5 of
 the indictment where the failure to define the term "Firearm"
 rendered those charges fatally defective and/or violated Hillis's
 constitutional right to be informed of the nature and cause of
 the accusation against him; (2) the Circuit Court violated
 Hillis's constitutional right to testify by failing to ensure
 that he was waiving his right to testify knowingly,
 intentionally, and voluntarily; and (3) the Circuit Court erred
 in denying Hillis's motion for judgment of acquittal where there
 was no substantial evidence that he had actual or constructive
 possession of the items.
 
After reviewing the parties' arguments, the record on
 
appeal, and relevant legal authority, we resolve Hillis's points
 on appeal as follows and affirm.
 
1. The Circuit Court did not err in denying Hillis's
 
motion to dismiss Counts 1 through 5 for failing to define the
 term "firearm" in those charges.
4 Hillis argues that the Circuit
 
Court erred because the charges were fatally defective for two
 
4 In each of Counts 1-5, Hillis was charged, in pertinent part, as
follows:
 
On or about the 20th day of November, 2013, in the
City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, BRANDON K.
HILLIS, a person who has been convicted in the State of
Hawaii or elsewhere of having committed with knowledge or
reckless disregard of the substantial and unjustifiable risk
that he had been so convicted, did intentionally or
knowingly own, possess, or control an object, with intent,
knowledge, or reckless disregard of the substantial and
unjustifiable risk that the object was a firearm and/or
ammunition therefor, thereby committing the offense of
Ownership or Possession Prohibited of Any Firearm or
Ammunition by a Person Convicted of Certain Crimes, in
violation of Section 134-7(b) and (h) of the Hawaii Revised
Statutes.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasons: (1) the term "firearm" in the charge fails to set forth 
all the essential elements of the offense and therefore should have been defined; and (2) the State was required to prove not only that the weapons were firearms, but that they met the specific statutory definition set forth in HRS § 134-1. Hillis claims the denial of his motion violated of Hawai
'i Rules of 
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 7(d), and the Hawai 'i Const. art. I, 
§§ 5, 10, and 14. 
Whether a charge sets forth all the essential elements 
of the offense is a question of law reviewed by the appellate courts 
de novo.  State v. Young, 107 Hawai 'i 36, 39, 109 P.3d 
677, 680 (2005). The challenged counts tracked the language of the statute, HRS § 134-7(b) and (h), and while they do not include the definition of "firearm" under HRS § 134-1, this definition of firearm does not create an additional element of the Felon in Possession offense and is consistent with the common, everyday understanding of the meaning of the term. State 
v. Mita, 124 Hawai
'i 385, 390, 245 P.3d 458, 463 (2010); compare 
Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 471 (11th ed. 2003) ("a weapon from which a shot is discharged by gunpowder, [usually] used of small arms.") and Black's Law Dictionary 751 (10th ed. 2014) ("[a] weapon that expels a projectile (such as a bullet or pellets) by the combustion of gunpowder or other explosive. – [a]lso termed gun"), with HRS § 134-1 ("'Firearm' means any weapon, for which the operating force is an explosive, including but not limited to pistols, revolvers, rifles, shotguns automatic firearms, noxious gas projectors, mortars, bombs, and cannon."). 
2. The Circuit Court did not violate Hillis's
 
constitutional right to testify by failing to conduct a proper
 
5
prior-to-trial advisory and ultimate Tachibana  colloquy. Hillis
 
does not dispute that the Circuit Court covered all the aspects
 of the right to testify and the right not to testify, nor does he
 point to any indication that he did not understand his rights as
 the Circuit Court explained them.
 
5
 Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai' i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Hillis contends the prior-to-trial colloquy was
 
deficient because it was overly complicated and the Circuit Court 
misstated the requirement that the defendant answer questions by the prosecutor. It appears that, in an abundance of caution, the Circuit Court conducted the entire ultimate Tachibana colloquy prior to trial, which informed and alerted Hillis to rights in addition to those required by 
State v. Lewis , 94 Hawai 'i 292, 
295, 12 P.3d 1233, 1236 (2000) and State v. Monteil, 134 Hawai 'i 
361, 371, 341 P.3d 567, 577 (2014). Therefore, advising Hillis of additional rights that are to be discussed later in the trial cannot be said to render the pretrial advisement overly complicated. 
Hillis argues that the trial court mislead him by

 
telling him if he testified he would be, "required to answer
 questions on cross-examination by . . . the prosecutor." Hillis
 contends he took this to mean "to answer every question asked of
 him by the state." Hillis argues that he believed that he would
 be required to answer every question by the prosecution, even
 questions over the objection of defense counsel, improper
 questions, irrelevant questions, questions outside the scope of
 direct, or questions related to matter that were prejudicial or
 subject to the motions in limine. To the extent the Circuit
 Court's warning was in error, when read in context, it was
 harmless.
 
If you do testify, you'll be treated just like every
other witness in this case. You'll come up to the
witness stand, you'll be sworn in, and then you'll be
asked questions by your lawyer, but you'll be required
to answer questions on cross-examination by . . . [the
deputy prosecutor.]
 
(Emphasis added.) In the context of being treated "just like
 
every other witness," Hillis would have seen other witnesses
 questioned prior to being required to make his decision. In
 addition, because Hillis was given the ultimate Tachibana
 colloquy prior to making his decision not to testify any
 confusion would have been corrected.
 
Hillis also argues that the Circuit Court's ultimate
 
Tachibana colloquy was deficient because it failed to engage in a
 "true colloquy" and instead merely recited a litany of rights. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court fully advised Hillis of the five rights
 
required by the Tachibana colloquy. The court then permitted a
 ten-minute recess to allow Hillis to speak to his attorney. The
 court questioned Hillis after consultation with defense counsel
 and ascertained that his decision was knowing, intelligent, and
 voluntary, and that he was "thinking clearly," and had "enough
 time to talk." The Circuit Court assiduously followed the
 mandates of Tachibana in determining Hillis was aware of his
 right to testify or not to testify, therefore Hillis's claim the
 ultimate Tachibana colloquy was deficient because it failed to
 engage in a "true colloquy" is without merit.
 
Hillis claims that including the word "important" and
 
the recommendation he should speak to his attorney in regard to
 the right not to testify overly-emphasized that right. After a
 careful review of both the pretrial warning and Tachibana
 exchange with Hillis, we conclude that the right not to testify
 was not over-emphasized.
 
3. The Circuit Court did not err in denying Hillis's 
motion for judgment of acquittal as, taking the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, State v. Timoteo, 87 Hawai
'i 108, 112-13, 952 P.2d 865, 869-70 (1997), there was 
substantial evidence of his actual or constructive possession of the firearms, illicit drugs, and paraphernalia (Contraband) with which he was charged. Hillis argues that the State has offered no evidence to establish the nexus between himself and the Contraband, other than the fact that he was present in the bedroom with the Contraband. Hillis points out there was no physical evidence introduced, such as fingerprints or DNA, proving possession of the Contraband; no evidence as to the ownership of the apartment; no evidence that Hillis had sole access to the bedroom; that other people were present in the apartment; and that Widija's personal papers and a magazine addressed to Widija were present in the living room. Hillis further argues personal items found in the bedroom establish mere access to the bedroom and that the presence of Widija's personal property indicates that he did not have exclusive access to the apartment. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"To support a finding of constructive possession the 
evidence must show 'a sufficient nexus between the accused and 
the drug to permit an inference that the accused had both power and the intent to exercise dominion and control over the drug.' Mere proximity is not enough." State v. Mundell, 8 Haw. App. 
610, 622, 822 P.2d 23, 29 (1991) (citation omitted), overruled on other grounds by State v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai
'i 87, 112, 997 P.2d 
13, 38 (2000). Several of the factors this court identified in State v. Moniz, 92 Hawai
'i 472, 476, 992 P.2d 741, 745 (App. 
6
1999) as indicative of possession were present in this case. 
Hillis was present in the bedroom alone in his underwear at the

 
specified address when the search warrant was executed, the
 shotgun was in plain view, ammunition and drugs were stashed
 about the bedroom, he was found in close proximity, and had easy
 access to the Contraband, glass pipes were found in the bedroom
 and uncharged broken glass pipes of the type used to smoke
 methamphetamine were found in the living room, the Contraband was
 within an enclosed space, and a large sum of money was present.
 
In the present case there was also ample evidence from

 
which a jury could infer that Hillis had the power and intent to
 exercise dominion and control over the Contraband. Hillis was
 found within the bedroom where the Contraband was recovered
 secured by a combination lock, three surveillance cameras and a
 computer, and a shotgun within reach. Further, only Hillis's
 personal documents were found in the bedroom, including three
 birth certificates, Social Security card, and Massachusetts
 
6
 
1) the defendant's ownership of or right to possession of
the place where the controlled substance was found; 2) the

defendant's sole access to the place where the controlled
substance was found; 3) defendant under the influence of
narcotics when arrested; 4) defendant's presence when the
search warrant executed; 5) the defendant's sole occupancy
of the place where the controlled substance was found at the
time the contraband is discovered; 6) the location of the
contraband; 7) contraband in plain view; 8) defendant's
proximity to and the accessibility of the narcotic;
9) defendant's possession of other contraband when arrested;
10) defendant's incriminating statements when arrested;
11) defendant's attempted flight; 12) defendant's furtive
gestures; 13) presence of odor of the contraband;
14) presence of other contraband or drug paraphernalia, not
included in the charge; 15) place drugs found was enclosed.
 
Moniz
, Id. (ellipses and brackets omitted).
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Department of Public Safety identification card in close 
proximity to the ammunition giving rise to the charge. In addition, the traffic citation issued to Hillis and pinned to the inside of the bedroom door--where the occupant would be sure to see it--showed that he had access to the bedroom for at least several weeks. In addition, ammunition outside the safe matching ammunition found loaded into the firearms within the safe suggest Hillis had access to the safe. Taking the evidence and the reasonable inferences therefrom as a whole, a reasonable mind could conclude that Hillis had both the capability and intent to exercise control and dominion over the Contraband. State v. 
Thomas, 137 Hawai
'i 207, 366 P.3d 1086, CAAP-14-0000448 2016 WL 
797066 at *5 (App. Feb. 29, 2016) (SDO) quoting State v. Tabaldi, 77 A.3d 1124, 1134 (N.H. 2013) ("Personal possessions of the defendant found in close proximity to the controlled substance may provide a sufficiently close nexus between the defendant and the substance to allow the jury to infer possession.") (internal quotation marks omitted). 
For the foregoing reasons, the June 23, 2015 Judgment
 
of Conviction and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the
 First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 19, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Jeffrey A. Hawk,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Donn Fudo,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
7

 