  SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000517
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
MARY JO FRYE,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
C. MIKAHALA KERMABON,
Defendant-Appellant,
 
HEIRS OR ASSIGNS OF W.L. PULELOA(K), ET AL,
Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0455(1))
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Pro Se Defendant-Appellant C. Mikahala Kermabon appeals
 
the "Final Judgment In Favor of Plaintiff Mary Jo Frye" entered
 
April 26, 2012 in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit1
 
(circuit court).
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
 
Kermabon's appeal is without merit.
 
The circuit court granted summary judgment against
 
Kermabon on the grounds that Kermabon failed to show any genuine
 
issues of material fact to refute Mary Jo Frye's claim to title
 
by adverse possession.
 
"It is well established that one claiming title to real 
property by adverse possession must bear the burden of proving by 
clear and positive proof, each element of actual, open, 
notorious, hostile, continuous, and exclusive possession for the 
statutory period." Mauna Kea Agribusiness Co., Inc. v. Nauka, 
105 Hawai' i 252, 255, 96 P.3d 581, 584 (2004) (brackets omitted) 
(quoting Morinoue v. Roy, 86 Hawai' i 76, 81, 947 P.2d 944, 949 
(1997)). 
The statutory period claimants must prove adverse 
possession was ten years between 1893 and 1973 and was extended to twenty years in 1973. Wailuku Agribusiness Co., v. Ah Sam, 
114 Hawai' i 24, 34 n.19, 155 P.3d 1125, 1135 n. 19 (2007). 
Successive interests may be tacked to create a continuous 
possession where there is privity of estate or title between each 
of the successive possessors so as to link each to the original 
entry. Kainea v. Kreuger, 31 Haw. 108, *4 (Haw Terr. 1929). 
Privity may be established by any conveyance or agreement whether in writing or oral. Id. The claimant need only establish that 
each successive possession was connected and continuous. Id. 
Frye presented the circuit court with ample evidence
 
establishing Kaonoulu Ranch as the original entry for purposes of
 adverse possession. Constructing fences and using the land for
 
pasture constitutes evidence of actual, open, notorious, and
 
continuous use. Deponte v. Ulupalakua Ranch, Limited, 48 Haw.
 
17, 19, 395 P.2d 273, 274-75 (1964). Frye submitted a
 declaration from a ranch hand employed by Kaonoulu Ranch since
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1952. The ranch hand testified that part of his duties at
 
Kaonoulu Ranch included repairing stonewalls and wire fences, and
 
driving bulls in and out of the property. The ranch hand further
 
testified to the presence of water troughs and pipelines
 
maintained by Kaonoulu Ranch. Frye provided sworn testimony from
 
a related civil case in which the ranch hand testified that such
 
activities continued from 1954 until 1989. The activities
 
conducted by Kaonoulu Ranch on the property comprise actual,
 
open, notoriously, continuous use of the property for over
 
thirty-five years, supporting Frye's assertion that Kaonoulu
 
Ranch was the original entry and had satisfied the requirements
 
for adverse possession. 
Frye submitted evidence confirming privity of estate or
 
title between Frye and Kaonoulu Ranch, linking Frye's interest to
 
the original entry. Frye presented two expert reports created by
 
senior title researchers. The first expert report charted the
 
possession of land from the original land commission grant to
 
Keawe to the conveyance from DeCoite to Okuno. In the second
 
report, the expert charted land possession from Okuno to Brown. 
Both reports referenced recorded deeds and written conveyances. 
The reports show a connected, continuity of possession from
 
Kaonoulu Ranch to Brown. Frye submitted a deed recording the
 
conveyance from Brown to Brown and Frye, completing the link from
 
Kaonoulu Ranch to Frye. Though Frye failed to provide all of the
 
actual deeds referenced in the expert reports, a written
 
conveyance is not necessary to effectuate privity. Kainea, 31
 
Haw. at *4. Therefore, the expert reports sufficiently establish
 privity of estate or title between Frye and Kaonoulu Ranch. 
Having established grounds for tacking successive interests, Frye
 
satisfies the statutory period for adverse possession.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Review of the record supports the circuit court
 
conclusion that Frye successfully demonstrated all requisite
 
elements of adverse possession.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Final Judgment In Favor
 
of Plaintiff Mary Jo Frye" entered April 26, 2012 in the Circuit
 Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 31, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
C. Mikahala Kermabon
 
Defendant-Appellant pro se.
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
 Michael W. Gibson
 
(Ashford and Wriston)
for Plaintiff Appellee Mary Jo
Frye.
 
Associate Judge
 
4
