NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001352
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
DANIEL IBBETSON, Plaintiff/Counter-Defendant/Appellee,
v. DEAN KAIAWE, Defendant/Counterclaimant/Third-Party
Plaintiff/Appellant, v. HAWAII CONFERENCE FOUNDATION,
a Hawaii nonprofit corporation, and
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS, COUNTY OF HAWAII,
a municipal corporation, Third-Party Defendants/Appellees
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-015K)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, and Reifurth, J.;
and Ginoza, J., concurring and dissenting)
Defendant-Appellant/Counterclaimant/Third-Party
Plaintiff Dean Kaiawe (Kaiawe ) appeals from the Amended Final
Judgment ( Amended Judgment ) entered on November 13, 2014, by the
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit ( Circuit Court).1  The Amended
Judgment entered judgment in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee/
Counterclaim Defendant Daniel Ibbetson ( Ibbetson) as to the
Complaint and Counterclaim, and in favor of Third-Party
Defendants Hawaii Conference Foundation ( HCF) and Department of
1The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Public Works, County of Hawai #i (DPW), as to the Third-Party
Complaint.  The Amended Judgment was entered pursuant to, inter
alia, an April 14, 2010 Order Granting Plaintiff/Counterclaim
Defendant Daniel Ibbetson's Motion for Summary Judgment as to All
Counts of the Counterclaim filed February 10, 2006, filed
November 25, 2009 (Summary Judgment Order ), which is also
challenged on appeal.
I. BACKGROUND
This case involves a 0.722-acre parcel of land located
in south Kona on the island of Hawai #i (the Property ).  In 1915,
Mikala Kaiawe conveyed "all of that certain piece or parcel of
ground situate[d[ in said Kaohe 5, lying on the makai side of the
government road adjoining Kaohe 4" to the Board of the Hawaiian
Evangelical Association ( Association ) (1915 Deed).  The 1915 Deed
describes the Property as follows: 
Commencing at the Northeast corner of this piece on
the old government trail, a little makai of the present
government road, adjoining Kaohe 4, and running thence along
the line between Kaohe 4 and Kaohe 5, 200 feet in a
westwardly direction to a stake and stone pile; thence
southwardly to a stake and stone pile 120 feet; thence
eastwardly to a stake and stone pile 275 feet; and thence
northwardly . . . to point of commencement, and containing
about three-fourths of an acre, more or less, and being
described in R.P. Number 2368 to Huakonou.  
To have and to hold the said premises, with the
appurtenances, so that it may be used as a cemetery, to the
said Board of the Hawaiian Evangelical Association, its
successors and assigns, forever.  
In 1952, the Association petitioned to change its name
to the Hawaiian Evangelical Association of Congregational-
Christian Churches.  In 1963, the Hawaiian Evangelical
Association of Congregational-Christian Churches changed its name
to Hawaii Conference of the United Church of Christ (UCC ). 
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On September 2, 1983, the UCC, as Grantor, executed a
quitclaim deed in favor of a related administrative entity, HCF,2
as Grantee, which avers that the Grantor
does hereby remise, release and quitclaim unto the Grantee,
its successors and assigns, [the Property] AND the
reversions, remainders, rents, issues and profits thereof,
and all of the estate, right, title and interest of the
Grantor, both at law and in equity, therein and thereto.
 (1983 Deed ) (emphasis added; format altered).  
The Property was described in an attached exhibit as
"the premises conveyed to the [UCC], a Hawaii nonprofit
corporation, formerly known as the [Association], by deed dated
February 2, 1915, recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances of the
State of Hawaii in Liber 425, Page 34."  The 1983 Deed also
states: 
TO HAVE AND TO HOLD the same, together with the
improvements thereon and all rights, easements, privileges
and appurtenances thereunto belonging or appertaining, unto
the Grantee, its successors and assigns, for cemetery
purposes only, forever. 
The 1983 Deed was filed with the State of Hawai# i
Bureau of Conveyances on October 11, 1983.
In February 2003, HCF and Ibbetson executed a Deposit,
Receipt, Offer and Acceptance ( DROA).  On March 17, 2003, HCF, as
Grantor, executed a limited warranty deed, conveying the Property
to Ibbetston, as Grantee ( 2003 Deed ).  The Property was described
in an attached exhibit as the premises acquired by the 1983 Deed
between UCC and HCF.  The 2003 Deed reads: 
That for Ten Dollars ($10.00) and other good and
valuable consideration paid by the Grantee, the receipt of
which is hereby acknowledged, the Grantor does hereby grant,
2In an HCF annual report submitted by Kaiawe, HCF describes itself
as "the investment and property management arm of the Hawaii Conference of the
United Church of Christ, continuing the first Christian work started in Hawaii
in 1820."
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
bargain, sell and convey unto the Grantee, as Tenant in
Severalty, all of the property more particularly described
in Exhibit A  attached hereto and made a part hereof;
And the reversions, remainders, rents, issues and
profits thereof and all of the estate, right, title and
interest of the Grantor, both at law and in equity, therein
and thereto; 
EXCEPTING AND RESERVING, HOWEVER, unto Grantor and its
successors and assigns, a perpetual non-exclusive easement
for the visitation, maintenance and care of existing grave
sites ("Grave Site A"), located upon the real property
identified in Exhibit 1 attached hereto, and an easement for
ingress and egress to Grave Site A from Mamalahoa Highway to
and from the grave sites.  Grantor also hereby reserves for
itself and its successors and assigns, a limited right of
entry for the purpose of visiting presently unidentified
grave sites ("Grave Site B") located upon the real property
identified in said Exhibit 1.  The foregoing easement and
right of entry shall run with the land and be in favor of
Grantor and for the benefit of the relatives of the persons
buried in the graves located within Grave Site A and Grave
Site B, subject to the following terms and conditions:   
(a)  No additional burials or internments of remains
will be allowed in either Grave Site A or Grave Site B, with
the exception that: 
(1)   Louisa Louika Kema Ha #alilio, wife of
William Makaenaena Ha #alilio, may be buried at Grave
Site A; and 
(2)   cremated remains may be interred at Grave
Site A, provided that such remains shall be interred
in standard sized vaults with comparably sized vault
markers. 
(b)  Entries and visits to Grave Site A shall be
limited to daylight hours. 
(c)  As the identities of the persons buried at Grave
Site B are currently unknown, and access to Grave Site B
would involve entry onto the property, any person desiring
to visit Grave Site B shall notify Grantee in advance to
coordinate the date and time of the visit with Grantee, to
agree to the location of access to Grave Site B, and to
provide verification of the visitor's relationship to the
deceased. 
(d)  Grantee shall bear no responsibility for
maintenance or care of either Grave Site A or Grave Site B,
provided that Grantee shall maintain the current access to
Grave Site A and Grave Site B in their existing condition,
but shall have no obligation to improve the access. 
(e)  Grantee shall not be responsible or liable for
claims for personal injury and property damage arising out
of the use of the foregoing easement or right of entry or
any breach of these conditions.  
The 2003 Deed was filed with the State of Hawai# i
Bureau of Conveyances on March 21, 2003.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On July 15, 2005, Ibbetson filed an application for a
special permit with the County of Hawai #i Planning Commission
(Planning  Commission ) seeking permission to allow a bed and
breakfast establishment on the Property.  At a September 30, 2005
meeting, the Planning Commission allowed Kaiawe to intervene in a
contested case hearing.  On December 27, 2007, the Planning
Commission granted Ibbetson's special permit application subject
to certain conditions.
In the meantime, on January 22, 2006, Kaiawe called
Ibbetson to inform him that he would visit a grave site on the
Property.  Kaiawe and three other persons visited Grave Site A
and Grave Site B.  A confrontation occurred between Kaiawe and
Ibbetson when Kaiawe allegedly destroyed bushes and landscaping
on the Property.  Kaiawe denied Ibbetson's allegations. 
On January 26, 2006, Ibbetson filed a Complaint for
Injunctive Relief and Damages ( Complaint ).  Ibbetson sought an
injunction to enjoin Kaiawe and "all those claiming by through or
under him, or those previously accompanying him to the subject
property from coming to the subject property, except in
accordance with the terms of the [2003 Deed]."  Ibbetson also
requested a temporary restraining order, and damages "for
trespass and property damage."
On February 10, 2006, Kaiawe filed his answer to
Ibbetson's Complaint.  Kaiawe asserted that:  (1) Ibbetson lacked
standing to assert his claims; (2) Ibbetson is not the owner of
the Property; (3) Ibbetson's grantor had no authority to sell the
Property; (4) the Property is subject to limitation and
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
restriction that it be used for cemetery purposes; (5) Kaiawe is
entitled under common law, statute, or contract to enter upon the
Property for the purpose of visiting grave sites and to maintain
the grave sites; (6) the limitation and restriction on the
Property gives Kaiawe the unrestricted right to enter the
Property without Ibbetson's consent or approval; (7) Ibbetson
cannot exclude or prohibit Kaiawe from entering the Property
since Kaiawe is a lineal descendant of persons who are buried on
the Property; and (8) Rule 19 of the Hawai# i Rules of Civil
Procedure ( HRCP) requires joinder of other parties. 
On the same day, Kaiawe filed a Counterclaim to
Complaint for Injunctive Relief and Damages ( Counterclaim). 
Kaiawe asserted that he was the lineal descendant of Mikala
Kaiawe, "who conveyed the subject property to [Ibbetson's]
predecessor on condition that the subject property be used for
cemetery purposes[.]"  Kaiawe argued that a real and actual
controversy existed as to the ownership and use of the Property
and that he sought "a declaration of the parties' respective
rights and obligations under Chapter 632, Hawaii Revised Statutes
(HRS) as to ownership and use of the Property.  Additionally,
Kaiawe requested that the Circuit Court determine the respective
rights and interest in the Property under HRS Chapter 669. 
On April 17, 2006, Ibbetson filed an answer to Kaiawe's
Counterclaim.  Ibbetson contended that Kaiawe failed to state a
claim, failed to join indispensable parties, and failed to
present a justiciable controversy.  Ibbetson asserted that Kaiawe
lacked standing, privity of contract, and that Kaiawe had no
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
right to trespass on private property and destroy private
property.  Ibbetson also asserted that Kaiawe had no interest or
title in the Property.
On October 27, 2006, Kaiawe filed a third-party
complaint against HCF (Third-Party Complaint ).  Kaiawe asserted
that HCF did not have authority and power to deliver a deed or to
convey the Property to Ibbetson, and that HCF continued to own
the Property for use as a cemetery.  Kaiawe asserted that he has
"the unconditional right to visit and to enter on the [Property]
in its entirety and to conduct reasonable acts of maintenance
thereon."  On December 28, 2006, HCF filed its answer to the
Third-Party Complaint. 
On February 23, 2007, the parties agreed to mediation.  
On February 26, 2007, the Circuit Court appointed the Honorable
Riki May Amano, retired, as the mediator.  Ibbetson filed a
Motion to Terminate Mediation on December 31, 2008.  The Circuit
Court entered a Stipulation for Order Granting Ibbetson's Motion
to Terminate Mediation on April 6, 2009. 
On August 18, 2009, Kaiawe filed a first amended third-
party complaint (Amended Third-Party Complaint).  Kaiawe added
DPW as a third-party defendant.  Kaiawe contended that DPW had no
authority to issue Ibbetson's building permit because it failed
to refer the application to the State Historic Preservation
Division of the Department of Land and Natural Resources. 
Additionally, Kaiawe continued to assert that HCF did not have
authority and power to deliver a deed or to convey the Property
to Ibbetson, and that HCF continued to own the Property for use
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
as a cemetery.  Kaiawe also asserted that he has "the
unconditional right to visit and to enter on the [Property] in
its entirety and to conduct reasonable acts of maintenance
thereon."  DPW filed an answer to the Amended Third-Party
Complaint on October 8, 2009.  HCF filed an answer to the Amended
Third-Party Complaint on January 7, 2010. 
On November 25, 2009, Ibbetson filed a motion for
summary judgment as to all counts of the Counterclaim ( Motion for
Summary Judgment ).  Ibbetson challenged Kaiawe's standing to
bring the Counterclaim.  Ibbetson contended that "there is no
evidence that any alleged actual or threatened injury to
Defendant Kaiawe is fairly traceable to the actions of Plaintiff
Ibbetson."  Additionally, Ibbetson contended that a claim for
"violation of the more restrictive language of the [1983] Deed
would be properly brought by heirs, successors and assigns of the
Hawaiian Evangelical Association."  In response to Kaiawe's
contention that the Property should revert to the heirs of Mikala
Kaiawe because it was not being used as a cemetery, Ibbetson
argued that the language of the 1915 and 1983 Deeds "clearly
express the intent of the respective grantors to convey a fee
simple estate to the respective grantees[.]"  The 1915 Deed, 1983
Deed, 2003 Deed, and Ibbetson's declaration were attached to the
Motion for Summary Judgment.
On January 7, 2010, Kaiawe filed objections to
Ibbetson's Motion for Summary Judgment.  Kaiawe asserted that the
language, "so it may be used as a cemetery" in the 1915 Deed
created a limitation on title, and that the 1983 Deed "merely
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
confirm[ed]" the limitation on title.  As such, Kaiawe contended
that HCF had no authority to convey the Property to Ibbetson.  
Additionally, Kaiawe contended that the Property was dedicated to
cemetery use by common law and statute.  Kaiawe asserted that as
a relative of Mikala Kaiawe he has a "common law right to protect
a 'dedicated' parcel and to ensure that the parcel so 'dedicated'
is used only for cemetery uses and no other uses[.]"  The 1915
Deed, 1983 Deed, 2003 Deed, and DROA were attached to Kaiawe's
objections.
On January 11, 2010, Ibbetson filed a reply memorandum
in support of his Motion for Summary Judgment.  Ibbetson claimed
that the Property was not dedicated by common law or statute. 
Additionally, Ibbetson argued that there "is no clear intention
in the language used by Mikala Kaiawe that would cause the
[Property] to revert back to Mikala Kaiawe if the Hawaiian
Evangelical Association were to have used the [roperty] for some
use other than a cemetery." 
The Circuit Court held a hearing on the Motion for
Summary Judgment on January 15, 2010.  The parties reiterated the
arguments from their respective filings.  The Circuit Court found
that there was no genuine issue of material fact and that
Ibbetson was entitled to judgment as a matter of law.  The
Circuit Court concluded that "the [1915 Deed] did not create a
fee simple determinable [and] that [Kaiawe] does not have
standing to enforce the [1983 Deed], and that the cemetery was
not a dedicated cemetery and, therefore, is not subject to the
restrictions set forth in Chapter 441 Hawaii Revised Statutes." 
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Circuit Court entered the Summary Judgment Order on
April 14, 2010.  In this written order, the Circuit Court stated
its conclusion as follows: 
(1) Defendant Kaiawe has no standing to enforce the [1983
Deed] from the [UCC] to the [HCF]; (2) that neither the
[1915 Deed] from Mikala Kaiawe to the [Association] or the
[1983 Deed] from the [UCC] to the [HCF] contain language
limiting the conveyance in such a manner that the deeds
could be construed as conveying anything other than a fee
simple interest in the subject property to the Grantee(s);
and (3) the property conveyed to Plaintiff Ibbetson by that
[2003 Deed], was never dedicated as a public cemetery.
On September 19, 2012, the Circuit Court approved and
entered a Stipulation for Entry of Final Judgment, which was
agreed to by all parties.  The parties stipulated that:  (1)
judgment would be entered in favor of Ibbetson as to the
Complaint and the Counterclaim; (2) judgment would be entered in
favor of HCF as to the Third-Party Complaint; and (3) the Amended
Third-Party Complaint against DPW was dismissed.  The parties
also stipulated that the Summary Judgment Order operates as the
"law of the case," and determines (1) the legal effect to be
given to the 2003 Deed, (2) the legal ownership of the Property,
(3) the legal authority of HCF to deliver the 2003 Deed, and (4)
the permitted uses of the Property. 
On November 5, 2012, the Circuit Court entered its
Final Judgment in favor of Ibbetson as to the Complaint and the
Counterclaim.  The Final Judgment provides, inter alia , that 
Plaintiff Daniel Ibbetson is the owner of the 0.722-acre
parcel described in the [2003 Deed], subject to (1) the
restrictions, easements, limitations and conditions
described in said [2003 Deed], (2) to the extent applicable,
the conditions described in Special Permit 05-015 issued by
the County of Hawaii Planning Commission on December 27,
2007 for [Ibbetson's] use of the subject parcel for a 'bed-
and-breakfast' facility, (3) the amendment of the easement
area for Easement '1' thereon as set forth in that
Stipulation for Entry of Final Judgment entered concurrently
herewith, and (4) the right of Defendant Dean Kaiawe to
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
visit Grave Site B as set [forth] in that Stipulation for
Entry of Final Judgment entered concurrently herewith. 
The Final Judgment also entered judgment in favor of
HCF as to the Third-Party Complaint, and dismissed the First
Amended Third-Party Complaint against DPW.
On December 5, 2012, Kaiawe filed a notice of appeal
from the Final Judgment in CAAP-12-0001062.  On May 8, 2013, the
Intermediate Court of Appeals ( ICA) entered an Order Dismissing
Appeal for Lack of Appellate Jurisdiction, as the Final Judgment
failed to resolve the trespass claim in the Complaint, lacked the
language necessary for certification under HRCP Rule 54(b), did
not specifically identify the "claim it purports to resolve by
declaring Appellee Ibbetson the owner of the Property, subject to
various restrictions, easements, limitations, and conditions[,]"
and entered judgment in favor of Ibbetson while awarding Kaiawe
in part the declaratory relief he sought in the Counterclaim.  
The Circuit Court entered an Amended Final Judgment on
November 13, 2014.  The Amended Judgment entered judgment in
favor of Ibbetson as to all counts in the Complaint and
Counterclaim.  With regard to Count 3 of the Complaint, the
parties agreed that "Kaiawe will not enter the area described as
Grave Site B except in compliance with the restrictions,
easements, limitations and conditions described in the [2003
Deed] . . . nor will he deface or destroy any real or personal
property on the site at the time of the entry or visitation."  
The Amended Judgment also entered judgment in favor of HCF as to 
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
all counts in the Third-Party Complaint, and dismissed the
Amended Third-Party Complaint against DPW.3 
On December 9, 2014, Kaiawe filed a notice of appeal. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR ON APPEAL
Kaiawe argues that the Circuit Court erred when it: 
(1) granted Ibbetson's Motion for Summary Judgment; (2) entered
the Amended Judgment in favor of Ibbetson as to the Counterclaim;
(3) entered its Amended Judgment in favor of Ibbetson as to the
Complaint; and (4) entered its Amended Judgment in favor of HCF
as to the Third-Party Complaint.  The gravamen of Kaiawe's appeal
is that the Circuit Court erred when it concluded that:  (1)
Kaiawe lacked standing to enforce the 1983 Deed; and (2) the
Property was not dedicated as a public cemetery.
III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
"On appeal, the issue of standing is reviewed de novo
under the right/wrong standard."  Abaya v. Mantell , 112 Hawai #i
176, 180, 145 P.3d 719, 723 (2006).
On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
reviewed de novo.  See State ex rel. Anzai v. City and
County of Honolulu , 99 Hawai #i 508, [515], 57 P.3d 433,
[440] (2002); Bitney v. Honolulu Police Dep't , 96 Hawai #i
243, 250, 30 P.3d 257, 264 (2001).
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law.  A fact is material if
proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties.  The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party.  In other
words, we must view all of the evidence and inferences 
3Kaiawe does not appeal the dismissal of the Amended Third-Party
Complaint against DPW. 
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the party
opposing the motion.
Kahale v. City and County of Honolulu , 104 Hawai #i 341, 344,
90 P.3d 233, 236 (2004) (citation omitted).
Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cty. of Honolulu , 119 Hawaii 90, #
96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008).  
With regard to the burdens of the moving and non-moving
parties on summary judgment, the Hawai# i Supreme Court has
articulated: 
The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine issue as
to all material facts, which, under applicable principles of
substantive law, entitles the moving party to judgment as a
matter of law. This burden has two components.
First, the moving party has the burden of producing support
for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of material fact
exists with respect to the essential elements of the claim
or defense which the motion seeks to establish or which the
motion questions; and (2) based on the undisputed facts, it
is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. Only
when the moving party satisfies its initial burden of
production does the burden shift to the non-moving party to
respond to the motion for summary judgment and demonstrate
specific facts, as opposed to general allegations, that
present a genuine issue worthy of trial.
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion. This burden always remains with the moving party
and requires the moving party to convince the court that no
genuine issue of material fact exists and that the moving
party is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law.
Wong v. Cayetano , 111 Hawai #i 462, 476, 143 P.3d 1, 15 (2006)
(quoting French v. Hawaii Pizza Hut, Inc. , 105 Hawaii 462, 470, #
99 P.3d 1046, 1054 (2004)). 
"A declaratory judgment is a form of equitable relief."
Kau v. City & Cty. of Honolulu , 104 Hawai #i 468, 473, 92 P.3d
477, 482 (2004).  "The relief granted by a court in equity is
discretionary and will not be overturned on review unless the
circuit court abused its discretion by issuing a decision that
clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of the
appellant."  Curtis v. Dorn, 123 Hawai# i 301, 306, 234 P.3d 683,
688 (App. 2010) (quoting Aickin v. Ocean View Invs. Co., Inc. , 84
Hawai#i 447, 453, 935 P.2d 992, 998 (1997) (citation, internal
quotation marks and brackets omitted)).
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Summary Judgment on Kaiawe's Counterclaim
Kaiawe contends that the Circuit Court erred when it
granted summary judgment against him on his Counterclaim.  In the
Counterclaim, Kaiawe alleged that a real and actual controversy
existed as to the ownership and use of the Property and that he
sought a declaration of the parties' respective rights and
obligations under HRS Chapter 632 as to the ownership and use of
the subject property."4  Additionally, Kaiawe requested that the
Circuit Court determine the "respective rights and interest in
the subject property" under HRS chapter 669.5  Thus we consider
whether the Circuit Court erred when it summarily ruled against
Kaiawe with respect to a quiet title claim and/or a request for
declaratory judgment.
1. Quiet Title 
On appeal, Kaiawe appears to disavow any claim or right
to title to the Property, stating that he "sought to impress a
servitude on (not a forfeiture of) the cemetery parcel based on
the Association and its successor's actual and long, undisturbed
use of the parcel as a cemetery after the Association first
4HRS Chapter 632 is titled "DECLARATORY JUDGMENTS." 
5HRS Chapter 669 is titled "QUIETING TITLE." 
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
accepted Mikala Kaiawe's 1915 Deed."  (Emphasis and footnote
omitted).  Kaiawe repeatedly emphasizes on appeal that his claim
is that the Property was dedicated to a cemetery use, either at
common law and/or by statute.
Nevertheless, in light of Kaiawe's request in the
Counterclaim that the Circuit Court determine the "respective
rights and interest in the subject property" under HRS Chapter
669, we note that HRS § 669-1(a) (2016) provides that a quiet
title action "may be brought by any person against another person
who claims, or who may claim adversely to the plaintiff, an
estate or interest in real property, for the purpose of
determining the adverse claim."  "In an action to quiet title,
the burden is on the [quiet title] plaintiff to prove title in
and to the land in dispute, and, absent such proof, it is
unnecessary for the [quiet title] defendant to make any showing." 
Maui Land & Pineapple Co. v. Infiesto, 76 Hawai# i 402, 407, 879
P.2d 507, 512 (1994) (citing State v. Zimring , 58 Haw. 106, 110,
566 P.2d 725, 729 (1977)).  The quiet title "plaintiff has the
burden to prove either that he has paper title to the property or
that he holds title by adverse possession."  Id. at 408, 879 P.2d
at 513 (citing  Hustace v. Jones, 2 Haw. App. 234, 629 P.2d 1151
(1981)).  Kaiawe has not raised an adverse possession claim, and
has not pled or provided any evidence of superior title.  Nor
does the 1915 Deed contain any reservation of interest or right
of reversion.  Ibbetson submitted evidence of unbroken title from
Mikala Kaiawe to the Association to HCF to him.  Thus, we 
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
conclude that the Circuit Court did not err when it entered
summary judgment as to Kaiawe's action to quiet title. 
2. Declaratory Judgment 
In his Counterclaim, Kaiawe sought, inter alia , a
declaration of the parties' respective rights and obligations
under HRS chapter 6326 as to the use of the Property.  Kaiawe
therein asserted that the 1915 Deed created a restriction that
the Property be used for cemetery purposes only.  Kaiawe alleged
that he has the right to "enter upon the subject property, to
visit the burial site of his ancestor Mikala Kaiawe and to engage
in appropriate activity on the land and to visit the burial sites
of such other persons who are buried on the subject property." 
On appeal, Kaiawe argues that the Circuit Court erred on summary
judgment when it concluded that (1) he lacks standing to enforce
what he contends is a servitude on the Property, i.e., to
6HRS § 632-1 (2016) provides, in relevant part: 
. . . . 
[(b)] Relief by declaratory judgment may be granted in
civil cases where an actual controversy exists between
contending parties, or where the court is satisfied that
antagonistic claims are present between the parties involved
which indicate imminent and inevitable litigation, or where
in any such case the court is satisfied that a party asserts
a legal relation, status, right, or privilege in which the
party has a concrete interest and that there is a challenge
or denial of the asserted relation, status, right, or
privilege by an adversary party who also has or asserts a
concrete interest therein, and the court is satisfied also
that a declaratory judgment will serve to terminate the
uncertainty or controversy giving rise to the proceeding.
Where, however, a statute provides a special form of remedy
for a specific type of case, that statutory remedy shall be
followed; but the mere fact that an actual or threatened
controversy is susceptible of relief through a general
common law remedy, a remedy equitable in nature, or an
extraordinary legal remedy, whether such remedy is
recognized or regulated by statute or not, shall not debar a
party from the privilege of obtaining a declaratory judgment
in any case where the other essentials to such relief are
present.
16NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
restrict the use of the entire Property to cemetery use only, and
(2) the Property was not dedicated as a public cemetery.
a. Standing to Enforce the 1983 Deed
The standing issue before us is somewhat nuanced.  In
his summary judgment motion, Ibbetson did not argue that Kaiawe
lacks standing with respect to the 1915 Deed, by which Kaiawe's
lineal ancestor conveyed the Property to the Association, or that
Kaiawe lacks standing as a person whose family member was buried
on the Property.  Rather, Ibbetson argued, and the Circuit Court
concluded, that Kaiawe does not have standing to enforce the more
restrictive language, which first appeared in the 1983 Deed
transferring the Property from the UCC to its administrative and
investment foundation, HCF.  In addition, Ibbetson argued that
there is no actual or threatened injury to Kaiawe, fairly
traceable to Ibbetson, that would entitle Kaiawe to affirmative
relief against Ibbetson.
In opposing summary judgment, Kaiawe did not argue 
that he had standing to enforce the 1983 Deed.  Instead, Kaiawe
argued that as a relative of Mikala Kaiawe, who is buried on the
Property, he has "a common law right to protect a 'dedicated'
parcel and to ensure that the parcel so 'dedicated' is used only
for cemetery uses and no other uses."  In addition, Kaiawe argued
that, as a lineal descendent of Mikala Kaiawe, he can enforce the
limitations of the 1915 Deed.  As to his actual or threatened
injuries, Kaiawe argued that by putting non-cemetery uses on the
Property, Ibbetson injured Kaiawe's protected interests that the 
17NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
parcel be used for cemetery uses only according to the terms of
the 1915 Deed and the Association's "dedication" of the Property.
On appeal, Kaiawe submits that the Circuit Court
misinterpreted the significance of the 1983 Deed and asserts that
1983 Deed "reflected the Association's confirmation (admission)
of its past dedication" of the Property to cemetery use; in other
words, Kaiawe introduced the 1983 Deed as evidence of the prior
dedication of the property.  
Thus, Kaiawe does not assert, argue, or otherwise
support a claim that he has standing to enforce the alleged
restrictions of the 1983 Deed per se.  The Circuit Court's ruling
on standing is limited to the conclusion that Kaiawe has no
standing to enforce the 1983 Deed.  Accordingly, having no basis
to do otherwise, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err
in concluding that Kaiawe has no standing to enforce the 1983
Deed.
b. Dedication
Kaiawe challenges the Circuit Court's conclusion that
the "property conveyed to Plaintiff Ibbetson by [the 2003 Deed]
was never dedicated as a public cemetery."  
Dedication is defined as the "appropriation of land, or
an easement therein, by the owner, for the use of the public, and
accepted for such use by or on behalf of the public."  Maui Ranch
Estate Owners Ass'n v. Cty. of Maui, 6 Haw. App. 414, 420-21, 724
P.2d 118, 123 (1986) (citation omitted); see also Gold Coast
Neighborhood Ass'n v. State, 2017 WL 3668851, *10-*12 (Hawai #i
August 25, 2017) (recognizing common law implied dedication to
18NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the State).  "Dedication of land for public use may be achieved
either by statute or by common law."   Id. at 421, 724 P.2d at
123.  "Common law dedication is accomplished either expressly, as
by deed, or impliedly, as by acts and conduct which manifest an
intent to give the property for public use."  Id. (citation
omitted).
(1)common law dedication
Kaiawe contends that the Property was dedicated to
cemetery use under common law and/or HRS Chapter 441.  In support
of his common law argument, Kaiawe relies principally on Smith v.
Wilder, 6 Haw. 228 (Haw. Rep. 1879).7  This case involved
Kawaiahao Church's dedication of a part of its churchyard for the
erection of the Lunalilo Mausoleum.  Id. at 228-29.  The issue in
the case was whether the government had the right of possession,
care, and control of the mausoleum.  Id.  at 228.  The supreme
court noted that the "dedication thus formally made would estop
the Kawaiahao Church from revoking the dedication and from making
any other disposition of this ground, so long as it continued to
be used as the site for the Lunalilo Mausoleum."  Id. at 229.  As
Kaiawe points out, the court noted: 
A dedication may be made without writing; by act in
pais, as well as by deed.  It is not at all necessary that
the owner should part with the title which he has, for
dedication has respect to the possession, and not the
permanent estate.  Its effect is not to deprive a party of
title to his land, but to estop him while the dedication
continues in force from asserting that right of exclusive 
7Kaiawe also cites an unpublished circuit court decision from 1971,
in violation of Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 35(c).  In any case,
we note that the improperly cited case cites no authority for its conclusions
of law and the remedy fashioned therein does not support Kaiawe's request for
a declaration that the entire Property must be used for cemetery purposes only
and no other use.
19NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
possession and enjoyment which the owner of property
ordinarily has.
Id. (citation and quotation marks omitted; format altered).
The supreme court further explained, however, the
nature of this estoppel:
The dedication of this land for the erection of a
Royal Mausoleum may be considered as a dedication if not to
a quasi public use, certainly to a purpose, the character of
which, as a resting place for the dead, entitles that it
should be sacredly preserved and hallowed.
According to common law in cases of ordinary
interments in the ground, the heir has no property in the
bodies or ashes of his ancestors, and he cannot sustain an
action against such as disturb the remains, but as the body
after burial becomes a part of the ground where it was
committed, 'earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dust,'
the person who has the freehold of the soil can bring an
action of trespass quare clausum fregit , against those who
disturb or disinter it; and any person who has the actual
possession of the land may sustain this action against a
wrong doer. 
But where the owner of the freehold of the cemetery
has, by a deed, conferred a right to the exclusive
occupation of a particular lot in a cemetery, such grantee
may maintain an action for trespass on the particular lot.
Blackstone says further, that 'other personal chattels
there are, which also descend to the heir in the nature of
heirlooms, as a monument or tombstone in a church, or the
coat-armor of his ancestor there hung up, with the pennons
and other ensigns of honor suited to his degree. In this
case, albeit the freehold of the church is in the parson,
and these are annexed to that freehold, yet cannot the
parson or any other take them away or deface them, but is
liable to an action from the heir.'
Id. at 229-30 (citations omitted).
Thus, Smith recognizes that, at common law, the fee
simple owner of a property that includes dedicated burial grounds
does not have the same right of exclusive possession and
enjoyment as an owner whose property is not so burdened, as
generally the actual resting places of the dead should be
"preserved and hallowed."  However, Smith does not recognize a
right of an heir to the remains of his ancestors or to the burial
site.  Nor does it support the proposition that the dedicated use
20NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of a part of a property as a burial site precludes a fee simple
owner from other uses of the remainder of the property.  Even if
this court were to conclude that the Circuit Court erred in
concluding that the Property was never dedicated as a public
cemetery, Smith does not support the relief requested by Kaiawe. 
Here, Ibbetson took the Property from HCF subject to a perpetual
non-exclusive easement, which was specifically excepted and
reserved, for the visitation, maintenance, and care of the two
grave sites located upon the Property, as described in the 2003
Deed.  There is no allegation or evidence that Ibbetson has
failed to comply with the conditions set forth in the 2003 Deed,
which are consistent with the common law principles recognized in
Smith.
As to the issue of common law dedication,  Smith simply
does not support the proposition that the dedicated use of part
of a parcel as a cemetery or burial grounds evidences an implied
dedication of the entirety of the property for use only as a
cemetery.  In Smith, the Lunalilo Mausoleum was formally
dedicated as a royal burial ground.  Only that particular plot of
land, within the greater Kawaiahao Church property, was at issue.
Kaiawe also cites, inter alia , Barker v. Hazel-Fain Oil
Co., 219 S.W. 874 (Tex. App. 1920), to support the contention
that "courts look to the facts regarding the use that the grantee
makes of the land in context of the deed's language."  In Barker ,
the subject deed specifically conveyed a property for use as a
public cemetery and was thereafter used for the burial of the
public generally, as well as members of the grantee church.  Id.
21NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
at 875-76.  The Texas appellate court did not conclude that the
form of the grantor's deed precluded a subsequent sale, or even
that it mandated the perpetual or exclusive use as a cemetery. 
Rather, the court found that, so long as the property was fit for
and used as a public cemetery, it must be maintained for the
benefit of the public and "that any person, as plaintiffs, having
loved ones buried therein would have the right to complain and to
invoke the aid of a court of equity to restrain destruction, or
spoliation, or disturbance of the graves."  Id. at 876.  In
addition to the dedication and use as a public cemetery, the
court's reinstatement of a temporary injunction on a purported
sale to oil company was based on particular facts not presented
here.  First, the would-be buyer had entered into the cemetery
and was "threatening to erect derricks, dig slush pits, etc., for
the drilling of an oil well which, it was averred, would
inevitably result, if allowed to proceed, in discordant noises,
obnoxious odors, and desecration of graves by spraying oil, etc." 
Id. at 875.  In addition, the court essentially concluded that
there was no cash consideration being given for the land as the
stated consideration was a fractional (1/8) interest in the oil
company whose only asset would be whole of the land being sold;
thus, the deed to the oil company was "wholly unauthorized and
invalid."  Id. at 878.  
We reject Kaiawe's assertion that Barker warrants the
relief requested in this case.  The language of the 1915 Deed,
"so that it may be used as a cemetery" expresses the grantor's
preferred use of the property, but does not limit or preclude
22NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
other uses.  See Midkiff v. Castle & Cooke, Inc. , 45 Haw. 409,
416, 368 P.2d 887, 891-92 (1962) (discussed below).  Nor does the
1915 Deed purport to dedicate the land as a public cemetery. 
Upon review of the declarations and exhibits submitted in
opposition to summary judgment, while two portions of the
Property were clearly utilized for burials, there is no evidence
that it was open for burials of the public at large, or that
Ibbetson's home, which is already built, in any way desecrates
the graves or interferes with the rights of the families of the
dead to access the grave sites, subject to reasonable
restrictions.  
Kaiawe also contends that the habendum clause in the
1983 Deed supports his claim of common law dedication of the
entire Property as a cemetery.  Hawai# i law establishes, however,
that a deed is construed according to the intent of the parties,
and "such intent must be ascertained from the language of the
instrument itself."  Midkiff, 45 Haw. at 415, 368 P.2d at 891. 
Midkiff also holds that where a deed clearly expresses the intent
of the grantor to convey a fee simple estate, and is sufficient
to accomplish that purpose, then a habendum clause will not limit
that grant, unless the habendum clause spells out an intention to
convey a fee simple determinable or other limited estate.  Id. at
415-16, 368 P.2d at 891.  
The principal reason given for this general rule is
that the purpose clause is a mere expression or declaration
or recital of the anticipated use by the grantee of the land
and that such an expression or declaration or recital does
not indicate an intent to qualify or limit the estate
granted by the deed.  In many of the decisions an additional
reason for the rule is given that a grantor desiring to
grant an easement or to convey a determinable fee or other 
23NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
limited estate can readily use appropriate language for that
purpose.
Id. at 416, 368 P.2d at 891-92 (citations omitted).
Here, the language and form of the 1983 Deed are
sufficient to convey a fee simple estate, and Kaiawe does not
argue otherwise.  Nothing in the 1983 Deed indicates that a
reversion to the grantor was intended or that less than a fee
simple estate was being transferred.  Nor does Kaiawe provide
authority for the proposition that a deed's expression of
anticipated use should be otherwise viewed as creating a common
law servitude on the deeded property that is inconsistent with
the estate that was conveyed by the deed.  Thus, we reject
Kaiawe's contention that the 1983 Deed evidences the dedication
of the Property in its entirety, for exclusive use as a cemetery. 
See also , e.g., Dumbarton Imp. Ass'n, Inc. v Druid Ridge Cemetery
Co., 195 Md. App. 53, 71, 5 A.3d 1133, 1143 (2010) & Hill v.
Towson Realty, Inc., 221 Md. 389, 395, 397-98, 157 A.2d 796 (App.
1960) (cemetery clause and use does not limit other use of the
remainder of the property).
Finally, we cannot conclude that the Planning
Commission testimony of Nancietta Haalilio ( Haalilio) creates a
genuine issue of material fact as to the public dedication of the
entirety of the Property.  Haalilio's statements confirm the
burials at Site A and Site B, which are undisputed, but does
otherwise support Kaiawe's claim of public dedication.
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
granting summary judgment against Kaiawe on his common law claim
that the Property was dedicated for use as a public cemetery.
24NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(2)statutory dedication
Kaiawe also contends that the Property was dedicated by
statute.  "Statutory dedication occurs when the statutory
provisions are complied with."  Maui Ranch , 6 Haw. App. at 421,
724 P.2d at 123.  The relevant statutory provision, for
cemeteries in existence prior to 1967, is HRS § 441-17 (2013),
which provides:   
§ 441-17 Existing cemeteries deemed dedicated;
extension of existing cemeteries.  All existing cemeteries
or parts thereof which shall have been lawfully established,
and for which a map or plat substantially similar to that
required by section 441-3 has been filed or recorded in the
bureau of conveyances or in the office of the assistant
registrar of the land court, shall be deemed to have been
dedicated as of [July 1, 1967], to the same extent and with
like effect as provided in this chapter.
HRS § 441-3 (2013) provides in relevant part: 
§ 441-3 Map or plat required; unique identifier.  (a)
The cemetery authority, as any of the dedicated cemetery
property, or any part or section thereof, is offered for
sale, transfer, or disposition in the form of plots, crypts,
or niches, shall also:
(1) In the case of land, survey and subdivide the
dedicated cemetery property into sections,
blocks, plots, avenues, walks, or other
subdivisions; make a good and substantial map or
plat showing the sections, blocks, plots,
avenues, walks, or other subdivisions, with
descriptive names, initials, or numbers that
uniquely identify each plot;
(2) In the case of a mausoleum or columbarium, make
a good and substantial map or plat on which
shall be delineated the sections, halls, rooms,
corridors, elevation, and other divisions, with
descriptive names, initials, or numbers that
uniquely identify each niche, mausoleum, or
crypt; and
(3) File the maps or plats required by this section
in the office of the bureau of conveyances or
the office of the assistant registrar of the
land court, and maintain a copy of all filed
maps as a permanent record of the cemetery
authority.
Thus, under HRS § 441-17, a cemetery that existed prior
to 1967 will be deemed dedicated if a map or plat, in compliance
25NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
with the requirements of HRS § 441-3, was filed or recorded in
the bureau of conveyances or in the office of the assistant
registrar of the land court.
Kaiawe contends, without citing any authority, that the
metes and bounds description in the 1915 Deed is "'substantially
similar to' the survey map referred to in Sections 441-3 and 17,
HRS."  The 1915 Deed describes the Property as follows: 
Commencing at the Northeast corner of this piece on
the old government trail, a little makai of the present
government road, adjoining Kaohe 4, and running thence along
the line between Kaohe 4 and Kaohe 5, 200 feet in a
westwardly direction to a stake and stone pile; thence
southwardly to a stake and stone pile 102 feet; thence
eastwardly to a stake and stone pile 275 feet; and thence
northwardly . . . to point of commencement, and containing
about three-fourths of an acre, more or less, and being
described in R.P. Number 2368 to Huakonou.   
Kaiawe's argument is without merit.  The plat or map
requirements of HRS §§ 441-17 & 441-3 are clearly tailored to
make an official record tailored to characteristics of a cemetery
property.  The metes and bounds description in the 1915 Deed
merely outlines the boundaries of the Property.  It does not
contain any names, initials, or numbers that uniquely identify
the sections, blocks, plots, avenues, walks, or other
subdivisions in the Property as parts of a cemetery, or any
"substantially similar" information of a cemetery nature.  Thus,
we conclude that the Property was not deemed dedicated as a
cemetery pursuant to HRS § 441-17.
As we have concluded that the Circuit Court did not err
in its ruling concerning Kaiawe's standing to enforce the 1983
Deed or in its determination that there is no genuine issue of
material fact as to the common law or statutory dedication of the
26NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Property, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
entering the Summary Judgment Order.
B. Kaiawe's Other Points of Error
Kaiawe's other points of error are also based on his
assertion of erroneous findings and conclusions in the Summary
Judgment Order.  As we have rejected those arguments, we conclude
that the second, third, and fourth points of error are without
merit.
V. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated above, the Circuit Court's
November 13, 2014 Amended Judgment is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 31, 2017.
On the briefs:
Michael J. Matsukawa,
for Defendant/Counterclaimant/
 Third-Party Plaintiff/
 Appellant.
Dennis A. Krueger,
(Jewell & Krueger),
and
Wayne Nasser,
James K. Mee,
(Ashford & Wriston),
for Plaintiff/Counter-Defendant/
 Appellee.
Derek R. Kobayashi,
Matthew A. Hemme,
(Schlack Ito),
for Third-Party Defendants/
 Appellees.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
27