 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000773
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KAPELI MIKA LAFAELE, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P.
 NO. 10-1-0084; CR. NO. 06-1-1590)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Kapeli Mika Lafaele (Lafaele)
 
appeals from the Order Denying Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or
 
Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner From Custody, Filed
 November 4, 2010, filed on August 3, 2012 (Order Denying
Petition), in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
Court).
1
 
On August 27, 2007, in Cr. No. 06-1-1590, Lafaele was
 
found guilty of Assault in the First Degree after pleading guilty
 
to that charge, as a lesser included offense of Manslaughter. 
Lafaele was sentenced to five years probation with 18 months
 imprisonment as a special condition.
 
On January 25, 2010, the Circuit Court revoked
 
Lafaele's probation and resentenced him to ten years
 incarceration.
 
On November 4, 2010, Lafaele filed a Petition to
 
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner
 
1
 The Honorable Richard W. Pollack presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
From Custody (Petition). In the Petition, Lafaele contended
 
that: (1) he did not voluntarily and knowingly enter into the
 
guilty plea; (2) trial counsel failed to disclose favorable
 evidence to him prior to his plea, i.e., that a prosecution
 witness was unavailable; (3) trial counsel refused to file an
 appeal; and (4) trial counsel provided ineffective assistance of
 counsel for committing the alleged errors above.
 
On August 3, 2012, after a hearing on the Petition, the
 
Circuit Court entered the Order Denying Petition, which concluded
 that Lafaele's Petition was without merit. 
On appeal, Lafaele claims the Circuit Court erred by
 
denying the Petition because he received ineffective assistance
 of trial counsel. Lafaele contends that trial counsel failed to
 inform him that the State was not ready to proceed with its
 material witness and that trial counsel failed to file an appeal
 from his guilty plea and probation revocation on January 25,
 2010.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Lafaele's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Lafaele was aware of issues regarding the
 
availability of a State's witness prior to entering into a guilty
 plea agreement for Assault in the First Degree, as a lesser
 included offense of Manslaughter. A transcript of the June 14,
 2007 trial proceeding indicates that Lafaele was present when his
 counsel objected to the State's anticipated Opening Statement. 
His trial counsel stated that the witness was not immediately
 available for trial, therefore, she objected to any reference to
 photographs that were dependent on the witness's testimony.  The
 
State responded that it would bring the witness to court in a
 
gurney if necessary. The State did not concede that the witness
 would not testify at trial. The State's Opening Statement
 alleged that the witness was present at the time of the incident
 but it did not indicate that the witness would actually testify
 or what the witness would testify about at trial. In the
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defense's Opening Statement, Lafaele's trial counsel described
 
the witness as very intoxicated and uncooperative or unresponsive
 to police questioning at the time of the incident but able to
 describe the incident in vivid detail later when he was sober.
 
In addition, at the July 30, 2012 hearing on the 
Petition, Lafaele's trial counsel testified that after the State notified the Circuit Court about difficulties with the witness, she informed Lafaele of the witness situation, including that "the State may have a problem in their case," and discussed that issue with him in conjunction with their discussion of the plea offer and its possible ramifications, prior to him accepting the plea offer. The Circuit Court found trial counsel to be credible and Lafaele not credible. "It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." State v. Mattiello, 90 Hawai
'i 255, 259, 978 
P.2d 693, 697 (1999) (citations, internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
(2) 
Lafaele's claim that his trial counsel provided
 
ineffective assistance due to her failure to file an appeal from
 his guilty plea and/or his probation revocation on January 25,
 2010 is without merit. Lafaele specifically waived his right to
 appeal everything that happened up to the time of the guilty plea
 when he entered into the plea agreement. 
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance
of counsel, [the appellate court] looks at whether
defense counsel's assistance was within the range of
competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases.
The defendant has the burden of establishing
ineffective assistance of counsel and must meet the
 following two-part test: 1) that there were specific
errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of
skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors
or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or
 substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious
defense. To satisfy this second prong, the defendant
needs to show a possible impairment, rather than a
probable impairment, of a potentially meritorious
defense. A defendant need not prove actual prejudice. 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai 'i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27 
(2003) (citations, internal quotation marks and footnote 
omitted). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
There is no dispute that trial counsel did not file an
 
appeal from either the guilty plea or the January 25, 2010
 
probation revocation. However, that fact alone is insufficient
 to prove ineffective assistance of counsel. Lafaele did not
 specify any withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
 meritorious defense, much less show a possible impairment due to
 the failure to file any appeals. Therefore, Lafaele failed to
 carry his burden to show that trial counsel provided ineffective
 assistance. The Circuit Court did not err by concluding that
 trial counsel did not provide ineffective assistance and
 Lafaele's claims were without merit. Thus, the Circuit Court did
 not err by denying the Petition.
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's August 3, 2012
 
Order Denying Petition is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 31, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Shawn A. Luiz 
for Petitioner-Appellant Chief Judge 
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Respondent-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 