NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1The Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided.NO. CAAP-13-0000168
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
ELIZABETH-ANN K. MOTOYAMA, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI #I, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION; GLENN OKIMOTO,
in his Official Capacity; BRENNON MORIOKA, Individually and
in his Official Capacity; FRANCIS KEENO, Individually and
in his Official Capacity; REY DOMINGO, Individually and 
in his Official Capacity; and JANE DOES 1-10;
JOHN DOES 1-10, Defendants-Appellees
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-1669-08 ECN)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant Elizabeth-Ann K. Motoyama (Motoyama
or Appellant) appeals from the March 4, 2013 Final Judgment
(Judgment), entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
(Circuit Court),1 in favor of the Defendants-Appellees
(collectively, the State Defendants  or Appellees ) and against
Motoyama.  Motoyama also challenges the Circuit Court's February
7, 2013 Order Granting Defendants' Motion for Judgment on the
Pleadings ( Order Granting Rule 12(c) Motion).NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2This action was preceded by a suit filed by Motoyama in
the U.S. District Court for the District of Hawai #i (Federal
Court) (Motoyama I).  Motoyama I arose from the same factual
allegations as this action and sought relief against the same
defendants as named in this case (as well as additional
defendants).  In Motoyama I, Motoyama moved to file a first
amended complaint, which was granted in part and denied in part. 
Motoyama was permitted to amend her Federal Court complaint to
bring certain additional claims against Defendant-Appellee State
of Hawai# i, Department of Transportation ( DOT), but denied leave
to add various additional state and federal claims against
Defendant-Appellee Glenn Okimoto ( Okimoto), in his official
capacity, and Defendants-Appellees Rey Domingo ( Domingo), Francis
Keeno (Keeno), and Brennon Morioka ( Morioka) (and others),
individually and in their official capacities.  After a further
motion, Motoyama was allowed to add Okimoto, then Director of
DOT, in his official capacity for the purpose of seeking
injunctive relief.  After the filing of Motoyama's second amended
complaint, the Federal Court defendants moved for summary
judgment.  On March 29, 2012, the Federal Court entered an order
granting the motion for summary judgment.  See Motoyama v. Haw.,
Dept. Of Transp., 864 F. Supp. 2d 965 (D. Haw. 2012) ( Motoyama
I), aff'd, 584 F. App'x 399 (9th Cir. 2014).   The same day, the
Federal Court also entered judgment in favor of all defendants
and against Motoyama on all claims.  The Ninth Circuit Court of
Appeals affirmed the Federal Court's judgment.  See Motoyama v.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3Haw., Dep't of Transp., 584 F. App'x 399 (9th Cir. 2014) cert.
denied, 135 S.Ct. 2840 (2015).
The complaint in this case (Motoyama II), which was
filed on August 5, 2011, includes seven counts, alleging:   (1)
violations of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS ) § 378-2(1)(A),(2),(3)
(1993) and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 ( Title VII ),
as amended, for disparate treatment and retaliation for engaging
in a protected activity, against DOT, Domingo, Keeno, and Morioka
(Count I); (2) violations of HRS § 378-2(1)(A),(2),(3) and the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA ), alleging disability
discrimination and retaliation against DOT, Domingo, Keeno, and
Morioka (Count II ); (3) violations of The Equal Protection Clause
of the U.S. Constitution and art. I and art. XVI of the Hawai# i
Constitution, against Domingo, Keeno, and Morioka (Count III );
(4) defamation through libel, slander, and false light invasion
of privacy, against Domingo, Keeno, and Morioka ( Count IV); (5)
intentional infliction of emotional distress (IIED ), against
Domingo, Keeno, and Morioka ( Count V); (6) wrongful termination
in violation of civil service laws and public policy, against
DOT, Domingo, Keeno, and Morioka ( Count VI); and (7) violation of
the Hawaii Whistleblowers' Protection Act ( HWPA), HRS § 378-62,
against DOT, Domingo, Keeno, and Morioka ( Count VII ).
On December 18, 2012, the State Defendants filed a
Hawai#i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(c) motion for
judgment on the pleadings, arguing that Motoyama is barred from
relief in this case based on:  (1) res judicata and collateral
estoppel from the Motoyama I Federal Court judgment; (2) theNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4applicable statutes of limitations; and (3) qualified immunity. 
After a January 17, 2013 hearing, the Circuit Court entered the
Order Granting Rule 12(c) Motion and Judgment.  Motoyama timely
filed a notice of appeal.
On appeal, Motoyama raises three points of error,
contending that the Circuit Court erred when it:  (1) stated
generally in its decision that it agreed with the State's
analysis of what occurred and that Motoyama's claims should have
been litigated in Motoyama I; (2) considered matters outside the
pleadings, but did not treat the HRCP Rule 12(c) motion as a
motion for summary judgment; and (3) concluded that the doctrines
of res judicata , collateral estoppel, qualified immunity, and the
statute of limitations barred Motoyama's claims in this case.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Motoyama's points of error as follows: 
(1)  To the extent that Motoyama contends that the
Circuit Court misapprehended the Federal Court's rulings based on
what the State presented, this argument is without merit.  To the
extent that Motoyama contends that the Circuit Court erred in
construing the effect of the Federal Court's rulings, Motoyama's
contentions will be addressed in conjunction with the disposition
of her third point of error.
(2)  HRCP Rule 12(c) states, in relevant part:
After the pleadings are closed but within such time as not
to delay the trial, any party may move for judgment on the
pleadings.  If, on a motion for judgment on the pleadings,
matters outside the pleadings are presented to and notNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5excluded by the court, the motion shall be treated as one
for summary judgment and disposed of as provided in Rule
56[.]
However, in ruling on a rule 12(c) motion, a court can
also take judicial notice of other facts.  See Marsland v. Pang,
5 Haw. App. 463, 475, 701 P.2d 175, 186 (1985) (citing 5C CHARLES
ALAN WRIGHT  & ARTHUR  R. MILLER,  FEDERAL PRACTICE  AND PROCEDURE  §
1367 (1969)) ("A Rule 12(c) motion is designed to provide a means
of disposing of cases when the material facts are not in dispute
and a judgment on the merits can be achieved by focusing on the
content of the pleadings and any facts of which the court will
take judicial notice."). 
 Where collateral estoppel is used as a defense in an
HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) motion, judicial notice extends to prior
related proceedings.  See Ellis v. Crockett, 51 Haw. 45, 55, 451
P.2d 814, 821 (1969).  Because a Rule 12(c) motion serves "much
the same purpose" as a Rule 12(b)(6) motion, except that it comes
after the conclusion of the pleadings, the same rule applies. 
Marsland, 5 Haw. at 474, 701 P.2d at 186.  Judicial notice of the
prior proceedings extends to "the truth of facts asserted in
documents such as orders, judgments[,] and findings of fact and
conclusions of law because of the principles of collateral
estoppel, res judicata, and the law of the case."  State v.
Kotis, 91 Hawai #i 319, 342, 984 P.2d 78, 101 (1999) (citation
omitted).
Here, Appellees raised the defenses of res judicata,
collateral estoppel, qualified immunity, and statute of
limitations in their Rule 12(c) motion.  Thus, the Circuit CourtNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6properly took judicial notice of the Motoyama I proceeding and
its relevant orders and judgments in determining whether the
claims in Motoyama II are precluded or barred.  Therefore, we
conclude that the Circuit court did not err when it considered
the orders and judgment from Motoyama I , but did not treat the
motion as a motion for summary judgment under HRCP Rule 56.
(3)  Motoyama argues that res judicata and collateral
estoppel do not preclude her state law claims against the DOT and
the individual defendants because, inter alia , no state law
claims were litigated in Motoyama I .  Motoyama does not dispute
on appeal that her federal law claims are barred by the doctrine
of res judicata .
 Res judicata prohibits a party from relitigating a
previously adjudicated claim or cause of action.  Res judicata is
applicable when:  (1) the  claim or cause of action  in the present
action is identical to the one decided in the prior adjudication;
(2) there was a final judgment on the merits in the prior
adjudication; and (3) the parties to the present action are the
same or in privity with the parties in the prior action.  See ,
e.g., Bremer v. Weeks , 104 Hawai #i 43, 53-54, 85 P.3d 150, 160-61
(2004).  Res judicata prohibits the relitigation of all grounds
and defenses which might have been properly litigated in the
prior action, even if the issues were not litigated or decided in
the earlier adjudication of the subject claim or cause of action. 
Id. at 53, 85 P.3d at 160 (citations omitted).NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2Collateral estoppel is frequently, and perhaps confusingly,
referred to as an aspect of res judicata.  See, e.g., Omerod, 116 Hawai# i at
263-64, 172 P.3d at 1007-08; Keahole Def. Coal., Inc. v. Bd. of Land & Nat.
Res., 110 Hawai# i 419, 429, 134 P.3d 585, 595 (2006) (citations omitted).
7Collateral estoppel2 may preclude the relitigation of a
fact or issue that was previously determined in a prior action on
a different claim or cause of action between the same parties or
their privies.  Collateral estoppel only applies, however, if the
particular issue in question was actually litigated, finally
decided, and essential to the earlier valid and final judgment. 
See Omerod v. Heirs of Kaheananui , 116 Hawai #i 239, 264, 172 P.3d
983, 1008 (2007) (citing Dorrance v. Lee , 90 Hawai #i 143, 149,
976 P.2d 904, 910 (1999)).  Thus, the test for collateral
estoppel has four elements:  (1) the fact or issue in the present
action is identical to the one decided in the prior adjudication;
(2) there was a final judgment on the merits in the prior
adjudication; (3) the parties to the present action are the same
or in privity with the parties in the prior action; and (4) the
fact or issue decided in the prior action was actually litigated,
finally decided, and essential to the earlier valid and final
judgment.  Id. (citing Dorrance , 90 Hawai #i at 149, 976 P.2d at
910).  Hence, where an essential element to one of Appellant's
claims is collaterally estopped, the claim should be dismissed
because Appellant cannot establish a prima facie case.
Count I claims a violation of Title VII and HRS § 378-
2, et seq. , alleging "disparate treatment/retaliation" for
engaging in a protected activity.  Specifically, Motoyama alleges
that because of her involvement in protected activities, theNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8State Defendants subjected her to "a retaliatory hostile work
environment through their numerous acts of retaliation by
its/their agents and employees, including, but not limited to,
being placed under investigation, having her duties removed,
being placed on administrative leave without justification, and
then having her employment wrongfully terminated." 
As the Title VII retaliation and discrimination for
participating in a protected activity claim has already been
litigated in Motoyama I , res judicata precludes its relitigation
here.  Protected activity laws under Title VII and HRS § 378-2
are analogous, but they do not appear to be identical causes of
action.  Therefore, a final judgment on the merits in the Title
VII does not necessarily bar the HRS § 378-2 claim under the
doctrine of res judicata .  However, if any essential elements of
the HRS § 378-2 claim were actually litigated, finally decided,
and essential to the valid final judgment in Motoyama I ,
collateral estoppel precludes the relitigation of those issues.
Hawaii's protected activity law is codified as HRS
§ 378-2(2) (1993) and holds, in relevant part:#
It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice: 
(2) For any employer . . . to discharge, expel, or otherwise
discriminate against any individual because the individual
has opposed any practice forbidden by this part or has filed
a complaint, testified, or assisted in any proceeding
respecting the discriminatory practices prohibited under
this part[.]
Such claims are subject to the following three part
test: 
(1) the plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of
such retaliation by demonstrating that (a) the plaintiff (i)
has opposed any practice forbidden by HRS chapter 378,
Employment Practices, Part I, Discriminatory Practices or
(ii) has filed a complaint, testified, or assisted in any
proceeding respecting the discriminatory practicesNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9prohibited under this part, (b) his or her employer, labor
organization, or employment agency has discharged, expelled,
or otherwise discriminated against the plaintiff, and (c) a
causal link has existed between the protected activity and
the adverse action; (2) if the plaintiff establishes a prima
facie case of retaliation, the burden shifts to the
defendant to provide a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason
for the adverse employment action, and (3) if the defendant
articulates such a reason, the burden shifts back to the
plaintiff to show evidence demonstrating that the reason
given by the defendant is pretextual.  
Schefke v. Reliable Collection Agency, Ltd., 96 Hawai# i 408, 426,
32 P.3d 52, 70 (2001) (citations, internal quotation marks, and
brackets omitted).
The Hawaii Supreme Court looks to federal courts'
analysis of Title VII in applying HRS § 378-2.  See Sam Teague,
Ltd. v. Haw. Civil Rights Comm'n, 89 Hawai# i 269, 281, 971 P.2d
1104, 1116 (1999) ("the federal courts' interpretation of Title
VII is useful in construing Hawai# i's employment discrimination
law").  The pertinent portion of Title VII regarding protected
activities is codified as 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3 and states, in
relevant part:#
It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer
to discriminate against any of his employees . . . because
he has opposed any practice made an unlawful employment
practice by this subchapter, or because he has made a
charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner
in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this
subchapter. 
42 U.S.C.A. § 2000e-3(a) (West).  In applying Title VII in
Motoyama I , the Federal Court analyzed Appellant's claim under: 
(1) the "opposition clause," where the protected activity is
opposing a discriminatory practice of the employer, and (2) the
"participation clause," where the protected activity is the
voicing of the claimant's own injury.  Motoyama I , 864 F. Supp.
2d at 984 (quoting Learned v. City of Bellevue, 860 F.2d 928, 932
(9th Cir. 1988)). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
10In Motoyama I, the Federal Court found that Appellant's
involvement in the investigation of employee complaints, as part
of her job, was not a protected activity under the opposition
clause because "her assertions and evidence do not suggest that
she opposed an action of the [DOT] or any supervisor that is
unlawful under Title VII[.]"  Id. at 980.  Specifically, four out
of five Title VII investigations relied on by Appellant in her
claim did not result in a finding of unlawful discrimination:
She made no findings regarding the J.S. complaint about
financial fraud, which was based on whistle-blowing related
to financial fraud and workplace violence . . . because it
had been withdrawn; she made no findings regarding the C.D.
case because the investigation was conducted by C.D.'s
supervisor; she concluded there was no discrimination based
on marital status or gender in M.Y.'s case; and the H.H.
case resulted in a settlement agreement without a specific
finding of sexual harassment.
Id. at 979.  As to the one investigation where discrimination had
occurred, it was a sexual harassment claim between co-employees,
and the fact that Appellant claimed that her supervisor was "very
critical of [her] findings" was "insufficient to establish" that
she opposed any discriminatory practice of DOT.  Id. at 980. 
Because she presented no evidence that she opposed any
discriminatory practice made unlawful under Title VII, the
Motoyama I  court determined that she did not engage in a
protected activity through her investigations of employee
complaints.  Id.   Because establishing that a plaintiff opposed a
unlawful employment practice is a required element of a Title VII
protected activity case, and because the issue was determined on
summary judgment, this issue has been actually litigated, finally
decided, and is essential to the judgment.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
11Like Title VII, HRS § 378-2(2) has an opposition clause
and a participation clause.  Here, the language of the opposition
clause in HRS § 378-2(2) is substantially the same as the
opposition clause in Title VII in that a prima facie  showing
requires the claimant to demonstrate that she "opposed any
practice forbidden by" that section.  As explained above,
Appellant failed to present any evidence of unlawful
discriminatory employment practices of DOT.  Out of the five
investigations she cited, only one of them found that
discrimination had occurred, and the fact that her supervisor was
"critical of her findings" does not suggest that she opposed any
unlawful activity.  Accordingly, she is estopped from
relitigating the issue of whether she opposed any unlawful
discriminatory practice through her investigations.  Thus, she is
unable to make a prima facie  case under HRS § 378-2(2).
With regards to the participation clause, the Federal
Court found that Appellant's personal discrimination claims
(here, the filing of her own EEOC charges) were not causally
related to any adverse employment action.  Motoyama I, 864 
F. Supp. 2d at 982.  The Federal Court found that the defendants
met their burden of production "through providing admissible
evidence sufficient for the trier of fact to conclude that
[Appellant] was terminated for knowingly filing false complaints
against her co-workers and the resulting negative impact on other
HDOT employees," and that Appellant failed in her burden to rebut
this showing.  Id.  The Federal Court also found that she could
not establish a causal connection because she filed her secondNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
12EEOC charge after her termination.  Id.  In making this holding,
the issue of whether Appellant's suspension and termination were
causally related to Appellant's own EEOC claims was essential to
the judgment and has been decided on the merits.  Thus, Appellant
is estopped from relitigating causation again here.  As causation
is an essential element to a HRS § 378-2(2) claim, she is unable
to make a prima facie  showing here.
In sum, Appellant's HRS § 378-2(2) claims under the
opposition and participation clauses are barred by collateral
estoppel.  Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not
err when it dismissed Count I.
Count II claims a violation of the ADA and HRS § 378-
2(1), alleging disability discrimination and retaliation.  
Appellant alleges that Appellees discriminated against her based
on her disability by
denying or unreasonably delaying the providing of reasonable
accommodations of parking in closer proximity, a flexible
schedule for traveling to ADA fitted restrooms, a flexible
arrival time due to her serious injuries and need to use the
City Handi-Van, extended time to complete work, and denying
her permission to install a personally-purchased printer
that she requested upon her return to work[.]
 She also alleges that Appellees subjected her to "a
hostile work environment and numerous adverse actions based upon
her status as a disabled person requesting ADA Reasonable
Accommodations, including, but not limited to, being placed under
investigation, having her duties removed, being placed on
Administrative Leave, and [being] wrongfully discharged from
employment."NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In Motoyama I, Appellant did not specify whether her claim came
under ADA Title I or Title II.  However, the court in 
Motoyama I properly 
found that Title II of ADA (denial of public benefits) does not apply to
employment.  Motoyama I, 864 F. Supp. 2d at 986 (citing Zimmerman v. Or.
Dep't of Justice, 170 F.3d 1169, 1184 (9th Cir. 1999)).3
13As the ADA discrimination and retaliation claim has
already been litigated in  Motoyama I ,3 it cannot be relitigated
here.  The District Court dismissed the ADA claim against the DOT
for money damages pursuant to Eleventh Amendment immunity;
however, the claim against Okimoto for injunctive relief was
heard and, in that context, the issues of discrimination and
retaliation were decided on the merits against Appellant. 
Motoyama I , 864 F. Supp. 2d at 985-92.  
Although the ADA and HRS § 378-2(1) are analogous, they
are not identical causes of action; therefore, a final judgment
on the merits of the ADA claim does not bar the HRS 378-2 claim
under the doctrine of res judicata .  But where any elements of
the ADA claim have been actually litigated, finally decided, and
are essential to the valid final judgment in Motoyama I ,
collateral estoppel precludes their relitigation.
Hawaii's disability discrimination law is codified as
HRS § 378-2(1) (1993), and states, in relevant part:  "It shall
be an unlawful discriminatory practice . . . [b]ecause of . . .
disability . . . [f]or any employer to . . . bar or discharge
from employment, or otherwise to discriminate against any
individual in compensation or in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of employment[.]" #
As noted above, the anti-retaliatory provision of
Hawai#i's disability discrimination law is codified as HRS § 378-NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
142(2), and holds that it is unlawful:  "For any employer . . . to
discharge, expel, or otherwise discriminate against any
individual because the individual has opposed any practice
forbidden by this part or has filed a complaint, testified, or
assisted in any proceeding respecting the discriminatory
practices prohibited under this part[.]" 
The Federal Court expressly found that the State
Defendants therein met their burden of production by showing that
they did provide requested accommodations, or at least made a
good faith effort to provide them.  Motoyama I , 864 F. Supp. 2d
at 990.  The court also specifically found that Appellant failed
in her burden of production by not producing evidence that she
was denied her accommodations for parking and flex-time, or that
her request for a personal printer was as an ADA accommodation
rather than for personal privacy reasons.  Id.  at 990-91. 
Accordingly, the court found that there was no evidence of
disability discrimination through the denial of reasonable
accommodations.
Here Appellant makes the same allegation, but under the
state statute.  However, the issue of whether she was denied
reasonable disability accommodations was actually litigated,
finally decided, and essential to the grant of summary judgment
against her.  Thus, she is estopped from relitigating the issue
here. 
 As to the issue of retaliation through subjecting
Appellant to "adverse actions," the Federal Court found a lack of
temporal proximity between her requests for accommodation and herNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
15placement on leave and eventual termination because the majority
of her requests for accommodations were "made over a year before
her placement on administrative leave."  Motoyama I , 864 F. Supp.
2d at 989-90.  In granting summary judgment against Appellant,
the court concluded that "[t]here is nothing in the record to
establish an inference that [her] termination was causally
connected to her request for accommodations."  Id. at 989.  As
the issue of causation was actually litigated, finally decided,
and essential to the grant of summary judgment, she is estopped
from relitigating it.  As causation is an essential element to a
HRS § 378-2(2) claim, she is unable to make a prima facie  case.
The mere fact that Appellant here posits certain
alleged injuries (i.e., not being provided with use of the City's
Handi-van, being placed under investigation, having her duties
removed) were not specifically addressed in Motoyama I  does not
permit the relitigation of the same subject matter.  See Silver
v. Queen's Hosp., 63 Haw. 430, 436, 629 P.2d 1116, 1121 (1981). 
Collateral estoppel nevertheless applies because the "particular
issue in question" ( i.e., the denial of reasonable
accommodations, retaliation) "was actually litigated, finally
decided and [is] essential to the earlier valid and final
judgment."  Smallwood v. City & Cty. of Honolulu , 118 Hawai #i
139, 147, 185 P.3d 887, 895 (App. 2008).  We conclude that the
Circuit Court did not err in dismissing this claim as it was
barred by collateral estoppel. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
16Count III claims a violation of The Equal Protection
Clause of the U.S. Constitution and art. I and art. XVI of the
Hawai#i Constitution, alleging that  
Ms. Motoyama was subjected to disparate treatment by
Defendants due to her disability and the protected activity
in which she engaged. Based on Ms. Motoyama's disability
status and her role as an Equal Employment Opportunity
Officer/Specialist who acted in accordance with all laws,
the Defendants denied her the equal application and
protection of all of its laws by treating those in similar
or same circumstances, disparately, or more favorably than
Ms. Motoyama. The constitutional laws which protect Ms.
Motoyama were ignored or unequally applied in her case, and,
in addition, federal and state laws protecting Ms. Motoyama
which were known to Defendants, were flagrantly disregarded
or applied unequally. 
(Format altered).
In Motoyama I, the District Court granted summary
judgment to the defendants on Motoyama's equal protection claim
on the grounds that:  (1) there is no direct cause of action
under the Constitution and an Equal Protection claim would have
to be brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983; (2) Motoyama failed to
bring her claim under § 1983; and (3) that even if she did, 
§ 1983 does not provide a cause of action against state
defendants.  864 F. Supp. 2d at 992-93.  As the Equal Protection
under the U.S. Constitution claim has already been litigated in
Motoyama I , it cannot be relitigated here. 
As to her claim under the Hawaii State Constitution,
Appellant's failure to raise said claim in Motoyama I precludes
its litigation here.#
The res judicata effect of a final federal court judgment
applies to all state claims which could have been raised
under pendent jurisdiction.  A plaintiff cannot maintain a
second action in state court on the same transaction in
which he attempts to advance a state law theory earlier
omitted in a federal action.  Only where it is clear that a
federal court would have refrained from exercising pendent
jurisdiction over the state claims, such as where a
jurisdictional bar operates, or where the federal court hasNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
17exercised its discretion not to hear them, will those state
claims not be barred in a subsequent state court suit.
 
Silver, 63 Haw. at 437-38, 629 P.2d at 1122-23 (citations
omitted).   
Count IV claims defamation through libel, slander, and
false light invasion of privacy, and Count V claims IIED. 
Count IV alleges that Appellees "intentionally and/or
recklessly" uttered 
false statements, including nonprivileged statements to
Defendant HDOT employees regarding Ms. Motoyama, which
Defendants knew would cause said employees to shun or avoid
Ms. Motoyama, or hold her in disdain, statements made to
employees who had no need to know, false statements that
were maliciously made during the investigation and
unemployment hearing, that were designed to damage [her]
professional reputation, character and standing[.]
In Count V, Motoyama re-alleges and incorporates by
reference her prior allegations and contends that the Appellees
thereby intentionally inflicted extreme emotional distress upon
her.      
In Motoyama I, Appellant sought to amend her complaint
to bring these claims, but was denied leave to add them because
the Federal Court would not have supplemental jurisdiction over
them.  As these claims were denied on jurisdictional grounds, and
the issues at the crux of these claims were not decided on the
merits, they are not barred by res judicata or collateral
estoppel. 
Counts IV and V are subject to the two-year statutes of
limitations set forth in HRS §§ 657-4 and 657-7 (1993).  Motoyama
was placed on administrative leave on March 4, 2009.  The alleged
tortious acts and injuries all were alleged to have occurred
prior to her being placed on administrative leave and, therefore,NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
18Motoyama's claims accrued prior to that date.  As this suit was
filed on August 5, 2011, Motoyama's tort claims in Counts IV and
V are barred by the applicable statutes of limitations.
Count VI claims wrongful termination in violation of
civil service laws and public policy, specifically, that
Appellant "was discharged without just cause and in violation of
Hawai#i Civil Service laws and public policy, and in retaliation
for reporting or in the process of reporting in the future,
violations of law or suspected violations of law."  There are
three requirements for bringing an actionable claim for wrongful
termination in violation of public policy.  
First, the employee's discharge must violate a clear mandate
of public policy. Second, the cause of action is limited to
certain protected activities. Such activities include
refusing to commit an unlawful act, performing an important
public obligation, or exercising a statutory right or
privilege. Third, there must be evidence of a causal
connection between the termination and the protected action
.
Cambron v. Starwood Vacation Ownership, Inc., 945 F. Supp. 2d
1133, 1140 (D. Haw. 2013) (emphasis added) (citing Villiarimo v.
Aloha Island Air, Inc., 281 F.3d 1054, 1067 (9th Cir. 2002)).  
In Motoyama I, the issue of whether Appellant's
termination was for cause or retaliatory was decided on the
merits against her.  Therefore, under the doctrine of collateral
estoppel, Appellant is estopped from litigating this factual
issue again here.  As Appellant is collaterally estopped from
proving that her termination was wrongful, she is unable to make
a prima facie case.
Count VII claims a violation of the HWPA.  Appellant
claims that Appellees "discriminated against and/or retaliated
against [her] for reporting violations of law or suspectedNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
19violations of law being committed by Defendant HDOT personnel by
subjecting [her] to a retaliatory hostile work environment and
numerous adverse actions based upon her having reported the
violations or suspected violations of law."  The HWPA provides,
in relevant part:
An employer shall not discharge, threaten, or otherwise
discriminate against an employee regarding the employee's
compensation, terms, conditions, location, or privileges of
employment because:  (1) The employee . . . reports or is
about to report to the employer . . . verbally or in
writing, a violation or a suspected violation of:  (A) A
law, rule, ordinance, or regulation, adopted pursuant to law
of this State[.]
HRS § 378-62 (Supp. 2014).  
In Crosby v. State Dept. of Budget & Fin. , 76 Hawai #i
332, 342, 876 P.2d 1300, 1310 (1994), the Hawai #i Supreme Court
described and discussed the elements of a valid claim under the
HWPA:
In order for an employee to prevail under the HWPA, however,
the employer's challenged action must have been taken
'because' the employee engaged in protected conduct in order
to be considered 'discriminatory' under the HWPA.  In other
words, a causal connection between the alleged retaliation
and the 'whistleblowing' is required.  The HWPA's
legislative history indicates that the legislature intended
that the required burden of proof be similar to that
utilized in traditional labor management relations discharge
cases.  Under the National Labor Relations Act, as amended,
29 U.S.C. §§ 151–168 (1988), an employee has the burden of
showing that his or her protected conduct was a 'substantial
or motivating factor' in the decision to terminate the
employee.
(Citation and brackets omitted.)
Thus, under  Crosby, an HWPA plaintiff must show that
the employee engaged in protected conduct, as defined in HWPA,
that the employer took some adverse action against the employee,
and that the employer's challenged action was taken because the
employee engaged in the protected conduct, i.e., that theNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
20protected conduct was a substantial or motivating factor in the
employer's decision to take the challenged action.
Albeit in the context of Motoyama's federal claims, in
Motoyama I , the Federal Court determined, based on the same
adverse actions as alleged herein, that Motoyama could not
establish a causal connection between any protected activity and
the alleged adverse actions.  Motoyama I , 864 F. Supp. 2d at 983-
84.  Rather, the adverse actions were attributed to Appellant
knowingly filing false complaints against her co-workers.  Id. at
982.  As the Federal Court ruled against Motoyama in Motoyama I
on this issue, and because that ruling was essential to the
judgment entered against her in that case, Motoyama is
collaterally estopped from relitigating the issue again here. 
Accordingly, we need not reach the parties other
arguments and, for these reasons, we conclude that the Circuit
Court did not err in entering the Order Granting Rule 12(c)
Motion.  Therefore, the Circuit Court's March 4, 2013 Final
Judgment is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii, November 22, 2016. #
On the briefs:
Elizabeth-Ann K. Motoyama, Presiding Judge
Plaintiff-Appellant Pro Se.
James E. Halvorson,
Maria C. Cook, Associate Judge
Deputy Attorneys General,
for Defendants-Appellees.
Associate Judge