NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000214
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ROBERT H.B. HSU, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-10-03917)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Robert H.B. Hsu ("Hsu") appeals
 
from the December 6, 2010 Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or
 
Order and Plea/Judgment ("Judgment") entered by the District
 Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division ("District
 Court").
1 Hsu was convicted of Operating a Vehicle Under the
 
Influence of an Intoxicant ("OVUII"), in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 291E-61(a)(3) (Supp. 2012)
 ("Subsection (a)(3)"). The District Court imposed a $250 fine
 plus additional fees. 
On appeal, Hsu argues that the District Court erred in
 
admitting the results of the Intoxilyzer 8000 ("Intoxilyzer")
 breath test because (1) "the State failed to prove that the
 Intoxilyzer . . . was operating accurately and/or that the
 calibration had been tested . . . in accordance with the
 manufacturer's specifications"; (2) "the evidence showed that no
 accuracy verification test had been performed at the time of
 . . . Hsu's breath test"; (3) Hsu's federal and state due process
 rights were violated by "denying [him] the opportunity to
 challenge the [breath test] result," thereby unconstitutionally
 
1
 The Honorable William Caldwell presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
restricting his ability "to present a complete and meaningful
 
defense"; (4) "the State failed to prove that there was probable
 cause to arrest and subsequently compel [him] to take the breath
 test"; and (5) "[t]he Complaint failed to allege the mens rea." 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Hsu's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Compliance with manufacturer specifications is not 
required to admit breath alcohol test results. To establish the evidentiary foundation for the admission of breath alcohol test results, the State must demonstrate the general reliability of the methodology used and the specific reliability of the test performed utilizing that methodology. State v. Lowther, 7 Haw. 
App. 20, 24, 740 P.2d 1017, 1020 (1987). Additionally, there must be "a showing of strict compliance with those provisions of the Rules which have a direct bearing on the validity and accuracy of the test result." State v. Kemper, 80 Hawai' i 102, 
105, 905 P.2d 77, 80 (App. 1995) (quoting State v. Matsuda, 9 Haw. App. 291, 293, 836 P.2d 506, 508 (1992)) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
The rules applicable in this case are found in Title 
11, chapter 114 of the Hawai' i Administrative Rules ("HAR") 
(1993) ("Chapter 114"). State v. Souza, 6 Haw. App. 554, 560, 
732 P.2d 253, 257–58 (1987). In implementing Chapter 114, the Director of the State Department of Health ("Director" or "DUI Coordinator") has soundly addressed both general and specific reliability concerns. See Haw. Admin. R. § 11-114-4, -5 (general 
reliability); § 11-114-4, -6, -7 (specific reliability). Thus, the District Court did not abuse its discretion when, by requiring strict compliance with those provisions of Chapter 114 that bear directly on validity and accuracy, see Kemper, 80 Hawai'i at 105, 905 P.2d at 80, it essentially, and 
appropriately, deferred to the Director's particular expertise for the limited purpose of establishing admissibility. See State 
v. Werle, 121 Hawai' i 274, 283, 218 P.3d 762, 771 (2009) 
(observing that showing compliance with Chapter 114 approval 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
requirements for machine and test procedures is a "shortcut" to
 
demonstrating general reliability, and making no mention of
 manufacturer specifications).
2
 
Therefore, we decline to require that the State
 
demonstrate compliance with manufacturer specifications before
 breath alcohol test results may be admitted.
 
(2) The "internal standard" accuracy verification test
 
performed by Honolulu Police Officer Craig Genovia ("Officer
 
3
Genovia")  strictly complied with HAR §§ 11-114-4, -6.  Hawai' i 
courts have long interpreted Chapter 114 to not require that accuracy verification devices utilize ethyl alcohol. See, e.g. 
, 
Kemper, 80 Hawai' i at 105–06, 905 P.2d at 80–81 (finding that use 
of a beam attenuator as an accuracy verification device for the Intoxilyzer strictly complied with Chapter 114); see also State v. Christie
, 70 Haw. 158, 163–64, 766 P.2d 1198, 1201–02 (1988)
 
(explaining the workings of a beam attenuator). 
In addition, Hsu's argument applies a conspicuously
 
selective definition of an "accuracy verification device." Hsu
 states:
 
An "accuracy verification device" is "a device or apparatus used
to substantiate the accuracy of the machine when a breath alcohol
 
test or an accuracy test is conducted." These devices may be
simulators, listed on the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration's [("NHTSA")] "Conforming Products List of
Calibrating Units for Breath Alcohol Testers" ("CPL") or other
"devices or apparatus approved by the NHTSA" or the Department of
Health. 
(citations and original brackets omitted). Critically, Hsu's
 
definition omits the central sentence in Chapter 114's
 definition: "These devices or apparatus [sic] may be internal,
 external, integral parts of or attachments to breath alcohol
 instruments." Haw. Admin. R. § 11-114-4 (emphasis added). 
2
 Hsu also argues that his breath test results should not be
admitted because "[n]owhere in this record is there any mention of the
procedure used by the supervisor and/or whether that procedure was approved by
the DUI Coordinator, as required by HAR [§] 11-114-7(a)." Hsu does not refer us to where in the record he raised this issue in the District Court, and heraises this argument on appeal for the first time in his reply brief.
Arguments raised for the first time in a reply brief are deemed waived. See 
In re Hawaiian Flour Mills, Inc., 76 Hawai' i 1, 14 n.5, 868 P.2d 419, 432 n.5
(1994). 
3
 The transcripts use both "Genovio" and "Genovia" for the spelling of
the officer's name; it is unclear which is correct. We utilize "Genovia"
 
throughout this decision.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Chapter 114 expressly permits that an accuracy 
verification device may be an internal or integral part of a 
breath alcohol instrument. And by implication, the degree of accuracy verification contemplated by Chapter 114 does not extend to components of a breath alcohol machine that cannot be tested by an internal or integral device. Indeed, this comports with prior findings that the use of accuracy verification devices that do not engage the sampling system are nonetheless strictly compliant with Chapter 114. See Kemper, 80 Hawai' i at 105–06, 
905 P.2d at 80–81. 
The accuracy verification device used by Officer
 
Genovia when administering the breath alcohol test to Hsu was in
 strict compliance with Chapter 114. Officer Genovia testified
 that he utilized the Intoxilyzer's internal standard as the
 accuracy verification test. The DUI Coordinator had approved the
 internal standard as an accuracy verification device for the
 Intoxilyzer version that Officer Genovia used, a fact of which
 the court took judicial notice. The internal standard is
 internal or integral to the Intoxilyzer. Therefore, the District
 Court did not abuse its discretion in treating the internal
 standard utilized by Officer Genovia as an adequate accuracy
 verification test.
 
(3) Hsu contends that his due process rights were
 
violated when the District Court denied his motion to compel the
 
4
production of COBRA data,  thereby precluding him from presenting
"a complete and meaningful defense." Hsu argues primarily that
 because a breath sample was not preserved following his breath
 test, due process requires that he have a meaningful opportunity
 to inspect the test machine, and that he required the COBRA data
 to do so. Due process, however, does not require that merely
 potentially useful discovery be provided to defendants. 
Hsu objects that his breath sample was not preserved
 
for further testing, but his underlying objection is that he was
 not afforded the full complement of alternative methods of
 obtaining comparable evidence identified in 
California v.
 
4
 Hsu asserts that COBRA data is data generated by and stored within
the Intoxilyzer.
 
4
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Trombetta, 467 U.S. 479 (1984). Specifically, Hsu argues that,
 
unlike the defendant in Trombetta, he was afforded no means of
 challenging the Intoxilyzer calibration.
5
 
Hsu fails, however, to address Trombetta's requirement
 
that the evidence must have had an exculpatory value apparent at
 the time of its destruction. Id. at 489. Hsu's argument is
 
crucially deficient because it lacks any suggestion that the
 police should have recognized that his breath sample was
 apparently exculpatory, or that the DUI Coordinator, in
 establishing rules under Chapter 114, should have generally
 recognized such exculpatory value.
6
 
Trombetta's elaboration of why the breath samples were
 
not exculpatory applies here as well. Id. Given the DUI
 
Coordinator's certification of the Intoxilyzer and promulgation
 of testing and calibration procedures under Chapter 114, we
 similarly find no basis for determining that there would be any
 more than a "tiny fraction" of cases where preserved breath
 samples could have proved exculpatory where in the first instance
 they were inculpatory. While Trombetta noted that California
 performs duplicate testing to protect against machine
 malfunctions and Hawai' i does not, we do not deem this 
5
 Hsu also argues that when the Supreme Court referenced the ability
to cross-examine the officer who administered the test, the Court "obviously"
meant to include the supervisors as ones who could be cross-examined, since
supervisors can also be sources of "operator error." We think that there is
 nothing obvious about Hsu's contention. The Court specifically referenced
only the "law enforcement officer who administered the Intoxilyzer test,"
despite elsewhere referencing weekly calibration checks performed on the
machine (implicitly referencing those who perform those checks). Trombetta,
467 U.S. at 490.
 
6
 In a related argument, Hsu argues against applying a presumption of
general reliability to the Intoxilyzer. In doing so, he identifies isolated
issues around the country involving the Intoxilyzer and other breath alcohol testequipment, but with one exception, these appear to be personnel- or departmental-specific issues and not any basis for finding a significant likelihood thatHawai'i or the Honolulu Police Department also suffers such problems. He cites 
to one state that declined to approve the Intoxilyzer because the device did notsatisfy the State's performance criteria. But the Intoxilyzer is a federallycertified product, Highway Safety Programs; Conforming Products List ofEvidential Breath Alcohol Measurement Devices, 77 Fed. Reg. 35747-01 (June 14,2012), approved by the legislatively designated alcohol testing expert, see Souza, 6 Haw. App. at 560, 732 P.2d at 257–58, and each model must be thoroughlytested at least once every thirty-one days, see Haw. Admin. R. § 11-114-7(a).Hsu's argument does not suggest or imply that the police or the DUI Coordinatorshould have recognized an apparent exculpatory value to preserving breath sampleswhere test results are inculpatory, and given the aforementioned assurances, wedo not find that they should have done so either. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
significant here. Under Chapter 114, Hawai' i employs a built-in 
accuracy-verification test to protect against machine 
malfunctions. That Hawai' i does so, but does not perform 
duplicate testing, does not suggest any significant likelihood that a preserved breath sample, originally inculpatory, would later prove exculpatory. 
Trombetta does not require particular access to the
 
Intoxilyzer or COBRA data absent a showing that Hsu's breath
 sample, if preserved, might have been exculpatory. To the extent
 that Hsu's argument relies on Trombetta, it is without merit. 
Setting aside Trombetta, Hsu's contention that the
 
District Court's denial of his motion to compel constituted a due
 process violation is not persuasive. Hsu sought the COBRA data
 in order to discern any operational issues that the specific
 Intoxilyzer used to test him might have experienced over time. 
He indicated no particular reason why he believed that such data
 would tend to be exculpatory in his case. It appears that, at
 most, he hoped the data would indicate operational issues, such
 that he could utilize the data to impeach the test result. 
Accordingly, we find that the data he sought was merely
 potentially useful evidence (or that it had only the potential of
 leading to useful evidence), rather than materially exculpatory
 evidence that would render the trial fundamentally unfair if not
 disclosed. Thus, we do not find a due process violation.
7
 
(4) Honolulu Police Officer Leon Barcenas ("Officer
 
Barcenas") possessed sufficient information to establish probable
 cause upon which to arrest Hsu. Witnessing a suspect commit a
 
7
 Hsu raises two additional arguments, which he claims are related
to his due-process argument. First, he calls into question the viability of
State ex rel. Marsland v. Ames, 71 Haw. 304, 788 P.2d 1281 (1990). Marsland
 
is still good law today, and, absent a constitutional violation, forecloses
discovery of the COBRA data in the instant case just as it did for copies of
the "repair, calibration, and maintenance records" in Marsland. Id. at 313,
315, 788 P.2d at 1286-87. While Hsu's contentions might serve to discredit
the weight a fact-finder would accord a single test result, we decline to
consider abrogating our Supreme Court's holding in Marsland. 
Second, Hsu contends that HRS § 291E-13 requires disclosure of the
COBRA data or Intoxilyzer maintenance records. Reading HRS § 291E-12 and §
291E-13 in the same manner, however, we recognize that each section defines
identically the set of occupations that may perform blood testing and that HRS
§ 291E-12 limits its applicability to blood testing only. Thus, we read HRS §
291E-13 to similarly apply to blood testing alone.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
traffic violation, detecting an odor of alcohol emanating from 
the suspect, observing physical characteristics and behaviors consistent with intoxication, and observing the suspect commit several mistakes during a field sobriety test ("FST") are together sufficient to find probable cause to arrest for OVUII. State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawai' i 409, 414–15, 431, 23 P.3d 744, 
749–50, 766 (App. 2001) (finding probable cause that the defendant committed OVUII where the defendant was observed "traveling at an excessive rate of speed . . . [his] eyes were red, [he] had an odor of alcohol on his breath, [his] demeanor was slow, . . . his speech was slurred[,]" and he failed in several ways to correctly perform the roadside FSTs). 
Officer Barcenas witnessed Hsu make a left turn in
 
disregard of a no-left-turn sign. While reviewing Hsu's driving
 documents, Officer Barcenas noticed Hsu's "watery, glassy" eyes
 and, while positioned closely to Hsu, Officer Barcenas detected
 an odor of alcohol emanating from Hsu's breath. During the
 consequent FST, Officer Barcenas observed Hsu make a series of
 mistakes. During the "walk and turn" test, Hsu missed one heel­to-toe connecting step on the outbound walk, he incorrectly
 pivoted rather than turning around using short choppy steps as
 instructed, and he mis-stepped about a foot's width off of the
 intended line on the return walk. During the "one-leg stand"
 test, Hsu held his arms out more than six inches from his body
 for the duration of the test rather than at his sides, and he was
 unable to keep his foot in the air, touching it to the ground
 about halfway through the test. 
Collectively, these factors were sufficient to cause a 
person of ordinary caution or prudence to believe and conscientiously entertain a strong suspicion that Hsu had been driving in violation of HRS § 291E-61, justifying his arrest and the resulting breath test. See State v. Naeole, 80 Hawai' i 419, 
424, 910 P.3d 732, 737 (1996). Unlike the defendant in State v. Kaleohano, 99 Hawai' i 370, 56 P.3d 138 (2002), the odor of 
alcohol on Hsu's breath and his performance on the FST are not equally susceptible of innocent explanation. We, therefore, conclude that Officer Barcenas had probable cause to arrest Hsu 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
for OVUII.
 
(5) Hsu's conviction under Subsection (a)(3) is not 
infirm for lack of a mens rea allegation in the Complaint because 
the Complaint need not allege mens rea under that subsection. State v. Nesmith, 127 Hawai' i 48, 61, 276 P.3d 617, 630 (2012). 
Thus, Hsu's final argument is without merit. 
Therefore, the District Court's December 6, 2010
 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 9, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Richard L. Holcomb 
(Holcomb Law, LLLC)for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Brian R. Vincent,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8
 