NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0003756
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KEITH C. GISHI, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 12-1-0393)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Keith C. Gishi (Gishi) appeals from
 
the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, entered on September 4,
 
1
2013 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court).
 
Gishi was convicted of assault in the second degree, in violation

 
of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-711(1)(a) (2014 Repl.).2
 
On appeal, Gishi contends the circuit court erred:
 
(1) when it granted the November 20, 2012 Motion to 
Consolidate Cases for Trial filed by Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State); 
(2) on February 28, 2013 and March 1, 2013 when it
 
"provid[ed] the legal basis behind the State's objections during
 cross-examination of its witnesses";
 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-711 provides, in relevant part:
 
§707-711 Assault in the second degree. (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the second degree if: 
(a)	 The person intentionally or knowingly causes
substantial bodily injury to another[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) when it "denied to admit into evidence the HPD-252
 
Statement of Chirstina [sic] Nakamoto-Putt [(Nakamoto-Putt)]";
 
(4) when it denied Gishi's February 28, 2013 oral
 
motion for mistrial;
 
(5) when it raised Gishi's bail, post-conviction; and
 
(6) in depriving Gishi of the right of adequate
 
representation at trial due to his counsel's joint representation
 of Gishi and Gishi's son (Son), despite the filed written waiver
 
of conflict of interest.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Gishi's
 appeal is without merit. 
(1)	 The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
granting the State's Motion to Consolidate Cases for
Trial.
 
Gishi argues that "[h]aving a consolidated trial 
instead of two separate trials [for Gishi and his Son] was 
improper and prejudiced Gishi by preventing him from having a fair trial." Gishi contends that "[t]he offenses [Gishi and his Son] were charged with could not be joined in one charge under [Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP)] Rule 8(a), Joinder of 
Offenses, because the physical altercation that [Son] and Gishi had with [Shiloh Putt (Putt)] were separate, not simultaneous[,]" 
and also argues that HRPP Rule 8(b)(3)(i) or (ii) do not apply to 
the instant case because "it is clear that Gishi and [his Son] were appropriately charged separately and that they could have not been joined in the same charge." 
In support, Gishi cites State v. Matias, 57 Haw. 96,
 
98, 550 P.2d 900, 902 (1976), and State v. Miyazaki, 64 Haw. 611,
 622, 645 P.2d 1340, 1349 (1982), for the proposition that the
 trial court must "balance possible prejudice to the defendant
 from joinder with the public interest in efficient use of
 judicial time through joint trial of defendants and offenses
 which are connected."
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We review the trial court's decision to join defendants
 
in a single trial for an abuse of discretion. State v. Renon, 73
 
Haw. 23, 31, 828 P.2d 1266, 1270 (1992) (citing Miyazaki, 64 Haw.
 
at 622–23, 645 P.2d at 1349).
 
Gishi's argument is unpersuasive. The circuit court,
 
pursuant to the State's motion to consolidate, joined Gishi and
 his Son, who were each charged with a single count of assault, as
 defendants under HRPP Rule 8(b).
3 The State contended the
 
offenses in both cases "ar[o]se out of the same episode,
 involve[d] the same complaining witness, . . . and charge[d] both
 Defendants with similar offenses." The State added that it
 "intend[ed] to call essentially the same witnesses in both
 cases."
4
 
Gishi and his Son were both charged with assault in
 
connection with the same March 7, 2012 incident. The alleged
 crimes by Gishi and his Son "were so closely connected in respect
 to time, place and occasion that it would be difficult to
 separate proof of one charge from proof of the others." HRPP
 
3
 HRPP Rule 8(b) provides:
 
Rule 8. JOINDER OF OFFENSES AND DEFENDANTS.
 
. . . .
 (b) Joinder of Defendants.  Two or more defendants may
be joined in the same charge:
 
(1) when each of the defendants is charged with
accountability for each offense included in the charge;
 
(2) when each of the defendants is charged with
conspiracy and some of the defendants are also charged with
one or more offenses alleged to be in furtherance of the
conspiracy; or
 
(3) when, even if conspiracy is not charged and all of
the defendants are not charged in each count, the several
offenses charged:
 
(i) were part of a common scheme or plan; or
 
(ii) were so closely connected in respect to time,
place and occasion that it would be difficult to separate
proof of one charge from proof of the others.
 
4
 Gishi argues that HRPP 13(b)(1) did not apply because the rule
requires HRPP Rule 8(c) to be met before it can be applied. This argument
lacks merit, as the language of HRPP Rule 13(b)(1) indicates that related
offenses are similarly defined for the purposes of both HRPP Rules 13 and
8(c), not that one rule is required for the other to operate.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rule 8(b)(3)(ii). In its ruling, the circuit court stated that 
both cases "ar[o]se out of the same incident." See In Interest 
of Doe, 79 Hawai 'i 265, 274, 900 P.2d 1332, 1341 (App. 1995) 
(holding that "[T]he efficient administration of justice was served by the consolidated trials, because the charges involved the same complaining witness and the same incident."). Judicial administration was served by having each of the witnesses testify once. See id. ("By consolidating the trials, Witness and the 
other witnesses testified once, rather than twice, to the same events."). The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in granting the Motion to Consolidate Cases for Trial. 
(2) The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
making its rulings on the State's objections.
 
Gishi argues that the circuit court erred because it
 
provided "assistance in providing the legal basis behind the
 
State's objections during cross-examination of its witnesses
 [which] resulted in bias against Gishi and prevented him from
 having a fair trial." Under the Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE),
 
the circuit court may clarify the nature of an objection for the
 
record.
 
Gishi does not present any evidence of personal bias, 
but only makes his uncorroborated assertions that prejudice was created by the rulings on the objections. Furthermore, the record shows that the circuit court acted in a similar manner during the defense's objections to the State's questioning. Gishi fails to establish any bias or prejudice. See State v. 
Yip, 92 Hawai
'i 98, 106, 987 P.2d 996, 1004 (App. 1999) (holding 
that appellant's argument "must fail" because appellant "advance[d] no other evidence or basis for his allegation of bias, other than . . . alleg[ing] trial errors[,] [and] . . . fail[ing] to explain why the judge was biased against him[,]" and the record revealed no bias). 
(3)	 The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
excluding the statement of Nakamoto-Putt.
 
Gishi contends the circuit court "could have admitted
 
either documents [sic] under HRE [Rule 613(b) (1993)] as
 
inconsistent statements instead of refusing to admit under HRE
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Rule 613(c) (1993)] as a consistent statements [sic] . . . ."
 
Gishi offered Exhibits K-1 and N-1 pursuant to HRE Rule 613(c) as
 a consistent statement. Consistent statements are admissible if
 they are used "to support the witness' credibility . . . ." See
 
HRE Rule 613(c). Gishi did not offer Exhibits K-1 and N-1 to
 support Nakamoto-Putt's credibility, which had not been attacked
 by the prosecution. The circuit court did not abuse its
 discretion in declining to admit the evidence as a consistent
 statement.
5
 
(4)	 Denial of Motion for Mistrial
 Gishi argues that the circuit court erred when it
 
denied his February 28, 2013 oral motion for mistrial, contending
 that "the prosecution's failure to properly question [Putt]
 prejudiced [his . . .] right to a fair trial." Gishi argues that
 the prosecutor continued to ask leading questions of Putt on
 direct examination despite objections by defense counsel.
 
Gishi fails to identify the portions of, or questions
 
within, the direct examination that defense counsel objected to. 
In light of the evidence presented, Gishi has not shown that the
 conduct of the prosecutor prejudiced any of his substantial
 rights as a defendant and denied him a fair trial. See State v.
 
Agrabante, 73 Haw. 179, 199, 830 P.2d 492, 503 (1992).
 
(5)	 The circuit court did not abuse its discretion when it
 
increased Gishi's bail after conviction.
 
Gishi contends the circuit court lacked statutory
 
authority to increase his bail from $25,000 to $50,000. Quoting
 
HRS § 804-4(a) (2014 Repl.), Gishi argues that "release on bail
 may continue, in the discretion of the court, after conviction of
 a felony . . . [,]" but states the statute is "silent or whether
 or not bail can be increased." Gishi also argues that although
 he eventually posted another bail bond, he "none the less [sic]
 was prejudiced because he had to come up with more money to be
 able to return to the community pending sentencing and was in
 custody longer than he should have been."
 
5
 Gishi did not confront Nakamoto-Putt with the circumstances
 
relating to her use of the word "tracking" in her prior statement. Contrary
to Gishi's contention, Nakamoto-Putt's prior use of that word was not
admissible as a prior inconsistent statement under HRE Rule 613(b).
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS chapter 804 ("Bail; Bond to Keep the Peace")
 
clearly outlines the court's ability to raise a defendant's bail
 
pending appeal. See HRS § 804-9 (2014 Repl.) ("The amount of
 
bail rests in the discretion of the justice or judge . . . .").
 
HRS § 804-9 provides that bail, while in the discretion
 
of the judge, "should be so determined as not to suffer the
 wealthy to escape by the payment of a pecuniary penalty, nor to
 render the privilege useless to the poor." The officer
 responsible for bail "should consider the punishment to be
 inflicted on conviction, and the pecuniary circumstances of the
 party accused." Id.
 
The circuit court considered both Gishi's financial
 
circumstances and the nature of his offense and explained that it
 raised Gishi's bail because of the "egregious nature of his
 offense" and found that Gishi "not only poses a flight risk but
 he poses more so a danger to the community . . . ." The circuit
 court raised Gishi's bail after the jury had found him guilty of
 felony assault based on the evidence presented at trial and while
 Gishi was pending sentencing. In considering the factors under
 HRS § 804-9, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion when
 it increased Gishi's bail.
 
(6)	 Gishi does not establish that his defense counsel
 
provided inadequate representation due to conflict of
interest.
 
Gishi argues that his defense counsel did not
 
adequately represent him because the joint representation of
 
Gishi and Son created a conflict of interest. Gishi also argues
 that his counsel provided inadequate representation when he
 advised Gishi not to testify despite stating earlier in Gishi's
 opening statement that there are "two sides to every
 story . . . ." Gishi contends that his choice to testify despite
 his counsel's advice against doing so "suggest[s] that there was
 already some tension between them . . . ." Gishi argues that his
 counsel's questioning of Gishi and his Son negatively differed,
 in that "[t]his different treatment of Gishi and [his Son] were
 observed by the jury and Gishi believes that this tainted his
 credibility with them and was a direct result of how [his
 counsel] interacted with him during the course of the trial."
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Gishi has failed to meet his burden of establishing
 
"(1) that there were specific errors or omissions reflecting
 
counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such
 errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or
 substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." 
State v. Aplaca, 74 Haw. 54, 67, 837 P.2d 1298, 1305 (1992).
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence, filed on September 4, 2013 in the Circuit Court of
 the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 31, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Daisy Lynn B. Hartsfield
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Sonja P. McCullenDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
7
 