NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0001347
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MELANI C. DEER, Claimant-Appellant, v.
EG&G TECHNICAL SERVICES, INC., Employer-Appellee, and
INSURANCE COMPANY OF THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA
 
AND SEDGWICK, CMS, Insurance Carrier-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2009-113 (2-08-00124))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Claimant-Appellant Melani C. Deer (Deer) appeals from
 
the "Decision and Order" of the Labor and Industrial Relations
 
Appeals Board (LIRAB) entered on May 8, 2013, which arose out of 
a December 26, 2007 work injury that occurred when, after bending
 
over to pick up some trash, Deer raised up and struck her face on
 a section of a parked helicopter.
 
On appeal, Deer contends the LIRAB erred in 
(1) granting the motion to strike Exhibits "BA" through "BI" and
 the motion to strike Exhibits "F" through "I"; and (2) failing to
 substantially reduce the award of attorneys' fees.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Deer's
 appeal is without merit. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. Admission of Exhibits
 
Deer argues on appeal that the exhibits she attempted
 
to introduce should not have been excluded because Employer-
Appellee EG&G Technical Services, Inc. (collectively referred to
 with Insurance Carrier-Appellee Insurance Company of the State of
 Pennsylvania and Sedgwick, CMS, as Employer) failed to establish
 
that it would be prejudiced by the introduction of the exhibits.
 
Employer argued in its June 17, 2010 "Motion For An
 
Order Striking Late Medical Report Submissions By [Deer]" (Motion
 
to Strike), that Deer's exhibits were "not submitted in
 
accordance with the Board's Pretrial Order and First Amended
 
Pretrial Order and their inclusion in the record at this late
 date would be prejudicial to Employer." Employer attached to its
 Motion to Strike the exhibits Deer sought to admit, which were
 dated March 10, 2010; March 22, 2010; April 1, 2010; and April 5,
 2010. Deer did not file an opposition brief to this Motion to
 Strike. In its "Order Granting Motion to Strike," the LIRAB
 explained, "Medical records and reports received by the Board
 after the medical reports submission deadline of February 24,
 2010 shall not be considered by the Board."
 
In Employer's October 24, 2012 "Motion To Strike
 
[Deer's] Exhibits In Whole Or In Part," Employer argued that the
 exhibits relating to medical reports should be stricken because
 they were submitted after the February 24, 2010 medical report
 cut-off and the March 24, 2010 discovery cut-off. On November 9,
 2012, the LIRAB entered its "Order Granting Motion to Strike in
 Part." The LIRAB ordered Deer's "Exhibits 'F,' 'G,' 'H,' and
 'I' . . . shall be stricken from the record on appeal."
1
 
Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) Chapter 47 concerns
 
the "Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board Rules of
 Practice and Procedure," which are to "be construed to secure the
 just, speedy, and inexpensive determination of every proceeding." 
HAR § 12-47-1 (effective 1981). The LIRAB is allowed to convene
 
1
 These exhibits are not included in the record on appeal.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
an initial conference, and may enter a pretrial order reciting
 
the action taken at the initial conference. HAR §§ 12-47-21,2 ­
3
22 (effective 1981). 
2
 HAR § 12-47-21 provides: 
§12-47-21 Initial conference.  (a) Upon
docketing an appeal, the board may convene an initial
conference to consider:
 
(1) 	The simplification of issues;
 
(2)	 The necessity or desirability of
amendments to pleadings;
 
(3)	 The possibility of obtaining stipulations
of fact and documents to avoid unnecessary
proof;
 
(4)	 Limiting the number of witnesses and
disclosing the names of witnesses to be
called;
 
(5)	 The position of each party, including the
basic facts it intends to prove;
 
(6)	 Marking of exhibits for identification;
and
 
(7)	 Other matters which may aid the efficient
disposition of the proceeding.
 
(b) Initial conference statements shall be filed
by the parties no later than three business days
before the scheduled initial conference covering those
areas identified in the notice of initial conference. 
Additional conferences may be scheduled at the board's
discretion. 
3
 HAR § 12-47-22 provides: 
§12-47-22 Pretrial order.  (a) When an initial
conference is held, the board may enter a pretrial
order which recites the action taken at the
 conference, including:
 
(1)	 The agreements made by the parties as to
any of the matters considered;
 
(2)	 The issues for hearing not otherwise
disposed of by stipulation or agreement of
the parties; and
 
(3)	 The discovery deadlines.
 
(b) When the pretrial order establishes
discovery deadlines, the specified deadline means as
follows:
 
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Deer argues that this case should be guided by our
 
decision in Messier v. Ass'n. of Apartment Owners of Mt. Terrace,
 
6 Haw. App. 525, 735 P.2d 939 (1987). In Messier, we considered
 whether the trial court erred in granting the appellee's motion
 to strike appellant's amended pretrial statement and denying
 appellant's motion to add critical witnesses, both governed by
 Rules of the Circuit Courts of the State of Hawai
'i (RCCH) Rule 
12(a)(15) (1984). Id. at 530, 735 P.2d at 944. When this court
 
4
decided Messier, RCCH Rule 12(a)(15)  provided: "Addition of
3(...continued)
(1)	 Unnamed witnesses means identification of
 
the name and address of an individual not
 previously identified in the party's
pretrial statement.
 
(2)	 Live witness means identification of
 individuals previously identified in the
party's pretrial statement or unnamed
witness statement, and who the party, in
good faith, intends to have testify at
trial. An individual not identified in
 the party's live witness statement shall
not be allowed to testify at trial.
 
(3)	 Medical report deadline means the date
that all medical reports or records shall
be filed at the board.
 
(4)	 Discovery deadline means the date that all
non-medical documents or records shall be
 filed at the board, except that the
transcript of an oral deposition of any
individual conducted before such deadline
 may be filed after such deadline. 
(c) The pretrial order shall control the
subsequent course of the appeal, unless modified by
the board at the trial or prior thereto to prevent
manifest injustice. The pretrial order shall
supersede the pleadings where there is any conflict
and shall supplement the pleadings in all other
respects.
 
(d) The board may impose administrative
sanctions as described in section 12-47-48 for
 noncompliance with the board's order.
 
4
 RCCH Rule 12(a)(15) was amended by the 1991 version of the RCCH,
and the RCCH currently includes an analogous provision under RCCH Rule 12(o).
RCCH Rule 12(o) provides: 
Rule 12. READY CIVIL CALENDAR.
 
(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Critical Witness. At any time after the time for the Final
 
Naming of Witnesses, upon a showing of good cause and substantial
 
need a party may move for the addition of a critical witness." 
Messier, 6 Haw. App. at 529 n.8, 735 P.2d at 944 n.8. This court
 held that the appellant's explanation for the tardiness
 constituted "good cause" under RCCH Rule 12(a)(15), and that
 appellees did not suffer prejudice as they had argued on appeal. 
Id. at 531-32, 735 P.2d at 945.
 
Deer has failed to identify any provision in HAR
 
Chapter 47 corresponding to the former RCCH Rule 12(a)(15) or the
 current RCCH Rule 12(o) that upon a showing of good cause would
 allow a party to move for the addition of a witness or evidence
 after the pretrial cut-off. Therefore, Messier does not guide
 our decision.
 
Furthermore, Deer does not provide any rule requiring
 
an opposing party to show it would be prejudiced by the late
 admission of exhibits. HAR § 12-47-22(d) specifically allows the
 LIRAB to impose sanctions for noncompliance with the LIRAB's
 pretrial order. Deer failed to comply with the pretrial order
 when she sought the admission of exhibits after the LIRAB's
 discovery deadlines had passed. Deer did not request an
 extension of time or move to reopen discovery. Although HAR
 § 12-47-22(c) permits the LIRAB to modify its pretrial order to
 prevent manifest injustice, Deer failed to demonstrate to the
 LIRAB that she could not have obtained the medical evidence prior
 to the pretrial deadline through the exercise of due diligence or
 that extending the pretrial discovery deadlines was necessary to
 prevent manifest injustice. Therefore, the LIRAB did not abuse
 its discretion in striking Deer's untimely exhibits from the
 
4(...continued)
. . . .
 
(o) Additional witness. At any time after the time
for Final Naming of Witnesses, upon a showing of good cause
and substantial need a party may move for the addition of a
witness. 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record. See Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 91-14(g) (2012
 
Repl.).
II. Attorneys' Fees Award
 
Deer argues that the LIRAB's award of attorneys' fees
 
was an abuse of discretion because the award was "the result of
 the failure of [Deer's] prior attorney's failure [sic] to prepare
 and present the evidence contained in Exhibits 'BH' and 'BI' to
 the [LIRAB] and opposing counsel in a timely manner."
 
On May 17, 2010, the LIRAB granted the "Request for
 
Approval of Attorney's Fee" submitted by Deer's attorney David J.
 Mikonczyk (Mikonczyk) On May 9, 2011, Deer submitted a letter to
 
the LIRAB requesting a reduction in the award of fees, which we
 
review as a motion in opposition to Mikonczyk's request for
 attorney's fees. LIRAB did not rule on Deer's opposition, which
 Deer contends is the equivalent to a denial of the motion.
 
HRS § 386-94 (Supp. 2014) governs attorneys' fees in
 
workers' compensation cases, and provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 386-94. Attorneys, physicians, other health care
providers, and other fees.  Claims for services shall not be
 
valid unless approved by the director or, if an appeal is
had, by the appellate board or court deciding the appeal.
Any claim so approved shall be a lien upon the compensation
in the manner and to the extent fixed by the director, the
appellate board, or the court. 
In approving fee requests, the director, appeals
board, or court may consider factors such as the attorney's
skill and experience in state workers' compensation matters,
the amount of time and effort required by the complexity of
the case, the novelty and difficulty of issues involved, the
amount of fees awarded in similar cases, benefits obtained
for the claimant, and the hourly rate customarily awarded
attorneys possessing similar skills and experience. In all
 cases, reasonable attorney's fees shall be awarded.
 
Under HAR § 12-47-55 (effective 1981), "[a]ny party objecting to
 
the approval of a [attorney fee] request may file a written
 objection thereto no later than ten calendar days following
 service."
 
Deer did not file her opposition until almost a year
 
after the LIRAB approved Mikonczyk's request for attorney's fees.
 We conclude that the LIRAB did not abuse its discretion by
 effectively denying Deer opposition. See HRS § 91-14(g). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore, 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Decision and Order" of
 
the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board entered on May
 8, 2013 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 8, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Charles H. Brower
 
for Claimant-Appellant. Chief Judge
 
Clyde Umebayashi
Muriel M. Taira
 (Kessner Umebayashi Bain &
Matsunaga)for Employer-Appellee and
Insurance Carrier-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
7
 