NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000102 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
JOHN P. DUNBAR, Plaintiff-Appellant, 
v. 
STATE OF 
HAWAI# I, HOLLY T. SHIKADA, OFFICE OF
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, COUNTY OF MAUI, ANDREW
H. MARTIN, RICHARD K. MINATOYA, RYAN ANDERSON-
TESHIMA, BYRON Y. FUJIEDA, DEPARTMENT OF
PROSECUTING ATTORNEY, JOHN PELLETIER, MAUI
POLICE DEPARTMENT, GERVIN MIYAMOTO, U.S.
MARSHAL'S OFFICE DISTRICT OF 
HAWAI# I,
Defendants-Appellees, 
and 
JOHN AND JANE DOES 1-10, DOE GOVERNMENT
AGENCIES 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, AND 
OTHER DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants 1
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO.  18-1-0326) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and McCullen, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant, John P. Dunbar (Dunbar), self-
represented, appeals from the 1) "Order Granting Defendants 
County of Maui, John D. Kim, Richard K. Minatoya, Ryan Anderson-Teshima, Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, Gary Yabuta and 
1 We have corrected the spelling of the last name of Defendant-
Appellee Ryan Anderson-Teshima in the caption, as "Teshima" instead of
"Tashima," which was incorrect. 
The Notice of Appeal also contained the name "L. Y. Tam Ho, Jr."
(Tam Ho ) in the caption, which we have removed, because Tam Ho was not named
in Dunbar's original complaint, was not a party to the proceedings below, andis not a party to this appeal. The record shows that Tam Ho was listed for the first time in the caption of Dunbar's December 12, 2018 "Plaintiff'sMotion for Leave to File Amemded [sic] Complaint and Memorandum in Support ofPlaintiff's Motion" that was never disposed of, since the case was dismissed. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Maui Police Department's [(County)] Motion to Dismiss or, in the 
Alternative, for Summary Judgment, as to Plaintiff John P. 
Dunbar's Complaint for Malicious Prosecution, Abuse of Process, Criminal Conspiracy, Libel" (County's Order Granting Dismissal);
2 
and 2) "Order Granting Defendants David M. Louie, Office of the Attorney General and the State of Hawaii's [(State)] Motion to 
Dismiss with Prejudice" (State's Order Granting Dismissal),
3 both 
filed on January 24, 2019 by the Circuit Court of the Second 
Circuit (Circuit Court).4 
On appeal,5 Dunbar contends that the Circuit Court 
erred by (1) failing to enter findings and conclusions following its dismissal of Dunbar's complaint, (2) failing to "mention[] that the underlying matter was, in fact, terminated" in Dunbar's favor; and (3) "determining as a matter of law" for Dunbar's malicious prosecution claim, that "sufficient evidence to establish probable cause" existed to initiate Dunbar's prosecution. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Dunbar's points of error as follows, and affirm. 
The pertinent procedural history is as follows. This 
appeal arises out of the dismissal of Dunbar's August 3, 2018 civil Complaint against the State and the County alleging malicious prosecution, abuse of process, criminal conspiracy and 
2 Pursuant to Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP ) Rule
43(c)(1), Andrew H. Martin, Maui Prosecuting Attorney is substituted for John
D. Kim, and John Pelletier, Maui Chief of Police is substituted for GaryYabuta. 
3 Pursuant to HRAP Rule 43(c)(1), Holly T. Shikada, Attorney General
of the State of Hawai #i is substituted for David M. Louie. 
4 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. 
5 Dunbar's Opening Brief fails to provide any record references as
required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(3), (b)(4)(ii)-(iii), (b)(4)(C), and (b)(7).Nevertheless, to promote access to justice, pleadings prepared by self-represented litigants should be interpreted liberally, and self-representedlitigants should not be automatically foreclosed from appellate review becausethey fail to comply with court rules. Erum v. Llego, 147 Hawai #i 368, 380-81,
465 P.3d 815, 827-28 (2020). 
Accordingly, we address Dunbar's appeal on the
merits to the extent his arguments can be discerned. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
libel arising out of a prior criminal prosecution of Dunbar. In 
the prior prosecution, Dunbar was charged in 2014 with failing to provide buccal swab samples after having been convicted of a felony offense. See State v. Dunbar, 139 Hawai# i 9, 11, 383 P.3d 
112, 114 (App. 2016). 
The circuit court granted Dunbar's motion 
to dismiss where Dunbar claimed that the State had not requested his DNA sample while he was on probation and that he was no longer required to provide a DNA sample because he had completed his probation. Id. at 12, 383 P.3d at 115. 
We upheld the 
circuit court's dismissal order, holding that pursuant to the relevant provisions in HRS Chapter 844D Part III, "Dunbar was no longer required to provide a buccal swab sample after he had been discharged from probation for his felony offense." Id. at 11, 
383 P.3d at 114. 
In the current civil action, the Circuit Court granted 
both the County's motion to dismiss and the State's motion to dismiss; and with respect to the malicious prosecution claim pertinent to this appeal, ruled as follows:
6 
Plaintiff's claims for malicious prosecution, abuse of
process, and false imprisonment fail as there was probable
cause for Plaintiff's arrest and prosecution. 
Probable cause is evidenced by the fact that Judge
Kobayashi of the district court made specific findings ofprobable cause in the arrest warrant, and the Court alsofinds that the judge's determination of probable cause wasnot nullified because the ICA later found that the statutorybasis for bringing the charges were erroneous. 
FOFs/COLs not required 
Dunbar's first contention that no FOFs or COLS were 
prepared by the Circuit Court in violation of HRAP Rule 10(f)7 is 
6 The County's motion was heard on December 11, 2018, and the
State's motion was heard on December 13, 2018. The Circuit Court's oral 
rulings with respect to the malicious prosecution claim were virtuallyidentical. 
7 HRAP Rule 10(f), entitled "Request for findings of fact and
conclusions of law," provides: 
In all actions where the court appealed from is not requiredto enter findings of fact and conclusions of law prior tothe entry of an order, judgment, or decree, but is requiredto do so once a notice of appeal is filed, the appellantshall, no later than 10 days after filing the notice of
(continued...) 
3 7(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
without merit. HRAP Rule 10(f) applies to "actions where the 
court appealed from is not required" to enter FOFs/COLs, "but is required to do so once a notice of appeal is filed." Circuit court civil actions are governed by the Hawai# i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP
), which do not require FOFs/COLs for the types of 
motions at issue here, regardless of whether a notice of appeal is filed or not. HRCP Rule 52, entitled "Findings by the Court," subsection (a) provides in relevant part: 
Effect.  In all actions tried upon the facts without a jury
or with an advisory jury, the court shall find the facts
specially and state separately its conclusions of lawthereon, and judgment shall be entered pursuant to Rule 58;. . . Findings of fact and conclusions of law areunnecessary on decisions of motions under Rules 12 or 56 . . 
. . 
(Emphasis added). 
Thus, HRCP Rule 52(a) expressly does not 
require a circuit court to enter FOFs/COLs for motions to dismiss 
under HRCP Rules 12 and motions for summary judgment under HRCP Rule 56. 
The "failure to mention" contention is waived 
Dunbar's contention that the Circuit Court erred by 
failing to "mention[] that the underlying matter was, in fact, 
terminated" in Dunbar's favor, is not supported by any record references, any legal authority, or any argument, and is waived. See HRAP Rule 28 (b)(4)(ii), (b)(7). Assuming arguendo the contention is not waived, the Circuit Court's oral rulings quoted supra show that the Court did find that the underlying matter was terminated in Dunbar's favor. 
appeal, file in the court appealed from a request for entry
of findings of fact and conclusions of law, naming the judgewho tried the action and entered the order, judgment, ordecree being appealed. 
The appellant shall attach a filed
copy of the notice of appeal to the request. The named judge shall enter the requested findings of fact andconclusions of law within 28 days after the request has beenfiled. To aid the court, the court may order the parties oreither of them to submit proposed findings of fact andconclusions of law after the filing of the request. Uponshowing of good cause, the appellate court may, on motionand notice made by the clerk of the court or a party, extendthe time to file findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
(Emphasis added)
. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
No disputed material facts as to probable cause 
With regard to the malicious prosecution claim, Dunbar 
contends that there was sufficient evidence to create a genuine 
issue of material fact as to the existence of probable cause to initiate the prosecution against Dunbar. Dunbar argues that: 
an affidavit in support of warrant signed by Defendant-
Appellee L. Y. Tam Ho, Jr., in which Ho swears thatPlaintiff-Appellant was convicted of the felony offense of"Escape in the second degree" when, in fact, Plaintiff hadbeen acquitted of that very offense on March 1, 2005 at abench trial in Maui second circuit court. It is quite clearthat Judge Kobayashi wholly abandoned his judicial role byserving as a mere rubber stamp for the ex-police officerTam Ho who sought the warrant. Judge Kobayashi neverconsidered a probable-cause determination. Tam Ho never possessed a good-faith belief in the validity of the arrestwarrant because he was biased and knew it to be invalid when he signed the affidavit in support of it. When viewed in the light most favorable to Plaintiff-Appellant,Defendants-Appellees evidence fails to establish anyreasonable basis for prosecuting Plaintiff-Appellant. 
On March 1, 2005, Plaintiff-Appellant, an honorably retired
U.S. Navy SEAL and Vietnam-era Veteran, was convicted of the
non-violent [ uncharged ] offense of Attempted escape in the
second degree in 2005 [ from an unlawful arrest lacking
probable cause and where excessive force was used by police ]
and sentenced to a term of probation that lasted until his
early release and discharge in 2008. 
Opening Brief at 11-12 (emphases added). Dunbar's argument above 
appears to claim that (1) the affidavit should not have stated that Dunbar "was convicted" of "Escape in the second degree" when Dunbar was "acquitted" of that offense on March 1, 2005; and (2) on March 1, 2005 Dunbar "was convicted" of "Attempted escape in the second degree[.]" Id. We construe Dunbar's argument as 
asserting that there were genuine issues of material fact with the probable cause finding by Judge Kobayashi, because the investigator's affidavit in support of the arrest warrant stated that Dunbar was convicted of the felony of escape in the second degree, instead of attempted escape in the second degree. 
Because the Circuit Court considered matters outside 
the pleadings, we apply a summary judgment standard of review for the motions to dismiss. See Goran Pleho, LLC v. Lacy, 144 
Hawai# i 224, 236, 439 P.3d 176, 188 (2019) ("[a] motion seeking 
dismissal of a complaint is transformed into a [HRCP] Rule 56 motion for summary judgment when the circuit court considers 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
matters outside the pleadings.") (quoting Wong v. Cayetano, 111 
Hawai# i 462, 476, 143 P.3d 1, 15 (2006) (internal quotation marks 
and citations omitted)). 
On appeal, we review the grant or 
denial of summary judgment de novo. Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawai# i 
46, 55, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285 (2013) (citation omitted). "[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Id. 
A claim for malicious prosecution requires proof "(1) 
that the prior proceedings were terminated in the plaintiff's favor; (2) that the prior proceedings were initiated without probable cause; and (3) that prior proceedings were initiated with malice." Reed v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 76 Hawai# i 219, 
230, 873 P.2d 98, 109 (1994) (emphasis, brackets and citations omitted). 
Dunbar's contention focuses on the second element that 
"the prior proceedings be initiated without probable cause." Id. 
"Probable cause exists when the facts and circumstances within one's knowledge and of which one has reasonably trustworthy information are sufficient in themselves to warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe that an offense has been committed." State v. Navas, 81 Hawai# i 113, 116, 913 P.2d 39, 42 
(1996) (citation omitted). 
The arrest warrant and probable cause determination 
were based on the suspicion that Dunbar had violated HRS §§ 844D-31(a) and -111(a) by failing to provide a buccal swab. HRS § 844D-31(a)(2014) requires individuals convicted of "
any felony 
offense" to provide a buccal swab sample. (Emphasis added.) The affidavit stated that Dunbar was convicted of the felony offense of "Escape in the Second Degree[,]" and that Dunbar had refused to comply with requests to provide a buccal swab sample, leading to the investigator's belief that Dunbar "appears to have violated H.R.S. § 844D-111(a)[.]"
8 
8 At the time of the alleged offense in this case, HRS § 844D–111
(2014) provided: 
(continued...) 
6 8(...continued)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"A fact is material if proof of that fact would have 
the effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties." Goran Pleho, LLC, 144 Hawai# i at 236, 439 P.3d at 188 
(internal citations omitted) (quoting Balthazar v. Verizon Hawaii, Inc., 109 Hawai# i 69, 72, 123 P.3d 194, 197 (2005). The 
fact that Dunbar was convicted of an attempt to commit the substantive offense of second-degree escape, rather than the second-degree escape itself, is not a material distinction where both offenses carry the same penalty. See HRS § 705-502 (2014) 
("An attempt to commit a crime is an offense of the same class and grade as the most serious offense which is attempted.") The distinction between a second-degree escape and an attempted 
second-degree escape conviction is immaterial to the probable 
cause determination, where it is undisputed that Dunbar was convicted of a felony and thus subject to HRS § 844D-31(a). See 
State v. McKnight, 131 Hawai# i 379, 394, 319 P.3d 298, 313 (2013) 
(holding that where "[t]he issuing judge misdated the warrant, but the actual date of issuance was never in dispute" and there was probable cause, the warrant was valid). That the undisputed fact of a felony escape conviction was missing the word "attempted" did not create a genuine disputed issue of material 
fact as to whether probable cause, an essential element of a 
malicious prosecution claim, was established. See Goran Pleho, 
LLC
, 144 Hawai# i at 236, 439 P.3d at 188. The Circuit Court did 
not err in granting the motions to dismiss the malicious 
§ 844D–111  Refusal or failure to provide specimen for
forensic identification. (a) A person commits the offense
of refusal or failure to provide specimen for forensicidentification if the person is required by this chapter toprovide any blood specimens, buccal swab samples, or printimpressions and intentionally or knowingly refuses or failsto provide any of the required blood specimens, buccal swabsamples, or print impressions after the person has receivedwritten notice from the department, the department of publicsafety, any law enforcement personnel, or officer of thecourt that the person is required to provide each and everyone of the blood specimens, buccal swab samples, and printimpressions required by this chapter.(b) Any person who negligently or recklessly fails to complywith this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Dunbar, 139 Hawai #i at 10 n.1, 383 P.3d at 113 n.1 (quoting HRS § 844D-111). 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prosecution claim. See Ralston, 129 Hawai# i at 55, 292 P.3d at 
1285. 
For the foregoing reasons, the (1) "Order Granting 
Defendants County of Maui, John D. Kim, Richard K. Minatoya, Ryan 
Anderson-Teshima, Department of the Prosecuting Attorney, Gary Yabuta and Maui Police Department's Motion to Dismiss or, in the Alternative, for Summary Judgment, as to Plaintiff John P. Dunbar's Complaint for Malicious Prosecution, Abuse of Process, Criminal Conspiracy, Libel"; and the 2) "Order Granting Defendants David M. Louie, Office of the Attorney General and the State of Hawaii's Motion to Dismiss with Prejudice," both filed and entered on January 24, 2019 by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit, are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 17, 2022. 
On the briefs: 
John P. Dunbar 
Self Represented Plaintiff-Appellant 
Ewan C. Rayner
Deputy Solicitor Generalfor Defendants-AppelleesHolly T. Shikada, Departmentof the Attorney General andState of Hawai# i 
Caleb P. Rowe Deputy Corporation CounselCounty of Mauifor Defendants-AppelleesCounty of Maui, Andrew H.Martin, Department of theProsecuting Attorney, JohnPelletier, Maui PoliceDepartment /s/ Katherine G. LeonardPresiding Judge 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge 
8 