  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001191
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JON SHIMOKAWA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
KANE'OHE DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DCW-13-0003304)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jon Shimokawa (Shimokawa) appeals 
from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order, filed on 
October 14, 2014, in the District Court of the First Circuit, K
ane'ohe Division (district court).1 Shimokawa was convicted of 
Terroristic Threatening in the Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 707-717(1) (2014).
2 
On June 23, 2013, an incident occurred between
 
Shimokawa and the complaining witnesses, Scott and Tristen
 Nakamura, as they were driving over the Pali Highway towards
 Kailua. Shimokawa is alleged to have been driving aggressively
 
1
 The Honorable David T. Woo, Jr. presided.
 
2
 HRS ยง 707-717 provides: "Terroristic threatening in the second
degree. (1) A person commits the offense of terroristic threatening in the
second degree if the person commits terroristic threatening other than as
provided in section 707-716. (2) Terroristic threatening in the second degree
is a misdemeanor." 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and initiated aggressive verbal exchanges that were made while 
driving. It is undisputed that the Nakamuras made a 911 call during the incident and while stopped at a stop light on the Kailua side of the Pali Highway, Shimokawa exited his car and approached the Nakamuras' car. The Nakamuras drove to the K
ane'ohe police station and made a police report. 
Shimokawa contends the district court erred when it:
 
(1) denied Shimokawa's first motion to dismiss; (2) denied Shimokawa's second motion to dismiss; (3) excluded a time period for purposes of Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 48; 
(4) admitted a voicemail recording into evidence; (5) weighed the
 evidence of the case; and (6) made cumulative errors requiring
 reversal.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Shimokawa's points of error as follows and affirm.
I. Shimokawa's first and second motions to dismiss.
 
Shimokawa contends the district court erred when it 
denied his first and second motions to dismiss because Plaintiff-
Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) was required to produce tape 
recorded interviews of Scott Nakamura, Tristen Nakamura, and Shimokawa.
3 
"A trial court's ruling on a motion to dismiss an 
indictment is reviewed for an abuse of discretion." State v. 
Hinton, 120 Hawai 'i 265, 273, 204 P.3d 484, 492 (2009) (citation 
and brackets omitted).
A. HRPP Rule 16
 
Shimokawa contends that the State violated HRPP Rule
 
4
16(b)(1)  when it failed to produce the tape recorded interviews.
3
 Shimokawa's first motion to dismiss filed on April 14, 2014,
addressed the recorded interviews of Scott and Tristen Nakamura and the second
 
motion to dismiss filed on September 18, 2014, addressed Shimokawa's recorded
interview. Both motions relied on similar arguments as a basis for dismissing
the case.
4
 In Shimokawa's memorandum in support of his first motion to dismiss,
he contended that he was entitled to discovery under HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(ii)
and (vii). In his memorandum in support of his second motion to dismiss,
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRPP Rule 16(a) provides that "[s]ubject to subsection
 
(d) of this rule, discovery under this rule may be obtained in
 
and is limited to cases in which the defendant is charged with a
 felony[.]" (Emphasis added.) HRPP Rule 16(d) provides that
 "[u]pon a showing of materiality and if the request is

 
reasonable, the court in its discretion may require disclosure as
 provided for in this Rule 16 in cases other than those in which
 the defendant is charged with a felony, but not in cases
 involving violations."
 
At a March 19, 2014 hearing, the State requested that
 
the case be continued because it "became aware that there may

 
have been an audio recorded interview done during the felony
 investigation phase of this case, which the State is not in
 receipt of right now."
5 The State voluntarily made the
 
information available and requested time to obtain the
 recordings, and the district court granted a continuance to allow
 the State to obtain the recordings. Given these circumstances,
 it does not appear there was any order by the district court
 requiring disclosure. 
Neither party disputes that the prosecution was unable
 
to obtain the recorded interviews of both complaining witnesses
 and Shimokawa. Shimokawa contends that because the State did not
 produce the recordings, the district court should have dismissed
 
6
the case pursuant to HRPP Rule 16(e)(9)(i),  which allows for
Shimokawa contended he was entitled to discovery under HRPP Rule 16(b)(1)(iii)
and (vii). In his opening brief, Shimokawa only refers to HRPP Rule
16(b)(1)(i) as a basis for why he was entitled to discovery.
5
 The State later revealed in a declaration of counsel attached to the
 
memorandum in opposition to Shimokawa's first motion to dismiss, that "[u]pon
investigation, it was discovered that on June 23, 201[3] Detective Robin
Puahala conducted audio recorded interviews of Scott Nakamura, Tristen
Nakamura, and Jon Shimokawa. All recordings were to [have been] submitted in
evidence under HPD 13228343."
6
 HRPP Rule 16(e)(9)(i) provides: 
(9) Sanctions.
 
(i) If at any time during the course of the proceedings it is
brought to the attention of the court that a party has failed to comply
with this rule or an order issued pursuant thereto, the court may order
such party to permit the discovery, grant a continuance, or it may enter
such other order as it deems just under the circumstances.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sanctions upon a party's failure to comply with HRPP Rule 16 or
 
an order pursuant to the rule. 
In State v. Dowsett, 10 Haw. App. 491, 878 P.2d 739
 
(1994), this court stated:
 
Obviously, the sanction of dismissal is addressed to the
sound discretion of the court. But in exercising the broad
discretion as to sanctions under HRPP Rule 16, the trial
court should take into account the reasons why the
disclosure was not made, the extent of prejudice, if any,
the feasibility of rectifying that prejudice by continuance,
and any other relevant circumstances.
 
Id. at 495, 878 P.2d at 742 (citations, brackets, quotation
 
marks, and emphasis omitted)
 
In this case, the State made a voluntary disclosure
 
about the recorded interviews, but did not produce them to
 Shimokawa because it could not locate them. The State issued a
 subpoena to the Honolulu Police Department (HPD) to obtain the
 recordings, however, HPD informed the State that no recordings
 were submitted into evidence. In addition, the Deputy Prosecutor
 attempted to locate Detective Robin Puahala (Puahala) who
 conducted the interviews. However, Puahala had retired from HPD
 in 2013. The Deputy Prosecutor also requested that a lieutenant
 of the Criminal Investigations Division check Puahala's work area
 to determine if there were any unsubmitted audio recordings.
 Despite these efforts on the part of the State, the recorded
 interviews were not located. Given the State's voluntary efforts
 to disclose the recorded interviews and the lack of an order by
 the district court requiring disclosure, it is doubtful that
 there was any violation of HRPP Rule 16.
 
Further, even if HRPP Rule 16 applied, any prejudice to 
Shimokawa in this case was minimal. First, Shimokawa contends that he was prejudiced by not having his own recorded interview because the recorded interview would show prior consistent statements. However, under Hawai
'i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 
613(c), prior consistent statements are only admissible at trial after: 
(1) Evidence of the witness' prior inconsistent statement
has been admitted for the purpose of attacking the witness'
credibility, and the consistent statement was made before
the inconsistent statement; or
(2) An express or implied charge has been made that the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
witness' testimony at the trial is recently fabricated or is
influenced by bias or other improper motive, and the
consistent statement was made before the bias, motive for
fabrication, or other improper motive is alleged to have
arisen; or
(3) The witness' credibility has been attacked at the trial
by imputation of inaccurate memory, and the consistent
statement was made when the event was recent and the
 witness' memory fresh.
 
At the motion to dismiss stage, Shimokawa did not show that his
 
prior consistent statements would have been admissible at trial.7
 
Second, Shimokawa contends that he was prejudiced by
 
not having the recorded interview of Scott Nakamura because the
 recording would demonstrate the sound of Nakamura's voice so that
 it could be compared to the 911 recording that was admitted into
 evidence, showing that Nakamura was the one yelling and
 aggressively speaking on the 911 recording and not Shimokawa.
 However, both Scott Nakamura and Shimokawa testified at trial,
 thus giving the court a context for what each of their voices
 sounded like. In addition, a recorded voicemail was admitted
 into evidence, and it was undisputed that Shimokawa was the one
 speaking on the voice message. 
Shimokawa also contends that he was prejudiced because
 
the recorded interview of Scott Nakamura would contain material
 to potentially impeach Nakamura's statements at trial.
 Shimokawa's argument is speculative in this regard. Moreover, 
Shimokawa was given a copy of Scott Nakamura's three-page written
 statement that Nakamura gave to the police the same day that the
 recorded interview took place.
 
In considering all of the facts above, the district
 
court did not abuse its discretion when it denied Shimokawa's
 first and second motions to dismiss. 
B. Due Process
 
Shimokawa contends that the district court erred when
 
it denied his first and second motions to dismiss because his
 right to due process was violated when the State did not produce
 the recorded interviews.
 
7
 As further support, the State did not cross-examine Shimokawa at
trial or offer other evidence attacking Shimokawa's credibility, thus
precluding prior consistent statements from being admitted as evidence.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
To support his due process argument, Shimokawa cites to 
State v. Matafeo, 71 Haw. 183, 787 P.2d 671 (1990), which applies 
the United States Supreme Court case Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963). In Brady, the United States Supreme Court held "that the suppression by the prosecution of evidence favorable to an accused upon request violates due process where the evidence is material either to guilt or to punishment, irrespective of the good faith or bad faith of the prosecution." Id. at 87 (emphasis 
added). To "establish a Brady violation, an appellant must make a showing that the suppressed evidence would create a reasonable doubt about the appellant's guilt that would not otherwise exist." State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai
'i 462, 479, 946 P.2d 32, 49 
(1997) (citation and brackets omitted). 
In this case, Shimokawa contends that the recorded
 
statements would contain more detail than the written statements
 the Nakamuras made and would potentially have impeachable
 material. Shimokawa also contends that his own recorded
 statement would contain potential prior consistent statements.
 Shimokawa's arguments do not show that the recorded interviews
 would have created reasonable doubt about his guilt. Moreover,
 given the record in this case, the recorded interviews were not
 so critical to the defense as to have made the trial
 fundamentally unfair without them. Matafeo, 71 Haw. at 187, 787
 
P.2d at 673. Therefore, the district court did not violate
 Shimokawa's due process rights when it denied his first and
 second motions to dismiss.
 
C. Inherent power of the court.
 
Shimokawa contends that the district court should have
 
granted his first and second motions to dismiss under its
 inherent supervisory powers, citing to 
State v. Moriwake , 65 Haw.
 
47, 647 P.2d 705 (1982) as support.
 
In 
Moriwake, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court iterated that 
[s]ociety has a strong interest in punishing criminal
conduct. But society also has an interest in protecting the
integrity of the judicial process and in ensuring fairness
to defendants in judicial proceedings. Where those
 fundamental interests are threatened, the "discretion" of
the prosecutor must be subject to the power and
responsibility of the court.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 56, 647 P.2d at 712 (citation and block format omitted). 
The court further stated that "[i]n considering whether such
 power and responsibility were properly exercised, we in turn will
 accord deference to the conclusion of the trial court[.]" Id.
 
In this case, given the speculative nature of
 
Shimokawa's arguments, as discussed above, the district court did
 not abuse its discretion when it denied Shimokawa's motions to
 dismiss.
 
II. Rule 48
 
Shimokawa contends that the district court improperly
 
excluded the time period from July 16, 2014 to October 2, 2014
 
for purposes of HRPP Rule 48.
 
HRPP Rule 48(b), "by its terms, can be invoked only by 
a motion to dismiss made by the defendant." State v. McDowell, 
66 Haw. 650, 651, 672 P.2d 554, 556 (1983) abrogation on other grounds recognized by State v. Nesmith, 127 Hawai
'i 48, 56-57, 
276 P.3d 617, 625-26 (2012). 
In this case, Shimokawa filed his second motion to
 
dismiss on September 18, 2014, after the July 16, 2014 order that
 continued the trial to October 2, 2014, but failed to assert
 dismissal on HRPP Rule 48 grounds. Shimokawa does not point to
 anywhere in the record where he filed a motion to dismiss based
 on a HRPP Rule 48 violation. Therefore, Shimokawa has waived any
 claim to relief under HRPP Rule 48.
 
III. Voicemail
 
Shimokawa contends that the district court erred when
 
it admitted into evidence a voicemail recording left by Shimokawa
 
on Tristen Nakamura's phone because HRE Rule 404(b) excludes
 evidence of other crimes, wrongs or acts to prove the character
 of a person. HRE Rule 404(b) provides:
 
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible
to prove the character of a person in order to show action
in conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible
where such evidence is probative of another fact that is of
consequence to the determination of the action, such as
proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan,
knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake
or accident.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
A few hours after the incident, Shimokawa left a
 
voicemail on Tristen Nakamura's cell phone which stated:
 
I don't know if I'm getting the right person but I just had
an incident with somebody driving a black BMW X5, RYU 123. I
know wasn't one girl driving but there was one girl in the
passenger seat. For the guy that was driving that car,
Bruddah, don't worry, I know who you are. And if you want to
play fucking stupid with me, I'll give you another call,
next time answer the phone.
 
At trial the State introduced the voicemail into
 
evidence, not as a basis for the charge of Terroristic
 
Threatening, but to show Shimokawa's state of mind. That is, to
 show he intended to terrorize Scott Nakamura or acted with a
 reckless disregard of the risk of terrorizing. Shimokawa
 objected and upon further offer of proof by the State, the
 district court admitted the voicemail.
 
HRS ยง 707-715 (2014) provides in pertinent part:
 
ยง707-715 Terroristic threatening, defined.  A person
commits the offense of terroristic threatening if the person
threatens, by word or conduct, to cause bodily injury to
another person or serious damage or harm to property,
including the pets or livestock, of another or to commit a
felony:
(1)	 With the intent to terrorize, or in reckless
disregard of the risk of terrorizing, another
person[.]
 
The State, in this case, had the burden of proving that
 
Shimokawa intended to terrorize or that he recklessly disregarded
 
the risk of terrorizing another person. The voicemail was
 probative of Shimokawa's intent because it showed his aggression,
 including that he would attempt to contact the Nakamuras even
 after the incident. We further note that, in the case of a bench
 trial, "[i]t is well established that a judge is presumed not to
 be influenced by incompetent evidence." State v. Antone, 62 Haw.
 
346, 353, 615 P.2d 101, 107 (1980). Therefore, we presume the
 district court considered the voicemail for the proper purpose of
 intent. In sum, the district court did not err when it admitted
 the voicemail into evidence.
8
 
8
 In his opening brief, Shimokawa also contends that the voicemail was
more prejudicial than probative. However, because Shimokawa did not state
this objection at trial, it is waived. State v. Moses, 102 Hawai' i 449, 456,
77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003) ("As a general rule, if a party does not raise anargument at trial, that argument will be deemed to have been waived onappeal[.]"). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. The district court's findings of fact.
 
Shimokawa contends that the district court erred when 
it made several erroneous findings of fact. The district court's 
findings of fact are reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard. Bhakta v. Cty. of Maui, 109 Hawai
'i 198, 208, 124 P.2d 
943, 953 (2005). 
Shimokawa first points to the district court's finding
 
that Shimokawa "did get out of his vehicle to approach the
 Nakamuras' vehicle and stated to Scott Nakamura What, you almost
 bang me, you fuckah."
 
Neither party disputes that Shimokawa exited his
 
vehicle and approached the Nakamura's vehicle, however, at trial,
 Scott Nakamura testified that he made the statement "What, you
 almost bang me, you fuckah." Thus, the district court
 misidentified who made the statement in its findings. 
Considering the record as a whole, however, 
misidentifying who made the statement was a harmless error. State v. Aplaca, 96 Hawai
'i 17, 25, 25 P.3d 792, 800 (2001) 
("Consistent with the harmless error doctrine, we have frequently stated that error 'must be examined in light of the entire proceedings and given the effect to which the whole record shows it is entitled. In that context, the real question becomes whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error might have contributed to conviction.)" (quoting State v. Gano, 92 Hawai
'i 161, 176, 988 P.2d 1153, 1168 (1999)). 
The remaining district court findings that Shimokawa
 
challenges address the district court's weighing of the evidence
 and the credibility of Scott Nakamura's testimony over
 Shimokawa's testimony at trial. 
"Matters related to the credibility of witnesses and 
the weight to be given to the evidence are generally left to the factfinder." State v. Mitchell, 94 Hawai
'i 388, 393, 15 P.3d 
314, 319 (App. 2000). Because there was a dispute over the evidence and how the events took place during the incident, the district court was required to weigh the evidence and assess the credibility of each witness. The district court stated that in 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"examining the testimony of the two parties, I do find Mr.
 
Nakamura more credible and I do find some serious problems with
 the defendant's testimony[.]" 
This court "will neither reconcile conflicting evidence 
nor interfere with the decision of the trier of fact based on the witnesses' credibility or the weight of the evidence." Mitchell, 
94 Hawai
'i at 393, 15 P.3d at 319. Therefore, we will not 
disturb the district court's findings challenged by Shimokawa. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of 
Entry of Judgement and/or Order, filed on October 14, 2014 in the District Court of the First Circuit, K
ane'ohe Division, is 
affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 15, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Mark S. Kawata,
Colleen Mari Jones,for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
James M. Anderson,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10

 