NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
NO. CAAP-24-0000505 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
 
 
US BANK TRUST NATIONAL ASSOCIATION,  
NOT IN ITS INDIVIDUAL CAPACITY BUT SOLELY AS OWNER  
TRUSTEE FOR VRMTG ASSET TRUST, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
AOAO HALEAKALA GARDENS, Defendant-Appellant;  
CYNTHIA D. SMITH; TROY T. SMITH; and 
HALEAKALA GARDENS – PHASE II, Defendants-Appellees,  
and DOES 1 through 20, Inclusive, Defendants 
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 2CCV-22-0000149) 
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Nakasone, Chief Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
 
Defendant-Appellant AOAO Haleakala Gardens (AOAO) 
appeals from the June 14, 2024 "Order Approving Commissioner's 
Report and Granting Plaintiff[-Appellee US Bank Trust National 
Association, Not in Its Individual Capacity but Solely as Owner 
Trustee for VRMTG Asset Trust's (US Bank)] Motion for Electronically Filed
Intermediate Court of Appeals
CAAP-24-0000505
08-JUN-2026
08:11 AM
Dkt. 66 SONOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
2 Confirmation of Foreclosure Sale, Allowance of Costs, 
Commissions and Fees, Distribution of Proceeds, Directing 
Conveyance and for Writ of Possession/Ejectments, Filed 
April 23, 2024" (Confirmation Order), the June 14, 2024 
"Judgment," and the July 10, 2024 "Order Denying [AOAO's] Non-
Hearing Motion for Reconsideration of [Confirmation Order]" 
(Order Denying Reconsideration)," entered by the Circuit Court 
of the Second Circuit (circuit court).1 
Defendants-Appellees Cynthia and Troy Smith (the 
Smiths
) were the owners of a condominium unit at the Haleakala 
Gardens (Property).  The Smiths obtained a loan, which was 
secured by a mortgage on the Property.  The mortgage was 
assigned to US Bank in 2021.  The Smiths defaulted on their loan 
in 2009.  The Smiths also stopped paying maintenance fees to the 
AOAO.  On June 18, 2013, the Smiths transferred their property 
via quitclaim deed to the AOAO to settle their outstanding 
maintenance fee debt.  Upon assuming possession of the Property, the AOAO rented and maintained the Property. 
US Bank commenced a judicial foreclosure action in 
June 2022 and moved for summary judgment in September 2023.  On 
November 1, 2023, the circuit court granted summary judgment in 
favor of US Bank and appointed a commissioner; the AOAO stopped 
 
1  The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided.  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
3 receiving rental income for the Property.  In April 2024, US 
Bank moved for confirmation of the foreclosure sale of the 
Property.  In its Confirmation Order, the circuit court ordered 
an accounting of all rental proceeds collected from the Property 
from June 2013, when the AOAO acquired possession of the 
Property, to June 2024, when the circuit court confirmed the 
foreclosure sale, as well as disbursement of any excess rental 
proceeds.  The AOAO moved to reconsider, and the circuit court entered its Order Denying Reconsideration. 
The AOAO asserts two related points of error on 
appeal, contending that the circuit court erred by "relying on": 
(1) "Hawaii Revised Statutes [(HRS)] § 514B-146(n) to require 
the [AOAO] to disburse rental income and provide an accounting 
accruing from the date of the [AOAO's] ownership of the 
Property"; and (2) "[Nationstar Mortgage, LLC v. Association of 
Apartment Owners of Elima Lani Condominiums, 152  Hawaiʻi 406, 526 
P.3d 383 (2023)] to order the [AOAO] to disburse rental income 
the [AOAO] obtained prior to the [circuit court's] granting of 
[US Bank's] Motion for Summary Judgment."   
Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
4 to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we resolve the AOAO's points of error2 as follows. 
  The AOAO contends that the circuit court's Confirmation Order erroneously ordered the AOAO's accounting and 
disbursement of the rental income pursuant to HRS § 514B-146(n) 
(2018).  "The lower court's authority to confirm a judicial sale 
is a matter of equitable discretion.  Hence, the exercise of 
discretion by the lower court judge will not be disturbed on appeal except for abuse."  U.S. Bank Tr., N.A. v. Ass'n of 
Apartment Owners of Waikoloa Hills Condo. Phase 1, 150 Hawaiʻ i 
573, 581, 506 P.3d 869, 877 (App. 2022) (cleaned up).  
Interpretation of a statute is a question of law reviewed de 
novo.  Barker v. Young, 153 
Hawaiʻi 144, 148, 528 P.3d 217, 221 
(2023).   
HRS § 514B-146(n) provides: 
After any judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure proceeding in 
which the association acquires title to the unit, any 
excess rental income received by the association from the unit shall be paid to existing lien holders based on the 
priority of lien, and not on a pro rata basis, and shall be 
applied to the benefit of the unit owner.  For purposes of this subsection, excess rental income shall be any net 
income received by the association after a court has issued 
a final judgment determining the priority of a senior 
mortgagee and after paying, crediting, or reimbursing the 
association or a third party for: 
 
(1)  The lien for delinquent assessments pursuant to 
subsections (a) and (b); 
 (2)  Any maintenance fee delinquency against the unit; 
 
 
2  We consolidate and reorganize the AOAO's points of error herein.    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
5 (3)  Attorney's fees and other collection costs related to 
the association's foreclosure of the unit; or
 
 (4)  Any costs incurred by the association for the rental, 
repair, maintenance, or rehabilitation of the unit 
while the association is in possession of the unit including monthly association maintenance fees, 
management fees , real estate commissions, cleaning 
and repair expenses for the unit, and general excise taxes paid on rental income; 
 
provided that the lien for delinquent assessments under 
paragraph (1) shall be paid, credited, or reimbursed first.   
 
(Emphasis added.) 
By its plain language, HRS § 514B-146(n) applies 
"[a]fter any judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure proceeding in 
which the association acquires title to the unit."  Id.; see 
also Barker, 153 Hawaiʻi at 149, 528 P.3d at 222 ("The rules of 
statutory interpretation require us to apply a plain language 
analysis when statutory language is clear.  Only when there is 
an ambiguity in a statute are we to resort to other methods of 
statutory interpretation.").   
The Hawai
ʻi Supreme Court has also expressly 
interpreted HRS § 514B-146(n) to apply in situations where an 
AOAO has foreclosed on a property: 
The first clause provides that the statute only applies 
after an association has foreclosed.  The second clause 
provides that "excess rental income" shall be paid to 
senior lien holders by priority, to be applied for "the benefit of the unit owner."  In context, it is clear that 
"the unit owner" refers to the owner prior to the 
association, on whom the association foreclosed.  See HRS 
§ 514B-146(a) (Supp. 2015) (allowing the association, 
during its foreclosure, to collect a "reasonable rental" 
from "the unit owner").   
 
. . . . 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
6 [W]e interpret HRS § 514B- 146(n) to apply to rental income 
received by the association after a mortgagee's subsequent 
foreclosure
, whether or not a commissioner is appointed.  
The statute entitles the association to such income, 
however collected, but only to the extent it does not 
exceed the sum of the amounts listed in subsections (1) through (4). . . . 
 
. . . .  
 [I]n enacting HRS § 514B- 146(n), the legislature intended 
for a foreclosing association to be able to collect what it 
was due and no more; hence, the association is to receive all rents short of "excess rental income."  Accordingly, 
the statute calls for an accounting to take place upon 
confirmation.  The association must account for all rents from the time it foreclosed on the property.   
 
Elima, 152 Hawaiʻ i at 415-16, 526 P.3d at 392- 93.3   
Here, the AOAO did not acquire the Property through 
judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure proceedings.  The Smiths, 
who were delinquent on their maintenance fees, quitclaimed the 
Property to the AOAO as part of a settlement agreement.  We 
conclude that neither HRS § 514B-146(n), nor Elima, provides 
legal authority for the circuit court to order the AOAO to account for and disgorge rental proceeds collected from the time it acquired the Property by quitclaim deed in 2013, until the 
Confirmation Order was entered in 2024.  The circuit court, 
which appears to have relied solely upon HRS § 514B-146(n) and 
Elima, therefore erred in ordering the AOAO to account for and 
disgorge the rental proceeds on that basis.   
 
3  In Elima, there were two foreclosure actions: a 2015 nonjudicial 
foreclosure pursuant to HRS § 667, et seq. (2016), through which the 
association acquired possession of the property; and a 2016 judicial 
foreclosure through which the lender and mortgagee obtained a foreclosure 
judgment.    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
7 For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Judgment.  We 
affirm in part, and vacate in part, the Confirmation Order and 
the Order Denying Reconsideration.  Specifically, we vacate the 
following paragraphs of the Confirmation Order: 
11.  The [AOAO] shall file a complete and detailed 
accounting and explanation of all rental proceeds 
collected, and any charges and expenses made against the 
. . . Property beginning from the date the [AOAO] became 
the record owner of the . . . Property through the date of the [circuit court's] entry of this [Confirmation Order].  
The [AOAO] shall provide its accounting and disburse any excess rental proceeds within thirty- five (35) days from 
the [circuit court's] entry of this [Confirmation Order] 
unless otherwise ordered by the [circuit court].  
12.  The [AOAO], shall disburse any excess rental 
proceeds by the sale closing deadline set forth by the [circuit court] herein, with the disbursement consistent 
with [Elima], in the following order of priority: 
 
i.  First, pay any real property taxes to the 
County of Maui that remain outstanding at the time of closing and any real property taxes 
that [US Bank] has advanced, to the benefit of 
the [AOAO], from the date of their ownership; 
 ii.  Second, any current common expenses owed on the Property and other charges as allowed under 
[HRS] § 514B- 146(n), due to [the AOAO] until 
the date of closing; 
 
iii.  Third, pay Commissioner's fees/costs; 
 
iv.  Fourth, to pay down [US Bank's] delinquency; 
 v.  Fifth, any further excess rental proceeds to 
[the Smiths], the former owners of the . . . 
Property. 
 
We further vacate any other part of the Confirmation Order and 
Order Denying Reconsideration that requires the AOAO to provide 
an accounting and disgorgement of the rental proceeds it 
collected on the Property prior to entry of the Confirmation Order.  We remand for further proceedings consistent with this NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
8 summary disposition order, including with regard to the circuit 
court's discretion to consider its equitable authority to order 
the AOAO's accounting and disgorgement of rental proceeds on any 
basis in equity other than HRS § 514B-146(n) and Elima.   
DATED: Honolulu,  Hawaiʻi, June 8, 202 6. 
On the briefs: 
Kelly A. LaPrade, 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
 
Leila M. Rothwell, for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
 
David W. Cain, for Defendants-Appellees.  /s/ Karen T. Nakasone Chief Judge  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Associate Judge 
 /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge
 
 