 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-11-0000396
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
STEVEN ALLEN SOTO, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-0236)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Steven Allen Soto (Soto) appeals 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) filed on 
April 12, 2011, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) 
charged Soto with third-degree promoting a dangerous drug, for knowingly possessing the dangerous drug methamphetamine, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 712-1243 (Supp. 
1
 The Honorable Edwin C. Nacino presided over Soto's trial, which is the
proceeding relevant to this appeal. The Honorable Michael D. Wilson presided
over Soto's sentencing.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2012).2 A jury found Soto guilty as charged. The Circuit Court
 
sentenced Soto to a five-year term of imprisonment, subject to a
 
mandatory minimum term of one year and eight months as a repeat
 offender, to run concurrently with any other sentence being
 served.
 
In his points of error, Soto contends that: (1) there
 
was insufficient evidence to support his conviction because
 "[t]he required element of possession of the dangerous drug was
 not established"; and (2) "the jury instructions were not
 sufficient to provide guid[a]nce on this issue." (Initial
 capitalization omitted.) We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment.
 
I.
 
We resolve the points of error raised by Soto as
 
follows:
 
1. Soto contends that there was insufficient evidence
 
to show that Soto possessed the "plastic bag" which was found to
 contain methamphetamine. We disagree. 
Officer Mitchell Neth (Officer Neth) testified that he
 
approached Soto and a female, who were sitting two or three feet
 apart on a concrete bench. Soto threw something at Officer Neth,
 which hit him on the hand and face. Officer Neth grabbed Soto's
 left hand and saw Soto drop a $10 bill and a green packet from
 that hand. Officer Neth saw a crystal-like substance in the
 packet, which appeared to be crystal methamphetamine, and he
 arrested Soto. Soto later said to Officer Neth, "Let's make a
 deal. If you release me, I'm going to show you the mother load
 of the drugs and where I got it from. If you release me, I will
 show you." The contents of the green packet were later analyzed
 and found to contain methamphetamine.
 
2
 HRS ยง 712-1243 provides in relevant part that "[a] person commits the
offense of promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree if the person
knowingly possesses any dangerous drug in any amount."
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
When viewed in the light most favorable to the State, 
there was sufficient evidence to show that Soto knowingly 
possessed the green packet recovered by Officer Neth and that Soto knowingly possessed methamphetamine. See State v. Tamura, 
63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117 (1981). Although Officer Neth's testimony regarding his recovery of the packet containing methamphetamine differed from Soto's testimony, the jury was entitled to believe Officer Neth. See State v. Smith, 106 
Hawai'i 365, 372, 105 P.3d 242, 249 (App. 2004) ("It is the 
province of the jury, not the appellate courts, to determine the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence."). 
2. Soto contends that the jury instructions were
 
insufficient. However, he does not identify with any
 particularity what portion of the jury instructions he is
 challenging. In his points of error, Soto simply states that
 "[t]he Court failed to provide jury instructions as to a
 specified method at all to determining who actually possessed the
 plastic bag in question or if the plastic bag was possessed by
 anyone at all. (see Attached Jury Instructions)[.]" Although
 Soto's brief refers to attached jury instructions, there are no
 jury instructions attached to his brief. In the argument section
 of Soto's brief, the argument he presents on his jury instruction
 claim states, in its entirety: "Furthermore, [Soto] contends that
 the Jury Instructions did not provide for conviction based upon
 an inference that he held the subject plastic bag."
 
Soto fails to present a discernable argument on his 
challenge to the jury instructions and accordingly this point of error is deemed waived. See Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
Rule 28(b)(7) (2010) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."); State v. Moore, 82 Hawai' i 202, 206 n.1, 921 P.2d 122, 126 n.1 
(1996) (stating that where the appellant "presents no discernable argument in support of his contention[,] . . . it is our prerogative to disregard this claim"). In any event, to the extent Soto is challenging the Circuit Court's instruction on 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
possession, we do not see any deficiency that is plain or
 
manifest.
 
II. 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 29, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Edward Smith 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 