FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
YONG SHIK WON, Defendant-Appellant.
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000858
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-11-01903)
 
March 28, 2014
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., and FUJISE and GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Defendant-Appellant Yong Shik Won (Won) was convicted
 
of operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant
 
(OVUII), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E­61(a)(3) (Supp. 2013).
1 A police officer, who observed Won
 
1HRS § 291E-61(a)(3) provides:
 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a
(continued...)  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
speeding, pulled Won over and subsequently arrested him for
 
OVUII. 
At the police station, an officer read the "implied
 
consent" form to Won, and Won agreed to take a breath test, which
 revealed an alcohol concentration above the legal limit.  The
 
police did not provide Won with Miranda warnings
2
 before reading
the implied consent form and obtaining his agreement to take the
 
breath test.
 
Prior to trial, Won moved to suppress the results of
 
his breath test. The District Court of the First Circuit
 
(District Court) denied Won's motion to suppress and found him
 
guilty of violating HRS § 291E-61(a)(3).3
 
On appeal, Won argues that the District Court erred in
 
denying his motion to suppress. Prior to 2011, it was settled
 
law that a person arrested for OVUII was not entitled to Miranda
 
warnings or to consult with an attorney before the police asked
 whether the arrestee would submit to testing. State v. Severino,
 
56 Haw. 378, 537 P.2d 1187 (1975). Won, however, contends that
 in light of the Legislature's recent enactment of HRS § 291E-68,
 which beginning in 2011 made the refusal to submit to a breath,
 blood, or urine test a crime, the police were required to advise
 him of his Miranda rights before reading him the implied consent
 form and obtaining his decision on testing. Won argues that
 because the police failed to give him Miranda warnings, any
 statement he made in response to the reading of the implied
 
(...continued)
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the
 
person operates or assumes actual physical control of a
vehicle:
 
. . .
 
(3) With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two
hundred ten liters of breath[.]
 
2See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966).
 
3The Honorable David Lo presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consent form was inadmissible, and his breath test results should
 
have been suppressed as the fruit of the Miranda violation.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In addition, Won argues that the results of his breath
 
test should have been suppressed because the police violated his
 
statutory right to an attorney under HRS § 803-9 (1993);4
 
misinformed him of his statutory right to an attorney, and
 misinformed him of the sanctions for refusing to submit to
 testing under the provisions of the current statutory scheme. 
Won further argues that in light of the United States Supreme
 Court's recent decision in Missouri v. McNeely, 133 S. Ct. 1552
 (2013), HRS § 291E-68 is unconstitutional; that because HRS 
§ 291E-68 is unconstitutional, he was misinformed of the
 sanctions for refusing to submit to testing since the implied
 consent form referred to sanctions under HRS § 291E-68; and that
 based on McNeely, the police were required to obtain a search
 warrant before conducting his breath test. 
For the reasons set forth below, we hold that Won was
 
not subjected to interrogation for purposes of Miranda and that
 the police did not violate Won's Miranda rights in obtaining his
 decision on testing; that Won has not met his burden of showing
 that McNeely rendered HRS § 291E-68 unconstitutional; that Won
 does not prevail on his other arguments; and that the District
 Court did not err in denying Won's motion to suppress.
 
4HRS § 803-9, entitled "Examination after arrest; rights of
arrested person[,]" provides in relevant part:
 
It shall be unlawful in any case of arrest for
examination:
 (1) To deny to the person so arrested the right
of seeing, at reasonable intervals and for a reasonable
time at the place of the person's detention, counsel or
a member of the arrested person's family;
 
. . . 
(4) In case the person arrested has requested that
the person see an attorney or member of the person's
family, to examine the person before the person has had
a fair opportunity to see and consult with the attorney
or member of the person's family[.]
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, we affirm Won's conviction.
 
5
  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
BACKGROUND
 
The following facts are based on police reports and
 
related exhibits, which the parties stipulated into evidence. On
 
April 20, 2011, at about 3:15 a.m., Honolulu Police Department
 (HPD) Officer Vincent Gonzales (Officer Gonzales) observed Won
 traveling faster than the posted speed limit. Officer Gonzales
 
paced Won going at about 55 miles per hour (mph) in a 35 mph zone
 
and subsequently stopped Won's vehicle.
 
While speaking with Won, Officer Gonzales observed that
 
Won had "red, watery, eyes[,]" and that he "emitted a strong odor
 of an alcoholic type beverage[.]" Officer Gonzales told Won that
 
he "believed [Won] to be intoxicated" and asked Won to perform
 
the Standardized Field Sobriety Tests (SFSTs), which Won agreed
 to perform. Won performed poorly on the SFSTs. Won agreed to
 take a Preliminary Alcohol Screening (PAS) test, which revealed a
 breath alcohol content of 0.176.
5
 
Based on these observations, HPD Sergeant Albert Lee
 
arrested Won and Officer Gonzales transported Won to the police
 station. At the police station, Sergeant Lee presented Won with
 a copy of a form entitled, "Use of Intoxicants While Operating a
 Vehicle Implied Consent for Testing" (Implied Consent Form), and
 read the form to him. Specifically, the Implied Consent Form
 
provided: 
Pursuant to chapter 291E, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS), Use
of Intoxicants While Operating a Vehicle, you are being
informed of the following:
 
1. Any person who operates a vehicle upon a public
way, street, road, or highway or on or in the waters of the
State shall be deemed to have given consent to a test or
tests for the purpose of determining alcohol concentration
or drug content of the persons [sic] breath, blood, or urine
as applicable.
 
2. You are not entitled to an attorney before you
submit to any test or tests to determine your alcohol and/or
drug content.
 
5Pursuant to HRS § 291E-11 (2007), the results of a PAS test
shall only be used in determining probable cause for an arrest,
and Won's PAS test results are not at issue in this case. 
6
  
  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3. You may refuse to submit to a breath or blood
test, or both for the purpose of determining alcohol
concentration and/or blood or urine test, or both for
determining drug content, none shall be given, except as
provided in section 291E-21. 
However, if you refuse to
submit to a breath, blood, or urine test, you shall be
subject to up to thirty days imprisonment and/or fine up to
$1,000 or the sanctions of 291E-65, if applicable. In
 addition, you shall also be subject to the procedures and
sanctions under chapter 291E, part III.
 
(Emphasis added; formatting altered.)
 
Won initialed the first and third enumerated paragraphs 
of the Implied Consent Form, but did not initial the second
 
paragraph, stating that he "[did] not agree" with it and was "not
 going to initial" it. Won initialed the portion of the form that
 
stated that he "[a]greed to take a breath test and refused the
 
blood test[,]" and he signed and dated the form. Won's breath
 
test showed a breath alcohol concentration of 0.170 grams of
 
alcohol per 210 liters of breath.
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) charged Won 
by complaint with OVUII, in violation of HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) and (a)(3).
6 The District Court granted Won's motion to dismiss the 
HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) portion of the charge, and therefore the State only proceeded to trial on the alleged HRS § 291E-61(a)(3) violation. Prior to trial, Won filed a suppression motion to 
preclude the State from introducing evidence of the results of 
his breath test. Won argued that the results of his breath test 
should be suppressed because: (1) he was mislead and/or 
inadequately advised as to his rights surrounding the breath test; (2) his Miranda rights were violated; (3) his statutory right to consult with an attorney pursuant to HRS § 803-9 was violated; and (4) his consent to take the breath test was coerced. 
The parties agreed that Won's suppression motion and
 
trial would be decided on stipulated evidence, which included
 
6The State also alleged that Won was subject to sentencing
as a first offender in accordance with HRS § 291E-61(b)(1) (Supp.
2013).
 
7
    
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Won's police reports and related exhibits. The District Court
 
denied Won's motion to suppress and found Won guilty of OVUII in
 violation of HRS § 291E-61(a)(3).
7 The District Court sentenced
 
Won to a fine of $500, a one-year revocation of his driver's
 license, 14 hours of substance abuse rehabilitation as well as
 substance abuse assessment and possible treatment, and various
 fees and assessments. The District Court entered its Judgment on
 October 25, 2012.
 
After Won had filed his opening brief, the United
 
States Supreme Court issued McNeely, a decision relating to non-
consensual blood draws in OVUII cases.  In light of McNeely, Won
 
filed a motion for supplemental briefing. The State did not
 
oppose Won's motion, which this court granted. Won and the State
 submitted supplemental briefs on the effect of McNeely on the
 instant case, and the Attorney General filed an amicus brief
 defending the constitutionality of Hawaii's implied consent law,
 set forth in HRS Chapter 291E. Oral argument was held on
 
September 26, 2013. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
A.
 
"No one can seriously dispute the magnitude of the 
drunken driving problem or the States' interest in eradicating it." Michigan Dept. of State Police v. Sitz, 496 U.S. 444, 451 
(1990). In 2012, 10,322 people were killed nationwide in alcohol-impaired driving crashes. See National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration (NHTSA), Traffic Safety Facts, 2012 Motor Vehicle Crashes: Overview (No. 811856, Nov. 2013), http://www­nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811856.pdf. In Hawai
'i, there were 51 
drunk driving fatalities in 2012, representing 41 percent of all 
7
 The Judgment indicates that Won violated "HRS [§] 291E­
61(a)(1)(3)(b)(1)." However, as noted supra, the record shows
that the (a)(1) portion of the charge was dismissed, and the
State proceeded only on the (a)(3) portion of the charge.
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
traffic deaths for that year. Id. 
9
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[A]ll 50 States have adopted implied consent laws that
 
require motorists, as a condition of operating a motor vehicle
 
within the State, to consent to BAC [(blood alcohol
 concentration)] testing if they are arrested or otherwise
 detained on suspicion of a drunk-driving offense." 
McNeely, 133
 
S. Ct. at 1566. The Hawai 'i Legislature enacted our implied 
consent statute in 1967 to reduce deaths, injuries, and damages
 arising out of highway traffic accidents. See 1967 Haw. Sess.
 
Laws Act 214, at § 1. In declaring its purpose in 1967 for
 enacting the implied consent statute, the Legislature stated:
 
Deaths of persons and injuries to them and damages to
property with the other losses suffered on account of
highway traffic accidents are of grave concern to the State
and its citizens as well as to the federal government. The
 legislature finds and declares that it is in the public
interest that the State initiate, coordinate and accelerate
every available means to decrease the fatalities, injuries,
damages and losses resulting from highway traffic accidents.
 
Id.
 
The implied consent and testing provisions of Hawai 'i's 
statutory scheme are currently set forth in HRS Chapter 291E,
 
Part II. Under Hawai 'i's statutory scheme, a person who drives 
on a public road is deemed to have consented to undergo chemical
 testing for alcohol or drugs, as prescribed by HRS Chapter 291E,
 Part II. HRS § 291E-11 (2007), provides in relevant part:
 
(a) Any person who operates a vehicle upon a public
way, street, road, or highway or on or in the waters of the
State shall be deemed to have given consent , subject to this
part, to a test or tests approved by the director of health
of the person's breath, blood, or urine for the purpose of
determining alcohol concentration or drug content of the
person's breath, blood, or urine, as applicable.
 
(b) The test or tests shall be administered at the
 
request of a law enforcement officer having probable cause
to believe the person operating a vehicle upon a public way,
street, road, or highway or on or in the waters of the State
is under the influence of an intoxicant or is under the age
of twenty-one and has consumed a measurable amount of
alcohol, only after:
 
(2)  (1) 	 A lawful arrest; and
 
	 The person has been informed by a law
enforcement officer that the person may refuse
to submit to testing under this chapter.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(c) If there is probable cause to believe that a
person is in violation of . . . section 291E-61 or
291E-61.5, [ 8
] as a result of having consumed alcohol, then
the person shall elect to take a breath or blood test, or
both, for the purpose of determining the alcohol
concentration.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
If a person under arrest for OVUII refuses to submit to
 
breath, blood, or urine testing, "none shall be given," HRS 
§ 291E-15 (Supp. 2013),9
 except that in the event there is a
collision resulting in injury or death, a law enforcement officer
 is not required to accept the person's refusal to undergo
 testing. Id.; HRS § 291E-21 (2007).
10
   
8HRS § 291E-61 sets forth the criminal offense of OVUII and
HRS § 291E-61.5 sets forth the criminal offense of Habitual
OVUII.
 
9HRS § 291E-15 provides:
 
If a person under arrest refuses to submit to a
breath, blood, or urine test, none shall be given,
except as provided in section 291E-21. Upon the law
enforcement officer's determination that the person
under arrest has refused to submit to a breath, blood,
or urine test, if applicable, then a law enforcement
officer shall:
 
(1) Inform the person under arrest of the
sanctions under section 291E-41, 291E-65, or
291E-68; and
 
(2) Ask the person if the person still refuses to
submit to a breath, blood, or urine test,
thereby subjecting the person to the
procedures and sanctions under part III or
section 291E-65, as applicable;
 
provided that if the law enforcement officer fails to
comply with paragraphs (1) and (2), the person shall
not be subject to the refusal sanctions under part III
or IV.
 
10HRS § 291E-21 provides in relevant part:
 
(a) Nothing in this part shall be construed to
prevent a law enforcement officer from obtaining a
(continued...)
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Prior to 2011, if a person failed to honor his or her
 
implied consent and refused to submit to chemical sobriety
 
testing as prescribed by HRS Chapter 291E, the person was subject
 to administrative sanctions in the form of revocation of his or
 her driver's license and referral for substance abuse assessment
 and treatment. 
See HRS §§ 291E-41 (2007), 291E-65 (2007). The
 
administrative sanctions remain in effect. However, effective
 January 1, 2011, the Legislature enacted HRS § 291E-68, which
 imposed additional criminal sanctions for the refusal to submit
 to a breath, blood, or urine test. See 2010 Haw. Sess. Laws Act
 
166, §§ 2, 26, at 398, 415. In its current form, HRS § 291E-68
 (Supp. 2013) provides: "Except as provided in section 291E­65,[ 
11
] refusal to submit to a breath, blood, or urine test as
required by part II is a petty misdemeanor." Under the Hawai 'i 
Penal Code, a person convicted of a petty misdemeanor may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty days, and may be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000. See HRS 
§§ 706-663 (1993), 706-640 (Supp. 2013). 
Accordingly, under the statutory scheme, except for 
cases involving collisions resulting in death or injury, the Hawai
'i Legislature has chosen to avoid violent police-citizen 
confrontations as a means of securing chemical sobriety test results. Instead of authorizing the police to force persons arrested in the typical OVUII case to undergo chemical testing based on their implied consent, the Hawai
'i Legislature has 
chosen to use the threat of administrative and criminal sanctions 
10(...continued)
sample of breath, blood, or urine, from the operator of
any vehicle involved in a collision resulting in injury
to or the death of any person, as evidence that the
operator was under the influence of an intoxicant.
 
11HRS § 291E-65 (Supp. 2013) pertains to sanctions for
persons under the age of twenty-one who are arrested for
operating a vehicle after consuming a measurable amount of
alcohol and who refuse to submit to testing.
 
12
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to encourage arrestees to submit to testing.12 "[T]he effect of
 
implied consent legislation 'is to equip [law enforcement]
 
officers with an instrument of enforcement not involving physical
 compulsion.'" Rossell v. City and County of Honolulu, 59 Haw.
 
173, 182, 579 P.2d 663, 669 (1978) (citation omitted). The
 Legislature's "obvious reason" for permitting persons, deemed to
 have given consent as a matter of law, to refuse testing "is to
 avoid the violence which would often attend forcible tests upon
 recalcitrant inebriates." Id. 
B. 
Won argues that in light of the recent enactment of HRS
 
§ 291E-68, which makes refusing to submit to a breath, blood, or
 urine test a crime, the police were required to give him Miranda
 warnings before reading the Implied Consent Form to him and 
obtaining his decision regarding testing. Won contends that
 
because the police failed to advise him of his Miranda rights,
 
any statement he made in response to the Implied Consent Form was
 inadmissible and the results of his breath test should have been
 suppressed as the "Fruit of the Poisonous Tree." We disagree.
 
At least fourteen other states, like Hawai
'i, have 
enacted implied consent laws that impose criminal sanctions on a driver for refusing to submit to chemical testing, either as a separate offense or as an element authorizing the imposition of 
12Won's case is a "typical" OVUII case in that: (1) he was
arrested on probable cause to believe that he was OVUII, in
violation of HRS § 291E-61, as a result of having consumed
alcohol; (2) Won was not "operating a vehicle involved in a
collision resulting in injury to or death of any person," see HRS
§ 291E-21; and (3) Won was not arrested for operating a vehicle
with a measurable amount of alcohol while under the age of
twenty-one, in violation of HRS § 291E-64 (2007). Our analysis
in this case is limited to the provisions of HRS Chapter 291E
which apply to a "typical" OVUII case like Won's case. We do not
 address or analyze other provisions of HRS Chapter 291E, such as
those applicable to cases involving the operation of a vehicle
involved in a collision resulting in death or injury or the
operation of a vehicle by a person under twenty-one with a
measurable amount of alcohol.
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
an increased sentence for a driver found to have operated a
 
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant.13 It appears that
 
all the courts from other jurisdictions that have considered
 implied consent laws imposing such criminal sanctions in the
 context of challenges, like that raised by Won, alleging Miranda
 violations or violations of the protection against self-
incrimination, have rejected those challenges. These courts have
 held that a driver's refusal to submit to testing is not a
 "testimonial communication" and that the conduct of the police in
 determining whether the driver refuses to submit to testing does
 not constitute "interrogation" for Miranda purposes. 
Accordingly, they have held the actions of the police in
 determining whether the driver refuses to submit to testing does
 not implicate the driver's Miranda rights or the protection
 against self-incrimination.
 
As explained below, we join what appears to be the
 
uniform view of every other court that has considered the issue
 raised by Won, under laws similar to Hawai
'i's that impose 
criminal sanctions on a driver's refusal to submit to testing,
 
13These states are: Alaska, California, Florida, Iowa,
Kansas, Louisiana, Maine, Minnesota, Nebraska, Ohio,
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont, and Virginia. See Alaska
 
Stat. Ann. §§ 28.35.031, 28.35.032 (West, Westlaw through 2013
Sess.); Cal Veh. Code §§ 23538, 23577 (West, Westlaw through Ch.
4 of 2014 Sess.); Fla. Stat. Ann. §§ 316.1932, 316.1939 (West,
Westlaw through 2013 Sess.); Iowa Code Ann. § 321J.2(3)(b)(2)(d)
(West, Westlaw through 2013 Sess.); Kansas Stat. Ann. § 8-1025
(West, Westlaw through 2013 Reg. & Special Sess.); La. Stat. Ann.
§§ 14:98.2, 32:666 (West, Westlaw through 2013 Sess.); Me. Rev.
Stat. tit. 29-A, § 2411(5)(A)(3)(b) (West, Westlaw through 2013
Sess.); Minn. Stat. Ann. §§ 169A.20, 169A.26(1)(b) (West, Westlaw
through Ch. 147 of 2014 Sess.); Neb. Rev. Stat. Ann. §§ 60-6,197,
60-6,197.03 (West, Westlaw through 2013 Sess.); Ohio Rev. Code
Ann. § 4511.19(A)(2), (G)(1)(a)(ii) (West, Westlaw through 2013
Sess.); 75 Pa. Cons. Stat. Ann. § 3804(c) (West, Westlaw through
Reg. Sess. Act 2014-5); R.I. Gen. Laws Ann. § 31-27-2.1 (West,
Westlaw through Ch. 534 of 2013 Sess.); Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 23,
§§ 1201, 1202 (West, Westlaw through 2013 portion of 2013-2014
Legis. Sess.); Va. Code Ann. § 18.2-268.3 (West, Westlaw through
2013 Sess.). 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and hold that the conduct of the police in this case did not
 
violate Won's Miranda rights.14 The police were not required to
 
give Miranda warnings to Won before reading the Implied Consent
 Form to him or obtaining his decision regarding testing. 
Accordingly, the results of Won's breath test was not subject to
 suppression as the fruit of a Miranda violation.
 
C.
 1.
 
The requirements imposed by Miranda v. Arizona , 384
 
U.S. 436 (1966), were designed to safeguard a defendant's
 privilege against compulsory self-incrimination. See Rhode
 
Island v. Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 297 (1980). In Miranda, "the
 Court concluded that in the context of 'custodial interrogation'
 certain procedural safeguards are necessary to protect a
 defendant's Fifth and Fourteenth Amendment privilege against
 compulsory self-incrimination." Innis, 446 U.S. at 297.
15 "The
 
concern of the Court in Miranda was that the 'interrogation
 environment' created by the interplay of interrogation and
 custody would 'subjugate the individual to the will of his
 examiner' and thereby undermine the privilege against compulsory
 self-incrimination." Id. at 299 (citation omitted). 
In 
State v. Santiago, 53 Haw. 254, 492 P.2d 657 (1971), 
the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that "the protections which the 
United States Supreme Court enumerated in Miranda have an independent source in the Hawai
'i Constitution's privilege 
14We note that in his briefs on appeal, Won has not cited
any case construing laws similar to Hawai 'i's that impose
criminal sanctions on a driver's refusal to submit to testing, in
which the court held that the driver was entitled to Miranda warnings before the police could determine whether he or shewould submit to testing. 
15The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution
 
provides in relevant part: "No person . . . shall be compelled in
any Criminal Case to be a witness against himself. . . ." U.S.
 Const. amend V. The Fifth Amendment privilege against self-
incrimination was made applicable to the states pursuant to the
Fourteenth Amendment. See Malloy v. Hogan, 378 U.S. 1, 5 (1964).
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against self-incrimination[,]" which is now set forth in Article
 
I, Section 10 of the Hawai 'i Constitution.16 Santiago, 53 Haw. at 
266, 492 P.2d at 664; State v. Ketchum, 97 Hawai 'i 107, 116 & 
n.14, 34 P.3d 1006, 1015 & n.14 (2001).
 
Thus, as a matter of state constitutional law, article I,
section 10 
requires that before reference is made at trial to
statements made by the accused during custodial
interrogation, the prosecutor must first demonstrate
that certain safeguards were taken before the accused
was questioned. . . . [T]he prosecutor must show that
each accused was warned that he [or she] had a right
to remain silent, that anything said could be used
against him [or her], that he [or she] had a right to
the presence of an attorney, and that if he [or she]
could no[t] afford an attorney one would be appointed
for him [or her]. . . . [U]nless these protective
measures are taken, statements made by the accused may
not be used either as direct evidence in the
 prosecutor's case in chief or to impeach the
defendant's credibility during rebuttal or
cross-examination.
 
Ketchum, 97 Hawai 'i at 116, 34 P.3d at 1015 (footnote omitted; 
brackets and ellipsis points in original) (quoting Santiago, 53
 
Haw. at 266, 492 P.2d at 664).
 
2.
 
Miranda warnings are required when two conditions are
 
met: (1) the defendant must be in custody; and (2) the defendant
 must be under interrogation. Id. at 118-19, 34 P.3d at 1017-18. 
There is no dispute that for Miranda purposes, Won was in custody
 when the police presented him with the Implied Consent Form. 
Thus, the critical question in this case is whether Won was
 "under interrogation" when the Implied Consent Form was read to
 him.
 
In 
Innis, the Supreme Court explained that not all
 
16Specifically, Article I, Section 10 of the Hawai 'i 
Constitution provides in relevant part: "nor shall any person be
compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against oneself."Haw. Const. art. I, § 10. When Santiago was decided, thisidentical language of Article I, Section 10 was contained inArticle I, Section 8 of the Hawai
'i Constitution, except the term
"himself" was used instead of "oneself." See State v. Ketchum,97 Hawai
'i 107, 116 & n.14, 34 P.3d 1006, 1015 & n.14 (2001). 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statements obtained by the police after a suspect has been taken
 
into custody are "to be considered the product of interrogation." 
Innis, 446 U.S. at 299. Rather "the special procedural
 safeguards outlined in Miranda" only apply where a suspect is
 both taken into custody and "is subjected to interrogation." Id. 
at 300. The Court explained that "'[i]nterrogation,' as
 conceptualized in the Miranda opinion, must reflect a measure of
 compulsion above and beyond that inherent in custody itself." 
Id. 
In Innis, the Court held that "the term 'interrogation'
 
under Miranda refers not only to express questioning, but also to
 any words or actions on the part of the police (other than those
 normally attendant to arrest and custody) that the police should
 know are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response
 from the suspect." Id. at 301 (footnote omitted). Subsequently,
 
the Court clarified that it did not create an automatic booking
 exception to Miranda for "any question asked during the booking
 process[.]" Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 U.S. 582, 602 n.14 (1990)
 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). The Court
 explained that "[w]ithout obtaining a waiver of the suspect's
 Miranda rights, the police may not ask questions, even during
 booking, that are designed to elicit incriminatory admissions." 
Id. (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). 
In Ketchum, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court stated that in 
general, "interrogation" for Miranda purposes means "express questioning or its functional equivalent[,]" and whether the police have "subjected a person to 'interrogation' is determined by objectively assessing the 'totality of the circumstances.'" Ketchum, 97 Hawai
'i at 119, 34 P.3d at 1018 (some internal 
quotation marks and citations omitted). "[T]he ultimate question becomes 'whether the police officer should have known that his or her words or actions were reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response' from the person in custody." Id. 
(brackets and citation omitted). In determining whether "interrogation" has occurred under the totality of the 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circumstances, a court must "focus upon the officer's conduct,
 
the nature of the question (including whether the question is a
 'routine booking question'), and any other relevant
 circumstance." Id. at 121, 34 P.3d at 1020 (footnote omitted).
 
3.
 
In addition, both the United States Supreme Court and 
the Hawai
'i Supreme Court have drawn a distinction between a 
suspect being compelled to provide testimonial communications and being compelled to become the source of real or physical evidence. The protections of Miranda and the privilege against self-incrimination only apply to testimonial communications. See 
Muniz, 496 U.S. at 590-92, (stating that the privilege against self-incrimination does not protect a suspect from being compelled to produce real or physical evidence, but only from being compelled to provide the government with evidence of a testimonial or communicative nature, and that Miranda protections applied to verbal statements "that were both testimonial in nature and elicited during custodial interrogation"); State v. Wyatt, 67 Haw. 293, 302-03, 687 P.2d 544, 551 (1984) (concluding that the police conduct of a field sobriety test did not implicate the privilege against self-incrimination because the State did not seek "communications" or "testimony" from the defendant); State v. Bowers, 548 N.W.2d 725, 731 (Neb. 1996) ("Miranda implicates only statements that are both testimonial in nature and elicited during custodial interrogation."). To be protected by Miranda, the "incriminating response" by a suspect in custody "must be testimonial in nature." Ketchum, 97 Hawai
'i 
at 130, 34 P.3d at 1029 (Acoba, J., concurring and dissenting); see Muniz, 496 U.S. at 590, 600; United States v. Rodriguez-Garcia, 983 F.2d 1563, 1568 (10th Cir. 1993) ("Consenting to a search is not 'evidence of a testimonial or communicative nature' which would require officers to first present a Miranda warning."). In order to be testimonial, the suspect's communication must itself "relate to a factual assertion or disclose information." Muniz, 496 U.S. at 589 
18
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted); Ketchum, 97 
Hawai'i at 130, 34 P.3d at 1029 (Acoba, J., concurring and 
dissenting). 
D.
 
We first address Schmerber v. California , 384 U.S. 757
 
(1966), and South Dakota v. Neville, 459 U.S. 553 (1983), United
 States Supreme Court decisions which examined the implications of
 Miranda and the Fifth Amendment in the context of a compelled
 blood draw of a defendant suspected of OVUII
17
 and an implied
consent statute authorizing the use of evidence of the defendant's refusal to undergo testing in an OVUII prosecution. We next discuss the Hawai
'i Supreme Court's decision in Severino, 
which held that an OVUII arrestee was not entitled to Miranda warnings or to consult with an attorney before the police determined whether he would submit to testing, under Hawai
'i's 
then-existing implied consent statute. We then consider cases from other jurisdictions that have considered Miranda and self-incrimination claims in the context of implied consent statutes, which, like Hawai
'i's current statute, impose criminal sanctions 
for refusal to submit to chemical testing. 
1.
 
In 
Schmerber, the police arrested Schmerber for OVUII
 
and directed a doctor to withdraw a blood sample for alcohol
 testing, despite Schmerber's refusal to consent to the test. 
Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 758-59. The results of this blood-alcohol
 test were admitted at trial and used to convict Schmerber of
 OVUII. Id. at 759. Schmerber appealed on several grounds,
 
including that the withdrawal of his blood and the admission in
 evidence of the blood-test analysis violated his Fifth Amendment
 privilege against self-incrimination. Id. at 759-61. 
17When referring to cases or statutes from other
jurisdictions, we will use OVUII to generically refer to offenses
prohibiting the operation of a vehicle while impaired by, or with
specific levels of, alcohol or drugs.
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In addressing Schmerber's argument, the Court stated
 
that the critical question was whether Schmerber was "compelled
 
to be a witness against himself." Id. at 761 (internal quotation
 
marks omitted). The Court rejected Schmerber's claim that the
 blood-test evidence should have been suppressed because it was
 obtained in violation of his Fifth Amendment privilege against
 self-incrimination. The Court held that:
 
the privilege protects an accused only from being compelled
to testify against himself, or otherwise provide the State
with evidence of a testimonial or communicative nature, and
that the withdrawal of blood and use of the analysis in
question in this case did not involve compulsion to these
ends.
 
Id. (footnote omitted; emphasis added). 
The Court noted that courts have typically held that
 
the Fifth Amendment "offers no protection against compulsion to
 
submit to fingerprinting, photographing, or measurements, to
 write or speak for identification, to appear in court, to stand,
 to assume a stance, to walk, or to make a particular gesture."
 Id. at 764. The Court explained that the distinction which has
 emerged "is that the privilege is a bar against compelling
 'communications' or 'testimony,' but that compulsion which makes
 a suspect or accused the source of 'real or physical evidence'
 does not violate it." Id. The Court concluded that although the
 
blood-test evidence was "an incriminating product of compulsion,"
 it was not testimonial or communicative in nature, and it
 therefore "was not inadmissible on privilege grounds." Id. at
 
765.
 
2.
 
In Neville, the Court considered whether the admission
 
in evidence of Neville's refusal to take a blood-alcohol test,
 pursuant to South Dakota's implied consent statute that
 authorized the use of such refusal evidence in a criminal OVUII
 trial, would violate Neville's privilege against self-
incrimination. Neville, 459 U.S. at 554-58. The Court held that
 
the admission of the refusal evidence would not violate Neville's
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
privilege against self-incrimination. Id. at 554. It also
 
concluded that the police inquiry into whether a suspect will
 
take a blood-alcohol test, pursuant to an implied consent
 statute, does not constitute interrogation within the meaning of
 Miranda. Id. at 564 n.15.
 The Court noted that Schmerber held that since a blood
 
test was "'physical or real' evidence rather than testimonial
 evidence," it was unprotected by the Fifth Amendment. Id. at
 
559.
18 Therefore, the Court reasoned that Schmerber "clearly
 
allows a State to force a person suspected of driving while
 intoxicated to submit to a blood alcohol test." Id. The Court
 
explained, however, that "to avoid violent confrontations," South
 Dakota "has declined to authorize its police officers to 
administer a blood-alcohol test against the suspect's will." Id.
 
Instead, the South Dakota statute permits a suspect to refuse the
 test and requires the police to inform the suspect of his right
 to refuse. Id. at 559-60. The Court, however, stated that
 
"[t]his permission is not without a price," as the South Dakota
 law authorizes the imposition of the sanction of license
 revocation for one year for a person who refuses to take the
 test. Id. at 560. In addition, "South Dakota further 
18The Court also noted that Schmerber had also rejected
arguments that the coerced blood test violated the rights to due
process and counsel, and the prohibition against unreasonable
searches and seizures. Id. at 559 n.8. 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
discourages the choice of refusal by allowing the refusal to be
 
used against the defendant at [a criminal OVUII] trial." Id. 
The Court held that the sanctions for refusal imposed
 
by the South Dakota statutory scheme did not violate the Fifth
 Amendment. The Court explained that South Dakota "did not 
directly compel [Neville] to refuse the test, for it gave him the
 choice of submitting to the test or refusing[,]" id. at 562, and
 that "the values behind the Fifth Amendment are not hindered when
 the state offers a suspect the choice of submitting to the
 blood-alcohol test or having his refusal used against him." Id.
 
at 563. It stated that "[t]he simple blood-alcohol test is so
 safe, painless, and commonplace . . . that the state could
 legitimately compel the suspect, against his will, to accede to
 the test." Id. The Court concluded that since
 
the offer of taking a blood-alcohol test is clearly
legitimate, the action becomes no less legitimate when the
State offers a second option of refusing the test, with the
attendant penalties for making that choice. Nor is this a
 case where the State has subtly coerced respondent into
choosing the option it had no right to compel, rather than
offering a true choice. To the contrary, the State wants
respondent to choose to take the test, for the inference of
intoxication arising from a positive blood-alcohol test is
far stronger than that arising from a refusal to take the
test.
 
Id. at 563-64 (some emphasis added). 
The Court recognized that the choice to submit to or
 
refuse a blood-alcohol test is not an easy or pleasant one for a
 
suspect, but it stated that "the criminal process often requires
 suspects and defendants to make difficult choices." Id. at 564.
 
The Court held that the refusal to take a blood-alcohol test
 lawfully requested by a police officer, "is not an act coerced by
 the officer, and thus not protected by the privilege against
 self-incrimination." Id. 
The Court also addressed the Miranda implications of a
 
police officer's asking a suspect whether he or she will take a
 blood-alcohol test pursuant to an implied consent statutory
 scheme. The Court concluded:
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In the context of an arrest for driving while intoxicated, a
police inquiry of whether the suspect will take a
blood-alcohol test is not an interrogation within the
meaning of Miranda. As we stated in Rhode Island v. Innis,
446 U.S. 291, 301, 100 S. Ct. 1682, 1689, 64 L. Ed.2d 297
(1980), police words or actions "normally attendant to
arrest and custody" do not constitute interrogation. The
 
police inquiry here is highly regulated by state law, and is
presented in virtually the same words to all suspects. It
 is similar to a police request to submit to fingerprinting
or photography. [Neville's] choice of refusal thus enjoys
no prophylactic Miranda protection outside the basic Fifth
Amendment protection.
 
Id. at 564 n.15 (emphases added).
 
3.
 
In Severino, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court held that an 
OVUII arrestee was not entitled to Miranda warnings or to consult 
with counsel before the police asked whether the arrestee would submit to chemical testing under the 1974 version of Hawaii's implied consent law. Severino, 56 Haw. at 380-81, 537 P.2d at 
1189. The court concluded that because actions taken under the implied consent law are civil in nature, "a motorist is not entitled to consult with counsel before deciding to submit to the chemical test prescribed by the implied consent statute." Id. 
The court further held that an OVUII arrestee is not 
entitled to the Miranda warnings prior to being required to
submit to the chemical tests prescribed by statute, inasmuch
as the Miranda rights are not applicable to implied consent
proceedings. He is deemed by law to have given his prior
consent.
 
Id. at 381, 537 P.2d at 1189 (internal citation omitted). 
Severino had been arrested for OVUII and was advised of
 
his Miranda rights and the requirements and sanctions of the
 
implied consent law. Id. at 380, 537 P.2d at 1188. Severino
 
refused to answer questions and refused to take any chemical
 tests for alcohol until he spoke to a lawyer. Id. His driver's
 
license was revoked based on his refusal to submit to testing. 
Id. at 379, 537 P.2d at 1188. The court held that although the
 police were not required to provide Severino with Miranda
 warnings before determining whether he would submit to testing,
 because the police had given him Miranda warnings, they were
 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
required to make clear that the Miranda rights did not apply to
 
Servino's decision on whether to submit to chemical testing. Id.
 
at 381-82, 537 P.2d at 1189-90. However, the police did not make
 clear to Severino that his Miranda rights did not apply to this
 decision. Id. at 382, 537 P.2d at 1190. The court reversed the
 
revocation of Severino's license, concluding that he had been
 misled by the Miranda warnings into believing that he had a right
 to remain silent and to refuse to submit to the test until he had
 consulted with his lawyer. Id.
 
4. 
Won contends that the Hawai
'i Supreme Court's holding 
in Severino that an OVUII arrestee is not entitled to Miranda warnings or to consult with counsel before the police determine whether the arrestee will submit to chemical testing is no longer good law. He contends that the Legislature's recent enactment of HRS § 291E-68 to impose criminal penalties for refusing to submit to testing changes the analysis, and that the police must now give an OVUII suspect Miranda warnings before reading the Implied Consent Form or obtaining the arrestee's decision regarding testing. 
We disagree. Won's argument appears to have been 
uniformly rejected by every court that has construed implied consent statutes which like Hawai
'i's statute impose criminal 
sanctions for refusal to submit to testing. 
In Deering v. Brown, 839 F.2d 539 (9th Cir. 1988), the 
United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit considered Alaska's implied consent statute, which like Hawai
'i's statute 
made the refusal to submit to testing a crime. Deering was prosecuted for OVUII and refusal to submit to breathalyzer testing, both full misdemeanors punishable by up to a year in prison, and his refusal to submit to testing was used as evidence supporting both charges. Id. at 541. The Ninth Circuit held 
that, regardless of criminalization, Deering's refusal to submit to testing was not a testimonial communication, it was not compelled, and as a nontestimonial communication, it was not 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
subject to Miranda protection. Id. at 542-44. The court
 
therefore held that use of evidence of Deering's refusal at trial
 
did not violate Deering's rights under the Fifth Amendment or
 Miranda. Id. at 544.
 In holding that Deering's refusal was not a testimonial
 
communication, the court started its discussion by noting that in
 the context of the OVUII charge, Deering's refusal to take the
 test was clearly nontestimonial conduct indicating a
 consciousness of guilt. Id. at 541. However, like Won, Deering
 
argued that criminalizing the refusal to submit to testing
 changed the analysis and transformed the refusal into a
 "'testimonial' statement." Id. The Ninth Circuit rejected this
 
argument. The court held that making refusal "an element of [a]
 crime, rather than merely evidence of an element of the crime (as
 it is in the case of the [OVUII] charge), does not transform the
 nature of the refusal itself." Id. at 542. 
The court explained that "Alaska's [criminal] refusal
 
statute [was] closely analogous to a criminal contempt penalty
 for violating a court order to produce nontestimonial evidence." 
Id. The court concluded:
 
Just as a defendant facing a court order to produce
nontestimonial evidence[, such as a handwriting exemplar,]
has no constitutional right to refuse the order, so Deering
had no right to refuse the police request for a breathalyzer
test. And just as the imposition of criminal contempt
penalties does not transform the refusal to obey a court
order regarding nontestimonial evidence into a testimonial
communication with respect to the contempt charge, neither
does the imposition by the State of Alaska of a criminal
penalty for refusal to provide the state with the physical
evidence of a breathalyzer test -- beyond the civil penalty
of license revocation clearly condoned in Neville -­qualitatively transform the refusal into testimony.
 
Id. at 542 (internal citations omitted). Like evidence of the
 
failure to obey a court order that is used to prove a criminal
 contempt charge, "evidence of Deering's refusal was not used for
 the testimonial or communicative content conveyed by his act of
 refusal[,]" but instead was "used to show that he had not
 performed the physical act of actually taking the test when
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
requested." Id. Because Deering's act of refusal was not used
 
for its communicative content but simply to convey that he failed
 
to take the test when requested, the court concluded that the act
 of refusal was not testimonial. Id. 
19
 
The Ninth Circuit also addressed Deering's argument
 
that evidence of his refusal to take the breathalyzer test was
 obtained by the police in violation of his Miranda rights. The
 court rejected Deering's Miranda claim. Id. at 544. The court
 
held that the "protections of Miranda do not apply to
 nontestimonial evidence" and that Deering's refusal to take the
 test was nontestimonial. Id. 
In addition to Deering, it appears that every other 
court that has considered Miranda or Fifth Amendment claims in the context of implied consent statutes with criminal refusal provisions similar to Hawai
'i's have rejected the claims. These 
courts have held that police inquiry into whether an OVUII suspect will submit to testing pursuant to such implied consent statutes does not constitute interrogation for Miranda purposes and that the refusal to submit to testing is not a testimonial communication. E.g., State v. Morale, 811 A.2d 185, 189-90 (Vt. 
2002) (holding that the police asking an OVUII suspect, "Do you wish to take the breath test?" did not constitute interrogation protected by Miranda); Rowley v. Commonwealth, 629 S.E.2d 188, 190-91 (Va. Ct. App. 2006) ("[T]he 'fact of the refusal to 
19The court also held that Deering's refusal was not
"compelled" for purposes of the Fifth Amendment by making the
refusal to submit to testing a crime. Id. at 542-44. The court
 
explained that the choice presented to Deering of either
producing the breathalyzer evidence or facing criminal sanctions
for withholding it, was "no more impermissibly coercive than any
order to produce physical evidence which is backed by the
sanction of criminal contempt." Id. at 543. In addition, the
court noted that the state does not directly compel a refusal.
Id. "[T]he compulsion [that criminalizing refusal] increases is
the compulsion to submit to the breathalyzer test, not the
compulsion to refuse, and refusal is the conduct made criminal in
 the statute." Id. 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
perform tests that do not themselves constitute communicative or
 
testimonial evidence is equally non-communicative and non-
testimonial in nature[,]'" (citation omitted), and the refusal to
 submit to testing, "[a]n inherently nontestimonial act[,] does
 not become testimonial simply because the legislature chooses to
 compel it upon pain of imprisonment."); Svedlund v. Municipality
 of Anchorage, 671 P.2d 378, 381 (Alaska Ct. App. 1983) (holding
 that the request to submit to a breathalyzer test was not
 "interrogation" for purposes of Miranda); State v. Busciglio, 976
 So.2d 15, 18-22 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2008) (concluding that
 asking OVUII suspect whether he was willing to take a breath test
 did constitute "interrogation" and that suspect's response was
 not "testimonial"); State v. Cramblet, No. A-01-895, 2002 WL
 976035, *5 (Neb. Ct. App. May 14, 2002) (holding that refusals to
 submit to testing obtained in the implied consent context are not
 testimonial or communicative and do not implicate the protections
 of Miranda). 
E.
 
We join these other courts that have considered 
arguments similar to that raised by Won in the context of implied consent statutes with criminal refusal provisions similar to Hawai
'i's and conclude that the police were not required to give 
Miranda warnings to Won before determining whether he would submit to testing. Considering the totality of the circumstances, we hold that the officer's reading of the Implied Consent Form to Won did not constitute interrogation, and that Won's response to the officer's actions by indicating his agreement to submit to breath testing was not a testimonial communication. We therefore conclude that Won's Miranda rights were not implicated or violated by the police action in obtaining his agreement to submit to a breath test. 
In analyzing Won's Miranda claim, we note the rather
 
unique circumstances that surround the actions of the police in
 determining whether an OVUII arrestee will submit to testing. 
Not only are the police required by statute in every OVUII arrest
 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to determine whether the OVUII arrestee will submit to testing,
 
but the police must also comply with specific requirements set
 forth in the statute in obtaining the arrestee's decision. In
 particular, a police officer must inform the arrestee that he or
 she may refuse to submit to testing, and if the suspect refuses,
 the officer must also inform the arrestee of the sanctions for
 refusal. See HRS §§ 291E-11, -15. The record reflects that the
 
police have opted to fulfill their statutory obligations by
 utilizing pre-printed forms which inform OVUII arrestees that
 under the implied consent statute, they are deemed to have
 consented to chemical sobriety testing; that they are not
 entitled to an attorney before submitting to testing; and that
 they may refuse to submit to testing, but that if they refuse,
 they are subject to sanctions, including up to thirty days of
 imprisonment. 
In sum, the actions and discretion of the police in
 
determining whether an OVUII arrestee will submit to testing are
 limited and constrained by statute. The standardized procedures
 employed by the police, which not only informs the OVUII arrestee
 that the police inquiry is pursuant to statute but of the
 arrestee's right to refuse and the consequences of refusal, serve
 to diminish any coercion associated with the inquiry and
 eliminate concerns over an arrestee's will being overborne by the
 type of coercive police tactics which prompted the Miranda
 requirements. See Innis, 446 U.S. at 299; Miranda, 384 U.S. at
 
467. In addition, given the obligation of the police under the
 
statute to determine whether an OVUII arrestee will submit to
 testing, the police are not seeking a response from the arrestee
 for its testimonial or communicative content or to incriminate
 the arrestee for refusing, but to comply with the statute. The
 statute is designed to induce an arrestee to submit to testing,
 not to refuse testing. In any event, the police inquiry does not
 seek testimonial evidence because it is the act or conduct of
 refusing, not the means by which the refusal is communicated,
 that violates the criminal refusal statute. 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under Ketchum, in determining whether "interrogation" 
for Miranda purposes has occurred, we must consider the totality 
of the circumstances and "focus upon the officer's conduct, the nature of the question (including whether the question is a 'routine booking question'), and any other relevant circumstance." Ketchum, 97 Hawai
'i at 121, 34 P.3d at 1020. 
With respect to the officer's conduct, the record reflects that to determine whether Won would submit to testing, the officer followed the routine practice of reading the Implied Consent Form to Won, which advised Won of his rights and obligations under the implied consent law, in order to obtain Won's response. There is no suggestion that the officer used any coercive tactics in presenting the Implied Consent Form to Won. 
With respect to the nature of the question, including
 
whether it was a routine booking question, the police inquiry
 into whether Won would submit to testing was required and
 controlled by statute. The inquiry is "highly regulated by state
 law" and is presented in a standardized form to OVUII arrestees,
 characteristics which prompted the United States Supreme Court to
 conclude that such inquiry did not constitute interrogation
 within the meaning of Miranda. Neville, 459 U.S. at 564 n.15. 
Moreover, the inquiry made by the police was not to secure
 testimonial communications or incriminating evidence, but was
 based on the statutory obligation imposed on the police to
 determine whether Won would submit to testing. See Morale, 811
 
A.2d at 189 (concluding that "[i]t would be anomalous . . . to
 suppress evidence gathered by asking the statutorily required
 question" regarding whether an OVUII suspect would submit to
 testing). 
Given the implied consent statutory scheme, Won's 
response to the inquiry was not sought for its testimonial content and was not testimonial in nature, but represented a nontestimonial act and nontestimonial conduct which the police by statute were required to determine. See Ketchum, 97 Hawai
'i at 
130, 34 P.3d at 1029 (stating that an "incriminating response" by 
29
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a suspect "must be testimonial in nature" to be protected by
 
Miranda) (Acoba, J., concurring and dissenting); Cramblet, 2002
 WL 976035 at *5-6 (concluding that the defendant's statements
 were not the product of interrogation because the question
 regarding testing was not intended to elicit verbal information
 from the defendant about a crime, but was asked because the
 statute required the defendant to be asked to submit to a
 chemical test). In addition, given the significant sanctions for
 refusal, the statute is designed to induce an OVUII arrestee to
 agree to testing, not to refuse. See Deering, 839 F.2d at 543. 
The police inquiry is similar to a routine booking
 
question in that the statute requires that inquiry into whether
 an OVUII arestee will submit to testing must be made in every
 OVUII arrest. Thus, it is an inquiry routinely made in every
 OVUII arrest, and the inquiry and its content are not based on
 police discretion, but are required by statute. 
Finally, other relevant circumstances support the
 
conclusion that police action in presenting the Implied Consent
 Form to Won did not constitute interrogation. Under the implied
 consent statutory scheme, by operation of law, a person who
 operates a vehicle upon a public road is deemed to have consented
 to submit to chemical sobriety tests if arrested for OVUII. See
 
HRS § 291E-11; Severino, 56 Haw. at 381, 537 P.2d at 1189. Thus,
 a person arrested for OVUII does not have an unfettered right to
 refuse to submit to testing. However, to avoid potential
 violence that would attend physically forcing a recalcitrant
 OVUII arrestee to submit to testing, the statute gives an
 arrestee the limited option of declining to submit to testing,
 but subjects the arrestee to sanctions, including criminal
 sanctions, for making that choice. Because the OVUII arrestee
 does not have the unfettered right to refuse to submit to testing
 under the statutory scheme, it would be misleading to advise the
 OVUII arrestee that he or she had the right to remain silent or
 to consult with counsel when asked whether he or she would submit
 to testing. See Severino, 56 Haw. at 381-82, 537 P.2d at 1189­
30
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
90. This is because an arrestee's refusal to respond to an
 
inquiry regarding testing, or delay in responding to obtain
 
counsel that effectively prevented a test from being
 administered, would expose the arrestee to sanctions, including
 criminal penalties, for refusing to submit to testing. 
For these reasons, considering the totality of the
 
circumstances, we conclude that the officer's reading the Implied
 Consent Form to Won to determine whether Won would submit to
 testing did not constitute "interrogation" within the meaning of
 Miranda. Accordingly, the officer was not required to advise Won
 of his Miranda rights before presenting the Implied Consent Form
 to Won and obtaining Won's response. 
II.
 
A.
 
Won argues that his breath test results should have
 
been suppressed because the police violated his statutory right
 to an attorney under HRS § 803-9. That statute provides in
 relevant part:
 
It shall be unlawful in any case of arrest for
examination:
 
(1)	 To deny to the person so arrested the right of seeing,
at reasonable intervals and for a reasonable time at
 
the place of the person's detention, counsel or a
member of the arrested person's family; 
. . . 
(4)	 In case the person arrested has requested that the
person see an attorney or member of the person's
family, to examine the person before the person has
had a fair opportunity to see and consult with the
attorney or member of the person's family[.]
 
HRS § 803-9.
 
We conclude that Won's argument is without merit. 
Won's argument is foreclosed by the Hawai 'i Supreme Court's 
decision in Severino. HRS § 803-9 was in effect when Severino 
was decided. The court in Severino specifically held that "a motorist is not entitled to consult with counsel before deciding to submit to the chemical test prescribed by the implied consent 
31
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statute." Severino, 56 Haw. at 380-81, 537 P.2d at 1189. 
Indeed, the court reversed Severino's license revocation, which
 
was based on his refusal to submit to testing, because Severino
 was misled into believing that he had a right to refuse testing
 until he had consulted with his counsel. Id. at 382, 537 P.2d at
 
1190.
 
Even assuming arguendo that before deciding whether to 
submit to testing, Won had a statutory right to counsel under HRS § 803-9 that was violated, Won was not entitled to suppression of the results of his breath test. "Generally, where evidence has been obtained in violation of a statute, that evidence is not inadmissible per se in a criminal proceeding unless the statutory violation has constitutional dimensions[,]" or the defendant can demonstrate, by a preponderance of the evidence, a connection between the statutory violation and the evidence to be suppressed. State v. Edwards, 96 Hawai
'i 224, 237-39, 30 P.3d 
238, 251-53 (2001) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). As shown by our analysis of Won's Miranda claim, the statutory violation alleged by Won does not have constitutional dimensions. 
In addition, Won has not shown by a preponderance of 
the evidence that the failure to permit him to consult with counsel led to his agreement to submit to the breath testing. As noted, the implied consent statute encourages such agreement by imposing significant sanctions, including criminal penalties, for refusal. Under Hawai
'i Rules of Professional Conduct Rule 1.2(d) 
(2014), "[a] lawyer shall not counsel a client to engage, or assist a client, in conduct that the lawyer knows is criminal . . . ." Since refusing to submit to testing is a crime, Won's counsel could not have directly advised Won to refuse to submit to testing. Moreover, Won does not provide any basis for believing that he would have refused to submit to a breath test if he had consulted with counsel. Therefore, Won has not shown, by a preponderance of the evidence, a connection between the alleged violation of HRS § 803-9 and the results of his breath 
32
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
test, and suppression of the breath test results based on the 
alleged statutory violation is not warranted. See Edwards , 96 
Hawai'i at 237-39, 30 P.3d at 251-53. 
B.
 
The Implied Consent Form informed Won that "You are not 
entitled to an attorney before you submit to any test or tests to determine your alcohol and/or drug content." 
Relying on State v. 
Wilson, 92 Hawai 'i 45, 987 P.2d 268 (1999), Won alternatively 
argues that his agreement to submit to testing was not knowing and intelligent because he was misinformed of his right to an attorney under HRS § 803-9. Won contends that his breath test results should be suppressed on this basis. We disagree. 
In Wilson, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court construed the 1997 
version of the Hawai 'i implied consent statute. The court stated 
that "as the statutory language makes clear, a driver's 'implied consent' to an evidentiary chemical alcohol test is qualified by his or her implied right to refuse such a test after being accurately informed of his or her statutory right to consent or refuse, as well as the consequences of such consent or refusal." Id. at 49, 987 P.2d at 272. It concluded that "Hawai
'i's implied 
consent scheme mandates accurate warnings to enable the driver to knowingly and intelligently consent to or refuse a chemical alcohol test." Id. Because the arresting officer had misstated 
the applicable sanctions for refusing to submit to testing, the court held that Wilson's decision to submit to testing was not knowing and intelligent, and it suppressed the results of his breath test. Id. at 51-54, 987 P.2d at 274-77. 
We conclude that Won's reliance on Wilson is misplaced. 
Wilson held that for an OVUII arrestee's decision on testing to
 be valid, the police must accurately inform the arrestee of his
 or her rights under the implied consent statute to consent to or
 refuse testing and the applicable consequences of the arrestee's
 decision. Id. at 49, 987 P.2d at 272. Won's right to counsel
 
under HRS § 803-9 is not part of his rights to consent to or
 refuse testing under the implied consent statute or part of the
 
33
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statutory consequences of his decision on testing. Wilson does
 
not require that an OVUII arrestee be advised of statutory rights
 
not contained in the implied consent statute, and HRS § 803-9
 itself does not require an advisement of rights. Therefore, Won
 is not entitled to suppress his breath test results based on
 Wilson.
 
III.
 
Won argues that his breath test results should have
 
been suppressed because the Implied Consent Form misinformed him
 of the sanctions for refusing to submit to testing. The portion
 of the form Won claims was inaccurate states: "if you refuse to
 submit to a breath, blood, or urine test, you shall be subject to
 up to thirty days imprisonment and/or fine up to $1,000 or the
 sanctions of 291E-65, if applicable." (Emphasis added.) Won
 contends that the form should have instead stated that if testing
 is refused, "you may be subject to up to thirty days imprisonment
 if convicted." Based on Wilson, Won argues that because he was
 misinformed of the sanctions for refusal, his agreement to submit
 to testing was invalid and his breath test results must be
 suppressed. We disagree.
 
In Wilson, under the then-existing implied consent 
sanctions, Wilson was subject to the revocation of his driving privileges for three months to a year if he agreed to and failed a blood-alcohol test. Wilson, 92 Hawai
'i at 51, 987 P.2d at 274. 
Instead, the implied consent form read to Wilson by the arresting officer stated only that a "three month revocation would apply if you chose to take the test and failed it." Id. (internal 
quotation marks and ellipsis points omitted). The court concluded that this advisement "was inaccurate and misleading" because it did not "fully inform Wilson of the legal consequences of submitting to a blood test[,]" and that the misleading information was relevant to his decision on whether to agree to or refuse the test. Id. The court therefore held that Wilson 
was prevented from making a "knowing and intelligent" decision on whether to take the test, and it affirmed the suppression of 
34
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wilson's test results based on the failure of the police to
 
fulfill their statutory duty to inform Wilson of his implied 
35
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
right to consent to or refuse testing, and the consequences of
 
that decision. Id. at 51-54, 987 P.2d 268 at 274-77. 
We conclude that, unlike in Wilson, the Implied Consent
 
Form presented to Won was not inaccurate or misleading. As
 stated in the form, if Won failed to submit to testing, he was
 subject to up to thirty days imprisonment. The use of the term
 "up to" also conveyed the contingent nature of the sanctions and
 that the reference to "thirty days imprisonment" was the maximum
 possible punishment. Moreover, it is common knowledge that
 imprisonment is a criminal punishment that is triggered by a
 conviction. We conclude that Won was sufficiently advised of the
 potential criminal sanctions for refusing to submit to testing
 and that his decision to submit to a breath test was knowing and
 intelligent. 
IV.
 
Won claims that in light of the United States Supreme 
Court's recent decision in McNeely, HRS § 291E-68 violates the Fourth Amendment to the United State Constitution and Article I, Section 7 of the Hawai
'i Constitution.20 Specifically, Won 
20The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution
 
states:
 
The right of the people to be secure in their
persons, houses, papers, and effects, against
unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be
violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon
probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and
particularly describing the place to be searched, and
the persons or things to be seized.
 
U.S. Const. amend. IV.
 
Article I, Section 7 of the Hawai
'i Constitution
 
states:
 
The right of the people to be secure in their
persons, houses, papers and effects against
unreasonable searches, seizures and invasions of
privacy shall not be violated; and no warrants shall
issue but upon probable cause, supported by oath or
(continued...)
 
36
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contends that McNeely establishes that he had a constitutional
 
right to withdraw his consent to be tested for breath alcohol
 concentration, and that HRS § 291E-68 impermissibly infringes on
 that right. In addition, Won argues that because HRS § 291E-68
 
is unconstitutional, the Implied Consent Form misinformed him of
 
the sanctions for refusing to submit to testing because it
 included the sanctions imposed by HRS § 291E-68. Finally, Won
 appears to argue that his breath test violated his rights under
 the Fourth Amendment and Article I, Section 7 because it was
 conducted without a search warrant. As explained below, we
 disagree with Won's arguments.
 
A.
 
Won argues that the Supreme Court's recent decision in 
McNeely renders HRS § 291E-68 unconstitutional. It is well settled that a party challenging the constitutionality of a statute faces a heavy burden. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has long 
held that: "(1) legislative enactments are presumptively constitutional; (2) a party challenging a statutory scheme has the burden of showing unconstitutionality beyond a reasonable doubt; and (3) the constitutional defect must be clear, manifest, and unmistakable." Pray v. Judicial Selection Comm'n, 75 Haw. 
333, 340, 861 P.2d 723, 727 (1993) (internal quotation marks, brackets, and citation omitted). 
In Schmerber, the United States Supreme Court upheld a
 
warrantless blood draw to conduct a blood-alcohol test from a
 non-consenting person arrested for OVUII, because the officer
 "might reasonably have believed that he was confronted with an
 emergency, in which the delay necessary to obtain a warrant,
 under the circumstances, threatened the destruction of
 
20(...continued)
affirmation, and particularly describing the place to
be searched and the persons or things to be seized or
the communications sought to be intercepted.
 
Haw. Const. art I, § 7. 
37
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence[.]" Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 770 (internal quotation
 
marks and citation omitted). In McNeely, the Court considered
 
"whether the natural metabolization of alcohol in the bloodstream
 presents a per se exigency that justifies an exception to the
 Fourth Amendment's warrant requirement for nonconsensual blood
 testing in all drunk-driving cases." McNeely, 133 S. Ct at 1556. 
The Court held that the answer to this question was no. Id. The
 
Court declined to adopt a categorical rule that exigent
 circumstances always exist to permit nonconsensual blood draws
 for alcohol testing without a warrant where there is probable
 cause for an OVUII arrest, and instead opted for a case-by-case
 assessment of exigency. Id. at 1561. 
In support of its decision, the Court noted the
 
intrusive nature of the blood-withdrawal search at issue in the
 case. The Court described the search as "involv[ing] a compelled
 physical intrusion beneath McNeely's skin and into his veins to
 obtain a sample of his blood[,]" and it stated that "[s]uch an
 invasion of bodily integrity implicates an individual's 'most
 personal and deep-rooted expectations of privacy.'" Id. at 1558
 
(citation omitted).
 
In response to the arguments of Missouri and its amici
 
that the absence of a per se exigency rule for blood draws would
 "undermine the governmental interest in preventing and
 prosecuting drunk-driving offenses," Justice Sotomayor stated:
 
States have a broad range of legal tools to enforce their
drunk-driving laws and to secure BAC [(blood alcohol
concentration)] evidence without undertaking warrantless
nonconsensual blood draws. For example, all 50 States have
adopted implied consent laws that require motorists, as a
condition of operating a motor vehicle within the State, to
consent to BAC testing if they are arrested or otherwise
detained on suspicion of a drunk-driving offense. Such laws
 
impose significant consequences when a motorist withdraws
consent; typically the motorist's driver's license is
immediately suspended or revoked, and most States allow the
motorist's refusal to take a BAC test to be used as evidence
 against him in a subsequent criminal prosecution.
 
Id. at 1566 (internal citations omitted) (emphasis added)
 
38
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(plurality opinion).21
 
B.
 
McNeely addressed the narrow question of whether the
 
dissipation of alcohol in the bloodstream establishes a per se
 
exigent-circumstances exception to the warrant requirement for
 nonconsensual blood draws for OVUII arrests. McNeely did not
 
address other potential exceptions to the warrant requirement,
 the Fourth Amendment implications of breath tests, the validity
 of implied consent statutes, or the validity of breath tests
 conducted pursuant to such statutes.
 
Here, Won agreed to submit to a breath test pursuant to 
Hawai
'i's implied consent statute. Unlike McNeely, Won was not 
subjected to a compelled nonconsensual blood draw. A breath test is "less intrusive" than a blood test. Skinner v. Railway Labor 
Executives' Ass'n, 489 U.S. 602, 625 (1989). "Unlike blood tests, breath tests do not require piercing the skin and may be conducted safely outside a hospital environment and with a minimum of inconvenience or embarrassment. Further, breath tests reveal the level of alcohol in the employee's bloodstream and nothing more." Id. 
A Hawai
'i driver, like Won, who is arrested for OVUII 
based on alcohol consumption has the option of electing to take a breath test, a blood test, or both. HRS § 291E-11(c). Because a Hawai
'i driver can chose to take the less intrusive breath test, 
and because in this case Won chose to take a breath test, we only address the constitutionality of HRS § 291E-68 as it applies to breath tests under the implied consent statutory scheme in a typical OVUII case.
22 We conclude that Won has failed to meet 
his heavy burden of showing that McNeely renders HRS § 291E-68 unconstitutional. See Pray, 75 Haw. at 340, 861 P.2d at 727. 
21Justice Kennedy, who was part of the Court's five-member
majority, did not join in the quoted portion of Justice
Sotomayor's opinion. 
22See footnote 12, supra.
 
39
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C. 
"As the text of the Fourth Amendment indicates, the
 
ultimate measure of the constitutionality of a governmental
 
search is 'reasonableness.'" Maryland v. King, 133 S. Ct. 1958,
 
1969 (2013) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). The
 proper function of the Fourth Amendment is not to constrain all
 bodily intrusions, but only intrusions which are unjustified and
 made in an improper manner. Id. The United States Supreme Court
 
has stated:
 
[W]hen faced with special law enforcement needs, diminished
expectations of privacy, minimal intrusions, or the like,
the Court has found that certain general, or individual,
circumstances may render a warrantless search or seizure
reasonable. Those circumstances diminish the need for a
 warrant, either because 'the public interest is such that
neither a warrant nor probable cause is required,' or
because an individual is already on notice, for instance
because of his employment, or the conditions of his release
from government custody, that some reasonable police
intrusion on his privacy is to be expected.
 
Id. (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
 
In determining whether a warantless search or seizure 
is reasonable, the court must balance the government's need to 
search against the intrusion on the individual's privacy interests. See In re Doe, 77 Hawai
'i 435, 439, 887 P.2d 645, 649 
(1994) (stating that the reasonableness of a class of searches requires balancing the need to search against the invasion which the search entails); United States v. Place, 462 U.S. 696, 703 (1983) ("We must balance the nature and quality of the intrusion on the individual's Fourth Amendment interests against the importance of the governmental interests alleged to justify the intrusion."); Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 20-21 (1968). In evaluating the individual's interests regarding bodily searches, courts consider the degree to which the search invades an individual's legitimate expectations of privacy and the magnitude of the intrusion, including the extent to which the procedure may threaten the person's safety or health. King, 133 S. Ct. at 
1978-79 (citing the diminished expectation of privacy of an 
40
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
individual taken into police custody and the minimal bodily
 
intrusion resulting from taking a buccal swab from inside the
 mouth in upholding the constitutionality of a statute authorizing
 a warrantless search using a buccal swab to obtain a sample of a
 person's DNA after certain arrests). 
D. 
As noted, McNeely only addressed the exigent-
circumstances exception to the warrant requirement for
 nonconsensual blood draws; it did not address breath tests or
 other exceptions to the warrant requirement. 
Consent to search is an exception to the warrant 
requirement under the Fourth Amendment and Article I, Section 7. See State v. Hanson, 97 Hawai
'i 71, 76, 34 P.3d 1, 6 (2001). 
Warrantless searches have also been found reasonable in other circumstances involving "special law enforcement needs, diminished expectations of privacy, minimal intrusions, or the like," where the need for a warrant is diminished because of the public interest or because "an individual is already on notice . . . that some reasonable police intrusion on his privacy is to be expected." King, 133 S. Ct. at 1969. 
In addition, "[d]riving is a privilege, not a right." 
State v. Spillner, 116 Hawai
'i 351, 364, 173 P.3d 498, 511 
(2007). Pursuant to Hawai 'i's implied consent statute, the 
Legislature has imposed conditions on its grant of the privilege to drive on public roads. As a matter of law, a person who exercises the privilege to drive and operates a vehicle on a public road is deemed to have given his or her consent to submit to testing of the person's breath, blood, or urine for alcohol or drugs, as prescribed by the implied consent statute. See HRS 
§ 291E-11; Severino, 56 Haw. at 381, 537 P.2d at 1189; Rossell, 59 Haw. at 182, 579 P.2d at 669. Thus, under Hawai
'i's implied 
consent statute, by driving on a public road, the driver has consented to testing. 
The Legislature presumably could have sought to make
 
the implied consent to breath testing completely irrevocable. 
41
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
See Rowley, 629 S.E.2d at 191 ("The act of driving constitutes an 
irrevocable, albeit implied, consent to the officer's demand for a breath sample."); State v. Diaz, 160 P.3d 739, 741-42 (2007) (applying statutory implied consent despite driver's attempt to withdraw consent). However, to avoid physical violence, Hawai
'i's implied consent statute gives a driver the limited 
right, subject to the imposition of significant sanctions, to refuse to submit to testing. But this limited statutory right to refuse testing only modifies, but does not vitiate, the driver's implied consent to testing. The limited statutory right to refuse testing also does not mean that the driver's implied consent is not valid for purposes of the Fourth Amendment and Article I, Section 7. See Rowley, 629 S.E.2d at 191 (holding 
that a driver's implied consent to submit to breath samples by exercising the privilege of driving was a valid consent to search under the Fourth Amendment); Burnett v. Municipality of Anchorage, 634 F. Supp. 1029, 1038 (D. Alaska 1986) (noting that a driver, who has given his or her implied consent to a breath test by driving on a public highway, is not entitled to recant or withdraw such consent for Fourth Amendment purposes after being lawfully arrested for OVUII).
23 
In effect, by exercising the privilege of driving, a
 
driver (like Won) consents to submit to a breath test, pursuant
 to a statutory scheme that protects the driver from being
 physically forced to undergo testing, but imposes sanctions on
 the driver's exercise of that option. In balancing the
 government's interest against the individual's privacy interest,
 we conclude that obtaining a driver's breath test under the
 procedures set forth in the implied consent statute is 
23In this regard, the implied consent statute has two
components, both of which are reasonable. It is reasonable for
 
the Legislature to condition its grant of the privilege of
driving on a person's agreement to submit to breath testing if
arrested for OVUII. It is also reasonable for the Legislature to
enforce that bargain by imposing penalties on a driver who
refuses to honor his or her agreement. 
42
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasonable and does not violate the Fourth Amendment and Article
 
I, Section 7. 
The governmental interest in protecting lives, securing
 
the safety of our public roads, and deterring drivers from
 operating vehicles while intoxicated is strong and compelling.
24
 
24Although the dissipation of alcohol in the bloodstream
does not establish a per se exigent-circumstances exception to
the warrant requirement for nonconsensual blood draws, McNeely,
133 S. Ct at 1556, 1563, it does impose time constraints on the
government with respect to obtaining the results of a breath
test.
 
43
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On the other hand, the intrusion on personal privacy effected by
 
a breath-test search under the statutory scheme is quite limited. 
Only a driver arrested on probable cause of OVUII, who already
 has a diminished expectation of privacy because he or she is in
 custody, see King, 133 S. Ct. at 1978, is subject to a breath
 test. Such a driver's objective expectation of privacy is
 further diminished by the implied consent to breath testing
 imposed by statute, which gives a driver statutory notice that if
 arrested for OVUII, "some reasonable police intrusion on his [or
 her] privacy is to be expected." Id. at 1969. The breath test
 
itself is minimally intrusive. See Skinner, 489 U.S. at 625. 
Unlike more intrusive blood tests, breath tests do not require
 piercing the skin, are safely conducted outside the hospital
 environment, and involve a minimum of inconvenience or
 embarrassment. Id. They only reveal very limited and targeted
 
information -- the level of alcohol in a driver's system. Id. 
Moreover, the breath tests are based on the driver's implied
 consent to testing that is given in exchange for the privilege of
 driving and administered under a statutory scheme which protects
 a driver from being physically forced to submit to the test. See
 
HRS §§ 291E-11, 291E-15. 
In Hanson, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court held that an 
airline passenger, who impliedly consented to the search of a toolbox by submitting it for inspection, could not withdraw his consent to search a plastic bag wrapped in duct tape found in the toolbox. Hanson, 97 Hawai
'i at 75-77, 34 P.3d at 5-7.25 The 
court reasoned that because the purpose of a security inspection can only be effectuated if the contents of items submitted for 
25In Hanson, an airline passenger submitted a toolbox for
inspection, but refused to consent to a security officer's
request to search a plastic bag wrapped in duct tape found in thetoolbox. Hanson, 97 Hawai
'i at 72, 34 P.3d at 2. The security
officer opened the plastic bag and found a handgun, which led toHanson's prosecution for a firearms offense. Id. 
44
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
inspection can be discerned, the scope of the passenger's implied
 
consent to search in submitting the toolbox for inspection
 extended to its contents, notwithstanding the passenger's refusal
 to consent to a search of the wrapped plastic bag. Id. at 76-77, 
34 P.3d at 6-7. Accordingly, the court held that the warrantless
 search of the wrapped plastic bag did not violate the Fourth
 Amendment or Article I, Section 7. Id. 
By similar reasoning, the purpose of the implied
 
consent statute would be defeated if a driver could freely
 withdraw his or her consent to submit to a breath test after
 being arrested for OVUII. We conclude that the statutory scheme,
 which imposes sanctions to dissuade a driver from withdrawing his
 or her content, is reasonable and does not violate the Fourth
 Amendment or Article I, Section 7.
26
 
McNeely does not address breath tests or the validity
 
of implied consent statutes, and neither McNeely's holding nor
 its reasoning compels the conclusion that HRS § 291E-68 is
 unconstitutional.
27 Indeed, Justice Sotomayor and three other
 
justices appear to endorse implied consent statutes, and their
 use of "significant consequences" to discourage a driver from
 
26We note that courts from other jurisdictions have also
held that a warrantless breath test obtained from an OVUII
 
arrestee is a valid search incident to arrest. See United States
 
v. Reid, 929 F.2d 990, 994 (4th Cir. 1991); Burnett v.
Municipality of Anchorage, 634 F.Supp. 1029, 1037 (D. Alaska
1986), aff'd 806 F.2d 1447, 1449-50 (9th Cir. 1986); Svedlund,
671 P.2d at 384.
 
27Although Won challenges the constitutionality of HRS §
291E-68, he notes that HRS § 291E-15 only requires the police to
advise an OVUII arrestee of the sanctions for refusing testing
after an initial refusal, and he states that his agreement to a
breath test would have been valid if it came in response to an
initial inquiry that did not mention the sanctions for refusal.
In light of our analysis, we need not distinguish between an
initial inquiry regarding testing and an inquiry following an
initial refusal under HRS 
§ 291E-15 in evaluating the constitutionality of HRS § 291E-68. 
45
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
refusing to submit to testing, as a preferred alternative to
 
"nonconsensual blood draws." See McNeely, 133 S. Ct at 1566
 
(plurality opinion). McNeely also emphasized the intrusive 
46
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
nature of a blood draw and did not analyze the constitutional
 
implications of a breath test, which is at issue in Won's case. 
See id. at 1558. Under these circumstances, we reject Won's
 claim that McNeely renders HRS § 291E-68 unconstitutional.
28
 
E.
 
Because Won has failed to show that HRS § 291E-68 is
 
unconstitutional, we reject his claim that the Implied Consent
 Form misinformed him of the sanctions for refusing to submit to
 testing because it included the sanctions imposed by HRS § 291E­68. We also reject Won's claim that his breath test violated the
 Fourth Amendment and Article I, Section 7 because it was
 conducted without a search warrant. Based on our previous
 analysis, we conclude that Won's breath test was properly
 obtained pursuant to the implied consent statute and that his
 rights under the Fourth Amendment and Article I, Section 7 were
 not violated. Under the circumstances presented, the police were
 not required to obtain a search warrant before conducting Won's
 breath test.
 
28We note that on February 3, 2014, Won submitted a citation
of a supplemental authority pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure Rule 28(j) (2010). Won cited an unpublished
decision of the United States Supreme Court in Aviles v. Texas,134 S. Ct. 902, 2014 WL 102362 (2014) (mem.), in which the Courtsummarily granted the writ of certiorari, vacated the judgment,and remanded the case to the Court of Appeals of Texas "forfurther consideration in light of [McNeely]." In the underlyingcase, the Texas Court of Appeals upheld the admission of awarrantless blood draw, taken by the police over the defendant'sobjection, pursuant to Texas's implied consent statute whichauthorized such action. Aviles v. State, 385 S.W.3d 110, 115-16(Tex. App. 2012). Won reads the Supreme Court's action in Avilesas indicating that there is no "implied consent" exception to thewarrant requirement. However, absent a more definitive statementby the United States Supreme Court, we decline to read theCourt's action in Aviles as a decision addressing the merits ofimplied consent statutes or the issues presented in Won's case. 
47
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm Won's conviction
 
and sentence.29
 
Jonathan Burge
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Brian R. Vincent
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Robert T. Nakatsuji
Deputy Solicitor General
Department of the Attorney General
for Amicus Curiae
 
29 As noted in footnote 7, supra, the Judgment erroneously
 
indicates that Won was convicted of violating both HRS 291E­61(a)(1) and (a)(3). We direct the District Court to file a
 corrected judgment to reflect that Won was only convicted of
violating HRS § 291E-61(a)(3), as first offender under HRS
§ 291E-61(b)(1). 
48
 