NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000408
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
K.G., Petitioner-Appellant, v.
D.D. and CHILD SUPPORT ENFOREMENT AGENCY,
STATE OF HAWAII, Respondents-Appellees
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-P NO. 15-1-0168)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant K.G. (Mother) appeals from the
 
Order After Trial on Child Custody, Visitation and Parenting
 
filed on April 29, 2016 (Order After Trial), filed in the Family
 
Court of the Second Circuit (Family Court).1
 The Order After
 
Trial awarded Mother and Respondent-Appellee D.D. (Father) joint
 legal custody of their son, I.D. The Order After Trial awarded
 
Mother primary physical custody, and Father was awarded
 significant parenting time.
 
On appeal, Mother argues that the Family Court abused
 
its discretion when it (1) granted joint legal custody and
 
1
 The Honorable Lloyd A. Poelman presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
significant parenting time to Father without rebutting the
 
presumption created by an act of family violence under Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-46(a)(9) (Supp. 2016), and (2)
 
showed bias for Father and Father's counsel. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Mother's points of error as follows: 
(1) Mother argues that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion when it granted Father joint legal custody and
 significant parenting time without rebutting the presumption
 created by an act of family violence under HRS § 571-46. In
 particular, Mother asserts that the Family Court "failed to grasp
 the underlying facts which would make it impossible for [Father]
 to overcome the rebuttable presumption." 
HRS § 571-46 states in relevant part: 
Criteria and procedure in awarding custody and
visitation; best interest of child. (a) In actions for
divorce, separation, annulment, separate maintenance, or any
other proceeding where there is at issue a dispute as to the
custody of a minor child, the court, during the pendency of
the action, at the final hearing, or any time during the
minority of the child, may make an order for the custody of
the minor child as may seem necessary or proper. In awarding
the custody, the court shall be guided by the following
standards, considerations, and procedures:
 
. . . . 
(9)	 In every proceeding where there is at issue a
dispute as to the custody of a child, a
determination by the court that family violence
has been committed by a parent raises a
rebuttable presumption that it is detrimental to
the child and not in the best interest of the
 child to be placed in sole custody, joint legal
custody, or joint physical custody with the
perpetrator of family violence. In addition to
other factors that a court shall consider in a
 proceeding in which the custody of a child or
visitation by a parent is at issue, and in which
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the court has made a finding of family violence
by a parent:
 
(A) 	 The court shall consider as the primary
factor the safety and well-being of the
child and of the parent who is the victim
of family violence;
 
(B) 	 The court shall consider the perpetrator's
history of causing physical harm, bodily
injury, or assault or causing reasonable
fear of physical harm, bodily injury, or
assault to another person; and
 
(C) 	 If a parent is absent or relocates because
of an act of family violence by the other
parent, the absence or relocation shall
not be a factor that weighs against the
parent in determining custody or
visitation;
 
(10)	 A court may award visitation to a parent who has
committed family violence only if the court
finds that adequate provision can be made for
the physical safety and psychological well-being
of the child and for the safety of the parent
who is a victim of family violence[.]
 
In Rezentes , this court recognized that the presumption
 
created under HRS § 571-46(a)(9)2
 is a presumption "imposing the
burden of producing evidence under [Hawaii Rules of Evidence
 
(HRE)] Rule 303." Rezentes v. Rezentes, 88 Hawai 'i 200, 208, 965 
P.2d 133, 141 (App. 1998) (quoting H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1511­96, in 1996 House Journal, at 1625). HRE Rule 303 (2016)
 provides in relevant part: 
(a) General rule. A presumption established to
implement no public policy other than to facilitate the
determination of the particular action in which the
presumption is applied imposes on the party against whom it
is directed the burden of producing evidence.
 
(b) Effect. The effect of a presumption imposing the
burden of producing evidence is to require the trier of fact
to assume the existence of the presumed fact unless and
until evidence is introduced which would support a finding
of its nonexistence, in which case no instruction on
presumption shall be given and the trier of fact shall
determine the existence or nonexistence of the presumed fact
from the evidence and without regard to the presumption.
 
2
 HRS § 571-46(a)(9) has not substantially changed since this
court's Rezentes decision. Compare HRS § 571-46(a)(9) (Supp. 1997) with HRS
 
§ 571-46(a)(9) (Supp. 2016). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Nothing in this rule shall be construed to prevent the
drawing of any inferences.
 
Here, the Family Court found that Father's conviction 
for Abuse of Family or Household Member constitutes an act of 
family violence under HRS § 571-46(a)(9). Based on the Family Court's determination of family violence, a rebuttable presumption was raised "that it is detrimental to the child and not in the best interest of the child to be placed in sole custody, joint legal custody, or joint physical custody with the perpetrator of family violence." HRS § 571-46(a)(9). To rebut the presumption, Father had to demonstrate that he posed no threat to I.D., and that placing I.D. in his care and custody would not be detrimental to I.D.'s best interests. See AC v. AC, 
134 Hawai
'i 221, 232, 339 P.3d 719, 730 (2014). 
The Family Court found that Father presented evidence
 
at trial that rebutted the presumption created by HRS § 571­46(a)(9). In reaching its finding, the Family Court clearly
 considered I.D.'s safety and well-being. The Family Court found
 that the "overwhelming evidence is that the child's safety needs
 are met when he is with [Father.]" The Family Court also found
 that Father and I.D. shared a close and loving relationship with
 Father's girlfriend A.A. and her children. Additionally, the
 Family Court found that Father is a loving and capable father who
 is able to separate his own needs from those of I.D. and who
 encourages I.D. to have a good relationship with Mother and
 I.D.'s extended family. Moreover, the Family Court considered
 Father's "history of causing physical harm, bodily injury, or
 assault or causing reasonable fear of physical harm, bodily
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
injury, or assault to another person[.]" HRS § 571-46(a)(9)(B). 
The Family Court found that the incident underlying the Abuse of
 Family or Household Member conviction was an isolated incident,
 that I.D. was not present during the incident, and that the
 incident did not involve Mother. The Family Court also
 determined that there was no credible evidence that Father
 behaved inappropriately to I.D. or in I.D.'s presence, or that
 Father was verbally or physically abusive to Mother. 
The Family Court has wide discretion in making its 
decisions and "those decisions will not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion." In re Doe, 95 Hawai
'i 183, 
189, 20 P.3d 616, 622 (2001). "An abuse of discretion occurs where the trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Rezentes, 88 Hawai
'i 
at 208, 965 P.2d at 141 (citation omitted). Furthermore, it is "well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Fisher v. 
Fisher, 111 Hawai
'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) (quoting 
Doe, 95 Hawai 'i at 190, 20 P.3d at 623). 
Based on the foregoing, we cannot conclude that the
 
Family Court abused its discretion when it determined that the
 presumption created by HRS § 571-46(a)(9) was rebutted. 
(2) Mother contends that the Family Court showed bias
 
towards Father and Father's counsel, citing Findings of Fact
 (FOFs) 6 and 11 in the Family Court's July 13, 2016 Findings of
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Fact; Conclusions of Law. In FOF 6, the Family Court found that
 
the "testimony of both [A.A.] and [Father] was credible. [A.A.'s]
  
testimony was especially credible. She was both open and candid
 in her testimony." In FOF 11, the Family Court found that:
 
There was no credible evidence presented at trial of
[Father] abusing drugs or alcohol. The credible evidence
 was that, during the months preceding the filing of the
instant petition, [Father] rarely drank and did not use any
illegal drugs. There was no evidence presented at trial
that [Father] was verbally or physically abusive to
[Mother.] The credible evidence showed that the child is
well fed when with [Father]. 
Mother and Father presented conflicting evidence
 
related to Father's alcohol consumption, alleged abuse, and
 
I.D.'s eating habits. Mother testified that Father was verbally
 abusive during the course of their relationship. Mother also
 testified that when Father "drinks or when he's on steroids his
 anger comes out a lot more. And he would call [her] a bitch, a
 cunt, on a daily basis." When asked if she stood by her
 statement in her affidavit that I.D. was not eating at Father's
 house, Mother responded affirmatively. A.A. testified that
 Father is a good parent to I.D., and he "makes sure [I.D.] gets
 his needs, his dinners, takes a bath, like any basic parent needs
 to do." A.A. also testified that she was aware that Father was
 not allowed to drink alcohol while on probation. A.A. related
 that Father drank alcohol "occasionally a couple times[,]" while
 on probation, but had not had a drink in months. Father
 testified that he never used drugs and that he has never
 physically abused I.D. or Mother. Upon review of the record, FOF
 11 reflects the Family Court's determination that A.A. and
 Father's testimony were credible. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Mother cites no authority to support her assertion that
 
a court's credibility determinations constitute evidence of bias
 
or prejudice. Mother provides no further argument or evidence to
 support her contention that the Family Court was biased towards
 Father. Thus, we reject Mother's assertion that the Family
 Court's credibility determinations constitute evidence of bias or
 prejudice. 
Mother also argues that the Family Court showed bias in
 
favor of Father's counsel. In support of her argument, Mother
 asserts that the Family Court
 
provided leading recitation of [Father's counsel's]
questions to witnesses, allowed [Father's counsel] to make
jumps from direct to cross-examination with a witness which
blurred the lines between direct and leading questions,
allowed [Father's counsel] to testify without sustaining
objections, and provided false and misleading facts in the
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law.
 
Upon a review of the entire record, we conclude that 
there is no support in the record to suggest that the Family 
Court disregarded its duty to "maintain the attitude and appearance of impartiality." State v. Pokini, 55 Haw. 640, 645, 
526 P.2d 94, 101 (1974). It appears that the Family Court assisted both parties' counsel throughout the custody trial. As such, the Family Court's actions "appear[ed] to be motivated by a desire to maintain order and decorum during the proceedings rather than by any improper biases." State v. Fukusaku, 85 
Hawai
'i 462, 483, 946 P.2d 32, 53 (1997) (footnote omitted). 
Based on the foregoing, we reject Mother's contention that the Family Court showed a bias towards Father's counsel. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, the Family Court's April 29, 2016
 
Order After Trial is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai ', June 29, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Stuart E. Ragan,
for Petitioner-Appellant. 
Kyle B. Coffman,
for Respondent-Appellee D.D. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
8
 