NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NOS. CAAP-12-0000365 and CAAP-12-0000527
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
FIRST UNITED FUNDING, LLC, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
NAUPAKA INVESTMENTS, L.L.C.; LAURI L. LANE, as Personal
Representative of the Estate of D. Grant Lane;
LAURI L. LANE, Defendants-Appellants,
and
 
NAUPAKA PLACE AT WAIKOLOA BEACH RESORT OWNERS ASSOCIATION;
JOHN DOES 1-50 and DOE ENTITIES 1-50, Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-82K)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
This case involves a borrower's challenge to the amount
 
determined to be owed on a loan in the course of a judicial
 
foreclosure action. 
Defendants-Appellants Naupaka Investments,
 
1
L.L.C. (Naupaka),  Lauri L. Lane, as personal representative of
the Estate of D. Grant Lane (Grant), and Lauri L. Lane (Lauri),
2
 
(collectively, the Defendants), appeal from a Judgment entered
 
1
 Naupaka is an Arizona limited liability company doing business in
Hawai'i. 
2
 The Lanes were a married couple, both named individually as parties
to this action. Grant passed away during the pendency of this litigation, and
Lauri, as Personal Representative of the Estate of Grant, was substituted as a
party. 
Additionally, Naupaka Place at Waikoloa Beach Resort Owners
Association was named as a defendant in this case, but it takes no part in
this appeal. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
April 30, 2012, in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit
 
3
(circuit court),  in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee First United
Funding, LLC (First United).4 Judgment was entered pursuant to
 
two orders which together granted First United's Motion for
 Confirmation of Sale, for Deficiency Judgment, for Writ of
 Possession and Cancellation of Notice of Pendency of Action. 
The circuit court entered two orders because, upon
 
confirming the sale of the subject property, the court deferred
 ruling on the amount owed to First United because the parties
 disagreed whether a Second Loan Modification between the parties
 was valid. In the end, after a further hearing and then various
 submissions by the parties, the circuit court treated the Second
 Loan Modification as void after First United indicated, via a
 post-hearing letter sent to the court, that if the circuit court
 believed there was a genuine issue of material fact related to
 that agreement, First United would withdraw its reliance on the
 Second Loan Modification and agree to treat that agreement as
 void.
 
On appeal, the Defendants assert that the circuit court
 
erred by (1) granting the deferred portion of First United's
 motion related to amounts owed to First United despite genuine
 issues of material fact regarding the Defendants' defenses as to
 the amounts owed; (2) improperly limiting Defendants' defenses to
 the existence of the Second Loan Modification and voiding the
 Second Loan Modification without legal basis; (3) holding that
 the Defendants' defenses were moot because they depended on the
 continued existence of the Second Loan Modification; (4) entering
 certain additional orders and findings based on the prior alleged
 errors; and (5) granting First United's motion for attorneys'
 fees.
 
3
 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided.
 
4
 First United is a Minnesota limited liability company doing business
in Hawai' i. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After appellate briefing was completed in this case, we
 
granted First United's motion for temporary remand to allow the
 
circuit court to correct clerical mistakes in the Judgment and
 the March 5, 2012 "Order Granting Deferred Portion of Plaintiff's
 Motion for Confirmation of Sale, for Deficiency Judgment, for
 Writ of Possession and Cancellation of Notice of Pendency of
 Action" (March 5 Order). During the temporary remand, the
 circuit court made corrections inter alia to its calculation of
 additional per diem interest. On March 19, 2013, the circuit
 court entered an Amended Judgment and an amended order (March 19
 Order).
 
For the reasons discussed below, we hold that the
 
circuit court erred in concluding that the Defendants' defenses
 regarding the amount owed to First United were moot. We vacate
 the Amended Judgment and remand.
I. Background
 
On August 23, 2007, First United loaned $6,650,000 to 
Naupaka for the purchase of two vacant residential lots on the Island of Hawai
'i (Subject Property). Naupaka executed a 
promissory note for the loan amount in favor of First United (Note). The Note provided inter alia that at no time shall the interest rate be less than 6% per annum and established a maturity date of August 15, 2008, at which time the entire remaining principal balance, plus any unpaid accrued interest, was due. Naupaka also executed a mortgage in favor of First United (Mortgage). Under the loan documents, First United reserved the right to pursue foreclosure on the Property in the event of default on the terms of the various loan documents. The Lanes jointly and severally guaranteed payment of the Note pursuant to a Guaranty (Guaranty). 
Effective August 15, 2008, Grant, on behalf of Naupaka,
 
and Corey Johnston (Johnston), as president of First United,
 executed a loan modification agreement (First Loan Modification)
 which extended the maturity date of the Note to February 15,
 2009.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Effective October 15, 2008, Grant and Johnston executed 
a Second Loan Modification Agreement (Second Loan Modification)
 
which inter alia extended the loan maturity date to August 15,
 2009; increased the interest due on the outstanding principal to
 a fixed rate of 7% per annum commencing on January 1, 2009; and
 required Naupaka to make a principal reduction payment of $1.19
 million to First United by March 30, 2009. The Second Loan
 Modification also provided that 
9. Borrower shall deliver to Lender's legal counsel,
to hold in escrow consistent with this Second Loan
 
Modification Agreement an original general warranty deed in
favor of Lender for the Hawaii Real Property free and clear
of all liens, encumbrances and security interests, except
those in favor of Lender and other liens, encumbrances and
security interests existing as of the date hereof (the
"Warranty Deed"). If Borrower or Borrower's realtor
 identifies a potential buyer for the Hawaii Real Property,
Lender will negotiate in good faith for the entering into a
purchase and sale agreement with such potential buyer. If
 the principal reduction payment described above is received
by Lender by March 30, 2009, the unrecorded original
Warranty Deed shall be returned immediately to Borrower. If
 
the principal reduction payment described above is not
received by Lender by March 30, 2009, then (a) Lender may
record the original Warranty Deed, and (b) Borrower (but not
the Guarantors) shall be deemed released from the
indebtedness evidenced by the Loan Documents, but neither
Borrower nor any Guarantor will be released from any other
liens, encumbrances, assessments and/or claims recorded
against the Hawaii Real Property except real estate taxes,
levied assessments and homeowner's association fees. If
 
Lender records the original Warranty Deed, Lender shall
immediately undertake to sell the Hawaii Real Property in a
commercially reasonable manner and, upon such sale, all net
sales proceeds shall be applied toward the obligations then
due under the Loan Documents, and Lender shall pay to
Borrower all net sales proceeds, if any, that are in excess
of the obligations then due under the Loan Documents.
 
(Emphases added.) The Defendants assert that Grant agreed to the
 
Second Loan Modification because of representations by Johnston
 that Johnston would provide the funds needed by Naupaka to make
 the $1.19 million principal reduction payment.
 
It appears undisputed that Naupaka fulfilled its duty
 
under section 9 of the Second Loan Modification to deliver
 original warranty deeds in favor of First United on the Subject
 Property. In a letter dated September 14, 2009, First United's
 counsel, Mark Gleeman (Gleeman), stated that "[t]his letter will
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
confirm that, pursuant to the Loan documents, as amended, a
 
principal reduction payment of $1,190,000 must be received by the
 Lender by September 30, 2009. Otherwise, Lender reserves the
 right to record the warrant[y] deed for the Hawaii Real
 Property . . . ."
5
 
Johnston did not provide Naupaka with funding for the
 
$1.19 million principal reduction payment, and Naupaka failed to
 make the principal reduction payment required by the Second Loan
 Modification or to repay all sums due on the maturity date. 
Despite Naupaka's failure to make the principal reduction
 payment, First United did not exercise its option to record the
 deeds. 
Subsequently, pursuant to orders entered on October 23,
 
2009, and February 5, 2010, in a case before the District Court
 of Dakota County, Minnesota, Community First Bank v. First United
 Funding, LLC, et al., No. 19HA-CV-09-6282, Lighthouse Management
 Group, Inc. (Lighthouse) was appointed as receiver for First
 United with authority to liquidate the assets of First United. 
The Minnesota district court found that First United had
 "oversold participation interests" in various loans, including
 the instant loan to Naupaka, and had failed to account for
 payments received from borrowers.
6
 
On March 8, 2010, Lighthouse filed the instant lawsuit 
against the Defendants in First United's name. On December 1, 2010, a judgment pursuant to Rule 54(b) of the Hawai
'i Rules of 
5 The record is unclear as to when or why the deadline for the $1.19
million payment was moved from March 30, 2009 to September 30, 2009.
6 Based on the Minnesota court's orders, it appears that First United
loaned money to various borrowers, including Naupaka, and that First United
then sold interests in the notes to other parties pursuant to "participation
agreements." For example, the "Naupaka note" is subject to a participation
agreement between First United and Community First Bank, pursuant to which
Community First Bank purchased $1 million of the Naupaka note, equating to "a
participation percentage of Fifteen Percent (15%)." The Minnesota court
 orders indicate that under the various participation agreements, First United
was responsible for inter alia administering the notes for the benefit of the
participants and acting prudently, but that First United had failed to account
for application of the payments it had received from the borrowers on the
notes.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Civil Procedure was entered, authorizing a foreclosure sale of
 
the Subject Property. There was no appeal as to that judgment. 
On March 7, 2011, a public auction was held at which
 
First United purchased the property for $5,100,000. First United
 filed a motion on May 13, 2011, requesting confirmation of the
 sale, a deficiency judgment, a writ of possession, and
 cancellation of a notice of pendency of action. As part of its
 motion, First United asserted a right to 7% interest pursuant to
 the Second Loan Modification. On August 3, 2011, the circuit
 court issued an order granting in part and deferring in part
 First United's motion. The circuit court confirmed the sale of
 the property, but deferred issues related to the amounts owed to
 First United because the Second Loan Modification had been
 brought to the court's attention for the first time in support of
 First United's motion to confirm, and the application of the
 Second Loan Modification was in dispute.
 
The Defendants and First United then submitted
 
memoranda regarding their positions on the amount owed to First
 United and the applicability of the Second Loan Modification. A
 key part of the dispute regarding the amounts owed was the
 Defendants' assertions that Grant was fraudulently induced by
 Johnston to enter the Second Loan Modification, and that First
 United failed to take reasonable steps to mitigate its damages. 
Based on the foregoing, the Defendants argued inter alia that the
 Second Loan Modification was voidable and that the amount owed to
 First United should be limited to amounts owed at the time First
 United could have recorded the deeds. At a September 19, 2011
 hearing on the deferred portion of the motion, the circuit court
 took the issues under advisement, and directed the parties to
 submit their proposed orders.
 
After the parties had submitted their respective
 
proposed orders and Defendants had objected to First United's
 proposed order, First United sent a letter to the court dated
 October 13, 2011, stating that, "to the extent that this Court
 believes that a genuine issue of material fact exists with
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
respect to fraudulent intent, [First United], in the interest of
 
avoiding any further delay and expense, withdraws its reliance on
 the Second Loan Modification and is willing to treat it as having
 been voided for the purposes of this Motion." In the letter,
 First United contended that such action rendered all of the
 Defendants' defenses moot because the defenses were based on the
 existence of the Second Loan Modification. 
7
On March 5, 2012, without a further hearing,  the
circuit court issued an order granting the deferred portion of
 First United's motion. The circuit court noted that First United
 had agreed to treat the Second Loan Modification as having been
 voided. The court then determined that the Defendants' defenses
 regarding the amounts owed to First United were moot because the
 defenses depended on the existence of the Second Loan
 Modification. In short, the court viewed the defenses as aimed
 only at voiding the Second Loan Modification. Subsequently, the
 circuit court entered the Judgment in favor of First United.
II. Standard of Review
 
The Defendants contend that the circuit court erred
 
because there are genuine issues of material fact regarding their
 asserted defenses that precluded the award of amounts owed to
 First United. 
The circuit court ruled on the amounts owed to First
 
United without an evidentiary hearing.
8 We therefore review the
 
circuit court's rulings on the deferred issues under a summary
 judgment standard. 
7 We note that Defendants did not submit anything addressing First
United's October 13, 2011 letter. At the September 19, 2011 hearing, the
circuit court had simply instructed the parties to submit proposed orders.
Both parties appear to have exceeded the circuit court's instructions.
8
 At the beginning of the September 19, 2011 hearing on the deferred
issues, the circuit court stated that "I think my primary question, based upon
the submissions, is whether all of the facts are before the Court, or whether
there are matters of credibility or things like that regarding fraud that
would require the Court to hold an evidentiary hearing." First United argued
against an evidentiary hearing and the court ultimately ruled based on the
parties' written submissions.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We review the circuit court's grant or denial of summary
judgment de novo. The standard for granting a motion for
summary judgment is settled:
 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if
 proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. In other
 words, we must view all of the evidence and the
inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable
to the party opposing the motion.
 
Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House Inc., 111 Hawai 'i 286, 
295, 141 P.3d 459, 468 (2006) (citations omitted).
III. Discussion
 
The procedural history of this case presents somewhat
 
unusual circumstances. First United asserted, among other
 
things, that the amounts owed to it included the higher interest
 rate of 7% set out in the Second Loan Modification. In response,
 the Defendants asserted that the Second Loan Modification was
 voidable because Grant entered the agreement in reliance on
 misrepresentations made by Johnston, and that the amounts owed to
 First United should be reduced because First United failed to
 take steps to mitigate its damages. Defendants also generally
 argued that, due to the fraudulent misrepresentation and failure
 to mitigate damages, First United possessed unclean hands and
 were being unjustly enriched. Thus, the Defendants' defenses
 appear to have been aimed at two goals: voiding the Second Loan
 Modification and its 7% interest rate; and generally, a reduction
 of the amounts owed to First United. 
The Defendants presented evidence in an effort to
 
support its asserted defenses, including the declaration of
 Jay M. Allen (Allen), Naupaka's attorney involved in the loan
 transaction, and various exhibits. After the parties had
 submitted extensive arguments on the validity of the Second Loan
 Modification and its effect on the amount owed, after the hearing
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on the deferred issues, and after the submission of proposed
 
orders, First United then retracted its reliance on the Second
 Loan Modification when the parties had been simply instructed to
 submit proposed orders. As previously noted, via a letter to the
 court, First United informed the court that it would be willing
 to withdraw its reliance on the Second Loan Modification and
 treat it as void, to the extent that the court believed there
 were genuine issues of material fact as to fraudulent inducement. 
The circuit court did not call for further briefing or a hearing
 to address this development before accepting First United's
 concession and its claimed effect on the defenses asserted by
 Defendants. The circuit court held that all of the Defendants'
 defenses depended on the continued existence of the Second Loan
 Modification, and therefore those defenses were deemed moot.
 
First United's change of position regarding the Second
 
Loan Modification via its post-hearing letter at the peak of the
 circuit court's decision-making process was highly unusual and
 appears to have prejudiced the Defendants' efforts to have their
 asserted defenses considered.
 
Moreover, regardless of whether the Second Loan
 
Modification was voidable, there are genuine issues of material
 fact as to the amount properly owed to First United. In this
 regard, we focus on the mitigation of damages defense because it
 is most directly related to amounts owed to First United. "In
 contract or in tort, the plaintiff has a duty to make every
 reasonable effort to mitigate his damages. The burden, however,
 is upon the defendant to prove that mitigation is possible, and
 that the injured party has failed to take reasonable steps to
 mitigate his damages." Malani v. Clapp, 56 Haw. 507, 517, 542
 
P.2d 1265, 1271 (1975) (citation omitted). Here, because the
 circuit court deemed the Defendants' defenses were moot, it did
 not consider the mitigation of damages defense.
 
As previously noted, the Defendants submitted the
 
declaration of Allen, who was familiar with the loan negotiations
 and the documentary evidence related to the negotiation process. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Defendants also submitted various loan documents and
 
correspondence, and the record further contains documents
 submitted by First United. 
The evidence shows that, under the original loan
 
agreement, the principal balance and any unpaid accrued interest
 would be due and payable by August 15, 2008, and the interest
 would never be less than 6%. As the maturity date neared, the
 parties agreed to the First Loan Modification, effective on
 August 15, 2008, which extended the maturity date to February 15,
 2009. The First Loan Modification also required Naupaka to inter
 alia pay a non-refundable extension fee of $66,500, and noted
 that Naupaka had paid in full all interest through August 15,
 2008, but the entirety of the principal remained unpaid. Shortly
 thereafter, the parties began to negotiate the Second Loan
 Modification. Allen attests that Johnston represented to Grant
 that Johnston would make available to Naupaka sufficient money to
 pay the $1.19 million principal reduction payment described in
 the Second Loan Modification and that Grant relied on that
 representation.
9 In turn, the Second Loan Modification required
 
Naupaka to execute and deliver to First United's counsel original
 warranty deeds on the Subject Property, which First United
 reserved the right to record if Naupaka failed to pay the $1.19
 million by March 30, 2009. Naupaka was also required to pay a
 non-refundable extension fee of $33,250, and the Second Loan
 Modification noted that accrued interest was paid in full through
 October 15, 2008, the effective date of the Second Loan
 Modification.
 
It is undisputed that Naupaka delivered to First
 
United's counsel, Gleeman, deeds to the Subject Property. Allen
 attests that he sent the deeds in January 2009. Gleeman
 acknowledged receipt of the deeds in a letter dated September 14,
 2009, in which he also stated that if the principal reduction
 payment was not received by September 30, 2009, First United
 
9
 First United does not challenge admissibility of Allen's declaration.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reserved the right to record the warranty deeds. There is no
 
indication in the letter or in the record why the deadline to pay
 the $1.19 million was extended to September 2009.
 
This evidence raises a genuine issue of material fact
 
as to whether mitigation was possible, and whether First United
 failed to take reasonable steps to mitigate its damages. At the
 time of Naupaka's failure to make the $1.19 million principal
 reduction payment, there was no challenge to the validity of the
 Second Loan Modification, which allowed First United to record
 the deeds, take immediate ownership of the property, and to
 conduct a sale of the Subject Property. First United's
 subsequent willingness during litigation to treat the agreement
 as void does not alter its rights at the time of the default and
 does not render the Defendants' defenses moot. Further,
 regardless of whether the Defendants have proven the market value
 of the Subject Property when the deeds could have been recorded,
 there are, at a minimum, genuine issues of material fact whether
 damages could have reasonably been mitigated. In this regard,
 First United would have recouped at least some of the principal
 earlier on, and the interest under the loan agreement would not
 have accrued over an extended length of time against the
 Defendants or be based on the entirety of the unpaid principal. 
In regards to the reasonableness of First United's 
actions, "[a]s a general principle . . . the question of whether one has acted reasonably under the circumstances is for the trier of fact to determine." Richardson v. Sport Shinko (Waikiki 
Corp.), 76 Hawai
'i 494, 503, 880 P.2d 169, 178 (1994). Where 
reasonable minds might differ as to the reasonableness of conduct, summary judgment is inappropriate. See Matsuura v. E.I. 
du Pont de Nemours & Co., 102 Hawai
'i 149, 163, 73 P.3d 687, 701 
(2003). Given the evidence in this case, reasonable minds can differ as to whether First United acted unreasonably given the circumstances by failing to record the deeds and instead initiating this foreclosure action the following year, which added to the accruing interest. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
First United argues that the loan documents gave it the
 
option of either recording the deeds or pursuing foreclosure, and
 
that requiring First United to pursue one of its contractually
 bargained-for options at the expense of the other would amount to
 re-writing the contract. However, given the allegations of fraud
 and the questionable conduct of Johnston in this case, we cannot
 conclude as a matter of law that mitigation of damages should not
 be considered. Indeed, there is enough evidence in the record to
 create a genuine issue of material fact whether First United
 sought to draw out the transaction in an effort to further
 accumulate fees and interest.
 
As an overriding matter, the record establishes that
 
First United was placed into receivership because it had
 "oversold participation interests" in various loans, including
 the loans to Naupaka, and failed to account for application of
 payments it had received. The Defendants' evidence further shows
 that Johnston was the President and sole member of First United,
 that First United made the loans to Naupaka, but that Johnston
 made the unfulfilled representation that he would provide funding
 for Naupaka to pay the $1.19 million principal reduction payment
 owed to First United.
 
Further, the evidence indicates that each extension of
 
the loan maturity date resulted in more interest and fees owed
 and paid by Naupaka to First United. At the time each loan
 modification agreement was executed, the parties agreed that
 Naupaka had only made payments on accrued interest, which were
 paid in full, leaving the entirety of the principal outstanding. 
Each time the parties reached a loan modification agreement,
 First United also charged Naupaka a substantial non-refundable
 extension fee. Also, despite Allen's undisputed declaration that
 he provided the deeds to First United in January 2009 as required
 under the Second Loan Modification, Gleeman did not acknowledge
 receipt until September 2009, almost six months after the
 apparent deadline for receipt of the $1.19 million payment. 
Then, after Naupaka's default on the loan and failure to make the
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
principal reduction payment, First United did not immediately
 
take ownership of the property by simply recording the deeds, as
 allowed under the Second Loan Modification. Rather, recovery on
 the loans was sought by filing the instant foreclosure lawsuit on
 March 8, 2010, about a year after the Second Loan Modification
 mandated receipt of the $1.19 million payment, and six months
 after the maturity date provided in the agreement.
 
Therefore, there is ample evidence, when viewed in a
 
light most favorable to the Defendants, raising a genuine issue
 of material fact whether First United sought to continually
 accrue interest and fees on unpaid principal, and thus,
 reasonable minds could differ as to whether First United acted
 reasonably in mitigating its damages.
 
The Defendants also claimed that the amounts owed
 
should be reduced based on First United's unclean hands and
 unjust enrichment, apparently due in part to First United's
 failure to mitigate damages. For similar reasons that we
 conclude that the circuit court erred in regards to the
 mitigation of damages defense, we conclude that these other
 defenses should not have been deemed moot as a matter of law.
 
Given the above, on de novo review, we hold that the
 
circuit court erred in entering the March 5, 2012 order on the
 deferred issues.
 
The Defendants also assert that the circuit court
 
committed plain error by basing the per diem interest rate on the
 voided Second Loan Modification and the circuit court compounded
 the error by failing to recalculate the per diem interest rate to
 reflect First United's purchase of the properties at the
 foreclosure auction. Because we vacate the Amended Judgment and
 remand the deferred issues to the circuit court, we need not
 address this issue.
 
The Defendants further assert that the circuit court
 
erred by granting First United's motion for attorneys' fees. 
Because we vacate the Amended Judgment, we also vacate the
 circuit court's award of fees and costs. 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. Conclusion
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Amended
 
Judgment and remand to the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit for
 
proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 30, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Steven S.C. Lim
 
Mason M. Yamaki Edmund W.K. Haitsuka
 (Carlsmith Ball LLP)
for Defendants-Appellants
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Patricia J. McHenry
Sean M. Smith
 (Cades Schutte LLP)
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge
 
14
 