NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000581
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MARTIN M.V. HELSEN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
LAHAINA DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 2P411-00077)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginzoa, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Martin M.V. Helsen (Helsen) appeals
 
from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order, entered on
 
June 6, 2011 in the District Court of the Second Circuit, Lahaina
 
Division (District Court).1
 
Helsen was convicted of Criminal Trespass in the Second
 
Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708­
814(1)(b) (Supp. 2012).2
 
1
 The Honorable Eric G. Romanchak presided.
 
2
 HRS § 708-814(1)(b) states in relevant part:
 
§708-814 Criminal trespass in the second degree. (1) A
 
person commits the offense of criminal trespass in the
second degree if:
 
. . . .
 (b) The person enters or remains unlawfully in or upon
commercial premises after a reasonable warning or request to
leave by the owner or lessee of the commercial premises, the
owner's or lessee's authorized agent, or a police officer;
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Helsen contends there was insufficient
 
evidence to support his conviction.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Helsen's points of error as follows:
 
Helsen argues that there was insufficient evidence
 
presented in support of his conviction and the State failed to
 
prove that the offense occurred on commercial premises, that no
 
warning or request to leave was given by an owner, lessee, or
 
lessee's authorized agent, that there was no reasonable warning
 
or request to leave, and that Helsen was not on the premises on
 
the date in question.
 
The State contends that there was sufficient evidence
 
to convict Helsen. With respect to Helsen's first point of
 
error, the State argues that "although there was no direct
 
testimony adduced at trail [sic] that the Alano Club was a
 
commercial property, the facts indicate that the Alano Club was a
 
commercial property, an income producing property." The State
 
argues that:
 
In order to keep the operations of the Alano Club, there
must be expenses incurred to meet the needs and maintenance
of the building and the parking lot, as well as the purchase
of food, utensils and utilities for the dinners being
served. By necessity, the Alano Club, an establishment,
must produce income to maintain itself and to keep its
operations going on. Thus, the Alano Club, an
establishment, was an income producing property.
 
The State argues that the trial judge was free to make all
 
reasonable and rational inferences under the facts in evidence,
 
including circumstantial evidence.
 
In State v. Cavness, 80 Hawai' i 460, 466, 911 P.2d 95, 
101 (App. 1996), this court noted that the phrase "commercial 
premises" is not defined by statute. In Cavness, this court 
2(...continued)
provided that this paragraph shall not apply to any conduct
or activity subject to regulation by the National Labor
Relations Act.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
applied the definition from Black's Law Dictionary which defined
 
"commercial property" as "income producing property (e.g. office
 
building, apartments, etc.) as opposed to residential property." 
Id. (brackets omitted).
 
The inference argued by the State is not reasonably
 
supported by the evidence presented. The State admits there is
 
no direct evidence that the Alano Club produces income. The only
 
evidence adduced at trial was that the Alano Club served food at
 
meetings allowed on the premises. Contrary to the State's
 
argument, this fact does not reasonably support the inference
 
that the Alano Club produced income in order to fund its
 
activities as there was no evidence establishing how the club
 
paid for its expenses. In addition, the manager of the club
 
testified that he resided on the premises. Thus, there was
 
direct evidence that the premises was residential in nature. 
Thus, the State failed to adduce sufficient evidence that the
 
premises was a commercial property within the meaning of HRS
 
§ 708-814(1)(b). Proof that Helsen entered or remained on a
 
commercial premises was an essential element of Criminal Trespass
 
in the Second Degree, in violation of HRS § 708-814(1)(b). 
Therefore, the State failed to prove all essential elements in
 
order to convict Helsen. Consequently, we need not address
 
Helsen's other points of error.
 
THEREFORE,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of Entry of
 
Judgment and/or Order, entered on June 6, 2011 in the District
 Court of the Second Circuit, Lahaina Division is reversed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 30, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Davelynn M. Tengan,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Artemio C. Baxa,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Maui,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3
 