NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000391
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
DARRYL H. ARRUDA,
Claimant-Appellant,
v.
 
WILLOCKS CONSTRUCTION CORP.,
and
 
HAWAII EMPLOYERS' MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY, INC.,
Employer/Insurance Carrier-Appellee,
and
 
SPECIAL COMPENSATION FUND,
Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS APPEALS BOARD
 
(CASE NO. AB 2009-431(WH) (9-06-01590))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
In this workers' compensation case, Claimant-Appellant
 
Darryl H. Arruda (Arruda) appeals from the "Amended Decision and
 
Order" of the Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board
 
(Board) in Case No. AB 2009-431(WH) filed March 15, 2012.
 
On appeal, Arruda contends the Board erred when it
 
concluded the prior administrative finding, which found Arruda
 
not permanently disabled, was uncontested.1
 
1
 Arruda failed to present arguments on his other points of error,
which are thus deemed waived. See Hawaif i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP)
Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived."). 
Arruda's brief violates HRAP Rule 28(b)(3) and (4) by failing to
cite to the record. The brief appears unfinished and in some instances,
misleading. Counsel for Arruda is warned that future violations may result in
sanctions. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Arruda sustained injuries to his low back from 
bouncing in the driver's seat while driving a service truck for
 
Employer-Appellee Willocks Construction Corporation (Willocks )
on October 12, 2006 (October Injury). Arruda visited his
 
treating physician, Kevin K. Kurohara, M.D. (Dr. Kurohara) later
 
that day. Arruda had previously sustained work injuries to his
 
low back in 1999 and 2005.
 
A. Director's Initial Decision
 
On October 9, 2007, the State of Hawaif i, Department of 
Labor and Industrial Relations Disability Compensation Division 
(Director) issued a "Decision and Order" finding Arruda sustained 
a compensable injury to the low back and psyche from the October 
Injury and was entitled to temporary total disability (TTD) 
benefits from October 15, 2006 through August 22, 2007. The 
Director also decided that further TTD benefits were contingent 
on disability certification and the matter of permanent 
disability from the October Injury, if any, was left to be 
determined later. Willocks appealed this decision. 
While Willocks' appeal was pending, Peter E. Diamond,
 
M.D. (Dr. Diamond) conducted an independent medical evaluation of
 
Arruda's orthopedic and psychological injuries. Willocks
 
withdrew its appeal and requested a hearing before the Director
 
to resolve open issues, including the issue of permanent
 
disability. The Director's "Notice of Hearing" listed permanent
 
disability as a purpose for the hearing.
 
B. Director's Supplemental Decision
 
On June 19, 2009, the Director issued a supplemental
 
decision (June Decision) finding in relevant part: (1) Arruda was
 
not entitled to further TTD benefits and his entitlement to
 
2
 Willocks is insured by Insurance Carrier-Appellee Hawaii
Employers' Mutual Insurance Company, Inc. "Willocks" refers to both insured
 
and insurance carrier.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
medical care ended July 31, 2008; (2) Willocks properly denied
 
Dr. Kurohara's treatment plans; (3) the October Injury did not
 
result in any permanent partial disability; and (4) Willocks was
 
not liable for expenses Arruda incurred pursuing vocational
 
rehabilitation services, "based on the opinion of Dr. Diamond
 
that no permanent partial disability resulted from [the October
 
injury], and [Willocks'] statement that appropriate work was
 
available for the claimant." (Emphasis added.)
 
On June 25, 2009, Willocks requested reconsideration of
 
the June Decision. The Director issued an amended decision on
 
July 20, 2009 (July Decision). The July Decision corrected two
 
clerical errors but did not change the substance of the June
 
Decision. Arruda then appealed the July Decision.
 
C. Appeals Board Decision
 
On November 9, 2009, after receiving initial conference
 
statements from Arruda, Willocks, and the Special Compensation
 
Fund, the Board determined the issues for trial as (1) whether
 
Arruda's October Injury entitled him to medical care beyond July
 
31, 2008, medical care under Dr. Kurohara's treatment plans, TTD
 
benefits beyond December 25, 2008, and/or vocational
 
rehabilitation services; and (2) whether Willocks was entitled to
 
a credit and/or reimbursement of any amounts overpaid to Arruda
 
for TTD as of August 1, 2008, and if so, in what amount.
 
Trial was held October 13, 2010. Following the trial,
 
Arruda submitted a second pre-hearing statement. This statement
 
added "[p]ermanent total disability or permanent partial
 
disability" (permanent disability) as an issue on appeal. 
However, the permanent disability issue had not been raised in
 
any initial conference statement or the Board's November 9, 2009
 
pretrial order.
 
The Board issued its first "Decision and Order" on
 
November 2, 2011. This "Decision and Order" was subsequently
 
amended twice. The first decision concluded:
 
3
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Arruda may be entitled to medical care beyond July 
31, 2008, depending on the requested care satisfying Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 386-21 (Supp. 2006) and the Hawaif i 
Workers' Compensation Medical Fee Schedule (Fee Schedule). 
(2) Arruda was not entitled to medical care under Dr.
 
Kurohara's treatment plans because the plans did not meet the
 requirements of the Fee Schedule.
 
(3) Arruda was not entitled to TTD benefits beyond
 
December 25, 2008: "The evidence is that Claimant was capable of
 
working at a light level of work, and, therefore, was not totally
 
disabled."
 
(4) Arruda is entitled to vocational rehabilitation
 
services because the "record indicates that [Arruda] may sustain
 
permanent disability as a result of the [October Injury] [and]
 
[t]here is no credible evidence that [Arruda] has not sustained
 
and will not sustain any permanent disability as a result of the
 
[October Injury]." (Emphasis added.)
 
(5) Willocks was not entitled to a credit or
 
reimbursement because the notice of its intent to claim a credit
 
failed to meet the requirements of HRS § 386-52 (1993).
 
On November 10, 2011, Willocks filed a request for
 
reconsideration under Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 12-47­
53 (eff. 1981). The request challenged the finding that Arruda
 
may have suffered a permanent disability from the October Injury
 
and the conclusion that Arruda was entitled to vocational
 
rehabilitation services. The Board granted the request and
 
issued an "Amended Decision and Order" on March 15, 2012 (March
 
Order).
3
 
The Board's March Order found the Director's July
 
Decision regarding permanent disability was not challenged on
 
3
 The March Order is an appealable final decision under HRS § 91­
14(a) (2012 Repl.) and HRS § 386-88 (2012 Repl.).
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appeal and reversed the conclusion that Arruda was entitled to
 
vocational rehabilitation services. On March 21, 2012, the Board
 
issued a "Second Amended Decision and Order," which corrected a
 
clerical error.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
Appellate review of the Board's decision is governed by
 
HRS § 91-14(g) (1993), which provides: 
Upon review of the record the court may affirm the decision
of the agency or remand the case with instructions for
further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the
decision and order if the substantial rights of the
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or 
(4) Affected by other error of law; or
 (5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized
by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted
exercise of discretion.
 
Igawa v. Koa House Rest., 97 Hawaif i 402, 405-06, 38 P.3d 570, 
573-74 (2001). 
Findings of fact are reviewed to determine if the 
agency decision was "clearly erroneous in view of reliable, 
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole record." Id. at 
406, 38 P.3d at 574. Conclusions of law are reviewed under HRS § 91-14(g)(1), (2), and (4); questions regarding procedural 
defects are reviewed under subsection (3). Capua v. Weyerhaeuser 
Co., 117 Hawaif i 439, 444, 184 P.3d 191, 196 (2008). We review 
conclusions of law de novo, under the right/wrong standard. Id. 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. DISCUSSION
 
The Board erred when it concluded the Director's
 
finding that Arruda was not permanently disabled was uncontested
 
on appeal. The Board's March Order found:
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
The Board [made] the following Findings of Fact.
 
. . . .
 4. The Director's decision dated June 19, 2009 and
amended decision dated July 20, 2009, determined that
[Arruda] sustained no permanent disability as a result of
his [October Injury].
4
 
Although [Arruda] appealed these decisions of the
Director, no party raised the issue of permanent disability
as an issue on appeal. As such, the Director's
determination that [Arruda] sustained no permanent
disability was uncontested.
 
. . . . 
23. Based upon the Director's uncontested
determination that [Arruda] did not suffer permanent
disability, the Board finds that [Arruda] did not suffer
permanent disability as a result of the [October Injury]
and, therefore, [Arruda] is not entitled to [Vocational
Rehabilitation Services].
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
The Board [made] the following Conclusions of Law.
 
. . . .
 6. The Director's determination that [Arruda] did not
sustain permanent disability as a result of the [October
Injury] was uncontested. The Board concludes, therefore,
that [Arruda] did not sustain permanent disability and is
not entitled to vocational rehabilitation services.
 
Arruda contends the Board's finding that the permanent
 
disability issue was uncontested is "clearly erroneous since it
 
is evident that [Arruda] argued the issue in its Post Hearing
 
Brief, . . . in its letter dated Nov. 30, 2011, opposition to
 
4
 The Board used "July 12, 2006" in the June decision instead of the
actual date of the October Injury; the Board's "Second Amended Decision and
Order" corrected the mistake.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reconsideration, and placed medical evidence in the record
 
[concerning permanent disability.]"
 
HRS § 386-87 (1993) provides that in an appeal from a
 
decision of the Director, the Board has the authority to review
 
the director's findings, conclusions, and exercise of discretion,
 
and "may affirm, reverse or modify any compensation case upon
 
review[.]" Here, the Board affirmed a finding of the Director
 
because it was not raised in the parties' pretrial statements. 
HAR § 12-47-22(c) gives the Board discretion to modify
 
the pretrial order to prevent manifest injustice:
 
(c) The pretrial order shall control the subsequent
course of the appeal, unless modified by the board at the
trial or prior thereto to prevent manifest injustice. The
pretrial order shall supersede the pleadings where there is
any conflict and shall supplement the pleadings in all other
respects.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
The issue of permanent disability was not specifically
 
raised before trial and was not included in the Board's pretrial
 
order. Arruda's second "pretrial" statement raised the issue
 
after trial. Willocks' post-trial memorandum addressed the issue
 
to the extent that it related to the issue of Arruda's
 
eligibility for vocational rehabilitation services. However, an
 
issue need not be in a pretrial order to confer subject matter
 
jurisdiction to the Board. See Kawamoto v. NHC, Inc., No. 29295
 
(App. Oct. 19 2009) (SDO); see also Alkire-Clemen v. Castle Med.
 Ctr., Nos. 28764 and 28765 (App. Jan. 28, 2010) (SDO). 
In Kawamoto, we rejected the employer's contention that
 
an issue needed to be specifically identified in the pretrial
 
order for the Board to address it. Kawamoto, SDO at 4-5. The
 
pretrial order in Kawamoto identified as issues on appeal whether
 the claimant suffered a compensable shoulder injury and whether
 
the claimant was entitled to orthopedic consultations for
 
shoulder conditions, but did not specify the issue of entitlement
 
to surgery. Id. The Board concluded the claimant suffered a
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
compensable shoulder injury and was entitled to both orthopedic
 
consultations and surgery. Kawamoto, SDO at 1. We affirmed this
 
finding, reasoning that HRS § 386-87 gives the Board authority to
 review the Director's entire decision de novo, and HAR
 
§ 12-47-22(c) gives the Board discretionary power to modify
 
pretrial orders at or before trial. Kawamoto, SDO at 4. We
 
further reasoned the employer had adequate notice that surgery
 entitlement would be an issue before the board because it rose
 
naturally from the potential conclusion that the claimant
 
suffered a compensable shoulder injury. Kawamoto, SDO at 5. 
In Alkire-Clemen, we again rejected the contention that
 
a Board conclusion was invalid because it exceeded the scope of
 
the issues specified in the pretrial order. Alkire-Clemen, SDO
 
at 3. There, the Board's pretrial order listed as an issue the
 claimant's entitlement to medical care solely for an adjustment
 
disorder. Id. We held: 
Claimant's appeal to the [Board] clearly encompassed the
question of whether Claimant's psychological condition was a
covered injury attributable to her February 24, 1998, work
injury. Through Claimant's medical reports, Employer was
aware that Claimant's psychological condition had not only
been diagnosed as an adjustment disorder, but also as a
chronic pain disorder and depression. Moreover, one of the
issues before the [Board] was "Whether Employer is liable
for [Claimant's Doctor's] continued psychiatric treatment."
Thus, we conclude that Employer had fair notice that its
liability for Claimant's psychological condition was in
issue and that Employer had a fair opportunity to litigate
that issue and to dispute that Claimant suffered from the
psychological condition found by the [Board].
 
Id.
 
Unlike Kawamoto and Alkire-Clemen, the Board here
 
refrained from considering an issue not specifically raised in
 
the pretrial order. While this situation presents an apparent
 
issue of first impression, Kawamoto and Alkire-Clemen remain
 
instructive. We are persuaded by the reasoning that pretrial
 
orders are not meant to be set in stone where issues lack clear
 
demarcations, share facts, and are inextricably intertwined.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Arruda's entitlement to vocational rehabilitation
 
services was an issue on appeal to the Board. HAR § 12-14-1
 
provides "[e]ligibility for vocational rehabilitation services
 
means the employee has or may have suffered permanent disability
 
as a result of work injuries." The plain language of this
 
regulation provides fair notice that permanent disability would
 
be at issue. We cannot conceive of a scenario in which
 
entitlement to vocational rehabilitation services can be resolved
 
without addressing the issue of permanent disability. As such,
 
we conclude the Board erred as a matter of law when it found the
 
issue of permanent disability was uncontested.
 
Our decision is also guided by long-standing policy 
considerations. Hawaif i's workers' compensation laws are founded 
on a beneficent, humanitarian purpose, which affords liberal construction in favor of employees. See Korsak v. Hawaii 
Permanente Med. Grp., 94 Hawaif i 297, 306, 12 P.3d 1238, 1247 
(2000). "The two goals of workers' compensation law are to 
restore the injured employee and to compensate the employee 
adequately." Respicio v. Waialua Sugar Co., 67 Haw. 16, 18, 675 
P.2d 770, 772 (1984). Considering the purpose and goals of workers' compensation, we must cautiously review any construction 
which might narrow the coverage or deprive qualified persons of 
benefits. See Camara v. Agsalud, 67 Haw. 212, 217, 685 P.2d 794, 
797 (1984) (discussing Hawaif i's unemployment compensation law). 
The Board's original order concluded that Arruda was
 
entitled to vocational rehabilitation services because the
 "record indicates that [Arruda] may sustain permanent disability
 
as a result of the [October Injury] [and] [t]here is no credible
 
evidence that [Arruda] has not sustained and will not sustain any
 
permanent disability as a result of the [October Injury]." The
 
Board's March Order, however, essentially reversed itself and
 
concluded Arruda was not entitled to vocational rehabilitation
 
because he did not specify permanent disability as an issue
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
before the Board. Affirmation of this attenuated logic would
 
contravene the purpose and goals of workers' compensation law. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Accordingly, the "Amended Decision and Order" of the
 
Labor and Industrial Relations Appeals Board in Case No. AB 2009­
431(WH), filed March 15, 2012, is vacated and this case is
 
remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, November 15, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Stanford H. Masui 
Erin B.J.H. Masui for Claimant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Robert E. McKee, Jr.for Employer/InsuranceCarrier-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Frances E.H. Lum Nelson T. HigaDeputy Attorneys Generalfor Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
10
 