NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000078
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
ASHLEY SANTANDER, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CARIS MED SURG, LLC; CARY RUPERT, INDIVIDUALLY,
Defendants-Appellants, and JOHN DOES 1-10;
JANE DOES 1-10; DOE ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-1554)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Caris Med Surg, LLC (Caris), and
 
Cary Rupert (Rupert) (collectively, Defendants) appeal from the
 
Order Denying Defendants' Motion to Compel Arbitration
 
(Arbitration Order), entered by the Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit (Circuit Court) on March 16, 2015.1
  
On appeal, Defendants raise five points of error,
 
contending that the Circuit Court erred: (1) when it failed to
 
conclude that Plaintiff-Appellee Ashley Santander's (Santander's)
 
2
agreement to arbitrate with Altres, Inc. (Altres)  unambiguously
1
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided. 
2
 Santander has not asserted any claims against Altres; Altres is
not a party to this case.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
covered Defendants; (2) even if the arbitration agreement was
 
ambiguous, when it failed to conduct an evidentiary hearing on
 the issue of arbitrability; (3) when it failed to conclude that
 none of Defendants' actions were inconsistent with Santander's
 agreement to arbitrate; (4) when it failed to consider whether
 Defendants' conduct prejudiced Santander; and (5) because its
 waiver conclusion had a disproportionate impact on arbitration
 agreements and is preempted by federal law.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Defendants' contentions as follows:
 
(1) HRS ยง 658A-7 (2016) governs motions to compel
 
arbitration. HRS ยง 658A-7 provides in relevant part: 
Motion to compel or stay arbitration. (a) On motion of
a person showing an agreement to arbitrate and alleging
another person's refusal to arbitrate pursuant to the
agreement: 
. . . .
 
(2)	 If the refusing party opposes the motion, the
court shall proceed summarily to decide the
issue and order the parties to arbitrate unless
it finds that there is no enforceable agreement
to arbitrate.
 
. . . . 
(c)	 If the court finds that there is no enforceable
 
agreement, it shall not, pursuant to subsection
(a) or (b), order the parties to arbitrate. 
"When presented with a motion to compel arbitration,
 
the court is limited to answering two questions: 1) whether an
 
arbitration agreement exists between the parties; and 2) if so,
 whether the subject matter of the dispute is arbitrable under
 such agreement." Siopes v. Kaiser Found. Health Plan, Inc., 130
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i 437, 446, 312 P.3d 869, 878 (2013) (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (quoting Douglass v. Pflueger Haw., Inc., 110 
Hawai'i 520, 530, 135 P.3d 129, 139 (2006)). It is well-
established that "[t]he party seeking to compel arbitration carries the initial burden of establishing that an arbitration agreement exists between the parties." Id. (citation omitted). 
Finally, "in order to be valid and enforceable, an arbitration agreement must have the following three elements: (1) it must be in writing; (2) it must be unambiguous as to the intent to submit disputes or controversies to arbitration; and (3) there must be bilateral consideration." Id. at 447, 312 P.2d at 879 (quoting 
Douglass, 110 Hawai
'i at 531, 135 P.3d at 140). 
In this appeal, Defendants argue that they are entitled
 
to enforce the Arbitration Policy signed by Santander and dated
 April 11, 2013, which was appended to a Pre-Employment Statement
 making certain representations to Altres, which was also signed
 by Santander and dated April 11, 2013.
3 The Arbitration Policy
 
states the following:
 
Because of the delay and expense that results from the use
of the federal and state court systems, ALTRES requires, as
a term and condition of employment and/or continued
employment, that all of its employees agree to submit to
binding arbitration any controversies concerning
compensation, employment, or termination of employment,
rather than to use the court system. If I am offered
employment, I expressly and knowingly agree that if any
dispute should ever arise between myself and ALTRES, and/or
between myself and the ALTRES customer, and/or arising out
 
3
 In the Circuit Court proceedings, Defendants also submitted a July
1, 2013 "Arbitration Agreement" to support its contention that a valid and
enforceable arbitration agreement exists between the parties, which was not
signed by Santander, had an "X" through her typed name as it appeared on the
signature line, and bore a typed notation, "signature invalid." However, on
appeal, Defendants clarified that they do not "seek to enforce the July 1,
2013 Arbitration Agreement." Thus, any reliance by Defendants on the
purported July 1, 2013 "Arbitration Agreement" and/or the arbitration-related
terms of their employment manual are waived.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of any transaction or occurrence at my workplace, concerning
any aspect of my employment including, but not limited to,
my compensation, the terms and conditions of my employment,
harassment and/or discrimination of myself in the workplace
and/or connected with work, or termination of my employment,
such dispute(s) shall be submitted to binding, mandatory and
exclusive arbitration and I shall not attempt to use any
court or judicial system to adjudicate such dispute(s). 
Defendants argue, inter alia, that this "arbitration
 
agreement" unambiguously constitutes an agreement by Santander to
 
arbitrate any claims against them. Santander argues, inter alia,
 that there is no admissible evidence in the record that
 Defendants were a party to the April 11, 2013 purported
 arbitration agreement, which predated her employment with the
 Defendants by three months, and there is no evidence of mutual
 assent between her and the Defendants. In response to
 Santander's argument, Defendants point to Santander's signature
 on the "agreement to arbitrate" and submits that "Caris was a
 party to the policy, unambiguously, as plainly evidenced by the
 parol evidence and under the most reasonable interpretation." 
In denying Defendants' motion to compel arbitration,
 
the Circuit Court concluded that there is a genuine issue of
 material fact as to whether an arbitration agreement actually
 exists between Defendants and Santander.
4 The Arbitration Policy
 
does not identify Caris or Rupert as Santander's employers. On
 the contrary, it specifically and exclusively references Altres's
 requirements for Altres employees: "ALTRES requires, as a term
 and condition of employment and/or continued employment, that all
 of its employees agree to submit to binding arbitration. . . ."
 
4
 As discussed below, we agree with the Circuit Court's denial of
the motion to compel arbitration, but conclude that Defendants did not create
a genuine issue of material fact as to the existence of an agreement to
arbitrate between them and Santander.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Emphasis added.) Nor are we persuaded by Defendants' argument
 
that the reference to an "Altres customer" in the Employment
 Application "unambiguously meant Caris," as Santander was not
 hired by Caris until months later, and the identity of the other
 party to an "agreement" is an essential term of a mutually
 binding agreement. We further note the lack of mutual
 consideration in the Arbitration Policy, which requires Altres's
 employees to submit to binding arbitration, but does not impose
 that requirement on Altres, or indicate that Altres's customers
 have mutually agreed to submit to binding arbitration. Cf. Brown
 
v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai
'i 226, 239-40, 921 P.2d 146, 
159-60 (1996). 
Defendants failed to meet their initial burden of 
establishing that an arbitration agreement exists between them and Santander. See Siopes, 130 Hawai
'i at 446, 312 P.3d at 878. 
They asserted no other legal grounds entitling them to compel arbitration. Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in denying Defendants' motion to compel arbitration. 
(2) & (3)  Citing Safeway, Inc. v. Nordic PCL Const.,
 
Inc., 130 Hawai
'i 517, 312 P.3d 1224 (App. 2013), Defendants 
argue that the Circuit Court erred when it failed to conduct an
 evidentiary hearing. The Circuit Court denied Defendants'
 request to hold an evidentiary hearing, stating: 
we could have the hearing and, at best, the Court
could find that there is an arbitration agreement, but
the Court, even if we found the arbitration agreement
exists, would still say there was a waiver, so I don't
see why we expend resources to handle that hearing to
get to that best conclusion for you, the Defendants. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
While we agree with the Circuit Court's conclusion that 
an evidentiary hearing was unnecessary in this case, we do so on 
different grounds. In Safeway, this court held that where there are genuine issues of material fact as to the existence of an agreement to arbitrate, then the trial court must hold an evidentiary hearing. Safeway, 130 Hawai
'i at 532, 312 P.3d at 
1239. In that case, a genuine issue of material fact existed because, simply stated, there was conflicting evidence as to whether certain "Supplementary Conditions" deleting the arbitration provision were incorporated into the parties' agreement. Id. at 530, 312 P.3d at 1237. This case is 
distinguishable. Here, Defendants have failed to meet their initial burden of bringing forward evidence establishing that an arbitration agreement exists between them and Santander. The Arbitration Policy requires binding arbitration for Altres's employees, including disputes involving Altres's customers. However, Defendants brought forward no admissible evidence that Santander was an Altres employee and no admissible evidence that they were Altres customers. Defendants brought forward no evidence raising a genuine issue of material fact that an arbitration agreement existed between Santander and Defendants. Absent such evidence, Defendants are not entitled to an evidentiary hearing. 
In light of our conclusion that there was no valid and
 
enforceable arbitration agreement between the parties, we need 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
not address Defendants' remaining contentions. Therefore, the
 
Circuit Court's March 16, 2015 Arbitration Order is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, August 31, 2017. 
On the briefs: Jeffrey S. Harris,
Christine K. David,(Torkildson, Katz, Moore,
Hetherington & Harris)
for Defendants-Appellants. 
Roman Amaguin,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
7
 