FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I

 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.

 
KOALAUKANI I. RAMOS-SAUNDERS aka

 
Koalaukani Ramos-Saunders, Defendant-Appellee

 
NO. CAAP-12-0000090

  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CRIMINAL NO. 11-1-0093)

 
APRIL 23, 2015

 
FOLEY, PRESIDING J., LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.

 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.  
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) appeals 
from the "Findings of Fact, Conclusion of Law and Order Granting 
Defendant's Motion to Suppress Evidence" (Findings of Fact and
Conclusions of Law), entered January 13, 2012, in the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit1
 (circuit court).

 
On appeal, the State contends the circuit court erred

 
in granting the November 30, 2011 "Motion to Suppress Evidence"

 
(
Motion to Suppress) submitted by Defendant-Appellee, Koalaukani

 
Ramos-Saunders (Ramos-Saunders).

 
1

 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
  
FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
I. BACKGROUND 
On December 3, 2010 at approximately 7:19 a.m., the

 
Honolulu Police Department (HPD) received a "dropped 911 call"

 
from a number that was registered to Walter Rosskopf (Rosskopf). 
Rosskopf's address was listed as Unit B, 59-068 Kamehameha

 
Highway (Unit B).

 
Two HPD officers, Officer Angela Montano (Officer

 
Montano) and Officer Joseph O'Neal (Officer O'Neal) (together,
officers), responded to the dropped call. The officers arrived

 
at the scene about 7:39 a.m. They proceeded to Unit B and spoke

 
with Paula Burgess (Burgess), who indicated she lived there.

 
Burgess told the officers that Rosskopf used to live in Unit B,

 
but that he had moved up the road to Unit A (Unit A). Unit A and

 
Unit B are two individual stand-alone residences that are located

 
approximately 750 feet away from each other. Burgess also told
 
 the officers that Rosskopf suffered from prostate cancer. 
Based on the information received from Burgess, Officer

 
Montano notified dispatch that they were relocating to Unit A.

 The officers did not question Burgess further or check Unit B to

 determine whether Rosskopf or anyone else was inside in need of

 assistance. The officers did not conduct any further

 investigation of Unit B. Instead, the officers went directly to
 
 Unit A.

 
Upon their arrival at Unit A, the officers knocked on

 
the front door and received no response. They walked around the
 
 exterior of Unit A, calling out to anyone who might be inside,

 but again got no response. The officers reported no indications
 
 such as voices or perceived movement, which could have suggested

 that someone was inside Unit A. The officers did not see anyone

 inside Unit A at any time.

 
While walking around Unit A's exterior, the officers

 
looked inside through an open window and saw what appeared to

 them to be the barrel of a firearm, with what looked like a

 "silencer" attached to the firearm, protruding from underneath a

 towel. The officers also observed that Unit A was in a state of

 "disarray," the glass sliding door was open, the two air-
conditioners were in operation, and the lights were on inside.

 
2

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon making the forgoing observations and continuing to

 
receive no response to their calling out, from outside Unit A, to

 
anyone who could be inside, the officers requested additional

 police units to assist them at the scene. They remained outside
 
 Unit A while they waited for the additional police units to

 arrive.

 
After approximately ten minutes, HPD Officer Nelson

 
Tamayori (Officer Tamayori) arrived at the scene and Officers

 
Montano and O'Neal briefed him as to the situation. Officer

 
Tamayori then walked around Unit A's exterior and observed the

 purported firearm and silencer. 
All three officers then discussed the situation and

 
their observations and decided to enter Unit A. The officers did

 not obtain a warrant to enter and search Unit A nor did they

 attempt to obtain one.

 
Following their warrantless entry of Unit A, the

 
officers conducted a search of Unit A's interior and subsequently

 found inside two rooms, behind closed doors, multiple marijuana

 plants and what appeared to them to be an "indoor marijuana grow"

 operation. At the time, no one was found or located in Unit A.
 
 
On January 20, 2011, Ramos-Saunders was indicted on one

 
count of commercial promotion of marijuana in the first degree,

 in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1249.4(1)(a)

 
2
(2014 Repl.),  and one count of unlawful use of drug
 
paraphernalia, in violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a) (2010 Repl.)
.3

 
2		 HRS § 712-1249.4(1)(a) provides in relevant part:

 
§712-1249.4 Commercial promotion of marijuana in the first
degree.  (1) A person commits the offense of commercial
promotion of marijuana in the first degree if the person knowingly:

 
(a)		 Possesses marijuana having an aggregate weight of twenty-
five pounds or more[.] 
HRS § 329-43.5(a) provides:

 
§329-43.5 Prohibited acts related to drug
paraphernalia.  (a) It is unlawful for any person to use, or
to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of this chapter. Any person who
(continued...)

 
3

 3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On November 30, 2011, Ramos-Saunders filed the Motion to Suppress

 
requesting the court "suppress all evidence obtained as a result

 of the illegal entry, search and seizure of [Ramos-Saunders' Unit

 A] on December 3, 2010 and thereafter." Specifically, Ramos-
 
Saunders maintained that "there was no objectively rational

 reason for Officer Montano to enter [Unit A] based solely on what

 is alleged to have been a 'dropped 911 call.'"

 
On December 15, 2011, the State filed a "Memorandum in

 
Opposition to Defendant's Motion to Suppress Evidence," asserting

 that there was probable cause to search Unit A and that there was

 exigent circumstances that justified the officers' warrantless

 entry into Unit A.

 
On December 21, 2011, the circuit court held a hearing

 
on the Motion to Suppress. The State called Officer Montano,
4

 
Officer O'Neal, and Officer Tamayori to testify to the

 circumstances that surrounded their search of Unit A. After the

 three officers gave their testimony, the circuit court reasoned

 that the police may have had probable cause upon viewing the

 firearm with the silencer through the window, but clarified that

 "it's probable cause to get a search warrant, not to enter the

 house without a warrant . . . ." Ultimately, the circuit court

 determined that no exigency existed and granted the Motion to

 Suppress.

 
On January 13, 2012, the circuit court reduced its

 
decision to the written Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law.

 On February 10, 2012, the State filed a notice of appeal.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW

 
Appellate courts review a circuit court's pretrial 
findings of fact under the clearly erroneous standard. State v. 
Naititi, 104 Hawai
'i 224, 233, 87 P.3d 893, 902 (2004) (citing 
State v. Locquiao, 100 Hawai 'i 195, 203, 58 P.3d 1242, 1250 
3(...continued)
violates this section is guilty of a class C felony and upon
conviction may be imprisoned pursuant to section 706-660
and, if appropriate as provided in section 706-641, fined
pursuant to section 706-640.

 
4

 Officer Montano changed her last name to "Zanella" before the
hearing, thus, the hearing transcript refers to her as "Angela Zanella."

 
4

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2002)). "A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when (1) the 
record lacks substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made." Id. (internal 
citation omitted). Substantial evidence is "credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." State v. 
Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) (citation 
and internal quotation mark omitted). 
Pretrial conclusions of law are reviewed under the de 
novo standard. Naititi, 104 Hawai 'i at 233, 87 P.3d at 902; see 
State v. Kauhi, 86 Hawai 'i 195, 197, 948 P.2d 1036, 1038 (1997) 
("We review the circuit court's ruling on a motion to suppress de novo to determine whether the ruling was 'right' or 'wrong'").• "A conclusion of law that is supported by the trial court's findings of fact and that reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be overturned." Dan v. State, 76 Hawai
'i 
423, 428, 879 P.2d 528, 533 (1994) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
III. DISCUSSION

 
A. Findings of Fact (FOF)

 
The State contends the following FOFs are clearly

 
erroneous: 1, 4, 5, 7, and 10.

 
1. FOF 1

 The State challenges the circuit court's FOF 1, which

 
states, "Police information was that there was a landline

 telephone registered to Rosskopf at that address." The State

 contends FOF 1 is clearly erroneous because there is insufficient

 evidence to conclude that the 911 call came from a landline

 because the testimonies of Officer Montano and Officer O'Neal

 conflict with one another.

 
During the hearing on the Motion to Suppress, Officer

 
Montano specifically indicated that she did not know whether the

 dropped 911 call came from a cellphone or a landline. In fact,
 
 she testified that she did not attempt to gather such information

 and could not recall whether anyone else had sought to determine

 
5

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
whether the call came from a landline. Unlike Officer Montano,

 
Officer O'Neal was familiar with the origins of the call and

 twice testified that he believed the call came from a landline.

 
"[I]t is well-settled that an appellate court will not 
pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Inoue v. Inoue, 118 Hawai
'i 86, 101, 185 P.3d 834, 849 
(App. 2008) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Given Officer Montano's testimony that she did not have or could not recall information relating to the origin of the 911 call and Officer O'Neal's unequivocal belief that the 911 call originated from a landline, the circuit court did not err in adopting Officer O'Neal's testimony as credible. FOF 1 is not clearly erroneous. 
2. FOF 4

 FOF 4 provides that "[t]he officers did not conduct any

 
further investigation of the drop call at Unit B; they did not

 question Burgess further, nor did they check the house to

 determine whether Rosskopf or anyone else who might have been

 inside needed assistance. Instead they went directly to Unit A." 
The State contends that "[e]ven though the circuit court related

 at the hearing that it did not base its decision on what it

 thought should have been done, . . . the circuit court implicitly

 found that the officers should have investigated Unit B instead

 of Unit A in its [FOF 4]."

 
The record indicates that the circuit court thought the

 
officers should have done a more thorough investigation of Unit B

 before proceeding to Unit A. However, the circuit court made it
 
 clear that its decision to grant the Motion to Suppress was not

 based on the fact that the officers failed to investigate Unit B. 
During the December 21, 2011 hearing, the circuit court stated

 
They made a mistake. They went looking for
[Rosskopf], when they should have, in the Court's view, done
a further investigation from where the call originated which
was why they were sent out there, why drop calls and open
lines are so crucial, et cetera. It was because it

 originated at Unit B and they did no further investigation
there.

 
They made a mistake. All they heard was [Rosskopf],
so they went looking for him when [Burgess] said he lives up
there, when they should have done a further investigation of

 
6

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
where the call originated, at Unit B. I'm not going to
grant the motion based on that, but they clearly made a
mistake.

 
(Emphasis added.) The circuit court then orally granted the
 
  
Motion to Suppress and again stated 
And like I said, I think it's very clear to me that
[the officers] made a mistake by going to Unit A and
following the name rather than following the source of the
call, because this whole thing started because of drop/open
911 call. And, you know, it's so potentially serious, et
cetera, well, then you got to stick with where the phone,
which they didn't do there and they got kind of confused
there. And I can kind of understand that, but that's what
they did. But I'm not, you know, I'm not granting the
motion based on that either.
 
   
(Emphasis added.)

 
The circuit court granted the Motion to Suppress based

 
on its finding that the officers were not faced with an exigent

 
circumstance so to justify a warrantless entry into Ramos-
Saunders' Unit A and not because the officers failed to

 investigate Unit B. The circuit court agreed that the officers
 
 faced a "suspicious" situation, but could not "see how by any

 stretch of the imagination they had specific and articulable

 facts to show them that there was an imminent danger to life such

 that [the officers had] to go into the house." The State's

 challenge to FOF 4 is without merit.

 
3. 	FOF 5
 
 FOF 5 provides:

 
5.		 Upon their arrival at Unit A, the officers knocked on
the front door and got no response. They then walked
around the exterior of the house, calling out to
anyone who might be inside, but again got no response.
The officers reported no indications such as voices or
perceived movement coming from inside the house which
could have suggested to the officers that anyone was
inside the house at that time. Nor did they at any
time see any person inside the house.

 
The State argues that "this jurisdiction has recognized

 
that 'a search is not . . . made legal by what it turns up. In

 
law it is good or bad when it starts and does not change

 character from its success.' [State v. Bonnell, 75 Haw. 124,
 
 137, 856 P.2d 1265, 1273 (1993)] (internal quotation marks and

 citation omitted)." Thus, the State alleges that FOF 5
 
 
is clearly erroneous insofar as the circuit court relied
upon it in assessing the totality of the circumstances
because it overlooks that it was objectively reasonable for
the officers to believe that someone was inside the home at

 
7

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that time notwithstanding the fact that they could hear no
voices or perceived movements within the home, or see any
person therein.

 
The State does not dispute that no one was found within the home. 
Instead the State appears to contend that these facts should not

 have been included in the circuit court's FOFs because these

 facts were not relevant to the circuit court's ultimate

 determination as to whether it was objectively reasonable for the

 officers to enter the home.

 
The absence of a third person in the home was relevant

 
to the extent that it indicated that the officers did not see a

 third person at any point before entering Unit A but, instead,

 relied on circumstantial evidence, such as the open glass sliding

 door and the presence of the firearm with a silencer, to form

 their opinion that someone was inside in need of assistance. FOF

 5 is not clearly erroneous.

 
4.		 
FOF 7

 
FOF 7 provides:

 7.		 
Upon making the foregoing observations, and continuing
to receive no response to their calls from outside the
house, the officers requested additional police units
to assist them at the scene. They remained outside
the house while they waited for the arrival of the
additional police units.

 
The State alleges that FOF 7 "is clearly erroneous

 
because it is an incomplete statement of fact." The State

 
concedes that FOF 7 "is supported by substantial evidence," but

 still argues that the circuit court's finding is erroneous

 because it fails to acknowledge that the officers continued to

 call out for Rosskopf while they waited for Officer Tamayori to

 arrive as backup.

 
We have held that "[w]here an appellant alleges that

 
the trial court failed to make adequate findings of fact, the

 appellate court will examine all the findings, as made, to

 determine whether they are (1) supported by the evidence; and (2)

 sufficiently comprehensive and pertinent to the issues in the

 case to form a basis for the conclusions of law. If those

 findings include sufficient subsidiary facts to disclose to the

 reviewing court the steps by which the lower court reached its

 ultimate conclusion on each factual issue, then the findings are

 
8

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adequate." Nani Koolau Co. v. K & M Const., Inc., 5 Haw. App.

 
137, 140, 681 P.2d 580, 584 (1984) (internal citations omitted). 
In the instant case, the circuit court's FOFs do not 
specify that the officers continued to call out to Rosskopf while 
they waited for Officer Tamayori to arrive. Such a finding, however, was not necessary. "The trial judge is required to only make brief, definite, pertinent findings and conclusions upon the contested matters; there is no necessity for over-elaboration of detail or particularization of facts." Rezentes v. Rezentes, 88 
Hawai
'i 200, 203, 965 P.2d 133, 136 (App. 1998) (quoting Doe v. 
Roe, 5 Haw. App. 558, 565-66, 705 P.2d 535, 542 (1985)). The circuit court included sufficient facts in its Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law indicating that although the officers made repeated attempts to contact Rosskopf, no one inside Unit A responded to their calls. See Nani Koolau, 5 Haw. App. at 140, 
681 P.2d at 584. FOF 7 is not clearly erroneous. 
5.		 FOF 10

 
FOF 10 provides:

 
10.		 Following their warrantless entry of the house, the
officers conducted a search of the house's interior

 
and subsequently found, inside two rooms behind closed
doors, multiple marijuana plants and what appeared to
them to be an "indoor marijuana grow" operation. No

 
person was ever found or located in the house at that
time.

 
(Emphasis added.)

 
Similarly to the State's challenge to FOF 5, the State

 
argues that FOF 10 is clearly erroneous, in part, because

 
"although it is supported by substantial evidence, a mistake was

 clearly made insofar as the circuit court relied upon the fact

 that '[n]o person was ever found or located in the house [during

 the search]' in its assessment of the totality of the

 circumstances."

 
The record does not indicate that the circuit court

 
relied solely on the absence of a third party in Unit A to

 justify its conclusion that no exigency existed. Instead, in
 
 granting the Motion to Suppress, the circuit court specifically

 noted that it also based its decision on the timing of the

 officers' decision to enter Unit A and the fact that the officers

 
9

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
did not see anyone inside before entering Unit A. The circuit 
court provided other sufficient facts to support its conclusion that no exigency existed, so we are not "left with the definite and firm conviction in reviewing the entire evidence that a mistake has been committed." Daiichi Hawaii Real Estate Corp. v. 
Lichter, 103 Hawai
'i 325, 337, 82 P.3d 411, 423 (2003). FOF 10 
is not clearly erroneous. B. Conclusions of Law (COL)

 
The State challenges the circuit court's recitation of

 
law in COL 5, which states:

 
5.		 Exigent circumstances exist when "immediate police
response is reasonably required 'to prevent imminent
danger to life or serious damage to property, or to
forestall the likely escape of a suspect or the
threatened removal or destruction of evidence.'" 
State v. Vinuya, 96 Hawaii 472, 488, 32 P.3d 116, 132
(2001) (quoting State v. Lloyd, 61 Hawaii 505, 512,
606 P.2d 913, 918 (1980)).

 
The State also challenges COL 7, which concludes:

 
7.		 Under the totality of the circumstances in this case,
the police officers who conducted the warrantless
entry and search of the house in question did not have
specific and articulable facts which established an
imminent danger to life or serious damage to property
or the likely escape of a suspect or the threatened
removal or destruction of evidence. In short, there
were insufficient facts from which to conclude that

 there existed exigent circumstances justifying the
warrantless entry and search of the house, and
therefore such entry and search were illegal.

 
According to the State, COL 5 is incorrect because "an

 
exigent circumstance is truly not just about an imminent danger

 
to life, as explained by [State v. Lloyd, 61 Haw. 505, 606 P.2d

 913 (1980)]." Instead, the State maintains that "an exigent
 
 circumstance generally exists 'when the demands of the occasion

 reasonably call for an immediate police response[,]' see [State

 v. Jenkins, 93 Hawai
'i 87, 102, 997 P.2d 13, 28 (2000)], and thus 
includes situations where a person requires emergency aid, see [Michigan v. Fisher, 558 U.S. 45, 48 (2009)]." As a result of that reasoning, the State contends that COL 7 is also "clearly erroneous because it is based on facts that are cast in an incorrect light when the circuit court used a standard that obviously differed from that provided by the United States 
10

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Supreme Court in [Brigham City, Utah v. Stuart, 547 U.S. 398

 
(2006)], Fisher, and [Ryburn v. Huff, 132 S. Ct. 987 (2012)]."

 
The State cites to Brigham City, Fisher, and Ryburn in 
support of its emergency aid argument. These federal cases establish an "emergency aid exception" in the federal exigency analysis. See Brigham City, 547 U.S. 398; Fisher, 558 U.S. 45; 
Ryburn, 132 S. Ct. 987. The essence of the State's argument is that the circuit court erred in relying on established Hawai
'i 
case law to determine whether exigency existed, instead of applying the federal exigency framework–-a framework that Hawai
'i 
has not adopted. 
It is well settled that "[a]rticle I, section 7 of the 
Hawai'i Constitution affords the people of this state greater 
protection than does the fourth amendment of the United States Constitution." State v. Taua, 98 Hawai
'i 426, 449, 49 P.3d 1227, 
1250 (2002). The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has noted that 
as the ultimate judicial tribunal in this state, this court
has final, unreviewable authority to interpret and enforce
the Hawaii Constitution. We have not hesitated in the past
to extend the protections of the Hawaii Bill of Rights
beyond those of textually parallel provisions in the Federal
Bill of Rights when logic and a sound regard for the
purposes of those protections have so warranted. 
State v. Tanaka, 67 Haw. 658, 661-62, 701 P.2d 1274, 1276 (1985)

 
(quoting State v. Kaluna, 55 Haw. 361, 369, 520 P.2d 51, 58

 (1974)).

 
Under Hawai
'i law, any warrantless search of a 
constitutionally protected area is presumptively unreasonable, unless "the government has probable cause to search and exigent circumstances exist necessitating immediate police action." State v. Pulse, 83 Hawai
'i 229, 245, 925 P.2d 797, 813 (1996) 
(quoting State v. Clark, 65 Haw. 488, 494, 654 P.2d 355, 360 (1982)) (internal quotation mark omitted). The issue before use is whether the circuit court erred in determining that no exigency existed. See Lloyd, 61 Haw. at 512, 606 P.2d at 918 
("[T]he question of exigency is addressed to the factfinding function of the trial court, and its findings in that regard will not be set aside unless determined to be clearly erroneous."). 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has determined that an 
exigent circumstance 
11

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
exists when the demands of the occasion reasonably call for
an immediate police response. More specifically, it includes
situations presenting an immediate danger to life or serious
injury or an immediate threatened removal or destruction of
evidence. However, the burden, of course, is upon the
government to prove the justification . . ., and whether the
requisite conditions exist is to be measured from the
totality of the circumstances. And in seeking to meet this
burden, the police must be able to point to specific and
articulable facts from which it may be determined that the
action they took was necessitated by the exigencies of the
situation.

 
Jenkins, 93 Hawai 'i at 103, 997, P.2d at 29 (emphasis added) 
(quoting Pulse, 83 Hawai 'i at 245, 925 P.2d at 813); see State v. 
Dorson, 62 Haw. 377, 384, 615 P.2d 740, 746 (1980). 
The State maintains "it was objectively reasonable for

 
the officers to believe any one or all of the following scenarios

 
in light of the totality of the circumstances confronting them:

 (1) that someone could have been injured from the gun they
 
 observed, was still within the home, and was unconscious from the

 injury; (2) suicide occurred within the home; or (3) someone

 entered the home, was in the process of burglarizing it when the

 police arrived, and, in burglarizing the home, Rosskopf or

 another person could have been in the unit at the time, thus

 creating a hostage situation."

 
The circuit court, however, determined that the facts

 
did not give rise to an exigent circumstance so as to justify the

 officers' entry and search of Unit A without first obtaining a

 warrant. The circuit court noted during its hearing on the

 Motion to Suppress that the circumstances facing the officers

 appeared "suspicious," but did not rise to the level of

 indicating a need for immediate police intervention.

 
We agree. The officers arrived pursuant to a dropped 
911 call and a tip that the call may have originated from a person who suffered from prostate cancer, which without further evidence does not in and of itself create exigency. The officers were only responding to one dropped 911 call that was received without any indication of a person being in duress or in need of immediate police assistance. See cf. Pulse, 83 Hawai
'i at 246­
47, 925 P.2d at 814-15 (finding that exigency existed to seize a gun in the immediate reach and control of defendant where the police officer was informed that defendant had just terrorized 
12

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
another with the gun); see also U.S. v. Najar, 451 F.3d 710, 720­
21 (10th Cir. 2006) (finding that exigency existed for police

 officer's warrantless search when the police received a dropped

 911 call and subsequent calls back to caller were answered and

 then immediately hung up).

 
Upon arriving at Unit A, the officers observed that 
Unit A was in a state of "disarray" with the front door open, the lights on, and two air conditioners running so as to indicate that someone was home. However, no one inside responded to the officers' repeated calls. In fact, the officers never saw or heard a third person in Unit A nor did they witness any signs of a struggle that would indicate that someone was in danger or in need of immediate police intervention. See Hannon v. State, 207 
P.3d 344, 347-48 (Nev. 2009) (finding that a officer, responding to a 911 call for possible domestic disturbance, did not have an objectively reasonable belief to justify emergency entry into defendant's apartment when the officer did not witness any actual violence, did not see any evidence of an attack, and had no reason to believe another person was inside the apartment). See 
cf. Jenkins, 93 Hawai
'i at 103, 997 P.2d at 29 (finding that a 
warrantless seizure was reasonable where officer thought he was in danger because the passengers in a pulled over vehicle exhibited an unusual degree of movement and refused to obey the officer's orders to remain in the vehicle). 
In addition, based on the totality of the 
circumstances, the presence of the firearm with a silencer did not create an exigent circumstance where there was no one near the firearm so as to necessitate its immediate removal. See cf. 
Pulse, 83 Hawai
'i at 246-47, 925 P.2d at 814-15 (finding that the 
officer's reasonable belief that defendant posed an imminent danger to public justified the warrantless seizure of defendant's gun that was within the defendant's immediate reach and control); see State v. Meyer, 78 Hawai
'i 308, 314, 893 P.2d 159, 165 (1995) 
("[N]o amount of probable cause can justify a warrantless search or seizure absent 'exigent circumstances.'"). 
The facts do not indicate that the officers were

 
prevented from obtaining a warrant nor do the facts indicate that

 
13

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the situation required immediate police action. The officers 
waited ten minutes for Officer Tamayori to arrive as back-up and the three officers had the opportunity to discuss the situation and their observations before deciding to enter Unit A. As the circuit court noted, these facts do not indicate the officers were faced with a situation that necessitated immediate intervention, but instead indicate the officers had the situation under control and the luxury of choosing when to enter Unit A. See State v. Vinuya, 96 Hawai
'i 472, 490, 32 P.3d 116, 134 (App. 
2001) (finding that no exigency existed for warrantless entry where police waited five hours before entering, had the luxury of choosing when to enter, and had sufficient time to obtain a warrant). 
Under Hawai
'i precedent, the totality of the 
circumstances indicate the officers were not faced with an "immediate danger to life or serious injury or an immediate threatened removal or destruction of evidence." See Jenkins, 93 
Hawai
'i at 102, 997 P.2d at 28. The circuit court did not err in 
determining that no exigency existed to justify the officers' warrantless entry into and search of Unit A.
IV. CONCLUSION

 
Therefore, the January 13, 2012 "Findings of Fact,

 
Conclusion of Law and Order Granting Defendant's Motion to

 Suppress Evidence," entered in the Circuit Court of the First

 Circuit is affirmed.

 
On the briefs:

 
Brandon H. Ito

 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellant.

 
William A. Harrison

 
(Harrison & Matsuoka)
for Defendant-Appellee.

 
14

 