NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000714 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
RAMON MARIANO GONZALEZ, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 09-1-308K)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ramon Mariano Gonzalez (Gonzalez)
 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered
 
September 29, 2011 in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit1
 
(circuit court). Gonzalez was convicted of the offense of sexual
 
assault in the fourth degree, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 707-733(1)(a) (2014 Repl.).
 
Gonzalez contends the circuit court erred by:
 
(1) denying his March 15, 2010 "Motion to Quash
 
Indictment Based on Excessive Hearsay in Grand Jury Proceedings";
 
(2) denying his September 27, 2010 "Motion to Suppress
 
DNA Evidence Based on Failure of Chain of Custody" (Motion to
 
Suppress DNA Evidence);
 
(3) refusing to allow Gonzalez to present evidence of
 
prior allegations of sexual assault by the complaining witness
 
(CW) that were subsequently recanted;
 
(4) denying his September 27, 2010 "Motion For [a
 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 104 (1993)] Hearing Regarding
 
1
 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Prior Sexual Assault Allegations made by [CW]" to exclude CW's
 
testimony for lack of competency and for denying his motion to
 strike CW's trial testimony based on lack of competency;
 
(5) failing to grant Gonzalez's February 14, 2011 
"Motion in Limine No. 5 or in the Alternative to Suppress and/or Strike DNA Evidence Based on Detective David Araki's Alteration and/or Tampering of Evidence and Property Receipts, and the State of Hawai
'i's Failure to Establish Chain of Custody and/or in the 
Alternative, Motion for Mistrial" (Motion in Limine No. 5) 
regarding the alteration by the police of evidence and property 
receipts and admission of DNA evidence; 
(6) refusing to grant his February 17, 2011 "Motion 
For Judgment of Acquittal on Count 1 of the Indictment Pursuant
 
st
to Rule 29, Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure [(HRPP)]" (1  Motion 
for Judgment of Acquittal on Count 1); 
(7)
 not allowing Gonzalez the opportunity to question
 
CW's mother about her bias against Gonzalez's wife in connection
 with an estate case;
 
(8)
 denying Gonzalez's February 22, 2011 "Motion For
 
Judgment of Acquittal on Count 1 of the Indictment Pursuant to
 [HRPP Rule 29], After All Parties Have Presented Their Case" (2
nd
 
Motion for Judgment of Acquittal on Count 1);
 
(9)
 denying Gonzalez's March 3, 2011 "Motion For a New
 
Trial Pursuant to [HRPP Rule 33]" (Motion for a New Trial); and
 
(10) denying his July 5, 2011 "Motion for
 
Reconsideration of (1) Motion For Judgment of Acquittal on Count
 1 of the Indictment Pursuant to [HRPP Rule 29], and (2) Motion
 For New Trial Pursuant to [HRPP Rule 33], Based on Change in Law
 Subsequent to Disposition of Motions" (Motion for
 
Reconsideration).
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
 Gonzalez's appeal is without merit.
(1) The circuit court did not err in denying Gonzalez's motion
to quash the indictment.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"Dismissal of an indictment is required only in
 
flagrant cases in which the grand jury has been overreached or
 
deceived in some significant way, as where perjured testimony has
 knowingly been presented . . . ." State v. Mendonca, 68 Haw.
 
280, 283, 711 P.2d 731, 734 (1985) (internal quotation marks
 omitted.)
 
The circuit court did not err in allowing hearsay
 
testimony before the Grand Jury in lieu of testimony by CW, who
 lived on another island. The HRE rule related to hearsay does
 not apply to grand jury proceedings. See HRE Rule 1101(d)
 
(1993).
 
Three witnesses testified before the Grand Jury. 
First, Edythe Maeda, a witness counsel with the prosecutor's office, testified that CW was unavailable and residing on Maui. Next, police detective David Araki (Detective Araki) of the 
Hawai
'i County Police Department, testified that he was involved 
in the investigation into an alleged sex assault against CW on 
April 11, 2009. He stated that CW was eighteen years old, and testified as to CW's account of the events of April 11, 2009. Third to testify was registered nurse Kim Page (Nurse Page), who 
does evaluations of victims of reported sex assaults. She 
testified that she examined CW on April 11, 2009. 
Gonzalez argues that Plaintiff-Appellee State of 
Hawai
'i (State) had an improper motive for using Detective 
Araki's testimony in place of CW's, because CW was not a believable or competent witness, and the State did not reveal to the Grand Jury that CW was allegedly mildly retarded. Detective Araki testified before the Grand Jury that "[CW] is kind of simple. She's eighteen, but, you know, she seems –- her mental age is a lot younger, at least to me." He also testified that when he asked CW why she did not react to the sexual assault when it happened, she "just had a . . . confused look." Additionally, Nurse Page testified that CW was "a little slow to answer questions at times, and that sort of thing." Gonzalez has not shown that the State had an improper motive. 
The Grand Jury was presented with Detective Araki's
 
recount of CW's statement to police, as well as his testimony
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the inside of CW's skirt tested positive for semen and the
 
laboratory results matched Gonzalez's DNA. Detective Araki's
 statement that Gonzalez asked for his lawyer was not significant
 in light of the evidence to indict Gonzalez.
(2) The circuit court did not err in admitting the DNA test
results obtained from the black skirt.
 
In his Motion to Suppress DNA Evidence, Gonzalez
 
alleges the DNA evidence should be suppressed "due to failure of
 
the chain of custody" of the evidence. He notes that the DNA
 evidence was collected from the black skirt allegedly worn by CW
 at the time of the incident on April 11, 2009 and that the skirt
 was not received into custody until April 14, 2009 when the skirt
 was turned over to police by CW's mother. Gonzalez alleged that
 the DNA evidence on the clothing "may have been tampered with or
 intermingled or contaminated by access to the clothing and
 bedding of the Gonzalez family, and thus must be suppressed."
 
In his Motion to Suppress DNA Evidence, Gonzalez never
 
alleged that the State's obtaining of the DNA evidence involved a
 violation of his constitutional rights, violation of statute, or
 violation of an administrative rule. Gonzalez argued only that
 the police did not secure the skirt (and DNA evidence contained
 thereon) until several days after the incident. HRPP Rule 41(f)
 states that "[a] person aggrieved by an unlawful search and
 seizure of property may move the court having jurisdiction to try
 the offense to suppress for use as evidence by the State anything
 unlawfully obtained."
 
Gonzalez contends the DNA evidence should not have been
 
admitted at trial due to lack of proper foundation, because the
 black skirt CW was wearing on the day of the alleged sexual
 assault was not recovered until four days after the incident
 occurred.
 
HRE Rule 901(a) (1993) states that "[t]he requirement
 
of authentication or identification as a condition precedent to
 admissibility is satisfied by evidence to support a finding that
 the matter in question is what its proponent claims."
 
Despite the four days between the alleged incident and
 
Detective Araki's recovery of the black skirt, the State
 introduced enough evidence for a juror to find that the black
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
skirt sent to the laboratory was the skirt that CW was wearing
 
during the sexual assault. CW testified that she was wearing a
 black skirt. CW's mother, testified that State's Exhibit 21 was
 the black skirt that CW was wearing when she met up with CW on
 the morning following the incident. CW's sister also testified
 that she saw CW wearing a skirt to bed the night before the
 incident. Additionally, Nurse Page testified that during the
 Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner (SANE) exam, CW indicated that she
 
had a skirt on during the assault that she was no longer wearing
 
when she went to the SANE exam. This testimony was sufficient to
 "support a finding" that the black skirt sent to the laboratory
 was the skirt that CW was wearing during the alleged sexual
 assault.
 
Gonzalez argues that the three days between when the
 
assault allegedly occurred and when Detective Araki obtained the
 skirt makes the DNA recovered from the skirt "wholly unreliable
 as the DNA clothing may have been tampered with, intermingled or
 contaminated by access to clothing and bedding of the Gonzalez
 family[.]" It was up to the jury to decide whether the DNA
 evidence was present on the skirt as a result of a sexual
 assault. Cf. Clark v. People, 32 P.3d 1287, 1293 (Colo. 2010)
 
(holding that it was within the province of the jury to resolve
 how semen matching the defendant's DNA profile was deposited on
 two pieces of clothing owned by the complainant).
 
Gonzalez makes a number of arguments suggesting the
 
State failed to sufficiently demonstrate chain of custody of the
 DNA evidence after the skirt was obtained by Detective Araki.
 There was ample evidence that it was "reasonably probable that
 tampering, substitution or alteration" of the black skirt and DNA
 located on the skirt did not occur. State v. DeSilva, 64 Haw.
 
40, 42, 636 P.2d 728, 730 (1981). Therefore, the circuit court
 did not abuse its discretion in determining that sufficient chain
 of custody existed for the DNA evidence and did not err in
 denying Gonzalez's Motion in Limine No. 5, Motion for Judgment of
 Acquittal on Count 1, Motion for New Trial, and Motion for
 Reconsideration, to the extent that they were premised on
 insufficient chain of custody for the DNA evidence.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Gonzalez also contends his constitutional right to
 
confront adverse witnesses was violated where a second lab
 
analyst who reviewed the findings of the DNA test did not testify
 at trial. The analyst responsible for actually conducting the
 DNA testing did testify at trial and was cross-examined by
 Gonzalez.
 
(3) The circuit court did not err in finding that CW was
competent to testify.
 
On September 27, 2010, Gonzalez filed a "Motion For HRE
 
Rule 104 Hearing Regarding Prior Sexual Assault Allegations Made
 
by [CW]," asking the circuit court to make an advance ruling
 prior to trial regarding the competency of CW to testify.
 
The circuit court found in its January 18, 2011 order
 
regarding the competency of CW, that she was 20 years old, knew
 the difference between a truth and a lie, and understood the oath
 to tell the truth. It further determined that "[CW] is a person
 with learning challenges, but she has no record of inability to
 tell the truth from a lie or from fantasy." These findings are
 supported by the evidence presented at the hearing.
 
CW's mother, testified that CW had some difficulties in
 
comprehension at school and had an individualized educational
 program. A 2009 school report indicated that CW had a learning
 disability categorized as "mild mental impairment." Mother
 testified that CW's teachers advised her that she was in the
 very-low or low percentile for "broad math, math calculation
 skills, and broad reading." Mother stated that although CW could
 get distracted, Mother did not observe any memory problems, a
 history of lying or not being truthful. She testified CW
 attended public elementary school and high school, and was taking
 part in a Maui Jobs Corps program. According to mother, CW was
 doing well in the program and was attempting to get her high
 school diploma.
 
CW testified that when she was asked to swear to tell
 
the truth in the courtroom, it meant "just to tell the truth and
 don't lie about anything." She stated that she sometimes would
 forget things. She also testified that it would be a lie if the
 attorney stated that a paper was green when the paper was in fact
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
yellow. CW indicated that she understood words such as "dog",
 
"shoe" and "table" but not "accurate" or "consequences".
 
HRE Rule 603.1 (1993) provides that "[a] person is
 
disqualified to be a witness if the person is (1) incapable of
 expressing oneself so as to be understood, either directly or
 through interpretation by one who can understand the person, or
 (2) incapable of understanding the duty of a witness to tell the
 truth." Here, the evidence established both that (1) CW was
 capable of expressing herself so as to be understood, and (2)
 understood what the oath meant, the difference between truth and
 a lie, and the duty of a witness to tell the truth. Accordingly,
 
the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in deeming CW
 competent to testify.
(4) The circuit court correctly required Gonzalez to prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that CW's prior allegation of
sexual assault was false, and properly found that there was no
recantation by CW.
 
Gonzalez sought to introduce evidence and testimony at
 
trial regarding CW's prior allegations of sexual assault by a
 
family member in 2004 (2004 Incident). Following an HRE Rule 104
 
hearing regarding prior sexual assault allegations, the circuit
 
nd
court entered its February 22, 2011 2  Motion for Judgment of
Acquittal on Count 1 concluding that "[s]ince [Gonzalez] has not
 proven by a preponderance of the evidence that the [2004
 Incident] was false, it falls within the protection of [HRE] Rule
 412 [(Supp. 2015)]."
 
The circuit court heard testimony from CW, a police

 
officer, a teacher, a social worker and a psychologist. It also
 reviewed exhibits, including a DVD from the 2004 Incident of an
 interview of CW. The circuit court found that it was not finding
 the 2004 Incident to be true, but instead found that Gonzalez had
 failed to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that
 they were false.
 
Gonzalez had introduced a 2004 report from the Honolulu
 
Police Department (HPD) Officer Hunter Ah Loo indicating CW had
 
made inconsistent statements and changed her story in the 2004
 
Incident. A relative testified that CW had been known to make
 untrue statements in 2004, and another relative, said that CW
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
told him, in connection with the 2004 Incident, that she did not
 
get raped.
 
During the 2004 hearing, HPD detective Phillip Blaine
 
Lavarias (Detective Lavaris), testified that in 2004 he was
 
investigating a reported sexual assault involving CW as part of a
 
Child Protective Services case and was present during the video
 recorded interview between CW and a social worker. At the time
 of the interview, CW indicated that she was thirteen years old.
 Detective Lavaris indicated that in his experience investigating
 sexual assault cases over the course of five years, the majority
 involved allegations of sexual assault by family members, and
 that many times pressures are put on the children not to break up
 the family. He testified that some of the statements made by CW
 during the 2004 Incident interview, "such as her grandparents
 telling her that it could have never happened," could indicate
 that some pressure had been put on her not to tell the truth. An
 American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry article
 regarding recantations of child sexual abuse allegations was also
 entered into evidence.
 
The evidence of CW's recantation of her allegations in 
the 2004 Incident is not clear, and Detective Lavaris's testimony indicated that CW may have recanted due to familial pressures. Therefore we cannot conclude the circuit court erred in finding that CW's previous allegations fell within the purview of the Rape Shield Law, HRE Rule 412, and were therefore not admissible at trial. See State v. West, 95 Hawai
'i 452, 460, 24 P.3d 648, 
656 (2001) ("[W]here the trial court is unable to determine by a preponderance of the evidence that [a prior allegation of sexual assault] is false, the defendant has failed to meet his or her burden, and the evidence may be properly excluded.").
(5) The circuit court did not err in limiting questions
regarding the value of an estate managed by Gonzalez's wife on
grounds of relevancy.
 
Gonzalez contends the circuit court should have allowed 
him to ask additional questions of mother at trial regarding the
 
value of an allegedly $12 million estate. Gonzalez alleged that
 this would call into question mother's credibility and show bias 
but since there was apparently no contested inheritance, evidence
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the size of the estate would only have served to confuse the
 
jury with unnecessary side issues. See HRE Rule 403 (1993). 
Accordingly, we hold that the circuit court did not err in
 limiting the evidence on the value of the estate.
(6) Gonzalez's point of error alleging that a statement made by
the prosecutor during closing referencing lesser-included
offenses was prosecutorial misconduct is without merit.
 
Gonzalez argues that the prosecutor engaged in
 
misconduct in her closing statement when she stated, "[w]e are
 
asking for a verdict of guilty of Sexual Assault in the First
 Degree, as charged, none of the lesser-included offenses that the
 defendant might want you to consider." Gonzalez did not object
 to the closing statement or ask for a curative instruction. He
 first raised this in his March 3, 2011 Motion for New Trial.
 
Claims of improper statements by prosecutors are 
evaluated "by first determining whether the statements are improper, and then determining whether the misconduct is harmless." State v. Tuua, 125 Hawai
'i 10, 14, 250 P.3d 273, 277 
(2011); see also State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai 'i 20, 26, 108 P.3d 
974, 980 (2005). In this case, there was no improper statement. "[C]losing argument affords the prosecution (as well as the defense) the opportunity to persuade the jury that its theory of the case is valid, based upon the evidence adduced and all reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom." State v. 
Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i 405, 413, 984 P.2d 1231, 1239 (1999) (citing 
State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai 'i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576 (1997)). 
Here, the State asked the jury to convict Gonzalez on the greater of the offenses presented by the jury instructions. By using the phrase, "none of the lesser-included offenses that the defendant might want you to consider[,]" it appears the State was drawing a reasonable inference that Gonzalez might prefer to be convicted of a lesser-included offense rather than the greater charged offense. Therefore the circuit court did not err in declining to grant a new trial.
(7) Gonzalez's other post-verdict motions were properly denied.
 
Gonzalez's points of error also challenge the circuit
 
court's denial of a number of Gonzalez's post-verdict motions. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
All of those motions are based on the arguments discussed supra,
 
and are without merit.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the September 29, 2011
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered in the Circuit Court
 of the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 3, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Robert D.S. Kim 
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Linda L. Walton Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
10
 