NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000013
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
AMBER FINANCIAL GROUP, LLC., JULIAN KOZAR, TRENA PAPAGEORGE, and
PETTRICE GAMBOL, Respondents/Appellants-Appellants, v. KEALI 'I S. 
1
LOPEZ, DIRECTOR,  DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS,
Agency/Appellee-Appellee, 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-2770-11(KKS))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
In this secondary appeal, Respondents/Appellants-
Appellants Amber Financial Group, LLC (AFG), Julian Kozar
 
(Kozar), Trena Papageorge (Papageorge), and Pettrice Gambol
 
2
(Gambol) (collectively, Appellants)  appeal from the August 25,
3
2010 Final Judgment  entered by the Circuit Court of the First
Circuit (Circuit Court) in favor of the Director (Director),
 Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs (DCCA).
 
On appeal before this court, Appellants challenge the
 
Circuit Court's affirmation of the Director's affirmation of the
 DCCA hearing officer's decision to revoke their licenses. In
 particular, Appellants argue that (1) it was error to allow AFG,
 a corporate entity, to appear without counsel in legal
 
1
 Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 43(c), the
current Director, Keali' i S. Lopez, is hereby substituted as a party. 
2
 A fourth Respondent, Denni-Lee Bumanglag, did not join this
appeal, as she was subsequently not employed by AFG as early as February 6,
2009, and apparently did not challenge the denial of her license renewal.
 
3
 The Honorable Karl K. Sakamoto presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
proceedings; (2) judgments against a corporate entity are not
 
judgments against individuals in their individual capacity, and
 that the term "disciplinary proceeding" on the license renewal
 application was vague and ambiguous; (3) the five year revocation
 was excessive; and (4) they were entitled to a trial by jury on
 the portion of the Order requiring payment of restitution to
 third parties prior to re-application.
 
After a careful review of the issues raised and the
 
arguments made by the parties, the applicable authority and the
 record, we affirm the Circuit Court's judgment as to all
 Appellants, except for Gambol, for the following reasons:
 
1. AFG argues that, based on Oahu Plumbing & Sheet
 
Metal, Ltd. v. Kona Constr., Inc., 60 Haw. 372, 374, 590 P.2d
 570, 572 (1979), the hearing officer's decision must be vacated
 because AFG was not represented by counsel in proceedings before
 the hearing officer. However, Oahu Plumbing involved a
 corporation's representation in court proceedings. 60 Haw. at
 372, 590 P.2d at 571. More to the point, Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) § 91-9(b)(5) (2012), provides that, in a contested case
 hearing,
 
any party may retain counsel if the party so desires and
. . . an individual may appear on the individual's own
behalf, or a member of a partnership may represent the
partnership, or an officer or authorized employee of a
corporation or trust or association may represent the
corporation, trust, or association.
 
(Emphasis supplied.) Kozar and Papageorge were officers of AFG,
 
and Kozar represented that he was appearing at the hearing on
 behalf of AFG. Thus, AFG was properly represented before the
 hearing officer.
 
2. Appellants argue that the five civil judgments
 
noted by the hearing officer were entered against AFG only, and
 thus the individual Appellants were not required to report these
 judgments in their respective applications for license renewal. 
While this may be so, the hearing officer's decision was also
 based on Appellants' failure to report that they had the instant
 disciplinary proceedings pending when they filed for renewal of
 their licenses. In the Petition for Disciplinary Action,
 Appellants were each named in their individual capacities in
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
addition to AFG being named as a corporate entity. Regardless of
 
their status as officers or mere employees of AFG, each Appellant
 in their individual capacity did in fact have "disciplinary
 proceedings pending" against them when they submitted their
 renewal forms.
 
3. Appellants argue that the term "Disciplinary
 
Proceeding" as used on the Renewal Application was vague and
 ambiguous. Appellants are mistaken to the extent they believe
 the term was meant to include civil judgments. As the DCCA
 freely admits, "civil judgments are not disciplinary actions
 required to be reported on the renewal applications[.]"
4
 
Appellants' argument is without merit.
 
4. Appellants argue that their punishment of a five-
year license revocation was excessive. Initially, we note that
 there was no period of time set by the Director for Appellants'
 revocation. Although Appellants do not explain how they
 determined their revocation was for five years, HRS § 436B-21
 (1993) provides that "[a] person may apply for a new license
 after five years from the effective date of the revocation[.]" 
Thus, the minimum duration of Appellants' revocation period is
 set by statute, not by the Director. As to whether the
 revocation of the Appellants' licenses was an abuse of
 discretion, HRS § 91-14(g)(6) (2012) provides that:
 
[u]pon review of the record the court may affirm the
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the
decision and order if the substantial rights of the
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are: . . . [a]rbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
 
4 However, independent of the requirements for a license renewal,
civil judgments are required to be reported to the DCCA Program pursuant to
HRS § 436B-16 (1993). Violation of HRS § 436B-16 was one of the grounds for
the September 18, 2008 Petition for Disciplinary Action. HRS § 436B-16(a)
provides that:
 
[e]ach licensee shall provide written notice within thirty
days to the licensing authority of any judgment, award,
disciplinary sanction, order, or other determination, which
adjudges or finds that the licensee is civilly, criminally,
or otherwise liable for any personal injury, property
damage, or loss caused by the licensee's conduct in the
practice of the licensee's profession or vocation. A
 licensee shall also give notice of such determinations made
in other jurisdictions.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of
discretion.
 
HRS § 436B-19 (1993) provides that "[i]n addition to
 
any other acts or conditions provided by law, the licensing
 
authority may refuse to renew, reinstate or restore, or may deny,
 revoke, suspend, or condition in any manner, any license" for any
 of the reasons enumerated therein, including "[p]rocuring a
 license through fraud, misrepresentation, or deceit[.]" HRS
 § 436B-19(5). Additionally, HRS § 454-4(b) (1993) (repealed by
 
5
Haw. Sess. Laws 2010, Act 84, § 29, eff. Jan. 1, 2011)  provided
that:
 
[t]he commissioner may revoke a license if the application
for the license contains a material misstatement, the
licensee demonstrates by a course of conduct negligence or
incompetence in performing any act for which the licensee is
required to be licensed, . . . or the licensee for a second
time is responsible for misconduct which warrants suspension
under subsection (a).
 
The hearing officer determined that Appellants violated
 
four separate provisions of HRS § 436B-19.6 Moreover, in
 
reaching his recommended sanction, the hearing officer
 
"considered the pattern of financial irresponsibility
 
5 HRS § 454-4 was repealed and replaced with HRS § 454F in order to
meet its "obligations under the federal Secure and Fair Enforcement for
Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (S.A.F.E Mortgage Licensing Act)" to regulate
the residential mortgage industry. Haw. Sess. Laws 2010, Act. 84, § 1. HRS
 § 454F-12 (Supp. 2012) provides, in pertinent part,
 
Enforcement authorities; violations; penalties.  (a) To
ensure the effective supervision and enforcement of this
chapter, the commissioner may, pursuant to chapter 91:
 
(1)	 Deny, suspend, revoke, condition, or decline to renew
a license because of a violation of this chapter,
rules, an order, or a directive entered under this
chapter;
 
(2)	 Deny, suspend, revoke, condition, or decline to renew
a license if an applicant or licensee fails at any
time to meet the requirements of section 454F-6 or
section 454F-8, violates section 454F-17, or withholds
information or makes a material misstatement in an
 application for a license or renewal of a license[.] 
6
 The hearings officer found in his Findings of Fact that Appellants
violated HRS §§ 436B-19(5), "Procuring a license through fraud,
misrepresentation, or deceit;" 436B-19(7), "Professional misconduct,
incompetence, gross negligence, or manifest incapacity in the practice of the
licensed profession or vocation;" 436B-19(8), "Failure to maintain a record or
history of competency, trustworthiness, fair dealing and financial integrity;"
and 436B-19(12), Failure to comply, observe, or adhere to any law in a manner
such that the licensing authority deems the applicant or holder to be an unfit
or improper person to hold a license[.]"
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Appellants] have exhibited since 2007, the lack of any
 
reasonable assurance that this pattern will not continue in the
 future, and [Appellants'] misleading license renewal
 applications."
 
In their defense, Appellants claim that they did not 
"engage in professional misconduct" in violation of HRS § 436B­19(7), and did not procure their licenses through misrepresentation in violation of HRS § 436B-19(5) because they mistakenly characterize their failure to report the civil judgments--instead of the failure to report the pending disciplinary investigation--as the misrepresentation in their license renewal applications.
7 The Petition for Disciplinary 
Action named the individual Appellants in addition to AFG as a corporate entity. Thus, the failure of each of the Appellants to report that Action in their respective applications where the application asks for that information was a misrepresentation. To the extent that Appellants characterize their actions as "an oversight" and "an unfortunate mistake[,]" in a similar licensing context, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held that a 
"misrepresentation need not be either fraudulent or intentional." Kim v. Contractors License Bd., 88 Hawai
'i 264, 271, 965 P.2d 
806, 813 (1998). 
Finally, as the hearing officer's decision reflects,
 
Appellants Kozar and Papageorge's characterization of the
 revocation of their licenses as based solely on their license
 renewal application is inaccurate. As members and owners AFG,
 the hearing officer's consideration of "the pattern of financial
 irresponsibility Respondents have exhibited since 2007 [and] the
 lack of any reasonable assurance that this pattern will not
 continue in the future" were additional factors in support of the
 sanction recommended and did not constitute an abuse of
 discretion.
 
7
 As discussed, supra, Appellants' argument that it was the failure
 
to report the pending civil judgments themselves and not the failure to report
the pending September 18, 2008 Petition for Disciplinary Action
mischaracterizes the hearing officer's findings and the Director's Final
Order. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
However, it is unclear on this record, whether the
 
hearing officer considered Gambol's role as an employee, and not
 
a member or owner of AFG, in deciding upon the sanction he
 recommended for her. We therefore are unable to determine
 whether the hearing officer improperly failed to consider
 Gambol's more limited status as an employee in rendering his
 decision. Moreover, assuming that revocation was an appropriate
 sanction for the failure to report the pendency of these
 disciplinary proceedings, as a mere employee and not an member or
 owner of AFG, it is not clear why Gambol's reapplication should
 be dependent on payment of the judgments entered against AFG. 
Therefore, we conclude it was error to affirm the sanction as to
 Gambol. 
5. Appellants argue that they were entitled to a jury
 
trial for the "portion of the [O]rder that requires payment of
 restitution to third parties prior to re-application after the
 revocation period" of their licenses. The "restitution" that
 Appellants refer to is the requirement that "satisfaction of the
 Judgments entered . . . shall be a condition for relicensure
 should [Appellants] reapply for a mortgage broker's or mortgage
 solicitor's license after the revocation period." Appellants
 agree that AFG is responsible for those judgments. At least as
 to AFG, this requirement was not a new obligation imposed, but
 rather a requirement that AFG's pre-existing obligation to pay
 the judgments be satisfied before any attempt to renew its
 license. Even as to Kozar and Papageorge, the Order does not
 require them to pay the judgments, but as a precondition to a
 petition for relicensure, that the judgments be paid.
 In any event, the licensing authority may "condition in 
any manner[] . . . any license" for one or more of the acts enumerated. HRS § 436B-19. "Where the language of the statute is plain and unambiguous, [the court's] only duty is to give effect to its plain and obvious meaning." Liberty Mut. Fire Ins. 
Co. v. Dennison, 108 Hawai
'i 380, 384, 120 P.3d 1115, 1119 (2005) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Appellants had a hearing prior to the entry of the Order. Appellants have 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failed to establish a right to a jury trial in such licensure
 
proceedings.
 
Therefore, we vacate the August 25, 2010 Final Judgment
 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit as to Pettrice
 Gambol and remand with instructions to vacate the Director's
 Final Order and to hold a hearing on the appropriate sanction as
 to Pettrice Gambol. In all other respects, the August 25, 2010
 Final Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 31, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Shawn A. Luiz,
for Respondents/Appellants-Appellants. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judges Patrick K. Kelly,
Regulated IndustriesComplaints Office,Department of Commerce andConsumer Affairs,for Agency/Appellee-Appellee. 
7
 