NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000354
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
LANRIC HYLAND, Appellant-Appellant,
v.
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES, STATE OF HAWAI 'I,
Appellee-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 17-1-101K)
 ORDER GRANTING MOTION TO DISMISS APPEAL 
FOR LACK OF APPELLATE JURISDICTION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Chan, JJ.)
 
Upon review of (1) the motion of Defendant-Appellee
 
Department of Human Services, State of Hawaii, (DHS) to dismiss
 
this appeal for lack of appellate jurisdiction, (2) the
 opposition filed by Plaintiff-Appellant Lanric Hyland (Hyland),
 and (3) the record, it appears that we lack jurisdiction over
 Hyland's appeal. 
Hyland appeals from the following orders entered by the
 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court): 
(1) a March 24, 2017 order denying his motion to
proceed in forma pauperis;
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) an April 3, 2017 order denying his motion to stay
enforcement of the DHS's administrative order (DHS
Final Decision) that is the subject of his appeal
to the Circuit Court and to reinstate his MedQuest
benefits pending the Circuit Court's decision on
his appeal; and 
(3) an April 3, 2017 order denying his motion (1) for
reconsideration of the Circuit Court's denial of
 his motion to proceed in forma pauperis; and (2)
to stay enforcement of the DHS's Final Decision
and to reinstate his MedQuest benefits pending the
Circuit Court's decision on his appeal.
 
The three orders that Hyland appeals involve two
 
issues: (1) the denial of Hyland's request for a stay of the
 
DHS's Final Decision and for reinstatement of his MedQuest
 benefits pending the Circuit Court's decision on his appeal; and
 (2) the denial of his motion to proceed in forma pauperis. In
 its motion to dismiss this appeal, the DHS argues that this court
 lacks jurisdiction over the first issue and takes no position on
 whether we have jurisdiction over the second issue.
 
HRS § 641-1 authorizes appeals to the Hawai
'i 
Intermediate Court of Appeals from final judgments, orders, or decrees. Appeals under HRS § 641-1 "shall be taken in the manner . . . provided by the rules of court." HRS § 641-1(c). Rule 58 of the Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) requires that 
"[e]very judgment shall be set forth on a separate document." Based on this requirement under HRCP Rule 58, the Supreme Court of Hawai
'i has held that "[a]n appeal may be taken . . . only 
after the orders have been reduced to a judgment and the judgment has been entered in favor of and against the appropriate parties pursuant to HRCP [Rule] 58[.]" Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Fleming 
& Wright, 76 Hawai
'i 115, 119, 869 P.2d 1334, 1338 (1994). 
The Circuit Court has not ruled on the merits, or
 
entered a final judgment, on Hyland's appeal from the DHS Final
 Decision. Thus, unless an exception to the final/separate
 judgment requirement is applicable, none of the orders Hyland
 seeks to appeal from constitute an appealable final judgment. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The only exception that may arguably apply is the 
collateral order doctrine. Under the collateral order doctrine, 
an interlocutory order that satisfies all three of the following requirements is appealable: "the order must [1] conclusively determine the disputed question, [2] resolve an important issue completely separate from the merits of the action, and [3] be effectively unreviewable on appeal from a final judgment." Abrams v. Cades, Schutte, Fleming & Wright, 88 Hawai
'i 319, 322, 
966 P.2d 631, 634 (1998) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted; brackets in original). 
We conclude that the Circuit Court's orders are not
 
appealable collateral orders to the extent they deny Hyland's
 request to stay enforcement of the DHS Final Decision and to
 reinstate his MedQuest benefits pending the Circuit Court's
 decision on his appeal. These aspects of the Circuit Court's
 orders do not conclusively determine the disputed question,
 because the Circuit Court can reconsider its decision to deny
 Hyland's request for a stay and reinstatement of benefits based
 on further developments, and they do not resolve an issue
 completely separate from the merits of Hyland's appeal of the DHS
 Final Decision to the Circuit Court. See Gulfstream Aerospace
 
Corporation v. Mayacamas Corporation, 485 U.S. 271, 277-78
 (1988); Federal Land Bank of Spokane v. L.R. Ranch Co., 926 F.2d
 859, 862 (9th Cir. 1991); HRS § 91-14(c)(1) (2012) (identifying
 "likelihood that the subject person will prevail on the merits"
 as a factor for the reviewing court to consider in deciding
 whether to stay enforcement of an agency decision). 
We also conclude, under the circumstances of this case,
 
that the Circuit Court's order denying Hyland's motion to proceed
 in forma pauperis is not an appealable collateral order. We note
 that generally, an order denying a motion to proceed in forma
 pauperis has been held to be an appealable order under the
 collateral order doctrine. Roberts v. United States District
 
Court for the Northern District of California, 339 U.S. 844, 845
 (1950); Furnace v. Board of Trustees of Southern Illinois
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
University , 218 F.3d 666, 669 n.2 (7th
 Cir. 2000).  An exception,
 
however, has been recognized when the plaintiff whose in forma
 
pauperis request was denied subsequently paid the filing fee and
 the case thereafter proceeded on the merits. See Burnett v.
 
Miller, 507 Fed. Appx. 796, 798 (10th Cir. 2013) (holding that
 the denial of an in forma pauperis motion was not appealable as a
 collateral order where the plaintiff subsequently paid the filing
 fee and the action continued to proceed before the trial court). 
The record in this case indicates that Hyland paid the
 
filing fee after his in forma pauperis motion was denied and that
 the denial of his motion did not prevent his appeal of the DHS
 Final Decision from proceeding on the merits in the Circuit
 Court. 
It also appears that the Circuit Court's order denying
 
Hyland's in forma pauperis motion will not "be effectively
 unreviewable on appeal from a final judgment." If Hyland's
 appeal to the Circuit Court is unsuccessful, he can obtain review
 of the Circuit Court's denial of his in forma pauperis motion
 pursuant to an appeal of the Circuit Court's judgment affirming
 the DHS Final Decision. If Hyland's appeal to the Circuit Court
 is successful, it appears that he could move for reimbursement of
 his filing fee pursuant to HRS § 607-24, and if this motion were
 denied, he could obtain review of the denial of his in forma
 pauperis motion through an appeal of the denial of his HRS 
§ 607-24 motion. Therefore, under the particular circumstances
 of this case, we conclude that the Circuit Court's order denying
 Hyland's motion to proceed in forma pauperis is not an appealable
 collateral order. 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that none of the
 
orders that Hyland seeks to appeal from are appealable final
 orders. We therefore lack jurisdiction over Hyland's appeal.
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the DHS's motion to dismiss
 
is granted and that Hyland's appeal is dismissed for lack of
 appellate jurisdiction.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that all pending motions in this
 
appeal are dismissed as moot.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, 
Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 
5
 