NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0005212
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CHARLY HERNANE, also known as CHARLIE HERNANE,
Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-0699)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
In this prosecution for the offense of Murder in the
 
Second Degree, Defendant-Appellant Charly Hernane (Hernane)
 
appeals from the judgment and argues for a new trial based on the
 improper argument of the trial prosecutor.
I.
 
On the late evening of May 10 or early morning hours of
 
May 11, 2011, the decedent, Hernane's adoptive mother (Mother),
 
1
was attacked and killed with a knife  in a bedroom that she
shared with Hernane. 
Mother's body was found in the morning of
 
May 11, 2011. Later that morning, Honolulu Police Department
 (HPD) officers arrested Hernane in the nearby Kalihi District
 Park, next to the Kal
akaua Gym. HPD officers testified that
 
Hernane had blood splattered on his shirt and appeared groggy. 
Of the three blood samples taken from the shirt Hernane was
 wearing at the time of his arrest, one sample came solely from
 
1
 Medical Examiner Dr. Kanthi De Alwis (Dr. De Alwis) later
testified that Mother died due to a combination of a stab wound to the neck
 
and a hemorrhagic stroke at the time of the stabbing. Dr. De Alwis could not
 determine which of the two caused Mother's death because either one could have
 been fatal.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Mother and the two other samples contained a mixture of blood
 
from at least two individuals, with the "major contributor" of
 the mix coming from Mother.
 
On May 18, 2011, the State of Hawai
'i (State) indicted 
Hernane for Murder in the Second Degree, a violation of Hawaii
 
2
Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 707-701.5 (2014)  and 706-656(2)
(2014).3 The case was tried before a jury on August 5, 2013
 
4
through August 9, 2013,  who found Hernane guilty as charged.
II.
 
On appeal, Hernane argues that the deputy prosecutor,
 
Darrell Wong, (DPA) committed prosecutorial misconduct during
 closing argument when he (1) orally modified the Circuit Court's
 instructions to the jury on state of mind; (2) improperly
 
2 HRS § 707-701.5 reads now, as it did in 2011,
 
[§ 707-701.5] Murder in the second degree.  (1)
Except as provided in section 707-701, a person commits the
offense of murder in the second degree if the person
intentionally or knowingly causes the death of another
person.
 
(2) Murder in the second degree is a felony for which
the defendant shall be sentenced to imprisonment as provided
in section 706-656.
3 HRS § 706-656(2) reads now, as it did in 2011,
 
§ 706-656 Terms of imprisonment for first and second
degree murder and attempted first and second degree murder.
 
. . . .
 
(2) Except as provided in section 706-657, pertaining
to enhanced sentence for second degree murder, persons
convicted of second degree murder and attempted second
degree murder shall be sentenced to life imprisonment with
possibility of parole. The minimum length of imprisonment
shall be determined by the Hawaii paroling authority;
provided that persons who are repeat offenders under section
706-606.5 shall serve at least the applicable mandatory
minimum term of imprisonment.
 
If the court imposes a sentence of life imprisonment
without possibility of parole pursuant to section 706-657,
as part of that sentence, the court shall order the director
of public safety and the Hawaii paroling authority to
prepare an application for the governor to commute the
sentence to life imprisonment with parole at the end of
twenty years of imprisonment; provided that persons who are
repeat offenders under section 706-606.5 shall serve at
least the applicable mandatory minimum term of imprisonment.
 
4
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appealed to the jurors' emotions by using an inflammatory power
 
point slide; and (3) issued an illegal "Allen charge."
A.
 
Hernane argues that the DPA committed prosecutorial
 
misconduct when he orally modified the Circuit Court's
 instruction to the jury on definitions related to states of mind
 for the commission of Murder in the Second Degree because he
 equated the statutory language, "intentionally" and "conscious
 object," with "desire to kill."
 
This court has held that "[p]rosecutorial misconduct 
warrants a new trial or the setting aside of a guilty verdict only where the actions of the prosecutor have caused prejudice to the defendant's right to a fair trial." State v. Carvalho, 106 
Hawai
'i 13, 16 n.7, 100 P.3d 607, 610 n.7 (App. 2004) (citation 
and internal quotation marks omitted). "To determine whether reversal is required under [Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP)] Rule 52(a) because of improper remarks by a prosecutor which could affect Defendant's right to a fair trial, we apply the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard of review." State v. Sanchez, 82 Hawai
'i 517, 528, 923 P.2d 934, 945 (App. 
1996) (citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). That standard of review requires an examination of the record and a determination of whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have contributed to the conviction. State v. Balisbisana, 83 Hawai
'i 109, 114, 924 P.2d 1215, 1220 
(1996). In assessing whether prosecutorial misconduct warrants a new trial, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has set forth three factors 
to consider: "(1) the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness of a curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant." State v. Pacheco, 96 
Hawai
'i 83, 93, 26 P.3d 572, 582 (2001).
1. DPA's Comments on State of Mind.
 
During his August 9, 2013 closing argument, the DPA
 
addressed the state of mind for murder as follows:
 
Let's talk about state of mind. I believe it is
 
instruction number seven that tells you that there are two
types of evidence -- direct evidence, such as testimony of a
witness and those who have actual knowledge of a fact and
circumstantial evidence. The state of mind -- this is on
 page 15 -- may be proved. What a person is thinking at the
time he commits a crime or commits an act which constitutes
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
a crime may be proved by circumstantial evidence. There can
be no eyewitness account of what somebody's thinking. A
 person can even tell you what he's thinking, but that may or
may not necessarily be the truth. You have to decide whether
that witness is credible. But, in any case, the state of
mind which acts are done or omitted or which a person fails
to do may or not -- may or may not indicate the state of
mind with which he does or refrains from doing an act. What
 does that mean? You've heard the phrase "actions speaks
louder than words." When you want to determine what someone
is thinking, what's going on in his mind, look at what he
does. What actions does he engage in? That will be a fair
 indication of what he's thinking, and that is the way that
the state of minds are proved.
 
Now, in this particular case, what is the defendant
guilty of? You need to ask yourself first when you consider
the evidence: Did the defendant, one, have a desire to
kill; or two, was he aware that using this knife in the
manner that he did -- as the medical examiner had told you,
most likely in a face to face situation. She couldn't tell
 you whether they were both standing up or if she was lying
down, but it was more likely face to face as he -- as he
used this weapon upon -- on his mother, his adoptive mother
rather than from behind. It was face to face. So you ask
yourself: Was he aware that engaging in that conduct,
stabbing in the neck was practically certain to cause the
death of [Mother]? If you can answer either one of those,
whether he had a desire to kill -- and as we've discussed
 earlier, how long does it take to form an intent to do
anything?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Your Honor, I have an objection to
make.
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: All right. At the bench.
 
(The following proceedings held at the bench:)
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: Your objection.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I think the prosecutor is using the
word "desire", misstates the law with regard to have an
intentional state of mind, or misstates what the law says
and ask for a correction to -­
[DPA]: Hold on. As I -- I believe there is case law
that makes reference to the description of an intentional
state of mind as having the desire.
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: Do you have the cite?
 
[DPA]: What was that?
 [CIRCUIT COURT]: Do you have the cite?
 [DPA]: No, I don't, Your Honor.
 [CIRCUIT COURT]: All right.
 [DPA]: But -­[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I just think it's confusing because
the jury has a definition, and they should rely on what's in
the definition.
 
[DPA]: Well, my argument is that conscious object to
cause a result is a desire.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: All right. I will overrule the
objection. Certainly either side may make appropriate
arguments, but ultimately the jurors have to follow the
instructions that were provided to them and to the extent
that they construe any arguments made by you or remarks to
be inconsistent with these instructions they're also
instructed on page 1 to disregard. I don't find that the
 argument made thus far knows that form, and so with that the
objection's overruled.
 
(Bench conference concluded.)
 
[DPA]: Okay. So as you ask the questions: Did the
 
defendant have a desire to kill, or was he aware that his
conduct was practically certain to cause the death of
[Mother]? If you find that either of those states of minds
have been satisfied, then you must find the defendant guilty
of Murder.
 
. . . .
 
. . . A person acts intentionally with respect to a
result of his conduct when it is his conscious object to
cause such a result. His conscious object, which I term as
basically he has that desire to engage in that conduct, a
desire to kill someone. That desire, that intent can come
upon someone in a second's notice just as you make a
spontaneous decision to do whatever you do. If somebody
angers you and you punch 'em in the face, it is your
conscious object to engage in that conduct.
 
In his closing argument, counsel for Hernane responded,
 
Now, you have your instructions on the law and you're
going to be able to deliberate and apply the law as given to
you. On page 16, it talks about state of mind, and it states
a person is not guilty of an offense unless the State proves
beyond a reasonable doubt that the person acted with a
required state of mind. And, again, the state of mind we're
talking about in this case is an intentional or knowing
state of mind.
 
'Intentional' is also defined on page 24. And [DPA]
talks about someone having a desire, okay? 
Intentional,
plain and simple. It means somebody meant to do it. It was
their purpose. It was their conscious object to cause a
result, and the result we're dealing with in this case is
death. In other words, in order to have an intentional state
of mind, you have to have meant to cause death in this case.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Hernane argues that the DPA committed prosecutorial
 
misconduct when he orally modified the Circuit Court's
 
instruction to the jury on definitions related to states of mind
for the commission of Murder in the Second Degree because he
 equated the statutory language, "intentionally" and "conscious
 object," with "desire to kill." Hernane bases his argument
 entirely upon the recent opinion of the Supreme Court of Hawai
'i  
in 
State v. Basham, 132 Hawai 'i 97, 319 P.3d 1105 (2014). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Basham, the defendant argued on appeal that the
 
State committed prosecutorial misconduct when, during closing
 
argument, the prosecutor misstated the law on accomplice
 liability, thereby reducing the culpability necessary to
 establish the statutory definition of an accomplice. Basham, 132
 
Hawai
'i at 108-09, 319 P.3d at 1116-17. Justice Pollack, writing 
for the majority, explained at length the problems with either
 party orally altering jury instructions.
 
Neither party should be permitted to argue during
closing arguments for alternative definitions of terms in
the jury instructions that best fits their own theory of the
case. If such arguments were permitted, then either side
could orally amend the court's instructions during closing
argument by providing their own popular definitions of key
terms in the instructions. The jurors would then be able to
select the definition they preferred or remembered when
applying the court's instructions during deliberations.
Such a practice would be especially problematic if it
involved critical instructions that are key to the State's
theory of prosecution, as the accomplice instruction was in
this case.
 
It is precisely to avoid such confusion that the rules
provide a specific procedure for the court, rather than the
counsel or the parties, to instruct the jury on the law.
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 30(b) (2012)
provides that parties "shall file written requests that the
court instruct the jury on the law." When a request is
filed, counsel is "entitled to be heard thereon." HRPP Rule
 30(c). "The court may revise the language of any or all of
the requested instructions which are approved by the court
in whole or in part[.]" HRPP Rule 30(d). The court is
 required to "inform counsel of its proposed action with
respect to any such revision made or instructions prepared
by the court, and any changes thereon made by the court
shall be reduced to writing and submitted to counsel prior
to their arguments to the jury." HRPP Rule 30(d). Jury
instructions that are settled as set forth above "shall be
 read to the jury." HRPP Rule 30(d).
 
The rules prohibit oral amendments to the jury
instructions once they have been given to the jury. HRPP
 Rule 30(e) provides that the court "shall in no case orally
qualify, modify or explain to the jury any instruction
. . . ." (Emphasis added). When the jury requests further
instruction during deliberation on its verdict, the court
may provide further instructions, but the instructions must
be "reduced to writing" and "first submit[ed]" to counsel.
HRPP Rule 30(e).
 
In this case, the above procedures were followed by
the parties until the prosecutor orally modified the court's
accomplice instruction by defining the words "promote" and
"facilitate." The prosecutor did not submit a written
request for such definitions, despite submitting four other
proposed instructions related to accomplice liability. The
 prosecutor also did not object to the lack of such
definitions during the settling of jury instructions, which
occurred just before closing arguments. Thus, neither the
court nor defense counsel had approved of defining "promote"
as "to encourage" and "facilitate" as "to make easy."
 
Id. at 109-10, 319 P.3d at 1117-18. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In response, relying on State v. Pinero, 70 Haw. 509, 
522 n.7, 778 P.2d 704, 713 n.7 (1989), the State argues that 
"[t]here is no meaningful difference between having the 'intent' or 'conscious object' with respect to one's conduct and the result of one's conduct and having the 'desire' with respect to the same." By implication, the State also appears to argue that, unlike in Basham where the Court held that the orally modified instruction "reduced the culpability required by HRS § 702­222[,]" Basham, 132 Hawai
'i at 110, 319 P.3d at 1118, the oral 
modification in the instant case did not meaningfully affect the culpability required by HRS § 707-701.5 and otherwise was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
In Pinero, in deciding whether the trial court's 
manslaughter instruction was correct, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court 
5
noted with apparent approval  the following analysis of the Model
Penal Code's formulation of the four states of mind.
 
Modern penal codes have consistently followed the lead
of the Model Penal Code by utilizing only four culpable
mental states and by defining them in a substantially
similar way.
 
The basic distinction between a person who acts
"purposely" ("intentionally") and one who acts "knowingly"
is that the former actor desires to engage in given conduct
(which happens to amount to a crime) or desires by his
conduct to cause a prohibited harmful result, while the
latter actor is merely aware that he is engaging in given
conduct (which happens to amount to a crime) or is aware
 that it is practically certain that his conduct will cause a
prohibited harmful result.
 
The difference between the terms "recklessly" and
"negligently", as usually defined, is one of kind, rather
than of degree. Each actor creates a risk of harm. The
 reckless actor is aware of the risk and disregards it; the
negligent actor is not aware of the risk but should have
 been aware of it.
 
Pinero, 70 Haw. at 522 n.7, 778 P.2d at 713 n.7 (1989) (emphasis
 
added) (quoting 1 C.E. Torcia, Wharton's Criminal Law § 27, at
 140 (14th ed. 1978)). See also, Commentary on HRS § 702-206
 
(2014) ("The difference between acting intentionally according to
 subsection (1), and knowingly, according to subsection (2), is
 narrow but nonetheless distinct. The distinction lies in the
 
5
 The second and third paragraphs quoted below were repeated in the
court's headnotes 10 and 11, 70 Haw. at 511, 778 P.2d at 707, supporting the
notion that it approved of this language. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fact that intent is characterized by a conscious object to engage 
in certain conduct or cause a certain result whereas knowledge is characterized by an awareness that conduct is of a certain type or that a certain result will almost certainly obtain.") Thus, while the DPA here arguably "explained" the intentional state of mind, unlike the argument in Basham, his explanation was an accurate statement of the law and did not modify the instruction in such a way as to reduce the culpability necessary to satisfy the statutory definition of "intentional" conduct.
6 Thus, we 
conclude that, the DPA did not violate HRPP Rule 30 and did not commit misconduct. State v. Meyer, 99 Hawai
'i 168, 171, 53 P.3d 
307, 310 (App. 2002) quoting State v. Lincoln, 3 Haw. App. 107, 125, 643 P.2d 807, 820 (1982) ("Since we find that the [prosecutor's] comments were not improper, we need not address the question as to whether the [jury] instruction cured the problem that would have been created by an improper comment." (Footnote omitted.)).
2. DPA's Power Point Slide.
 
Hernane objected to the DPA's PowerPoint Slide #4,
 
which contained the caption "No good deed goes unnoticed" above a
 
photograph of Mother's body.
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Well, you know, the photo -- the
slide in question is a photograph of the decedent. And
 
above the photograph in large blue letters is the phrase "no
good deed goes unnoticed." Now, my interpretation of this
is this is a comment, a sarcastic comment on the case and
that the decedent adopted [Hernane], took him in, cared for
him, and in return he kills her. And I think this is an
 improper argument. If anything, it's designed to inflame
the jury and appeal to their passion or emotion which is
strictly prohibited, you know, in having them use that to
decide the case. So I think it's unnecessary and improper
and there's a danger that it will inflame the jury.
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: All right. [DPA], I'll hear your
response.
 
[DPA]: Only, Your Honor, you know, that this is the
state of the evidence, and the State intends to make that
argument that, yes, she -- Ms. -- the complainant in this
case did adopt him and as a re -- I mean, and this is what
happened. It's -- it is what it is, and that's all I'm
arguing -­
[CIRCUIT COURT]: All right.
 
6
 Similarly, we note that Hernane's counsel's argument explained the
intentional state of mind ("It means somebody meant to do it. It was their
purpose.") in terms that did not change its meaning.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[DPA]: -- circumstances of the case -­
[CIRCUIT COURT]: All right.
 [DPA]: -- but this is argument and I would -­[CIRCUIT COURT]: All right, the objection is duly
noted as well as the response. At this point this is
closing argument. And, given that, there's a fair amount of
latitude that the court allows to both sides in making
arguments that appropriately comment upon the evidence. And
 this particular slide, the phrase that appears at the top of
the slide is not in quotation marks. It was not part of the
record. However, if you make it clear, [DPA], that this is
not intended as a quote from the evidence and that it's
simply so that that danger does not exist, then I will
permit it, all right?
 
During his closing argument, the DPA stated that
 
Mother's "death sentence" was her "reward" for adopting Hernane.
 
[DPA]: The thing is [Mother], as you've heard from
the evidence, adopted [Hernane] at a very young age. She
 basically did a good deed. And you've heard the term "no
good deed goes unnoticed." Unfortunately, in this case, her
good deed turned into something very, at this point,
noticeable but a punishment for her. It was her death
 sentence. She had every intent to take in [Hernane], to
support him as a young child in the Philippines, moved to
Hawaii and was -- when she was capable of caring for him
then, brought him over to Hawaii. Although he went back to
the Philippines for a while, he came back. And she
 continued to care for him. And this was her reward.
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: [DPA], can you please clarify that
phrase at the top of the screen, please.
 
[DPA]: "No good deed goes unnoticed." We would like
 
to think that when we do good things that there are rewards
for our good deeds. In this case, there probably was along
the way, but in the end there was no reward for [Mother].
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Your Honor, I would object. 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: May I see counsel at the bench.
 
(The following proceedings held at the bench:)
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: All right, at this point would you
like to fully state your objection?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Well, Your Honor, I think, clearly,
[DPA] is trying to appeal to their passion and prejudice at
this point. The court has made it clear that [DPA] was to
clarify that the words are not quotes from the decedent and
he has failed to clarify that.
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: [DPA], at this point I interjected
because it was clear based upon my rule relative to the
defendant's objection I ruled the objection that it would
necessarily require to clarify to ensure the jurors to
understand that this is simply a characterization and it is
not intended as to the reference as to any evidence in the
case, specifically. And so with that, I will overrule the
objection subject to you clarifying that, but I suggest you
also move on.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[DPA]: Okay. I'm sorry. An explanation that this is
not a characterization of the evidence?
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: No, in other words, it is not
intended to be a reference to any specific evidence, namely,
a quote that was introduced.
 
[DPA]: Okay.
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: So subject to your making that
clarification so that it's clear that the jurors will not
misconstrue that, then I will overrule the objection, all
right?
 
[DPA]: Okay.
 
(Bench conference concluded.)
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: Proceed.
 
[DPA]: Okay. Just to clarify. This "no good deed goes
unnoticed" is not intended by the State to comment on the
evidence itself. There's been no evidence testimony that
says no good deed goes unnoticed. It is pure argument on
the State's part and is not intended to comment on the
evidence, okay?
 
Hernane argues, "the DPA's Power Point slide and its
 
corresponding argument that appealed to the passions and
 
prejudices of the jurors constituted prosecutorial misconduct." 
Hernane asserts that "the DPA made blatant appeals to the jurors'
 emotions and expressed his personal opinion on [Hernane's] and
 [Mother's] characters" when (1) he displayed the caption
 accompanying an image of Mother's body and (2) he "snidely argued
 that [Mother's] death was her 'reward' for taking in [Hernane] as
 a young child and supporting and caring for him."
 
The State argues that "it cannot be said conclusively
 
that the prosecutor was appealing to the jury's sympathy. 
Indeed, during his closing argument the prosecutor specifically
 reminded the jury that it was not to base its decision in the
 case on passion, prejudice, or sympathy."
 
a. The Nature of the Conduct.
 
In State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i 405, 412-13, 984 P.2d 
1231, 1238-39 (1999), the Supreme Court of Hawai 'i discussed the 
function of the prosecutor in closing argument.
 
This court has repeatedly noted that "[t]he
prosecution has a duty to seek justice, to exercise the
highest good faith in the interest of the public and to
avoid even the appearance of unfair advantage over the
accused." [State v.] Quitog
, 85 Hawai' i [128,] 136 n.19,
938 P.2d [559,] 567 n.19 [(1997)] (quoting State v.
Moriwaki, 71 Haw. 347, 354, 791 P.2d 392, 396 (1990)
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted)); State v.
Pemberton
, 71 Haw. 466, 476, 796 P.2d 80, 85 (1990). The
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
American Bar Association (ABA) Prosecution Function Standard
3-1.2(c) (3d ed. 1993) states that "[t]he duty of the
prosecutor is to seek justice, not merely to convict."
 
With regard to the prosecution's closing argument, a
prosecutor is "permitted to draw reasonable inferences from
the evidence and wide latitude is allowed in discussing the
evidence. It is also within the bounds of legitimate
argument for prosecutors to state, discuss, and comment on
the evidence as well as to draw all reasonable inferences
 from the evidence." Quitog, 85 Hawai' i at 145, 938 P.2d at
576 (quoting State v. Clark, 83 Hawai' i 289, 304, 926 P.2d
194, 209, reconsideration denied, 83 Hawai' i 545, 928 P.2d
39 (1996) (citations omitted)). In other words, closing
argument affords the prosecution (as well as the defense)
the opportunity to persuade the jury that its theory of the
case is valid, based upon the evidence adduced and all
reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom. Quitog,
 
85 Hawai' i at 145, 938 P.2d at 576. In this regard, ABA
Prosecution Function Standard 3-5.8(a) (1993) states:
 
"In closing argument to the jury, the prosecutor may
argue all reasonable inferences from evidence in the
record. The prosecutor should not intentionally
misstate the evidence or mislead the jury as to the
inferences it may draw." The commentary on Standard
3-5.8 aptly emphasizes:
 
The prosecutor's argument is likely to have
significant persuasive force with the jury.
Accordingly, the scope of argument must be consistent
with the evidence and marked by the fairness that
should characterize all of the prosecutor's conduct.
Prosecutorial conduct in argument is a matter of
special concern because of the possibility that the
jury will give special weight to the prosecutor's
arguments, not only because of the prestige associated
with the prosecutor's office, but also because of the
fact-finding facilities presumably available to the
office.
 
Rogan at 412-13, 984 P.2d at 1238-39. Quite simply, "prosecutors
 
'should not use arguments calculated to inflame the passions or
 prejudices of the jury.'" Id. at 413, 984 P.2d at 1239 (quoting
 
ABA Prosecution Function Standard 3-5.8(c) (3d ed. 1993)).
 
In Rogan, the court held that, in a sexual assault
 
case, the prosecutor's comment that it is "every mother's
 nightmare to find some black, military guy on top of your
 daughter" constituted an impermissible appeal to racial
 prejudice. Id. at 412, 984 P.2d at 1238 (brackets and ellipsis
 
omitted). In the instant case, the DPA's caption does not fall
 neatly into a prohibited category of comment.
 
Arguments that rely on racial, religious, ethnic, political,
economic, or other prejudices of the jurors introduce into
the trial elements of irrelevance and irrationality that
cannot be tolerated. Of course, the mere mention of the
status of the accused as shown by the record may not be
improper if it has a legitimate bearing on some issue in the
case, such as identification by race. But where the jury's
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
predisposition against some particular segment of society is
exploited to stigmatize the accused or the accused
witnesses, such argument clearly trespasses the bounds of
reasonable inference of fair comment on the evidence.
 Accordingly, many courts have denounced such appeals to
prejudice as inconsistent with the requirement that the
defendant be judged solely on the evidence.
 
Id. at 413, 984 P.2d at 1239 (quoting ABA Prosecution Function 
Standard 3–5.8(c) (3d ed.1993)) (emphasis added). See also, 
State v. Mars, 116 Hawai 'i 125, 143, 170 P.3d 861, 879 (App. 
2007) (concluding that the "prosecutor's remark about '[t]his community is measured by how we treat its weakest members' was improper, since it appeared to invite the jury to base its verdict on considerations other than the evidence in the case.") 
Here, the caption, "No good deed goes unnoticed" was
 
not relevant to any issue at trial, and could have been
 reasonably interpreted as an invitation to the jury to base its
 decision on considerations other than the evidence in the case.
 The DPA's caption is an obvious misquote of the common saying,
 "No good deed goes unpunished." It is inconceivable that the DPA
 did not know or consider this; moreover, the caption would
 trigger any reasonable juror's memory of the correct adage. The
 clear message conveyed by the DPA's misquote is that Hernane
 "punished" Mother. In fact, the DPA followed up by stating that,
 "Unfortunately, in this case, her good deed turned into something
 very, at this point, noticeable but a punishment for her." The
 DPA's comment plays upon the notion that children "owe" their
 parents, and that an adopted child should be especially grateful. 
Neither idea was relevant to a fact in dispute at trial.
 
Moreover, these comments also amount to unreasonable
 
inferences not drawn from evidence. It is uncontested, as the
 State argued, that Mother adopted and cared for Hernane, that is
 to say, performed a "good deed." The State also presented strong
 circumstantial evidence that Hernane killed Mother with a butcher
 knife. However, as the DPA also argued in his closing arguments,
 "we'll never know why this happened" and, while the prosecution
 need not prove motive for the crime, motive can be relevant to
 state of mind and Hernane's state of mind was very much at issue
 at trial.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
b. The Promptness of a Curative Instruction.
 
The Circuit Court overruled Hernane's objection to the
 
slide and therefore no curative instruction was issued.
 
The State asserts that the Circuit Court's instructions
 
prior to closing argument telling jurors not to be influenced by
 
7
passion or prejudice  sufficed to cure any potential prejudicial
effect of the power point slide because "[a]s a rule, juries are 
presumed to . . . follow all of the trial court's instructions. State v. Knight, 80 Hawai
'i 318, 327, 909 P.2d 1333, 1142 
(1996)." Taking this assertion to its logical extreme, the prejudice caused by any improper argument could be eradicated by the trial court's general instruction to disregard such remarks. This is not the law in this jurisdiction. Moreover, a curative instruction requires specificity and necessarily comes after the improper comments. See State v. Marsh, 68 Haw. 659, 661, 728 
P.2d 1301, 1303 (1986) (vacating conviction and noting circuit court's failure to issue specific instruction concerning prosecutor's closing comments). 
This factor therefore weighs heavily in Hernane's 
favor. See, e.g., State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai
'i 504, 516, 78 
P.3d 317, 329 (2003) ("Generally, we consider a curative instruction sufficient to cure prosecutorial misconduct because we presume that the jury heeds the court's instruction to disregard improper prosecution comments. However, no curative instruction was given in this case. Therefore, this second factor weighs heavily in [defendant's] favor.") (citation omitted). 
c. The strength or weakness of the evidence.
 
Although the case as a whole against Hernane was
 
relatively strong, evidence of the state of mind element was the
 weakest part of the State's case. Hernane asserts that "the
 seminal issue in this case was whether [Hernane] possessed the
 requisite state of mind (intentionally) for commission of the
 
7
 The Circuit Court instructed,
 
Statements or arguments made by lawyers are not
evidence. You should consider their arguments to you, but
you are not bound by their memory or interpretation of the
evidence.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
offense." Hernane presented no evidence. The State's evidence 
included testimony from family members that Hernane was adopted by Mother before she came to Hawai
'i in 1997; they lived in a 
house shared with Mother's sister-in-law and family; Hernane was quiet and "never" spoke with people in the house and was "always in the room" he shared with Mother; and at the time of her death, Mother was sick and on dialysis. On May 10, 2011, Hernane was seen around midnight smoking outside on the back steps of the house. 
A neighbor reported that, at midnight on May 10, 2011,
 
he heard a man arguing in Filipino and English, coming from some
 other house. Later, he heard a "boom;" something dropping on the
 plywood floor.
 
Mother was discovered the following morning lying face-
down on her bed with "sharp force injuries" and no vital signs. 
There was blood on the bed sheets and a butcher knife on the
 floor. The butcher knife was usually kept in a kitchen drawer. 
Blood on the butcher knife was later found to be that of Mother.
 
Mother sustained "an incised wound []to the lower part
 
of the left earlobe, [] that extended from the face to the lower
 part of the earlobe to the back . . . a stab wound also to the
 left neck . . . another small incision to the left back of the
 neck as well as the shoulder[.]" She also had two small cuts on
 her left hand. The wound across the earlobe was one and one-half
 inches long and about an inch deep but was not fatal. The stab
 wound was about four inches deep and resulted in a partial cut to
 the jugular vein and bleeding of the internal structures and
 could have been fatal. The medical examiner also found that
 Mother had a large area of bleeding into the left side of her
 brain consistent with a hemorrhagic stroke which could have been
 the consequence of her high blood pressure coupled with some kind
 of fight/flight response. This hemorrhage coupled with the stab
 wound caused Mother's death. The medical examiner opined that
 the butcher knife could have caused Mother's injuries and the
 injuries were consistent with the assailant facing Mother and
 Mother was lying down or standing.
 
Hernane was not found in the bedroom with Mother but
 
was found later that morning, sleeping on a concrete slab near
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the back door of a nearby gym. Blood stains on Hernane's shirt
 
and shorts were tested; Mother was a "major contributor" to the
 DNA profiles of five of the six samples; Mother was the "single
 source" of the remaining sample.
 
While the circumstantial evidence that Hernane stabbed
 
Mother is strong, it cannot be said that evidence of his intent
 is equally so. Multiple wounds were inflicted, but only one was
 fatal; most were superficial. One witness testified that he
 heard an argument, but he could not determine with any certainty
 where the voices were coming from nor what was said. The
 strongest evidence of intent was in the fact that Hernane
 retrieved the butcher knife from the kitchen and took it upstairs
 to the bedroom which was indicative of advance planning. 
However, there was no evidence of when the knife was taken from
 the kitchen, thus weakening the nexus. As the DPA's argument was
 directed to this weakest part of the case, we conclude that this
 factor is at most neutral, if not in Hernane's favor.
 
Weighing all three factors, the first two weigh heavily 
in Hernane's favor and the third is either neutral or slightly in Hernane's favor. Thus we cannot conclude the DPA's prosecutorial misconduct was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Hernane's second asserted point of error is therefore meritorious. The remedy for improper argument is the granting of a new trial.
8 
Carvalho, 106 Hawai 'i at 16 n.7, 100 P.3d at 610 n.7. 
C. DPA's Comments on Jury Deliberations.
 
The DPA stated the following in regard to reaching a
 
unanimous verdict: 
Now, let's go into the facts to see how the evidence
proves the defendant's guilty. Both the acts occurred and
 
the state of mind in which he acted was present. One other
 thing. When you consider if the defendant acted recklessly
and consider Manslaughter, consider this instruction as
well. It is only if you, as jurors, collectively find the
defendant not guilty of Murder in the Second Degree. In
 other words, you don't believe that he acted intentionally
or knowingly, or if you're unable to reach a unanimous
verdict, then you consider Manslaughter, only then. But I
 ask you before you consider Manslaughter, you know, it's
easy to go in there and say, well, you know, maybe you're
split between Murder and Manslaughter, and you say, you know
what, let's just compromise, let's just consider
manslaughter, then we can get a unanimous verdict and we can
 
8
 Hernane does not argue that the prosecutorial misconduct warrants
a reversal of the judgment and we agree.
 
15
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
get out of here. Please seriously consider the evidence and
really with respect to the state of mind. Consider that
 before you -- before you just say, you know what? We will -­we're unable to reach a unanimous verdict as to Murder. It
 may be 11-1 in favor of Murder, but please deliberate with
an eye to reaching a unanimous verdict as long as it doesn't
violate your conscience, but work towards that goal.
 
Hernane did not object to this argument.
 
Hernane argues that the DPA committed prosecutorial
 
misconduct when he admonished the jury "that it should continue
 
deliberating until it reached a unanimous verdict[.]" Hernane
 asserts that the DPA's admonishment amounted to an "Allen
 charge."
 
The Supreme Court of Hawai
'i has declared that "Allen 
charges" are impermissible in Hawai 'i. An "Allen charge" is an 
instruction by the court to deadlocked jurors, encouraging the
 minority to reasonably reconsider their position.
9 In Hawai 'i, 
Allen charges have been disapproved since 1985. State v.
 
Fajardo, 67 Haw. 593, 601, 699 P.2d 20, 25 (1985).
 
DPA's comments here did not amount to an "Allen
 
charge." First, the jury was not deadlocked. See State v.
 
Matavale, 115 Hawai 'i 149, 170, 166 P.3d 322, 343 (2007) 
(discussing "Allen charges" arising solely in the context of a
 deadlocked jury). Second, the Circuit Court did not deliver the
 offending comment. See Fajardo, 67 Haw. at 600, 699 P.2d at 24
 
("Whether or not a case must be retried is not something that a
 jury should consider in its deliberations. It is error for a
 trial court to comment on the possible effects of a hung jury.") 
9 The Supreme Court of the United States summarized the lower
court's instruction to the jury,
 
that, although the verdict must be the verdict of each
individual juror, and not a mere acquiescence in the
conclusion of his fellows, yet they should examine the
question submitted with candor, and with a proper regard and
deference to the opinions of each other; that it was their
duty to decide the case if they could conscientiously do so;
that they should listen, with a disposition to be convinced,
to each other's arguments; that, if much the larger number
were for conviction, a dissenting juror should consider
whether his doubt was a reasonable one which made no
 impression upon the minds of so many men, equally honest,
equally intelligent with himself. If, unon [sic] the other
hand, the majority were for acquittal, the minority ought to
ask themselves whether they might not reasonably doubt the
correctness of a judgment which was not concurred in by the
majority.
 
Allen v. United States, 164 U.S. 492, 501 (1896).
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Emphasis added.) Third, the offending comment was not aimed at
 
presently dissenting or minority jurors.
 
Read in context, the DPA's comment was at worst a plea
 
to convict on the primary charge. The DPA qualified his argument
 with "as long as it doesn't violate your conscience" and
 referenced the Circuit Court's instruction previously read.
10
   
The nature of the State's comment was not improper and did not
 constitute misconduct.
 
Hernane's third asserted point of error is without
 
merit.
 
III.
 
Therefore, we vacate the October 22, 2013 judgment of
 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit and remand for a new
 trial.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 30, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Jon N. Ikenaga,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant.
 Presiding Judge
James M. Anderson,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
10 The Circuit Court instructed the jury on this subject as follows:
 
Each of you must decide the case for yourself, but it
is your duty to consult with one another and to deliberate
with a view to reaching an agreement, if you can do so
without violating your individual judgment. In the course of
your deliberations, do not hesitate to re-examine your own
views and change your opinion if convinced it is erroneous.
But do not surrender your honest belief as to the weight or
effect of evidence for the mere purpose of returning a
verdict.
 
. . . .
 
If and only if you find the defendant not guilty of
Murder in the Second Degree, or you are unable to reach a
unanimous verdict as to this offense, then you must consider
whether the defendant is guilty or not guilty of the
included offense of Manslaughter.
 
17
 