NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000674
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CW, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
DW, Defendant-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 13-1-0002)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
This appeal involves a dispute over the terms of an 
agreement to settle a post-decree motion to reduce child support
 
payments. Plaintiff-Appellant CW (Wife) and Defendant-Appellee
 DW (Husband) were divorced pursuant to a divorce decree filed in
 the Family Court of the Fifth Circuit (Family Court).
1 Wife
 
appeals from two post-decree orders entered by the Family Court:
 (1) the "Order Denying [Wife's] Motion to Enforce Rule 68 Offer
 of Settlement and For Attorney's Fees and Costs Filed June 14,
 2016" (Order Denying Wife's Motion to Enforce), which was filed
 on September 12, 2016; and (2) the "Stipulated Order Regarding
 [Wife's] Motion and Affidavit for Order to Show Cause and Relief
 
1 The Honorable Edmund D. Acoba presided over the
proceedings relevant to this appeal.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
After Order or Decree Filed January 19, 2016" (Stipulated Order),
 
which was filed on October 5, 2016. 
On appeal, Wife contends that the Family Court erred in
 
(1) adopting Husband's interpretation of the terms of the
 parties' settlement of Wife's post-decree motion to reduce her
 child support payments; and (2) awarding attorney's fees and
 costs to Husband based on its denial of Wife's motion to enforce
 her version of the settlement agreement. 
The central question presented in this appeal is
 
whether the parties had agreed to settle Wife's post-decree
 motion to reduce her child support payments by reducing her child
 support payments by one-half of the increase in medical insurance
 premiums (1) for the children only or (2) for both the children
 and Wife. Husband argued that the parties had agreed to a
 reduction in child support based on the increase in only the
 children's medical insurance premiums; Wife argued that the
 parties had agreed to a reduction in child support based on the
 increase in both the children's and Wife's medical insurance
 premiums. The Family Court ruled in favor of Husband. We
 conclude that the record clearly supports the Family Court's
 ruling, and we affirm the Family Court.
 
I.
 
The parties were divorced pursuant to a Divorce Decree
 
filed on October 1, 2014. The Divorce Decree incorporated the
 parties' previously signed "Agreement . . . Incident to Divorce,"
 which provided that "[Wife] shall continue to provide the medical
 insurance for the children." The Divorce Decree provided that
 "Wife shall be responsible for her own health insurance and
 medical costs"; that "Husband shall be responsible for his own
 health insurance and medical costs"; and that Wife shall pay
 Husband $1,500 per month in child support.
 
A.
 
On January 19, 2016, Wife filed a "Motion and Affidavit
 
for Order to Show Cause and Relief After Order or Decree" (Motion
 to Modify Decree). In this motion, Wife stated that she sought 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to modify her existing child support obligations because, in
 
relevant part, "the health insurance premiums have increased in
 cost[.]" Wife stated that the facts upon which her motion was
 based included that "[t]he health insurance premiums for the
 children have increased in cost to $535.46 per month." (Emphasis
 added.) In her Motion to Modify Decree, Wife did not assert that
 she sought to modify her child support payments based on an
 increase in her health insurance premiums, and she did not state
 that her health insurance premiums had increased or specify how
 much she was paying for health insurance premiums for herself. 
On February 13, 2016, Husband sent Mother an offer of 
settlement pursuant to Hawai
'i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 68 
(Rule 68 Offer). Husband's Rule 68 Offer stated that Husband "will agree to [Wife] continuing to pay the $1500 per month in child support minus one-half of the increase in the health insurance premium, the amount which shall be determined once [Husband's attorney is] in receipt of documentation of the previous health insurance premium and the current amount, neither of which has been provided." Wife accepted Husband's offer. 
B. 
On April 5, 2016, a hearing was held to place the
 
parties' stipulated settlement on the record. The attorneys for
 both parties appeared, and they waived the presence of their
 clients. The parties placed the terms of their settlement
 agreement on the record as follows:
 
[Husband's Counsel]:  There is a stipulation. We
 
don't have specific numbers, but the parties have agreed

that effective January 15th, they will -- the child support
will stay the same 
and the parties will split the cost of
the increase in the children's health insurance premiums -­
[Wife's Counsel]:  
(Inaudible.)
 
[Husband's Counsel]:  
-- from -­
[Wife's Counsel]:  
It's 1,500 minus one-half of the
increase -­
[Husband's Counsel]: 
Okay.
 
[Wife's Counsel]:  
-- in the health insurance
 
premiums, is what we agreed to, per the offer. And then we
 did agree to January 15th. I just -­
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
THE COURT: Okay.
 
[Wife's Counsel]: -- got her confirmation yesterday.
That's why I didn't tell you.
 
[Husband's Counsel]: Oh, okay. No problem. 
THE COURT: Okay. 
[Husband's Counsel]:  So we just don't have -- I'm
just waiting for some documentation to confirm the numbers
and that it's just the children that are covered.
 So once
 
we have that, we'll plug it in. 
But there's an agreement as to the spirit of what's
happening and that it will just be -- the increase for the
children's portion of the health insurance coverage will be
subtracted from the child support.
 
THE COURT:
 
Okay. So, [Wife's Counsel], you'll
prepare the stipulation and order?
 
[Wife's Counsel]: Yes, I can.
 
THE COURT: Okay.
 
[Husband's Counsel]: Thank you.
 
THE COURT: Anything else, then -­
[Wife's Counsel]: Thank you.
 THE COURT: -- for this?
 [Husband's Counsel]: That was it.
 [Wife's Counsel]: No.
 THE COURT: All right. Thank you very much.
 
[Wife's Counsel]: Thank you.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
C.

 
Wife submitted a proposed stipulated order which
 
provided for a reduction in Wife's child support payments by a
 
specific dollar amount equal to one-half of the increased medical
 insurance premiums for both Wife and the children. Wife did not
 
disclose that the amount of the reduction included the increased
 
medical insurance premiums for both Wife and the children. 
Husband objected to the proposed Stipulated Order, asserting,
 among other things, that Wife had not provided documentation
 showing that the amount of the child support reduction in the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
proposed stipulated order was based only on the increased medical
 
insurance premiums for the children. 
On June 14, 2016, Wife filed a "Motion to Enforce Rule
 
68 Offer of Settlement and For Attorney's Fees and Costs" (Motion
 to Enforce). Wife requested that the Family Court accept and
 enter the proposed stipulated order that Wife had drafted and
 award Wife attorney's fees and costs for having to file the
 Motion to Enforce. Husband filed an opposition to the motion. 
On August 11, 2016, the Family Court held a hearing on Wife's
 Motion to Enforce. The Family Court agreed with Husband's claim
 that the parties had agreed to reduce Wife's child support
 payments by "split[ting] the increase of the children's portion
 of the medical premiums," and it rejected Wife's claim that the
 parties had agreed to reduce the child support payments by one-
half of the increased medical premiums for both Wife and the
 children. The Family Court denied Wife's Motion to Enforce and
 awarded Husband his attorney's fees and costs for having to
 defend against the motion. 
On September 12, 2016, the Family Court entered its
 
Order Denying Wife's Motion to Enforce, which denied Wife's
 motion and awarded Husband $659.15 in attorney's fees and costs. 
On October 5, 2016, the Family Court entered the Stipulated
 Order, which reduced Wife's child support payments by one-half of
 the increased cost of health insurance for the parties' children.
 This appeal followed.
 
II.
 
On appeal, Wife contends that the Family Court erred in 
adopting Husband's interpretation of the terms of the parties'
 settlement of Wife's Motion to Modify Decree, through which Wife
 sought to reduce her child support payments. We disagree.
 
The record provides clear support for the Family
 
Court's ruling, in Husband's favor, that the parties had agreed
 to settle Wife's Motion to Modify Decree by reducing Wife's child
 support payments by one-half of the increased medical insurance 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
premiums for the children only, and not the increased medical
 
insurance premiums for both Wife and the children. 
The Divorce Decree plainly distinguished between the
 
parties' obligation to pay medical insurance for themselves and
 medical insurance for their children. Pursuant to the Divorce
 Decree, Wife was responsible for providing medical insurance for
 the children, and Wife and Husband were each responsible for
 their own medical insurance. In her Motion to Modify Decree,
 Wife only sought the modification of her child support
 obligations. She did not seek the modification of any obligation
 relating to her own support or maintenance. The only fact
 provided by Wife to support her claim that "health insurance
 premiums have increased in cost" was that "[t]he health insurance
 premiums for the children have increased in cost to $535.46 per
 month." (Emphasis added.) In her motion, Wife did not refer to
 her health insurance premiums or state how much she was paying
 for her health insurance. 
Given this context, the plain meaning of Husband's Rule
 
68 Offer to reduce Wife's child support by "one-half
 of the increase in health insurance premiums" was that Husband
 was offering to reduce Wife's child support by one-half of the
 increased costs for the children's health insurance. Wife did
 not mention her own health insurance costs in her Motion to
 Modify Decree, and she did not state that she was seeking to
 modify any obligation relating to her own support or maintenance,
 such as the provision in the Divorce Decree requiring her to pay
 for her own health insurance. Thus, it would be unreasonable to
 construe Husband's Rule 68 Offer as an offer to reduce Wife's
 child support by the increased health insurance costs for both
 the children and Wife.
 
The plain meaning of Husband's Rule 68 Offer and the
 
agreement created by Wife's acceptance was confirmed at the
 hearing held to place the terms of the stipulated settlement on
 the record. At the hearing, Husband's counsel stated that the
 terms of the agreement were that "the parties will split the cost
 of the increase in the children's health insurance premiums[.]" 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Husband's counsel further stated that "the increase for the
 
children's portion of the health insurance coverage will be
 subtracted from the child support." Wife's counsel did not
 dispute or object to these representations by Husband's counsel
 of the terms of the settlement agreement. Wife's counsel did not
 say that the parties had agreed to split the costs of the
 increase in Wife's health insurance premiums. Instead, in
 response to Husband's counsel's statement of the terms of the
 parties' settlement agreement, Wife's counsel advised the Family
 Court that there was nothing to add and agreed to prepare the
 stipulation and order.
 
Under these circumstances, we conclude that the Family
 
Court did not err in adopting Husband's interpretation of the
 terms of the parties' settlement agreement and in entering its
 Order Denying Wife's Motion to Enforce. We further conclude that
 the Family Court did not err in entering the Stipulated Order,
 which included an award of attorney's fees and costs. We reject
 Wife's claim that the Family Court abused its discretion in
 awarding attorney's fees and costs. In light of the
 circumstances presented, the Family Court did not abuse its
 discretion in awarding attorney's fees and costs incurred by
 Husband in having to defend against Wife's Motion to Enforce. 
See HRS § 580-47(f) (Supp. 2016). 
III.
 
We affirm the Order Denying Wife's Motion to Enforce
 
and the Stipulated Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 16, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Alethea Kyoko Rebman
Dyan K. Mitsuyama(Mitsuyama & Rebman LLLC)for Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge 
Stacey Jorofffor Defendant-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7
 