NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000511 22-SEP-2026 07:59 AM Dkt. 126 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000511 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
#I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KAI DELA CRUZ, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-19-0001711) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Kai Dela Cruz was found guilty of murder in the second 
degree and sentenced to life with the possibility of parole. 
He 
appealed from the Judgment of Conviction Sentence.1 We ruled 
that the trial court did not obtain a valid waiver of Dela Cruz's 
right to testify. State v. Dela Cruz, No. CAAP-24-0000511, 2025 
WL 3514789 (Haw. App. Dec. 8, 2025) (SDO), vacated, No. SCWC-24-0000511, 2026 WL 2099862 (Haw. July 21, 2026) (mem. op.). The supreme court disagreed and remanded for us to address Dela Cruz's remaining contentions. 
We hold: (1) the circuit court did not err by denying 
Dela Cruz's motion to suppress statements he made during a custodial interrogation; (2) the circuit court did not err by declining to instruct the jury on extreme mental or emotional disturbance (EMED) manslaughter; and (3) there was no 
prosecutorial misconduct during closing argument. 
1 The Honorable Shanlyn A.S. Park presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Dela Cruz contends the trial court erroneously 
denied his motion to suppress because he did not waive his right 
to counsel.2 He challenges the trial court's findings of fact, 
but the latest supreme court decision on this issue instructs that the standard of review is de novo, based on the totality of the circumstances. State v. Garces, --- Hawai# i ---, ---, 
--- P.3d ---, ---, 2026 WL 2474834, at *4, *9 (Haw. Aug. 24, 2026). 
Dela Cruz was in custody when he was interviewed by 
Honolulu Police Department detectives Ryan Kaio and Scott Sato. 
The interview was recorded, videotaped, and transcribed. Dela 
Cruz argues he made an unequivocal request for counsel or, alternatively, an ambiguous or equivocal one, and the circuit court failed to apply State v. Hoey, 77 Hawai# i 17, 881 P.2d 504 
(1994). 
(1) when a suspect makes an ambiguous or equivocal request
for counsel during custodial interrogation, the police musteither cease all questioning or seek non-substantiveclarification of the suspect's request, and (2) if, uponclarification, the defendant unambiguously and unequivocallyinvokes the right to counsel, all substantive questioningmust cease until counsel is present. Conversely, we holdthat if, upon clarification, the defendant voluntarily,knowingly, and intelligently waives the presence of counsel,substantive questioning may continue. 
Id. at 36, 881 P.2d at 523. 
Dela Cruz's opening brief quotes discrete portions of 
the interview transcript; it makes no reference to the audio or 
video recording. The totality of the Miranda advisement, including what can be seen and heard on the video [shown like this], was: 
Q . . . . Okay, and then you know, since you've been
here, did anyone threaten you, or tell you you 'gotta
talk to us, or anything like that? 
A (inaudible) [Dela Cruz shakes head side-to-side.] 
Q No, okay. Um, since you been here you've been treated
okay? 
2 The Honorable James S. Kawashima presided over Dela Cruz's motion
to suppress. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A Yes. 
Q Okay, and then you had . . . um, did you get enough
sleep? 
A Yes. Q Okay, so you feel good, you all right? 
A (No audible response.) [Dela Cruz nods head up-and-
down.] 
Q What about something to eat? 
A Yes. Q Something to drink. 
A 
(No audible response.) [Dela Cruz nods head up-and-
down.] 
Q Okay, you don't want anything to drink right now or
anything, you good? 
A I fine, yeah. 
Q Okay, okay, so, Kai, what I going do um, you know,
again, this is like just procedure yeah, I have to
read you your rights, because you are here um . . . 
A 
Okay. 
Q So I want you to follow along, there's couple places
where you're 'gonna need to initial. 
A Um-hmm. 
Q Okay, um, other than that you can follow along, again,
if you don't understand something, just stop me and
say, what does that mean, okay? 
A All right. 
Q Okay, so, Kai Dela Cruz, that's spelt [sic] correctly,
right? 
A 
Yes. 
Q Okay, do you know that you're in the custody of
Detective Ryan Kaio, that's me, and Detective Scott
Sato, at the Alapai Main Police Station, you knowwhere you are right now? 
A Yes. 
Q And we introduced ourselves to you, yeah? 
A (No audible response.) [Dela Cruz nods head up-and-
down.] 
Q Okay, so you agree with that, you know you're here,
then you can initial there. [Dela Cruz writes on the
paper.]  Okay, I'm going to ask you question [sic]
about [Dela Cruz reads the paper as Kaio speaks]  . . . 
this is what you're arrested for, yeah, Murder in the 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Second Degree, which occurred on November 19th, that's
yesterday, 2019, at 302 Ohai Place number D, this is
your address. 
A Yes. 
Q First I want to inform you of certain rights you have
under the Constitution. Before I ask you any
questions you must understand your rights. Okay, youhave a right to remain silent. You don't have to sayanything to me or answer any of my questions.Anything you say may be used against you at yourtrial. You have the right to have an attorney present
while I talk to you. [Dela Cruz nods head up-and-
down.] If you cannot afford an attorney, the court
will appoint one for you, prior to any questioning.[Dela Cruz nods head up-and-down.]  If you decide to
answer my questions without an attorney being present,
you still have the right to stop answering at any
time. [Dela Cruz nods head up-and-down.]  Okay, you
understand what I have told you? 
A Yes, (inaudible) [and not,]  like if I got one attorney
right now? 
Q Then this stops, we cannot ask you any questions
without. 
A 'Cause I get one attorney for my last case. 
Q Okay, is it a private attorney, or? A Um, I don't want, I'm . . . Q A public defender, or? A Something like that, I go to punchbowl [sic], see her
once in a while. 
Q Okay, um, that's for another unrelated case, not
related to this, right? 
A Not this case. Q Okay. 
A Another felon [y] case. 
Q Okay, well, if you want an attorney, you can, if you
want. 
A Will I have one new one with this one, or the same
one? 
Q I don't know if it will be the same one, --
A Okay. Q -- the court appointed ones, it all depends, yeah. A Yeah. Q So, do you understand what I have . . . you understand
all of this though? 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A Yes. 
Q Okay, so initial. Do you want to initial there.
Okay, do you want an attorney now meaning right here
with us? Um, if . . . while we're talking? 
A No, you guys doing your job. 
Q Okay, so for this question, do you want an attorney
now? 
A No need. Q Okay. A 'Cause I get one attorney but you guys just doing your
job, yeah. 
Q Okay, yeah, I mean up, it's up to you, completely up
to you? 
A (No audible response.) [Dela Cruz writes on the
paper.] 
Q Okay, would you like to tell me what happened? 
A So, so. [Kaio and Dela Cruz laugh, Sato can be heard
laughing off-camera.] 
Q What you mean, so, I mean, yeah, you can, you know,
like -- like this last line here
[] says, if you 'wanna
. . . you answer my questions without an attorney want
[Dela Cruz nods head up-and-down]  . . . if you feel
like, 'ah, you know, I no like already, then you can
stop at any time? 
A Yes. 3
Q Okay, so you want to do that, you 'wanna? 
A 
Yes, whatever you ask me now. 
Q Well, it's up to you, you 'gotta make the choice, I
cannot tell you? 
A So, yes. [Dela Cruz writes on the paper.] 
Q Okay, Kai, sign on . . . sign you [sic] name on this
top line right here. [Dela Cruz writes on the paper.]  
Okay, and then put your address. [Dela Cruz writes on
the paper.]  Okay, you can use um . . . its 11-20-19,
th the date, November 20 . [Dela Cruz writes on the
paper.] 
A Nineteen, yeah? 
Q Nineteen, yeah. [Dela Cruz writes on the paper.]  And 
the time now is 3:09 pm. [Dela Cruz writes on the
paper.]  Okay, (inaudible). So I'm just going to sign 
3 The line being referred to reads: "If you decide to answer my
questions without an attorney being present, you still have the right to stop
answering at any time." 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
here saying that I was here (inaudible) [when you].
[Kaio writes on the paper.] 
Dela Cruz initialed and signed the HPD-81 form like 
this: 
Do you understand what I have told you?  KD Yes No 
Do you want an attorney now?  Yes KD No 
Would you like to tell me what happened?  KD Yes No 
The video shows Dela Cruz was alert, attentive, and 
responsive to Detective Kaio. He made eye contact with the 
detectives, and did not appear to be confused or physically or mentally impaired. Based on the totality of circumstances, we conclude that Dela Cruz voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently waived his right to counsel. The circuit court did not err by denying his motion to suppress his statements to Detectives Kaio and Sato. 
(2) Dela Cruz contends the trial court erred by 
failing to instruct the jury on EMED manslaughter. Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-702 (Supp. 2019) provides: 
(2) In a prosecution for murder or attempted murder
in the first and second degrees it is an affirmative
defense, which reduces the offense to manslaughter orattempted manslaughter, that the defendant was, at the timethe defendant caused the death of the other person, underthe influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance for which there is a reasonable explanation. The reasonableness of the explanation shall be determined from the viewpoint ofa reasonable person in the circumstances as the defendantbelieved them to be[.] 
EMED manslaughter "involves the intentional or knowing 
killing of another while under the influence of a reasonably 
induced extreme mental or emotional disturbance causing a temporary loss of normal self-control." State v. Young
, 93 
Hawai#i 224, 233, 999 P.2d 230, 239 (2000) (cleaned up). "[A] 
killer's self-control, or lack of it, at the time of the killing is a significant, even determining, factor in deciding whether the killer was under the influence of an extreme emotional disturbance such that his conduct would fall under HRS 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 707–702(2)." State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai# i 325, 333, 966 P.2d 
637, 645 (1998) (emphasis added). 
The person Dela Cruz killed was named Isaac Lee. Lee 
was houseless and lived in the bushes behind the apartment 
building where Dela Cruz and his mother lived. At trial, Dela Cruz's mother described things Lee would do that were "a problem" for Dela Cruz, that he would complain to her about. 
Dela Cruz argues his "frustration with Lee built up." 
The evening he was killed, Lee was smoking "clear" — crystal methamphetamine — on the lânai of the apartment Dela Cruz shared with his mother. Dela Cruz smoked with Lee. The jury heard Dela Cruz's recorded statement: 
Q . . . . okay, then what happened? 
A And then I just did what I did, I confront him. Q Um-hmm, and then um, you must have got pissed off with
him? 
A 'Nah, I wasn't like pissed off with him, I was more
like, the thing was built in me, and I was weak. I 
was drained in my arms, and my chest, I was justdrained. 
Q You couldn't help yourself? 
A Yeah, I was like weak, like. Q What -- what -- what did you stab him with? A One weapon. Q Okay, what 'kine weapon? 
A Um, I 'wen poke him with one knife. 
Q Okay, what . . . where your . . . where the knife came
from, you had 'em on you? 
A Yeah, it was in the house. Q The knife was from inside . . . so when you came out,
you 'wen pick 'em up? 
A Um-hmm. Q What 'kine knife, was it stick knife, what -- what
'kine knife? 
A Um, I not too sure. Q Okay. A I think was one tool, one hardware took [sic] knife. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q Like, what you mean, like the box cutter type? 
A No, like one Milwaukee tool knife, or something. Q Oh, just like the blade kind? A Yeah, Milwaukee knife. . . . . 
Q Where did you pull it out from, that Milwaukee tool
thing, where you had 'em? 
A In my hand. 
Q Oh, so when you went outside, you had 'em in your
hand? 
A 
I had 'em in my hand. 
Q Which hand, right hand? A Yes. 
Q Okay, and then um . . . the reason why I ask, I tried
for picture 'em in my mind, you know, how the thing
went down. Um, and then where did you poke him first? 
A 
In his body. 
Q Where, try--try point to? 
A His body, --Q Oh. A -- I don't know, I just did what I did at the time,
and I just 'wen walk out. 
The medical examiner testified Lee sustained ten stab 
wounds and one incised wound. He explained that a stab wound is 
deeper than it is long; an incised wound is longer than it is deep. 
While settling jury instructions, the trial court 
stated: 
based upon the defendant's statement to law enforcement,
there isn't any indication in that statement that he actedwith such loss of self-control that resulted from -- from extreme mental or emotional disturbance. 
. . . . 
You have the defendant stating things such as, while
it piles up. 
And the events that he's talking about is
taking food, leaving dishes, and those -- walking in and outof the house. Those are things that are not occurringimmediately on the lanai. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
THE COURT: And these are things that are piling up in
him, even with respect to his responses. That -- that it 
irritates you a little bit? Yes. 
With respect to the comments about him, Issac [Lee],
talking with his mom, the testimony solicited was that themom was in a room at the time of the event and was not on the lanai, and so that issue doesn't rise to the level ofextreme emotional -- extreme mental or emotional disturbance. 
Additionally, the issues that Mr. Dela Cruz was
concerned with, again, taking of the food, walking throughthe house, conversations with the mom, is not things thatwere occurring on the lanai. And when he is asked -- and it was also very clear from his statement that he was smokingmethamphetamine prior to this happening. 
And he said, I wasn't -- and then in response to
whether he was pissed off, which would indicate somethingwould be rising to an extreme mental or emotionaldisturbance, even -- I don't know even if pissed off wouldnecessarily rise to that level. But when asked that question, his response was: Nah, I wasn't, like, pissed offwith him. I was more like the thing was built in me. I was weak. I was drained in my arms and my chest. I was justdrained. 
And then the answer (sic) was, you couldn't help
yourself? 
He was like, yeah, I was -- I was like weak,
like. 
. . . . 
So the defense's request for an EMED instruction is
denied. 
Dela Cruz argues: "The Circuit Court is not the 
gatekeeper of the reasonableness of Dela Cruz's explanation or 
excuse." To the contrary: 
[T]he trial court determines whether or not the record
reflects any evidence of a subjective nature that the
defendant acted under a loss of self-control resulting from
extreme mental or emotional disturbance. If the record does 
not reflect any such evidence, then the trial court shall
properly refuse to instruct the jury on EMED manslaughter. 
Sawyer, 88 Hawai# i at 333, 966 P.2d at 645. 
Here, the record reflects no subjective evidence that 
Dela Cruz lost self-control because of extreme mental or 
emotional disturbance when he stabbed Lee. "The disturbance was meant to be understood in relative terms as referring to a loss 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of self-control due to intense feelings." State v. Adviento, 132 
Hawai#i 123, 150, 319 P.3d 1131, 1158 (2014). It is not enough 
for the defendant to claim he or she was experiencing emotional 
distress; "the mitigating EMED defense focuses on the defendant's reaction to the stress, [that is], on whether the defendant's reason was overborne." State v. Perez, 90 Hawai# i 65, 74, 976 
P.2d 379, 388 (1999) (cleaned up). And the extreme mental or emotional disturbance must have been felt "at the time of the killing[.]" Sawyer, 88 Hawai
#i at 333, 966 P.2d at 645. 
The trial court did not err by refusing to instruct the 
jury on EMED manslaughter, because the record did not "reflect[] any evidence of a subjective nature that [Dela Cruz] acted under a loss of self-control resulting from extreme mental or emotional disturbance" when he stabbed Lee. Sawyer, 88 Hawai# i at 333, 966 
P.2d at 645. 
(3) Dela Cruz contends there was prosecutorial 
misconduct during closing argument when the deputy prosecuting attorney (DPA) said, concerning Dela Cruz's state of mind: 
And this isn't stabbing him with an intent to wound or
disfigure or even stabbing him once in the arm to scare him.
No one, even a ten year old child, thinks that stabbingsomeone five times in the chest, in what Dr. Inouye calledthe cardiac box, isn't gonna kill you. 
Dela Cruz did not object to the argument. We review 
for plain error. State v. Brown, 157 Hawai# i 354, 367, 577 P.3d 
1045, 1058 (2025). 
Prosecutorial misconduct is "a legal term of art that 
refers to any improper action committed by a prosecutor, however 
harmless or unintentional." Id. at 381, 577 P.3d at 1072. We 
must first determine whether the prosecutor's actions were improper; if so, we must then determine whether the violation of the defendant's right to a fair trial was harmless. Id.
Dela Cruz argues the DPA's statement was improper 
because there was "no evidence elicited during the trial concerning the medical knowledge of the average person or of a ten-year-old child." It is true that "a remark introducing new 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence" is misconduct. Brown, 157 Hawai# i at 381, 577 P.3d at 
1072. But a ten-year-old child's medical knowledge wasn't an 
issue in the trial. 
Dr. Inouye, the emergency room trauma surgeon who 
treated Lee, testified about the five stab wounds in Lee's chest. The DPA's complete argument on that point was: 
No one, even a ten year old child, thinks that stabbing
someone five times in the chest, in what Dr. Inouye calledthe cardiac box, isn't gonna kill you. 
Because children and even lay people, we don't have
vast stores of medical knowledge. 
But we have reason and we 
have common sense. Reason and common sense which helps usfilter information, which helps us understand the world andthe way things work in the world. That's why it's importantand that's why I talked about it during voir dire and that'swhy it's important for you to keep it with you and that'swhy it's talked about in jury --
. . . . 
[DPA]: And that's why I talked about it with you and
it's in the jury instructions. It's actually in the jury
instructions when they tell you what you're supposed tofigure out what a reasonable doubt is. You're supposed todo it through the lens of reason and common sense. And it's again in the jury instructions when it tells you how toconsider the evidence. It says to consider the evidence andinferences drawn from the evidence which are justified byreason and common sense. It's your understanding of howthings work. 
And so, again, it's important because it tells us
reason and common sense, which even children have, thatthere are important things in the chest here. Most notably,the heart and the lungs. And there are other things, buteveryone knows that this is where the heart and the lungsare. 
Now, if an attacker wanted to kill someone, that's
where he'd stab. He won't go for the hand, he won't go forthe foot, he won't go for the head. It's really hard topenetrate a skull. He won't go for the neck. Well, maybehe'd go for the neck, but the neck is skinnier. You have to aim better, someone could move. If you miss, you might justget a slash across the neck like Isaac had. 
Center mass is where an attacker is going to aim for.
Surest bet for a solid hit. Surest bet for a critical hit. 
The jury had been charged to "consider only the 
evidence that has been presented to you in this case and 
inferences drawn from the evidence which are justified by reason and common sense." The DPA's appeal to reason and common sense was not improper. We find no plain error. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The July 16, 2024 Judgment of Conviction Sentence is 
affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai#i, September 22, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
Jon N. Ikenaga,
Henry P. Ting,Office of the Public Defender, forDefendant-Appellant. 
Steven S. Alm,
Prosecuting Attorney,Stephen K. Tsushima,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for State of Hawai# i. /s/ Katherine G. LeonardPresiding Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
12
 