NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000999
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
SAINGOEN DAVIS, Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
GARY W. VANCIL; MARK VAN PERNIS; VAN PERNIS-VANCIL,
A Law Corporation, Defendants/Cross-Claim
Plaintiffs-Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
and
 
NICHOLLE DAVIS, Defendant/Cross-Claim
Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-352K)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
This is a civil suit arising out of the intestate
 
probate of the estate of Richard K. Davis (Richard). 
Plaintiff­
Appellant/Cross-Appellee Saingoen Davis (Saingoen) brought this
 
lawsuit against Defendants/Cross-Claim Plaintiffs­Appellees/Cross-Appellants Gary W. Vancil (Vancil), Mark Van
 Pernis (Van Pernis), and Van Pernis-Vancil, a law corporation,
 (collectively, the Attorney Defendants), and Defendant/Cross-
Claim Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellee Nicholle Davis (Nicholle)
 alleging ten counts related to the probate. In the probate
 proceedings, Nicholle, who is Richard's daughter, was the
 appointed personal representative for the estate, the Attorney
 Defendants were retained by Nicholle to represent the estate, and
 Saingoen asserted claims as Richard's surviving spouse.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Saingoen appeals from the Final Judgment entered in
 
this case on November 21, 2011, in the Circuit Court of the Third
 
Circuit (circuit court).1 Judgment was entered inter alia in
 
favor of the Attorney Defendants on all claims asserted by
 Saingoen in her First Amended Complaint pursuant to two orders
 granting the Attorney Defendants' two motions for partial summary
 judgment.
2
 
On appeal, Saingoen asserts that the circuit court
 
erred by (1) granting both of the Attorney Defendants' motions
 for partial summary judgment; and (2) granting the Attorney
 Defendants' motion for costs.
 
The Attorney Defendants cross-appeal from the Judgment,
 
raising points of error related to the "Order Granting in Part
 and Denying in Part the Van Pernis-Vancil Defendants' Motion for
 Attorney Fees and Costs" (Order Granting Costs and Denying Fees)
 filed on September 23, 2011. The Attorney Defendants assert the
 circuit court (1) erred as a matter of law when it held that the
 assumpsit statute, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 607-14 (Supp.
 2014), did not apply; and (2) abused its discretion when it
 denied the Attorney Defendants' motion for attorneys' fees.
 
We hold that (1) the circuit court correctly granted
 
summary judgment on all counts except for Counts II (Fraud on
 Plaintiff) and VI (Punitive Damages); (2) because there is no
 prevailing party at this time, the award of costs was premature;
 and (3) the circuit court correctly concluded that the assumpsit
 statute did not apply.
I. Background
A. Probate Proceedings
 
On January 4, 2004, Richard, a U.S. citizen, died in 
Thailand without leaving a will. Saingoen, a resident of 
Thailand, made claims in probate asserting she is Richard's surviving spouse. Nicholle, a resident of Kailua-Kona, Hawai
'i, 
1
 The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
 
2
 Judgment was also entered in favor of Nicholle based on a stipulation
for dismissal that had been filed on August 3, 2011. Saingoen's claims
against Nicholle are not at issue in this appeal.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
is Richard's adult daughter from a previous marriage. Nicholle
 
retained the Attorney Defendants to represent Richard's estate
 and guide it through probate in the Circuit Court of the Third
 Circuit, P. No. 04-1-0158 (probate matter).
3 Nicholle was
 
appointed as personal representative of the estate, although
 there is a dispute as to whether Saingoen was prompted not to
 submit her own application to be appointed personal
 representative based on false representations by the Attorney
 Defendants.
 
Saingoen, through counsel, asserted claims in the 
probate case for statutory allowances based on her purported status as surviving spouse. In opposition to Saingoen's petition for statutory allowances, Nicholle, through the Attorney Defendants, asserted that Saingoen had failed to sufficiently prove her identity or her marriage to Richard.
4 In June 2005, 
the probate court referred the parties to mediation, noting in part that Saingoen's purported certificate of marriage failed to include a final certification in compliance with Rule 15 of the Hawai
'i Probate Rules (HPR). 
Both before and after the probate court referred the
 
parties to mediation, Vancil is alleged to have made various
 representations to Saingoen's counsel acknowledging that Saingoen
 had established her marriage to Richard. These include, inter
 alia, representations in a May 26, 2005 letter by Vancil, as well
 as a statement by Vancil in a June 6, 2006 letter that "[s]ince
 your client has finally provided the necessary documents to prove
 that she was the spouse at the time of Decedent's death, we
 should meet and confer about final distribution of the Estate."
 
Subsequent to the alleged representations by Vancil,
 
Nicholle, through the Attorney Defendants, filed a Petition for
 Approval of Final Accounts and Distribution and Complete
 
3
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided over the probate matter. 
4
 Nicholle also contended that Saingoen's claim for statutory
allowances under Hawai' i law was questionable because HRS § 560:2-401 (2006)
provides that the governing law is the decedent's domicile at death, and
Richard died in Thailand. 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Settlement of Estate (Petition for Final Accounts). Saingoen
 
argues that contrary to Vancil's previous representations, the
 Petition for Final Accounts asserted inter alia that Saingoen had
 not proven her status as Richard's surviving spouse and her claim
 should be dismissed for lack of proof. At that point, Saingoen
 was not represented by counsel. The probate court set the matter
 for hearing on October 25, 2007. Saingoen filed objections to
 Nicholle's Petition for Final Accounts the day before the
 hearing, October 24, 2007.
 
On November 19, 2007, the probate court entered an
 
order approving Nicholle's Petition for Final Accounts and
 dismissing Saingoen's claim with prejudice. Saingoen did not
 appeal from the November 19, 2007 probate order.
B. The Instant Proceedings
 
On November 7, 2008, Saingoen initiated this action by 
filing a Complaint against Nicholle asserting claims of fraud, fraud on the court, and breach of fiduciary duty. Saingoen asserted that: Nicholle made various misrepresentations which lead Saingoen not to challenge Nicholle's request to become personal representative of Richard's estate; Nicholle breached her fiduciary duty to Saingoen as the surviving spouse; and Nicholle committed fraud on the court by telling the probate court that Saingoen had not proven both her status as surviving spouse or that Richard was domiciled in Hawai
'i. 
In late March/early April 2009, Saingoen and Nicholle
 
entered into a "Settlement Agreement and Release" (Settlement
 Agreement). Under the terms of the Settlement Agreement,
 Nicholle agreed to inter alia assign to Saingoen all of her
 claims, individually and as personal representative of the
 estate, against the Attorney Defendants. The Settlement
 Agreement also provided that "[i]n the event such assigned claims
 are not considered legally assignable, to that extent, Nicholle
 Davis agrees to permit Saingoen Davis and her counsel to
 prosecute those claims against the lawyers in Nicholle Davis'
 name[.]" On November 4, 2009, Saingoen filed a petition for
 determination of good faith settlement.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On April 7, 2010, Saingoen filed the First Amended
 
Complaint against the Attorney Defendants and Nicholle. In the
 
complaint, Saingoen appears to identify ten counts as follows: 
Count I -	 Fraud, Violation of HRS § 480-1 (2008)
(Unfair and Deceptive Trade Practices),
Negligence (against Nicholle and the
Attorney Defendants);
Count II - Fraud on Plaintiff (Vancil);
Count III - Fraud on the Court (Nicholle and the
Attorney Defendants);
Count IV - Negligence (the Attorney Defendants);
Count V - Breach of Fiduciary Duty (Nicholle);
Count VI - Punitive Damages (Nicholle and the
Attorney Defendants);
Count VIII
5 -	 Grossly Excessive Attorney Fees and
Costs (Nicholle and the Attorney
Defendants);
Count IX -	 Breach of Fiduciary Duty (the Attorney
Defendants);
Count X - Malpractice (the Attorney Defendants);
Count [XI]
6 - Standard of Care (the Attorney
Defendants).
 
Saingoen contends that some of the claims against the Attorney
 
Defendants were assigned claims from Nicholle to Saingoen.
 
On July 30, 2010, the circuit court entered an order
 
granting Saingoen's petition for determination of good faith
 regarding her Settlement Agreement with Nicholle. On August 19,
 2010, the Attorney Defendants filed a notice of appeal from the
 July 30, 2010 order, which resulted in appellate case no. 30707. 
While the appeal in appellate case no. 30707 was
 
proceeding, the Attorney Defendants filed two motions for partial
 summary judgment in the circuit court: the first involved Counts
 I, II, III, IV, IX, X and XI; the second covered Counts VI and
 VIII and any remaining claims against Attorney Defendants,
 including any allegedly assigned claims. The circuit court
 granted both motions. In the order granting the Attorney
 Defendants' first motion (First MSJ Order), the court simply
 stated that no genuine issues of material fact were in dispute as
 
5
 In the First Amended Complaint, Saingoen skipped a Count VII.
 
6
 This count is incorrectly labeled as a second Count IX in the First
Amended Complaint.
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to Counts I, II, III, IV, IX, X and XI. In the order granting
 
the Attorney Defendants' second motion (Second MSJ Order), the
 court dismissed Counts VI and VIII and any assigned claims with
 prejudice on grounds that the claims were non-assignable, but
 noted that the court did not rule on Saingoen's contention that
 she should be permitted to substitute Nicholle as a plaintiff
 pursuant to the Settlement Agreement as that issue was not
 properly before the court because no motion was filed to
 substitute parties. 
On July 29, 2011, the Attorney Defendants filed a
 
motion for attorneys' fees and costs. The Attorney Defendants
 asserted a right to attorneys' fees under the assumpsit statute,
 HRS § 607-14. The circuit court granted the request for costs,
 but denied the motion for fees, explaining that
 
the court finds the essential character of the action sounds
 
in tort rather than contract and therefore the assumpsit
statute does not apply. Moreover, the causes of action that
are arguably in the nature of assumpsit are so intertwined
with the dominant action that the court would be unable to
 apportion the total fee requested between the assumpsit and
non-assumpsit claims[.]
 
On November 21, 2011, the circuit court entered the
 
Final Judgment in favor of the Attorney Defendants and against
 
Saingoen. Saingoen filed a timely notice of appeal from the
 judgment on November 29, 2011. The Attorney Defendants filed a
 timely notice of cross-appeal on December 21, 2011. 
Meanwhile, as to appellate case no. 30707, this court 
issued a summary disposition order on February 24, 2012, which vacated the circuit court's order granting Saingoen's petition for determination of good faith regarding her Settlement Agreement with Nicholle. That issue was remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings.
7 Davis v. Davis, No. 30707, 2012 
WL 603947, 126 Hawai 'i 473, 272 P.3d 1240, at *3 (App. Feb. 24, 
2012) (SDO), cert. denied, No. SCWC-30707, 2012 WL 2897545 (July 16, 2012). 
7
 We take judicial notice of appellate case no. 30707, a related
appeal. See Kaleikini v. Thielen, 124 Hawai' i 1, 5, 237 P.3d 1067, 1071
(2010). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II. Discussion
 
A. Saingoen's Appeal
1. Summary Judgment Standard
 
Saingoen contends that the circuit court erred in
 
granting both of the Attorney Defendants' motions for partial
 
summary judgment. 
We review the circuit court's grant or denial of
summary judgment de novo. The standard for granting a
motion for summary judgment is settled:
 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if
 proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. In other
 words, we must view all of the evidence and the
inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable
to the party opposing the motion.
 
We have further explained the burdens of the moving and
non-moving parties on summary judgment as follows:
 
The burden is on the party moving for summary judgment
(moving party) to show the absence of any genuine
issue as to all material facts, which, under
applicable principles of substantive law, entitles the
moving party to judgment as a matter of law. This
 burden has two components.
 
First, the moving party has the burden of producing
support for its claim that: (1) no genuine issue of
material fact exists with respect to the essential
elements of the claim or defense which the motion
 seeks to establish or which the motion questions; and
(2) based on the undisputed facts, it is entitled to
summary judgment as a matter of law. Only when the
moving party satisfies its initial burden of
production does the burden shift to the non-moving
party to respond to the motion for summary judgment
and demonstrate specific facts, as opposed to general
allegations, that present a genuine issue worthy of
trial.
 
Second, the moving party bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion. This burden always remains with the
moving party and requires the moving party to convince
the court that no genuine issue of material fact
exists and that the moving part is entitled to summary
judgment as a matter of law.
 
Stanford Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawai 'i 286, 
295-96, 141 P.3d 459, 468-69 (2006) (citations omitted).
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2. First MSJ Order
 
The counts dismissed by the First MSJ Order can be put
 
into two large groups: (1) claims related to misrepresentations
 
(Counts I, II, and III), and (2) claims related to the existence
 of a duty (Counts IV, IX, X, and XI).
a. Claims related to misrepresentations
 
In the First Amended Complaint, Saingoen asserted three
 
claims based on the alleged misrepresentations of the Attorney
 Defendants: (1) Count I, unfair and deceptive trade practices
 (UDAP) pursuant to HRS Chapter 480; (2) Count II, Fraud on the
 Plaintiff; and (3) Count III, Fraud on the Court.
1. HRS Chapter 480
 
Saingoen contends that the circuit court erred in
 
granting summary judgment on Count I because inter alia there
 remained a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Saingoen
 was a "consumer" within HRS § 480-1 (2008).
8
 
Only a "consumer" may bring a private action under HRS
 
Chapter 480 for UDAP. HRS § 480-2(d) (2008). HRS § 480-1
 defines "consumer" as "a natural person who, primarily for
 personal, family, or household purposes, purchases, attempts to
 purchase, or is solicited to purchase goods or services or who
 commits money, property, or services in a personal investment." 
"An interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
reviewed de novo." Cieri v. Leticia Query Realty, Inc., 80 
Hawai
'i 54, 59, 905 P.2d 29, 34 (1995). "It is well settled 
that, when construing a statute, this court's foremost obligation is to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the language contained in the statute itself. Moreover, where the language of the statute is plain and unambiguous, our only duty is to give 
8
 In opposition to the summary judgment motion and on appeal, Saingoen
asserts that even if she was not a consumer of the Attorney Defendants'
services, Nicholle was and Nicholle assigned her claims to Saingoen pursuant
to the Settlement Agreement. As discussed infra, Saingoen fails to
demonstrate that the circuit court erred in granting summary judgment on all
assigned claims. We only review here whether Saingoen herself had standing to
bring a UDAP claim under HRS chapter 480.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
effect to its plain and obvious meaning." Id. at 67, 905 P.2d at
 
42 (citations, quotation marks, and brackets omitted).
 
In Count I of the First Amended Complaint, Saingoen 
broadly asserted she was a "consumer" within HRS § 480-1, but did 
not explain the basis for this assertion. In support of their motion for partial summary judgment, the Attorney Defendants attached deposition transcripts and the declaration of Vancil showing that Saingoen was not asked to, nor did she attempt to, purchase legal services from the Attorney Defendants. This satisfied the Attorney Defendants' initial burden to affirmatively show that there existed no genuine issue of material fact that Saingoen was not a "consumer" in "a transaction involving conduct in any trade or commerce[.]" Cieri, 80 Hawai
'i at 65, 905 P.2d at 40 (quotation marks omitted). 
In response, Saingoen, for the first time, asserted 
that she was a consumer because she committed property (giving up her right to be personal representative of Richard's estate) in a personal investment (financial interest in the proceeds of Richard's estate). Saingoen reiterates this argument on appeal. Despite Saingoen's contentions, there is no evidence, even when viewed in a light most favorable to her as the non-movant, that could raise a genuine issue of material fact that a "transaction" occurred between Saingoen and the Attorney Defendants in a "business context", id. at 65, 905 P.2d at 40; Hawaii Cmty. Fed. Credit Union v. Keka, 94 Hawai
'i 213, 227, 11 P.3d 1, 15 (2000) 
("[W]e construed HRS § 480-2 . . . to limit claims of unfair or deceptive trade practices, within the purview of HRS chapter 480, to transactions occurring within a 'business context[.]'" (citation omitted)), or that her alleged decision not to petition to be appointed personal representative amounted to a personal investment of property, Joy A. McElroy, M.D., Inc. v. Maryl Group, Inc., 107 Hawai
'i 423, 436, 114 P.3d 929, 942 (App. 2005) 
("[T]he concept of 'investment' includes an expectation of 'profitable returns.'"); Black's Law Dictionary 953 (10th ed. 2014) (defining "invest" in part as "[t]o apply (money) for 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
profit"). Thus, the circuit court properly granted summary
 
judgment as to Count I.
2. Fraud on the Plaintiff
 
Saingoen contends the circuit court erred in granting
 
summary judgment on Count II because she presented competent
 evidence of misrepresentations by Vancil and her detrimental
 reliance on those misrepresentations. 
The elements for a claim of fraud are as follows:
 
(1) false representations were made by defendants, (2) with
knowledge of their falsity (or without knowledge of their
truth or falsity), (3) in contemplation of plaintiff's
reliance upon these false representations, and (4) plaintiff
did rely upon them. Further, plaintiff must show that he
suffered substantial pecuniary damage for the aim of
compensation in deceit cases is to put the plaintiff in the
position he would have been had he not been defrauded.
 
Hawaii's Thousand Friends v. Anderson, 70 Haw. 276, 286, 768 P.2d 
1293, 1301 (1989) (citations, quotation marks, and brackets omitted). "[T]o prevail on a claim of fraudulent inducement, plaintiffs must prove that their reliance upon a defendant's representations was reasonable." Matsuura v. E.I. du Pont de 
Nemours & Co., 102 Hawai
'i 149, 163, 73 P.3d 687, 701 (2003); see 
also Restatement (Second) Torts § 525 (1977) (noting the requirement of "justifiable reliance"). 
Further, we note that an attorney may be sued for fraud
 
by an adverse party. Buscher v. Boning, 114 Hawaii 202, 220
 
n.13, 159 P.3d 814, 832 n.13 (2007); Kahala Royal Corp. v.
 Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 113 Hawaii 251, 268-69, 151
 P.3d 732, 749-50 (2007); Matsuura, 102 Hawaii at 159, 162, 73
 P.3d at 697, 700; Guiliani v. Chuck, 1 Haw. App. 379, 383-84, 620
 P.2d 733, 736-37 (1980).
 
In Count II of the First Amended Complaint, Saingoen
 
asserted that Vancil made intentional misrepresentations of
 material fact at various points in the probate matter that:
 (1) there existed no conflict of interest between Nicholle and Saingoen, and that Nicholle and Vancil would cooperate in a quick and efficient probate; and (2) Vancil accepted Saingoen's evidence that she was the surviving spouse and that Richard died domiciled in Hawai
'i. Saingoen alleged that Vancil made the 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
misrepresentations with intent to induce reliance by Saingoen and
 
her attorneys to permit Nicholle to serve as personal
 representative and to not file further documentation with the
 probate court or take any other steps concerning the "surviving
 spouse" issue; Vancil knew, or should have known, the
 representations were false; and Saingoen's attorneys reasonably
 relied upon the misrepresentations to Saingoen's detriment. 
In their motion for partial summary judgment, the
 
Attorney Defendants asserted that summary judgment on Count II
 was appropriate because Saingoen could not prove a claim of
 fraud. The Attorney Defendants argued that (a) Saingoen did not
 detrimentally rely on any representations because she received
 Nicholle's Petition for Final Accounts and filed objections; and
 (b) any reliance was not reasonable because any representations
 were made during settlement negotiations. In support of their
 motion as to Count II, the Attorney Defendants only submitted a
 deposition transcript from Saingoen's brother-in-law, Thomas
 Stoudt, that Saingoen had received Nicholle's Petition for Final
 Accounts and filed objections. This evidence does not
 demonstrate that there existed no genuine issue of material fact
 on Saingoen's fraud claim.
 
Moreover, in opposition to the summary judgment motion,
 
Saingoen adduced a multitude of evidence raising genuine issues
 of material fact. She submitted declarations from two attorneys
 who represented her for part of the probate proceedings. She
 also submitted voluminous documentary evidence, including letters
 between Vancil and Saingoen's attorneys. The evidence submitted
 by Saingoen shows the following. After Richard's death, Saingoen
 retained an attorney, Michael J. Matsukawa (Matsukawa), to
 represent her in the probate matter. Matsukawa attests in his
 declaration that he took steps to have Saingoen appointed as
 personal representative of Richard's estate. Matsukawa further
 attests that during telephone calls, Vancil represented to him
 that 
he saw no conflict of interest between Nicholle Davis and
 
Saingoen Davis concerning the Davis Estate, that their
respective shares in the estate were set forth by Hawaii
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
statute. He also indicated that we could cooperate to close
and distribute the estate as quickly and as efficiently as
possible. He requested that Saingoen Davis not apply to the
Court to be the personal representative of the estate, but
that he be permitted to apply for Nicholle Davis as personal
representative. . . .
At no time in these telephone calls did Mr. Vancil
indicate or suggest that he or Nicholle Davis planned to
engage in an adversarial relationship with the surviving
spouse when appointed as personal representative of her
father's estate.
 
In a follow-up letter dated May 12, 2004, Vancil attached a draft
 
of the petition to have Nicholle appointed personal
 representative. In the draft, a "Sain Davis" was identified as
 "Wife/heir at law". Matsukawa attested that he relied on
 Vancil's representations in concluding that "it was reasonable in
 Saingoen Davis' interest to permit Nicholle Davis to act as
 personal representative of her father's estate[,]" and thus
 Matsukawa did not file Saingoen's application to be appointed
 personal representative.
 
Subsequently, Saingoen filed a Statement of Claim in 
the probate matter asserting claims for statutory allowances as the surviving spouse. In opposition to Saingoen's petition, Nicholle, through the Attorney Defendants, asserted that Saingoen had failed to sufficiently prove her identity or her marriage to Richard. Nicholle also contended that Saingoen's claim for statutory allowances under Hawai
'i law was questionable because 
HRS § 560:2-401 (2006) provides that the governing law is the decedent's domicile at death, and Richard died in Thailand. 
Later, after Matsukawa had provided documentation
 
requested by Vancil, Vancil wrote in a May 26, 2005 letter to
 Matsukawa that, "since you have finally provided a copy of the
 affidavit of Richard Kirk Davis showing that the affidavit was
 dated May 2, 2001 we no longer require any further proof of the
 marriage of the decedent to your client, Saingoen Davis."
 (Emphasis added.) Notwithstanding this statement, five days
 later, at a May 31, 2005 probate hearing on Saingoen's petition
 for determination of statutory allowances, Van Pernis contended
 inter alia that Saingoen had not proven marriage by admissible
 evidence. 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In a letter from the probate court to the parties dated
 
June 2, 2005 (which was not file-stamped), the probate court
 
indicated its denial of Saingoen's petition without prejudice,
 but referred the parties to mediation.
9 The probate court noted
 
that it declined to receive the purported certificate of marriage
 into evidence because Saingoen had inter alia not provided a
 final certification in compliance with HPR Rule 15. 
Matsukawa attests that on February 23, 2006, he
 
provided to Vancil evidence of Saingoen's marriage to Richard,
 including the marriage certificate and marriage registration
 form, certified as required under HPR Rule 15. Matsukawa further
 attests that upon delivery of the documents, Vancil informed him
 that Vancil accepted the documents as proof that Saingoen was
 Richard's surviving spouse, and thus Matsukawa took no further
 steps to provide further evidence to the probate court to prove
 Saingoen's status as surviving spouse. In a letter dated June 6,
 2006, Vancil represented to Matsukawa that "[s]ince your client
 has finally provided the necessary documents to prove that she
 was the spouse at the time of Decedent's death, we should meet
 and confer about final distribution of the Estate." (Emphasis
 added.)
 
On September 27, 2006, Kenneth A. Ross (Ross) replaced
 
Matsukawa as Saingoen's counsel in the probate matter. In a
 letter to Ross dated October 23, 2006, Vancil again acknowledged
 that Saingoen had proven her status as the surviving spouse.
10
 
11
In subsequent letters,  the parties debated Richard's domicile
9 Based on the record in this case, it is unclear if the probate court
ever entered a file-stamped order consistent with this letter. The probate
court's letter does not constitute entry of an order.
10 Vancil's October 23, 2006 letter to Ross stated in pertinent part:
"even though your client has proved that she is the 'surviving spouse', since
Decedent was not domiciled in Hawaii at the time of his death, the Personal
Representative is reluctant to pay anyone any more money unless there is a
deal."
11
 In a draft letter to a mediator attached to Vancil's letter to Ross
 
dated February 15, 2007, Vancil wrote
 
(continued...)
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at death, and Vancil, in fact, argued that Richard's marriage to
 
Saingoen was evidence that Richard was domiciled in Thailand.12
 
Ross attests that "[a]t no time during my
 
representation of Saingoen Davis did Mr. Vancil indicate or
 suggest to me that an issue existed in the case whether she was a
 surviving spouse of Mr. Davis' estate[,]" or that "any further
 documents were required to be filed to confirm Saingoen Davis'
 status as Mr. Davis' surviving spouse." Ross attested that it
 was in reliance on these representations that he did not take any
 steps to prove Saingoen's marriage to Richard. 
On July 13, 2007, the probate court granted Ross's
 
motion to withdraw as counsel. Thereafter, Saingoen proceeded
 pro se in the probate matter.
 
A little over two months later, on September 24, 2007,
 
the Petition for Final Accounts was filed by the Attorney
 Defendants on behalf of Nicholle, which challenged whether
 Saingoen had proven her status as surviving spouse and whether
 she had provided any evidence authenticating her identity. A
 hearing was set for October 25, 2007. At 11:47 am, on October
 24, 2007, the day before the hearing, Saingoen, through her
 brother-in-law, filed objections to Nicholle's Petition for Final
 Accounts. In support of her objections, Saingoen submitted what
 she asserted was evidence of her marriage to Richard. It is
 unclear in our record what evidence Saingoen submitted. Saingoen
 
11(...continued)
[T]here were only two issues for you to mediate,
. . . [h]owever the first issue is now resolved. We
 
finally received the documents that we requested for some
time from Mr. Matsukawa and it appears that Saingoen Davis
is in fact the wife of the deceased. The only questions now
is where the decedent was domiciled at the time of this
 death.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
12 The issue of domicile was important because Saingoen asserted claims
for statutory allowances under Hawai' i law. However, HRS § 560:2-401 provides
that "[r]ights to homestead allowance, exempt property, and family allowancefor a decedent who dies not domiciled in this State are governed by the law ofthe decedent's domicile at death." 
14
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
was not present for the hearing the next day as she appears to
 
have been in Thailand.
 
In the face of this evidence, the Attorney Defendants
 
assert that Saingoen did not detrimentally rely on any
 representations because she filed an objection to Nicholle's
 Petition for Final Accounts, and submitted proof of marriage that
 was rejected by the probate court. However, whether Saingoen,
 who was pro se at the time, filed objections does not establish
 that there is no genuine issue of material fact as to detrimental
 reliance. When viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to
 Saingoen, it shows that Vancil intentionally represented to
 Saingoen's attorneys on numerous occasions that Saingoen had
 provided sufficient evidence to establish that she was Richard's
 surviving spouse. After the probate court had indicated that it
 declined to receive the purported certificate of marriage between
 Saingoen and Richard because there was no final certification as
 required by HPR Rule 15, Matsukawa attests that he subsequently
 provided to Vancil evidence of marriage and the final
 certification required by HPR Rule 15. In a letter dated June 6,
 2006, Vancil wrote, "[s]ince your client has finally provided the
 necessary documents to prove that she was the spouse at the time
 of Decedent's death, we should meet and confer about final
 distribution of the Estate". Vancil echoed this sentiment in a
 October 23, 2006 letter, noting that Saingoen had "proved that
 she is the 'surviving spouse'[.]"
13
 
Contrary to these representations, Nicholle, through
 
the Attorney Defendants, raised a challenge to Saingoen's status
 as surviving spouse as part of Nicholle's Petition for Final
 Accounts, at a time that Saingoen was pro se. Both Matsukawa and
 Ross attest that, in reliance on Vancil's representations, they
 did not pursue additional evidence to prove marriage. Thus,
 
13 Additionally, in a draft letter to the designated mediator enclosed
with Vancil's February 15, 2007 letter to Ross, Vancil wrote "the first issue
is now resolved. We finally received the document that we requested for some
time from Mr. Matsukawa and it appears that Saingoen Davis is in fact the wife
of the deceased. The only question now is where the decedent was domiciled at
the time of his death."
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Saingoen asserts she was caught off-guard at a time when she was
 
pro se and had not pursued other potential evidence regarding her
 status as surviving spouse.
14 Given the evidence, there are
 
genuine issues of material fact as to whether Saingoen
 detrimentally relied on intentional misrepresentations by Vancil. 
Further, we reject the Attorney Defendants' contention 
that the alleged representations were made during failed
 mediation or settlement negotiations and thus Vancil's letters
 constitute inadmissible evidence.
 
First, we note that the Attorney Defendants did not 
object to the admissibility of Saingoen's exhibits before the circuit court and thus they have waived any challenge as to admissibility. Price v. AIG Hawai
'i Ins. Co., 107 Hawai 'i 106, 
112, 111 P.3d 1, 7 (2005). 
Second, even assuming the subject letters were sent as
 
part of settlement negotiations, Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE)
 Rule 408 precludes certain evidence "to prove liability for or
 invalidity of the claim or its amount." HRE 408 does not bar
 admission of evidence of compromise negotiations offered for
 "another purpose", such as to support a fraud claim, and does not
 render reliance on a party's representations per se unreasonable. 
See HRE Rule 408 ("This rule also does not require exclusion when
 the evidence is offered for another purpose[.]").
 
Third, the Attorney Defendants contend that Saingoen's
 
reliance on the letters was improper because the letters were
 statements made during mediation pursuant to Rule 7 of the
 Mediation Rules of the HPR. We disagree. Rule 7 provides in
 pertinent part that "parties and attorneys are prohibited from
 informing the court of discussions or actions taken at the
 mediation . . . ." However, we note that Vancil's purported
 representations as to whom should be personal representative and
 Vancil's May 26, 2005 letter, which provided that "we no longer
 require any further proof of the marriage," occurred before the
 
14 The record does not indicate the basis for the probate court's
denial of Saingoen's claims for statutory allowances.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
probate court referred the parties to mediation on June 2, 2005. 
It is also doubtful that Vancil's letters dated June 6, 2006 and
 October 23, 2006 constitute discussions or actions taken at
 mediation, as these letters contain no mention or reference to
 mediation. Further, like HRE Rule 408, Rule 7 provides that
 "[t]his rule also does not require exclusion of evidence that is
 offered for another purpose," which in this case is to prove
 fraud in a separate proceeding before a different court.
 
The Attorney Defendants cite no authority for the 
notion that a party cannot rely on the representations of an attorney that a disputed issue had been resolved. At no point in the submitted letters did Vancil couch his concession of marital status as a factual position merely for negotiation or mediation purposes. "As a general principle the question of whether one has acted reasonably under the circumstances is for the trier of fact to determine. Additionally, this court has acknowledged the accepted principle that, where reasonable minds might differ as to the reasonableness of plaintiff's conduct, the question is for the jury." Matsuura, 102 Hawai
'i at 163, 73 P.3d at 701 
(citations, quotation marks, brackets and ellipsis omitted). Because reasonable minds can differ as to the reasonableness of Saingoen's reliance on Vancil's representations, Count II should not have been resolved by summary judgment. 
The circuit court thus erred in granting summary
 
judgment on Count II.
3. Fraud on the Court
 
Saingoen contends that the circuit court erred in
 
concluding there were no genuine issues of material fact whether
 the Attorney Defendants committed a fraud on the court where the
 evidence showed that the Attorney Defendants made
 misrepresentations to the probate court that deprived Saingoen of
 her ability to protect her interests as surviving spouse. 
The circuit court appears to have questioned whether
 
there is an independent cause of action for fraud on the court. 
Saingoen cites no authority that establishes a separate cause of
 action for fraud on the court affording an award of monetary
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
damages to a plaintiff and our review reveals none. Fraud on the 
court is a ground upon which a court may set aside a judgment. Standard Mgmt., Inc. v. Kekona, 98 Hawai
'i 95, 100, 43 P.3d 232, 
237 (App. 2001). It is not a cause of action upon which to award damages to an individual. See Cvitanovich-Dubie v. Dubie, 125 
Hawai
'i 128, 144-45, 254 P.3d 439, 455-56 (2011) ("[S]ince the 
remedy for fraud on the court is far reaching, it only applies to very unusual cases involving far more than an injury to a single litigant, but rather, a corruption of the judicial process itself." (citation, quotation marks, and brackets omitted)); Kang v. Harrington, 59 Haw. 652, 660, 587 P.2d 285, 291 (1978) ("In
 assessing punitive damages the trial court should have ignored
 appellant's fraud upon the court and looked only to his fraud on
 appellee. The appropriate action to be taken in a case of fraud
 upon the court is for the injured party to maintain an
 independent action based on that fraud and seek to be relieved
 from the judgment of the court."). 
Thus, the circuit court properly granted summary
 
judgment as to Count III.
b. Claims related to the existence of a duty
 
The circuit court granted summary judgment on four 
claims related to whether the Attorney Defendants owed a duty to Saingoen: Count IV, Negligence; Count IX, Breach of Fiduciary Duty; Count X, Malpractice; and Count XI, Standard of Care. Saingoen contends the circuit court erred in granting summary judgment on these counts because (a) once Vancil acknowledged she was the surviving spouse, she satisfied the six-part test under Blair v. Ing, 95 Hawai
'i 247, 21 P.3d 452 (2001) (Blair I), that 
establishes whether an attorney owes a duty to a non-client beneficiary; and (b) as the surviving spouse, the Attorney Defendants owed her a duty as an intended third-party beneficiary of a contract for legal services.
15 If a duty existed, Saingoen 
15 In her opening brief, Saingoen asserts the Attorney Defendants owed
her a duty pursuant to Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers § 51
(2000). Saingoen did not assert this as a foundation of the purported duty
(continued...)
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
contends a jury could have found that the duty was breached based
 
on the evidence. 
The existence of a duty is a question of law, Bidar v. 
Amfac, Inc., 66 Haw. 547, 552, 669 P.2d 154, 158 (1983), that must be decided on a case-by-case basis. Blair I, 95 Hawai
'i at 
260, 21 P.3d at 465. 
The Attorney Defendants moved for summary judgment on
 
these counts asserting broadly that they did not owe a duty to
 Saingoen because they did not represent her, but rather they only
 represented the estate. The Attorney Defendants assert that
 Saingoen cannot satisfy the Blair I balancing test because it is
 only applicable in the estate planning context and Saingoen was
 not the intended beneficiary of the Attorney Defendants' legal
 services. 
In Blair I, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court adopted a six-
factor balancing test "as relevant to the determination whether to impose a duty upon attorneys to non-client beneficiaries in the estate planning context." Id. at 260, 21 P.3d at 465. The 
supreme court expressly limited the adoption of the balancing test to "the estate planning context." Id. at 253, 258-59, 260, 
21 P.3d at 458, 463-64, 466; see Buscher, 114 Hawai
'i at 220, 159 
P.3d at 832 (distinguishing Blair I as applying "in the estate planning context"). 
Moreover, the supreme court further held that "[t]he 
class of individuals who may bring a malpractice action is limited to a client's intended beneficiaries, provided no other remedy exists to prevent future harm." Blair I 95 Hawai
'i at 
261, 21 P.3d at 466. "[A] benefit that is merely incidentally conferred upon the beneficiary will not meet the first factor of the [Blair I] balancing test or the third party beneficiary principle that the contract be entered into with the intent to benefit the non-client." Id. Saingoen, even if the surviving 
15(...continued)
before the trial court and the argument is thus waived. Cnty. of Hawaii v.
UNIDEV, LLC, 129 Hawai' i 378, 387, 301 P.3d 588, 597 (2013) ("It is axiomatic
that where a party fails to raise an argument before the courts below, that
argument may be deemed waived for purposes of appeal."). 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
spouse, was not the intended beneficiary of the Attorney 
Defendants' representation of the estate. See Young v. Van 
Buren, No. 28543, 2010 WL 4278321, 130 Hawai 'i 349, 310 P.3d 
1050, at *4 (App. Oct. 29, 2010 as amended Nov. 23, 2010) (SDO) (holding that the plaintiffs did not satisfy the six-factor test because they were not the intended beneficiaries of the trust amendment prepared by counsel). 
In deposition testimony, Nicholle testified that she 
hired the Attorney Defendants to help with the probate of Richard's estate. In that role, the Attorney Defendants had an attorney-client relationship with the fiduciary for the estate (Nicholle) acting in a fiduciary role, but not with the beneficiaries of the estate; owed a duty to notify beneficiaries of the fiduciary's activities known to be illegal that threaten the interests of the beneficiaries; and were officers of the court required to "assist the court in securing the efficient and effective management of the estate." HPR Rule 42. The efficient and effective management of the estate does not mean the protection of one beneficiary's interests at the expense of other interests. The interests of a beneficiary and the interests of the estate are not always aligned. For instance, under HRS § 560:2-102 (2006), a surviving spouse's share of the intestate estate varies based on the number of recognized heirs. Thus, estate counsel's duty to efficiently and effectively manage the estate might be at the expense of the surviving spouse's interest. Counsel for an estate cannot be expected to owe a duty to a particular beneficiary, especially when there are multiple beneficiaries, which would lead to potential conflicts of interest. See Buscher, 114 Hawai
'i at 220, 159 P.3d at 832; 
Blair I, 95 Hawai 'i at 262-63, 21 P.3d at 467-68. Clearly, the 
Attorney Defendants were not retained for the principal purpose to benefit Saingoen. Thus, Saingoen was not an intended beneficiary of a contract for legal services. 
Therefore, the circuit court properly granted summary
 
judgment on Counts IV, IX, X, and XI. 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3. Second MSJ Order
 
The Second MSJ Order dismissed Counts VI (Punitive
 
Damages), VIII (Excessive Attorney's Fees), and any claims
 
allegedly assigned to Saingoen by Nicholle. Saingoen contends
 that the circuit court erred because she adduced evidence raising
 a genuine issue of material fact whether the Attorney Defendants
 charged excessive attorneys' fees and that the claims were
 assignable under her Settlement Agreement with Nicholle.
16
 
In support of their motion for summary judgment, the 
Attorney Defendants inter alia assert that Nicholle's claims as administrator of estate are personal claims of legal malpractice and cannot be assigned as a matter of law. The circuit court granted summary judgment on the second motion for summary judgment because it concluded that the claims were unassignable. On appeal, Saingoen presents no substantive argument that the claims were assignable besides an assertion that there is no Hawai
'i law compelling dismissal with prejudice. In light of her 
failure to present a substantive argument regarding the assignability of the claims, Saingoen has failed to carry her burden as appellant to show error. See Kamaka v. Goodsill 
Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai
'i 92, 110 n.20, 176 P.3d 91, 
109 n.20 (2008); Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co., 116 Hawai
'i 277, 309 n.21, 172 P.3d 1021, 1053 
n.21 (2007); Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai 'i 225, 230, 909 
P.2d 553, 558 (1995). 
Saingoen also contends the circuit court erred in not
 
allowing her the "opportunity" to substitute Nicholle as a party-
in-interest. The circuit court did not rule on the issue of
 substitution of parties because Saingoen failed to file a proper
 
16 In terms of the assignability of claims under the Settlement
Agreement, in Case No. 30707 this court vacated the circuit court's order
granting Saingoen's petition for determination of good faith settlement and
remanded for further proceedings. Davis, 2012 WL 603947, at *3. Clause 7 of
 
the Settlement Agreement provides "[i]n event the court denies the Section
663-15.5(b) motion, . . . the Agreement shall be void." Based on the record
 in this case, the status of the Settlement Agreement is unclear. Despite all
briefing in this case being filed after issuance of the Summary Disposition
Order in No. 30707, no party argues that this issue is moot. 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
motion. On appeal, Saingoen argues that it was the circuit 
court's burden to dismiss the case without prejudice to permit substitution of parties under Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure 
(HRCP) Rule 25. However, HRCP Rule 25(c) requires a motion for substitution of a transferee of an interest. Sandstrom v. 
Larsen, 59 Haw. 491, 501 n.5, 583 P.2d 971, 979 n.5 (1978). Saingoen does not assert she filed a proper motion. Therefore, the circuit court did not err in granting summary judgment as to any alleged assigned claim from Nicholle. 
In regards to Count VI, the Attorney Defendants moved
 
for summary judgment because a punitive damages claim is not an
 independent tort, and all of Saingoen's direct claims had been
 dismissed. However, because we have determined that the circuit
 court erred in granting summary judgment on Count II and have
 remanded that count back to the circuit court, we also vacate the
 circuit court's summary judgment ruling as to Count VI.
4. Costs
 
Given that we vacate in part the Final Judgment, there
 
is no prevailing party at this time. Thus, we also vacate the
 
circuit court's award of costs.
 
B. The Attorney Defendants' Cross-Appeal
 
The Attorney Defendants cross-appeal from the circuit 
court's denial of their request for attorneys' fees. "The circuit court's grant or denial of attorneys' fees and costs is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard." Kahala Royal Corp. v. 
Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 113 Hawai
'i 251, 266, 151 P.3d 
732, 747 (2007). 
The Attorney Defendants requested attorneys' fees
 
pursuant to HRS § 607-14, asserting that this was essentially an
 action in the nature of assumpsit. Although we are remanding as
 to the fraud and punitive damages claims, we will review the
 Attorney Defendants' cross-appeal because both of the remanded
 claims clearly are not in the nature of assumpsit. Thus, any
 potential assumpsit claims are among the claims adjudicated in
 favor of the Attorney Defendants and which we have affirmed.
 
22
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In analyzing whether a claim is in the nature of assumpsit
under HRS § 607-14, this court has said:
 
"Assumpsit" is a common law form of action which
allows for the recovery of damages for non-performance
of a contract, either express or implied, written or
verbal, as well as quasi contractual obligations. In
 deciding whether to award fees under HRS § 607-14, the
court must determine the nature of the lawsuit where
 both assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims are asserted
in an action.
 
In ascertaining the nature of the proceeding on appeal, this
court has looked to the essential character of the
 underlying action in the trial court. The character of the
 action should be determined from the facts and issues raised
 in the complaint, the nature of the entire grievance, and
the relief sought. Where there is doubt as to whether an
 action is in assumpsit or in tort, there is a presumption
that the suit is in assumpsit. Additionally, this court
recently stated, for the first time, that, in awarding
attorneys' fees in a case involving both assumpsit and
non-assumpsit claims, a court must base its award of fees,
if practicable, on an apportionment of the fees claimed
between assumpsit and non-assumpsit claims. 
Blair v. Ing, 96 Hawai 'i 327, 332, 31 P.3d 184, 189 (2001) (Blair 
II) (citations, quotation marks, brackets, and footnotes 
omitted). 
The Attorney Defendants assert that Saingoen's claims
 
were in the nature of assumpsit because, without a contract
 between themselves and Nicholle, there would have been no tort
 claims, plus the damages requested were more closely akin to
 contract damages because they arose out of alleged frustrated
 expectations, citing Blair II and Helfand v. Gerson, 105 F.3d 530
 (9th Cir. 1997). The Attorney Defendants stress that, if there
 is any doubt, the presumption is that the claims are assumpsit. 
In turn, the Attorney Defendants contend that any tort claims
 were derived from the assumpsit claims, thus were inextricably
 linked, and the court should have awarded reasonable fees.
 
To ascertain the nature of the proceeding, we must look 
to the essential character of the underlying action. Blair II, 
96 Hawai
'i at 332, 31 P.3d at 189. "The character of the action 
should be determined from the facts and issues raised in the complaint, the nature of the entire grievance, and the relief sought." Id. Assumpsit claims are premised in the non­
performance of a contract. Id. In Blair II, an accountant filed 
23
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a request for compensation for necessary expenses and attorney 
fees in defending a professional malpractice action. Id. at 329, 
31 P.3d at 186. In opposition, the plaintiffs contended that the accountant was not entitled to attorneys' fees under the assumpsit statute because the malpractice suit sounded in tort, rather than assumpsit. Id. at 332, 31 P.3d at 189. The Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court disagreed. The supreme court concluded that because the plaintiffs asserted both a claim for breach of implied contract and negligence, and that both claims were premised on the same alleged breach, the negligence claim arose out of the alleged implied contract. Id. The supreme court 
continued that "[w]ithout the implied contract, which could create a cognizable duty, Plaintiffs would have no negligence claim." Id. Further, the supreme court noted that the alleged 
damages were more closely akin to contract damages because they were economic damages arising out of the alleged breach of contract. Id. at 332-33, 31 P.3d at 189-90; see also Helfand, 
105 F.3d at 538-39. 
Here, Saingoen did not allege a breach a contract. In 
her First Amended Complaint, Saingoen's multitude of claims stem from allegations of fraud and breach of duty which sound in tort. Further, Saingoen does not assert breach of contract or seek damages based upon frustrated contractual expectations, as opposed to injury from the alleged torts. See Kahala Royal 
Corp., 113 Hawai
'i at 281-82, 151 P.3d at 762-63; TSA Int'l, Ltd. 
v. Shimuzu Corp., 92 Hawai 'i 243, 264, 990 P.2d 713, 734 (1999). 
The asserted claims are not in the nature of assumpsit. 
"The mere fact that [the plaintiff's] claims relate to a contract . . . does not render a dispute between the parties an assumpsit action." TSA Int'l, 92 Hawai
'i at 264, 990 P.2d at 
734. The essential character of the action was not in the nature
 
of assumpsit and the circuit court did not abuse its discretion
 in denying the Attorney Defendants' motion for attorneys' fees.
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the Final Judgment as
 
to Counts II and VI. We remand this case to the circuit court
 
for further proceedings on these counts consistent with this
 opinion. We affirm the Final Judgment with respect to the
 remaining counts (Counts I, III, IV, V, VIII, IX, X, and the
 second IX).
 
Because we vacate the Final Judgment in part, we also
 
vacate the circuit court's "Order Granting in Part and Denying in
 Part the Van Pernis-Vancil Defendants' Motion for Attorney Fees
 and Costs," entered on September 23, 2011, to the extent it
 awarded costs to the Attorney Defendants. We affirm the order to
 the extent it denied attorneys' fees requested pursuant to HRS
 § 607-14.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 30, 2015. 
James J. Bickerton 
(Nathan P. Roehrig with
him on the briefs)
(Bickerton Lee Dang & Sullivan)for Plaintiff-Appellant/
Cross-Appellee Chief Judge
Associate Judge 
James Shin 
(Keith K. Hiraoka, Jodie D. Roeca
with him on the briefs)  
(Roeca Luria Hiraoka LLP)for Defendants/Cross-Claim
Plaintiffs-Appellees/Cross-Appellants Associate Judge 
25
 