NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000699
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
FRANCISCO MAHUKA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-0186)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Francisco Mahuka (Mahuka) appeals
 
from an August 9, 2011, Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
(Circuit Court) Judgment of Conviction and Sentence for Robbery
 
in the Second Degree, Terroristic Threatening in the First
 
Degree, and Abuse of a Family or Household Member.1 Mahuka
 
raises two points of error, contending that: (1) the Circuit
 Court committed plain error when it failed to instruct the jury
 
on the lesser included offenses of Terroristic Threatening in the
 
Second Degree and Harassment; and (2) he was deprived of his
 
constitutional right to effective assistance of counsel. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Mahuka's points of error as follows:
 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) Mahuka maintains that the Circuit Court committed
 
plain error when it failed to instruct the jury on the lesser
 
included offenses of Terroristic Threatening in the Second
 
2 3
Degree and Harassment  to Count Three, Terroristic Threatening
in the First Degree. Mahuka contends that based on his testimony
 
that he did not threaten the complaining witness with any knives,
 
there was a rational basis in the evidence warranting a jury
 
instruction as to the lesser included offenses. Mahuka further
 
claims that the jury was not given the opportunity to consider
 
the lesser included offenses, and therefore, the Circuit Court's
 
plain error "contributed to [Mahuka's] conviction of Terroristic
 
Threatening in the 1st Degree," thereby denying Mahuka's
 
fundamental rights, and mandating that his conviction be vacated
 
and a new trial ordered.
 
"It is well settled that the trial court must correctly 
instruct the jury on the law," in order to "insure the jury has 
proper guidance in its consideration of the issues before it." 
State v. Feliciano
, 62 Haw. 637, 643, 618 P.2d 306, 310 (1980). 
Furthermore, in our judicial system, "the trial courts, not the parties, have the duty and ultimate responsibility to insure that 
juries are properly instructed on issues of criminal liability." 
State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai' i 405, 415, 16 P.3d 246, 256 (2001) 
2
 HRS § 707-717(1) (1993) provides that "A person commits the
offense of terroristic threatening in the second degree if the person commits
terroristic threatening other than as provided in section 707-716[,]" i.e.,
including but not limited to terroristic threatening without the use of a
 
dangerous instrument.
 
3
 HRS § 711-1106 (Supp. 2012) provides that a person commits the
offense of harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy, or alarm any other
person, that person, inter alia, "[s]trikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise
touches another person in an offensive manner or subjects the other person to
offensive physical contact," "[i]nsults, taunts, or challenges another person
in a manner likely to provoke an immediate violent response or that would
cause the other person to reasonably believe that the actor intends to cause
bodily injury to the recipient or another or damage to the property of the
recipient or another," or "[m]akes a communication using offensively coarse
language that would cause the recipient to reasonably believe that the actor
intends to cause bodily injury to the recipient or another or damage to the
property of the recipient or another."
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(citations omitted). As articulated by the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
in Haanio, "trial courts are duty bound to instruct juries sua 
sponte regarding lesser included offenses, having a rational 
basis in the evidence." 94 Hawai' i at 415, 16 P.3d at 256 
(citation, internal quotation marks, ellipsis, and footnote omitted). This is true "despite any objection by the defense, 
and even in the absence of a request from the prosecution." Id. 
at 414, 16 P.3d at 254. "[I]n the absence of such a rational 
basis in the evidence," however, "the trial court should not 
instruct the jury as to included offenses." State v. Kinnane, 79 
Hawai'i 46, 49, 897 P.2d 973, 976 (1995). Accordingly, 
the trial court's failure to give appropriate included
offense instructions requested by a party constitutes error,
as does the trial court's failure to give an appropriate
included offense instruction that has not been requested.
Such error, however, is harmless when the jury convicts the
defendant of the charged offense or of an included offense
greater than the included offense erroneously omitted from
the instructions. The error is harmless because jurors are
presumed to follow the court's instructions, and, under the
standard jury instructions, the jury, in reaching a
unanimous verdict as to the charged offense or as to the
greater included offense, would not have reached, much less
considered, the absent lesser offense on which it should
have been instructed.
 
Id. at 415-16, 16 P.3d at 256-57 (citations, internal quotation
 
marks, brackets, and footnote omitted; emphasis added).
 
Harassment is not an included offense of Terroristic
 
Threatening in the First Degree. State v. Burdett, 70 Haw. 85,
 
86, 762 P.2d 164, 165 (1988). With respect to Terroristic
 Threatening in the Second Degree, Haanio is dispositive. 
Notwithstanding Mahuka's argument that the jury was not given the
 
opportunity to expressly and separately consider the lesser
 
included offenses of Terroristic Threatening in the Second Degree
 
and Harassment, the jury found Mahuka guilty of the charged
 
offense in Count Three, Terroristic Threatening in the First
 
Degree.  Accordingly, any error in the Circuit Court's failure to
 
instruct the jury as to a lesser included offense was harmless.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) Mahuka argues that his trial counsel provided
 
ineffective assistance of counsel, contending that his attorney: 
(1) failed to object to or cross-examine the competency of the
 
minor witness (Minor); (2) raised no objections during the
 
State's opening statements and closing arguments, including the
 
deputy prosecuting attorney's misstating of the evidence during
 
closing arguments; (3) did not object or cross-examine any of the
 
State's exhibits, readily stipulated to the admission of all of
 
the State's exhibits, and made no attempts to question the
 
validity of the evidence, conducted no voir dire of any of the
 
State's witnesses on the exhibits that were offered into
 
evidence, and failed to object to the "shear repetitiveness" of
 
the State's exhibits and what they were offered to prove; (4)
 
posed only two objections during the State's case-in-chief, and
 
failed to object to leading questions, speculations, hearsay
 
testimonies, questions and testimonies lacking foundations,
 
questions asked and answered, cumulative testimony, irrelevance,
 
misstating of the evidence, prejudice under HRE Rule 403,
 
testimony beyond the scope of the witnesses' personal knowledge,
 
and the deputy prosecuting attorney's testifying rather than
 
asking questions; (5) failed to object to the jury instructions;
 
(6) failed to cross-examine the State's witnesses; and (7)
 
conducted cross-examination which was "perfunctory, showed lack
 
of preparation and often elicited testimony damaging to his
 
client and reiterated the same responses asked by the State."
 
Without specification, Mahuka claims that these errors
 
"resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a
 
potentially meritorious defense," and further maintains that
 
"[defense counsel] should have demanded that the State prove
 
their case beyond a reasonable doubt." 
The burden of establishing ineffective assistance of
 
counsel rests upon the appellant. State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346,
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
348, 615 P.2d 101, 104 (1980) (citation omitted). The
 
defendant's burden is twofold: 
First, the appellant must establish specific errors or
omissions of defense counsel reflecting counsel's lack of
skill, judgment or diligence. Second, the appellant must
establish that these errors or omissions resulted in either
 the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
meritorious defense. Where an appellant successfully meets
these burdens, he will have proven the denial of assistance
"within the range of competence demanded of attorneys in
criminal cases."
 
Id. at 348-49, 615 P.2d at 104 (citations and footnote omitted;
 
emphasis added). Moreover,
 
General claims of ineffectiveness are insufficient and every
action or omission is not subject to inquiry. Specific
actions or omissions alleged to be error but which had an
obvious tactical basis for benefitting the defendant's case
 
will not be subject to further scrutiny. If, however, the
action or omission had no obvious basis for benefitting the
defendant's case and it "resulted in the withdrawal or
 
substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious
defense," then it will be evaluated as information that an
ordinary competent criminal attorney should have had. 
State v. De Guair, 108 Hawai' i 179, 187, 118 P.3d 662, 670 (2005) 
(ellipses and brackets omitted) (quoting Briones v. State, 74 
Haw. 442, 462-63, 848 P.2d 966, 976 (1993)). 
While Mahuka generally lists alleged errors reflecting
 
defense counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence, Mahuka
 
fails to meet his burden of showing that such errors or omissions
 
resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a
 
potentially meritorious defense.
 
Mahuka claims that defense counsel failed to object to
 
Minor's competency to testify. Mahuka cites Minor's testimony at
 
the competency hearing indicating that she knew the difference
 
between a truth and a lie, but could not describe it. At that
 
hearing, defense counsel stipulated to Minor's competency.
 
Defense counsel's decision to refrain from objecting
 
constituted a legitimate tactical choice. "Defense counsel's
 
tactical decisions at trial generally will not be questioned by a
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reviewing court." Antone, 62 Haw. at 352, 615 P.2d at 106
 
(citation omitted). 
Lawyers require and are permitted broad latitude to make on-
the-spot strategic choices in the course of trying a case.
A defense attorney's freedom to make such decisions,
however, is not without limits. Where trial counsel makes a
 critical tactical decision which would not be made by
diligent, ordinarily prudent lawyers in criminal cases, the
right to effective assistance of counsel may be denied.
 
Id. (citations omitted). 
Generally, "[e]very person is competent to be a
 
witness," however, "[a] person is disqualified to be a witness if
 
the person is (1) incapable of expressing oneself so as to be
 
understood, either directly or through interpretation by one who
 
can understand the person, or (2) incapable of understanding the
 
duty of a witness to tell the truth." HRE Rule 601, HRE Rule
 
603.1. At the time of the trial, Minor was fourteen (14) years
 
of age. Minor further testified that she was in the Ninth grade
 at Waianae High School, and her favorite subject was English.
 
Although she was unable to articulate the difference between a
 
truth and a lie, Minor agreed that telling the truth is a good
 
thing, while telling a lie is a bad thing. Minor was further
 
able to identify a lie, as follows:
 
[Prosecutor]: Okay. You see my jacket, what color is my
jacket? 
[Minor]: Black. 
[Prosecutor]: Okay. If I told you my jacket is pink, isthat the truth or a lie? 
[Minor]: Lie. 
Minor also agreed that if you promise to do something, that means
 
you're going to do it; thereafter, Minor promised to tell the
 
truth throughout the proceedings. After defense counsel
 
stipulated to Minor's competency, the Circuit Court explained to
 
Minor that she would be under oath and sworn to tell the truth,
 
and if she did not tell the truth she could get into trouble with
 
the court. Minor stated that she understood. The Circuit Court
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
then found Minor competent to testify. Based on these
 
circumstances, defense counsel's absence of objection does not
 
demonstrate incompetence at trial, nor does it indicate the
 
substantial impairment or withdrawal of a potential defense. 
See, e.g., Antone, 62 Haw. at 352-53, 615 P.2d at 106-07
 
(similarly finding that defense counsel's absence of objection to
 
minor's competency to testify "does not demonstrate incompetence
 
at trial" where the trial court was nevertheless likely to find
 
minor competent to testify). 
The majority of Mahuka's ineffective assistance of
 
counsel claim pertains to defense counsel's failure to object, in
 
certain instances, to the State's opening and closing remarks,
 
the State's exhibits, witness testimony, and jury instructions. 
Mahuka notably fails to point to any objectionable remark,
 
question, or testimony in the record on appeal in support of his
 
position. Instead, Mahuka simply identifies general areas of
 
trial testimony and exhibits admitted, and offers a broad
 
assertion that no objection was made. 
Mahuka claims that defense counsel failed to object
 
during the State's opening statements and closing arguments, and
 
that defense counsel did not object to the deputy prosecuting
 
attorney's misstatement of the evidence during closing arguments.
 
Apart from these assertions, Mahuka does not cite any
 
objectionable statements, or misstatements, made by the deputy
 
prosecuting attorney during either the State's opening statements
 
or closing arguments. Similarly, Mahuka does not allege how, if
 
at all, defense counsel's errors or omissions resulted in either
 
the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
 
meritorious defense. 
"An opening statement merely provides an opportunity
 
for counsel to advise an outline for the jury, the facts and
 
questions in the matter before them. Hence, the purpose of an
 
opening statement is to explain the case to the jury and to
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
outline the proof. It is not an occasion for argument." State
 
v. Sanchez, 82 Hawai' i 517, 528, 923 P.2d 934, 945 (App. 1996) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
Because the scope and extent of the opening statement is left to 
the sound discretion of the trial judge, "the trial court should 
exclude irrelevant facts and stop argument if it occurs. The 
State should only refer in the opening statement to evidence that 
it has a genuine good-faith belief will be produced at trial." 
Id. (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). After a 
thorough review of the trial transcripts, it appears that the 
deputy prosecuting attorney's (DPA) opening statements merely 
provided the jury an outline of the facts later produced at 
trial. The DPA's statements are devoid of any improper or 
objectionable remarks. 
With regard to the prosecution's closing argument, "a 
prosecutor is permitted to draw reasonable inferences from the 
evidence and wide latitude is allowed in discussing the evidence. 
It is also within the bounds of legitimate argument for 
prosecutors to state, discuss, and comment on the evidence as 
well as to draw all reasonable inferences from the evidence." 
State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai' i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999) 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). Nevertheless, "prosecutors are bound to refrain from expressing their personal 
views as to a defendant's guilt or the credibility of witnesses." 
State v. Clark, 83 Hawai' i 289, 304, 926 P.2d 194, 209 (1996). A 
thorough review of the DPA's closing argument indicates that the DPA discussed and commented on the evidence presented at trial, 
and articulated reasonable inferences that could have been drawn 
based on the evidence presented. The transcript does not 
indicate that the DPA expressed any personal views as to Mahuka's 
guilt or credibility, nor are Mahuka's claims of the DPA's 
misstatement of the evidence readily apparent from the trial 
transcripts. Moreover, the jury was instructed that statements 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or remarks made by counsel are not evidence.4 The jury is 
presumed to have followed the court's instructions, State v. 
Jhun, 83 Hawai' i 472, 482, 927 P.2d 1355, 1365 (1996), and the 
jury is presumed to have relied on its own recollection of the evidence, rather than counsel's misstatements. See State v. 
Mars, 116 Hawai' i 125, 135, 170 P.3d 861, 871 (App. 2007). 
In light of the Circuit Court's instructions, the
 
failure of Mahuka to point out any specific objectionable remark
 made by the DPA during opening statements and closing arguments,
 
and the failure to establish what, if any, potentially
 
meritorious defense was withdrawn or substantially impaired,
 
Mahuka fails to establish ineffective assistance of counsel. See
 
Antone, 62 Haw. at 348-49, 615 P.2d at 104.
 
Mahuka generally claims that defense counsel failed to
 
object or cross-examine any of the State's exhibits, and instead,
 readily stipulated to the admission of all of the State's
 
exhibits.  Mahuka further claims that defense counsel made no
 
attempt to question the validity of the evidence, conducted no
 
voir dire of any of the State's witnesses on the exhibits offered
 
into evidence, and failed to object to the "sheer repetitiveness"
 
4
 At the beginning of the trial, the Circuit Court instructed the
jury as follows:
 
[B]efore we take evidence the next stage in the trial is the
making of opening statements by the attorneys. Again, the purpose
of opening statement is to give you an outline of the evidence
that the party expects will be presented to you. It's essentially
a preview of the trial as seen by that party. Opening statements
are not evidence, but merely intended to help give you an outline
in considering the evidence.
 
Again, before the parties delivered their closing arguments, the Circuit Court
similarly instructed the jury as follows:
 
[A]t this time the attorneys will be making their closing
arguments. Again, closing arguments, like their opening
statements, are not evidence[.]
 
Additionally, as part of the jury instructions, the Circuit Court clearly
instructed the jury that "[s]tatements or remarks made by counsel are not
evidence."
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the State's exhibits and what they were offered to prove.
 
Although Mahuka claims that defense counsel failed to object to
 
any of the State's thirty-three exhibits, Mahuka specifically
 
points to two exhibits: (1) photos of the complaining witness's
 
injuries; and (2) a certified document from the Department of
 
Motor Vehicle, indicating that Mahuka's license was suspended at
 
the time of the offense. Mahuka claims that defense counsel
 
erred in stipulating to these exhibits, "which resulted in either
 
the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
 
meritorious defense," and instead, defense counsel "should have
 
demanded that the State prove their case beyond a reasonable
 
doubt."
 
The admission of photographs "is eminently suited to 
the trial court's exercise of its discretion because it requires 
a cost-benefit calculus and a delicate balance between probative 
value and prejudicial effect." State v. Edwards, 81 Hawai' i 293, 
297, 916 P.2d 703, 707 (1996) (internal quotation marks and 
brackets omitted). Pursuant to Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) 
Rule 901(a), "[t]he requirement of authentication or 
identification as a condition precedent to admissibility is 
satisfied by evidence sufficient to support a finding that the 
matter in question is what its proponent claims." This 
authentication is satisfied by "[t]estimony of witness with 
knowledge . . . that a matter is what it is claimed to be." HRE 
Rule 901(b)(1). 
Here, the State sought to admit six photographs of the
 
complaining witness's injuries, each depicting the location and
 
extent of different injuries. The photographs were properly
 
authenticated by witness testimony, and the photos corroborated
 
witness testimony about the incident. Accordingly, the
 
photographs were properly admitted and defense counsel did not
 
provide ineffective assistance by failing to object.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mahuka also takes issue with defense counsel's failure 
to object to the admission of State's Exhibit 36, a Department of 
Motor Vehicle (DMV) certified document indicating that Mahuka's 
license was suspended at the time of the incident. Pursuant to 
HRE Rule 803(b)(8), the DMV document falls under an exception to 
the hearsay rule as a self-authenticating public record or 
report. In addition, the record on appeal indicates that defense 
counsel did in fact object to the DMV document on prejudice 
grounds and ensured that the Circuit Court redacted potentially 
damaging information indicating that Mahuka's license was 
suspended because he failed to pay child support. Thus, defense 
counsel's action in stipulating to the admissibility of the 
redacted DMV document appears to have been a reasonable tactical 
choice and not ineffective assistance of counsel. See State v. 
Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 39-40, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247-48 (1998) 
("[M]atters presumably within the judgment of counsel, like trial 
strategy, will rarely be second-guessed by judicial hindsight."). 
Each of the remaining exhibits identified by Mahuka
 
have met the HRE Rule 901(a) condition precedent to admissibility
 
through witness testimony - each exhibit was identified by the
 
complaining witness and Officer Fleigner, and defense counsel was
 
shown each exhibit before it was admitted into evidence. As
 
defense counsel is not expected to make a "futile objection," see
 
Antone, 62 Haw. at 351, 615 P.2d at 106, and there being no other
 
apparent bar to admissibility, defense counsel did not provide
 
ineffective assistance of counsel by failing to object to these
 
exhibits. Additionally, Mahuka fails to establish which, if any,
 
potentially meritorious defense was withdrawn or substantially
 
impaired by defense counsel's failure to object. 
While Mahuka generally claims that defense counsel
 
committed errors by failing to object to leading questions,
 
speculations, hearsay testimonies, questions asked and answered,
 
testimony lacking foundation, witness testimony given beyond the
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
scope of the witness' personal knowledge, prosecutorial
 
testimony, cumulative testimony, irrelevant testimony, the
 
misstatement of evidence, and HRE Rule 403 prejudice, Mahuka does
 
not point to any specific objectionable testimony. A review of
 
the record on appeal does not reveal substantial error. 
Therefore, Mahuka fails to meet his burden in establishing
 
specific instances of error. 
Because the Circuit Court's jury instructions were not
 
erroneous, as discussed above, defense counsel was not
 
ineffective for failing to object to them. "Trial counsel is not
 
required to make futile objections merely to create a record
 
impregnable to assault for claimed inadequacy of counsel." 
Antone, 62 Haw. at 351-52, 615 P.2d at 106 (citations, internal
 
quotation marks, and ellipsis omitted).
 
Mahuka also alleges that he received ineffective
 
assistance of counsel because defense counsel "did not cross
 
examine the State's witnesses." Mahuka names three witnesses in
 
particular, (1) Officer Fleigner, (2) Matsuda, and (3) Nau. 
While Mahuka briefly summarizes the testimony given by these
 
three witnesses, Mahuka fails to cite to any objectionable
 
testimony given by these witnesses, and he fails to suggest how
 
the failure to cross-examine these witnesses resulted in the
 
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious
 
defense. Inasmuch as the decision not to cross-examine a witness
 
is generally in the realm of "tactical decisions" made by counsel
 
at trial, after a thorough review of the record on appeal, there
 
is nothing to suggest that the failure to object to or cross-
examine these witnesses resulted in the withdrawal or impairment
 
of a potentially meritorious defense. See State v. Silva, 75
 
Haw. 419, 441, 864 P.2d 583, 593 (1993) (explaining that defense
 counsel's "tactical decisions at trial generally will not be
 
questioned by a reviewing court"). 
12
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mahuka further claims that defense counsel's cross-
examination of the complaining witness, and the defendant's case 
in chief, "just aided the State's case in chief and had the jury 
focused on the knives rather than any defenses to the charges at 
hand."  It is well-settled that lawyers "require and are 
permitted broad latitude to make on-the-spot strategic choices in 
the course of trying a case." State v. Smith, 68 Haw. 304, 311, 
712 P.2d 496, 501 (1986) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). Furthermore, "matters presumably within the judgment 
of counsel, like trial strategy, will rarely be second-guessed by 
judicial hindsight." State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 39-40, 960 
P.2d 1227, 1247-48 (1998) (internal quotation marks omitted). During defense counsel's cross-examination of the complaining 
witness, counsel did indeed question her about the use of knives. 
However, it appears he did so in an attempt to argue that Mahuka 
was not pointing the knives at the complaining witness, and in an 
attempt to rebut the complaining witness's prior testimony and 
impeach her credibility. Moreover, defense counsel's questioning 
of the complaining witness, which elicited testimony that Mahuka 
did not in fact prevent the complaining witness from leaving the 
computer room, benefitted Mahuka in that it likely played a role 
in Mahuka's acquittal of Count One, Kidnapping. Additionally, 
defense counsel's questioning of Mahuka about the knives appeared 
to have been a tactical decision to help bolster his defense that 
he did not in fact point the knives at the complaining witness, 
and it was the complaining witness who first drew a knife on him. 
Notwithstanding defense counsel's attempts, the jury might have 
found Mahuka's testimony self-serving and not credible. If 
counsel's allegedly erroneous actions or omissions have "an 
obvious tactical basis for benefitting the defendant's case," 
they "will not be subject to further scrutiny." Briones v. 
State, 74 Haw. at 462-63, 848 P.2d at 976. Accordingly, defense 
counsel did not provide ineffective assistance in his cross­
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
examination of the complaining witness or his presentation of the
 
defense's case-in-chief. Mahuka has failed to establish
 
ineffective assistance of counsel.
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's August 9, 2011
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 12, 2013 
On the briefs: 
Tae Won Kim 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting Attorneyfor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
14
 