NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
CAAP-11-0000458
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
SKYLER RAY FARREN, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR NO. 10-1-2274)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Skyler R. Farren (Farren) appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) entered
 
1
in the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court)  on May
12, 2011. Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged 
Farren with: (1) abuse of a family or household member (Count I); 
and (2) second-degree terroristic threatening (Count II). The complaining witness (CW) was Farren's girlfriend, with whom he had been residing. A jury found Farren guilty of Count I and acquitted him of Count II. The Family Court sentenced Farren to two years of probation, subject to the condition of two days of incarceration. Farren's sentence was stayed pending appeal. 
On appeal, Farren contends: (1) the Family Court erred
 
in allowing hearsay testimony over his objection, or
 
1
 The Honorable Fa' auuga L. To' oto'o presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
alternatively, in failing to issue a proper limiting instruction;
 
(2) the prosecutor's remarks in closing argument constituted
 misconduct; (3) the Family Court's instructions on self-defense
 were erroneous; and (4) there was insufficient evidence to
 support Farren's conviction for abuse of a family or household
 member. We affirm.
 
I.
 
The State adduced the following evidence at trial. 
Farren lived with the CW and her three children. The couple's
 relationship was "tense," with Farren berating and constantly
 calling the CW names. Because their relationship was not working
 out, the CW told Farren he had to move out, and she gave him
 thirty days to find another place.
 
The CW testified that the next day, Farren continued to
 
call her names and make rude comments. When Farren came home
 from work, he took off his dirty and sweaty work shirt and threw
 the shirt overhand at the CW, hitting her in the face from a
 distance of eight or nine feet. After initially testifying that
 being hit by the shirt did not hurt, the CW admitted that she had
 told a police officer that there was "maybe a little bit" of pain
 when the shirt hit her face. Farren did not object to this
 testimony. The CW further testified, without objection, that the
 shirt "hit my face, it slapped my face."
 
Later, while the CW and Farren were in the living room,
 
the CW warned Farren that she would get a restraining order.
 Farren responded, "Fuck the restraining order." Farren pulled
 out a knife with the blade exposed and brandished it for one or
 two seconds before putting it back in his pocket. Farren then
 put his left hand on the CW's upper neck just under her jaw line,
 using the crook between his thumb and index finger. Farren
 pushed the CW backwards three feet, causing her to fall over a
 wooden stool and onto a couch.
 
The CW went to the adjoining residence of a neighbor
 
and asked if she could leave her computer there because she was
 afraid Farren might break it. The CW was visibly shaking and
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
tearful. The CW then went to the police station, where she
 
reported the incident to Officer Camille Koholua (Officer
 Koholua). 
II.
 
We resolve the arguments raised by Farren as follows:
 1. Farren argues that the Family Court erred in
 
allowing Officer Koholua, over a hearsay objection, to testify
 that the CW told the officer that Farren threw a shirt "that
 struck [the CW] in the face causing pain." Farren argues in the
 alternative that if this testimony was admissible, the Family
 Court erred in failing to give a limiting instruction. Officer
 Koholua's testimony was essentially duplicative of the CW's
 unobjected-to testimony that Farren threw a shirt that "hit . . .
 [and] slapped [the CW's] face" and caused "maybe a little bit" of
 pain. We conclude that any error in admitting Officer Koholua's
 testimony without a limiting instruction was harmless. See State
 
v. Crisostomo, 94 Hawai' i 282, 290, 12 P.3d 873, 881 (2000) 
(concluding that any error in admitting evidence that was cumulative of properly admitted evidence was harmless); State v. Clark, 83 Hawai' i 289, 298, 926 P.2d 194, 203 (1996) (same). 
2. Farren argues that the prosecutor engaged in
 
misconduct through his remarks in closing argument, which
 referred to our society being governed by "the rule of law," and
 not "the law of the jungle." Farren also cites as misconduct,
 the prosecutor's remarks that in our country, unlike some other
 countries, we do not apply the "law of the jungle," where might
 makes right, and we do not allow "whoever's the biggest and most
 powerful . . . to call the shots." Farren did not object to the
 prosecutor's remarks, but now claims that they deprived him of a
 fair trial.
 
While poorly phrased, the prosecutor's remarks
 
essentially directed the jury to apply the rule of law and
 emphasized the underlying rationale for the criminal prohibition
 against threatening and assaultive behavior -- that might does
 not make right. Considered in context, we reject Farren's
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
contention that the prosecutor's comments constituted plain error 
which adversely affected Farren's substantial rights. See 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 52(b) (1977). 
3. Farren argues that the Family Court's instructions 
on self-defense were erroneous because the Family Court did not use the recently adopted Hawai' i Pattern Jury Instructions -­
Criminal (HAWJIC) Instruction 7.01B (Apr. 4, 2011) on self-defense, but instead gave the former HAWJIC self-defense instruction. Farren argues that the Family Court's instruction was deficient because it did not include the language in the new HAWJIC instruction that: "The defendant may estimate the necessity for the use of force under the circumstances as he/she reasonably believes them to be when the force is used, without retreating . . . ." (brackets omitted). Instead, the Family Court gave the former HAWJIC self-defense instruction which contained language that: "The reasonableness of the defendant's belief that the use of such protective force was immediately necessary shall be determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable person in the defendant's position under the circumstances of which the defendant was aware or as the defendant reasonably believed them to be." HAWJIC Instruction 7.01 (2000). 
Farren cites no case which holds that the portion of 
the former HAWJIC self-defense instruction he challenges was defective. He nevertheless claims that the absence of language that "the defendant may estimate the necessity for the use of force . . . without retreating" rendered the Family Court's instruction prejudicially erroneous. We disagree. The Family Court's instruction accurately captures the requirement that the necessity for the defendant's use of force be evaluated from the viewpoint of a reasonable person in the defendant's position based on the circumstances as the defendant was aware or reasonably believed them to be. See State v. Augustin, 101 
Hawai'i 127, 127-28, 63 P.3d 1097, 1097-98 (2002) (Order 
Dismissing Certiorari Proceeding). There was no suggestion in this case that Farren had a duty to retreat before engaging in 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
self-defense. Therefore, the instruction's silence as to whether
 
there was a duty to retreat did not affect Farren's substantial
 rights.
 
4. We reject Farren's claim that there was 
insufficient evidence to support his conviction because there was no substantial evidence that the CW suffered any "physical pain." The CW testified that Farren put his hand on her upper neck and pushed her backward three feet, causing her to fall over a stool and onto a couch. Shortly after the incident, the CW appeared at her neighbor's residence, visibly shaking and tearful. Although the CW denied that she felt pain as a result of the push, the jury was free to disregard this testimony and could reasonably infer that the CW experienced physical pain as the result of being pushed in the neck and falling backward. See State v. 
Hoang, 94 Hawai' i 271, 281, 12 P.3d 371, 381 (App. 2000) 
(concluding that the trier of fact could reasonably infer pain from evidence of physical contact, even though there was no specific evidence adduced regarding pain). We conclude that when viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, State v. Tamura, 63 Haw. 636, 637, 633 P.2d 1115, 1117 (1981), there was sufficient evidence to support Farren's conviction. 
III.
 
We affirm the May 12, 2011, Judgment of the Family
 
Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 15, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Audrey L. Stanley
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant 
Chief Judge
 
Brian R. Vincent
 Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
5
 