NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001300
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JOHN LESLIE GALLAGHER, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 13-1-0972(3))
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant John Leslie Gallagher (Gallagher)
appeals from the October 31, 2014 Judgment of Conviction and
Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit
(Circuit Court).1  Gallagher was convicted of Criminal Property
Damage in the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised
Statutes (HRS) § 708-821(1)(b) (2014)2.  He appeals his
conviction, arguing improper admission of prior bad acts, the
failure to instruct the jury on his defense, and ineffective
assistance of counsel.
After a careful review of the issues raised and the
arguments made by the parties, the applicable legal authority,
1The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
2HRS § 708-821(1)(b) provides:
A person commits the offense of criminal property damage in
the second degree if by means other than fire [] [t]he
person intentionally or knowingly damages the property of
another, without the other's consent, in an amount exceeding
$1,500[.]
(Formatting altered.)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and the record, we resolve Gallagher's arguments as follows and
affirm.
1. The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion by
admitting relevant evidence of Gallagher's prior bad acts.3 
Citing to Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rules 401, 402, 403 and
404(b),4 Gallagher argues that the evidence of four prior
3Gallagher's point of error does not comply with Hawai #i Rules of
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4)(A), insofar as it fails to provide
"the full substance of the evidence admitted" and for this reason alone we
could disregard it.  See HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) ("Points not presented in
accordance with this section will be disregarded, except that the appellate
court, at its option, may notice a plain error not presented.").  Although
Gallagher notes the State sought admission of evidence of four incidents, he
concedes the State withdrew its request with regard to the last, September 19,
2013 incident but added a March 24, 2013 incident.  However, neither in his
point on appeal, nor his argument on the point, does Gallagher describe the
testimony admitted nor provide record references for the substance of the
testimony.  Nonetheless, because this court endeavors to reach the merits of
an appeal where possible, we will address this argument only with regard to
evidence of prior acts generally.
4These rules provide,
Rule 401  Definition of "relevant evidence".  
"Relevant evidence" means evidence having any tendency to
make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the
determination of the action more probable or less probable
than it would be without the evidence.
Rule 402  Relevant evidence generally admissible;
irrelevant evidence inadmissible.   All relevant evidence is
admissible, except as otherwise provided by the
Constitutions of the United States and the State of Hawaii,
by statute, by these rules, or by other rules adopted by the
supreme court.  Evidence which is not relevant is not
admissible.
Rule 403  Exclusion of relevant evidence on grounds of
prejudice, confusion, or waste of time.   Although relevant,
evidence may be excluded if its probative value is
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice,
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless
presentation of cumulative evidence.
Rule 404 Character evicence not admissible to prove
conduct; exceptions; other crimes.  . . . 
(b)  Other crimes, wrongs, or acts.  Evidence of other
crimes wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the
character of a person in order to show action in conformity
therewith.  It may, however, be admissible where such
evidence is probative of another fact that is of consequence
to the determination of the action, such as proof of motive,
opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity,
modus operandi, or absence of mistake or accident.  In
criminal cases, the proponent of evidence to be offered
under this subsection shall provide reasonable notice in
advance of trial, or during trial if the court excuses
(continued...)
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
incidents was irrelevant to the only aspect of the criminal
property damage offense in dispute--the amount of the damage
caused and his intent with respect to that amount--and even if
relevant, the relevance was substantially outweighed by its
unfairly prejudicial effect.
A trial court's determination that evidence is "relevant"
within the meaning of HRE Rule 401 [] is reviewed under the
right/wrong standard of review.  However, a trial court's
balancing of the probative value of prior bad act evidence
against the prejudicial effect of such evidence under HRE
Rule 403 is reviewed for abuse of discretion.  An abuse of
discretion occurs when the court clearly exceeds the bounds
of reason or disregards rules or principles of law to the
substantial detriment of a party litigant.
State v. Fetelee, 117 Hawai# i 53, 62–63, 175 P.3d 709, 718–19
(2008) (citations and ellipsis omitted).
Gallagher is mistaken in his assumption that evidence
is only relevant to prove matters in dispute.  As defined in HRE
Rule 401, relevant evidence includes that which makes "any fact
that is of consequence to the determination of the action" more
or less probable.  See Hawaii Rules of Evidence Manual  § 401-2[7]
(2016-17 ed.) ("The consequential fact sought to be proved need
not be in dispute.").  Moreover, the State bears the burden of
proving each element of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt and
Gallagher offered no stipulation as to any of the essential
elements of the instant offense.  In any event, Gallagher's
intent was  in dispute, and "[t]he mind of an alleged offender may
be read from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from
all the circumstances."  State v. Sadino , 64 Haw. 427, 430, 642 
P.2d 534, 536-37 (1982) quoted with approval in State v. Kiese,
126 Hawai #i 494, 502-03, 273 P.3d 1180, 1188-89 (2012).
The State argues that the "four prior instances of
harassment between the Normans and [Gallagher]" showed Gallagher
harbored prior animosity towards the Normans, making it more
probable than not that he "intentionally or knowingly caused over
$1,500 [] worth of damage to the Normans's vehicle."  The Circuit
Court apparently agreed, commenting that, "[o]therwise, there
4(...continued)
pretrial notice on good cause shown, of the date, location,
and general nature of any such evidence it intends to
introduce at trial.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
really would be no sense to this entire incident."  Gallagher
responds that the evidence was inadmissible as it was irrelevant
to the actual dollar amount of damage or to Gallagher's intent to
cause that magnitude of damage during the charged incident
because none of the prior incidents involved actual or attempted
property damage.  Gallagher provides no authority for the
proposition that the prior incidents must involve property damage
in order to be relevant to his intent.
 Gallagher also maintains that because his counsel told
the jury in opening statements that the only dispute was the
amount of damages and that he admitted in his testimony his
intent to kick the Normans' vehicle, there was no basis to admit
the evidence of prior incidents.  Again, because Gallagher's
intent was a matter of consequence, it was relevant.  We also
note that Gallagher did not enter into a stipulation regarding
his intent, his counsel's arguments were not evidence, and his
testimony was presented after the State presented the evidence in
question.
Gallagher also maintains the Circuit Court abused its
discretion by admitting the evidence, because the unfair
prejudice substantially outweighed any limited probative value.  
The State claims there was a substantial need for the evidence in
order to prove Gallagher's intent, there was no alternative way
to establish the context of the relationship between Gallagher
and the Normans, and the evidence of the prior conduct was not
likely to rouse the jury to an overmastering sense of hostility
toward Gallagher.
When weighing probative value versus prejudicial effect
in the context of HRE 403, a court must consider a variety of
factors, including:
the strength of the evidence as to the commission of the
other crime, the similarities between the crimes, the
interval of time that has elapsed between the crimes, the
need for the evidence, the efficacy of alternative proof,
and the degree to which the evidence probably will rouse the
jury to overmastering hostility.
State v. Behrendt, 124 Hawai# i 90, 106, 237 P.3d 1156, 1172
(2010) (citing State v. Renon , 73 Haw. 23, 38, 828 P.2d 1266,
1273 (1992)). 
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In its ruling the Circuit Court relied on the need for
the evidence, opining that the evidence of the prior incidents
was "the only way" for the State to show its theory of the case,
i.e., the "rhyme or reason to what occurred on the night in
question."  While allowing that there was some prejudicial effect
from the evidence, the Circuit Court concluded that the high
probative value of the evidence was not substantially outweighed
by the prejudicial effect.
The Circuit Court also issued a limiting instruction
prior to the presentation of the evidence as well as during the
charge to the jury and, without more, we presume that the jury
adhered to those instructions.  State v. Acker , 133 Hawai #i 253,
278, 327 P.3d 931, 956 (2014).  Based on our review of the
record, we conclude the Circuit Court did not abuse its
discretion by allowing presentation of the evidence of prior
incidents.
2. Gallagher claims the Circuit Court erred by
failing to instruct the jury that "it is a defense, which reduces
the class or grade of the offense to a class or grade of offense
consistent with defendant's state of mind, that the defendant
believed the valuation of the property or services to be less,"
in accordance with the commentary to HRS § 708-823.  However,
this is an incorrect statement of the law, as the State was not
required to prove the value of the property, but rather, the
value of the damage  caused.  State v. Pardee , 86 Hawai #i 165,
170, 948, P.2d 586, 591 (App. 1997).
In any event, assuming for the sake of argument that it
was error for the Circuit Court not to instruct the jury that it
was a defense that Gallagher thought the property damage was less
than $1,500, any error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
The jury was instructed, with regard to the charged offense of
Criminal Property Damage in the Second Degree and the lesser
included offense of Criminal Property Damage in the Third Degree,
that it must find Gallagher "was aware or believed the damage to
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the property exceeded" the pertinent amount.5  Thus, the jury was
told that it must find Gallagher was aware or believed he caused
over $1,500 in damage to find him guilty of Criminal Property
Damage in the Second Degree.  The failure to tell the jury that
it was a defense if he lacked this awareness or belief would not
have altered their analysis.  Thus, as we presume the jury
followed the instructions given, the jury could not have reached
their verdict without finding that Gallagher was aware or
believed the damage he caused was in excess of $1,500.  Gallagher
has failed to show that he was harmed by the instructions as
given.
3. Although he admits the majority of his claims are
not fully developed on the record, Gallagher raises three claims
of ineffective assistance of trial counsel on direct appeal out
of an abundance of caution, as he is represented by different
counsel on appeal than at trial.  See Loher v. State, 118 Hawai# i
522, 531, 193 P.3d 438, 447 (App. 2008), overruled on other
grounds by State v. Auld, 136 Hawai #i 244, 361 P.3d 471 (2015)
(holding that defendant waived ineffective assistance of trial
counsel claims by not raising them on direct appeal where
represented by different attorney on appeal).
Gallagher's first two claims are that trial counsel was
ineffective for failing to call two impeachment witnesses and
failing to challenge an entry regarding an alleged California
conviction for bank robbery in the presentence investigation
report.  As Gallagher merely requests that he should be allowed
to raise these claims in a post-conviction petition because he
has not had a realistic opportunity to develop the record on
these claims, we do not address the merits of these claims.6
5The jury was also instructed as to the lesser included offense of
Criminal Property Damage in the Fourth Degree, for which no dollar amount of
the damage needed to be proven.
6We acknowledge . . . that not every trial record is
sufficiently developed to determine whether there has
been ineffective assistance of counsel; indeed, a
defendant is often only able to allege facts that, if
proved, would entitle him or her to relief. 
Therefore, we hold that where the record on appeal is
insufficient to demonstrate ineffective assistance of
counsel, but where:  (1) the defendant alleges facts
(continued...)
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
As to his remaining allegation, Gallagher points to
counsel's failure to request the aforementioned jury instruction
regarding his lack-of-intent defense.  As we have concluded that
the failure to give such an instruction did not prejudice his
defense, State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai# i 504, 514, 78 P.3d 317,
327 (2003) (to establish an ineffective assistance of counsel
claim defendant must establish, inter alia that the omission
substantially impaired a potentially meritorious defense),
Gallagher has failed to show his trial counsel was ineffective on
this basis.
Therefore, we affirm the October 31, 2014 Judgment of
Conviction and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the
Second Circuit without prejudice to Gallagher bringing a petition
under Hawai #i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 40 raising a claim
for ineffective assistance of counsel for failure to call two
impeachment witnesses at trial.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 20, 2017.
On the briefs:
Cynthia Kagiwada,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Peter A. Hanano,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
6(...continued)
that if proven would entitle him or her to relief, and
(2) the claim is not patently frivolous and without
trace of support in the record, the appellate court
may affirm defendant's conviction without prejudice to
a subsequent Rule 40 petition on the ineffective
assistance of counsel claim.
State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 439, 864 P.2d 583, 592-93 (1993).
7