NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000805
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
ROSEMARIE GAETA, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
WEST MAUI RESORT PARTNERS, LP, Defendant-Appellant,
and DOE CORPORATIONS 1-5, DOE ENTITIES 1-5,
JOHN DOES 1-5, JANE DOES 1-5, Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-0052(2))
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Fujise, Acting Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant West Maui Resort Partners, LP,
(West Maui Resort ) appeals from the August 17, 2016 Entry of
Final Judgment (Judgment ) and the October 24, 2016 Order Denying
West Maui Resort's HRCP Rule 60(b) Motion for Relief from Final
Judgment ( Order Denying Motion for Relief ), both entered by the
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit ( Circuit Court).1 
I.
On January 29, 2015, Plaintiff-Appellee Rosemarie Gaeta
(Gaeta) filed a Complaint against Kaanapali Beach Vacation Owners
1The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Association (the Owners Association ).  The Complaint and Summons
were served on the Owners Association on February 20, 2015, as
evidenced by the Return and Acknowledgment of Service filed on
March 2, 2015.  On May 12, 2015, Gaeta filed a First Amended
Complaint against the Owners Association, and the Owners
Association filed its Answer on June 3, 2015.
The case was submitted to arbitration under the Court
Annexed Arbitration Program ( CAAP).  An arbitration hearing was
held on April 12, 2016, between Gaeta and the Owners Association.
On or about April 22 (or April 26), 2016,2 the
arbitrator issued an undated Arbitration Award (
Original Award )
in favor of Gaeta and against the Owners Association, which
apportioned liability as 49 percent to Gaeta's negligence and 51
percent to the Owners Association's negligence, and awarded Gaeta
$65,701.64 in damages against the Owners Association, plus costs
in the amount of $5,013.34.
In the meantime, on April 18, 2016, the Circuit Court
entered a Stipulation to Substitute West Maui Resort Partners LP
for Defendant Association of Apartment Owners of Kaanapali Beach
Vacation Resort; Order, between Gaeta and the Owners Association
(the Stipulation ).  The Stipulation stated that "[g]ood cause
exists for said amendment because in course of discovery it was
discovered that West Maui Resort Partners and not Defendant
[Owners Association] was in control of the premises where the
Plaintiff suffered the injury alleged in the Complaint."  The
2The parties reference different dates.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Stipulation was not signed by an attorney or other person
purporting to represent or have the authority to act on behalf of
West Maui Resort, who was not yet a party to the case.
On May 10, 2016, the Owners Association – which was
still the only defendant in this action – filed Defendant's
Notice of CAAP Appeal and Request for Trial De Novo, representing
itself as "Kaanapali Beach Vacation Owners' Association
substituted by stipulation as West Maui Resort Partners, LP."
(Capitalization altered.)
On May 13, 2016, Gaeta filed her Second Amended
Complaint.  The Second Amended Complaint named West Maui Resort
as the defendant.3  On the same day, counsel for the Owners
Association emailed the arbitrator to inform him of the
Stipulation and to request that an amended arbitration award be
issued "to properly describe the stipulated/ substituted party on
the caption as a matter of form over substance."4
On May 24, 2016, an Amended Arbitration Award, which
now identified West Maui Resort as the liable defendant, was
issued and transmitted to counsel by the Arbitration
Administrator, along with an advisement concerning Hawai# i
Arbitration Rules ( HAR) Rule 21.
3No summons was issued to West Maui Resort and no return
of service was filed. However, when West Maui Resort answered the
Second Amended Complaint on June 1, 2016, a defense of
insufficiency of process or insufficiency of service of process
was not included.  See Hawai #i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP)
Rule 12(h). 
4Counsel for the Owners Association later appeared as
counsel for West Maui Resort, beginning with a deposition notice
filed on May 31, 2016, the day before West Maui Resort answered
the Second Amended Complaint.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On June 1, 2016, West Maui Resort filed an Answer to
the Second Amended Complaint.  
On June 14, 2016, West Maui Resort filed a First
Amended Notice of CAAP Appeal and Request for Trial de Novo .  
On June 22, 2016, the Arbitrator Administrator sent a
letter to counsel stating the Amended Award was filed on May 24,
2016, and therefore, under HAR Rules 21 and 22, the Notice of
Appeal and Request for Trial De Novo was required to be filed by
June 13, 2016, but was filed on June 14, 2016.  On June 24, 2016,
the Arbitration Administrator wrote a letter to the parties
informing them that his view was that he needed to enter the
Amended Award as a Final Judgment, but he would hold off 10 days
to give West Maui Resort an opportunity to file an appeal of the
disputed issue to the Arbitration Judge.  An appeal was filed and
opposed, and a hearing was held, but relief was denied by an
order entered on August 16, 2016.  The May 24, 2016 Amended Award
was entered as the Judgment on August 17, 2016.
On August 25, 2016, West Maui Resort filed an HRCP Rule
60(b)(4) motion for relief from the Judgment (Motion for Relief ),
contending that the Judgment violates West Maui Resort's right to
procedural due process and is void because West Maui Resort was
deprived of an opportunity to be heard before the decision was
rendered and judgment was entered against it.  West Maui Resort
also contended that HAR Rule 21 did not bar the motion because
the Judgment is void.  After further briefing and a hearing the
Motion for Relief was denied.
II.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, West Maui Resort raises a single point of
error, arguing that the Circuit Court erred when it denied the
Motion for Relief because the Amended Award was based on the CAAP
arbitration, West Maui Resort was not a party to the CAAP
arbitration, and therefore, West Maui Resort was denied its due
process rights to a meaningful opportunity to be heard.
III.
We first address Gaeta's contention that this court
lacks appellate jurisdiction to consider this matter because the
final judgment is not subject to appellate review.  Gaeta relies
on Darcy v. Lolohea, 77 Hawai #i 422, 886 P.2d 759 (App. 1994),
and  HAR Rule 21, which states:
If, after twenty (20) days after the award is served
upon the parties, no party has filed a written Notice of
Appeal and Request for Trial De Novo, the clerk of the court
shall, upon notification by the Arbitration Administrator,
enter the arbitration award as a final judgment of the
court. This period may be extended by written stipulation,
filed with the Arbitration Administrator within twenty (20)
days after service of the award upon the parties, to a
period no more than forty (40) days after the award is
served upon the parties. Said award shall have the same
force and effect as a final judgment of the court in a civil
action, but may not be appealed.
In Darcy, the plaintiffs filed a complaint against the
defendants for damages for personal injuries suffered in a car
accident involving the defendants.  77 Hawai #i at 424, 886 P.2d
at 761.  After a CAAP arbitration hearing, the arbitrator issued
a decision in favor of the plaintiffs.  Id. at 425, 886 P.2d at
762.  The defendants did not file an appeal and request a trial
de novo from the award.  Id.  Pursuant to HAR Rule 21, the
arbitration award became a final judgment.  Id. 
Defendants sought relief from the judgment, contending
that the arbitrator and circuit court erred because the
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
plaintiffs were precluded from suing under the motor vehicle
insurance law.  Id. at 425, 886 P.2d at 762.  This court stated:   
The concise answer to Defendants' argument is that the
issue may not be considered by the circuit court or the
appellate courts because HAR Rule 21 unambiguously
establishes that, "[i]f after twenty (20) days after the
award is served upon the parties, no party has filed a
written Notice of Appeal and Request for Trial De Novo,    
. . . [s]aid award shall have the same force and effect as a
final judgment of the [circuit] court in the civil action,
but may not be appealed."  When the language of the rule is
clear, we must give effect to its plain and obvious meaning.
Because the judgment "may not be appealed[,]" the
appellate courts are clearly without jurisdiction to
consider the merits of the arbitration decision. . . . 
Thus, we are without jurisdiction to consider Defendants'
appeal from the arbitration judgment.
Id. at 426, 886 P.2d at 763 (citation and emphasis omitted).  
In the instant case, however, we are not asked to
consider the merits of the arbitration decision.  Instead, West
Maui Resort argues that its procedural due process rights were
violated because judgment was entered against it based on a CAAP
arbitration that was completed before it was even named as a
defendant.  We agree that Darcy is distinguishable.  In Darcy,
this court noted:  "We are not faced with the question of the
applicability of a public policy exception to the HAR or with the
contention that an arbitration award, although final, has been
'clearly shown' to have violated public policy."  Id. at 424 n.3,
886 P.2d at 761 n.3 (citing Inlandboatmen's Union of the Pac. v.
Sause Bros., Inc., 77 Hawai# i 187, 193, 881 P.2d 1255, 1261 (App.
1994)).  The entry of judgment on an arbitration award obtained
in disregard of well-defined precepts of procedural due process
is a violation of public policy.  See generally Inlandboatmen's
Union of the Pac. v. Sause Bros., Inc., 77 Hawai# i 187, 193, 881
P.2d 1255, 1261 (App. 1994) (citing United Paperworkers Int'l
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Union v. Misco, Inc., 484 U.S. 29 (1987)).  Therefore, we
conclude that we have appellate jurisdiction to consider whether
West Maui Resort was denied its due process rights.
IV.
West Maui Resort contends that the Judgment is void and
therefore it was entitled to relief under HRCP Rule 60(b)(4),
which states:  "On motion and upon such terms as are just, the
court may relieve a party or a party's legal representative from
a final judgment, order, or proceeding for the following reasons:
. . . (4) the judgment is void[.]"  "[A] judgment is void only if
the court that rendered it lacked jurisdiction of either the
subject matter or the parties or otherwise acted in a manner
inconsistent with due process of law."  Citicorp Mortg., Inc. v.
Bartolome, 94 Hawai #i 422, 428, 16 P.3d 827, 833 (App. 2000)
(citation omitted; emphasis added).  "The basic elements of
procedural due process are notice and an opportunity to be heard
at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner."  Mauna Kea
Anaina Hou v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 136 Hawai #i 376, 389, 363
P.3d 224, 237 (2015) (citations omitted).
Here, a judgment for damages was entered against West
Maui Resort based entirely on Gaeta's claims against the Owners
Association, Gaeta's presentation of evidence against the Owners
Association, and the Owners Association's defense of its own
interests.  As noted above, no claims had been asserted against
West Maui Resort, and West Maui Resort was not named as a
defendant or served with a summons and complaint at the time of
the arbitration hearing.  West Maui Resort had no opportunity to
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
make arguments, present evidence, or otherwise be heard at any
time prior to the arbitrator's decision on the substance of
Gaeta's claims.  West Maui Resort did not enter into the
Stipulation to substitute it as a party-defendant in this case. 
Although West Maui Resort later waived defenses based on
insufficiency of process or insufficiency of service of process
by failing to preserve them, pursuant to HRCP Rule 12(h), it was
yet not a proper party to the case when the Amended Arbitration
Award against it was issued.  We conclude that entry of the
Judgment against West Maui Resort under these particular
circumstances failed to provide West Maui Resort with notice and
an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful time and in a
meaningful manner and therefore is inconsistent with due process
of law.5  Accordingly, the Circuit Court erred in denying the
Motion for Relief.
V.
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's October 24, 2016
Order Denying Motion for Relief and August 17, 2016 Judgment are
vacated and this case is remanded to the Circuit Court for 
5Arguably, a trial de novo  may be an inadequate remedy
for the lack of an opportunity to meaningfully participate in a
CAAP arbitration hearing, as the appealing party faces a
heightened standard to "prevail" at trial and a non-prevailing
party may be subject to substantial monetary sanctions for
failing to prevail in a trial de novo.  See HAR Rules 25 & 26.  
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
further proceedings to resolve Gaeta's claims against West Maui
Resort.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 28, 2018.
On the briefs:
Richard B. Miller,
Mark B. Desmarais,
Ashley R. Shibuya,
(Tom Petrus & Miller, LLLC),
for Defendant-Appellant.Acting Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Matson Kelley,
Alex Wilkins,
(Law Office of Matson Kelly),
and
Jon S. Jacobs,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
9