 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-11-0000721
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
PHILLIP G. KUCHLER, INC., Claimant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
v.
 
ABE LEE REALTY, LLC, and ABRAHAM W.H. LEE, Respondents­
Appellants/Cross-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P. NO. 11-1-0325)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
This appeal arises out of a motion by Phillip G.
 
Kuchler, Inc. (Kuchler) to confirm an arbitration award against
 
Abe Lee Realty, LLC (Lee Realty) and Abraham W.H. Lee (Lee). The
 motion was filed in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (Circuit Court).
1 Respondents-Appellants/Cross-Appellees Lee
 
Realty and Lee (collectively, "Respondents") appeal from the
 "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Claimant [Kuchler's]
 Motion to Confirm Final Award of Arbitrator as Judgment Against
 Abe Lee Realty, LLC and Abraham W.H. Lee" (Confirmation Order)
 that was filed by the Circuit Court on August 29, 2011. 
Claimant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant Kuchler cross-appeals from the
 "Final Judgment" of the Circuit Court filed on September 9, 2011,
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
which is stated to be "[b]ased upon" the Confirmation Order. 
Kuchler also cross-appeals from three post-judgment orders.2
 
Abe Realty as the "Buyer" and Lee as "Guarantor,"
 
entered into an agreement with Kuchler to purchase real-estate
 management accounts held by Kuchler. The purchase price was
 based on the gross monthly receipts generated by the management
 accounts. Kuchler and Respondents submitted disputes arising out
 of the purchase agreement to arbitration. The arbitrator ordered
 that Lee "sequester" certain gross monthly receipts by depositing
 them in a separate bank account while the parties' dispute was
 being arbitrated. The arbitrator eventually ruled that Abe
 Realty was liable to Kuchler for the purchase price under their
 purchase agreement and that Lee, while not the Buyer under the
 purchase agreement, was liable to Kuchler for a portion of the
 purchase price based on his personal guaranty. 
The parties' appeals to this court revolve around what
 
the arbitrator actually decided with respect to the disposition
 of the funds that were placed in the separate account, which the
 arbitrator referred to as being "held in escrow"; whether the
 Circuit Court properly interpreted the arbitrator's decision
 regarding the disposition of these funds; and whether the Circuit
 Court's rulings that were related to Kuchler's attempts to
 collect the arbitration award were proper. 
In their appeal, Respondents contend that the Circuit
 
Court erred by including in the Confirmation Order the following
 language which they assert was contrary to the arbitrator's
 decision: "The funds deposited into the escrowed bank account are
 
2 Kuchler appeals from the following post-judgment orders of the Circuit
Court: (1) the January 6, 2012, "Order Dismissing [Kuchler's] Motion to
Enforce [Confirmation Order]"; (2) the January 6, 2012, "Order Granting in
Part and Denying in Part [Lee's] Motion 1) For Protective Order, 2) to Vacate
Ex Parte Motion For Examination of [Lee], 3) to Vacate Ex Parte Motions for
Garnishee Summons After Judgment[,] 4) For Order Directing Claimant to Restore
[Lee's] Garnished Accounts, 5) For Sanctions, and 6) For Entry of a
Satisfaction of Judgment for [Lee]" (Order Regarding Lee's Omnibus Motion);
and (3) the February 9, 2012, "Order Denying [Kuchler's] Motion to Reconsider
12/15/11 Decision (1) Dismissing [Kuchler's] December 12, 2011 Motion to
Enforce [Confirmation] Order and (2) Granting in Part and Denying in Part
[Lee's] October 26, 2011 Omnibus Motion." 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to be used to partially satisfy the judgment owed by [Lee Realty]
 
only."
 
In its cross-appeal, Kuchler contends: (1) the Circuit
 
Court erred in entering a Final Judgment which did not conform to
 the arbitrator's award and its own Confirmation Order; (2) the
 Circuit Court erred in ruling that it lacked jurisdiction to
 enforce its Confirmation Order due to the filing of this appeal;
 (3) the Circuit Court erred in entering a satisfaction of
 judgment for Lee and precluding additional collection efforts
 against him; and (4) the Circuit Court erred in denying Kuchler's
 motion for reconsideration of prior rulings adverse to Kuchler.
 
As explained below, we vacate portions of the Circuit
 
Court's orders challenged on appeal, and we remand the case for
 further proceedings. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
In April 2009, Kuchler and Lee Realty entered into an
 
"Asset Sale and Purchase Agreement" (Purchase Agreement) under
 which Lee Realty agreed to purchase from Kuchler a portfolio of
 real estate management accounts held by Kuchler. The Purchase
 Agreement provided in relevant part that Lee Realty would pay
 Kuchler: (1) one-half of the gross income received from the
 management accounts less $4,000 for the cost of a bookkeeper and
 less "direct expenses" from May 1, 2009, through December 31,
 2009; plus (2) twenty-months times the "Average Monthly Gross
 Receipts," which would be derived by adding the total gross
 receipts less direct expense less $4,000 for May 1, 2009, through
 December 31, 2009, divided by eight months. Lee, who was
 identified in the Purchase Agreement as Lee Realty's "principal,"
 personally guaranteed payment of the purchase price "for the
 first year." Lee signed the Purchase Agreement on behalf of Lee
 Realty and as "Guarantor."
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
Disputes soon arose regarding the Purchase Agreement. 
Kuchler and Respondents submitted their disputes to arbitration
 
before Arbitrator Keith W. Hunter (Arbitrator), pursuant to the
 terms of the Purchase Agreement. Kuchler, among other things,
 asserted claims against Respondents for money owed to Kuchler
 under the Purchase Agreement as well as for unjust enrichment and
 interference with contract and prospective economic advantage. 
Respondents, in turn, claimed that Kuchler, through
 misrepresentations, fraudulently induced Respondents to enter
 into the Purchase Agreement and that Kuchler had also breached
 its obligations under the Purchase Agreement.
 
A.
 
Prior to the arbitration hearing, Kuchler filed a
 
motion with the Arbitrator seeking to require Respondents to make
 immediate payment of all monies due under the Purchase Agreement. 
Respondents opposed the motion, arguing that they were alleging
 breach of the Purchase Agreement and seeking damages against
 Kuchler. Respondents, however, offered to deposit the disputed
 fees and commissions collected on the management accounts into a
 neutral account pending the outcome of the arbitration.
 
Although the Arbitrator denied Kuchler's request for
 
immediate payment of monies due under the Purchase Agreement, it
 noted that Kuchler had "raised valid points in that: (1)
 [Respondents] currently [are] receiving the whole benefit of all
 fees earned off of the subject [management accounts]; (2) the
 [Purchase Agreement] language anticipates a portion of these
 funds to go to Kuchler, and (3) Kuchler is prejudiced
 economically by the imbalance of resources." The Arbitrator
 ruled that:
 
the appropriate remedy is to sequester all "Gross Monthly
Receipts" as defined in the [Purchase Agreement] in a
neutral account beyond the use of either party pending the
final outcome of their dispute. "Gross Monthly Receipts"
means total gross receipts from the subject assets less
direct expenses and bookkeeping expenses according to the
formula established in the [Purchase Agreement]. The
 purpose of this fashion of order is to prevent either party
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
from gaining from the disputed contract unfairly, while
relieving [Respondents] from having to carry the direct
expenses from other resources.
 
The Arbitrator therefore granted Kuchler's motion in
 
part and entered the following interim order on July 16, 2010:
 
1. [Respondents are] ordered to open forthwith a
separate account in an FDIC-insured, interest-bearing
account at a bank located in Honolulu, Hawaii.
 
2. [Respondents are] to deposit into said
account all Gross Monthly Receipts (i.e., gross
receipts less direct and bookkeeping expenses as set
forth in the contract) from the subject Kuchler
accounts that [Respondents have] received to date, and
on a monthly basis into the future until this order
expires according to the terms below.
 
3. [Respondents are] to provide initial
account opening statements and thereafter monthly
account statements reflecting all account activity and
balances to Kuchler's counsel and the Arbitrator.
 
4. [Respondents are] to provide itemized
profit and loss statements for all [they have]
received to date on the Kuchler accounts, and on a
monthly basis moving forward, [Respondents are] to
provide concurrently with the monthly bank account
statements to Kuchler's counsel and this Arbitrator,
monthly profit and loss statements for the subject
Kuchler accounts, and
 
5. This order will remain in full force and
 
effect until entry of the final Award in this
Arbitration or until further order of the Arbitrator.
 
B.
 
On April 25, 2011, after seven days of hearings, the
 
Arbitrator issued a his "Arbitrator's Decision and Partial Final
 
Award" (Partial Final Award). The Arbitrator found that Kuchler
 did not fraudulently or improperly induce Respondents to enter
 into the Purchase Agreement and that Kuchler and Respondents had
 validly entered into the Purchase Agreement. The Arbitrator
 therefore determined that Kuchler was entitled to the award of
 damages (i.e., the agreed upon purchase price) pursuant to the
 terms of the Purchase Agreement. The Arbitrator found that only
 Lee Realty, and not Lee as an individual, was the "Buyer" under
 the Purchase Agreement and therefore only Lee Realty was liable
 for the obligations of the "Buyer" under the Purchase Agreement. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
However, because Lee had personally guaranteed the purchase price
 
for the first year, Lee was liable as a guarantor for the first
 years's payment under the Purchase Agreement. The Arbitrator
 determined that Lee Realty owed Kuchler $172,845.55 under the
 Purchase Agreement and that Lee was personally liable for
 $66,941.87 pursuant to his guaranty. The Arbitrator also
 determined that Kuchler was the prevailing party in the
 arbitration and entitled to attorneys' fees and costs. 
In its "Conclusion and Award," the Final Partial Award
 
states as follows: 
1. Judgment is entered in favor of Claimant,
Phillip Kuchler, Inc., against Respondents Abe Lee Realty,
LLC and Abraham W. H. Lee in the amount of $172,845.55.
 
2. The sums currently held in escrow may be used to
partially satisfy this award.
 
3. Claimant Kuchler is awarded reasonable
 
attorneys' fees and expenses, which will be determined
according to the briefing schedule set forth above.
 
4. Any and all other claims not specifically
addressed herein are denied and dismissed.
 
5. This Arbitrator retains Jurisdiction for the
 
sole and exclusive purpose of issuing an award of reasonable
attorneys' fees and expenses. In all other respects, this
Arbitrator is functus officio.
 
(Emphasis added.) The Arbitrator's reference in the Final
 
Partial Award to sums "held in escrow" was apparently to the
 Gross Monthly Receipts the Arbitrator had ordered Respondents to
 deposit into the separate bank account that the Arbitrator had
 ordered Respondents to open. Because the parties, the
 Arbitrator, and the Circuit Court refer to the separate bank
 account as the "escrow" account, we will also use the term
 "escrow" in referring to the separate bank account.
 
C. 
Unbeknownst to Kuchler and the Arbitrator, Lee withdrew
 
$118,034.17 that had been deposited into the escrow account on
 April 29, 2011, four days after the Partial Final Award was
 issued, by writing a check to himself. According to Lee, he 
deposited that check into Lee Realty's bank account, and then the
 
6
   
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
funds were used to "cut checks to Kuchler for his 66,000-plus,
 
for his judgment"; pay Respondents' attorney $15,000; pay an 
associate of Lee $16,000; and pay Lee $18,000 for money Lee
 Realty owned to him.
 
On May 7, 2011, Kuchler's attorney wrote to
 
Respondents' attorney requesting that the "substantial funds in
 the frozen bank account" be used to immediately pay a portion of
 the award, "as the Arbitrator has stated in paragraph 2 of his
 Conclusion." On May 17, 2011, Respondents' counsel sent
 Kuchler's counsel an "Official Bank Check" from First Hawaiian
 Bank in the amount of $66,941.87, along with a letter stating
 that the check was "in full satisfaction of Mr. Lee's personal
 guaranty as ordered by Arbitrator Hunter."
 
On June 6, 2011, the Arbitrator issued the "Final Award
 
of Arbitrator" (Final Award) The Final Award expressly
 incorporated the Arbitrator's previous Partial Final Award and
 awarded Kuchler, as the prevailing party, an additional
 $81,948.76 in attorneys' fees and $8,027.53 in costs.
 
D.
 
On June 21, 2011, Kuchler filed with the Arbitrator, a
 
"Motion to Clarify the Final Award of Arbitrator," pursuant to
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 658A-20(a)(3) (Supp. 2012).
3
 
Kuchler requested that the Arbitrator modify or correct the Final
 Award to clarify that: (1) Lee and Lee Realty were jointly and
 severally liable for the award of $89,976.29 in attorneys' fees
 and costs; (2) besides the award of attorneys' fees and costs,
 judgment had been entered against Lee Realty for $172,845.55 and
 against Lee for $66,941.87 out of the $172,845.55; and (3) "[t]he
 
3
 HRS § 658A-20, entitled "Change of award by arbitrator," provides in
relevant part:
 
(a) On motion to an arbitrator by a party to an arbitration
proceeding, the arbitrator may modify or correct an award:
 
. . . .
 
(3) To clarify the award.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sums currently held in escrow . . . may be used" to partially
 
satisfy Lee Realty's liability on the Final Award and "those
 funds shall continue to remain in escrow until they have been
 exhausted in partial satisfaction of [Lee Realty's] liability on
 the [Final] Award consistent with the Arbitrator's Interim Order
 entered July 16, 2010, which required Respondents . . . to open a
 separate bank account to deposit and hold . . . gross monthly
 receipts pending their disposition in the Final Award."
 
On June 30, 2011, the Arbitrator issued the
 
"Arbitrator's Post Award Order Re: [Kuchler's] Motion to Clarify
 the Final Award of Arbitrator" (Clarification Order). With
 respect to Kuchler's first two requests for clarification, the
 Arbitrator ruled that Lee was not individually liable for the
 attorneys' fees and costs awarded and that Lee's liability as
 guarantor was limited to $66,941.87 of the total amount awarded. 
With respect to the third request for clarification, the
 Arbitrator framed the request raised by Kuchler as "Whether the
 funds in escrow pursuant to the Arbitrator's July 16, 2010 order
 for interim relief are to remain in escrow until they have been
 exhausted in partial satisfaction of the final award."
 
The Arbitrator stated that
 
the funds in escrow were placed there as the property of Lee
Realty and remained the property of Lee Realty until such
time as the Partial [Final] Award was entered, as that found
that Kuchler had an ownership right in the escrow funds as
well. Moreover, Mr. Lee, since he was found not a party to
the sales contract, never had a legal ownership interest in
any escrow funds.
 
The Arbitrator found and concluded as follows: 
The Partial Final Award and Final Award both provided
that the funds in escrow were available to satisfy any award
made in this Arbitration. The language and purpose of the
Order establishing the escrow account clearly did not permit
the funds to be released from escrow without account, as
they were placed in escrow specifically to preserve the
funds pending resolution of the dispute over the rights to
these fees. Kuchler claimed an ownership interest in those
fees as did Lee Realty, who was collecting the fees.
 
Lee Realty was held to be the sole principal party to
the contract with Kuchler, as [Respondents] advocated
strenuously in the arbitration. As such, all of the
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
management fees received and deposited into escrow comprised
only Lee Realty's property at the time they were deposited
up until the Partial Final Award was entered. On the other
 hand, as [Respondents] argued and this Arbitrator agreed,
Mr. Lee was not a principal party to the [Purchase
Agreement] and not the owner of the management contracts.
As such, none of the money deposited into the escrow account
was his money and he has had no legal right to access it in
any personal capacity at any time.
 
This arbitration established that Kuchler has, as [it]
claimed, a legally valid ownership interest in the escrowed
funds. Namely, Kuchler was entitled to be paid certain
amounts earned by Lee Realty on the management contracts,
which earnings were placed in the escrow account pending the
resolution of this dispute. Thus, after entry of the
Partial Final Award, both Kuchler and Lee Realty had legal
interests in the escrowed fees, and Mr. Lee, individually,
had no legal interest in the escrowed fee. In accordance
 with these facts, the Partial Final Award allowed for the
escrowed [sic] to be applied to the award.
 
III.
 
In the meantime, on June 20, 2011, Kuchler submitted a
 
"Motion to Confirm Final Award of Arbitrator as Judgment Against
 
Abe Lee Realty, LLC and Abraham W.H. Lee" (Motion to Confirm
 Arbitrator's Final Award) with the Circuit Court, which was filed
 on June 22, 2011. Kuchler requested that the Circuit Court
 confirm the Arbitrator's Final Award and also confirm the
 Arbitrator's July 16, 2010, interim order (Interim Order), so
 that "the funds ordered to be deposited into the escrowed bank
 account shall continue to be held frozen pending application of
 those funds to satisfy the arbitration award and judgment in this
 case[.]" 
A.
 
Up through Kuchler's filing of the Motion to Confirm
 
Arbitrator's Final Award and the Arbitrator's issuance of his
 June 30, 2011, Clarification Order, Respondents still had not
 disclosed to Kuchler that funds in the escrow account had been
 withdrawn. However, Kuchler apparently was becoming suspicious
 that Respondents may have withdrawn the funds. On July 1, 2011,
 Kucheler's counsel sent a letter to Respondents' counsel, which
 stated that with the clarification of the Final Award provided by
 the Clarification Order, Kuchler was demanding that Lee Realty
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
immediately pay the $262,821.84 in damages and attorneys' fees
 
and costs that the Arbitrator had awarded. Kuchler's counsel
 also requested a current bank statement to verify that amounts
 previously deposited in the escrow account were still there. The
 letter stated that "[i]f either of your clients mistakenly
 thought that they could withdraw funds from the escrow account,
 they must immediately replace those funds. In that event, please
 provide me with a statement showing that the funds have been
 replaced." The letter also requested that Respondents' counsel
 verify that the $66,941.87 check tendered as full satisfaction of
 Lee's personal liability, which Kuchler had not yet cashed, "were
 not withdrawn from the escrowed account." 
Respondents' counsel responded to the letter, but did
 
not disclose the status of the funds that had been deposited into
 the escrow account. 
On July 7, 2011, Kuchler filed a "Motion for Issuance
 
of Garnishee Summons Before Judgment" directed to First Hawaiian
 Bank for funds owed to Respondents. In support of the motion,
 Kuchler asserted that the funds sought to be garnished were
 ordered by the Arbitrator to be deposited by Respondents into a
 separate bank account at First Hawaiian Bank. 
On July 21, 2011, the Circuit Court held a hearing on
 
(1) Kuchler's Motion to Confirm Arbitrator's Final Award; and (2)
 Kuchler's Motion for Issuance of Garnishee Summons Before
 Judgment. In ruling on these motions, the Circuit Court
 considered the Interim Order, the Partial Final Award, the Final
 Award, and the Clarification Order. At the hearing, Kuchler
 requested that as part of its order confirming the Arbitrator's
 award, the Circuit Court should order that the escrow account
 remain intact, as the Arbitrator in his Clarification Order ruled
 that the funds in the account could not be withdrawn without
 account and that none of the funds belonged to Lee. Respondents
 opposed this request arguing that the Partial Final Award, by
 using the word "may," gave the Respondents discretion on how to
 use the funds in the escrow account. Respondents also argued
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Lee only guaranteed that Lee Realty would pay Kuchler
 
$66,000 on the Purchase Agreement, and therefore, Lee's
 obligation had been satisfied by the payment of the guaranteed
 amount, regardless of whether that money was paid by Lee or Lee
 Realty. 
On August 15, 2011, the Circuit Court issued an order
 
granting in part and denying in part Kuchler's Motion for
 Issuance of Garnishee Summons Before Judgment. The Circuit Court
 authorized the issuance of a garnishee summons to First Hawaiian
 Bank with respect to Lee Realty, but denied the issuance of the
 summons with respect to Lee. 
On August 29, 2011, the Circuit Court filed its
 
Confirmation Order, which states:
 
1. Judgment on the Arbitrator's Decision and
Partial Final Award dated April 25, 2011, shall be entered
herein as follows: $172,845.55 against Abe Lee Realty, LLC,
and of that amount, $66,941.87 against Abraham W.H. Lee
solely in his capacity as guarantor.
 
2. Judgment on the Final Award of Arbitrator dated
June 3, 2011, shall be entered herein as follows: $89,976.29
against Abe Lee Realty, LLC.
 
3. Kuchler's request that Lee be held joint and
severally liable with [Lee Realty] for $66,941.87 is hereby
DENIED.
 
4. Kuchler's request for an award of attorney's
fees and costs is hereby DENIED.
 
5. The funds deposited in the escrowed bank account
are to be used to partially satisfy the judgment owed by Abe
Lee Realty LLC only.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
On September 9, 2011, the Circuit Court filed its Final
 
Judgment, which was stated to be "[b]ased upon the [Confirmation
 
Order]. The Final Judgment reads:
 
Judgment is hereby entered as follows:
 
1. In favor of Claimant Phillip G. Kuchler[, Inc.]
("Kuchler") and against Respondent Abe Lee Realty, LLC in
the amount of $262,821.84;
 
2. In favor of Kuchler and against Respondent
Abraham W.H. Lee, individually, solely in his capacity as 
11
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
guarantor of $66,941.87 of the aforementioned $262,821.84
judgment against Abe Lee Realty, LLC.
 
The Final Judgment does not contain any language regarding the
 
disposition of the escrow account.
 
On October 3, 2011, Respondents filed a notice of
 
appeal from the Confirmation Order. On October 13, 2011, Kuchler
 filed a notice of cross-appeal from the Final Judgment.
 
B.
 
After the Final Judgment was filed, Kuchler engaged in
 
attempts to collect on the Judgment, which included the issuance
 of additional garnishee summons and an examination of Lee, as a
 judgment debtor. During the examination of Lee on November 8,
 2011, Lee disclosed that he withdrew $118,034.17 from the First
 Hawaiian Bank escrow account on April 29, 2011, four days after
 the arbitrator issued his Partial Final Award. Lee testified
 that the funds were deposited into Lee Realty's account and used
 to write a check to Kuchler for "[$]66,000-plus" (an apparent 
reference to the check tendered to Kuchler on May 17, 2011, as
 satisfaction of Lee's personal guaranty), as well as to make
 payments to Respondents' attorney, Lee's associate, and Lee. Lee
 also testified that around April 2011, he began the process of
 closing down Lee Realty and switching his real estate business to
 a new corporate entity called "I Properties."
 
On October 26, 2011, Lee filed a "Motion 1) for
 
Protective Order, 2) to Vacate Ex Parte Motion of Examination of
 [Lee], 3) to Vacate Ex Parte Motions for Garnishee Summons after
 Judgment, 4) for Order Directing [Kuchler] to Restore [Lee's]
 Garnished Accounts, 5) for Sanctions and 6) for Entry of a
 Satisfaction of Judgment for [Lee]" (Lee's Omnibus Motion).
4
 
Lee's Omnibus Motion sought a protective order regarding, and an
 order vacating, Kuchler's ex parte motion for examination of Lee
 
4
 Although the motion is entitled "Respondents' motion . . ." and is
signed by counsel as attorney for Lee Realty and Lee, the body of the motion
states that the motion is made by Lee and the motion seeks relief on behalf of
Lee. We therefore refer to the motion as "Lee's Omnibus Motion."
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with respect to Lee's personal assets and an order vacating
 
Kuchler's ex parte motions for garnishee summons after judgment
 against Lee. In support of his motion, Lee argued that the
 tender to Kuchler of the check for $66,941.87 on or about May 18,
 2011, discharged Lee's liability under his personal guaranty. 
Lee therefore asserted that he was entitled to a satisfaction of
 judgment and orders precluding Kuchler from engaging in further
 collection activities against Lee.
 
On December 12, 2011, Kuchler filed a motion to enforce
 
the Circuit Court's Confirmation Order. Specifically, Kuchler
 requested that the Circuit Court enforce the portion of the
 Confirmation Order that states "the funds deposited in the
 escrowed bank account are to be used to partially satisfy the
 judgment owned by [Lee Realty] only" by ordering Respondents
 either to (1) replace the $118,034.17 withdrawn from the escrowed
 account or (2) pay said funds directly to Kuchler. Kuchler also
 requested that the Circuit Court order that Kuchler may cash the
 tendered check for $66,941.87 and attribute the check to payment
 of interest on the Judgment and attorneys' fees and cost owned by
 Lee Realty.
 
The Circuit Court held a hearing on Lee's Omnibus
 
Motion on November 4, 2011, which was continued to December 15,
 2011, at which time the Circuit Court considered both Lee's
 Omnibus Motion and Kuchler's motion to enforce Confirmation
 Order. The Circuit Court orally ruled that it was granting Lee's
 Omnibus Motion in all respects, except for his request for
 sanctions against Kuchler. It also orally dismissed Kuchler's
 motion to enforce the Confirmation Order on the ground that it
 lacked jurisdiction to rule on the motion because Respondents had
 filed a notice of appeal from the Confirmation Order.
 
On January 6, 2012, the Circuit Court issued its
 
written: (1) Order Regarding Lee's Omnibus Motion, which granted
 Lee's Omnibus Motion, except for his request for sanctions; and 
(2) "Order Dismissing [Kuchler's] Motion to Enforce [Confirmation
 Order]," which dismissed Kuchler's motion to enforce the
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Confirmation Order for lack of jurisdiction. See footnote 2,
 
supra. 
On January 5, 2012, Kuchler filed a motion to
 
reconsider the Circuit Court's decisions to grant in part Lee's
 
Ominbus Motion and to dismiss Kuchler's motion to enforce the
 Confirmation Order. On January 25, 2012, the Circuit Court
 orally denied Kuchler's motion for reconsideration, and it filed
 its written order denying the motion for reconsideration on
 February 9, 2012. On February 3, 2012, Kuchler filed a notice of
 supplemental cross-appeal from the post-judgment orders and 
rulings (1) partially granting Lee's Omnibus Motion; (2)
 dismissing Kuchler's motion to enforce the Confirmation Order;
 and (3) denying Kuchler's motion for reconsideration. See
 
footnote 2, supra. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Respondents argue that the Circuit Court erred in
 
including the following language in its Confirmation Order: "The
 funds deposited in the escrowed bank account are to be used to
 partially satisfy the judgment owed by [Lee Realty] only."
 Respondents argue that this language was contrary to the
 Arbitrator's decision because they assert that the Arbitrator did
 not impose any restrictions on Lee Realty's use of the funds in
 the escrow account. They contend that once the Arbitrator issued
 his Partial Final Award, Lee Realty had the discretion "to use
 the monies held in the escrow account as it saw fit in the
 ordinary course of its business." 
We review a circuit court's ruling on an arbitration 
award de novo, keeping in mind that the circuit court's review of an arbitration award must be "extremely narrow and exceedingly deferential." Tatibouet v. Ellsworth, 99 Hawai' i 226, 233, 54 
P.3d 397, 404 (2002) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). In a case involving the circuit court's confirmation of an arbitration award under the former arbitration statute, HRS Chapter 658, the Hawai' i Supreme Court stated: 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Our review of arbitration awards is guided by the
following principles. It is well settled that because of
 
the legislative policy to encourage arbitration and thereby
discourage litigation, judicial review of an arbitration
award is confined to the strictest possible limits. As
 such, a court has no business weighing the merits of the
arbitration award. Indeed, the legislature has mandated
that a court may vacate an arbitration award only on the
four grounds specified in HRS § 658-9, and may modify or
correct an award only on the three grounds specified in HRS
§ 658-10. Therefore, HRS § 658-8 contemplates a judicial
confirmation of the award issued by the arbitrator, unless
the award is vacated, modified, or corrected in accord with
HRS §§ 658-9 and 658-10.
 
Based upon the policy limiting judicial review of
arbitration awards, this court has held that parties who
arbitrate a dispute assume all the hazards of the
arbitration process including the risk that the arbitrators
may make mistakes in the application of law and in their
findings of fact. Where arbitration is made in good faith,
parties are not permitted to prove that an arbitrator[ ]
erred as to the law or the facts of the case.
 
Id. (block quote format, internal quotations, and citations
 
omitted). The same principles of judicial review apply to
 arbitration awards under the current arbitration statute, HRS
 Chapter 658A. Low v. Minichino, 126 Hawai' i 99, 105, 267 P.3d 
683, 689 (App. 2011).
5
 
A.
 
Because Respondents contend that the challenged
 
language in the Circuit Court's Confirmation Order was contrary
 to the Arbitrator's decision, we begin with an analysis of what
 the Arbitrator decided with respect to the disposition of the
 funds in the escrow account. As explained below, we disagree
 with Respondents' assertion that based on the Arbitrator's
 decision, Lee Realty had the discretion "to use the monies held
 in the escrow account as it saw fit." We also disagree, however,
 with Kuchler's contention that the Arbitrator ordered that all of
 the funds in the escrow account were required to be used to
 satisfy the award against Lee Realty. 
Pursuant to its Interim Order, the Arbitrator ordered
 
Respondents to open a separate bank account and deposit into the
 
HRS Chapter 658 was repealed and replaced with HRS Chapter 658A. 2001
 
Haw. Sess. Laws Act 265.
 
15
 5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
account all Gross Monthly Receipts received in the past and to be
 
received in the future while the arbitration was ongoing. The
 Arbitrator noted that Respondents had been receiving all of the
 revenue from the management accounts, whereas the Purchase
 Agreement provided that Kuchler was entitled to a portion of
 those revenues. The Arbitrator therefore determined that it was
 appropriate to "sequester" all Gross Monthly Receipts "in a
 neutral account beyond the use of either party pending the final
 outcome of their dispute." The Arbitrator ruled that the order
 requiring the maintenance of the separate account containing the
 Gross Monthly Receipts "will remain in full force and effect
 until entry of the final Award in this Arbitration or until
 further order of the Arbitrator."
 
In his Partial Final Award issued on April 25, 2011,
 
the Arbitrator found that under the Purchase Agreement, Lee
 Realty was liable as the Buyer to Kuchler for $172,845.55 and Lee
 was personally liable as a guarantor to Kuchler for $66,941.87. 
The Partial Final Award stated that "[t]he sums currently held in
 escrow may be used to partially satisfy this award."
 
Respondents contend that: (1) the Interim Order expired
 
by its own terms following the issuance of the Partial Final
 Award; and (2) because the Partial Final Award provided that the
 sums in escrow "may be used," instead of "must" be used, to
 partially satisfy the award, Lee Realty was free in its
 discretion to use the money in escrow as it saw fit. We
 disagree.
 First, the Interim Order was to remain in full force
 
and effect "until entry of the final Award in this Arbitration or
 until further order of the Arbitrator." The Partial Final Award
 was not the "final Award" in the arbitration, because the Partial
 Final Award made clear that the Arbitrator intended to further
 award attorneys' fees and costs in favor of Kuchler as the
 prevailing party. In addition, the Arbitrator had not made any
 further order with respect to the disposition of the funds in the 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
escrow account. Thus, the Interim Order did not expire with the
 
issuance of the Partial Final Award. 
Second, given the Arbitrator's purpose in establishing
 
the escrow account, it was clearly unreasonable for Respondents
 to believe that Lee or Lee Realty could, without notice to
 Kuchler or the Arbitrator, unilaterally withdraw the funds and
 freely use the funds as Lee Realty saw fit. The stated purpose
 of establishing the escrow account was to sequester the revenue
 earned on the management accounts "in a neutral account beyond
 the use of either party" because a portion of those revenues
 under the terms of the Purchase Agreement was owed to Kuchler. 
Moreover, in the Partial Final Award, the Arbitrator ruled that
 the Purchase Agreement was valid and enforceable and that Kuchler
 was owed $172,845.55 under the Purchase Agreement. Given this
 context, we conclude that the statement in the Partial Final
 Award that "[t]he sums currently held in escrow may be used to
 partially satisfy this award" cannot reasonable be construed to
 mean that Lee or Lee Realty could unilaterally withdraw the funds
 from the escrow account and use it for any purpose Lee Realty saw
 fit. The meaning ascribed to this statement by Respondents is
 without merit.
 
Our conclusion is confirmed by the Arbitrator's
 
Clarification Order, in which the Arbitrator stated that "[t]he
 language and purpose of the [Interim] Order establishing the
 escrow account clearly did not permit the funds to be released
 from escrow without account, as they were placed in escrow
 specifically to preserve the funds pending resolution of the
 dispute over the rights to these fees." The Clarification Order
 concluded that Lee had no legal right to any of the funds in the
 escrow account, and that both Kuchler and Lee Realty had legal
 interests in the funds deposited into the account. The
 Clarification Order then stated that "[i]n accordance with these
 facts, the Partial Final Award allowed for the escrowed [account]
 to be applied to the award."
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
Although we conclude that Respondents' interpretation
 
of the Arbitrator's decision regarding the use of the funds in
 
the escrow account is unreasonable, we also conclude that the
 Arbitrator did not go as far as Kuchler claims. Kuchler argues
 that the Arbitrator's decision should be construed to mean that
 all of the funds in the escrow account must be used to satisfy
 the award against Lee Realty. We disagree with Kuchler. Our
 reading of the Arbitrator's Interim Order, Partial Final Award,
 and Clarification Order convinces us that the Arbitrator chose
 not to make a final determination on how the funds in the escrow
 account were required to be used. 
The Arbitrator only determined that (1) both Kuchler
 
and Lee Realty had legal interests in the funds in the account;
 (2) that Lee did not have any interest in these funds; and (3)
 the funds could not be "released from escrow without account." 
Despite being given the opportunity by Kuchler's clarification
 motion, the Arbitrator did not specifically rule on whether all
 the funds placed in the escrow account were required to be used
 to satisfy the award against Lee Realty. Instead, the Arbitrator
 simply stated in his Clarification Order that "the Partial Final
 Award allowed for the escrowed [account] to be applied to the
 award." (Emphasis added.) Obviously, the Arbitrator was not
 aware that Respondents had already withdrawn the funds from the
 escrow account when he issued his Clarification Order. While it
 is clear that Respondents' action in unilaterally withdrawing the
 funds from the escrow account violated the Arbitrator's orders,
 we cannot say that the Arbitrator determined that all the funds
 in the escrow account were required to be used to satisfy the
 award against Lee Realty.
 
C.
 
Having determined what the Arbitrator actually ordered
 
with respect to the funds in escrow, we turn to whether the
 Circuit Court's Confirmation Order was consistent with the
 Arbitrator's decision. As noted, the challenged portion of the
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Confirmation Order states: "The funds deposited into the escrowed
 
bank account are to be used to partially satisfy the judgment
 owed by [Lee Realty] only." Both Kuchler and Respondents
 construe this provision of the Confirmation Order as meaning that
 the Circuit Court ordered that the funds placed in escrow were
 required to be used only to satisfy the judgment owed by Lee
 Realty. Based on our review of the record, we agree that this is
 the most reasonable interpretation of the Circuit Court's
 Confirmation Order.
 
Construed in this fashion, we conclude that the
 
challenged provision of the Confirmation Order went beyond the
 decision actually made by the Arbitrator. As noted, the
 Arbitrator ruled that Kuchler, along with Lee Realty, had a legal
 interest in the funds in the escrow account and that the funds
 could not be withdrawn by Lee Realty "without account." 
Accordingly, it was improper for Respondents to unilaterally
 withdraw the funds without recognizing Kuchler's interest. The
 Arbitrator also ruled that Lee had no legal right to access the
 funds in the escrow account in any personal capacity. However,
 aside from recognizing Kuchler's partial interest in the funds,
 prohibiting Respondents from unilaterally withdrawing the funds,
 and permitting the funds to be used to partially satisfy the
 award against Lee Realty, the Arbitrator did not make a decision
 on how the funds were required to be used. 
The role of the Circuit Court in confirming an
 
arbitration award is to confirm the award made by the Arbitrator. 
Because the provision of the Confirmation Order challenged by
 Respondents went beyond the Arbitrator's award, we vacate the
 challenged provision and remand the case with instructions that
 the Circuit Court enter a Confirmation Order that conforms to the
 Arbitrator's award. 
II.
 
In its cross-appeal, Kuchler argues that the Circuit
 
Court erred in failing to conform its Final Judgment to the
 Confirmation Order by not including the provision of the
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Confirmation Order challenged by Respondents. This argument has
 
been rendered moot by our decision to vacate the challenged
 provision. 
III.
 
Kuchler also challenges the Circuit Court's post-
judgment decisions: (1) granting Lee a satisfaction of judgment
 on his liability as a guarantor, based on the tender of the check
 for $66,941.87, and precluding further attempts to collect the
 judgment against Lee; (2) dismissing Kuchler's motion to enforce
 the Confirmation Order for lack of jurisdiction because the
 Confirmation Order had been appealed; and (3) denying Kuchler's
 motion for reconsideration of these rulings.
 
A.
 
Lee's Omnibus Motion requesting entry of a satisfaction
 
of judgment and an order precluding further collection attempts
 against him was based on his counsel's tender of the $66,941.87
 check to Kuchler. In support of his motion, Lee argued that the
 tender of this check discharged Lee's liability under his
 personal guaranty, regardless of whether the funds came from the
 escrow account or whether the payment was attributed to Lee or
 Lee Realty. The Circuit Court apparently agreed with Lee's
 argument in granting Lee a satisfaction of judgment on his
 liability as guarantor and precluding further collection attempts
 against Lee. We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in this
 decision.
 
At the outset, we note that in his debtor's
 
examination, Lee admitted that he unilaterally withdrew the funds
 from the escrow account and that the $66,941.87 check tendered to 
Kuchler came from these funds. As the Arbitrator ruled, Lee has
 no legal right to the escrowed funds, and Lee's tender of the
 funds to discharge his personal liability was improper. Lee
 attempts to get around this obstacle by arguing that the source
 of the funds and whether the $66,941.87 check is attributed to 
Lee or Lee Realty is irrelevant to the question of whether Lee's
 personal liability as guarantor was satisfied.
 
20
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lee's argument is based on two underlying propositions:
 
(1) that pursuant to his guaranty, any payment by Lee Realty
 
under the Purchase Agreement must first be used to extinguish
 Lee's liability; and (2) Kuchler was required to attribute any
 payment it received on the arbitration award, or the judicial
 order or judgment confirming the award, to damages for breach of
 the Purchase Agreement, and not to attorneys' fees and costs. 
With respect to Lee's first proposition, he contends
 
that because he only guaranteed the purchase price under the
 Purchase Agreement "for the first year," any payments made by Lee
 Realty for the purchase price served to extinguish his guarantee. 
Lee's contention, however, is inconsistent with the terms of the
 Purchase Agreement.
 
"The nature and extent of a guarantor's liability
 
depends on the terms of the guarantee contract." Tenet
 
HealthSystem TGH, Inc. v. Silver, 52 P.3d 786, 788 (Ariz. Ct.
 App. 2002). The guaranty provision of the Purchase Agreement
 provided as follows:
 
1.8 Security for Payment of Purchase Price. The
 
payment of the purchase price in accordance with this
Agreement shall be personally guaranteed for the first year
by the Buyer's principal, Abe Lee (whose consent to this
Agreement acknowledges his guaranty), pursuant to an
unconditional guaranty under which Seller may pursue
collection of the unpaid amounts under this Agreement and
under the following described promissory note against either
or both Buyer and/or the Guarantor in such order or
combination as Seller chooses. The Guaranty Document shall
be a standard form acceptable to Seller and shall be
executed and delivered at the Closing. At the determination
 of the final purchase price, Buyer shall execute a
promissory note payable to the order of Seller in the amount
of the then outstanding balance of the purchase price in
accordance with the amortization schedule as provided in
6
Section 1.7.[ ]
(Emphasis added.) Lee's claim that any payments made by Lee
 
Realty for the purchase price served to extinguish Lee's
 guarantee is belied by the terms of guaranty provision, which
 authorize Kuchler to "pursue collection of the unpaid amounts
 
6
 The record indicates that no "Guaranty Document" or promissory note
was actually prepared or signed.
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
under [the Purchase Agreement] . . . against either or both [Lee
 
Realty] and/or [Lee] in such order or combination as [Kuchler]
 chooses." (Emphasis added.) We conclude that the guarantee
 provision does not support the first proposition underlying Lee's
 argument. 
With respect to Lee's second proposition, he cites no
 
authority to support his claim that Kuchler was required to
 attribute the $66,941.87 check to the damages portion of the
 arbitration award. Under the arbitration award, Lee Realty owed
 Kuchler $89,976.29 in attorneys' fees and costs, as well as
 $172,845.55 in damages, of which Lee was a guarantor of
 $66,941.87. Lee had no personal right to access the escrowed
 funds used for the $66,941.87 check tendered to Kuchler. Lee
 provides no valid reason why Kuchler could not attribute the
 check to payment of the attorneys' fees and costs portion of the
 Arbitrator's award. In that event, none of the check proceeds
 would have satisfied the amounts owed by Lee Realty for damages
 or by Lee on his guaranty.
 
We conclude that Lee's argument that the tender of the
 
$66,941.87 check extinguished his liability as guarantor is
 without merit. Lee had no personal right to access the escrowed
 funds used for the check and had no right to require that Kuchler
 attribute the check proceeds to Lee's guaranty. Accordingly, we
 conclude that the Circuit Court erred in granting Lee a
 satisfaction of judgment and in precluding Kuchler from engaging
 in further collection actions against Lee.
 
B.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing 
Kuchler's motion to enforce the Confirmation Order for lack of jurisdiction. Respondents did not post a supersedeas bond and the Confirmation Order was not stayed pending Respondents' appeal. See Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 8 (2010). 
Accordingly, Respondents' appeal from the Confirmation Order did not deprive the Circuit Court of jurisdiction to enforce the Confirmation Order. See MDG Supply, Inc. v. Diversified 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Investments, Inc., 51 Haw. 375, 381-82, 463 P.2d 525, 529 (1969)
 
(concluding that the trial court retains jurisdiction over the
 enforcement of a judgment after the filing of a notice of appeal
 from the judgment, where no supersedeas bond is filed). 
We note, however, that we have vacated the provision of
 
the Confirmation Order that was the focus of Kuchler's
 enforcement motion. Thus, Kuchler's motion will be affected by
 our decision as well as any modifications made by the Circuit
 Court to the Confirmation Order on remand.
 
C.
 
Based on the foregoing analysis, we need not
 
independently address Kuchler's arguments regarding the Circuit
 Court's denial of his motion for reconsideration.
 
CONCLUSION
 
We vacate: (1) the portion of the Confirmation Order
 
challenged by Respondents on appeal; (2) the portions of the
 Order Regarding Lee's Omnibus Motion and the "Order Dismissing
 [Kuchler's] Motion to Enforce Confirmation Order" that were
 challenged by Kuchler on appeal; and (3) the order denying
 Kuchler's motion for reconsideration. We remand this case for
 further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 31, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Richard E. Wilson 
for Respondents-Appellants/
Cross-Appellees
 
Chief Judge
Dennis W. King
William J. Deeley John Winnicki
 (Deeley King Pang & Van Etten
A Limited Liability Law
Partnership)
for Claimant-Appellee/ Cross-Appellant
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
23
 