NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-21-0000580
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I
THINH TRAN, an individual; and SEAN KADING, an individual,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING FOR THE COUNTY OF MAUI; COUNTY OF MAUI;
MAYOR RICHARD BISSEN,  successor in interest; KATE BLYSTONE,  in
her capacity as DIRECTOR OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING,
Defendants-Appellees, and DOES 1-20, Defendants2 1
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 2CCV-20-0000316) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.)
Thinh Tran and Sean Kading appeal from the September 2,
2022 Amended Final Judgment  for the Maui County Department of
Planning and its Director  and the County of Maui and its Mayor
(collectively, the County) entered by the Circuit Court of the
Second Circuit.   They challenge the order dismissing their
second amended complaint for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. 3
1Richard Bissen, the current Mayor of the County of Maui, is
substituted for former Mayor Michael Victorino under Hawai #i Rules of
Appellate Procedure ( HRAP
) Rule 43(c)(1).
2Under HRAP Rule 43(c)(1), Kate Blystone has been substituted for
former Director of the Department of Planning Michele McLean.
3The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided.Electronically Filed
Intermediate Court of Appeals
CAAP-21-0000580
20-MAR-2025
08:31 AM
Dkt. 64 SONOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
We vacate the Amended Final Judgment and remand for further
proceedings.
Tran and Kading filed the second amended complaint on
April 1, 2021.  It made these allegations:  Tran owned twohouses, and Kading owned one house, in Kaanapali Golf Estates(KGE).  KGE's 1990 supplemental Declaration  allowed owners to
rent units to tenants for 30-day periods.  In 2012 the Countyadopted Ord. 3941 , which created a new permitted-use category
called short-term rental home  (STRH).  See Maui County Code ( MCC)
Chapter 19.65.  It required an owner to obtain an STRH permit torent a house to a tenant for less than 180 days.  MCC§ 19.65.050.
According to the second amended complaint, Tran rented
his houses to tenants for 30-day periods before Ord. 3941 wasadopted.  Kading bought a lot in 2012 (the year Ord. 3941 wasadopted) "with the intent and expectation" based on theDeclaration that he could build a house and rent it to tenantsfor 30-day periods.  Kading applied for an STRH permit.  The MauiPlanning Commission  conducted a contested case hearing, then
denied the application.  After the second amended complaint wasfiled, Kading filed a Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 91-14
appeal from the Planning Commission's decision, Kading v. MauiPlanning Commission, Judiciary Information Management System CaseNo. 2CCV-21-0000154 (the Agency Appeal ).  The circuit court
hearing the Agency Appeal entered a decision and order affirmingthe Planning Commission decision.  The Agency Appeal remainspending because no Hawai #i Rules of Civil Procedure ( HRCP)
Rule 72(k) judgment has been entered.  
4
Tran did not apply for an STRH permit but if he did, he
claims it would probably be denied because the people who opposedKading's application would probably oppose his application.
4We take judicial notice of Kading's agency appeal under Hawaii
Rules of Evidence Rule 201.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The second amended complaint's first count alleged that
Tran's and Kading's property was unconstitutionally taken by the
County without compensation.   The second count alleged the
County should be estopped from enforcing Ord. 3941 against Tranand Kading because they bought their respective properties inreliance on the County having approved the Declaration, whichallowed 30-day rentals within KGE.5
The County moved to dismiss the second amended
complaint for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.  The circuitcourt entered findings of fact, conclusions of law, and an orderdismissing the second amended complaint with prejudice on July 7,2021.  Judgment was entered on September 21, 2021.  This appealfollowed.  After a temporary remand, the Amended Final Judgmentwas entered on September 2, 2022.
 The County's motion to dismiss challenged the circuit
court's subject matter jurisdiction.  We review questions ofjurisdiction de novo.  Hawaii Government Employees Association,Local 152 v. Lingle, 124 Hawai #i 197, 201, 239 P.3d 1, 5 (2010). 
A circuit court deciding an HRCP Rule 12(b)(1) motion to dismissfor lack of subject matter jurisdiction is not restricted to thepleadings, and may receive evidence to resolve factual disputesover jurisdiction.  Davis v. Bissen, 154 Hawai #i 68, 77, 545 P.3d
557, 566 (2024).
Tran and Kading's statement of the points of error
challenges the circuit court's findings of fact ( FOF) nos. 2, 5,
and 6, and conclusions of law ( COL) nos. 5, 6, 10, and 17.  We
review findings of fact under the clearly erroneous  standard, and
conclusions of law under the right/wrong  standard.  Est. of Klink
ex rel. Klink v. State, 113 Hawai #i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 523
(2007).  We review a mixed finding of fact and conclusion of law
5The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution, made
applicable to the states by the Fourteenth Amendment, provides that "private
property [shall not] be taken for public use, without just compensation." Article I, section 20 of the Hawai #i Constitution similarly provides: "Private
property shall not be taken or damaged for public use without justcompensation."
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
under the clearly erroneous  standard because it implicates the
facts and circumstances of the specific case.  Id.  Unchallenged
findings of fact are binding on appeal.  Okada Trucking Co. v.Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawaii # 450, 459, 40 P.3d 73, 82 (2002).
Tran and Kading's argument does not follow their points
of error.  They argue — incorrectly — that the circuit court hadto assume the truth of the allegations in their second amendedcomplaint or, alternatively, that there were genuine issues ofmaterial fact.  Neither standard applies to an HRCP Rule 12(b)(1)motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction.  Davis, 154 Hawai #i
at 77, 545 P.3d at 566.  Accordingly, we first review thechallenged FOFs and COLs.
The circuit court found:
2. [Tran and Kading's] properties, and KGE, are
zoned within a residential R-3 zoning district, which under
current law requires a minimum rental period of 180 days,unless the owner obtains a Short Term Rental Permit (STRHPermit).
FOF no. 2 is a mixed finding and conclusion.  The
second amended complaint alleged that KGE was zoned R-3.  The
circuit court did not err by making that finding.  FOF no. 2referred to "current law" — that is, after Ord. 3941 was adopted. For residential-zoned property, "bed and breakfast home" and STRHwere the only permitted uses allowing rentals of less than180 days.  MCC § 19.08.020.  The bed and breakfast use is not atissue here.  FOF no. 2 is not clearly erroneous under thecircumstances of this case.
The circuit court found:
5.[Kading] did not communicate with the Director,
or anyone within the Department of Planning regarding a
finding of non-conforming use on his own, specificproperties within KGE.
6.[Tran] did not communicate with the Director, or
anyone within the Department of Planning, regarding thestatus of KGE or his own specific properties within KGE.
(Citations to record omitted).
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
These findings were supported by then-planning director
Michele McLean's declaration and the email thread between McLean
and Kading.  FOF nos. 5 and 6 are not clearly erroneous.
The circuit court concluded:
5. [Tran] never communicated with the Department of
Planning on the status of KGE or his own properties, and
never made a request that the Director provide him with anon-conforming use finding of his property.
6. [Tran] never received a final decision from the
Department as to the effect of the regulations on hisproperty.
COL nos. 5 and 6 are actually findings of fact.  They
were supported by McLean's declaration.  They are not clearly
erroneous.
The circuit court concluded:
10. [Kading] did communicate with the Director
regarding the status of KGE as a whole, but not the status
of his own property within KGE.  The Department's responseto [Kading]'s request does not qualify as a final decisionon his own property, and thus cannot sustain a takingsclaim.
COL no. 10 is a mixed finding and conclusion.  The
first sentence is a finding that is consistent with FOF no. 5,
supported by McLean's declaration and the email thread, and notclearly erroneous.  The second sentence is a conclusion of law. It is not wrong.  The Department's response to Kading's requestwas: "Our response  hasn't changed from the previous responses we
have given.  The property [KGE] has never been zoned to allows[sic] short-term rental."  (Emphasis added.)  It was an email,not a letter on Department letterhead.  The email subject linewas "Re: KGE Grandfathering Request - follow up".  Even if thisemail was a "final decision," it could not have supported aregulatory taking claim because Kading never applied for a
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
nonconforming use exception for his own "structure or zoning
lot."6  MCC § 19.04.040.
The circuit court concluded:
17. Plaintiffs had the option to appeal the
Director's decision regarding KGE as a whole as "person[s]
aggrieved" to the [Board of Variances and Appeals] (despitenot establishing standing to do so, herein).  However,neither [Tran nor Kading] appealed the Director's decisionregarding KGE.
Any error in COL no. 17 was harmless, because Kading's
failure to request a nonconforming use exception for his
structure or zoning lot renders his regulatory taking claimunripe.
We next review the substantive issues.  The County's
motion to dismiss argued that the circuit court lackedjurisdiction because Tran and Kading didn't exhaust theiradministrative remedies, and their regulatory taking claims werenot ripe.
(1)The exhaustion doctrine applies when a party seeks
judicial review of the substance of an adverse administrativedecision.  Leone v. Cnty. of Maui, 128 Hawai #i 183, 192, 284 P.3d
956, 965 (App. 2012).  "Thus, exhaustion of any appeals permittedwithin the administrative process is required before seekingrelief from the courts."  Id.  The second amended complaint did
not seek judicial review of an adverse administrative decision. Count I sought compensation for a regulatory taking, and Count IIsought to estop the County from enforcing Ord. 3941 against Tran
6Tran and Kading's brief uses the term "grandfathered," but the MCC
uses the term "nonconforming uses":
"Nonconforming uses" means any use of a structure or
zoning lot  which was previously lawful but which does not
conform to the applicable use regulations of the district in
which it is located, either on the effective date of theordinance codified in this article or as a result of anysubsequent amendment.
MCC § 19.04.040 (2021) (emphasis added).  The current definition appliedduring the time material to this appeal.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and Kading.  Exhaustion of administrative remedies does not apply
here.
The ripeness doctrine applies to Count I.  "[B]efore a
property owner may initiate a suit seeking compensation for ataking, the claim must be ripe."  Leone, 128 Hawai #i at 190, 284
P.3d at 963.  "[R]ipeness is an issue of subject matterjurisdiction."  Id. 
 at 189, 284 P.3d at 962.  A regulatory taking
claim "becomes ripe when the government entity charged withimplementing the regulations has reached a final decisionregarding the application of the regulations to the property atissue."  Id. at 190, 284 P.3d at 963 (cleaned up).
Tran did not apply for approval of a nonconforming use
under MCC §§ 19.500.110 & 19.510.10.  His regulatory taking claimwas not ripe.  The circuit court did not err by dismissingCount I of the second amended complaint as to Tran.  But thedismissal should have been without prejudice because there was no
decision on the merits.
Kading applied for an STRH permit.  The Planning
Commission denied his application.  That decision is the subjectof the Agency Appeal, which seeks review of the substance of thatadministrative decision.  Relevant to the ripeness analysis forthis case, Kading did not apply for a nonconforming use exceptionfor his own structure or zoning lot.  Kading's regulatory takingclaim was not ripe because there has been no final decisionforeclosing him from getting a nonconforming use exception.  Cf.Leone, 128 Hawai #i at 192, 284 P.3d at 965.  The circuit court
did not err by dismissing Count I of the second amended complaintas to Kading.  But again, the dismissal should have been withoutprejudice because there was no decision on the merits.
(2)Count II of the second amended complaint claims
the County should be equitably estopped from enforcing Ord. 3941against Tran and Kading.  "The theory of equitable estoppelrequires proof that one person wilfully caused another person toerroneously believe a certain state of things, and that personreasonably relied on this erroneous belief to his or her
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
detriment."  Maria v. Freitas, 73 Haw. 266, 273, 832 P.2d 259,
264 (1992).  Tran and Kading argue they "relied on the County'sprior approvals" of the 1990 supplemental Declaration, which letKGE owners rent their units to tenants for 30-day periods.  Thecircuit court had subject matter jurisdiction over the equitableestoppel claim under HRS § 603-21.5(a)(3) (2016).  The doctrinesof ripeness and exhaustion of administrative remedies do notapply to Count II.  We express no opinion on the merits of thatclaim.
The September 2, 2022 Amended Final Judgment is
vacated, and this case is remanded to the circuit court.  Onremand, the circuit court should enter an order dismissingCount I of the second amended complaint without prejudice, andadjudicate Count II on the merits.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai#i, March 20, 2025.
On the briefs:
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Presiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate JudgeTerrance M. Revere,
Amanda L. Dutcher,for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Kristin K. Tarnstrom,
Brian A. Bilberry,Deputies Corporation Counsel,County of Maui,for Defendants-Appellees.
8