NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOS. CAAP-15-00000524 AND CAAP-16-0000787
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
CAAP-15-0000524
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JESSICA L. HINEBAUGH, Defendant-Appellant, and
MICHAEL A. AYALA, Defendant-Appellee
 
and
 
CAAP-16-0000787
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JESSICA L. HINEBAUGH, Defendant-Appellee, and
MICHAEL A. AYALA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 13-1-1529)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
 
This is the consolidated appeal of two co-defendants
 
convicted of attempted murder, kidnapping, robbery, and theft.1
 
In CAAP-15-0000524, Defendant-Appellant, Jessica L.
 
Hinebaugh (Hinebaugh) appeals from the Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit's (Circuit Court) June 16, 2015 Judgment of Conviction
 and Sentence. In CAAP-16-0000787, Defendant-Appellant, Michael
 A. Ayala (Ayala) appeals from the Circuit Court's October 31,
 2016 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence.
2
 
1
 The Order of consolidation of CAAP-15-0000524 and CAAP-16-0000787
 
under CAAP-15-0000524 was entered on February 27, 2018.
 
2
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After a jury trial, the Circuit Court convicted
 
Hinebaugh and Ayala of Count 1 - Attempted Murder in the Second
 
Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statues (HRS) §§ 705-500
 (2014), 707-701.5 (2014), and 706-656 (2014); Count 2 - Robbery
 in the First Degree, in violation of HRS § 708-840 (Supp. 2013)
 and/or 708-840(1)(b)(i) (Supp. 2013); Count 3 - Kidnapping, in
 violation of HRS § 707-720(1)(e) (2014); Count 5 - Identity Theft
 in the Second Degree, in violation of HRS § 708-839.7 (2014); and
 Count 6 - Theft in the Second Degree, in violation of HRS § 708­831(1)(b) (2014).
3 Hinebaugh was also convicted of Count 4 ­
Unauthorized Possession of Confidential Personal Information, in
 violation of HRS § 708-839.55 (2014).
 
On appeal, Hinebaugh and Ayala
4 contend that the
 
Circuit Court improperly admitted certain physical and
 testimonial evidence, and Ayala contends that the Circuit Court
 improperly excluded evidence of Hinebaugh's juvenile conviction
 and abused its discretion in denying his motion for severance. 
Hinebaugh contends that the State committed prosecutorial
 misconduct by improperly commenting on her exercising her right
 not to testify, improperly shifting a burden of proof to
 Hinebaugh, and presenting improper character evidence.
 
After a careful review and consideration of the
 
parties' arguments, the record on appeal, and relevant legal
 authorities, we resolve Hinebaugh and Ayala's points on appeal as
 
3 For both appellants, Count 3 merged with Counts 1 and 2, Count 5
merged with Count 2, and Count 6 merged with Counts 2 and 5.
 
4 We note that Ayala's points of error do not comply with Hawai 'i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4), insofar as he states in his
Opening Brief, "[t]he Statement of the Points of Error are attached as anaddendum to this brief and is filed separately as an Addendum to this brief."
Assuming, arguendo , that such an addendum complies with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4),
no addendum has been filed. Thus, Ayala has failed to identify the points of
error, provide citations to the record identifying where the alleged erroroccurred, where the error was objected to, and where the grounds for theobjection may be found. Ayala's counsel is again warned that futurenoncompliance may result in disregard of the noncompliant points and/orsanctions. HRAP Rules 28(b)(4) and 51; Kakalia v. State, 125 Hawai 'i 475 n.2,
264 P.3d 53 n.2, No. 29519, 2011 WL 5530147 at *2 (App. Nov. 14, 2011) (SDO). 
As permitted by HRAP Rule 28(b)(4), we will review the claims we
are able to ascertain from his Opening Brief for plain error. Cf. State v. 
Ortiz, 91 Hawai 'i 181, 197-98, 981 P.2d 1127, 1143-44 (1999) ("Inasmuch as
Ortiz's failure to comply with HRPP [sic] Rule 28(b) leaves this court withoutany basis upon which to judge the merits of his argument regarding theadmission of evidence . . . we will not review it."). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
follows and affirm Hinebaugh and Ayala's Judgments of Conviction
and Sentence.
  
A.	 AYALA AND HINEBAUGH
 
Ayala contends that testimony regarding zip ties should
 
have been excluded because zip ties were not utilized in the
 commission of the offenses
5, and both Ayala and Hinebaugh contend
 
that admission of the evidence constituted impermissible
 character evidence under Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule
 404(a) and impermissible evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or
 acts under HRE Rule 404(b)
6. We disagree.
 
Mere possession of zip ties in a purse or bedroom does
 
not infer that Hinebaugh "was a person of a violent nature who
 was regularly in possession of nefarious paraphernalia" because
 Zip ties can be used for a multitude of purposes, most of which
 are innocuous and harmless. 
Be that as it may, Shelby Franks's
 
(Franks), the complaining witness (CW), and Ayala all testified
 that they had seen zip ties in Hinebaugh's possession in the days
 leading to the attack, and Ayala brought zip ties out during the
 attack. It is reasonable to infer that Hinebaugh had planned to
 
5	 Hinebaugh concedes that testimony regarding zip ties was relevant.
 
6	 HRE Rule 404 provides, in relevant parts,
 
(a) Character evidence generally. Evidence of a person's
character or a trait of a person's character is not
admissible for the purpose of proving action in conformity
therewith on a particular occasion, except:
 
(1)	 Character of accused. Evidence of a pertinent
trait of character of an accused offered by an
accused, or by the prosecution to rebut the
same;
 
. . . .
 
(b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts. Evidence of
 
other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the
character of a person in order to show action in conformity
therewith. It may, however, be admissible where such
evidence is probative of another fact that is of consequence
to the determination of the action, such as proof of motive,
opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity,
modus operandi, or absence of mistake or accident. In
 criminal cases, the proponent of evidence to be offered
under this subsection shall provide reasonable notice in
advance of trial, or during trial if the court excuses
pretrial notice on good cause shown, of the date, location,
and general nature of any such evidence it intends to
introduce at trial.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
use the zip ties to restrain CW or had obtained the zip ties in
 
preparation for the attack. Consequently, the Circuit Court did
 not abuse its discretion and therefore did not commit plain
 error, when it determined that the zip ties were admissible under
 HRE Rule 404(b) as proof of "motive, opportunity, intent,
 preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or
 absence of mistake or accident."
7
 
B.	 AYALA
 1.	 The Circuit Court properly excluded evidence of
Hinebaugh's juvenile conviction.
 
Ayala contends that he should have been allowed to
 
introduce Hinebaugh's juvenile conviction for arson and attempted 
murder of her father to prove that Hinebaugh had motive to attack
 CW. 	 However, admission of the juvenile conviction would only
 show Hinebaugh's motive or plan to injure her father, not make it
 more or less probable that she had a possible motive or plan to
 injure CW. Therefore, the conviction was inadmissible under HRE
 Rules 401
8, 4029, and 404(b), and the Circuit Court properly
 
excluded evidence of Hinebaugh's juvenile conviction.
 
7 Hinebaugh contends that the State failed to provide adequate
notice, as required under HRE Rule 404(b), as another basis for exclusion.
However, Hinebaugh did not properly preserve the issue for appeal as shefailed to object in a timely manner as required under HRE Rule 103(a)(1).This ground is therefore waived. HRE Rule 103(a)(1) ("Error may not bepredicated upon a ruling which admits or excludes evidence unless asubstantial right of the party is affected, and . . . a timely objection ormotion to strike appears of record, stating the specific ground of objection,if the specific ground was not apparent from the context[.]"); HRS § 641-16(2016) ("[t]here shall be no reversal for any alleged error in the admissionor rejection of evidence . . . unless such alleged error was made the subjectof an objection noted at the time it was committed or brought to the attentionof the court in another appropriate manner."); State v. Wallis, 80 Hawai 'i 
382, 410, 910 P.2d 695, 723 (1996) (holding that a point of error was waivedwhere the appellate challenge to testimony was premised on grounds not raisedduring trial). 
8
 HRE Rule 401 provides,
 
"Relevant evidence" means evidence having any tendency to
make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the
determination of the action more probable or less probable
than it would be without the evidence.
 
9
 HRE Rule 402 provides,
 
All relevant evidence is admissible, except as otherwise
provided by the Constitutions of the United States and the
State of Hawaii, by statute, by these rules, or by other
rules adopted by the supreme court. Evidence which is not
 relevant is not admissible.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. 	The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 
denying Ayala's motion for severance.
 
Ayala contends that the failure to sever his trial from
 
that of Hinebaugh denied him a fair trial. The joint trial would
 
have denied Ayala a fair trial if one of the following situations
 were present:
 
(1) where the core of each defense is in irreconcilable
conflict with the other, (2) where the defendant in question
is prevented from introducing evidence that would have been
admissible in that defendant's separate trial not involving
other defendants, and (3) where evidence damaging to the
defendant in question is admitted and it would not have been
admissible in that defendant's separate trial not involving
other defendants
.
 
State v. Timas, 82 Hawai' i 499, 511, 923 P.2d 916, 928 (App. 
1996). "The defendant has the burden of proving a denial of a 
fair trial." Id. Upon review of a motion to sever, the 
appellate court "may not conclude that the defendant suffered prejudice from a joint trial unless it first concludes that a defendant was denied a fair trial. What might have happened had the motion for severance been granted is irrelevant speculation." Id. at 512, 923 P.2d at 929 (ellipsis and brackets omitted). 
Ayala argues that the first two situations apply to 
this case.
10 First, although the defendants' defenses differ, 
they are not irreconcilable. Unlike Walton, where both the prosecution and Walton's co-defendant asserted that Walton stabbed the victim, State v. Walton, 133 Hawai' i 66, 86, 324 P.3d 
876, 897 (2014), this is not such a case. According to Ayala, Hinebaugh's defense was that "[CW]'s abandonment instilled the hatred of Hinebaugh that led to the assault" while Ayala's defense was that "he did not harbor such ill will or hatred towards [CW.]" However, that each had different motivations for their participation did not render their defenses irreconcilable. As Hinebaugh's counsel succinctly stated, Ayala and Hinebaugh's defenses were not inconsistent, but, rather, inconvenient. 
10
 Ayala appears to argue that the third situation also applies, but
he does not identify the specific evidence that was admitted and would not
have been admitted if there were separate trials. Consequently, Ayala has
waived this argument. HRAP 28(b)(7). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Regarding the limitation of evidence, Ayala rests his
 
argument for severance solely on his inability to introduce
 
evidence of Hinebaugh's juvenile conviction. As discussed,
 supra, the Circuit Court properly excluded the evidence of the
 conviction on relevance grounds, and separate trials would not
 have transformed the evidence from irrelevant to relevant. We
 hold that Ayala was not denied a fair trial by Circuit Court's
 denying his motion for severance.
 
3.	 The Circuit Court properly instructed the jury on
Assault in the First Degree.
 
Ayala cites this Court's holding in Maddox for the 
proposition that CW's medical treatment proved that her stab 
wounds did not rise to the level of severity required for a finding of Assault in the First Degree under HRS §§ 707-700 (2014) and 707-710 (2014); thus, there was no rational basis in the evidence to provide jury instructions on Assault in the First Degree. State v. Maddox, 116 Hawai' i 445, 453, 173 P.3d 592, 600 
(App. 2007) (holding that a stab wound to the chest "that penetrates close to vital internal organs and vessels but misses without harming them, so that the injury quickly resolve itself without the need for significant treatment" does not constitute "bodily injury which creates a substantial risk of death" within the meaning of HRS § 707-700). Assuming, arguendo that the jury instructions in this case were in error under Maddox, Ayala's conviction would be a ground for reversal if "it affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the error was . . . prejudicial." State v. Metcalfe, 129 Hawai' i 206, 222, 297 P.3d 
1062, 1078 (2013) (quoting State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai' i 1, 11, 928 
P.2d 843, 853 (1996)). Ayala fails to explain, nor does the record suggest, how the giving of the instruction of Assault in the First Degree may have contributed to his conviction of Attempted Murder in the Second Degree. Consequently, the giving of jury instructions on Assault in the First Degree was not prejudicial.
11 
11
 Ayala's relies upon Kupau for the proposition that Circuit Court
abused its discretion by giving an objected-to jury instruction. State v. 
Kupau, 76 Hawai 'i 387, 879 P.2d 492 (1994), overruled by State v. Haanio, 94
(continued...)
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C. 	HINEBAUGH
 
1.	 Circuit Court properly instructed the jury on
accomplice liability.
 
Hinebaugh contends that a lack of notice of accomplice
 
liability in the charging document violated Hinebaugh's
 
constitutional right to due process. Hinebaugh concedes that the
 argument is foreclosed by Apao. State v. Apao, 59 Haw. 625, 586
 
P.2d 250 (1978). Nevertheless, she urges us to revisit the
 Hawai'i Supreme Court's decision in Apao because it "must be 
overturned" in light more recent case law. We must decline as
 only the Hawai' i Supreme Court may revisit its own precedent.
12 
2.	 The Circuit Court properly admitted the Declaration by
the custodian of bank records to authenticate CW's
 account records and properly admitted CW's account
records.
 
Hinebaugh contends that the admittance of the
 
Declaration by the custodian of records at USAA Federal Savings
 
Bank (USAA) violated her right to confront and cross-examine the
 witness against her in violation of article I, section 14 of the
 Hawai'i Constitution and the Sixth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution.
13 Hinebaugh further contends that, because the
 
Circuit Court erred in admitting the Declaration, the bank
account records were erroneously admitted.
  
11(...continued)
Hawai'i 405, 16 P.3d 246 (2001). However, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court overruled
Kupau when it held that "trial courts must instruct juries on all lesser
included offenses as specified by HRS § 701-109(5),  despite any objection by
the defense , and even in the absence of a request from the prosecution."
Haanio
, 94 Hawai 'i at 414, 16 P.3d at 255 (2001), overruled on other grounds
(emphases added). 
12 Because the charging document was sufficient, the Circuit Court
properly instructed the jury on accomplice liability. Despite Hinebaugh's
contention that Circuit Court was required to specifically "instruct the jurythat it must unanimously agree as to accomplice or principal liability,"Circuit Court's instructions were proper because "[a] specific unanimityinstruction is not required where a single defendant may be convicted aseither the principal or an accomplice." State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai 'i 462, 489
n.24, 946 P.2d 32, 59 n.24 (1997) (citation and internal quotation marksomitted). 
13
 Hinebaugh concedes that she did not object to the Declaration
during trial or within a timely manner; consequently, she failed to properly
preserve the issue for appeal as required under HRE Rule 103(a)(1) and HRS
§ 641-16.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We need not reach Hinebaugh's arguments. CW's husband
 
testified at trial to the accuracy and authenticity of the
 
challenged bank account records. He provided sufficient
 foundation to the transactions contained within the bank account
 record as being from his and CW's USAA bank account when he
 recognized and identified them as being theirs and a "fair and
 accurate copy of [their] bank statements." Proper foundation was
 therefore laid through in-court testimony, and the transactions
 contained in the bank account records were properly admitted.
 
3. 	Testimonial evidence of pocket knives, Hinebaugh's
claims of having pancreatic cancer, and text message
from Hinebaugh were relevant and properly admitted.
 
(a) Pocket Knives.
 Hinebaugh contends that testimony regarding Hinebaugh
 
possessing pocket knives should have been excluded because no
 
pocket knives were used in the commission of the offense, which
 made the testimony unfairly prejudicial. We disagree. Hinebaugh
 conceded, in closing argument, that she participated in the
 unprovoked attack on CW by holding her down and not stopping
 Ayala from using a knife against CW. Testimony that Hinebaugh
 carried knives prior to the incident was probative of intent,
 plan, preparation, and the willingness to use such weapons, prior
 to the incident. The evidence was not unfairly prejudicial as it
 was consistent with not only the prosecution's theory of the
 case, but Hinebaugh's defense, that she acted out of extreme
 emotional disturbance caused by her anger and need for revenge
 against CW, who, in Hinebaugh's view, abandoned her to their
 abusive father. Therefore, testimony of Hinebaugh possessing
 pocket knives was admissible under HRE Rule 404(b). 
Hinebaugh further contends that evidence of the pocket
 
knives exacerbated the prejudicial effect of the zip ties
 because, together, they implied that Hinebaugh was a violent
 person. As discussed supra, because no inference can be made
 that Hinebaugh is a violent person upon zip ties alone, evidence
 of Hinebaugh owning pocket knives cannot exacerbate such an
 inference. Thus, testimony of the presence of zip ties would
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
withstand an HRE Rule 40314 challenge because the evidence is
 
not, as Hinebaugh alleges, "overwhelmingly prejudicial." 
Hinebaugh further contends that the Circuit Court
 
failed to give an appropriate limiting instruction to the jury
 
because the limiting instruction given referred to the singular
 "knife" instead of the plural "knives," and the limiting
 instruction was only provided following one out of three
 applicable witnesses' testimony. Hinebaugh provides no authority
 in support of her argument that the Circuit Court was required to
 provide a limiting instruction at all, let alone that it was
 deficient, and she alleges no substantial right violation. 
Regardless, we conclude there was no plain error. HRE
 
Rule 103(d).
 
Following Franks's testimony, the court instructed the
 
jury, 
Members of the jury, you have heard evidence that the
defendant Hinebaugh at another time may have had in her
possession a pocket knife . This evidence, if believed by
you, may be considered only on the issue of the defendant
Hinebaugh's motive[,] opportunity[,] intent[,]
preparation[,] plan[,] knowledge, or whether the alleged
conduct resulted from a mistake or accident. 
Do not consider this evidence for any other purpose.
You must not use this evidence to conclude that because the
 
defendant Hinebaugh at another time may have had in her
possession a pocket knife that defendant Hinebaugh is a
person of bad character and therefore must have committed
the offenses charged in this case.
 
(emphases added). Because of Circuit Court's use of the 
indefinite article "a," the jury was unlikely to understand the limiting instruction to mean that it only referred to a specific knife and not any other knives Franks may have talked about, because Franks never specified the number of knives she had observed, nor described them individually. Therefore, "when read and considered as a whole, the instructions given [to the jury were not] prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." State v. Pond, 118 Hawai' i 452, 461, 193 P.3d 368, 
14
 HRE Rule 403 provides, "[a]lthough relevant, evidence may be
excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of
unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of
cumulative evidence."
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
377 (2008). The limiting instruction was therefore not deficient
 
for the use of the singular form of "knife." 
Furthermore, the limiting instruction did not specify
 
that it pertained only to Franks's testimony. Thus, the
 instruction specified to the jury that evidence of any pocket
 knife could only be used for the specific purposes Circuit Court
 identified, and we fail to see how the instructions that were
 given were unfairly prejudicial or may have contributed to
 Hinebaugh's conviction. Consequently, the limiting instruction
 properly mitigated any prejudicial effect the testimony regarding
 pocket knives may have had.
15
 
(b) Testimony regarding Hinebaugh's claims of having
cancer.
 
Hinebaugh contends that testimony regarding Hinebaugh's 
claims of suffering from pancreatic cancer and having, depending 
on the testimony, at most one month left to live were improperly admitted into evidence because the statements "did not make any fact of consequence to the case more or less probable" as required by HRE Rules 401 and 402. However, Ayala explained that Hinebaugh's assertion that she had "a month left to live" was one of the reasons he came to Hawai' i. The cancer statements were 
therefore relevant for the jury to determine whether Hinebaugh had brought Ayala to Hawai' i in advance to provide her with 
assistance in the attack. Therefore, the statements were admissible for the purpose of proving preparation and planning under HRE Rule 404(b),
16 and they were admissible as statements 
by a party-opponent under HRE Rule 803(a)(1)17 because the 
15 As to Hinebaugh's contention that the knives evidence was
inadmissible for lack of advance notice under HRE Rule 404(b), the issue was
not properly preserved for appeal. HRE Rule 103(a)(1); HRS § 641-16 (2016).
Because Hinebaugh failed to object to the admission of the knives evidence at
trial, the evidence was properly considered by the jury, and the issue is
waived.
 
16
 Consistent with this conclusion, it was not prosecutorial
misconduct to use the statements concerning cancer during closing argument as
evidence of planning or preparation.
 
17
 HRE Rule 803 provides, in part,
 
The following are not excluded by the hearsay rule, even
though the declarant is available as a witness: 
(continued...)
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statements were made by Hinebaugh and used against her. Circuit
 
Court thus properly allowed the statements.18
 
(c) Text message from Hinebaugh.
 Hinebaugh contends that, under HRE Rules 803(a)(1) and
 
1002,
19 Franks should have been prevented from testifying that
 
Hinebaugh had sent her a text message in which Hinebaugh said,
 "Michael is here with me in Mililani."
 
The text message is a writing under HRE Rule 1001,
20
 
which, under HRE Rule 1002, requires that the original be
 produced to prove the contents. State v. Espiritu, 117 Hawai' i 
127, 134, 176 P.3d 885, 892 (2008) (holding that testimony about
 text messages received from defendant was admissible as party
 admission, and the original text messages were not required in
 order for witness to testify regarding them).
21 Nevertheless,
 
17(...continued)
(a) Admissions.
 
(1)	 Admission by party-opponent. A statement that is
 
offered against a party and is (A) the party's own
statement, in either the party's individual or a
representative capacity, or (B) a statement of which
the party has manifested the party's adoption or
belief in its truth.
 
18 Hinebaugh further argues that the statements were inadmissible to
prove that Hinebaugh lied about having pancreatic cancer because the Statepresented no evidence to the contrary. However, the statement was notintroduced to prove whether she actually had cancer, but, rather, to proveadvance planning by telling Ayala that she was dying to induce him to join herin Hawai 'i. 
19	 HRE Rule 1002 provides,
 
To prove the content of a writing, recording, or photograph,
the original writing, recording, or photograph is required,
except as otherwise provided in these rules or by statute.
 
20	 HRE Rule 1001 provides, in part,
 
For purposes of this article the following definitions are
applicable:
 
(1)	 "Writings and recordings" consist of letters, words,
sounds, or numbers, or their equivalent, set down by
handwriting, typewriting, printing, photostating,
photographing, magnetic impulse, mechanical or
electronic recording, or other form of data
compilation.
 
21
 Hinebaugh's reliance on Espiritu for the proposition that "the
text message evidence was improper for lack of foundation, in violation of HRE
[Rule] 1002 and affected a substantial fundamental right" is misguided. The
 
(continued...)
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the text message is admissible as a party admission. Id. Thus,
 
Franks's testimony about the text message "is admissible because
 
the text message [itself] would be admissible under the exception
 for party admissions," and the Circuit Court properly admitted
 this testimony. Id.
 
4. 	The deputy prosecutor did not commit prosecutorial
misconduct during closing argument.
 
Hinebaugh contends that the deputy prosecutor (a)
 
"improperly commented on [Hinebaugh] exercising her right to
 
remain silent"; (b) improperly shifted the burden of proof that
 she had been raped to Hinebaugh; and (c) improperly argued that
 Hinebaugh had a propensity for lying when he said during closing
 argument, "[o]ne, there is no evidence that [the allegation that
 Hinebaugh had been raped] is true. Remember, Jessica Hinebaugh
 is already on record as to lying about being terminally ill with
 pancreatic cancer."
 
We note that, because Hinebaugh did not object to the
 
claimed misconduct during the trial, we review the issues for
 plain error. 
(a) Comment on exercising the right to remain silent.
 Hinebaugh does not provide any argument to support her
 
contention that the deputy prosecutor's statement that "there is
 no evidence that this allegation is true" was an improper comment
 on Hinebaugh exercising her right to remain silent. Instead, she
 merely quotes from Mainaaupo, saying "The jury would 'naturally
 and necessarily interpret the prosecution's . . . [sic] as a
 comment on [Hinebaugh's] failure to testify.'"
 
Mainaaupo is distinguishable. In Mainaaupo, the deputy 
prosecutor asserted during closing arguments, "[a] person is stopped in a stolen car and he really is innocent, what's the first thing he's going to do?" State v. Mainaaupo, 117 Hawai' i 
21(...continued)
issue in Espiritu was whether a sufficient foundation was laid to use a police
report's recording of a text message to refresh the witness's memory when itappeared the witness had recollected the gist of the text message even priorto reading the police report verbatim. Espiritu, 117 Hawai 'i 127, 176 P.3d
885. Espiritu did not address whether a foundation was necessary prior to the
witness testifying from memory about the contents of the text message. See
 
id.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
235, 253, 178 P.3d 1, 19 (2008). The deputy prosecutor's comment
 
thereby inferred that an innocent person would have talked to the
 police when stopped, and because the defendant chose not to talk
 to police, he must have been guilty. Therefore, the deputy
 prosecutor was commenting on the defendant exercising his right
 to remain silent during interrogation. See U.S. Const. amend. V.
 
("No person . . . shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a
 witness against himself[.]"); Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436
 (1966). 
Unlike in Mainaaupo, Hinebaugh exercised her right to
 
not testify during a trial. Hinebaugh does not explain how the
 deputy prosecutor's statement might be considered a comment on
 Hinebaugh exercising her right not to testify, for the statement
 is a mere conclusion that the record does not contain evidence
 that the allegation is true and such evidence is not limited to
 testimony by Hinebaugh. Because Hinebaugh has presented no
 argument in support, we conclude that this point is waived.
 
(b) Shifting the burden of proof to Hinebaugh.
 Hinebaugh contends that the deputy prosecutor "misled
 
the jury into believing that [Hinebaugh] had to prove that she
 had been raped." Hinebaugh appears to have a similar contention
 regarding the deputy prosecutor's statement that "[t]here is no
 credible evidence that her father raped her."
22
 
Hinebaugh is mistaken. The burden of proof of an 
affirmative defense, such as Extreme Mental or Emotional Disturbance (EMED) raised by Hinebaugh, rests with the defendant. 2003 Haw. Sess. L. Act 64 §§ 1 and 3. Because EMED is an affirmative defense, the defendant "must prove the elements of the defense by a preponderance of the evidence." State v. 
Locquiao, 100 Hawai' i 195, 206, 58 P.3d 1242, 1253 (2002). 
The burden of proof of the EMED defense properly rested
 
with Hinebaugh. Thus, insofar as the statements can be construed
 as comments on the burden of proof, the deputy prosecutor did not
 mislead the jury.
 
22
 Hinebaugh included the quote in her brief in a paragraph in which
she lists what she argues were multiple instances of prosecutorial misconduct.
She did not specify why this statement constituted misconduct, but it appears
to belong to this argument of shifting of the burden of proof.
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(c) Insinuating Hinebaugh had a propensity for lying.
 
Hinebaugh contends that the deputy prosecutor's 
statement that "Hinebaugh is already on record as to lying about being terminally ill with pancreatic cancer" constituted "an improper propensity argument" in violation of HRE Rule 404(b). However, Hinebaugh did not testify at trial; the argument of the deputy prosecutor was that Hinebaugh lied to Franks and Ayala as part of her planning of the instant offense. Furthermore, the deputy prosecutor is allowed to "draw reasonable inferences from the evidence" because he is allowed "wide latitude . . . in discussing the evidence." State v. Clark, 83 Hawai' i 289, 304, 
926 P.2d 194, 210 (1996). 
Franks and Ayala testified that Hinebaugh had told
 
them, in or around September 2013, that she expected to die
 within one month of pancreatic cancer. Because the trial was
 held approximately 18 months later, the deputy prosecutor argued
 the reasonable inference that Hinebaugh likely had not been
 suffering from terminal cancer in 2013, and that she must
 therefore have lied to Franks and Ayala in furtherance of her
 plan to attack CW. Furthermore, Hinebaugh carried the burden of
 proving the EMED defense, but she did not present any evidence
 
that she had been sexually assaulted by her father; the only
 evidence was presented by the State in the form of CW testifying
 that Hinebaugh made this claim to her. Thus, the deputy
 prosecutor could argue the reasonable inference that the failure
 to present evidence of sexual assault was because there was none,
 and Hinebaugh lied in making this assertion when she spoke to the
 CW. See supra. Thus, the statement was a permissible,
 
reasonable inference drawn from the evidence was not part of an
 argument regarding Hinebaugh's credibility at trial, and
 therefore not prosecutorial misconduct.
VI. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm Circuit Court's
 
June 16, 2015 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence of Hinebaugh
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and Circuit Court's October 31, 2016 Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence of Ayala. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 30, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
Taryn R. Tomasa,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-AppellantHinebaugh. Presiding Judge 
Richard D. Gronna,for Defendant-Appellant Ayala. 
Donn Fudo and 
Stephen K. TsuhimaDeputy Prosecuting Attorneys,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
15
 