NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000654
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ALFRED KALANI BEAVER, JR., Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR NO. 08-1-532)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Alfred Kalani Beaver, Jr. (Beaver)
 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, filed on
 
August 17, 2011 in the Family Court of the Third Circuit (family
 
court).1
 
After Beaver's Deferred Acceptance of No Contest Plea
 
(DANC Plea) was set aside, Beaver was convicted of Persistent
 
Nonsupport, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 709­
903 (1993).
 
On appeal, Beaver contends that the family court erred
 
by setting aside his DANC Plea on the basis that he refused to
 
follow his probation officers' instruction that he sign a form
 
stating the terms and conditions of his deferral after an Amended
 
1
 The Honorable Lloyd Van De Car presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Order Granting Motion for Deferred Acceptance of No Contest Plea
 
(Amended Order Granting DANC Plea) was entered.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Beaver's point of error as follows:
 
Beaver contends that his DANC Plea should not have been
 
revoked "merely because he declined to comply with a probation
 
officer's unreasonable request for a redundant and superfluous
 
signature on September 13, 2010." Beaver argues that the Amended
 
Order Granting DANC Plea was made nunc pro tunc to January 13,
 
2010; that he signed the terms and conditions on January 13,
 
2010, which were attached to the original Order Granting DANC
 
Plea; and that the new terms and conditions form that his
 
probation officer wanted him to sign was the same as the one he
 
had already signed on January 13, 2010.
 
We review the family court's order setting aside the 
DANC plea for abuse of discretion. State v. Naone, 92 Hawai' i 
289, 306, 990 P.2d 1171, 1188 (App. 1999) (citation omitted). "An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearly 
exceeded the bounds of reason or has disregarded rules or 
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a 
party litigant." Id. (quoting State v. Davia, 87 Hawai' i 249, 
253, 953 P.2d 1347, 1351 (1998)). 
Beaver's argument is best captured by his assertion
 
that "[t]here is nothing in [the] amended order or the records of
 this . . . case that the trial court intended for its amended
 
order to impose any additional requirement or burden on
 
Mr. Beaver, including signing terms and conditions again." 
Beaver is simply incorrect.
 
The Amended Order Granting DANC Plea corrected the
 
original Order Granting DANC Plea by reflecting that restitution
 
for child support had been ordered by the family court. The
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
original Order Granting DANC Plea mistakenly did not include
 
restitution.  Notably, Beaver does not contest that the family
 
court ordered restitution for child support during the
 
January 13, 2010 hearing at which his DANC Plea was granted or
 
that the original Order Granting DANC Plea erroneously failed to
 
reflect the restitution. 
The terms and conditions form signed by Beaver on
 
January 13, 2010, required that he comply with the reasonable
 
instructions of his probation officer. The terms and conditions
 
also required Beaver to make restitution if the court had ordered
 
restitution. Contrary to Beaver's argument, signing a new terms
 
and conditions form upon entry of the Amended Order Granting DANC
 
Plea was a reasonable instruction by his probation officer, even
 
if the terms and conditions attached to the amended order was the
 
same as the one he previously signed. Beaver's probation officer
 
Ruben Cardenas (Cardenas) testified that it was part of statewide
 
probation policy and procedure to explain the order and the
 
changes and to have Beaver sign so that he could comply. 
Beaver's signing meant he understood and was willing to abide
 
with the conditions set forth in the order.
 
The original Order Granting DANC Plea erroneously did
 
not reflect the condition of restitution upon Beaver. When
 
probation officer Gordlyn Surigao (Surigao) reviewed the original
 
Order Granting DANC Plea and the terms and conditions of
 
probation with Beaver, she did not know that restitution for
 
child support had been ordered because it was not on the face of
 
the original order. Surigao testified that it was Beaver who
 
brought up child support and Beaver appeared to be under the
 
impression it was a separate issue that had been dismissed.
 
When the Amended Order Granting DANC Plea was issued,
 
Surigao forwarded the new documentation to Cardenas, who was
 
supervising Beaver on Oahu, to have it executed by Beaver. 
Cardenas met with Beaver on September 13, 2010, showed him the
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
amended order, explained the change regarding restitution, and
 
informed Beaver that he had to sign the amended documentation. 
In response, Beaver refused to sign despite being instructed to
 
do so. Beaver told Cardenas that he did not agree to the
 
restitution. Cardenas warned Beaver that his deferral could be
 
revoked. 
Surigao also contacted Beaver by telephone to explain
 
the amended order; to advise Beaver that he was required to sign
 
the amended terms; and advised Beaver that if he refused to sign,
 
his deferral could be revoked. 
It was reasonable to require Beaver to sign a new terms
 
and conditions form in September 2010 after the amended order was
 
issued. It is undisputed that the family court ordered Beaver to
 
pay restitution for child support when Beaver's DANC plea was
 
granted at the January 13, 2010 hearing. However, when Beaver
 
signed the terms and conditions on January 13, 2010, the original
 
Order Granting DANC Plea did not reflect the restitution and he
 
was thus not informed by probation officer Surigao that he was
 
required to comply with the restitution requirement. When the
 
Amended Order Granting DANC Plea was issued, it reflected the
 
restitution requirement, which in turn made clear that a
 
condition of the court's order was that Beaver pay restitution.
 
Probation officers Cardenas and Surigao made reasonable
 
instructions to Beaver that he sign the terms and conditions
 
after the amended order was issued to ensure his understanding of
 
the amended order and so that he would comply. Beaver's refusal
 
to sign the document and recognize that he agreed to restitution
 
as a valid condition of his deferral was a refusal to follow the
 
reasonable instructions by his probation officers, thereby
 
violating a condition of his deferral. The family court did not
 
abuse its discretion by revoking Beaver's DANC Plea. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence, filed on August 17, 2011 in the Family Court of the
 Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, February 11, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Robert K. Allen 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Ricky R. DamervilleDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai' i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
5
 