NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000401
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
SCOTT A. ABREGANO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 12-1-1963)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Scott A. Abregano (Abregano)
 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence for
 
violating an order of protection in violation of Hawaii Revised
 Statutes (HRS) ยง 586-11 (2006 and Supp. 2013) entered by the
 
1
Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court)  on March 13,
2013.
 
On appeal, Abregano argues that the Family Court: (1) 
erred in denying his motion to dismiss for violation of his right to a speedy trial under Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) 
2
Rule 48;  (2) violated his constitutional rights when it
exhibited bias by 
sua sponte interjecting itself into the State 
of Hawai 'i's examination of its witness; and (3) erred in denying 
1
 The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided.
 
2
 Although Abregano entitles his argument as a violation of HRPP
Rule 48 "and Speedy Trial[,]" he includes no argument nor citation to
authority supporting a constitutional violation. We therefore deem any claimof error based on either the Hawai' i or United States constitutions waived. 
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be
deemed waived."). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
him the opportunity to call a juror as a witness in support of
 
his motion for a new trial.
 
After a careful review of the issues raised and the
 
arguments made by the parties, the record, and applicable
 authority, we resolve Abregano's points on appeal as follows and
 affirm.
 
1. The Family Court did not err in ruling the period
 
between February 11, 2013 and March 11, 2013 excluded due to the
 illness of the trial judge. HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) provides for an
 exclusion for "other periods of delay for good cause." At the
 February 11, 2013 calendar call, Judge Castagnetti announced
 that, due to coming down with the flu, she would not be able to
 conduct the trial in that week and set the case for "calendar
 call setting" on March 11, 2013. Prior to that date, on March 5,
 2013, Abregano moved to dismiss this case based on HRPP Rule 48. 
Abregano neither waived the delay for Rule 48 purposes nor
 objected to this continuance.
 
Abregano acknowledges that the Hawai
'i Supreme Court 
has held that "[u]nder Rule 48(c)(8), a general 'good cause' ground is provided to take care of unanticipated circumstances, and is recognized expressly as a residual discretionary power in the trial judge[,]" State v. Estencion, 63 Haw. 264, 267, 625 
P.2d 1040, 1042 (1981) (internal citation omitted), and that "'good cause' means a substantial reason which affords a legal excuse[,]" State v. Senteno, 69 Haw. 363, 368, 742 P.2d 369, 373 (1987) (defendant was without local counsel for five months after motion to withdraw was granted). 
The Family Court did not err in ruling the delay in the
 
circumstances presented here was excused for good cause.
3 See,
 
e.g., U.S. v. Lane, 561 F.2d 1075, 1078 (2d. Cir. 1977) (delay
 due to the illness of a judge characterized as an "institutional
 factor[]" and not "unnecessary delay" under Federal Rules of
 Criminal Procedure Rule 48); U.S. v. Ferris, 751 F.2d 436, 441-42
 (1st Cir. 1984) (delay due to the judge's illness is properly
 excludable time under Speedy Trial Act, 18 U.S.C. ยง 3161).
 
3
 Although the Family Court did not cite to it specifically, it
agreed that it was referring to the good cause provision of Rule 48.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Abregano also argues that, even if judge illness
 
constitutes good cause, the record does not reflect that the
 
court exercised "due diligence" in setting his case four weeks
 out, in light of the existence of twenty-five circuit court
 judges and the ability, under HRS ยง 603-41 (1993), for the chief
 justice to temporarily appoint a judge. However, the Family
 Court stated that "[t]here are no replacement judges" and
 Abregano fails to provide authority for the proposition that a
 "due diligence" showing must be made to qualify for a good cause
 exclusion or, that under the circumstances presented here, due
 diligence required that a replacement judge be secured. 
Moreover, the record reflects that, at the hearing on Abregano's
 motion to dismiss, the Family Court and the prosecution took
 efforts to have Abregano's case heard expeditiously and, in fact,
 trial was held the following day.
 
2. Abregano has failed to establish that the Family
 
Court's interjection into the prosecution's examination of its
 witness exhibited bias because the Family Court's statements
 during the testimony served to negate some of his defenses and
 "gave credence to the State's arguments." While it is true that
 "[t]he judge should not assume the role of an advocate for either
 party[,]" State v. Schutter, 60 Haw. 221, 222-23, 588 P.2d 428,
 
429 (1978) (internal quotation marks omitted), the Family Court's
 actions cannot be construed as advocating for the State's
 position.
 
A review of the exchange in context reveals that the 
Family Court was attempting to expedite the prosecution's examination by pointing out that the subject matter the prosecution was attempting to elicit was already contained in the State's exhibit in evidence. A trial court "shall exercise reasonable control over the mode and order of interrogating witnesses and presenting evidence so as to (1) make the interrogation and presentation effective for the ascertainment of the truth, (2) avoid needless consumption of time, and (3) protect witnesses from harassment or undue embarrassment." Hawai
'i Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 611(a). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Furthermore, although Abregano argues on appeal that
 
the Family Court's comments impacted upon his mistake of fact
 
defense, the Family Court simply referred to the order of
 protection which had already been admitted in evidence. The
 Family Court's comments did not prevent Abregano from pursuing
 his mistake of fact defense.
 
Finally, to the extent that the jury might have taken 
the Family Court's remarks as exhibiting a bias, they were instructed to ignore the court's remarks unless they were instructions. State v. Hauge, 103 Hawai
'i 38, 59, 79 P.3d 131, 
152 (2003) (the "jury is presumed to have followed the [circuit] court's instructions"). 
3. Abregano argues that it was error to deny his
 
motion for a new trial when the Family Court prevented him from
 presenting the testimony of one of the jurors in support of his
 motion. Abregano proffered that a juror remembered that the
 Family Court told the prosecutor "to look on the first page of
 the order when the prosecutor was asking about to whom the terms
 of the order applied" and "that [the] comment played a role in
 her decision making."
 
Rule 606(b), HRE, regarding the competency of a juror

 
as a witness provides that,
 
Upon an inquiry into the validity of a verdict or
indictment, a juror may not testify concerning the effect of
anything upon the juror's or any other juror's mind or
emotions as influencing the juror to assent to or dissent
from the verdict or indictment or concerning the juror's
mental processes in connection therewith. Nor may the
juror's affidavit or evidence of any statement by the juror
indicating an effect of this kind be received.
 
The Rule 606 Commentary explains,
 
The intent of this subsection is to strike a proper balance
by excluding testimony relating to the internal deliberative
process and allowing testimony about objective misconduct
and irregularities. . . .
 
The Advisory Committee's Note to the original federal
proposal, upon which subsection (b) is modeled, said: "The
 trend has been to draw the dividing line between testimony
as to mental processes, on the one hand, and as to the
existence of conditions or occurrences of events calculated
 improperly to influence the verdict, on the other hand,
without regard to whether the happening is within or without
the jury room. . . . The jurors are the persons who know
what really happened. Allowing them to testify as to
matters other than their own reactions involves no
 particular hazard to the values sought to be protected.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In this case, the "outside influence" at issue was the
 
remarks made by the court in the presence of the jury. Those
 
remarks were a matter of record, as shown by the transcript of
 the trial. Thus, the purpose of calling the juror to the stand
 was exactly for the purpose prohibited by the rule: to testify
 regarding her and the other jurors' deliberative process in
 reaching the verdict. Abregano's argument that the juror could
 have testified "as to whether the influence of the court's
 comments [were] present during deliberations" is without merit.
 
Based on the foregoing, the March 13, 2013 Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence of the Family Court of the First Circuit
 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 31, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Titiimaea N. Ta 'ase,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Brandon H. Ito,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
5
 