NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000773
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
BARBARA ELLEN SHERRILL, Petitioner-Appellant
v.
 
ESTATE OF THOMAS MICHAEL PICO, JR.,
also known as, THOMAS M. PICO, JR., Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(P. NO. 10-1-0254 (Formal))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Barbara Ellen Sherrill (Sherrill),
 
appearing pro se, appeals from the "Order Denying Request for
 
Hearing Re: Petitioner's Claims, Daughter's as Beneficiary's,
 Objection to Filing of Will, and Notification of an Interest in
 Decedent's Mother's Current Estate" (Order Denying Request for
 Hearing) issued by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit sitting
 
1
in Probate (Probate Court)  on September 21, 2011.  
1
 The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided .
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As explained in greater detail below, our review of
 
Sherrill's appeal is limited to addressing appealable issues
 
arising out of the Order Denying Request for Hearing that
 Sherrill has standing to raise as a creditor of the estate. We
 conclude that the only portion of the Order Denying Request for
 Hearing that is appealable is the portion that denied Sherrill's
 request for relief from the probate judgment. We affirm that
 portion of the Order Denying Request for Hearing. 
BACKGROUND FACTS
 
I. Intestacy Proceedings
 
Thomas Michael Pico, Jr. (Decedent), died on May 19,
 
2009. He was survived by six children, three adult daughters and
 three sons. Sherrill is the mother of Decedent's three adult
 daughters, and Appellee Personal Representative Mary K. Zanakis-
Pico (Zanakis-Pico) is the surviving spouse of Decedent.
 
Sherrill and Decedent were never married.
 
On May 19, 2010, Sherrill filed a "Request to be
 
Appointed Special Administrator" in the Probate Court, requesting
 
her appointment as special administrator in order to protect the
 interests of her daughters as well as her own interests. 
Sherrill subsequently sent a letter to the Probate Court
 
requesting a telephonic hearing, which was denied.
On August 17, 2010, Zanakis-Pico filed a "Petition for
 
Adjudication of Intestacy and Appointment of Personal
 
Representative" (Petition for Adjudication of Intestacy), seeking
 a formal determination of intestacy and to be appointed as
 personal representative of Decedent's estate.
 
On August 30, 2010, Zanakis-Pico filed an objection to
 
Sherrill's request to be appointed special administrator. On
 September 1, 2010, Sherrill filed an objection to Zanakis-Pico's
 request to be appointed personal representative. On that same
 date, Sherrill also filed a "Request for Change of Judge,"
 asserting that she was "told by the Supreme Court that there are
 judges who will allow a telephonic hearing." 
2
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A hearing on Zanakis-Pico's Petition for Adjudication
 
of Intestacy and Sherrill's Request to be Appointed Special
 
Administrator was held on November 4, 2010. Sherrill, a resident
 
of the State of Arizona, was not present at the hearing. At the
 
hearing, the Probate Court orally granted Zanakis-Pico's Petition
 
for Adjudication of Intestacy and appointed Zanakis-Pico as
 personal representative of the estate. The Probate Court also
 orally denied Sherrill's Request to be Appointed Special
 Administrator, concluding that Sherrill "is not an interested
 person of the estate and has not established a basis for
 appointment of a special administrator." 
On November 29, 2010, the Probate Court entered an
 
order denying Sherrill's Request to be Appointed Special
 Administrator. On November 30, 2010, the Probate Court entered
 an order granting Zanakis-Pico's Petition for Adjudication of
 Intestacy, as well as a "Judgment Pursuant to Order Granting
 Petition for Adjudication of Intestacy and Appointment of
 Personal Representative" (Intestacy Judgment).  The Intestacy
 
Judgment, among other things, entered judgment: (1) determining
 
that Decedent died intestate; (2) determining that Decedent's
 heirs were Zanakis-Pico and Decedent's six children; and (3)
 appointing Zanakis-Pico as personal representative of Decedent's
 estate.
 
On December 29, 2010, Sherrill filed a motion, pursuant 
to Hawai
'i Probate Rules (HPR) Rule 36(b)(6) (2006), requesting 
relief from the order denying her request to be appointed special administrator and seeking a new hearing. The Probate Court filed the motion pursuant to its "no bounce rule," but did not assign a hearing date because Sherrill did not submit an order setting date, time, and place of hearing in compliance with the HPR. The Probate Court subsequently entered an order denying Sherrill's motion. 
Sherrill also submitted an "Ex Parte Motion to Change
 
Judge" which asserted that "there are apparently other justices
 that will allow petitioner a telephonic hearing procedure" and
 
3
      
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that "the current judge is not the appointed probate judge." The
 
ex parte motion was stamped "Denied" and filed on January 11,
 2011. 
On February 10, 2011, Zanakis-Pico filed a "Petition
 
for Authority for Compromise Settlement of Claim" (Petition for
 
Authority to Settle Claim), seeking authority to settle a medical
 
tort claim, which apparently involved a claim of medical
 
malpractice arising out of Decedent's death. The Petition for
 
Authority to Settle Claim asked the Probate Court to approve a
 
settlement offer, under which the "surviving family members shall
 
receive a confidential settlement amount[,]" and to authorize
 Zanakis-Pico to execute any documents necessary to effectuate the
 settlement. On March 18, 2011, Sherrill's three adult daughters
 (Daughters), through their attorneys James C. McWhinnie and
 Matthew T. Evans, filed an objection to the Petition for
 Authority to Settle Claim. In their objection, Daughters
 asserted that "none of the Daughters has ever received written
 confirmation of the settlement offer; nor have they been given an
 opportunity to review the actual and complete terms of said
 offer."
 
On March 29, 2011, Zanakis-Pico filed a response to
 
Daughters' objection, which asserted that: (1) "[s]ubsequent to
 her appointment as the Personal Representative, [Zanakis-Pico]
 found a Will executed by [D]ecedent dated August 21, 1997"; (2)
 the Will "specifically excludes the Daughters as heirs of
 [D]ecedent's estate"; (3) the Will "is or will be admitted to
 probate"; (4) the terms of the proposed confidential settlement
 for the medical tort claim has been provided to counsel for
 Daughters; and (5) even though the "Will specifically excludes
 the Daughters from any share of the estate," Zanakis-Pico "has
 voluntarily agreed to give a portion of her recovery to the
 Daughters[.]" 
4
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II. Probate Proceedings
 
A.
 
On March 30, 2011, Zanakis-Pico filed a "Petition for
 
Probate of Will and Appointment of Personal Representative"
 
(Petition for Probate). In the Petition for Probate, Zanakis-
Pico asserted that "[t]he Will was recently found by [Zanakis-
Pico]"; that "[Zanakis-Pico] believes the Will to have been
 validly executed"; and that Zanakis-Pico believes that the Will
 is "Decedent's Last Will." The will, which was submitted with
 the Petition for Probate, states that "[t]he failure of this Will
 to provide for any distribution to my daughters . . . other than
 as residuary beneficiaries upon failure of my sons . . . or their
 children to survive me is intentional and is due to the fact that
 my daughters are provided for by their mother." The Petition for
 
Probate sought: (1) a determination that Decedent is dead and
 
that the will dated August 21, 1997, is valid and unrevoked; and
 (2) appointment of Zanakis-Pico to serve as personal
 representative. 
On April 18, 2011, the Probate Court filed a document
 
submitted by Sherrill entitled "[Sherrill's] Claims and Three
 Daughter's as Beneficiaries," in which Sherrill pleaded "her
 claims to the estate of [Decedent]" and also asserted "the rights
 of [Daughters] as the [D]ecedent's heirs and beneficiaries." 
Sherrill asserted that she was entitled to approximately
 $325,000.00 plus interest pursuant to an "Agreement" signed by
 Decedent dated February 2, 1993, which formed the basis of a
 "Stipulation and Order" entered on June 18, 1993, by the Arizona
 Superior Court, regarding child support and other payment
 obligations owed by Decedent. Sherrill also alleged that
 Decedent entered into another agreement written in 1997 that
 promised to pay her $8,000 plus interest through the clerk of the
 Arizona court. Sherrill attached exhibits, which included copies
 of the two agreements and the Stipulation and Order, to her
 pleading. In addition, Sherrill asserted that Decedent owed her
 for losses she sustained as a result of his failure to marry her
 
5
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and the burdens placed on her in raising Daughters. With respect
 
to the claims of her Daughters, Sherrill asserted that Decedent
 had agreed to carry life insurance of $180,000 for the benefit of
 Daughters and that Daughters were "entitled to a fifty percent
 sharing of his estate according to Probate law." 
On May 9, 2011, Sherrill filed an objection to the
 
filing of the will submitted by Zanakis-Pico. In her pleading,
 Sherrill questioned the validity of the "supposed will" based,
 among other things, on the belated discovery of the will; an
 alleged motive to prevent Daughters from sharing in the recovery
 from the medical tort/wrongful death claim; and Decedent's love
 of his Daughters and expressions of intent to care for them,
 which were inconsistent with the will's purported disinheriting
 of Daughters. On May 12, 2011, a hearing was held on Zanakis­Pico's Petition for Probate. At the hearing, Zanakis-Pico's
 counsel informed the Probate Court that Zanakis-Piko had received
 Sherrill's objection, that at a prior proceeding, the Probate
 Court had determined that Sherrill was not an interested party,
 and that it was counsel's understanding that Sherrill had not
 submitted "any factual evidence to dispute the validity of the
 will." Sherrill was not present at the hearing. The Probate
 Court orally granted the Petition for Probate. 
On June 27, 2011, the Probate Court entered an "Order
 
of Formal Probate of Will, Determination of Testacy and Heirs,
 and Appointment of Personal Representative" (Order of Formal
 Probate of Will), which (1) determined that Decedent died
 testate; (2) determined that the will dated August 21, 1997, was
 the last will and testament of Decedent; (3) determined
 Decedent's heirs and devisees; (4) admitted the will to probate
 as Decedent's last will and testament; and (5) appointed Zanakis-
Pico as personal representative of Decedent's estate. On the
 same date, the Probate Court entered a Judgment pursuant to its
 Order of Formal Probate of Will (Probate Judgment).
 
With respect to Zanakis-Piko's Petition for Authority
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to Settle Claim, regarding the medical tort claim pertaining to
 
Decedent, the Probate Court held hearings on March 31, 2011, and
 
May 5, 2011, at which Daughters were represented by their
 
counsel. On June 8, 2011, the Probate Court entered orders which
 
collectively granted the Petition for Authority to Settle Claim,
 
and it also entered final Judgments pursuant to such orders. The
 
Probate Court ordered that "[b]y agreement, the settlement
 
distribution shall be as stated in the Amended Settlement Terms,
 
which will be filed with this Court, under seal."
 
B. 
On September 21, 2011, the Probate Court filed a
 
document submitted by Sherrill entitled "Request for Hearing Re:
 
Petitioner's Claims, Daughter's as Beneficiary's, Objection to
 Filing of Will, and Notification of an Interest in Decedent's
 Mother's Current Estate" (Request for Hearing), which was dated
 July 9, 2011. In her Request for Hearing, Sherrill: (1)
 requested a hearing "to pursue her claims and her daughter's
 rights as beneficiaries of this estate as already filed with the
 court," which she asserted had been served on the personal
 representative's counsel, who "has failed to respond"; (2) re­asserted her claim that the will submitted by Zanakis-Pico was
 invalid; and (3) gave notice of an interest of Decedent's estate
 in Decedent's mother's current estate. 
On September 21, 2011, the Probate Court filed an Order
 
denying Sherrill's Request for Hearing (Order Denying Request for
 Hearing). In that Order, the Probate Court noted that the
 Request for Hearing had been "received by the Small Estates
 branch of the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on July 15, 2011
 and forwarded to the Twenty-Third Division" and was filed on
 September 21, 2011. The Probate Court provided the following
 explanation for its denial of the Request for Hearing.
 
The Court having reviewed the [Request for Hearing]
and record in this matter, finds that the issues raised in
the [Request for Hearing] were previously addressed by the
Court at the May 12, 2011 hearing on the [Petition for
Probate]. Ms. Sherrill's written objection to that Petition
was filed and received on May 9, 2011. After review of the
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record, the Court, over Ms. Sherrill's written objection,
granted the Petition, admitted the foregoing Will to
probate, and appointed Mary Zanakis-Pico as personal
representative. The Court having ruled at the May 12, 2010
hearing, and an Order and Judgment filed on June 27, 2011,
Ms. Sherrill's request for a hearing in the instant [Request
for Hearing] is res judicata. 
Wherefore, the [Request for Hearing] is denied. 
On the same date, based on its Order Denying Request for Hearing,
 
the Probate Court filed a Judgment on the Order Denying Request
 for Hearing.
 
C. 
On October 21, 2011, the Probate Court filed Sherrill's
 
Notice of Appeal from the Order Denying Request for Hearing. On
 that same date, the Probate Court filed a document submitted by
 Sherrill entitled "Request to Allow [Sherrill's] Claim Served to
 Counsel March 23, 2011, and Hearing." In that pleading, Sherrill
 requested that the Probate Court allow the claim that the Probate
 Court filed on April 18, 2011 -- an apparent reference to
 Sherrill's pleading entitled "[Sherrill's] Claims and Three
 Daughter's as Beneficiaries," which was filed on April 18, 2011. 
Attached to Sherrill's October 21, 2011, pleading was a copy of a
 letter from counsel for Zanakis-Pico dated August 29, 2011,
 informing Sherrill that the personal representative had rejected
 this claim. The letter stated:
 
This is to inform you that the personal representative
has rejected your claim titled "Petitioner's Claims and
Three Daughter's as Beneficiaries" dated March 5, 2011 and
received August 22, 2011. Pursuant to [Hawaii Revised
Statutes (HRS)] §560:3-806, a copy of which is enclosed, you
have sixty (60) days from the date of this notice to file an
action in Court for allowance or be forever barred.
 
On April 26, 2012, the Probate Court held a hearing on
 
(1) Sherrill's "Request to Allow [Sherrill's] Claim Served to
 
Counsel March 23, 2011, and Hearing" and (2) an Amended Petition
 filed by Sherrill (collectively, "Post-Appeal Pleadings"). The
 Probate Court determined that to the extent that Sherrill was
 raising a creditors' claim, "based on the totality of the record,
 the Court finds that there is no credible evidence of a valid
 
8

  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
claim against the state [sic]." On July 2, 2012, the Probate
 
Court filed its order denying Sherrill's Post-Appeal Pleadings,
 which stated:
 
1.	 Although the instant [Post-Appeal Pleadings] may
be related to [Sherrill's] appeal of the
judgment entered on September 21, 2011, the
instant [Post-Appeal Pleadings] may assert
claims against the estate that have not been
previously addressed by this Court.
 
2.	 The Court finds no credible evidence that the instant
 [Post-Appeal Pleadings] state any valid creditor or
any other claims against the estate.
 
On July 2, 2012, the Probate Court entered a Judgment (July 2, 
2012, Judgment) pursuant to its order denying the Post-Appeal Pleadings and HPR Rule 34(a) (2006), and it certified the July 2, 2012, Judgment for appeal in the manner provided by Hawai
'i Rules 
of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(b) (2000). On July 27, 2012, Sherrill filed a notice of appeal from the July 2, 2012, Judgment in a separate appeal, Appeal No. CAAP-12-0000676.
2 
DISCUSSION
 
In this appeal, Sherrill contends that: (1) Judge
 
Derrick H.M. Chan (Judge Chan) erred by failing to recuse
 himself; (2) the Probate Court erred by failing to continue the
 November 4, 2010, hearing on Zanakis-Pico's Petition for
 Adjudication of Intestacy and Sherrill's Request to be Appointed
 Special Administrator and by failing to grant Sherrill a new
 hearing on these matters; (3) the Probate Court erred by
 accepting the will submitted by Zanakis-Pico as Decedent's last
 will and testament; and (4) the Probate Court erred in issuing
 its Order Denying Request for Hearing. 
I.
 
At the outset, we note that our review of Sherrill's
 
2The references in this paragraph are based on the appellate record in
Appeal No. CAAP-12-0000676, of which we take judicial notice. See Kaleikini
 
v. Thielen, 124 Hawai' i 1, 5, 237 P.3d 1067, 1071 (2010) (taking judicial
notice of a separate, but closely related appeal). This court ultimately
dismissed Appeal No. CAAP-12-0000676 due to Sherrill's failure to timely paythe appellate filing fee, and the Hawai' i Supreme Court rejected Sherrill's
application for certiorari. 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appeal is limited to addressing appealable issues arising out of
 
the Order Denying Request for Hearing that Sherrill has standing
 to raise. 
Sherrill raises arguments that the Probate Court's
 
rulings violated her Daughters' rights as beneficiaries of
 Decedent's estate. However, Sherrill lacks standing and the
 authority to assert claims on behalf of her adult Daughters. 
Sherrill is not a lawyer and therefore is not authorized to
 represent her Daughters' interests on appeal. See Oahu Plumbing
 
& Sheet Metal, Ltd. v. Kona Constr., Inc., 60 Haw. 372, 376-77,
 590 P.2d 570, 573-74 (1979) (holding that while persons may
 appear pro se on their own behalf, they may not act as
 "attorneys" and represent others); see also HRS § 605-2 (1993)
 (prohibiting the unauthorized practice of law).
3
 
Second, having never been married to Decedent and 
receiving no mention in his will, Sherrill lacks standing to raise any claim as an heir or devisee. See Kaho'ohanohano v. 
State, 114 Hawai
'i 302, 318, 162 P.3d 696, 712 (2007) ("[T]he 
crucial inquiry with regard to standing is whether the plaintiff has alleged such a personal stake in the outcome of the controversy as to warrant his or her invocation of the court's jurisdiction and to justify exercise of the court's remedial powers on his or her behalf." (internal quotation marks, citation, and emphasis omitted)). Sherrill's standing is limited to asserting claims that are based on her interests as an alleged creditor of Decedent's estate. 
Third, Sherrill is only appealing from the Order
 
Denying Request for Hearing. Her appeal is therefore limited to
 appealable issues arising out of this Order. 
Accordingly, we limit our consideration of Sherrill's
 
arguments on appeal to those affecting her interest as a creditor 
3Sherrill's Daughters were all adults at the time of the proceedings in
the Probate Court and were represented by counsel for certain aspects of the
probate proceedings. Daughters did not appeal from the Probate Court's
rulings.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that raise appealable issues arising out of the Probate Court's
 
Order Denying Request for Hearing.
 
II.
 
We reject Sherrill's contention that Judge Chan erred
 
by failing to recuse himself. In support of her contention,
 Sherrill argues that Judge Chan was required to recuse or remove
 himself from the case based on HRS § 601-7 (1993 & Supp. 2004). 
However, Sherrill misrepresents the text of HRS § 601-7, which
 she purports to quote in her opening brief. Contrary to
 Sherrill's purported quotation, HRS § 601-7(b) does not require
 that a separate judge hear a motion to disqualify, and HRS 
§ 601-7 does not have a subsection (c).
 
Sherrill failed to comply with the requirements of HRS 
§ 601-7 because her requests for a new judge did not include the required affidavit asserting that the judge has a personal bias or prejudice and facts and reasons supporting that assertion. Moreover, Sherrill's basis for seeking a new judge was because Judge Chan had denied her request for a telephonic hearing. However, "[b]ias cannot be premised on adverse rulings alone." Arquette v. State, 128 Hawai
'i 423, 448, 290 P.3d 493, 518 
(2012). Our review of the record reveals no basis to support a claim that Judge Chan had a personal bias or prejudice against Sherrill, and we hold that Judge Chan properly declined to recuse himself from the case. 
III.
 
A.
 
"[F]or purposes of appeal, probate cases are bifurcated 
into two . . . separately appealable parts. The first part is the order of formal probate of will or an order of intestacy entered in a formal testacy proceeding. The second part includes the other orders, the last of which is usually the order approving final accounts." Labayog v. Labayog, 83 Hawai
'i 412, 
422, 927 P.2d 420, 430 (App. 1996). 
On June 27, 2011, the Probate Court filed the Probate
 
Judgment, which admitted the will submitted by Zanakis-Piko as
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Decedent's last will and testament and appointed Zanakis-Piko as
 
the personal representative of the estate. No appeal was filed
 from the Probate Judgment. On September 21, 2011, Sherrill's
 Request for Hearing was filed, which challenged the validity of
 the will, but also sought a hearing on Sherrill's claims as an
 alleged creditor of the estate. We construe the portion of
 Sherrill's Request for Hearing that challenged the validity of
 the will as a post-judgment petition under HPR Rule 36(b) (2006)
 seeking relief from the Probate Judgment. The Order Denying
 Request for Hearing was an appealable final post-judgment order
 to the extent that it denied Sherrill's request for relief from
 the Probate Judgment. However, the Probate Judgment did not
 resolve Sherrill's creditors' claims. Neither did the Order
 Denying Request for Hearing. Therefore, the Order Denying
 Request for Hearing was a non-appealable interlocutory order to
 the extent that it denied Sherrill's request for a hearing on her
 creditors' claims.
4
 
B.
 
With respect to Sherrill's appeal from the portion of
 
the Order Denying Request for Hearing that rejected her challenge
 to the validity of the will and denied her request for relief
 from the Probate Judgment, we affirm the Probate Court. As
 noted, Sherrill only has standing as an alleged creditor of the
 estate. In her appeal, she provides no valid basis as a creditor
 to challenge under HPR Rule 36(b) the Probate Judgment entered by
 the Probate Court.
 
4We note that Sherrill appealed from both the Probate Court's Order
Denying Request for Hearing and the Judgment on the Order Denying Request for
Hearing. To the extent that the Order Denying Request for Hearing denied
Sherrill's request for relief from the Probate Judgment, it was an appealable
final post-judgment order, and the entry of the Judgment on the Order Denying
Request for Hearing was not necessary for an appeal. To the extent that the
 Order Denying Request for Hearing denied Sherrill's request for a hearing on
her creditors' claims, it was a non-appealable interlocutory order that was
not made appealable by the entry of the Judgment on the Order Denying Request
for Hearing. 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
With respect to Sherrill's appeal from the portion of
 
the Order Denying Request for Hearing that denied her request for
 
a hearing on her creditors' claims, we conclude that we lack
 appellate jurisdiction over this interlocutory ruling. The Order
 Denying Request for a Hearing did not finally resolve the merits
 of Sherrill's creditors' claims, and the Probate Court did not
 certify its order denying Sherrill's request for a hearing on her
 creditors' claims for appeal as an appealable interlocutory order
 or in the manner provided by HRCP Rule 54(b). See HPR Rule 34(a)
 
and (b).
 
Moreover, Sherrill's claim that the Probate Court erred
 
in denying her request for a hearing on her creditors' claims has
 been rendered moot by the Probate Court's subsequent decision to
 hold a hearing on her creditors' claims. It appears that the
 Probate Court viewed Sherrill's Request for a Hearing as only
 challenging the Probate Judgment and did not realize that it also
 included a request for a hearing on Sherrill's creditors' claims. 
Thus, the Probate Court did not focus on Sherrill's request for a
 hearing on her creditors' claims when it denied her Request for
 Hearing, and instead only focused on her challenge to the Probate
 Judgment. However, after Sherrill filed her "Request to Allow
 [Sherrill's] Claim Served to Counsel March 23, 2011, and
 Hearing," the Probate Court apparently realized that Sherrill
 sought to assert creditors' claims. The Probate Court
 subsequently held a hearing on Sherrill's creditors' claims and
 denied them on the merits. Sherrill then filed an appeal from
 the July 2, 2012, Judgment, which denied her creditors' claims,
 in Appeal No. CAAP-12-0000676. Under these circumstances, we
 conclude that Sherrill's claim that the Probate Court erred in
 denying her request for a hearing on her creditors' claims is
 moot.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Order Denying
 
Request for Hearing to the extent that it denied Sherrill's
 
request for relief from the Probate Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 5, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Barbara E. Sherrill
 
Petitioner-Appellant Pro Se
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Randall M.L. Yee

 
Law Office of Randall M.L. Yee 
for Respondent-Appellee
 
14
 