NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000196
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee, v.
DONNA LYNCH, Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff/
Third-Party Plaintiff-Appellant, and
BANK OF AMERICA, N.A., SUCCESSOR BY MERGER TO
BAC HOME LOANS SERVICING, LP, FKA COUNTRYWIDE HOME
LOANS SERVICING, LP, Third-Party Defendant-Appellee,
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50, Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-0578(3))
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Acting Chief Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant/Counterclaim Plaintiff/Third-Party Plaintiff-
Appellant Donna Lynch (Lynch) appeals from the Order Denying
Defendant's Motion for Relief Pursuant to Rule 60(b)(1),(2),(3)
and (6), and to Strike the Writ of Possession Entered on August
20, 2015 Filed on December 29, 2015 (Order Denying the Rule 60(b)
Motion), entered in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit
(Circuit Court), on April 15, 2016, against her and in favor of
Plaintiff/Counterclaim Defendant-Appellee Federal National
Mortgage Association ( Fannie Mae ) and Third-Party Defendant-NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Appellee Bank of America, N.A., Successor by Merger to BAC Home
Loans Servicing, LP, FKA Countrywide Home Loans Servicing, LP
(Bank of America ) (together, Appellees).  Lynch also challenges
the Circuit Court's Order Denying Defendant's Non-Hearing Motion
to Reconsider Motion for Relief Pursuant to Rule 60(b)(1),(2),(3)
and (6), and to Strike the Writ of Possession Entered on August
20, 2015, entered in the Circuit Court on April 1, 2016 ( Order
Denying Reconsideration ).1  
Although represented by counsel on this appeal, Lynch's
Opening Brief does not contain a "concise statement of the points
of error" as required by Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure
(HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4).  Nor does Lynch's brief provide accurate
and sufficient record references supporting "each statement of
fact or mention of court or agency proceedings."  HRAP Rule
28(b)(3).  However, the Hawai #i Supreme Court "has consistently
adhered to the policy of affording litigants the opportunity to
have their cases heard on the merits, where possible." 
Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai# i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553,
558 (1995) (internal quotation marks omitted).  Thus, upon
careful review of the record and the briefs submitted by the
parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments
advanced and the issues raised, as well as the relevant statutory
and case law, we have considered Lynch's discernible arguments as
follows:
Fannie Mae filed a Complaint for Ejectment ( Complaint )
against Lynch on August 29, 2011, after purchasing the subject
1The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
property at a non-judicial foreclosure sale held in 2010.  Lynch
answered the Complaint and filed a counterclaim against Fannie
Mae and a third-party complaint against Bank of America.  After
various proceedings, on January 21, 2015, the Circuit Court
entered an order granting summary judgment as to the counterclaim
and third-party complaint.  On August 20, 2015, the Circuit Court
entered an order granting summary judgment on the Complaint, a
Writ of Possession, and a Judgment.
On December 29, 2015, Lynch filed a motion pursuant to
Hawai#i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rules 60(b)(1), (2), and
(6), seeking to set aside the August 20, 2015 order granting
summary judgment order on the Complaint, Judgment, and Writ of
Possession.2  Lynch primarily argued, pursuant to HRCP Rule
60(b)(1), that relief should be granted due to the negligence and
mistakes of her prior attorneys, the Dubin Law Firm (Dubin Firm). 
Lynch also argued, pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(2), that there was
newly discovered evidence in that she learned that the Dubin Firm
had failed to conduct adequate discovery in the case.  In
addition, Lynch argued, pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(6), that in
light of the fact that the Circuit Court had denied in part
Appellees' motion to dismiss her counterclaim and third-party
claims, absent the Dubin Firm's gross incompetence, she would
have been able to litigate her case on the merits and the order
granting summary judgment and the Writ of Possession would not
have been entered.  After a series of hearings, further filings
2Lynch did not seek relief from the January 21, 2015 order granting
summary judgment as to the counterclaim and third-party complaint.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and arguments by both sides, the Circuit Court orally ruled that
there was not sufficient factual or legal basis to grant the
requested relief and denied the motion.
On March 1, 2016, prior to the written entry of the
Order Denying the Rule 60(b) Motion, Lynch filed a motion for
reconsideration of the denial of the Rule 60(b) motion.  Lynch
argued that the Circuit Court should reconsider her Rule 60(b)
Motion because Fannie Mae had late-filed a supplemental or reply
memorandum to a supplemental affidavit filed by Lynch and she was
prejudiced in not receiving it until after the final hearing on
her motion.  On April 1, 2016, the Circuit Court entered the
Order Denying Reconsideration, which noted that the late-filed
reply was filed after the court's final hearing and oral ruling
and stated that the court had not considered Appellees' late-
filed reply in conjunction with its ruling on Lynch's Rule 60(b)
motion.
On appeal, Lynch primarily argues that the Circuit
Court abused its discretion in denying her motion for
reconsideration because the Circuit Court failed to make
reasonable accommodations to ensure that Lynch, as a then-pro se
litigant, had an opportunity to have her matters be fairly heard. 
This argument is without merit.  
As Lynch acknowledges, the Circuit Court held three
hearings on her Rule 60(b) motion.  It is clear from the
transcript of the hearings on Lynch's Rule 60(b) motion that the
court carefully considered all of Lynch's substantive arguments. 
In addition, the court suggested possible options or avenues of
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
assistance for Lynch including, for example, suggesting at the
first hearing that Lynch speak to a HUD certified counselor.  At
the second hearing, the court asked counsel for Appellees to
further communicate with Lynch and the HUD certified counselor
and perhaps other agencies.  At the final hearing on Lynch's Rule
60(b) motion, after further argument of the parties, the court
addressed Lynch's asserted grounds for relief based on her former
counsel's alleged negligence.  See U.S. Bank Nat. Ass'n v.
Salvacion, No. 30594, 2011 WL 1574585 (Haw. App. April 26, 2011)
(mem. op.); accord Isemoto Contracting Co., Ltd. v. Andrade, 1
Haw. App. 202, 205, 616 P.2d 1022, 1025 (1980) (stating that
carelessness of counsel is not excusable neglect sufficient to
invoke relief under HRCP Rule 60(b)(1)).  
The Circuit Court, upon consideration of the matters
pointed to by Lynch and its own record, did not view the Dubin
Firm's actions as excusable neglect under HRCP Rule 60(b)(1). 
Nor did the court view the asserted lack of discovery to
constitute newly discovered evidence warranting relief under HRCP
Rule 60(b)(2).  Finally, the court recognized that, under
exceptional or aggravated circumstances, relief might otherwise
be available based on counsel's gross and inexcusable negligence,
but the court did not find that such circumstances existed in
this case.  See generally Hawai #i Hous. Auth. v. Uyehara , 77
Hawai#i 144, 149, 883 P.2d 65, 70 (1994) ("when an attorney's
neglect is gross and inexcusable courts have held that relief may
be justified under Rule 60(b)(6) . . . a case could arise of such
extreme aggravation with respect to the conduct of counsel that a
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
trial court, in its discretion, would set aside a judgment in a
civil case" (citations and quotation marks omitted)).
Upon review, we cannot conclude that the Circuit Court
abused its discretion in denying Lynch's motion for
reconsideration or the underlying HRCP Rule 60(b) motion.  See,
e.g., Beneficial Hawai# i, Inc. v. Casey , 98 Hawai# i 159, 164, 45
P.3d 359, 364 (2002) ("circuit court's disposition of an HRCP
Rule 60(b) motion is reviewed for abuse of discretion"); Ass'n of
Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., Ltd., 100
Hawai#i 97, 110, 58 P.3d 608, 621 (2002) (citation omitted) (the
appellate court reviews a "trial court's ruling on a motion for
reconsideration . . . under the abuse of discretion standard"). 
On appeal, Lynch asserts that the Dubin Firm failed to
communicate with her.  Yet, in support of her requests for
relief, she provides numerous email communications between her
and Dubin Firm lawyers, including Mr. Dubin.  While Mr. Dubin's
assessments of the case and strategies were unsuccessful, they
were not, as Lynch now argues, nonexistent.  Lynch also asserts
that the Dubin Firm late-filed its memorandum in opposition to
summary judgment.  However, the record shows that the court
considered the memorandum, as well as counsel's arguments.  Lynch
claims that she was prejudiced by the Dubin Firm's failure to
respond to requests for admissions because Appellees' counsel
orally argued that her admissions provided additional arguments
for relief.  However, the record shows that the subject requests
for admissions were not placed in the record until after the
court announced its ruling on the motion and there is nothing to
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
support the suggestion that the court relied on purported
admissions not properly before the court.  Upon a thorough
consideration of all of the evidence and arguments presented to
the Circuit Court, as well as Lynch's arguments on appeal, we
reject Lynch's argument that the Circuit Court abused its
discretion in denying her relief from the order granting summary
judgment in favor of Fannie Mae on its Complaint for Ejectment.
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's April 15, 2016
Order Denying the Rule 60(b) Motion and April 1, 2016 Order
Denying Reconsideration are affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 12, 2018.
On the briefs:
Michael J. Collins,
Joshua C. James,
(Cain & Herren, ALC)
for Defendant/Counterclaim
  Plaintiff/Third-Party
  Plaintiff-Appellant.Acting Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Patricia J. McHenry,
(Cades Schutte LLP)
for Plaintiff/Counterclaim
  Defendant-Appellee Federal
  National Mortgage Association,
          and
Third-Party Defendant-Appellee
  Bank of America, N.A., successor
  by merger to BAC Home Loans
  Servicing, LP, FKA Countrywide
  Home Loans Servicing, LP.Associate Judge
7