NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000591 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
STEVEN C. ALONGI, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CRIMINAL NO. 1CPC-17-0001258) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Steven C. 
Alongi, also known as 
Steven Clark Alongi, appeals from the 
"Judgment of Conviction and 
Probation Sentence" entered by the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit on June 26, 2018.1 For the reasons explained below, we 
affirm the Judgment. 
On September 8, 2017, Alongi was charged by felony 
information and non-felony complaint with (1) Unauthorized Entry Into Motor Vehicle in the First Degree and (2) Assault in the Third Degree. He pleaded not guilty. 
Jury trial began on January 17, 2018. The complaining 
witnesses were spouses Julia and Anthony. They went through the 
Kunia Wendy's drive-thru on April 24, 2017. Julia was driving; 
Anthony was sitting in the passenger seat. They got their food. Julia reversed into a handicap stall in the parking lot. A 
1 The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
vehicle drove into the parking lot and reversed into the handicap 
stall on the passenger side of Julia's car. The man driving the vehicle stared at them aggressively. Julia stared back at him. The man started to film Julia and Anthony. Julia reached for her phone to film the man. She then realized that she forgot to put up her handicap placard; she put the placard up and asked the man if that was the problem. An argument followed. Anthony called the police. 
While Anthony was on the phone, the man walked to their 
car, reached in, and started punching Anthony. Julia got out and walked around the back of her car; however, the man got back into his car and started it. Julia said, "yeah, that's what I thought." The man turned off his car, got out, and asked her "what did you think?" Julia told the man, "that you're a fuckin' coward." The man punched Julia in the mouth. Julia punched him back in the mouth. The man punched Julia about four more times on the left side of her face and she fell to the ground. 
Anthony testified that two persons then intervened. 
Julia believed that one was a customer and the other was a Wendy's employee. The man, however, got in his car and "sped out of the parking lot." 
Julia identified Alongi as the man that assaulted them. 
The deputy prosecuting attorney (DPA) asked Julia: "Are you 
certain that the defendant sitting in the courtroom here today is 
the man that punched you and your husband on April 24th of 2017?" She responded, "You know, there's always that little bit of doubt." 
Anthony also testified that he participated in the 
photographic lineup conducted by the police. He told the officer, "I'm not sure. I -- I don't remember exactly, I can't identify." At trial, however, Anthony testified that he was absolutely certain Alongi was the man who reached in the car window and punched him. 
Gabriel Billimon testified at trial. He was working at 
Wendy's on the day of the incident. He took out the trash. He walked past two vehicles — a silver-looking SUV and a grayish 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
colored four-door Chevy. There appeared to be one person in the 
Chevy and two people in the SUV. Billimon heard "somebody screaming stop, stop what you doing." He looked back and saw the driver of the Chevy punching a male in the passenger seat through the window of the SUV. A woman got out of the driver's side of the SUV and told the driver of the Chevy to stop what he was doing. The driver of the Chevy walked toward the woman and began "blowing the lady[,]" or hitting her with both hands. The driver of the Chevy hit the woman about six times before she fell to the ground. A customer then approached the driver of the Chevy and the woman, and the driver of the Chevy started to back off. Billimon walked up behind the driver of the Chevy and hit him in the thigh while he was getting into his car, to prevent him from leaving, but he was able to drive off. 
Billimon identified Alongi as the driver of the Chevy. 
Billimon had also identified Alongi in the photographic lineup conducted by the police. He explained that he saw Alongi at least twice before, "sleeping in the [Wendy's] parking lot in his car." On those occasions, his boss would instruct him to tell Alongi he could not park there and Alongi would leave the premises. Billimon stated he was "[h]undred percent" certain that Alongi was "the man that [he] had seen on those prior occasions, the man that [he saw] punching those people, [and] the same man that [he] identified . . . in court[.]" 
The jury found Alongi guilty as charged on both counts. 
The Judgment was entered on June 26, 2018. This appeal followed. 
POINTS OF ERROR 
Alongi raises five points of error: 
1. "The inadmissible and prejudicial expert/
pseudo-expert opinions on Alongi's guiltoffered by Juror Croucher and Juror Nguyentainted the jury"; 
2. "The Circuit Court abused its discretion in denying Alongi's first motion for mistrialbased on the [DPA's] misconduct in adducing 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Detective Carreira's highly prejudicial
comments"; 
3. "The Circuit Court abused its discretion in denying Alongi's second motion for mistrialbased on Julia's admitted violation of the witness exclusionary rule"; 
4. "Alongi was deprived of his constitutionalright to testify where his stated decisionnot to testify was forced upon him by the[deputy public defender]"; and 
5. "There was no substantial evidence to supportAlongi's convictions." 
STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
1. A trial court has discretion to regulate voir dire 
to keep the questioning within reasonable bounds to assist in 
impaneling an impartial jury. State v. Churchill, 4 Haw. App. 
276, 279, 664 P.2d 757, 760 (1983) (citing Hawai# i Rules of Penal 
Procedure Rule 24(a)). 
2. and 3. The denial of a motion for mistrial "is 
within the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be upset absent a clear abuse of discretion." State v. Pasene, 144 
Hawai# i 339, 365, 439 P.3d 864, 890 (2019) (citing State v. 
Furutani, 76 Hawai# i 172, 178-79, 873 P.2d 51, 57-58 (1994)). 
4. The validity of a criminal defendant's right to 
testify is a question of constitutional law reviewed under the right/wrong standard. State v. Celestine, 142 Hawai# i 165, 169, 
415 P.3d 907, 911 (2018) (citing State v. Gomez-Lobato, 130 Hawai# i 465, 468-69, 312 P.3d 897, 900-01 (2013)). 
5. When a criminal defendant challenges the 
sufficiency of the evidence to support a conviction, the evidence must be considered in the strongest light for the prosecution. See State v. Kalaola, 124 Hawai# i 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 
(2010). 
The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established
beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantialevidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Substantial evidence as to every material element of the
offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficientquality and probative value to enable a person of reasonablecaution to support a conclusion. 
Id. (cleaned up). 
DISCUSSION 
1. The circuit court did not plainly err bynot sua sponte striking voir direresponses given by two potential jurors. 
Alongi argues that during voir dire two potential 
jurors — 
Croucher and Nguyen — impermissibly expressed "expert/ 
pseudo-expert opinions" that Alongi was guilty. Croucher 
disclosed that he was a psychologist and "an active member of theCenter of Law and Science, and that's kind of like bridging neuropsychology and law." Nguyen disclosed that he grew up "in alow income neighborhood" and had "seen many things. . . . I witnessed violence, murder." Both expressed opinions that Alongiwas guilty. Alongi did not object during the voir dire or move to strike Croucher's or Nguyen's opinions;
  accordingly, we 
review for plain error. 2 
  
After the jury was sworn but before opening statements 
were given, the circuit court instructed the jury: 
In terms of considering what is evidence and what is
not, again, evidence comes in the form of sworn testimony of
witnesses and any exhibits received into evidence. 
A question asked by a lawyer is not evidence.
Objections made by lawyers also are not evidence. And questions asked and responses of jurors during juryselection also are not evidence . The opening statements and
the closing arguments of the lawyers as I told you also arenot evidence. And any testimony that the court may excludeor strike is also not evidence in the case. 
(Emphasis added.) "A jury is presumed to follow the court's 
instructions." State v. Feliciano, 149 Hawai# i 365, 377, 489 
P.3d 1277, 1289 (2021) (citation omitted). Nothing in the record 
2 Alongi challenged Croucher for cause. The State did not object.
The circuit court granted the challenge. Alongi also challenged Nguyen for
cause. The circuit court granted the challenge over the State's objection. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  
 points to the contrary in this case. On this record, we cannot 
conclude that the circuit court committed plain error during jury voir dire. 
2. The circuit court did not abuse its 
discretion by denying Alongi's firstmotion for mistrial. 
Alongi argues that the circuit court erred by denying 
his first motion for mistrial because "the [DPA] engaged in 
misconduct by adducing Detective Carreira's irreparably prejudicial comments that informed the jurors that he deal[t] with 'Major Crimes' and felonies." 
Alongi's first motion for mistrial was based upon 
testimony given by Detective Carreira. On direct examination, Detective Carreira testified: 
Q Mr. Carreira, what do you do for a living, sir? 
A I'm a detective with the Honolulu Police 
Department. 
Q How long have you been employed with HPD? A Um -- going on 14 to 15 years. Q Are you assigned to a particular division? A 
Yes, Major Crimes Detail . 
Q As a detective with the Major Crimes Detail ,
what are some of your general duties and responsibilities? 
A Investigate cases, go to scenes, interview
witnesses. 
You know, basic -- basically investigate any
kind of criminal case, normally a felony level . 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Objection, Your Honor. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Alongi did not object to the questions that elicited 
the allegedly improper testimony; he objected only to Detective 
Carreira's answers. The circuit court sustained the objection. The following exchange then took place: 
THE COURT: How do you want me to cure? An 
instruction or leave it alone? Because he can't -- he's 
investigated felonies, doesn't necessarily mean that thisone is a felony. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Yeah. I don't know how to remedy
it. Does the court have a preference? 
THE COURT: Well, if I try to give a curative
instruction now, I think it's gonna be obvious and it draws
attention to it. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I don't know, Judge. 
THE COURT: But maybe I make -- but I may direct the
prosecutor to ask whether or not he investigates all kinds
of criminal offenses. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Okay. 
THE COURT: But I'll hear your thoughts. [DPA]: Judge, that was an unanticipated response.
However, if defense counsel would and the court would like
me to cure it, I'll do what I can to cure that. 
And then 
plus, I mean, that taken together with the fact that heworks for Major Crimes I think further complicates theissue. 
THE COURT: And I guess the fir -
-
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I don't want a mistrial . 
(Indiscernible). 
THE COURT: So my first question is do you want me to
[give] a curative instruction? 
My first thought would be
no. But if you want me to, I'll give one. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I think I have to, I have to ask
for a curative instruction. 
THE COURT: 
So I'm going to strike testimony? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Yeah, just to strike I guess,
yeah, the last response without repeating it should bestricken and not to -- they are not to consider it in their-- I guess in their evaluation of the facts of this case orin deliberation of this case. 
THE COURT: Okay. I'll give a curative instruction. 
The next thing I'm going to order is when they're
talking, when you ask Detective Carreira about his jobs, his
duties, and his responsibilities that you lead so that hestays away from major crimes and from felony-level offenses. 
[DPA]: 
Judge, I'll move on beyond the whole issue,
beyond his background at this point, if that's beneficial tothe court. But if the court would like me to clarify thathe investigates all types of crimes, I'm happy to do that aswell. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I think that would just draw more
attention (indiscernible) -
-
[DPA]: I'll just --
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: -- alleged crimes or whatever. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[DPA]: I'll just move on, if that's okay. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Okay. 
(Emphasis added.) The circuit court then gave the following 
curative instruction: 
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, Detective Carreira's last
two answers are stricken from the record. You are not to consider it during your deliberations of this case in anyway. 
Nevertheless, Alongi later moved for a mistrial. The 
circuit court denied the motion. Because the jury is presumed to 
follow the court's instructions, it cannot be said that Alongi was prejudiced by Detective Carreira's statements. State v. 
Acker, 133 Hawai# i 253, 279, 327 P.3d 931, 957 (2014). The 
circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying Alongi's first motion for mistrial. 
3. The circuit court did not abuse its 
discretion by denying Alongi's secondmotion for mistrial. 
The circuit court invoked Rule 615 of the Hawaii Rules 
of Evidence (HRE), commonly referred to as the "witness exclusion 
rule," before the start of Alongi's trial. 
Exclusion of witnesses . At the request of a party the court
shall order witnesses excluded so that they cannot hear the
testimony of other witnesses, and it may make the order ofits own motion. 
Rule 615, Hawaii Rules of Evidence, Chapter 626, Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (2016). "The purpose of HRE Rule 615 is to prevent the shaping of testimony by one witness to match that of another, and to discourage fabrication and collusion." State v. Elmaleh, 7 
Haw. App. 488, 492, 782 P.2d 886, 889 (1989) (cleaned up). 
Alongi allegedly punched complaining witness Anthony as 
Anthony was seated in his car. Alongi then allegedly punched complaining witness Julia after Julia confronted Alongi about punching Anthony. Immediately after the incident, Anthony was not able to identify Alongi in a photographic lineup. During the 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 trial, Julia identified Alongi as the person who punched her and 
Anthony. After Julia testified, but before Anthony testified, Julia told Anthony that she had identified Alongi in court as the person who assaulted her. 
When Anthony testified he identified Alongi as the 
person who punched him. Anthony admitted that he was shown a photographic lineup, was able to narrow the suspects down to two photographs, but was unable to identify Alongi as the person who punched him. At the conclusion of the direct examination, Anthony stated he was "[a]bsolutely" certain that Alongi was the man "[t]hat reached through the car window and punched [him.]" 
On cross-examination, defense counsel questioned 
Anthony as follows: 
Q . . . And you and your wife [Julia], you guys
drove here together today, correct? 
A Yes. 
Q Okay. And you and your wife during these
recesses, during lunch you guys are together, correct? 
A Correct. Q And you guys are sitting in a witness room out
here together, correct? 
A Correct. Q Okay. And you were in there when your wife came
out from after she testified, correct? 
A Yes. Q 
Okay. And she was upset, right? 
A First time. Q I'm sorry? A First time because she coming out twice. Q Okay. First time she was upset? A Yeah. Crying and. Q Okay. And she told you that she ID'd my client 
in court? 
A Yeah. She told me. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The State, on re-direct examination, addressed defense counsel's 
line of questioning: 
Q Well, I just want to ask about the implications
of [defense counsel]'s questions. 
A Okay. 
Q Your wife, did she tell you that she saw the guy
who assaulted you in court today? 
A 
Actually, I ask her did you see him? She say
yes. 
Q Okay. My question to you is you've identified
the defendant here in court, right? 
A Yes. Q Are you identifying this defendant based on your
own recollection? 
A On my recollection. 
Q 
You're not doing so --
A Nah, nah, no, no. Q Let me finish the question. A Uh-huh. 
Q Are you identifying the defendant because your
wife told you that he was in the room? 
A No. Q All right. [Anthony], why are you saying this
is the man that beat you through the window on April 24th? 
A I recognize now. 
Q In person? A In person. I don't recognize in picture. 
On re-cross examination, defense counsel revisited the 
issue: 
Q Well, you heard . . . [the DPA] ask you about
when you went back and talked to your wife, correct? 
A Yes. Q Okay. And you said you asked her was he in
there and she said yes, correct? 
A Yes. 
Q Okay. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  
 
 
  
 
  A No, I ask her did you rec -- did you see him. 
Q Okay. And then she said yes, --A Yes. Q 
-- correct? 
And then you're now in court and you're identifying
Mr. Alongi --
A Yes. 
Q -- as the person who as [sic] assaulted you,
correct? 
A. Correct. 
Alongi orally moved for mistrial while the jury was in 
deliberation: 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Your Honor, at this time defense
would make a motion for a mistrial based on a violation of 
the Court's rule. Under HRE Rule 611 [sic], . . . thewitness exclusionary rule will always be in effect from thehearing on any motions and/or jury selection until andincluding closing arguments. 
The basis for my motion is the testimony of
Mr. Anthony Szaraz, who testified that after his wife, JuliaSzaraz, had testified, she came back into the room wherethey were seated together, where they had been together thewhole morning. She came in. He asked her specifically if[Alongi] was in the courtroom and she answered yes, afterwhich [Anthony] came into the courtroom. And after not being able to identify [Alongi] as the person who assaultedhim in the sequential six-pack lineup, he points to [Alongi]with what he said was a hundred percent certainty that thiswas the man who assaulted him through the window. 
Also [Julia] did talk about a phone call she got from
Detective Carreira. However, I believe that that is anindirect violation of the witness exclusionary rule asinvoked by the Court through its Rule 611 order. 
THE COURT: It's a direct violation . 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Well, direct violation. And based 
on -- you know, the rule itself is one of sequestration suchthat it's in place in order to protect one witness from kindof molding or shaping their testimony in order to align withthe testimony of another witness. And I believe that's what happened here in court, regardless of what [Anthony] says --excuse me -- may have testified to on the stand. 
As such I believe that it prejudices [Alongi] such
that he's not able to get a fair trial. And that's the basis for our motion, Your Honor. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  
 (Emphasis added.) The circuit court heard further argument, then 
denied the motion for mistrial. The court explained: 
THE COURT: After taking judicial notice of the
records, files, and proceedings, in 1CPC-17-0001285, given
the arguments of counsel and considering the testimonythat's been provided in the case, Court has a couple ofcomments on the witness exclusionary rule. The prosecutor'sright. It is a rule of sequestration to prevent the shapingof testimony between witnesses. That being said, whether ornot there's actual collusion or actual shaping of testimonyis a determination to be made by the finder of fact. And as long as the finder of fact has all of the circumstances ofthat violation before them to consider, they have the properinformation with which to come to that conclusion. 
So what the Court is really finding is when reviewing
the testimony of [Anthony], he was cross-examined vigorouslywith all of the facts of the violation of the in limine order and the witness exclusionary rule. He was cross-examined on the statements that his wife made, thestatements that he learned, and whether or not it impactedhim when he made his in-court identification. 
If the jury ultimately finds that it undermines his
credibility and his testimony, the jury has the informationto make that conclusion. The jury also has the relevant andall of the information with respect to the violation of thesequestration rule to make the adequate credibilitydetermination for all of the witnesses. 
So given that, because he was subjected to
cross-examination and the totality of the violation of thesequestration rule was brought to the jury's attention, theCourt cannot conclude that now the technical violation of the rule resulted in the deprivation of [Alongi]'s right toa fair trial. 
So based on those findings and conclusions, Court
respectfully denies the motion for mistrial. 
"[T]he sanctions which a court chooses to attach to the 
violation of its sequestration order is a matter within the 
discretion of the court." Elmaleh, 7 Haw. App. at 493, 782 P.2d 
at 889 (original brackets omitted) (citing Harkins v. Ikeda, 57 Haw. 378, 384, 557 P.2d 788, 792 (1976)). Noncompliance with HRE Rule 615 does not require a new trial "unless the court's decision to allow the allegedly tainted testimony was an abuse of discretion or resulted in prejudice to the defendant." Id. at 
493, 782 P.2d at 890 (citation omitted). "The defendant has the burden of proving that there was either prejudice or an abuse of discretion." Id. at 493-94, 782 P.2d at 890 (cleaned up). 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Elmaleh, we held that the violation of the 
sequestration order was harmless because the complaining witness 
admitted on cross-examination that she was present during the conference between the prosecuting attorney and one of the State's witnesses (a police officer). Id. 
Similarly, in State v. Steger, 114 Hawai# i 162, 158 
P.3d 280 (App. 2006), we concluded that a witness's viewing of an exhibit previously marked by other witnesses was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt because, among other reasons, "the circuit court took sufficient remedial action by permitting [the defendant] to cross-examine [the witness] about his viewing of [the exhibit]." Id. at 175, 158 P.3d at 293 (citing Elmaleh, 7 
Haw. App. at 494, 782 P.2d at 890). The defendant's ability to cross-examine the police officer, we noted, "not only alerted the jury to what had happened but also permitted [the defendant] to attack [the witness]'s credibility by arguing that [the witness] had been influenced by his exposure to the previously-marked diagram." Id. "[T]he jury was able to judge for itself the 
extent to which [the witness]'s testimony may have been improperly influenced by his viewing of [the exhibit]." Id. 
Alongi, like the defendants in Elmaleh and Steger, 
failed to show that he was prejudiced or that the circuit court abused its discretion by denying his motion for mistrial. The record shows that defense counsel extensively cross-examined Anthony on his interactions with Julia in the witness room. The circuit court, consistent with the record, recognized that "[Anthony] was cross-examined on the statements that [Julia] made, the statements that he learned, and whether or not it impacted him when he made his in-court identification." Defense counsel "alerted the jury" to Anthony's discussion with Julia in the witness room and "permitted [Alongi] to attack [Anthony]'s credibility[.]" See Steger, 114 Hawai# i at 175, 158 P.3d at 293. 
As in Steger, Alongi's jury was able to judge for itself the extent to which Anthony's testimony may have been improperly influenced by his discussions with Julia in the witness room. On the record before us, we cannot say that the circuit court abused 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
its discretion in denying the motion for mistrial based on 
Anthony's and Julia's violation of the witness exclusion rule. 
4. The circuit court did not deprive Alongi
of his constitutional right to testify. 
Alongi contends he "was deprived of his constitutional 
right to testify where his purported waiver of that right was the 
result of coercion by [his defense counsel]." He acknowledges that the circuit court engaged him in an appropriate Tachibana colloquy,
3 and that the alleged conduct of his defense counsel is 
"not reflected in the record of the proceedings herein[.]" We therefore decline to address this issue, without prejudice to Alongi's right to file a Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 40 
post-conviction petition. 
5. The evidence was sufficient to support
Alongi's conviction. 
Alongi contends there was insufficient evidence to 
identify him as the perpetrator. In support of his argument, 
Alongi asserts that Julia, Anthony, and Billimon "provided conflicting, tainted and biased identifications of Alongi as the alleged perpetrator[, which] did not constitute substantial evidence[.]" 
Alongi first argues that Julia's identification was not 
credible because she twice failed to identify Alongi in photographic lineups and she agreed on cross-examination that she was "not a hundred percent certain" about her in-court identification of Alongi. 
Alongi next argues that Anthony's testimony was not 
credible because he twice failed to identify Alongi in photographic lineups and was only able to identify Alongi in court after Julia told him she had identified Alongi during her testimony, in violation of the witness exclusion rule. 
3 See Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai #i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995). 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
              Finally, Alongi argues that Billimon's testimony was 
biased and not credible because: (1) his testimony concerning his 
unobstructed view of the incident and whether he punched or kicked the perpetrator was contradicted by objective evidence presented at trial; (2) his identification of Alongi as the driver of the Chevy was colored by his prior encounters with Alongi; and (3) he admitted to speaking alone with the deputy prosecuting attorney about the case and also having a pending drunk driving case that was being prosecuted by the office of the prosecuting attorney. 
Julia, Anthony, and Billimon all identified Alongi at 
trial. Although Alongi challenges their credibility, "it is within the jury's purview" to determine witness credibility. State v. Williams, 149 Hawai# i 381, 399, 491 P.3d 592, 610 (2021) 
(citing State v. Jhun, 83 Hawai# i 472, 483, 927 P.2d 1355, 1366 
(1996) ("In a jury trial, the jury is the trier of fact and, thus, is the sole judge of the credibility of the witnesses and the weight of the evidence.")). There was substantial evidence adduced at trial to support Alongi's conviction. 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment of Conviction 
and Probation Sentence entered by the circuit court on June 26, 2018, is affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 7, 2022. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Presiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge
15 Thomas Waters,Law Office of Thomas Waters,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 