  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000605 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN THE MATTER OF 
HAWAII STATE TEACHERS ASSOCIATION,
Complainant-Appellant-Appellant,
and 
BOARD OF EDUCATION, DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION,
STATE OF HAWAII; PATRICIA HAMAMOTO, SUPERINTENDENT,
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, STATE OF HAWAII;
AND SUSAN H. KITSU, DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION,
STATE OF HAWAII, Respondents-Appellees-Appellees,
and 
HAWAII LABOR RELATIONS BOARD, KERRY KOMATSUBARA,
SESNITA A.D. MOEPONO, AND J.N. MUSTO,
Agency-Appellees-Appellees 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(Civil No. 1CC161001878) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge and Hiraoka, J. and Kubota,
Circuit Court J. (in place of Ginoza, Chief Judge, Wadsworth
and Nakasone, JJ., recused)) 
This appeal involves Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 89-9. The statute deals with collective bargaining in public 
employment. Complainant-Appellant-Appellant Hawaii State Teachers Association (HSTA) contends that Respondents-Appellees-NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellees Hawai# i State Board of Education (BOE)1 and the State 
of Hawai# i Department of Education (DOE) adopted a policy and 
approved rules and a plan to implement the policy without 
negotiating terms with HSTA. We hold that BOE and DOE were not required to negotiate with HSTA over terms of the policy, rules, or implementation plan because: they did not change HSTA's collective bargaining agreement (
CBA); they were specifically 
subject to the terms of the CBA; and they were within DOE's management rights. Accordingly, we affirm the Judgment entered 
by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on July 14, 2017,
2 
which affirmed Decision No. 484 of Agency-Appellee-Appellee the 
Hawaii Labor Relations Board (HLRB). 
BACKGROUND 
HRS Chapter 89 deals with collective bargaining in 
public employment. HRS § 89–9 (Supp. 2007) sets "the scope of 
topics subject to mandatory bargaining." Univ. of Haw. Pro. 
Assembly v. Tomasu, 79 Hawai# i 154, 160, 900 P.2d 161, 167 
(1995). The statute provided,3 in relevant part: 
(a) The employer and the exclusive representative
shall . . . negotiate  in good faith with respect to wages,
hours, . . . and other terms and conditions of employment
that are subject to collective bargaining and that are to be 
embodied in a written agreement as specified in section 89-
10, but such obligation does not compel either party to
agree to a proposal or make a concession . . . [.] 
. . . . 
(c) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
all matters affecting employee relations , including those
that are, or may be, the subject of a rule adopted by the
employer  or any director, shall be subject to consultation 
with the exclusive representatives of the employees
concerned. The employer shall make every reasonable effortto consult with exclusive representatives and consider  their 
1 BOE formulates policy for the state's public school system. Haw. 
Const. art. X, section 3. 
2 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. 
3 HRS § 89–9 has been amended several times since the HSTA filed the
prohibited practice complaint that is the subject of this appeal; we analyzethe version of the statute in effect when the HLRB proceeding was initiated. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
input, along with the input of other affected parties, prior
to effecting changes in any major policy affecting employeerelations. 
(d) . . . The employer and the exclusive
representative shall not agree to any proposal that would. . . interfere with the rights and obligations of a publicemployer to: 
(1) Direct employees; 
(2) Determine qualifications, standards for work,and the nature and contents of examinations; 
(3) Hire, promote, transfer, assign, and retainemployees in positions; 
(4) Suspend, demote, discharge, or take otherdisciplinary action against employees for propercause; 
(5) Relieve an employee from duties because of lack ofwork or other legitimate reason; 
(6) Maintain efficiency and productivity, includingmaximizing the use of advanced technology, ingovernment operations; 
(7) Determine methods, means, and personnel by whichthe employer's operations are to be conducted;and 
(8) Take such actions as may be necessary to carryout the missions of the employer in cases ofemergencies. 
This subsection shall not . . . preclude negotiations overthe procedures and criteria on promotions, transfers,assignments, demotions, layoffs, suspensions, terminations,discharges, or other disciplinary actions as a permissive
subject of bargaining during collective bargaining
negotiations [.] 
(Bold italics added.) 
HSTA is the collective bargaining representative for 
persons employed by DOE in bargaining unit 5.  Under HRS § 89-
9(a), DOE was required to "negotiate" with HSTA about "terms and 
conditions of employment" of teachers "to be embodied in a written agreement[.]" Under HRS § 89-9(c), DOE was required to "consult" with HSTA and "consider" HSTA's "input" before adoptinga "rule" "affecting employee relations." 
Under HRS § 89-9(d), 4
 
4 Bargaining unit 5 consists of "[t]eachers and other personnel of
the department of education under the same pay schedule[.]" HRS § 89-6(a)(5). 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"promotions, transfers, assignments, demotions, layoffs, 
suspensions, terminations, discharges, or other disciplinary actions" were DOE's management rights, the "procedures and criteria" for which could be subjects for collective bargaining negotiations. 
On November 5, 2007, the BOE's Committee on Special 
Programs recommended adoption of a policy prohibiting the harassment and bullying of, and discrimination against, students by DOE employees. The committee explained: 
Federal law requires that any educational entity that
receives federal assistance establish and adopt grievanceprocedures for complaints of discrimination. [Proposed]Board Policy 4211 would keep the Department of Education(Department) in compliance with federal law as theDepartment receives federal financial assistance.Additionally, there were recommendations from theSuperintendent's Safe Schools Community Advisory Committeethat recommended a strong policy against bullying andharassment. 
By letter dated November 7, 2007, DOE sent the proposed 
policy to HSTA "for consult and confer."  DOE explained: 5
This policy was developed pursuant to recommendation fromthe Safe Schools Community Advisory Committee. This Committee was comprised of community leaders and governmentstakeholders who made recommendations on how to improvesafety in Hawaii schools. One of the key recommendationswas to adopt and implement a policy against harassment,bullying and discrimination by staff against students. 
The policy includes federal law requirements under Title VI
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and as amended by the CivilRights Act of 1991, and Title IX of the Education Amendmentsof 1972, also known as the Patsy T. Mink Equal Opportunityin Education Act. 
The rationale for the proposed policy is to ensure that the
DOE formalizes its position on anti-harassment, anti-bullying, and anti-discrimination against students. This policy will apply to all DOE employees. 
DOE requested a response by December 10, 2007. 
5 DOE sent similar letters to the United Public Workers and the 
Hawaii Government Employees Association, which were the collective bargainingrepresentatives for DOE employees in other bargaining units. Neither union demanded negotiation. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HSTA did not respond to DOE's letter. DOE scheduled 
meetings with HSTA during February 2008. HSTA canceled the 
meetings. On February 15, 2008, HSTA informed DOE by email that "HSTA has reservations on this policy." HSTA described its reservations in a letter to DOE dated February 20, 2008. HSTA's letter concluded: 
We welcome a policy that covers all administrators,
teachers, staff and students within school communities inthe workplace and their interactions with each other. 
As is the case for all policy and regulation proposals, the
Association reserves its right to continue to comment as itevolves through implementation. 
During a regular meeting on February 21, 2008, BOE 
approved Board Policy 4211, titled "Anti-Harassment, Anti-
Bullying, and Anti-Discrimination Against Student(s) by Employees Policy" (BP 4211). BP 4211 stated (among other things): 
The Department of Education strictly prohibits
discrimination, including harassment, by any employee
against a student based on the following protected classes:race, color, national origin, sex, physical or mentaldisability, and/or religion. In addition to the above protected basis, the Department of Education strictlyprohibits any form of harassment and/or bullying based onthe following: gender identity and expression, socio-economic status, physical appearance and characteristic[sic], and sexual orientation. 
By letter dated February 22, 2008, DOE informed HSTA: 
DOE will follow its normal course in developing regulationsand procedures as it always does immediately after a policyis adopted. Normal disciplinary procedures will be followedas outlined in the collective bargaining agreement  and other 
DOE rules, policies, and/or procedures. 
(Bold italics added.) 
On March 28, 2008, Respondent-Appellee-Appellee 
Patricia Hamamoto, then-Superintendent of the DOE, approved 
Standard Practice 0211 (SP 0211). The purpose of SP 0211 was 
"[t]o describe the regulations and procedures of [BP 4211]." 
Regarding discipline for violations, SP 0211 stated: 
5 . . . . NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Employee(s) who are found to have violated this policy,
after an internal administrative investigation has beencompleted, may receive disciplinary action as deemedappropriate by an appropriate administrator. Such action will be taken in accordance with DOE policies, regulations,rules, collective bargaining agreements , and other laws,
rules, and regulations. 
(Bold italics added.) 
Also on March 28, 2008, Hamamoto approved the 
"Implementation Plan" for BP 4211 (BP 4211 IP). BP 4211 IP had 
been submitted by Respondent-Appellee-Appellee Susan H. Kitsu, 
then-Director of DOE's Civil Rights Compliance Office. The 
purpose of BP 4211 IP was "to ensure that there is no harassment,discrimination, and/or bullying of students by employees." Regarding discipline for violations, BP 4211 IP stated:  
Any complaints will be immediately investigated, and if any
evidence corroborates an allegation, prompt action will betaken by the proper officials, up to termination and in line 
with provisions under collective bargaining agreements ,
laws, rules, DOE policies and procedures, and other relevantauthorities. 
(Bold italics added.) 
By letter dated May 12, 2008, HSTA demanded that DOE 
negotiate the contents of BP 4211, SP 0211, and BP 4211 IP. The 
letter stated (among other things): 
The aforementioned policy, standard practice documents, the
proposed repeal of title 8, subtitle 2, chapter 41 of theDOE,[
6] and implementation forms result in significant and
material impacts on wages, hours, terms and conditions ofemployment of bargaining unit [5] employees and changesexisting terms and conditions of employment. 
By letter dated May 21, 2008, the DOE responded: 
By letter dated November 7, 2007, the [DOE] sent a letter to[HSTA] submitting then Proposed Policy #4211 . . . forconsult and confer. . . . 
6 We take judicial notice, pursuant to Rule 201 of the Hawaii Rules
of Evidence, that Hawai #i Administrative Rules ( HAR) Title 8 ("Department of
Education"), Subtitle 2 ("Education"), Part 1 ("Public School"), Chapter 41
("Civil Rights Policy and Complaint Procedure") was not repealed untilAugust 15, 2019. 
The repeal of Chapter 41 is not at issue in this appeal. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . A consult and confer meeting was scheduled for
Tuesday, February 12, 2008[,] but was cancelled by HSTA. 
. . . . 
HSTA's request for negotiation was raised for the first timeby letter dated May 12, 2008. 
DOE maintains that the 
adoption and implementation of the policy is not a subjectof negotiation. 
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
On May 27, 2008, HSTA filed a Prohibited Practice 
Complaint against DOE, BOE, Hamamoto, and Kitsu with HLRB under 
HRS Chapter 89. HSTA alleged that DOE and BOE "unilaterally formulated, adopted, and/or implemented mid-term changes to the unit 5 collective bargaining agreement without negotiations or mutual consent of HSTA[.]" HSTA claimed that BOE's refusal to negotiate was a prohibited practice that violated certain subsections of HRS § 89-13. The statute provided, in relevant part: 
(a) It shall be a prohibited practice for a public
employer or its designated representative wilfully to: 
. . . . 
(5) Refuse to bargain collectively in good faithwith the exclusive representative as required insection 89-9; [or] 
. . . . 
(7) Refuse or fail to comply with any provision ofthis chapter[.] 
HRS § 89-13 (Supp. 2007). 
HLRB issued Decision No. 484 on September 7, 2016. The 
HLRB dismissed all of HSTA's charges against BOE, DOE, Hamamoto, 
and Kitsu. 
On October 7, 2016, HSTA filed a notice of appeal from 
Decision No. 484 with the circuit court. The circuit court heard oral arguments on June 30, 2017. On July 14, 2017, the circuit court entered its "Order Affirming the Decision of the Hawaii Labor Relations Board, Case No. CE-05-667, Decision No. 484, 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dated September 7, 2016[.]" The Judgment was also entered on 
July 14, 2017. 
This secondary appeal followed. 
POINTS OF ERROR 
HSTA raises four points of error: 
"1. The Circuit Court Wrongly Affirmed Board
Decision No. 484 That Failed To Recognize
That Policies Affecting Discipline AndDischarge and Employees' Job Security AreMandatory Subjects of Bargaining"; 
"2. The Circuit Court Wrongly Affirmed Board
Decision No. 484 Where The Board's Application of Management Rights UnderSection 89-9(d), HRS, Was Contrary To TheCollective Bargaining Rights Granted ToPublic Employees"; 
"3. The Circuit Court Wrongly Affirmed Board
Decision No. 484 That Failed To Recognize TheDOE's Unilateral Changes and Failure toProvide Information Needed for BargainingWere Prohibited Practices"; and 
"4. The Circuit Court Wrongly Affirmed Board
Decision No. 484 As the Decision Failed To Recognize The Complaint Was Filed Within90-Days of the DOE's Unilateral Changes andRefusal To Bargain." 
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
Our review of a circuit court decision on appeal from 
an administrative agency determination is a secondary appeal; we 
must determine whether the circuit court was right or wrong in its decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS § 91–14(g) to the agency's decision. Tomasu, 79 Hawai# i at 157, 900 P.2d at 
164. "[T]he agency's decision carries a presumption of validity 
and [the] appellant has the heavy burden of making a convincing showing that the decision is invalid because it is unjust and unreasonable in its consequences." Id. (brackets omitted). 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HRS § 91–14 (2012 & Supp. 2016), entitled "Judicial 
review of contested cases," provides in relevant part: 
(g) Upon review of the record, the court may affirm
the decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it mayreverse or modify the decision and order if thesubstantial rights of the petitioners may have beenprejudiced because the administrative findings,conclusions, decisions, or orders are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; (4) Affected by other error of law; (5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by
abuse of discretion or clearly unwarrantedexercise of discretion. 
"Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are 
reviewable under subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions 
regarding procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of fact under subsection (5); and an agency's exercise of its discretion under subsection (6)." Tomasu, 79 Hawai# i at 157, 900 
P.2d at 164. 
An agency's findings of fact are reviewed for clear 
error. Id.An agency's conclusions of law are freely 
reviewable. Id. 
DISCUSSION 
HSTA contends that BOE and DOE were required to 
negotiate the terms of BP 4211, SP 0211, and BP 4211 IP before they were adopted and approved, because "teachers are subject to discipline, discharge, and other adverse actions affecting their job security for violations of the 'bullying' work rules and standards[.]" 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1. HLRB did not rule that policies
affecting discipline, discharge, or jobsecurity could never be subjects fornegotiation under HRS § 89-9(a). 
HSTA argues that HLRB "erred when it determined that 
department policies and work rules affecting discipline, 
discharge, and the job security of teachers did not constitute a 'mandatory subject' of collective bargaining, and that [DOE]'s refusal to negotiate as requested by HSTA did not constitute a breach of the duty to bargain." The argument is incorrect. HLRB in fact acknowledged: "To the extent that the adoption and implementation of a BP pursuant to a SP and IP may materially 
affect the discipline provisions of the CBA, bargainable topics 
may arise, and consequently, a BP, SP or IP may be the subject of 
mandatory bargaining." (Bold italics added.) 
HSTA contends that "[t]he facts were undisputed that 
the bullying policy were [sic] enforced through discipline, 
discharge, and other adverse personnel actions affecting the job security of teachers." HLRB found, however, that HSTA failed to "specifically point[] out any provisions of BP 4211, SP[ ]0211 or BP 4211 IP which specifically conflicted with or changed any 
provisions of applicable DOE policies, rules, regulations, 
collective bargaining agreements, and other laws, rules, and 
regulations concerning the discipline of its members then in 
effect (Existing Rules)" (bold italics added). 
HSTA argues that BP 4211, SP 0211, and BP 4211 IP 
allowed teachers to be disciplined based on anonymous complaints, which was contrary to the CBA. CBA Article X. provided, in relevant part: 
D. Any serious complaint or any repeated minor complaint,
including anonymous complaints concerning a teacher,shall be reported immediately to the teacher by thesupervisor receiving the complaint. The use of complaints and the filing of said complaints shall becovered by Article IX - Personnel Information. 
Any teacher against whom a serious complaint has been
filed will have the opportunity to meet with thecomplainant(s). At the teacher's request, thesupervisor shall be present at such a meeting. The 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
supervisor shall call the complainant(s) for a meeting
at a mutually acceptable time by the teacher, thecomplainant(s) and the supervisor. 
HSTA cites no provision of BP 4211, SP 0211, or BP 4211 IP 
allowing DOE to discipline a teacher based on an anonymous complaint of discrimination, harassment, or bullying. We find none. The CBA requires that a teacher be allowed to meet with the complainants — which could include parents of a student — before discipline can be imposed. HLRB noted: 
In defending BP 4211, SP 0211 and BP 4211 IP, DOE
repeatedly stated . . . that nothing in BP 421l, SP 021l or
BP 421l IP conflicted with or changed the Existing Rules oremployee rights in the context of disciplinary actions whichmay be taken by DOE. When HSTA first raised its generalconcerns regarding the effect of BP 4211 on disciplinarymatters, [DOE] stated that "(n]ormal disciplinary procedureswill be followed as outlined in the collective bargainingagreement and other [DOE] rules, policies and/or procedures. 
. . . . 
In effect, [DOE] stated to both [HLRB] and HSTA that
BP 4211, SP 0211 and BP 4211 IP were not intended to, and infact, did not amend or change the CBA  or any of DOE's
existing rules and regulations  affecting teachers'
discipline, except as the same may be subject to federallaws or regulations preempting state laws or regulations(which were not discussed in depth by the parties). 
Based on the foregoing and in holding [DOE] to [its]
position and understanding of the nature and reach of eachdocument, the [HLRB] finds that each of BP 4211, SP 0211 andBP 4211 IP is subject to all Existing Rules regardingteacher's discipline, except as the Existing Rules (1) maybe revised or amended or otherwise changed in accordancewith Hawaii law or (2) as the Existing Rules may have beenor may be affected by federal law. Any disputes over theforegoing shall be resolved in accordance with the 
applicable grievance provisions of the CBA then in effect . 
[HLRB] takes this position simply because both parties
failed to provide [HLRB] with sufficient evidence todetermine whether specific provisions of BP 4211, SP 0211 orBP 4211 IP did or did not violate either the CBA, any otherExisting Rules or any provision of HRS Chapter 89. 
(Underscoring in original, bold italics added.) 
HLRB thus found that although DOE policies affecting 
teacher discipline, discharge, or job security may be  mandatory 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
subjects of bargaining, BP 4211, SP 0211, and BP 4211 IP did not 
change the unit 5 CBA or any existing DOE rules or regulations 
affecting teachers: 
After reviewing the testimony of the witnesses,
especially Kitsu, and the language of the CBA, BP 4211, SP
0211 and BP 4211 IP, [HLRB] finds that HSTA failed to meetits burden of showing specifically (1) why any of theprovisions of BP 421l, SP 0211 or BP 4211 IP are vague orambiguous or (2) how they amend or modify the provisions ofthe CBA. . . . 
Thus, since SP 0211 specifically provides that all
investigations and any disciplinary actions regarding aviolation of BP 4211 are subject to the Existing Rules(i.e., "DOE policies, regulations, rules, collective 
bargaining agreements , and other laws, rules, and
regulations"), there is no evidentiary support for HSTA'sclaims that BP 4211, SP 0211 or BP 4211 [IP] are in conflictwith the requirements of the CBA. 
(Bold italics added.) The HLRB's finding — that BP 4211, 
SP 0211, and BP 4211 IP did not effect mid-term changes to the unit 5 CBA — was supported by substantial evidence in the record and was not clearly erroneous. The HLRB's conclusion — that negotiation over the terms of BP 4211, SP 0211, and BP 4211 IP was not mandated by HRS § 89-9(a) — was supported by its finding and applied the correct rule of law. See Est. of Klink ex rel. 
Klink v. State, 113 Hawai# i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 523 (2007) 
(noting that a conclusion of law that is supported by the trial court's findings of fact and reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be overturned). 
2. HLRB did not apply DOE's HRS § 89-9(d)
management rights contrary to thecollective bargaining rights granted toHSTA members. 
HSTA next contends that HLRB applied DOE's HRS § 89-
9(d) management rights contrary to teachers' HRS § 89-9(a) 
"collective bargaining rights." 
In Tomasu the Hawai# i Supreme Court recognized that HRS 
§ 89-9(a) and (d), "if read disjunctively, would either grant unlimited discretion to the managerial functions of the employer, see HRS § 89–9(d), or would allow management and employees to 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
submit all aspects of work to the bargaining table. See HRS 
§ 89-9(a)." Tomasu, 79 Hawai# i at 160-61, 900 P.2d at 167-68 
(footnotes omitted). The supreme court then quoted from a Hawaii 
Public Employment Relations Board decision:7 
Section 89–9(a), (c) and (d) must be considered in
relationship to each other in determining the scope ofbargaining. For if Section 89–9(a) were considereddisjunctively, on the one hand, all matters affecting theterms and conditions of employment would be referred to thebargaining table, regardless of employer rights. On the other hand, Section 89–9(d), viewed in isolation, wouldpreclude nearly every matter affecting terms and conditionsof employment from the scope of bargaining. Surely, neitherinterpretation was intended by the Legislature. 
Bearing in mind that the Legislature intended Chapter 89 to
be a positive piece of legislation establishing guidelinesfor joint-decision making over matters of wages, hours and
working conditions, we are of the opinion that all matters 
affecting wages, hours and working conditions are negotiable
and bargainable, subject only to the limitations set forthin Section 89–9(d) . 
Id. at 161, 900 P.2d at 168 (quoting In re Haw. State Tchrs. 
Ass'n and the Dep't of Educ., Decision No. 22, 1 HPERB 251 (1972)) (italics in original). 
In Tomasu, the University of Hawai# i Board of Regents 
(BOR) issued a policy statement in accordance with the federal 
Drug-Free Workplace Act (DFWA). The University of Hawai# i 
Professional Assembly (UHPA)
8 filed a prohibited practice charge 
against BOR with HLRB, claiming that the policy statement 
"affected topics subject to mandatory bargaining and that the BOR's refusal to bargain constituted an unfair labor practice." Id. at 156, 900 P.2d at 163. HLRB ruled that the policy statement was not bargainable. UHPA appealed. The circuit courtaffirmed. UHPA appealed to the supreme court.  
7 Hawaii Public Employment Relations Board was the former name for
HLRB. See What Does the HLRB Do?, State of Hawai #i Labor Relations Board,
https://labor.hawaii.gov/hlrb/about-us/  (last visited August 11, 2022). 
8 UHPA was the collective bargaining agent for all faculty members
of the University of Hawai #i (UH) system. See About UHPA, University of
Hawai #i Professional Assembly, https://www.uhpa.org/about-uhpa  (last visited
August 12, 2022). 
13  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The supreme court noted that the DFWA "mandates that, 
when an employee violates the drug enforcement policy, the 
employee must be duly sanctioned or must participate in a drug 
abuse assistance or rehabilitation program. The [DFWA] does not 
describe the exact procedure for these actions, leaving these 
details to the individual employers to fashion and implement."9 
Id. at 162, 900 P.2d at 169 (bold italics added). Because implementation of the policy statement would require unspecified discretionary action by UH upon violation by an employee: 
the employee [is] in an awkward position. The employee
knows that certain actions will result in discipline becausethe federal statute mandates discipline, but the employeedoes not know what form the discipline will take  because the 
policy statement has yet to be implemented by the employer.Thus, the employee clearly is subject to some form ofdisciplinary action, which definitely affects terms ofemployment and working conditions subject to mandatorybargaining under HRS § 89–9(a). 
Id. at 163, 900 P.2d at 170 (bold italics added). Under those 
facts, the supreme court held that BOR was obligated to negotiate with UHPA over the policy statement. 
By contrast, in this case HLRB found and concluded that 
HSTA failed to show that BP 4211, SP 0211, or BP 4211 IP conflicted with, or changed any provisions of, the teachers' CBA. BP 4211, SP 0211 and BP 4211 IP specified that any teacher discipline would be subject to the CBA, and HLRB held that any disputes over teacher discipline "shall be resolved in accordance with the applicable grievance provisions of the CBA then in effect." Thus, this case is more like United Public Workers v. Hanneman, 106 Hawai# i 359, 105 P.3d 236 (2005). 
In Hanneman, the City and County of Honolulu 
unilaterally transferred several refuse collection employees (members of a bargaining unit represented by the United Public Workers (UPW)) from an overstaffed baseyard to an understaffed 
9 The Tomasu opinion does not specify whether the UHPA collective
bargaining agreement in effect when UH adopted the policy statement contained
provisions for faculty participation in drug abuse assistance orrehabilitation programs, but the decision implies it did not. 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
baseyard. The transferred employees were those with the least 
seniority, as required by the UPW collective bargaining agreement. Id. at 361, 105 P.3d at 238. The City offered to 
consult with UPW about the transfers under HRS § 89-9(c). UPW demanded negotiation under HRS § 89-9(a). The City maintained that the transfers were a management right and not subject to negotiation, citing HRS § 89-9(d). 
UPW filed a complaint with HLRB. HLRB applied a 
balancing test and ruled that the City's management right to transfer did not supersede UPW's bargaining right because "the consequent disruption of seniority at both baseyards is likely to have a deleterious effect upon the exercise of bargained-for rights which are seniority-based." Hanneman, 106 Hawai# i at 362, 
105 P.3d at 239. 
The City appealed. The circuit court affirmed. 
The City filed a secondary appeal. The supreme court held that HLRB erred by applying a balancing test: 
The plain language of HRS § 89–9(d)[(3)] is clear and
unambiguous that "[t]he employer and the exclusive
representative shall not agree to any proposal . . . whichwould interfere with the rights and obligations of a publicemployer to . . . [h]ire, promote, transfer, assign, andretain employees in positions." (Emphasis added). . . .Moreover, with respect to the balancing test employed by theHLRB, HRS § 89–9 does not expressly state or imply that anemployer's right to transfer employees is subject to abalancing of interests. Contrary to the HLRB'sinterpretation, our holding in Tomasu does not approve ofthe HLRB's balancing test. Rather, we believe Tomasu standsfor the proposition that, in reading HRS §§ 89–9(a), (c) and(d) together, parties are permitted and encouraged tonegotiate all matters affecting wages, hours and conditionsof employment as long as the negotiations do not infringe
upon an employer's management rights under section 89–9(d) . 
In other words, the right to negotiate wages, hours andconditions of employment is subject to , not balanced
against, management rights. 
Id. at 365, 105 P.3d at 242 (underscoring in original, bold 
italics added). 
Similarly, in this case the plain language of HRS §89-
9(d)(4) makes HSTA's right to negotiate conditions of employment subject to DOE's right to "[s]uspend, demote, discharge, or take other disciplinary action against employees for proper cause[.]" 
15   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thus, BOE's adoption of BP 4211, and DOE's implementation of 
SP 0211 and BP 4211 IP, all of which were subject to the existingunit 5 CBA, were an appropriate exercise of management rights under HRS § 89-9(d). BOE's and DOE's actions were not contrary to teachers' collective bargaining rights under HRS § 89-9(a). BP 4211, SP 0211, and BP 4211 IP were not "written agreement[s]" required to be negotiated under HRS § 89-9(a); rather, they were "rule[s]" "affecting employee relations," which were subject to "consultation" under HRS § 89-9(c). DOE complied with HRS § 89-9(c) by sending then-proposed BP 4211 to HSTA "for consult and confer."  
3. HLRB correctly concluded that DOE's
failure to provide information did notconstitute a prohibited practice. 
HSTA requested information from BOE and DOE in 
connection with its demand for negotiation. HSTA contends that 
HLRB erroneously failed to recognize that DOE's failure to provide the information was a prohibited practice. 
HLRB found and concluded: 
. . . HSTA's request for information was based on its
contention that BP 4211, SP 0211 and BP 4211 IP raisedmandatory subjects of bargaining. There was no grievancepending and there were no ongoing collective bargainingnegotiations extant at the time the demand for informationwas made. . . . 
. . . . 
Here, [HLRB] held that HSTA could not force [BOE and
DOE] to bargain over BP 4211, SP 0211 or BP 4211 IP becausethey were the subject of the consult and confer requirement[of HRS § 89-9(c)] and not the negotiations requirement [ofHRS § 89-9(a)]. There is no evidence to show that [BOE]agreed to enter into permissive negotiation regarding BP4211, SP 0211 or BP 4211 IP. HSTA did not allege and didnot pursue a breach of duty to consult claim. In the absence of a duty to bargain, breach of duty to consult orany other argument regarding the relevancy of the requestedinformation other than in the context of mandatorybargaining, [BOE] had no obligation to produce the requestedinformation. 
. . . . 
Based on the foregoing, the [HLRB] concludes that
because the information request made in the [HSTA's] May 12, 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2008 letter related to BP 4211, which is deemed to be
non-mandatory subjects of bargaining [under HRS § 89-9(d)],[BOE] had no obligation to provide the requested informationbecause the [HLRB]'s determination that BP 4211, SP 0211,and BP 4211 IP "are not a mandatory subject of bargainingdooms the whole of [HSTA's] claim." 
(cleaned up) (quoting N. Bay Dev. Disabilities Servs., Inc. v. 
NLRB, 905 F.2d 476, 479 (D.C. Cir. 1990)). HLRB's findings were supported by substantial evidence, and its conclusions were supported by its findings and applied the correct rule of law. See Klink, 113 Hawai# i at 351, 152 P.3d at 523. 
4. HLRB's ruling that HSTA's claims based
on BP 4211 were untimely, even iferroneous, was harmless. 
Finally, HSTA contends that HLRB erred by ruling that 
HSTA's claims relating to BP 4211 were untimely. 
We need not 
decide that issue because despite ruling that HSTA's claims 
relating to BP 4211 were untimely, HLRB decided HSTA's claims relating to BP 4211 on the merits. As explained above, HLRB's conclusion that BP 4211 was not subject to negotiation or mandatory bargaining was correct. Accordingly, the circuit court was not wrong to affirm HLRB Decision No. 484 on the merits. 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment entered by the 
circuit court on July 14, 2017, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, August 18, 2022. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Peter K. Kubota
Circuit Court Judge
17 Herbert R. Takahashi, Rebecca L. Covert,for Complainant-Appellant-Appellant Hawaii State Teachers Association. 
James E. Halvorson, Jeffrey A. Keating,Deputy Attorneys General,State of Hawai# i,
for Respondents-Appellees-Appellees. 