  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000124
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MICHAEL DEMING, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION

 
(CASE NO. 1P1120000029)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Michael Deming (Deming), pro se,
 
appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order, filed
 
on March 12, 2012 in the District Court of the First Circuit,
 Honolulu Division (district court).
1 Judgment was entered
 
against Deming for violation of Revised Ordinances of Honolulu
 
2
(ROH) § 10-1.2(a)(12) (Supp. 2012),  which prohibits entering or
remaining in a public park during the night hours that the park

 
1 The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided.
 
2 ROH § 10-1.2(a)(12) provides:
 
Sec. 10-1.2 Park rules and regulations.
(a)	 Within the limits of any public park, it is unlawful
for any person to:
 
. . . .
 (12)	 Enter or remain in any public park during the
night hours that the park is closed, provided
that signs are posted indicating the hours that
the park is closed[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is closed if signs are posted indicating the hours of park
 
closure. Deming was fined $100 and ordered to pay a $30 fee
 pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 351-62.6 (Supp.
 2014).
 
On appeal, Deming asserts over sixteen (16) points of
 
error. Many of Deming's points of error are duplicative, raise
 issues that he did not raise in the district court, or are not
 supported by any relevant argument.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Deming's points of error as follows and affirm.
 
Deming's opening brief fails to comply with Hawai
'i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28 in numerous ways. For example, Deming's opening brief fails to provide a concise statement of the case providing record references to support his stated facts; Deming's points of error fail to indicate where in the record the alleged errors occurred, where in the record he objected to the alleged errors, or the manner in which the alleged errors were brought to the attention of the district court; Deming fails to provide substantive arguments in support of many points of error, and fails to cite to authorities, statutes and parts of the record relied upon. See HRAP 28(b). 
Notwithstanding Deming's noncompliance with HRAP 28, given his pro se status, we will address Deming's contentions to the extent they are discernible. Housing Finance & Dev. Corp. v. Ferguson, 
91 Hawai
'i 81, 85-86, 979 P.2d 1107, 1111-12 (1999).
Points of Error 1(a), 2, 9, and 15  Deming claims there 
was insufficient evidence to convict him and that his sentence was grossly disproportionate to the offense. We do not agree. In this case, there was substantial evidence to support Deming's conviction. State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai
'i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 
322, 330-31 (2007). 
ROH § 10-1.2(a)(12) prohibits a person from entering or
 
remaining in any public park during the night hours that the park
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is closed, provided that signs are posted indicating the hours
 
that the park is closed. Officer Sean Costigan (Officer
 Costigan) cited Deming for being in Thomas Square Park at around
 10:15 p.m. Officer Costigan testified that Thomas Square is a
 City and County of Honolulu park maintained by the Department of
 Parks and Recreation. "'Public park' means any park, . . . or
 other recreation area or facility under the control, maintenance
 and management of the department of parks and recreation." ROH
 § 10-1.1 (Supp. 2013). Therefore, Thomas Square is a public park
 within the meaning of ROH § 10-1.2.
 
Officer Costigan testified that there were at least
 
four, but possibly six, signs posted at the park that stated the
 park was closed from 10 p.m. to 5 a.m. Deming was inside a
 public park during night hours when the public park was closed. 
There was substantial evidence of every element of the offense to
 support Deming's conviction for violating ROH § 10-1.2(a)(12). 
Therefore, points of error 1(a), 9, and 15 are without merit.
 
Violation of ROH 10-1.2(a)(12) is a petty misdemeanor. 
HRS § 701-107 (2014). The maximum penalty for violating ROH
 § 10-1.2(a)(12) is a $500 fine or 30 days imprisonment, or both. 
ROH § 10-1.6(d) (Supp. 2013). In addition, a $30 fee shall be
 imposed upon every defendant convicted for a petty misdemeanor. 
HRS § 351-62.6. Deming's sentence was a fine of $100 and
 imposition of the mandatory $30 fee. Deming does not state how
 his sanctions were grossly disproportionate to his conviction for
 violating ROH § 10-1.2(a)(12), and in any event, we conclude any
 argument in this regard lacks merit. Deming's point of error 2
 lacks merit. 
Points of Error 1(b) and 14  Deming contends that the
 
State erred in prosecuting the case as what he terms a "First
 Strike" and without a criminal information charge. Both
 contentions are without merit. Under ROH § 10-1.6(d)(1), there
 is no escalating penalty for multiple or repeated violations of
 ROH § 10-1.2(a)(12). Thus, the State did not specify and was not
 required to specify whether this was the first time that Deming
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had violated ROH § 10-1.2(a)(12). Next, ROH § 10-1.6(b) (Supp.
 
2013) provides that a citation may be issued to violators in
 instances that do not mandate physical arrest. Deming was issued
 a citation by Officer Costigan for violation of ROH § 10­1.2(a)(12), which did not mandate arrest. The State was not
 required to issue Deming a criminal information charge.
Point of Error 1(c)  Deming claims the State erred in
 
creating, maintaining, and forwarding a substantive
 investigations file that implied he was a domestic terrorist
 associated with Occupy Honolulu to the Department of Homeland
 Security, N.S.A., F.B.I., Interpol, and other law enforcement
 agencies two months prior to a determination of his guilt in this
 case. The record is devoid of any such document or action by the
 State. Deming did not raise this claim in any of his numerous
 pretrial motions or at trial. Officer Costigan was not asked
 about and did not testify to an investigation file on Deming,
 whether Deming was believed to be a domestic terrorist, or
 whether Deming was associated with Occupy Honolulu. Therefore,
 point of error 1(c) is waived and without merit.
Points of Error 3(a), 6(a), 6(b), 13(b), 13(c), and
13(d) Deming contends that the district court improperly limited 
his right to cross-examine Officer Costigan and effectively violated the Confrontation Clauses of both the United States Constitution and the Hawai
'i Constitution. Specifically, Deming 
states that the district court erred in prohibiting him from attacking Officer Costigan's credibility with evidence of bias, interest, or motive in violation of Hawai
'i Rules of Evidence 
(HRE) Rules 404(b) and 609.1; the district court erred by limiting relevant evidence under HRE Rules 403 and 611; the district court prevented him from cross-examining Officer Costigan with substantive questions; the district court erred by sustaining the prosecution's objections based on relevance thereby not allowing Deming to investigate and identify inconsistencies and perjured statements by Officer Costigan and denying his objection to facially and/or materially defective 
4
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
evidence presented by Officer Costigan pursuant to HRE Rule
 
609.1(a); and the district court erred by failing to allow him to
 substantively cross-examine Officer Costigan on the geographic
 location of his seizure and arrest, the geographic location of
 the park, and possible fabrications by Officer Costigan.
3
 
Specifically, Deming claims that he sought to introduce
 
evidence relevant to Officer Costigan's credibility, bias toward
 ordinary people in society, motive to discover and take credit
 for uncovering a domestic terrorist, interest in successful
 prosecution of this case to enhance his career status,
 inconsistent statements in the Incident Report and HPD Review and
 Reproduction Request, motive to fabricate statements, and attempt
 
4
to elicit a confession without a Miranda  warning. Deming also
 
claims that he was prohibited from asking Officer Costigan about
 his personal log of the arrest at issue; prohibited from asking
 questions about a police manual on protocol for arresting
 defendants in similar circumstances; prohibited from inquiring
 about Officer Costigan's educational background and ongoing
 training on criminal procedure; prohibited from asking Officer
 Costigan whether he was biased or predisposed to select Deming
 for a stop, seizure, and detention absent reasonable suspicion,
 probable cause, and a lack of a search warrant; and prohibited
 from inquiring about being profiled and having his file forwarded
 to the Department of Homeland Security.
 
While the right of cross-examination is protected by
 
the Confrontation Clause, "it has never been held that this right
 is absolutely without restriction." State v. Balisbisana, 83
 
3
 Many of Deming's contentions stem from his argument that his
cross-examination of Officer Costigan was impaired by the lack of documentary
discovery provided by the State and denial of his pretrial motions. As
 
discussed infra, Deming was afforded all of the documentary discovery that he
was entitled to and all alleged errors on appeal with respect to the denial of
his pretrial motions are without merit. Thus, Deming's ability to
cross-examine Officer Costigan due to a lack of documentary evidence and
denial of pretrial motions are not addressed again.
 
4
 Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966).
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i 109, 114, 924 P.2d 1215, 1220 (1996) (citation and 
internal quotation mark omitted). Under HRE Rule 609.1(a), 
"[t]he credibility of a witness may be attacked by evidence of bias, interest or motive." However, "[t]he Sixth Amendment is satisfied where sufficient information is elicited to allow the jury to gauge adequately a witness' credibility and to assess his or her motives or possible bias." Balisbisana, 83 Hawai
'i at 
114, 924 P.2d at 1220 (citation, internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
Review of the record on appeal reveals that Deming did
 
not attempt to cross-examine Officer Costigan regarding numerous
 issues that he now raises in his appeal as areas of potential
 cross-examination. Thus, his contentions of obstruction by the
 district court as to those issues are without merit. 
Moreover, as to the questions actually posed by Deming 
to Officer Costigan, there is no indication his points of error have any merit. For example, Deming asked Officer Costigan whether he respected all citizens of Hawai
'i and whether he acts 
as a public servant on their behalf which Officer Costigan answered in the affirmative. When Deming asked whether Officer Costigan ever told anyone that he was not a public servant, the district court sustained the State's objection based on relevance. Thereafter, Deming did not make an offer of proof as to relevance to bias, interest, or motive. On appeal, Deming again offers no argument as to how alleged general bias toward ordinary people in society is relevant to the issues in this case. Deming made no attempt to question Officer Costigan about bias against him personally. 
Deming questioned Officer Costigan about the existence
 
of "an official Honolulu HPD police manual[.]" Officer Costigan
 responded that there were general policies but he was not sure
 that it was considered a manual. As for Deming's claim that he
 was not allowed to further question Officer Costigan about
 protocol for arresting defendants, it was not relevant because
 Deming was not arrested. Thus, even if Deming's cross­
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
examination into arrest protocol was prohibited, it was not
 
erroneous. 
Deming questioned Officer Costigan about the geographic
 
location of the park and Officer Costigan recited the streets
 names surrounding Thomas Square. Deming's attempt to use a map
 showing Thomas Square was precluded because the district court
 was satisfied with the evidence as to Thomas Square, stating that
 the court was familiar with the location, that Officer Costigan
 had testified he had observed Deming in the middle of the park by
 a Banyan tree, and the case was not about the sidewalk area. 
Deming's cross-examination of Officer Costigan fully
 
apprised the trier-of-fact of Officer Costigan's possible bias,
 interest, or motive in so far as Deming inquired about them. 
Deming presents no substantive argument in regards to his
 apparent challenge to rulings on objections. Points of error
 3(a), 6(a), 6(b), 13(b), 13(c), and 13(d) are without merit.
Points of Error 3(b), 12, and 13(a)  Deming contends
 
that the district court erred by not striking Officer Costigan's
 testimony because Officer Costigan's Police Incident Report was
 materially and facially defective as a matter of law. 
In his Opening Brief, Deming references a discrepancy
 
in the HPD Incident Report that the location code indicates the
 incident took place at a "residence," not a "public park." 
Presumably, Deming raises this issue to demonstrate that Officer
 Costigan's testimony that the incident occurred in a public park
 is untrustworthy and challenges whether he was properly charged
 for violation of ROH § 10-1.2(a)(12). After Deming's request to
 admit the Incident Report was granted, he did not raise the issue
 of the inconsistent location code and he did not impeach Officer
 Costigan with the Report. In addition, in his Opening Brief,
 Deming states "[i]t is indisputed [sic] that the alleged crime
 scene where Appellant Deming's arrest took place was a public
 park known as 'Thomas Square'[.]" Therefore, points of error 12
 and 13(a) are waived. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Deming also contends the time of the incident listed on
 
the Incident Report is inconsistent with Officer Costigan's
 
testimony. The citation issued to Deming stated that the
 incident occurred at about 2215 hours. The "Date/Time/Reported"
 field in the Incident Report stated "12-21-11/2215." Officer
 Costigan testified that the incident occurred at about 10:15 p.m. 
Using a twenty-four hour clock, 2215 is 10:15 p.m. There was no
 evidence that the reported time of the incident was other than
 approximately 10:15 p.m. Therefore, point of error 3(b) is
 without merit.
 
Points of Error 4 and 5  Deming contends the district
 
court erred by not enforcing and/or quashing the subpoena duces
 tecum he served upon Officer Costigan and the HPD Custodian of
 Records. Deming sought by way of subpoena, in addition to
 documents related to his case, Officer Costigan's personal files,
 Officer Costigan’s personnel file, copies of complaints against
 Officer Costigan, internal affairs investigations of Officer
 Costigan, and lawsuits against Officer Costigan. 
Deming did not make a pretrial discovery request in 
accordance with Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 16. 
HRPP Rule 16(d) provides that "[u]pon a showing of materiality and if the request is reasonable, the court in its discretion may require disclosure as provided for in this Rule 16 in cases other than those in which the defendant is charged with a felony, but not in cases involving violations." Moreover, for non-felony cases, HRPP Rule 16.1(b) provides that "[i]f discovery is sought of materials that would be discoverable in felony cases pursuant to these rules, a request for discovery shall be made to the opposing side in writing and shall list the specific materials being sought." Although Deming did not make a proper discovery request, the district court took up the issue with the State in open court and the State provided all discovery to Deming that would have been available had he made a proper discovery request. 
The district court also denied Deming's motion to
 
enforce the subpoenas. Deming served upon Officer Costigan and
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Custodian of Records of the Honolulu Police Department (HPD) 
subpoenas duces tecum. The right to compel production of documents by subpoena pursuant to HRPP Rule 17(b) is not "a rule providing for an additional means of discovery." Honolulu Police 
Dep't v. Town, 122 Hawai
'i 204, 214, 225 P.3d 646, 656 (2010) 
(citation and quotation mark omitted). The right to compel production of documents pursuant to a subpoena is limited to the production of evidence, not the production of documents that provide leads to potential evidence. Id. In this case, Deming 
attempted to use subpoenas duces tecum to obtain documents as part of a fishing expedition for apparent impeachment purposes. This is contrary to the purpose of HRPP Rule 17(b). See State v. 
LeVasseur, 1 Haw. App. 19, 28, 613 P.2d 1328, 1334 (1980) (holding that the defense's subpoena to peruse records to ascertain whether exculpatory evidence existed was too generalized and "did not meet the requirements of specificity and particularization required by HRPP [Rule] 17(b)"). 
Therefore, the district court did not err by denying
 
Deming's motion to enforce the subpoenas duces tecum.
Points of Error 7(a) and 7(b)  Deming contends the
 
district court erred by denying his "Motion to Suppress the
 warrantless search, seizure, questioning and one hour detention
 of [Deming]." Deming was not arrested and Officer Costigan
 denied detaining Deming other than for a few minutes to issue a
 citation. There is no contrary evidence. Moreover, Officer
 Costigan testified that he could not recall if Deming made any
 statements to him during the few minutes it took to issue the
 citation to Deming, and Officer Costigan also did not frisk
 Deming for weapons or otherwise search Deming during the
 encounter. Thus, there was no evidence or statements by Deming
 to suppress. Therefore, points of error 7(a) and 7(b) are
 without merit.
 
Points of Error 8(a) and 8(b)  Deming contends that the
 
district court erred by failing to hold a pretrial probable cause
 hearing and failed to hold a substantive pretrial motion hearing
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
on his numerous pretrial motions. Both contentions are without
 
merit. Pursuant to HRPP Rule 5(b) regarding offenses other than
 a felony, when the offense is charged by a citation and the
 defendant was not arrested, there is no right to a preliminary
 hearing at which probable cause is determined. Furthermore,
 contrary to Deming's claim, the district court held a hearing and
 decided all of Deming’s pretrial motions prior to testimony by
 the first witness at trial. 
Point of Error 10  Deming contends the district court
 
erred by denying his Motion in Limine to preclude the State from
 calling witnesses and submitting evidence because the State
 produced three pages of discovery immediately prior to trial on
 February 23, 2012, despite the documents being in the State's
 possession since the day after the incident, December 22, 2011. 
Deming filed his Motion in Limine on January 30, 2012. At no
 time did Deming argue that his Motion in Limine should be granted
 due to the timing of the State’s discovery production. 
Therefore, this argument is waived. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4).
Point of Error 11  Deming contends the district court
 
erred by denying his Motion for Mistrial because the State
 produced three pages of discovery at trial and did not turn over
 copies until after opening statements were made. Contrary to
 Deming's claim, the record reflects that the State produced the
 copies prior to opening statements. Also, neither of Deming's
 two motions for a mistrial made during trial were based upon the
 State's production of discovery. Therefore, this argument is
 waived. HRAP Rule 28(b)(4).
Point of Error 16  Deming contends the district court
 
erred by allowing into evidence Officer Costigan's Incident
 Report and a HPD Review and Reproduction Service Request which
 profiled Deming as affiliated with Occupy Honolulu and a domestic
 terrorist suspect when there was no proof of his involvement with
 Occupy Honolulu. The documents do not appear to profile Deming
 as he asserts. In any event, the district court admitted both
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reports into evidence at Deming's request. Thus, Deming cannot
 
claim error from the admission of the exhibits. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of
 
Entry of Judgment and/or Order, filed on March 12, 2012, in the
 District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division is
 affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 25, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Michael E. Deming
Defendant-Appellant, pro se Presiding Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
11

 