  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000716
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ALIIKEA BASHAM, aka Aliikea I. Basham,
Defendant-Appellant, and MICHAEL BASHAM, Defendant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-0663)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Aliikea Basham (Basham) appeals
 
from the September 19, 2011 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
1
Court),  following a jury trial wherein Basham was found guilty
of the charge of Assault in the First Degree, in violation of 
Hawai'i Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 707-710 (1993).2 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 
2
 HRS ยง 707-710 provides, in relevant part:
 
(1)	 A person commits the offense of assault in the first degree
if the person intentionally or knowingly causes serious
bodily injury to another person.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Basham contends, in four points of error, that the
 
Circuit Court erred when it denied his motion for a mistrial due
 
to prosecutorial misconduct based on:
 
1. the prosecutor's reference in rebuttal closing
 
argument to facts not in evidence;
 
2. the prosecutor's statement during rebuttal closing
 
argument that Basham reviewed a witness's initial written
 
statement prior to Basham's own testimony;
 
3. in closing argument, the prosecutor's misstatement
 
of the law related to accomplice liability; and, for these
 
reasons,
 
4. the Circuit Court erred when it denied Basham's
 
motion for mistrial based upon these acts of prosecutorial
 
misconduct.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Basham's points of error as follows:
 
[W]henever a defendant alleges prosecutorial misconduct, [the
appellate court] must decide: (1) whether the conduct was
improper; (2) if the conduct was improper, whether the misconduct
was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt; and (3) if the misconduct
was not harmless, whether the misconduct was so egregious as to
bar reprosecution.
State v. Maluia , 107 Hawai' i 20, 26, 108 P.3d 974, 980 (2005). 
The harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard 
"requires an examination of the record and a determination of 
whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error 
complained of might have contributed to the conviction."  State 
v. Rogan, 91 Hawai' i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999) 
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). This Court 
will grant a new trial or set aside a guilty verdict only where 
the prosecutorial misconduct has "caused prejudice to the 
defendant's right to a fair trial." State v. McGriff, 76 Hawai' i 
148, 158, 871 P.2d 782, 792 (1994). We consider three factors when determining whether the alleged prosecutorial misconduct 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reached the level of reversible error: "[1] the nature of the 
alleged misconduct, [2] the promptness or lack of a curative 
instruction, and [3] the strength or weakness of the evidence 
against the defendant." State v. Agrabante, 73 Hawai' i 179, 198, 
830 P.2d 492, 502 (1992). 
(1) During closing argument, a prosecutor's statements 
must be based on the testimony and/or exhibits admitted into evidence and reasonable inferences from the evidence. State v. 
Mainaaupo, 117 Hawai' i 235, 253-54, 178 P.3d 1, 19-20 (2008) 
(citation omitted). Here, the prosecutor impermissibly referred 
to a fact not in evidence when, in addition to noting the 
testimony that Officer Barrett was no longer a policeman, he 
added, "[i]n fact Officer Barrett no longer lives on the island 
of Oahu." The Circuit Court promptly sustained Basham's 
objection and ordered the jury to disregard the prosecutor's 
improper statement. The statement was not repeated or further 
alluded to and, although improper, was by no means egregious. 
The remark was made in response to the defense's argument that 
Officer Barrett's absence should be interpreted as damaging to 
the eye witness's testimony. It was uncontested, however, that 
the eye witness's initial "written" statement, written down by 
Officer Barrett because of the witness's limited English language 
skills, was abbreviated in comparison to her later detailed 
account and trial testimony. The one-page write-up of the 
initial report by the eye witness, who was the victim's wife, did 
not include reference to Basham holding the victim down while the 
victim was assaulted. 
The Circuit Court's instruction was immediate, clear,
 
and further supported by the court's general instructions,
 
including that remarks of counsel are not evidence, that the
 
jury's decision must be based only upon the evidence presented
 
and its reasonable inferences therefrom, and that the jury must
 
not consider stricken evidence. There is no reason to believe
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that the jury did not follow the court's instructions. See State
 
v. Knight, 80 Hawai' i 318, 327, 909 P.2d 1133, 1142 (1996). 
Finally, although witness credibility was a critical 
issue in this case (see State v. Tuua, 125 Hawai' i 10, 16-17, 250 
P.3d 273, 279-80 (2011)), we cannot conclude that there is a 
reasonable possibility that the prosecutor's single, promptly 
cured, reference to Officer Barrett as residing elsewhere 
affected Basham's conviction. There was in fact testimony in the 
record that Officer Barrett was no longer with the Honolulu 
Police Department. Officer Barrett was not a witness to the 
assault; the import of his testimony would have been whether the 
eye witness's initial statement, which the officer wrote down, 
failed to include that Basham held the victim down while he was 
assaulted. It was, however, already uncontested that the witness 
did not mention Basham's actions in her initial statement to the 
officer. Basham's counsel argued that the eye witness should not 
be believed because of what she omitted from her initial 
statement. The persuasive value of this omission was squarely 
before the jury and not diminished by the prosecutor's remark. 
Accordingly, we conclude that there is not a reasonable 
possibility that the prosecutor's improper remark contributed to 
Basham's conviction and that it was harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt. 
(2) We reject Basham's argument that the prosecutor 
engaged in a "generic tailoring" argument. The prosecutor did 
not argue that Basham tailored his testimony based solely on his 
constitutional right to be present at trial. See State v. 
Mattson, 122 Hawai' i 312, 226 P.3d 482 (2010). Rather, in 
response to defense counsel's specific argument that Basham's 
testimony was consistent with the written statement of the eye 
witness's initial report to police, the prosecutor specifically 
argued that, in his testimony, Basham tracked that written 
statement. Thus, the prosecutor engaged in a "specific 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
tailoring" argument that was directly tied to the evidence
 
presented and Basham's argument regarding consistency with that
 
evidence. Mattson allows a prosecutor to comment on a
 
defendant's tailoring of his or her testimony to specific
 evidence. Id. at 327, 226 P.3d at 497.
 
(3) We reject Basham's contention that the prosecutor
 
misstated the law by: (1) downplaying the requirement that, to
 
find Basham guilty as an accomplice, the prosecutor had to prove
 
beyond a reasonable doubt that Basham had the intent to promote
 
or facilitate the commission of the assault; and (2) providing
 
the jury with his own definitions of "promote" and "facilitate." 
The prosecutor did not misstate the law related to accomplice
 
liability by either shifting the burden of proof or negating the
 
intent requirement for accomplice liability. The record is
 
replete with instances, during the State's closing and rebuttal
 
closing arguments, where the prosecutor: (1) acknowledged that
 
the prosecution has the burden of proof beyond a reasonable
 
doubt; and (2) either referred to the jury instructions on
 
accomplice liability or acknowledged the intent requirement.  The
 
terms "promote" and "facilitate" are not statutorily defined, and
 
the prosecutor accurately defined the two words according to
 
commonly understood meanings which were consistent with their
 
dictionary definitions. Basham does not argue that the
 
prosecutor's definitions were incorrect, only that they had the
 
effect of downplaying the State's burden of proof. Under the
 
circumstances of this case, including that the prosecution fully
 
acknowledged its burden and the Circuit Court properly instructed
 
the jury on the State's burden, we cannot conclude that the
 
prosecutor's argument was improper.
 
Accordingly, we reject Basham's argument that the
 
Circuit Court erred when it denied Basham's motion for mistrial 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
based upon prosecutorial misconduct. The Circuit Court's
 
September 19, 2011 Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 26, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Thomas M. Otake 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Keith M. Kaneshiro Prosecuting AttorneyJames M. Anderson Deputy Prosecuting Attorneyfor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 