NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000670
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DAVID H. KAAWA, IV, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-277K)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) indicted 
Defendant-Appellant David Kaawa, IV (Kaawa), on two counts of 
sexual assault. Count 1 charged Kaawa with Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen Years and alleged that during a three-year period, as part of a continuing course of conduct, Kaawa engaged in three or more acts of sexual penetration or sexual contact with the complaining witness, who was under the age of fourteen. Count 2 charged Kaawa with Sexual Assault in the First Degree and alleged that Kaawa knowingly engaged in sexual penetration with the complaining witness, who was between fourteen and sixteen years old. The complaining witness in both counts (Minor) is the daughter of Kaawa's former girlfriend, and Minor viewed Kaawa as her step-father. At the time of the alleged sexual assaults, Minor was being raised NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by Kaawa, and Minor and her siblings resided with Kaawa in the
 
same home. 
After a jury trial, Kaawa was found guilty as charged
 
on both counts. The Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit
 
1
Court)  sentenced Kaawa to consecutive twenty-year terms of
incarceration on Counts 1 and 2. The Circuit Court entered its
 "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" (Judgment) on June 29,
 2012.
 
On appeal, Kaawa contends that: (1) the Circuit Court 
improperly allowed evidence of Kaawa's physical abuse of Minor and her siblings and allegations of the sexual abuse of Kaawa's adopted sister by one of Kaawa's brothers, pursuant to Hawai
'i 
Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b) (Supp. 2013); (2) the Circuit Court's limiting instruction on the HRE Rule 404(b) evidence was inadequate to cure the taint of the "other bad acts" evidence; and (3) there was insufficient evidence to support Kaawa's convictions. As explained below, we affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Minor's mother (Mother) had been in a long-term
 
relationship with Kaawa. Mother was the biological mother of
 Minor and her four brothers and one sister. Kaawa was not the
 biological father of Minor and her two oldest brothers. Kaawa
 and Mother were the biological parents of Minor's two youngest
 brothers and her sister. Kaawa, Mother, Minor, and Minor's two
 oldest brothers began living together when Minor was about four
 or five years old. The family grew to include Kaawa, Mother,
 Minor, and Minor's five siblings, who all resided together. 
In May 2006, when Minor was twelve years old, Mother
 
suddenly moved away, leaving all her children with Kaawa. Minor
 testified at trial that after Mother left, Minor slid into
 depression because she "didn't have a mom anymore." Kaawa told
 
1The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Minor that Mother left because "she didn't love [the children]
 
anymore" and that Mother was not coming back. Minor believed
 
Kaawa. Over the subsequent years, Kaawa also told Minor that
 
Mother did not want the children, did not want to talk to the
 children, and did not want to have anything to do with them.
 
According to Minor, about a month after Mother left,
 
Kaawa began sexually abusing Minor. Kaawa came into Minor's room
 late one evening, while Minor's five-year-old sister lay asleep
 on the bed. Kaawa was crying and said he missed Mother. Kaawa
 asked Minor for a hug. He then asked Minor to put her hand on
 his penis. When Minor did not comply, Kaawa forced Minor to
 place her hand on his penis and then to masturbate him. When
 Kaawa was done, he apologized to Minor. However, he did not stop
 sexually abusing Minor. 
The sexual abuse progressed to Kaawa requiring Minor to
 
regularly engage in sexual intercourse with him and to perform
 oral sex on him. Kaawa's sexual abuse of Minor continued
 unabated, and he sexually abused her for several years. Kaawa
 told Minor that if she reported the sexual abuse to anyone, he
 "could go to jail" and then all the children would be separated. 
Minor explained that she refrained from reporting the sexual
 abuse because she was scared of Kaawa and his family. Minor also
 did not want her siblings to be separated and did not want Kaawa
 to go to jail. 
II.
 
Prior to trial, the State filed several notices of
 
intent to use evidence pursuant to HRE Rule 404(b). These
 included a notice of its intent to use "[e]vidence that [Kaawa]
 was violent toward [Minor] and toward other children in the same
 home in the presence of [Minor], to show why [Minor] was afraid
 of him and was reluctant to come forward to testify against him." 
Kaawa filed a motion in limine to preclude "[t]estimonial or
 documentary evidence relating to any other 'bad acts' involving
 the defendant[.]" The Circuit Court denied this portion of
 Kaawa's motion in limine "subject to only the [HRE Rule] 404(b)." 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
During its case-in-chief, the State presented some
 
evidence of Kaawa's engaging in physical violence directed at
 
Minor and her siblings. Minor's second oldest brother (Brother
 2) testified that he recalled an incident when Minor was about
 fifteen, in which Kaawa was hitting Minor and Minor was begging
 Kaawa to stop. Brother 2 also testified that Kaawa would give
 him and Minor's oldest brother (Brother 1) "lickins" if Kaawa
 discovered that they had been playing with Kaawa's Xbox 360. 
Brother 2 stated that Kaawa hit him with a backhand to the face
 after discovering Brother 2 had been sneaking into Kaawa's room
 to find the remote control for the Xbox, and that this happened
 "more than once."
 
In the defense case, Kaawa's counsel asked CF, the
 
2
girlfriend of one of Kaawa's brothers (Uncle 1),  whether she had
seen signs of abuse in Kaawa's family, and CF denied seeing signs
 of abuse. Defense counsel later asked CF whether she had the
 opportunity to see how Kaawa disciplined his children. After CF
 responded affirmatively, defense counsel asked CF to share her
 observations with the jury. In response, the Circuit Court asked
 counsel to approach the bench. At side-bar, the Circuit Court
 advised defense counsel that he was "opening the door." The
 Circuit Court stated: "You're asking about ever saw signs of
 abuse in the Kaawa family. You're opening the door wide open. 
You want to continue to go down that path?" Defense counsel
 stated that he was just talking about physical abuse, not sexual
 abuse. When the bench conference concluded, defense counsel
 asked CF if Kaawa ever hit Brother 2, and CF said she never saw
 that happen. 
When Kaawa testified, he denied ever hitting the
 
children. 
Kaawa stated that "I never hit my kids, and I never
 
allow nobody for hit my kids." 
2As noted, Kaawa is not the biological father of Minor and
therefore Kaawa's biological family members are not related to
Minor by blood. However, for simplicity, we will use family
designations in place of certain names.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In rebuttal, the State called Brother 1. Brother 1 
testified that he recalled "plenty" of times when Minor got
 
"lickings." He recalled one incident when Minor was sixteen and
 talked back to Kaawa. Kaawa became angry and grabbed Minor by
 the hair, and he "was just wailing on her" with an open hand,
 striking her on the head. Brother 1 also testified that Kaawa
 would give Brother 1 and Brother 2 "lickings" if they did not
 finish their chores. Brother 1 recalled Kaawa hitting him with
 an open and closed fist, a spatula, a belt, and a broomstick. 
III.
 
Kaawa had an adopted sister (Aunt), who was about three
 
years younger than Minor and was one of Minor's best friends. 
Minor and Aunt confided in each other. In the State's case-in­chief, Minor testified that when she was about fourteen or
 fifteen, Aunt "opened up to [Minor]" and told Minor something
 "personal" that had to do with "abuse."
3 In response, Minor told
 
Aunt that Kaawa had been having sex with Minor. The two girls
 agreed that they would both go to Kaawa's mother (Grandmother)
 and tell her what was happening to them. Aunt talked to
 Grandmother first. In response, Grandmother yelled at Aunt,
 called Aunt a liar, and gave Aunt "wacks." At that time, Minor
 decided not to tell Grandmother about Kaawa because Minor was
 scared Grandmother would also call her a liar and give her
 "lickins." 
Minor testified that she did subsequently tell
 
Grandmother about Kaawa's sexual abuse. Grandmother telephoned
 Kaawa. When Kaawa arrived, Grandmother and Kaawa's father, who
 was also there, asked Kaawa why he was sexually abusing Minor and
 told Kaawa that he needed to stop. Kaawa did not say anything in
 response to his parents. Kaawa's parents, however, allowed Minor
 to go home with Kaawa. When they got home, Kaawa asked Minor why
 
3At the Circuit Court's prompting, the State clarified
through Minor's testimony that what happened to Aunt did not
involve Kaawa. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
she told on him and said he would try hard to stop. Kaawa
 
stopped for about two weeks, but then resumed his sexual assaults
 on Minor.
 
At trial, Minor described distinctive details about
 
Kaawa's genitals. The State also introduced photographs of
 Kaawa's genitals that it had obtained through a court-ordered
 examination. The State never showed the photographs to Minor. 
IV.
 
AD, Minor's friend from school, noticed that during
 
ninth grade, Minor would come to school and would be crying. AD
 asked Minor what was wrong, but Minor would not say anything. AD
 testified that when they were in the tenth grade, Minor disclosed
 to AD that Kaawa was sexually abusing Minor, but made AD promise
 not to tell anyone. 
RO was another friend of Minor. Minor testified that
 
in her junior year, CF (Uncle 1's girlfriend) found out that
 Minor had told RO that Kaawa was sexually abusing Minor. CF was
 angry, and CF told Minor that Minor had to go to RO's house and
 tell RO and RO's parents and family that Minor was lying about
 the sexual abuse. CF told Minor to say that Minor had made up
 the allegation of sexual abuse because Minor was mad at Kaawa. 
Minor did as she was told by CF.
 
A teacher at Minor's school testified that Minor stated
 
one day in class that Minor thought she was pregnant, but Minor
 refused to say who the father was. On September 27, 2010, a
 counselor (Counselor) at Minor's high school called the police
 after speaking to a co-worker, becoming aware of rumors
 circulating around school, and speaking to Minor.
 
On that same day, Police Officer Benjamin Galluppi
 
(Officer Galluppi) arrived at Minor's school. CF was present
 when Minor was questioned by Officer Galluppi. Officer Galluppi
 testified that CF supplied the answers to Officer Galluppi's
 questions, and Officer Galluppi was not able to get any
 statements from Minor. Later that day, Minor and all her
 siblings were removed from Kaawa's home.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The next day, September 28, 2010, Minor was interviewed
 
by Detective David Arakaki (Detective Arakaki). During that
 
interview, Minor denied that she had been sexually abused by
 Kaawa. Minor told Detective Arakaki that she was a virgin, that
 the sexual abuse allegation was just a rumor she started when she
 was angry at Kaawa, and that the rumor had "spread like
 wildfire."
 
Shortly after Detective Arakaki interviewed Minor, he
 
was contacted by Child Protective Services Supervisor Karen
 Kawamoto (Kawamoto). Kawamoto informed Detective Arakaki that
 Minor needed to be re-interviewed because Minor said that she had
 not told the truth to the police. On September 30, 2010,
 Kawamoto re-interviewed Minor. In this re-interview, Minor
 stated that Kaawa had been sexually abusing her about twice every
 three weeks. She also testified before a grand jury that Kaawa
 had sexually abused her practically every night, except for times
 when she was menstruating. 
Brother 2 testified that he remembered occasions when
 
he saw Kaawa going into Minor's room at around 9:30 or 9:45 at
 night. Kaawa would stay in Minor's room for half an hour and
 sometimes the door would be closed. 
Sometime after Minor disclosed the alleged sexual
 
abuse, Uncle 1 boarded a bus that Minor was taking to school. 
Minor's classmate who was on the bus testified that Uncle 1 told
 Minor to "stop this" and that she needed to say "it was all a
 lie, that she wants to come back home." Uncle 1 was yelling at
 Minor who looked scared and unsure of what to do. As Minor got
 off the bus with Uncle 1, Minor told her friends to notify school
 officials.
 
When Minor left the bus with Uncle 1, CF was waiting
 
for them in a car. Uncle 1 and CF told Minor that she had to
 recant her allegations of sexual abuse and indicated that Kaawa
 was contemplating suicide. Uncle 1 and CF allowed Minor to leave
 the car after they learned that school officials had been
 notified.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
V.
 
Kaawa's theory of defense was that Minor had falsely
 
accused Kaawa of sexual abuse to get back at him for prohibiting 
her from dating a girl, who was significantly older than Minor,4
 
after Minor disclosed to Kaawa that she was gay. In the defense
 case, Kaawa informed the Circuit Court that he wanted to recall
 Minor to lay the foundation for Aunt's proffered testimony that
 Minor told Aunt that Minor would get back at Kaawa for
 prohibiting Minor from dating this girl. The Circuit Court
 informed the defense that if Aunt testified about private
 conversations with Minor, then the State may develop the
 circumstances relating to the conversations and also impeach
 Aunt.
 
The defense recalled Minor who testified that she and
 
Aunt were close and that Aunt was her best friend while they were
 growing up. Minor stated that she and Aunt had many private
 conversations and knew each other's secrets. Minor acknowledged
 that she had a conversation with Aunt about two weeks before
 being removed from Kaawa's home, but denied that she ever told
 Aunt that she wanted to get back at Kaawa.
 
Aunt then testified that she lived with Kaawa's
 
parents, and that she and Minor were good friends and like
 sisters, who shared everything with each other. Aunt stated that
 the last "deep" conversation she had with Minor was two weeks
 before Minor and her siblings were removed from Kaawa's home. 
During this conversation, Minor told Aunt that she "would get
 back at [Kaawa]" because Kaawa would not let Minor be with
 "someone who was older than her."
 
On cross-examination, Aunt acknowledged that she had a
 
brother (Uncle 2), who was a different brother than Uncle 1. The
 State did not pursue questions about Uncle 2 after Kaawa
 objected. The State also asked Aunt about a meeting she had with
 
4Kaawa testified that the girl was twenty-five years old at
the time.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Counselor. Aunt denied that she met with Counselor and Minor on
 
December 7, 2010; that she told Minor with Counselor present that
 CF forced Aunt to tell lies about Minor; that she said there were
 Kaawa people watching what she was doing while in school; and
 that she said CF forced Aunt to write lies in an application for
 a restraining order against Minor.
 
Grandmother testified that she first heard about the
 
sexual abuse allegations concerning Kaawa and Minor about two
 weeks before the children were removed from Kaawa's home. She
 testified that she would have gone to the police department and
 taken Minor if she believed the allegations were true. However,
 she did not do so because Minor told her that nothing happened. 
On cross-examination by the State, Grandmother stated
 
that she would have cooperated with the police if Kaawa had
 sexually abused Minor. Grandmother acknowledged that Detective
 Arakaki had contacted her to talk about Aunt and acknowledged
 that Uncle 2 was her son. Grandmother, however, denied that
 Detective Arakaki asked her if she knew a person with the same
 first name as Uncle 2, and she also denied telling Detective
 Arakaki that she did not know anyone by that name. Grandmother
 denied that she refused to talk to Detective Arakaki about the 
allegations concerning Kaawa. She further denied that Minor told
 her that Minor had been sexually abused by Kaawa.
 
Kaawa testified in his own defense. Kaawa repeatedly
 
denied sexually abusing Minor. He indicated that Minor was able
 to describe his genitals because she may have seen him taking a
 shower when the door was open or using the bathroom. Kaawa
 denied ever hitting his children or hitting Mother.
 
VI.
 
In rebuttal, the State recalled Detective Arakaki. 
Detective Arakaki testified that he contacted Grandmother and
 told her he was investigating allegations of possible sexual
 assault involving Aunt and a suspect with the same first name as
 Uncle 2. Detective Arakaki did not know the suspect's last name. 
Detective Arakaki asked Grandmother if she knew anyone who had
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the same first name as Uncle 2, and Grandmother said no. On
 
cross-examination, Detective Arakaki stated that the police
 investigation concerning Aunt had been suspended and that as far
 as he knew, Child Protective Services had taken no further
 action. 
The State also recalled Counselor, who testified that
 
she had a meeting with Aunt and Minor on December 7, 2010. 
Counselor stated that Aunt asked several times whether Counselor
 was recording the meeting, and that Aunt appeared very scared and
 nervous. Counselor testified that Aunt was afraid of what would
 happen to her if her family found out that she was speaking to
 Counselor and Minor. According to Counselor, Aunt told Minor,
 "You know that I have to do what they say. You know what's going
 to happen to me[.]" Aunt stated that CF forced her to fill out
 paperwork for the restraining order that was filed against Minor,
 and that CF told Aunt what to write. Aunt was afraid someone
 would see her in Counselor's office. Counselor testified that
 Aunt admitted that the allegations in the restraining order were
 false. Counselor further testified that Aunt told Minor,
 "[t]hey're making me do this" and that "[Aunt] did not want to do
 what they were asking her to do." Aunt told Counselor that Aunt
 had been hurt by someone with the same first name as Uncle 2, but
 did not provide a last name.
 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 A.
 
Kaawa argues that the Circuit Court improperly allowed
 
evidence of: (1) Kaawa's physical abuse of Minor and her siblings
 and (2) the allegations of sexual abuse of Aunt by Uncle 2. 
Kaawa contends that this evidence was inadmissible under HRE Rule
 404(b). We disagree.
 
HRE Rule 404(b) provides:
 
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is
not admissible to prove the character of a person
in order to show action in conformity therewith. 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
It may, however, be admissible where such evidence
is probative of another fact that is of
consequence to the determination of the action,
such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent,
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, modus
operandi, or absence of mistake or accident. In
 criminal cases, the proponent of evidence to be
offered under this subsection shall provide
reasonable notice in advance of trial, or during
trial if the court excuses pretrial notice on good
cause shown, of the date, location, and general
nature of any such evidence it intends to
introduce at trial.
 
The list of permissible purposes for the admission of 
"other bad acts" set forth in HRE Rule 404(b) is not intended to 
be exhaustive. State v. Clark, 83 Hawai
'i 289, 300, 926 P.2d 
194, 205 (1996). Under HRE Rule 404(b), any purpose for which bad-acts evidence is introduced is a proper purpose as long as the evidence is not offered solely to prove the defendant's criminal propensity. Id. at 300–01, 926 P.2d at 205–06 (citing 
United States v. Miller, 895 F.2d 1431, 1436 (D.C. Cir. 1990)). For example, in Clark, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court upheld the 
introduction of prior uncharged acts of domestic violence perpetrated by the defendant against the complaining witness. The supreme court held that this evidence was admissible under HRE Rule 404(b) to show "the context of the relationship between the [complaining witness] and the defendant, where the relationship is offered as a possible explanation for the complaining witness's recantation at trial." Id. at 303, 926 
P.2d at 208. 
"Other bad act" evidence is admissible under HRE Rule
 
404(b) when: (1) it is relevant to any fact of consequence other
 than the defendant's propensity to commit the crime charged; and
 (2) its probative value is not substantially outweighed by the
 danger of unfair prejudice. State v. Renon, 73 Haw. 23, 31–32,
 
828 P.2d 1266, 1270 (1992). The trial court's decision in
 balancing probative value against unfair prejudice involves the
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5
application of HRE Rule 403  and is reviewed for abuse of
discretion. State v. Cordeiro
, 99 Hawai 'i 390, 404, 56 P.3d 692, 
706 (2002). 
Kaawa does not dispute that the evidence he claims was
 
improperly admitted was relevant. Therefore, his HRE Rule 404(b)
 
claim turns on whether the Circuit Court abused its discretion in
 admitting the evidence. "An abuse of discretion occurs when the
 court 'clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules
 or principles of law to the substantial detriment of a party
 litigant.'" Id. (citations omitted). 
B.
 
Kaawa's contention that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in admitting evidence of Kaawa's physical abuse of
 Minor and her two oldest brothers is without merit. An
 underlying issue in the case was why Minor delayed reporting the
 alleged sexual abuse to authorities, and why she did not disclose
 the sexual abuse when first questioned by Detective Arakaki. 
Minor testified that she refrained from reporting Kaawa's sexual
 abuse because she was afraid of Kaawa and members of his family.
 
The evidence that Kaawa had physically abused Minor and 
her two oldest brothers was directly relevant to providing a explanation for Minor's reluctance to report Kaawa's sexual abuse to authorities. It provided the jury with a context to understand the relationship between Kaawa, Minor, and Minor's two oldest brothers, where that relationship was offered to explain Minor's delayed reporting and her initial denial when questioned by Detective Arakaki. See Clark, 83 Hawai
'i at 303, 926 P.2d at 
208. It corroborated Minor's testimony that her delayed
 
5HRE Rule 403 (1993) provides:
 
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its
probative value is substantially outweighed by the
danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or
misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue
delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of
cumulative evidence. 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reporting was motivated, in part, by fear of Kaawa. It also
 
helped to explain why Minor did not report the sexual abuse to
 her two oldest brothers or ask them to protect her against
 Kaawa's sexual abuse, and how Kaawa exercised control over Minor
 and her two oldest brothers such that Kaawa could feel empowered
 to sexually abuse Minor for years. Given the nature of the
 allegations in this case, it was important for the jury to 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
understand the dynamics of the family relationships in order to
 
fairly evaluate the evidence presented. 
In addition, the evidence that Kaawa had physically 
abused Minor and her two oldest brothers was relevant to impeach Kaawa's credibility. Kaawa testified that he never hit the children and CF testified that she never saw any signs of abuse. When defense counsel broached this subject with CF, the Circuit Court warned defense counsel that he was opening the door "wide open." See State v. Brooks, 125 Hawai
'i 462, 469-74, 264 P.3d 
40, 47-52 (App. 2011) (concluding that a party may open the door to evidence that would otherwise be inadmissible). Despite this warning, defense counsel thereafter elicited CF's testimony that Kaawa never hit Brother 2. Defense counsel also elicited Kaawa's testimony that he never hit his kids and never let anyone else hit his kids. 
We conclude that the evidence that Kaawa had physically
 
abused Minor and her two oldest brothers was offered for valid
 purposes, unrelated to showing Kaawa's criminal propensity, and
 that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in admitting
 this evidence. 
C.
 
Kaawa contends that the Circuit Court abused its
 
discretion in admitting evidence of the allegations of sexual
 abuse of Aunt by Uncle 2. We disagree.
 
Minor testified that she only disclosed to Aunt that
 
Kaawa was sexually abusing Minor after Aunt disclosed to Minor
 something "personal" having to do with "abuse." Through its
 questioning of witnesses, the State suggested that the person who
 was alleged to have sexually abused Aunt was Uncle 2. Evidence
 that Uncle 2 had allegedly sexually abused Aunt was relevant to
 showing that Aunt had indeed confided in Minor something very
 private, which would serve to explain why Minor, in turn, would
 confide in Aunt that Kaawa had been sexually abusing Minor. 
Minor also testified that after their mutual disclosures, she and
 Aunt made a pact to tell Grandmother. However, when Aunt told
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Grandmother about what was happening to Aunt, Grandmother reacted
 
by yelling at Aunt, calling her a liar, and giving her "wacks." 
Minor explained that Grandmother's reaction to Aunt's disclosure
 dissuaded Minor from telling Grandmother about Kaawa's sexual
 abuse at that time.
 
Accordingly, evidence that Uncle 2 had allegedly
 
sexually abused Aunt was relevant to provide context to Minor's
 testimony and explain why Minor was reluctant to go to Kaawa
 family members for help. Evidence that Uncle 2 had allegedly
 abused Aunt, but that Grandmother had punished Aunt for
 disclosing such abuse, also provided insight into Aunt's
 relationship with the Kaawa family and why she may have succumbed
 to pressure by the Kaawa family (including CF) to provide false
 testimony against Minor. The evidence challenged by Kaawa was
 admissible under HRE Rule 404(b).
 
In any event, Aunt's purported allegations of sexual
 
abuse were not directed against Kaawa. In addition, the
 references to the alleged abuse of Aunt by Uncle 2 were brief,
 somewhat vague, and fleeting. Accordingly, we conclude that any
 error in the introduction of such references was harmless beyond
 a reasonable doubt.
 
II.
 
Kaawa argues that the HRE Rule 404(b) limiting
 
instruction given by the Circuit Court was inadequate to cure the
 prejudicial effect of the challenged HRE Rule 404(b) evidence,
 "especially since this evidence of bad acts did not fit into the
 exceptions set out in HRE [Rule] 404(b)." The Circuit Court
 instructed the jury as follows:
 
You have heard evidence that the defendant at
 
another time may have committed other wrongs or
acts. You must not use this evidence to determine
 that the defendant is a person of bad character
and therefore must have committed the offenses
 charged in this case. Such evidence may be
considered by you only on the issue of the
defendant's motive, intent, plan, knowledge, and
for no other purpose. 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court's instruction served to protect Kawaa
 
against the jury's improper consideration of the "bad acts"
 
evidence by instructing the jury that it could not use the
 evidence "to determine that the defendant is a person of bad
 character and therefore must have committed the offenses charged
 in this case." Although the instruction unduly restricted the
 jury's consideration of the evidence for proper purposes, those
 restrictions redounded to Kaawa's benefit. See State v. Tyrrell,
 
60 Haw. 17, 29-30, 586 P.2d 1028, 1036 (1978) ("A defendant
 cannot complain of an erroneous instruction which benefits him.")
 Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court's instruction
 does not provide a basis for vacating Kaawa's convictions.
 
III.
 
Minor testified in graphic detail about the continuous
 
and repeated acts of sexual abuse Kaawa committed against her. 
When viewed in the light most favorable to the State, Minor's
 testimony, as corroborated by other evidence presented by the
 State, was sufficient to support Kaawa's convictions. See State
 
v. Eastman, 81 Hawai
'i 131, 141, 913 P.2d 57, 67 (1996) (stating 
that the testimony of a single percipient witness may constitute substantial evidence to support a conviction); State v. Montgomery, 103 Hawai
'i 373, 381, 82 P.3d 818, 826 (App. 2003) 
("The testimony of a single witness, if found credible by the trier of fact, may constitute substantial evidence to support a conviction." (citation omitted)). We reject Kaawa's claim that the evidence was insufficient. 
CONCLUSION 
We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment. DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 25, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Richard D. Gronna 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Jason R. Kwiat Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i Associate Judge 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
 
19
 