   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000060
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KARYN EILEEN HERRMANN, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KENNETH ROSS HERRMANN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 95-0-0475)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION

 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
In this appeal from a denial of post-decree relief,
 
Defendant-Appellant Kenneth Ross Herrmann (Father) presents
 
issues involved in his attempt to recoup overpaid child support
 
and enforce pre-existing support termination provisions in the
 
Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).1
 
I.
 
Father and Plaintiff-Appellee Karyn Eileen Herrmann
 
(Mother) had two children together: Son, born on July 1, 1987,
 
and Daughter, born on June 16, 1991. On February 11, 1998,
 
Father and Mother were divorced by the Family Court. In the
 
February 11, 1998 Divorce Decree (1998 Decree), Paragraph 4
 
awarded the parties joint legal custody and shared physical
 
custody of the children and Paragraph 5 required Father to make
 
child support payments to Mother in the amount of $1,600 per
 
1
 The Honorable Paul T. Murakami presided unless otherwise noted.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
child per month, for a total of $3,200 per month. Paragraph 5
 
further stated that
 
Child support for each child shall continue until he
or she attains the age of 18 years or graduates from or
discontinues high school, whichever occurs last. The issue
 of child support thereafter, if any, including the amount,
duration, manner of payment, payor, and payee, shall be
reserved for future agreement by the parties or future
determination by the Court, if necessary.
 
. . . .
 
. . . [Father] shall make his child support payments
through the Child Support Enforcement Agency ("CSEA"). . .
pursuant to Section 571-52, Hawaii Revised Statutes (Act
200, House Bill No. 3570, H.D.1, S.D.1, C.D.1, effective
June 7, 1998).
[ 2
]  Payment to the CSEA shall be by income
assignment (pursuant to the Order for Income Assignment
which shall be filed concurrently herewith). . . . When
called upon to determine that his obligation of child
support for [children] has finally terminated, the CSEA and
[Father's] employer may accept a written declaration, signed
under penalty of perjury by [Father, Mother], and the
affected adult child, to that effect and a further order of
the Family Court shall not be required.
 
The Child Support Enforcement Agency is hereby made a
party for the limited issue of child support.
 
All of the foregoing shall be subject to the further
order of the [Family] Court.
 
The 1998 Decree separately provided that primary and
 
secondary education expenses would be paid entirely by Father, as
 
both children attended private schools at that time. In
 
Paragraph 7, the 1998 Decree stated,
 
2 Act 200, Section 2 provided,
 
§571-52. Immediate Income Withholding.  In any case
where child support is an issue, and an order for child
support is established or modified, and the obligor receives
income on a periodic basis, the court shall concurrently
enter an order for immediate income withholding which shall
operate as an assignment by the person to the child support
enforcement agency for the benefit of the child of such
amounts at such times as may be specified in the child
support order. Such order may also include child support
arrears and/or reimbursement of debt pursuant to §346-37.1
[regarding the recovery of public assistance payments]. The
 provisions of section 571-52.2(d), (e), (f), (g), (l), (m)
and (n) shall apply to all orders for immediate income
withholding issued under this section.
 
1988 Haw. Sess. Laws at 349.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
7. Post High School, Higher Education Expenses. 
Each child's post high school, higher education expenses
shall first be paid from the security account(s) held in
trust for him or her. The issue of payment of the balance
of each child's post high school, higher education expenses
shall be reserved for future agreement by the parties or
future determination by the Court, if necessary.
 
On July 29, 2003, Father filed a pro se Motion and 
Affidavit for Post-Decree Relief seeking sole legal custody of 
Son. On October 27, 2003, Mother made an offer of settlement 
pursuant to Hawai 'i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 68. In 
essence, Mother offered physical custody of Son, with certain conditions, to Father, beginning with Son's semester break from 
the Mid-Pacific Institute, and asked for a recalculation of child 
support. On November 7, 2003, Father accepted Mother's offer of 
physical custody of Son beginning in December 2003, but indicated 
that he wanted to "work together to draft a revision." Son left 
Hawai
'i to move in with Father on or about December 18, 2003. 
Although the parties disagree about the reasons for the
 
delay in finalizing the terms of this amendment to the 1998
 
Decree, on September 1, 2004, the Amendment to Divorce Decree, as
 
Modified, Pursuant to Rule 68 Offer (2004 Amendment), was
 
3
approved by the Family Court  and filed.  Under the 2004
 Amendment, Paragraph 5 of the 1998 Decree was "withdrawn" and a
 
new Paragraph 5 was "substituted," which provided, in pertinent
 
part, 
5. [Father] shall pay to [Mother] as and for the
support and maintenance of [Daughter] the sum of [$2,630]
per month commencing on the fifth day of January, 2004. . .
 . [Mother] shall pay to [Father] as and for the support and
maintenance of [Son] the sum of [$50] per month commencing
on the fifth day of January 2004. [sic]
 
Thus, Father, as of January 2004, would no longer pay Mother
 
child support for Son and Mother was obligated to pay Father $50
 
per month for Son. As of September 2004, Father's support
 
payments for Daughter would increase to $2,630, resulting in a
 
net payment of $2,580 per month to Mother.
 
3
 The Honorable Christine E. Kuriyama presided.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The 2004 Amendment did not alter the termination date
 
for Father's child support obligation:
 
Child support for each child shall continue until he
or she attains the age of 18 years or graduates from or
discontinues high school, whichever occurs last. The issue
 of child support thereafter, if any, including the amount
duration, manner of payment, payor, and payee, shall be
reserved for future agreement by the parties or future
determination by the Court, if necessary.
 
On November 1, 2004, CSEA mailed a letter to Father
 
informing him that it had made an "over disbursement" to Mother
 
in the amount of $14,040. CSEA did not explain or itemize the
 
amount.4 The letter noted that "[a]ny issues concerning the
 
recovery of the above over payments should be handled between the
 custodial and non-custodial parents."
 
Father testified that, following receipt of CSEA's
 
November 1, 2004 letter, he repeatedly asked Mother to reimburse
 
him without success. However, Father did not pursue the matter
 
of reimbursement through the Family Court until the motion for
 
post-decree relief that is the subject of this appeal.
 
On November 14, 2008, in anticipation of Daughter's
 
graduation and eighteenth birthday the following year, Mother
 
filed a Motion and Affidavit for Post-Decree Relief asking the
 
Family Court to order Father to pay Daughter's college expenses. 
Mother asserted that Father would not commit to paying for
 
Daughter's college expenses as he had done for Son. Mother noted
 
that her own income was insufficient to provide for Daughter's
 
college expenses. Mother further noted that "once [Daughter] is
 
away it is going to be very difficult for me to even make ends
 
4
 Father speculates that the amount represents $1,600–the amount of
support for Son ordered in the 1998 Decree–multiplied by nine months–the
period between January and September 2004--because CSEA continued to collect
child support payments from Father for Son after January 2004 through
September 2004. Father further speculates that the $14,040 amount is a typo,
because $1,600 times 9 equals $14,400. At the August 10, 2011 hearing on
Father's Motion for Post-Decree Relief, counsel represented, and Father, who
was present by telephone, did not deny, that he was not asking for
reimbursement in the correctly computed amount of $14,400. Moreover, although
Father claimed he did not receive the $50/month support payments from Mother
for Son for the months of January through September 2004, he did not request
payment of this additional $450.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
meet. Because [Daughter] does not want to visit her father it
 
will be necessary for me to continue to provide a home for her
 
during vacations."
 
Mother attached an Income and Expense Statement to her
 
November 14, 2008 motion. Mother asserted that, exclusive of
 
rent, her monthly expenses for Daughter as of November 7, 2008
 
amounted to $810. In her declaration, Mother averred that room
 
and board and tuition for Evergreen State College was $4,595 and
 
$27,672 respectively.
 
On April 22, 2009, the Family Court granted in part and
 
denied in part Mother's November 14, 2008 Motion and Affidavit
 
for Post-Decree Relief (2009 Stipulation). The Family Court
 
ordered that:
 
(1) [Father], pursuant to stipulation on the record, shall
be responsible for payment of all costs and fees for
[Daughter] to attend the Evergreen State College including
tuition, books and student supplies, room and board and a
reasonable allowance for clothing and student activities
and/or additional fees provided that [Daughter] remains a
full-time student in good standing and in a curriculum
leading to a bachelor's degree.
 
(2) [Father], pursuant to stipulation, shall continue to
provide medical coverage for [Daughter] for as long as he is
obligated to make payments pursuant to Paragraph (1).
 
(3) All of the foregoing shall be subject to the further
order of the Family Court.
 
(4) [Mother's] request for attorneys fees and costs is
denied.
 
On June 16, 2009, Daughter attained the age of 18
 
years. In September 2009, Daughter moved to Olympia, Washington
 
and began attending Evergreen State College. Father testified
 
that CSEA continued to deduct $2,580 in child support per month
 
for Daughter. Father further testified that, in an attempt to
 
resolve the matter without resorting to the courts, "he
 
communicated with CSEA and objected to the continuation of the
 
collection of this amount and that he informed CSEA that
 
[Daughter], beginning in September of 2009, was not living at
 
home anymore, was a full-time student at [Evergreen State
 
College] in state of Washington, and that [Father] was paying for
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
all of [Daughter's] higher education expenses." Letters from
 
CSEA dated April 6, 2009 and August 12, 2010, indicate that CSEA
 
determined that child support for Daughter shall continue.
 
On April 13, 2011, Father filed a Motion and Affidavit
 
5
for Post-Decree Relief (Motion)  asking the Family Court to (1)
retroactively terminate child support from Father to Mother for
 
6
Daughter to September 2009  because Daughter moved out of
Mother's home at that time; (2) order Mother to reimburse Father
 
$14,040 in child support overpayment for Son as determined by
 
CSEA in their November 1, 2004 letter; and (3) order Mother to
 
reimburse Father for child support overpayment for Daughter since
 
September 2009.
 
At the August 10, 2011 hearing on Father's Motion, 
Father, Daughter, and Mother all testified concerning the amounts 
and manner in which money was paid towards Daughter's maintenance 
and support. 
Father asserted that, pursuant to the 2009 
Stipulation, he paid $78,233.72 for Daughter's college expenses for her first two years and in addition, deposited $1000 per 
month into Daughter's mainland bank account for which there 
remained a balance of three to five thousand dollars. Father 
also asserted that Daughter had never asked him for more money 
nor told him that she had insufficient funds to meet her living 
expenses in college. He understood that Daughter did not come 
home to Hawai
'i for every vacation from college, that she visited 
family in the "midwest" and some of the time she stayed in the "Pacific northwest." Father acknowledged that, "except for when 
she's been living with me when I've been in Hawai
'i" Daughter was 
with Mother in Hawai 'i. Throughout this period, CSEA continued 
to collect from him the child support ordered in the 2004 
Amendment. Father also acknowledged his continued obligation to 
pay Daughter's college expenses and medical coverage through 
5
 Father retained the counsel of Charles T. Kleintop early in 2010.
 
6
 The filing erroneously refers to Daughter departing for college in
September 2010. This mistake was noted and corrected prior to the August 10,
2011 hearing on the motion.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
graduation and committed to pay the airfare for Daughter to make 
two round trips to Hawai 'i from Washington. 
Daughter testified that Mother regularly deposited $500
 
per month into a Bank of Hawaii account for her and would also
 
regularly send her gift cards or put money on account for her at
 
certain stores. Mother also helped her move into the dormitory
 
and purchased a bed and other incidentals for her and paid her
 
airfare to return home for Christmas in 2009 and 2010, spring
 
break in 2010 and summer of 2010. Since she moved off-campus in
 
January 2011, Father has been depositing $1000 in her account
 
each month. Daughter asserted that she never asked Father for
 
more money because she balanced her spending between the funds
 
provided by both Mother and Father.
 
Mother asserted that she deposited $500 per month into 
Daughter's Hawai 'i bank account and also supported Daughter with 
additional gift cards and tab accounts. Mother's Income and Expense Statement asserted total monthly expenses for Daughter of 
$2,170 as of June 2011 which represented a monthly average. 
Mother testified that she provided a copy of the 2009 Stipulation 
stating that Father was responsible for Daughter's educational 
expenses, to CSEA. With regard to support for Son, Mother 
acknowledged that she was to pay $50 per month beginning in 
January 2004 through September 2004 and that she received $1,600 
per month during that period. 
On December 2, 2011, the Family Court issued its
 
Decision, Re: Hearing on Order to Show Cause Filed 04/13/2011
 
[sic], in which the Family Court denied all three of Father's
 
requests. In denying Father's Motion, the Family Court noted, in
 
relevant part, the following:
 
1. . . . Per the representations of the parties, it would
appear that the disputed $14,000.00 overpayment was due in
no small part to the delay in the entry of the Order owing
to disagreements between the parties as to the form of the
Order, during which time the prior child support amount was
being garnished from Father. The child support has remained
consistent throughout since 2004 to present.
 
. . . .
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. . . . Although Mother's [November 14, 2008] Motion
contemplated [Daughter] going to school on the mainland, the
issue of child support ceasing was not raised by either
party.
 
. . . .

 
4. . . . The credible evidence showed that Father has
 
indeed faithfully paid [Daughter's] college expenses
pursuant to his April, 2009 agreement. The evidence also
 indicated that Mother has sent sums of additional monies to
 both her children over the years. Mother testified that her
 
position that inter alia the basis for her continued receipt
of child support although [Daughter] was in Washington State
at school was that she was maintaining the home for
[Daughter's] periodic returns during her school career, and
that such funds were necessary. [Daughter] testified that
she considered Hawaii to be her home.
 
. . . .
 
a) The Court finds that while [Daughter] is away at
school, the 2009 agreement that Father pay for her
schooling is independent and separate from the child
support provision that has been in effect since 2004.
The Court notes that child support could have been
dealt with in the 2009 litigation, it was not. The
 Court further notes that it is inequitable for Father
to now demand retroactive reimbursement some 24 months
 later, albeit the triggering event of [Daughter's]
leaving for Washington being some 20 months ago. The
 Court therefore declines to order the prayed for
reimbursement or halt the child support previously
ordered until such time that [Daughter] graduates or
attains the age of 23, whichever comes first[.]
 
b) . . . [W]hile Father may have an argument that
he overpaid child support in 2004, and notwithstanding
his testimony to the Court that he made no less than
thirteen (13) requests to Mother for repayment since
2004, there have been no Court filings on this issue
since 2004 until the instant matter was filed in
 April, 2011. Lacking any documentary evidence to the
contrary, the Court finds that Father is estopped from
pursuing the claim, given the passage of time and
opportunities to have previously raised the issue.
 
"Decision, Re: Hearing on Order to Show Cause Filed 04/13/2011"
 
entered on December 2, 2011 (Decision).7
 
7
 The record does not reflect an order to show cause filed on
 
April 13, 2011. On December 30, 2011, the Family Court entered its Order
Denying Defendant's Motion and Affidavit for Post-Decree Relief Filed
04-13-2011 (Order) deciding Father's Motion. On April 4, 2012, the Family
Court entered its Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law regarding Father's
Motion pursuant to HFCR Rule 52(a).
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Father's timely appeal followed. On appeal, Father
 
challenges the denial of his requests for reimbursement of his
 
2004 overpayment of child support for Son and 2009-2011
 
overpayment of child support for Daughter and termination of his
 
child support obligation for Daughter pursuant to the 1998 Decree
 
and 2004 Amendment.
 
II.
 
A. Overpayment of Child Support for Son.
 
As we have seen, Son moved in with Father in December
 
2003 while his parents finalized what would become the 2004
 
Amendment. When the 2004 Amendment was filed in September 2004,
 
it no longer required that Father pay $1,600 per month for Son
 
and provided that Mother would pay fifty dollars per month to
 
Father towards Son's support, effective as of January 2004. 
However, the child support payments withheld from Father's
 
paycheck were not reduced until September 2004. Consequently, on
 
November 1, 2004, CSEA notified Father and Mother that an
 
overpayment of support in the amount of $14,040 had been made to
 
Mother, but that "[a]ny issues concerning the recovery of the
 
above over payments should be handled between the custodial and
 
non-custodial parents. The State will not be involved in this
 
matter."
 
The statutory provision governing child support
 
payments collected through salary assignments make it the
 
"primary" responsibility of the party receiving the payments to
 
terminate the salary assignment and specifically allows for
 
reimbursement of overpayments. Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 571-52.2(d) (2006).8 Father requested reimbursement from
 
8
 The provision reads, in pertinent part,
 
In the event that the obligee retains private counsel or
proceeds pro se, the obligee shall have primary
responsibility for terminating the assignment. If the
 obligee fails to terminate the assignment when appropriate,
the obligee shall reimburse the obligor to the extent of any
overpayment. If the assignment is not terminated when
appropriate, the obligor may seek reimbursement for any
(continued...)
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Mother "at least 13 different occasions" without success. 
However, Father did not bring the matter to the Family Court's
 
attention until his Motion in April of 2011. Mother argued
 
against the reimbursement, taking the position that the change in
 
child support payments for Son did not take effect until
 
September 2004, Father's motion was not brought within a
 
reasonable time under HFCR Rule 60(b), the statute of limitations
 
under HRS § 657-1 had run, and that Father's claim was brought in
 
the wrong court. The Family Court concluded that Father was
 
"estopped" from seeking reimbursement for Son's support, "given
 
the passage of time and opportunities to have previously raised
 
the issue." The Family Court cited no other basis for its denial
 
of Father's claim.
 
We presume that the Family Court was referring to the
 
concept of "estoppel by laches," which is an "equitable doctrine

 
by which some courts deny relief to a clamant who has
 unreasonably delayed or been negligent in asserting a claim." 
th
Black's Law Dictionary, 668 (10  ed. 2009).  
There are two components to laches, both of which must
exist before the doctrine will apply. First, there must
have been a delay by the plaintiff in bringing his claim[ ]
and that delay must have been unreasonable under the
circumstances. Delay is reasonable if the claim was brought
without undue delay after plaintiff knew of the wrong or
knew of facts and circumstances sufficient to impute such
knowledge to him. Second, that delay must have resulted in
prejudice to defendant. Common but by no means exclusive
examples of such prejudice are loss of evidence with which
to contest plaintiff's claims, including the fading memories
or deaths of material witnesses, changes in the value of the
subject matter, changes in defendant's position, and
intervening rights of third parties.
 
Adair v. Hustace, 64 Haw. 314, 321, 640 P.2d 294, 300 (1982)
 
(citations omitted).
 
"The relief granted by a court in equity is
 
discretionary and will not be overturned on review unless the
 
8(...continued)
overpayment from the obligee or from the child support
enforcement agency, to the extent the overpayment was

disbursed to the department of human services.
 
(Formatting altered).
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court abused its discretion by issuing a decision that 
clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or 
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of the 
appellant." Aickin v. Ocean View Invs. Co., Inc., 84 Hawai 'i 
447, 453, 935 P.2d 992, 998 (1997) (citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
While the delay of over six years between the time
 
Father was given notice of the overpayment by CSEA and his Motion
 
is considerable, Mother did not claim and the Family court did
 
not find that Mother was prejudiced by the delay. As both
 
elements of laches are not present, the Family Court failed to
 
apply the applicable law and thereby abused its discretion in
 
ruling Father was prevented from being reimbursed for his
 
overpayment of support for Son.
 
B. CHILD SUPPORT FOR DAUGHTER
 
1. Termination of Child Support Payments.
 
The Family Court denied Father's request to halt child
 
support for Daughter as of September 2009, when Daughter began
 
attending college in Washington State. Father argues that the
 
Family Court erred because under the terms of the 2004 Amendment,
 
his child support obligation for Daughter automatically
 
terminated when she reached the age of 18 years after she
 
graduated from high school. We agree.
 
The last provision specifically governing child support
 
in this case is contained in the 2004 Amendment. Paragraph 5 of
 
the 2004 Amendment states, in pertinent part:
 
Child support for each child shall continue until he or she
attains the age of 18 years or graduates from or
discontinues high school, whichever occurs last. The issue
 of child support thereafter, if any, including the amount,
duration, manner of payment, payor, and payee, shall be
reserved for future agreement by the parties or future
determination by the Court, if necessary.
 
. . . .
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
All of the foregoing shall be subject to the further order
of the Family Court.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Thus, the plain language of the 2004 Amendment
 
terminated child support for both children upon the attainment of
 
age 18 or graduation from high school, whichever was later. In
 
Daughter's case, both had occurred by June 2009 and by September
 
2009, the point at which she began attending college in
 
Washington State and Father contended his child support payments
 
for Daughter should have ended and, in any event, separate and
 
apart from the child support being assigned from his salary, he
 
was paying her college expenses at that point. 
As the Family Court acknowledged in Finding of Fact 71,
 
"[t]he agreement that [Father] would pay for [Daughter's] college
 
expenses as embodied in the [2009 Stipulation] is separate and
 
independent from the child support provision that has been in
 
effect since 2004." However, the Family Court apparently
 
believed, when denying Father's request, that the 2004
 
Amendment's provision for child support was still in effect when
 
it decided Father's Motion. We find no such provision in the
 
record. 
To the extent that the Family Court relied on the 2004
 
Amendment's child support provision in reaching challenged
 
Conclusion of Law 7, which states that "[c]hild support for
 
[Daughter] shall remain in effect until such time as [Daughter]
 
graduates from college or reaches the age of 23, whichever comes
 
first" (emphasis added), it is erroneous. Therefore, child
 
support payments to Mother for Daughter should have ended in June
 
2009 pursuant to the 2004 Amendment. 
2. Reimbursement of Child Support Overpayments.
 
Having concluded that the child support payments made
 
to Mother since June 2009 were unauthorized, we turn to the issue
 
of reimbursement for this overpayment. Father sought
 
reimbursement for child support payments made from September 2009
 
going forward. Finding of Fact 55.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Complicating this reimbursement issue are a number of
 
factors: The first is that the record does not reveal that the
 
amount of support Daughter was entitled to while she attended
 
college was ever calculated using the appropriate Child Support
 
Guidelines as required by HRS § 580-47. We note that the
 
calculation of appropriate support for "Adult Dependent Children"
 
who are in need of support because they are full-time students,
 
include additional considerations. See Child Support
 
9
Guidelines,  http://www.courts.state.hi.us/docs/form/maui/
2CE248.pdf.
 
Another factor is, in addition to the child support
 
amount paid by Father through CSEA, it appears Father paid for
 
items that would be considered included in child support as part
 
of his obligation to pay for Daughter's "college expenses." The
 
Family Court found (Finding of Fact 62), that Father has paid
 
9 Considerations pertaining to "Adult Dependent Children" include:
 
All Stipulations and orders for child support should
expressly retain Court and [Office of child Support
Hearings] jurisdiction to modify or extend child support.
 
Support for an adult child who is a full-time student
according to the institution the child attends may continue
until the child attains the age of 23 after considering
these factors: (1) the adult child's earnings, (2) the
adult child's property, (3) the adult child's needs, as well
as (4) both parents' income and resources.
 
In appropriate circumstances, an educationally dependent
adult child receiving educational support should be expected
to contribute to his/her own self support through (1) part-
time employment not harmful to the child's academic
progress, or to other appropriate school-related pursuits,
(2) grants, scholarships, and fellowships (tuitionforgiveness), and (3) loans. [n.13: 
Nabarrete v. Nabarrete ,
86 Hawai' i 368, 949 P.2d 208 (App. 1997).] 
Payments may be made directly to the educationally dependent

adult child by agreement of the parents or by order of the
court. Normally, a parent who receives child support for an
educationally dependent adult child should pay for the
child's room and board.
 
The Court in its discretion may order the parents of a
disabled to child to support their child beyond the age of
majority, and beyond age 23, without regard to the child's
educational status.
 
2010 Child Support Guidelines at 14.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Daughter's college expenses pursuant to the 2009 Stipulation,
 
which provided in pertinent part,
 
[Father], pursuant to stipulation on the record, shall be
responsible for payment of all costs and fees for [Daughter]
to attend the Evergreen State College including tuition,
books and student supplies, 
room and board and a reasonable
allowance for clothing and student activities and/or
additional fees provided that [Daughter] remains a full-time
student in good standing and in a curriculum leading to a
bachelor's degree.
 
Therefore, more than the tuition, books, fees, and student
 
supplies normally associated with college expenses, the 2009
 
Stipulation provided that Father would pay for room and board, a
 
reasonable allowance for clothes, and for student activities. 
Father also agreed to pay for Daughter's medical coverage in the
 
2009 Stipulation. Thus, to the extent that Father separately
 
paid for items that would generally be paid for through child
 
support payments, Father paid for these expenses twice.
 
Still another factor is that the record reveals, and 
the Family Court also found, that Mother contributed towards 
Daughter's expenses both at college and when she resided in 
Hawai'i during semester breaks, and used the child support 
payments from Father to do so. Findings of Fact 63-70. 
Therefore, whether, and to what extent Father overpaid
 
child support for Daughter depends, in the first instance, on a
 determination of what amount was necessary to meet Daughter's
 
needs while in college. Child support is defined, in relevant
 
part, as "payment for the necessary support and maintenance of a
 
child as required by law," HRS § 576D-1 (2006), and it is well
 
settled that "a payment in excess of the children's reasonable
 
needs at the appropriate standard of living is, by definition, a
 
payment for something other than child support." Richardson v.
 
Richardson, 8 Haw. App. 446, 456, 808 P.2d 1279, 1286 (1991). 
Conversely, "[a]n unusually high monthly income that would result
 
in a computation higher than the reasonable needs of the children
 
is one exceptional circumstance warranting departure." Matsunaga
 
v. Matsunaga, 99 Hawai
'i 157, 166, 53 P.3d 296, 305 (App. 2002) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Again, that 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Daughter is an adult dependent child due to being a full time 
college student, also warrants special considerations, including 
her earnings and assets. See Hawai 'i Child Support Guidelines 
2010 at 14. 
Thus, before the Family Court can determine whether
 
offsets against the overpaid child support might be appropriate,
 the parties should each submit a fully documented and completed
 
Child Support Guidelines Worksheet. Once the Family Court
 
determines the child support amount, it can then determine the
 
amount of overpayment and possible offsets to calculate the
 
amount of reimbursement due to Father. 
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the "Decision Re: 
Hearing on Order to Show Cause Filed 04/13/2011" issued on
 
December 2, 2011 and the "Order Denying Defendant's Motion and
 
Affidavit for Post-Decree Relief Filed 04-13-2011" entered on
 
December 30, 2011, by the Family Court of the First Circuit and
 
remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 17, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Charles T. Kleintop
Dyan M. Medeiros
(Kleintop, Luria & Medeiros),for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Francis T. O'Brien,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge

 
Associate Judge

 
15
 