  
      
        
      NOT  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST'S  HAWAI I  REPORTS  AND   PACIFIC  REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000581 27-FEB-2025 08:18 AM Dkt. 41 SO 
CAAP-22-0000581
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE  COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I  
STATE  OF  HAWAI I,  Plaintiff-Appellee,   v.  
JASON  M.  FREDERICO,  Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  CIRCUIT  COURT  OF  THE  FIRST  CIRCUIT 
(CR.  NO.  1PC131000713) 
SUMMARY  DISPOSITION  ORDER 
(By:   Leonard,  Acting  Chief  Judge,  Hiraoka   and  Guidry,   JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant   Jason  M.  Frederico   (Frederico )  
appeals   from  the  July  18,  2022  Order  of  Resentencing;  Revocation 
of  Probation,  Notice  of  Entry  (Order  of  Resentencing ),  entered  by 
the  Circuit  Court  of  the  First  Circuit  (Circuit  Court)  in  favor 
of  Plaintiff-Appellee  the  State  of  1
Hawai i  (State).    Frederico 
also  challenges  the  Circuit  Court's  October  19,  2022  Findings  of 
Fact,  Conclusions  of  Law,  and  Order  Denying  [Frederico's]  Motion 
to  Terminate  Probation  (Motion  to  Terminate ) (FOFs/COLs/Order ). 
Frederico  raises  a  single  point  of  error  on  appeal, 
contending  that  the  Circuit  Court  erred  in  denying  the  Motion  to 
Terminate. 
Upon  careful   review  of  the  record  and  the  briefs 
submitted  by  the  parties,  and  having  given  due  consideration  to 
the  arguments  advanced  and  the  issues  raised,  we  resolve 
Frederico's  point  of  error  as  follows:  
Frederico was
 granted a four-year period of deferral of 
his no-contest plea (DANC) pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes 
1 The Honorable Trish K. Morikawa presided.          
    
         
      
         
      
      
      
        
        
  
        
      
      
         
          
       
      
        
        
       
        
        
          
       
        
          
         
           
          
        
         
          
           
       
     
      
          
      
       
       
        
       
       
       
        
         
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(HRS)  §  853-1(b)  (2014).2   The  parties  agree  that  the  Circuit 
Court  correctly  concluded  that  HRS  §§  706-625  (2014)  and  706-627 
(2014)  apply  to  a  period  of  deferral  imposed  pursuant  to  HRS 
chapter  853.   See  State  v.  Kaufman,  92  Hawai i   322,  329,  991  P.2d 
2 HRS § 853-1 states: 
§ 853-1 Deferred acceptance of guilty plea or nolo 
contendere plea; discharge and dismissal, expungement of 
records . (a) Upon proper motion as provided by this 
chapter: 
(1) When a defendant voluntarily pleads guilty or 
nolo contendere, prior to commencement of trial, 
to a felony, misdemeanor, or petty misdemeanor; 
(2) It appears to the court that the defendant is 
not likely again to engage in a criminal course 
of conduct; and 
(3) The ends of justice and the welfare of society 
do not require that the defendant shall 
presently suffer the penalty imposed by law, 
the court, without accepting the plea of nolo contendere or 
entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the 
defendant and after considering the recommendations, if any, 
of the prosecutor, may defer further proceedings. 
(b) The proceedings may be deferred upon any of the 
conditions specified by section 706-624. As a further 
condition, the court shall impose a compensation fee 
pursuant to section 351-62.6 and a probation services fee 
pursuant to section 706-648 upon every defendant who has 
entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a petty 
misdemeanor, misdemeanor, or felony; provided that the court 
shall waive the imposition of a compensation or probation 
services fee, if it finds that the defendant is unable to 
pay the compensation or probation services fee. The court 
may defer the proceedings for a period of time as the court 
shall direct but in no case to exceed the maximum sentence 
allowable; provided that, if the defendant has entered a 
plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a petty misdemeanor, 
the court may defer the proceedings for a period not to 
exceed one year. The defendant may be subject to bail or 
recognizance at the court's discretion during the period 
during which the proceedings are deferred. 
(c) Upon the defendant's completion of the period 
designated by the court and in compliance with the terms and 
conditions established, the court shall discharge the 
defendant and dismiss the charge against the defendant. 
(d) Discharge of the defendant and dismissal of the 
charge against the defendant under this section shall be 
without adjudication of guilt, shall eliminate any civil 
admission of guilt, and is not a conviction. 
(e) Upon discharge of the defendant and dismissal of 
the charge against the defendant under this section, the 
defendant may apply for expungement not less than one year 
following discharge, pursuant to section 831-3.2. 
2          
         
          
         
        
         
 
   
        
        
      
        
         
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
832, 839 (2000) (holding that the tolling provisions in HRS 
§ 706–627 apply to deferral periods pursuant to a deferred plea). 
Frederico  argues  that  HRS  §§  706-625(1),  (4)  and  706-
627(1),  read  in  pari  materia ,  exclude  "motions  to  modify"  from 
motions  that  toll  a  defendant's  deferral  period.   HRS  §  706-625 
provides,  in  pertinent  part: 
§  706-625   Revocation,  modification  of  probation 
conditions.   (1)   The  court,  on  application  of  a  probation 
officer,  the  prosecuting  attorney,  the  defendant,  or  on  its 
own  motion,  after  a  hearing,  may  revoke  probation  except  as 
provided  in  subsection  (7),  reduce  or  enlarge  the  conditions 
of  a  sentence  of  probation,  pursuant  to  the  provisions 
applicable  to  the  initial  setting  of  the  conditions  and  the 
provisions  of  section  706-627.  
   . . . . 
(4) The court may modify the requirements imposed on 
the defendant or impose further requirements, if it finds 
that such action will assist the defendant in leading a 
law-abiding life. 
HRS § 706-627 provides: 
§  706-627   Tolling  of  probation.   (1)   Upon  the  filing 
of  a  motion  to  revoke  a  probation  or  a  motion  to  enlarge  the 
conditions  imposed  thereby,  the  period  of  probation  shall  be 
tolled  pending  the  hearing  upon  the  motion  and  the  decision 
of  the  court.   The  period  of  tolling  shall  be  computed  from 
the  filing  date  of  the  motion  through  and  including  the 
filing  date  of  the  written  decision  of  the  court  concerning 
the  motion  for  purposes  of  computation  of  the  remaining 
period  of  probation,  if  any.   In  the  event  the  court  fails 
to  file  a  written  decision  upon  the  motion,  the  period  shall 
be  computed  by  reference  to  the  date  the  court  makes  a 
decision  upon  the  motion  in  open  court.   During  the  period 
of  tolling  of  the  probation,  the  defendant  shall  remain 
subject  to  all  terms  and  conditions  of  the  probation  except 
as  otherwise  provided  by  this  chapter. 
(2) In the event the court, following hearing, 
refuses to revoke the probation or grant the requested 
enlargement of conditions thereof because the defendant's 
failure to comply therewith was excusable, the defendant may 
be granted the period of tolling of the probation for 
purposes of computation of the remaining probation, if any. 
This  court  rejected  a  nearly  identical  argument 
(concerning  the  tolling  of  probation)  in  State  v.  Wilbur-Delima, 
154  Hawai i  496,  502,  555  P.3d  660,  666  (App.  2024);  see  also 
State  v.  Holland-Dornath,  CAAP-21-0000442,  2024  WL  3936732,  *2 
(App.  Aug.  26,  2024)  (SDO)  (following  Wilbur-Delima).   Based  on 
the  reasoning  set  forth  in  Wilbur-Delima,   we  conclude  that  a 3 
3 3 Frederico  notes  that  the  arguments  on  the  tolling  issue  raised  in 
this  case  were  previously  made  by  his  counsel  (the  Office  of  the  Public 
Defender)  in  Holland-Dornath.          
            
        
      
        
         
         
          
         
         
         
           
        
        
       
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
motion to modify the terms of a DANC that seeks to enlarge a 
condition of the DANC is a tolling motion. 
Like the appellants in Wilbur-Delima and Holland-
Dornath , Frederico had entered the HOPE Probation Program. 
Although the subject motions to modify were not entitled as 
motions to enlarge sentence, in each instance, the State moved 
for an enlarged DANC condition, i.e., more jail time was sought; 
Frederico stipulated to the violations of one or more conditions 
of probation, the motions were granted, and Frederico was ordered 
to serve additional jail time. Accordingly, the Circuit Court 
did not err in treating the State's motions to modify as tolling 
motions. 
Based on the foregoing, and this court's Opinion in 
Wilbur-Delima , the Circuit Court's July 18, 2022 Order of 
Resentencing and October 19, 2022 FOFs/COLs/Order are affirmed. 
DATED:
 Honolulu, Hawai i, February  27, 2025. 
On  the  briefs: /s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Acting  Chief  Judge 
Jon  N.  Ikenaga, 
Deputy  Public  Defender, /s/  Keith  K.  Hiraoka 
for  Defendant-Appellant. Associate  Judge 
Donn  Fudo, /s/  Kimberly  T.  Guidry 
Deputy  Prosecuting  Attorney, Associate  Judge 
for  Plaintiff-Appellee. 
4
 