                           
                         NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOS. CAAP-16-0000661 and CAAP-16-0000662
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
CAAP-16-0000661
 
IN THE INTEREST OF CH; MM
(FC-S NO. 13-00059)
 
IN THE INTEREST OF MM
 
(FC-S NO. 14-00222)
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
AND
 
CAAP-16-0000662
 
IN THE INTEREST OF CH; MM
 
IN THE INTEREST OF MM
 
(FC-S NO. 14-00222)
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
 
Mother-Appellant (Mother) and Father-Appellant (Father)
 
(collectively, Parents) separately appeal from the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights (Order), entered by the Family Court
 of the First Circuit (family court) on October 5, 2016,
1
 which
granted the Motion to Terminate Parental Rights filed by the
 Department of Human Services (DHS) and terminated the parental
 and custodial rights of Mother and Father to their children, MM1
 
1
 The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
and MM2.
 
Father argues that the family court erred in
 
terminating his parental rights (1) based on insufficient
 
evidence that he was not willing and able to provide a safe
 family home for MM1 and MM2 even with the assistance of a service
 plan, and he would not become willing and able to do so within
 the reasonably foreseeable future; (2) because DHS contributed to
 his failed attempt to reunify with CH, Mother's child from
 another relationship; and (3) because the Permanent Plan with the
 goal of adoption by MM1 & MM2's current resources caregivers is
 not in MM1 and MM2's best interests.
 
Mother argues that the family court erred in
 
terminating her parental rights (1) based on insufficient
 evidence that she was unwilling and unable to provide MM1 and MM2
 with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service
 plan, and she would not become willing or able to do so within
 the reasonably foreseeable future; and (2) because the Permanent
 Plan with the goal of adoption by MM1 & MM2's current resources
 caregivers is not in MM1 and MM2's best interests.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Mother and Father's respective points of error as
 follows.
 
I.	 The family court was not wrong to terminate
Father's parental rights.
 
Father contests Findings of Fact (FOFs) 149/1532
 and
150/154,3
 which are actually Conclusions of Law (COLs), and COLs
2
 Parts of MM1 and MM2's respective FOF/COLs are identical except for
the numbering and/or child referred to. Where the numbers for the same FOF
 
are different, the opinion includes the number in MM1's FOF/COL followed by
the number in MM2's FOF/COL. Where the number is the same, the opinion
includes only one number.
3
 The FOFs provide:
 
[149/153]. Father is not presently willing and able
to provide [MM1/MM2] with a safe family home, even with the
assistance of a service plan.
[150/154]. It is not reasonably foreseeable that
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
9 and 104
 on the ground that they are based on the following
FOFs, which he maintains are clearly erroneous.
 
FOF 126/1305
 is based on substantial evidence.  DHS
 
social worker Barry Kwock (Kwock) testified that while Mother was
in prison, Father did not engage in services because, as he
 admitted, he had trouble coping with Mother being gone. Father
 testified that he had no explanation for his failure to
 participate in random urinalysis (UA) while Mother was in prison
 except that he was confused about what was happening in the case
 and had lost hope. He did not engage in services because he
 lacked a phone, could not contact his attorney for directions,
 and had no service plan until 2015. He did not ask Kwock for the
service plan when he saw him at his weekly visits with MM1 and
 MM2 because he did not think it was important, was focused on his
daughters and Mother's release, and talking to Kwock triggered
 his anger.
  
 
 
FOFs 124/128, 138/142, and 141/1456
 are based on
Father will become willing and able to provide [MM1 and MM2]
with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a
service plan, within a reasonable period of time not to
exceed two years from [MM1's and MM2's] date of entry into
foster care.
 
4
 The COLs provide:
 
9. [Parents] are not presently willing and able to
provide [MM1 and MM2] with a safe family home, even with the
assistance of a service plan.
10. It is not reasonably foreseeable that [Parents]
will become willing and able to provide [MM1 and MM2] with a
safe family home, even with the assistance of a service
plan, within a reasonable period of time.
5
 The FOF provides, "Father refused to engage in services during
Mother's incarceration and it was not until June 2015 that Father decided to
 re-engage in services, thereby demonstrating his dependency on Mother."
6
 The FOFs provide:
 
[124/128]. Father denies any part or responsibility
in the physical harm to [CH]. Father's attitude is based in
 part on the fact that [CH] is not his child. Father
 described his relationship with [CH] as like a father
figure, but not like his own children, because it's
different with [sic] it's your own.
. . . . 
[138/142]. Father completed multiple parenting
programs, including the Ka Pa' alana Program, [CCSS], and
PARENTS, Inc., however, Father is unable to demonstrate his 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
substantial evidence. Kwock testified that he was concerned
 
about Father's ability to protect MM1 and MM2 and that Father
 would not disclose to DHS harm caused by Mother to MM1 and MM2
 because Father had tried to hide Mother's abuse of CH in the
 past.
 
CH reported that on October 3, 2014, Father7
 hit his
cheek (10/3/14 Abuse), bruising it. CH appeared to be afraid of
 Father so DHS asked Father to leave for a week, which Father
 agreed to. However, three days later, Father was found with
 Mother and the children. CH reported that on October 26, 2014
 (10/26/14 Abuse), Father held him down while Mother hit him on
 the bottom with a stick. The abuse created open wounds on his
 buttocks.
 
Father testified that when the 10/26/14 Abuse occurred,
 
he was in another room and did not see what was happening. He
 did not check to see if CH was okay. He was more concerned about
 MM1 and MM2 being taken away if Mother continued hitting CH than
 he was about how CH was reacting or if he was in pain. He yelled
 at Mother to stop because their daughters could be taken away.
 Kwock testified that Father later saw the wounds on CH's bottom
 and claimed he did not know why they were there. Father surmised
 that CH may have been scratching himself and/or had rubbed his
 bottom against a car seat that had brackets on it.
 
Father testified that although he and CH had a close,
 
father-and-son relationship, it was different than his
 relationship with his biological children. He tried to let
 Mother guide CH.
 
FOF 140/1448
 is based on substantial evidence.  Kwock
 
testified that Father had not cooperated throughout the case. 
Father withheld information and tried to cover up for Mother when
 
ability to be protective of [MM1 and MM2] in that he allowed
Mother to inflict physical harm to [CH].
. . . . 
[141/145]. Father continues to minimize the severity
of the physical harm to [CH].
7
 CH ultimately identified Mother as the one who hit him.
 
8
 The FOF provides, "Father has not been truthful and forthcoming
throughout the pendency of this case."
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Kwock investigated the abuse to CH. Father admitted in his
 
testimony that when Kwock tried to take MM2 into custody, Father
 avoided him. Kwock testified that Father did not report his
 positive drug-test results to Kwock or take "ownership" of his
 substance abuse. Father tested positive for methamphetamine
 (meth) in March, June, and September 2014, but claimed the
 results were all inaccurate and he had not used illegal drugs
 since 1999.
 
FOFs 142/146, 143/147, and 144/1489
 are not clearly
erroneous. Kwock testified that although Father complied with
 services, Father did not understand why they were recommended.
 With regard to Father's substance-abuse issues, Father testified
 that he had last used illegal drugs, including meth, marijuana,
 and cocaine, in 1999. In June, 2014, he tested positive for meth
 and marijuana, but claimed he had taken no drug except cough
 medicine. Father also testified did not know why he tested
 positive for amphetamine on September 12, 2014, but it may have
 been because he consumed a Monster drink before being tested.
 According to Father, quitting was not difficult, and he did not
 need substance-abuse treatment. Kwock testified that although
 Father had completed the random UA program and did not have a
 substance-abuse issue at the time of trial, he had been dishonest
 about his substance-abuse in the past and had not fully addressed
 his substance-abuse issues.
 
With regard to Father's anger problems, although Father
 
testified that he had resolved them through his anger management
 program, Kwock testified that Father had unresolved anger issues.
 
With regard to Father's lack of protectiveness, Kwock
 
testified that Father believed Mother had not been using drugs
 when she tested positive for amphetamine after giving birth to
 
9
 The FOFs provide:
 
[142/146]. Father refuses to recognize the safety
issues he has, including substance abuse problems, domestic
violence issues, and his inability to be protective of [MM1
and MM2].
[143/147]. Father is not committed to meaningfully
engaging in services.
[144/148]. Father lacks insight and continues to
contend that he has no issues.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
MM1 and that Mother's diabetes had created a false result. He
 
later suggested that the hospital, Kapiolani Medical Center
 (Kapiolani), had tampered with the sample. Father testified that
 Mother was not using drugs when she tested positive for meth on
 November 9, 2014 and February 21, 2016, and she did not need
 substance-abuse treatment.
 
As discussed, when Mother was abusive toward CH, Father
 
showed a lack of concern for CH and presented alternative
 explanations for CH's injuries. Further, following the 10/26/14
 Abuse, Father tried to keep MM2 away from the social worker who
 tried to take custody of her on DHS's behalf.
 
FOFs 148/152, 158/162, and 159/16310
 are not clearly
erroneous. Father argues that DHS should have granted his
 reasonable request for increased visits with MM1 and MM2. 
However, there is no evidence in the record on appeal that Father
 ever requested increased visits.
 
Father argues that DHS contributed to his failure to
 
reunify with MM1 and MM2 because DHS failed to provide CH with
 recommended individual therapy until September 20, 2014, despite
 Parents' repeated requests for it months before that date, and
 failed to refer Mother and CH to a therapist for recommended
 conjoint therapy. 
A November 1, 2013 DHS Family Service Plan
 
recommended conjoint therapy for Mother and CH when CH's
 therapist deemed it appropriate, in order to address Mother's
 problems parenting CH. At trial, Kwock admitted that he failed
 to include the therapy recommendation in any subsequent service
 
The FOFs provide:
 
[148/152]. Under the circumstances presented in this
case, Father was given every reasonable opportunity to
effect positive changes to provide a safe family home and to
reunify with [MM1/MM2].
[158/162]. Under the circumstances presented in the
instant case, DHS has exerted reasonable and active efforts
to reunify [MM1/MM2] with [Parents] by identifying
necessary, appropriate, and reasonable services to address
the identified safety issues, and making appropriate and
timely referrals for these services.
[159/163]: Under the circumstances presented by the
instant case, DHS gave [Parents] every reasonable
opportunity to succeed in remedying the problems which put
[MM1/MM2] at substantial risk of being harmed in the family
home, and to reunify with MM1/MM2].
 10
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
plan, although he had discussed the recommendation with Mother.
 
By the time of trial, Mother had found a conjoint therapist.
 Kwock did not know if a therapy session had been held.
 
This case concerns the termination of Parents' parental
 
rights to MM1 and MM2, not Mother's stipulation to the
 termination of her parental rights over CH. Father has failed to
 show how the alleged omissions regarding CH contributed to his
 loss of parental rights over MM1 and MM2.
11 Thus, any error on
 
the family court's part in granting the MTPR on these grounds was
 harmless.
 
Father argues that FOFs 54/58, 55/59, 60/64, and
 
154/158
12
 are clearly erroneous because it is not in the best
interest of MM1 and MM2 to be adopted by their maternal
 grandmother (Grandmother) in light of Mother's statements in her
 October 24 and 25, 2013 psychological evaluation and Parents
 statement to DHS that Grandmother's husband drove while drinking.
 The August 26, 2015 (8/26/15) Safe Family Home Report provides
 that CH, MM1, and MM2 were bonding with Grandmother and her
 family. The children loved each other, were in good health, and
 had been placed in "the least restrictive and most homelike
 
11
 If Father means to argue that had DHS provided the therapy in a
timely manner, Mother would not have abused CH, there would have been no risk
of harm to MM1 and MM2 by Mother, and Father would not have failed to protectMM1 and MM2, the argument is not supported by the record on appeal. As arguedby the State, the record does not indicate that Mother or Father requestedthat DHS provide therapy for CH or conjoint therapy for Mother and CH. In fact, at the ' Ohana conference on 7/15/14, the notes indicate that Parents
needed to secure medical insurance for CH in order to obtain therapy.
12
 The FOFs 54/58, 55/59, and 60/64 provide:
 
[54/58]. [MM1 and MM2] [are] doing well in [their]
current placement and ha[ve] bonded with [their] resource
caregivers, who are able to meet all of [their] physical,
medical, emotional, and psychological needs.
[55/59]. DHS did not abuse its discretion in placing
. . . [MM1 and MM2] with [their] relative resource
caregiver[s].
. . . .
 [60/64]. To be returned to the care of [their] Mother
and/or Father would not be in the best interests of [MM1 and
MM2].
 
FOF 154/158 provides, "The Permanent Plan dated August 19, 2015, assists in
achieving the ultimate goal of the Permanent Plan, which is adoption into an
appropriate home."
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
environment, in the closest proximity as possible to the family
 
home, considering the family's situation and the placement
 options available . . . at the time of placement." The maternal
 grandparents had been the DHS-licensed, relative, resource
 caregiver earlier in the case and were willing and able to help
 with the children and committed to meeting their needs.
 
At trial, Kwock testified that he was aware of Mother's
 
allegations against Grandmother in the psychological evaluation
 but still believed Grandmother was an appropriate caregiver.
 Grandmother met all of DHS's requirements and passed the home
 study. Kwock had never seen Grandmother exhibit the kind of
 behavior Mother had described.
 
It was in the family court's discretion to credit 
Kwock's testimony and accord it and the 8/26/15 Safe Family Report more weight than Mother's allegations. See In re Doe, 95 
Hawai
'i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001) (noting that an 
appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence, as such is the province of the trier of fact). 
FOFs 149/153 and 150/154 and COLs 9 and 10 are not
 
clearly erroneous as to Father. See id. (a family court's
 
determinations pursuant to HRS § 587-73(a) are reviewed on appeal
 for clear error).
 
II.	 The family court was not wrong to terminate
Mother's parental rights.
 
Mother contests COLs 9 and 10 on the ground that they
 
are based on clearly erroneous FOFs.
 
FOFs 51 and 65/69
13 are based on substantial evidence.
 
At trial, Kwock testified that the case was opened after
 Kapiolani reported both Mother and MM1 tested positive for
 amphetamine. The family court admitted into evidence State's
 Exhibit 15, Mother's birth record from Kapiolani. The birth
 
13
 FOF 51 provides, "[MM1] tested positive for Amphetamines upon
birth." FOF 65/69 provides, "Mother tested positive for amphetamines upon
giving birth to [MM1] on April 2, 2013, however, Mother denied using any
drugs." 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
record indicates "mom, baby positive u tox screen for 
amphetamines." A DHS child/adult protective services specialist, Lisa Kunioka (Kunioka), who visited Kapiolani after Mother gave birth, testified that a hospital social worker told her that Mother and MM1 tested positive for amphetamines. A lab confirmed the presumptive positive test result. Mother provides no authority to support the notion that DHS was required to provide additional evidence regarding the validity of the positive test result, and we find none. Further, this court declines to pass upon the family court's determination regarding the weight of evidence. See In re Doe, 95 Hawai
'i at 190, 20 P.3d at 623 
(noting that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the weight of the evidence, as such is the province of the trier of fact). 
FOFs 79/83 and 80/84
14 are based on substantial 
evidence. Mother argues the FOFs are clearly erroneous to the extent they reflect that the family court faulted her for failing to engage in services while incarcerated. She maintains that she did not participate because services were unavailable in prison. Mother did not make this argument below, therefore, it is waived on appeal. See Rule 28(b)(4) Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure. 
FOF 96/10015 is based on substantial evidence. Mother
 
argues that the evidence adduced at trial showed she completed
 many of her services and continued to participate in others, and
 her visits with MM1 and MM2 were going well. Kwock testified
 that Mother's parenting ability was a concern because despite
 finishing the parenting program, she had harmed CH. Thus, she
 was unable to demonstrate what she had learned. She lacked
 
14
 The FOFs provide:
 
[79/83]. Mother was incarcerated from November 2014
 
through September 2015 for convictions related to her
physical abuse of [CH].
[80/84]. While Mother was incarcerated, she did not
engage in any of the recommended services.
15
 The FOF provides, "Mother completed multiple parenting programs,
including the Ka Pa' alana Program; [CCSS]; and PARENTS, Inc.; however, Mother
is unable to demonstrate and effectively apply the skills learned, asevidenced by her physical abuse to [CH]." 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
insight into the role the services were playing and how she was
 
harming her children. She admitted in her testimony that she
 only participated in domestic violence services because she was
 ordered to do so.
 
Mother argues that the family court unfairly considered
 
the children "generally" rather than individually. She does not
 elaborate on this argument, and its precise meaning is unclear.
 If she means to argue that the court erred in considering her
 parenting of CH when determining whether to terminate her
 parental rights to MM1 and MM2, such argument lacks merit.
 Mother's parenting of CH was relevant to whether she was willing
 and able to provide a safe home to MM1 and MM2, even with the
 assistance of a service plan, and whether she would be willing
 and able to do so in the reasonably foreseeable future (i.e., if
 she had domestic-violence and substance-abuse issues,
 acknowledged the risk of harm the issues posed to MM1 and MM2,
 and appreciated the value of services to address the issues).
 
If Mother means that the family court erred by
 
considering MM1 and MM2 as a single unit, this argument lacks
 merit as well. The family court issued FOFs/COLs, tailored to
 each child, in each case. There was no need for the family court
 to distinguish further between MM1 and MM2 because the court's
 decision to terminate Mother's parental rights was not based on
 direct harm to MM1 and MM2 but, rather, Mother's failure to
 accept that she had domestic-violence and substance-abuse issues,
 acknowledge the risk of harm these issues posed to MM1 and MM2,
 and appreciate the value of services to address these issues.
 
Mother argues that FOF 158/16216
 is clearly erroneous
because DHS failed to tailor services to address the safety
 issues. Specifically, she alleges that DHS failed to refer CH to
 an individual therapist until September 2014, despite Parents'
 
16
 The FOF provides:
 
[158/162]. Under the circumstances presented by the
instant case, DHS has exerted reasonable and active efforts
to reunify [MM1 and MM2] with [Parents] by identifying
necessary, appropriate, and reasonable services to address
the identified safety issues, and making appropriate and
timely referrals for these services.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
repeated requests for one in the months leading up to that date,
 
and never referred CH and Mother to the recommended conjoint
 therapy. However, Mother has not demonstrated that the omissions
 contributed to the termination of her parental rights.
17 In
 
light of Mother's failure to demonstrate progress after taking
 part in the services DHS did recommend, the omissions were
 harmless.
 
Mother argues that FOFs 54/58, 55/59, 153/157, and
 
154/158
18
 are clearly erroneous because the court ordered the
Permanent Plan based on insufficient evidence that it was in MM1
 and MM2's best interests, where the court sought to enable
 Parents to continue visiting MM1 and MM2. At trial, after orally
 granting the MTPR, the family court found that MM1 and MM2 were
 bonded with Parents and would not understand suddenly losing
 contact with them, and the court understood that DHS intended to
 allow Parents to maintain contact with MM1 and MM2 even if they
 were adopted. The family court ordered an 
'Ohana conference so 
the parties could mediate conflicts between the maternal
 grandparents and Parents to allow for continued visitation. The
 family court's finding that visitation with MM1 and MM2 should
 continue and its decision to terminate parental rights do not
 
17
 If Mother means to argue that had DHS provided the therapy in a
timely manner, Mother would not have abused CH and, therefore, would not have
presented a risk of harm to MM1 and MM2, the argument is not supported by the
record on appeal.   As argued by the State, the record does not indicate that
Mother or Father requested that DHS provide therapy for CH or conjoint therapy
for Mother and CH. In fact, at the ' Ohana conference on 7/15/14, the notes
indicate that Parents needed to secure medical insurance for CH in order to obtain therapy.
18
 The FOFs provide:
 
[54/58]. [MM1 and MM2] [are] doing well in [their]
current placement and ha[ve] bonded with her resource
caregivers, who are able to meet all of [their] physical,
medical, emotional, and psychological needs.
[55/59]. DHS did not abuse its discretion in placing
. . . [MM1 and MM2] with [their] relative resource
caregiver.
. . . . 
[153/157]. . . . . The goal of adoption is in accord
with the statutory presumption that the goal of adoption in
a proposed permanent plan is in a child's best interests.
HRS §§ 587A-32(a)."
[154/158]. The Permanent Plan dated August 19, 2015,
assists in achieving the ultimate goal of the Permanent
Plan, which is adoption into an appropriate home.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
contradict each other nor express ambivalence on the part of the
 
family court.
 
Mother also argues, as expressed in her psychological
 
evaluation, that Grandmother is unable to care for MM1 and MM2
 appropriately. As discussed, the family court had the discretion
 to credit Kwock's testimony and accord more weight to it and the
 information in the 8/26/15 Safe Family Report than Mother's
 allegations.
 
COLs 9 and 10 are not clearly erroneous as to Mother.
 
III. The remaining FOFs contested by Mother and/or
Father are not clearly erroneous.
 
Parents contest FOF 45/51,19
 which is not clearly
erroneous because it accurately summarizes the contents of the
 
family court's October 5, 2016 Order.
 
Father contests FOF 151/155,20
 which is clearly
erroneous in that the expert opinion it describes was not
 presented at trial. Nevertheless, the error is harmless because
 even without it, the remaining FOFs provide substantial evidence
 to support the Order.
 
19 The FOF provides:
 
Also on October 5, 2016, the Court granted DHS' [TPR
Motion]. Pursuant to HRS § 587A-33(a), the Court found by
clear and convincing evidence that: (1) [Parents] are not
willing and able to provide [MM1 and MM2] with a safe family
home, even with the assistance of a service plan; (2) it is
not reasonably foreseeable that [Parents] will becom[e]
willing and able to provide [MM1 and MM2] with a safe family
home, even with the assistance of a service plan, within a
reasonable period of time; and (3) the proposed Permanent
Plan dated August 19, 2015, is in the best interests of
[MM1/MM2]. The Court terminated the parental rights of
[Parents]; awarded permanent custody of [MM1/MM2] to DHS;
and ordered the Permanent Plan dated August 19, 2015.
20
 The FOF provides:
 
Based on the credible expert testimony presented at trial,
it is important for parents involved in child welfare cases
to develop insight into their problems (safety issues) and
the cause of their problems in order to facilitate in making
positive lifestyle changes that would allow them to provide
a safe family home for their child. Lack of insight
negatively impacts a parent's ability to resolve the
parent's problems.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Mother contests FOF 152/156,21
 which is not clearly
erroneous because it accurately reflects the contents of the
 
FOF/COLs.
 
Mother contests FOFs 153/157 and 154/158,22 which are
 
not clearly erroneous because they accurately reflect the goal of
 the Permanent Plan.
 
Mother contests FOF 155/159,
23
 which is not clearly
erroneous because it accurately reflects the guardian ad litem's
 recommendation.
 
24
Mother contests FOF 166/170,  which is a credibility
determination, which this court declines to review. See In re 
Doe
, 95 Hawai 'i at 190, 20 P.3d at 623. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights, entered by the Family Court of the
 First Circuit, on October 5, 2016, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 29, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Korrine S.S. Oki,
for Father-Appellant. 
Thomas A.K. Haia,
for Mother-Appellant. 
Julio C. Herrera,
Jay K. Goss,Asami M. Williams,Deputy Attorneys General,for Department of HumanServices, Petitioner-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
21
 The FOF provides, "Having made the 'parental unfitness' [FOFs],
pursuant to HRS §§ 587A-33(a)(1) and (2) regarding [Parents], the Court makes
the following [FOFs] regarding the Permanent Plan dated August 19, 2015." 
22
 The FOF provides, in relevant part, "The goal of the Permanent Plan
is permanent custody of [MM1/MM2], with the ultimate goal of adoption." 
23
 The FOF provides, "[MM1's/MM2's] [guardian ad litem] recommended
that permanent custody of [MM1/MM2] be awarded to the DHS and that the
Permanent Plan dated August 19, 2015, be ordered." 
24
 The FOF provides, "Mother's testimony was found by the court to be
not credible." 
13
 