NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000595
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
JAMES FERREIRA, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
MAUI MEMORIAL MEDICAL CENTER, a division of HAWAII
HEALTH SYSTEMS CORPORATION; MAUI MEDICAL GROUP, INC.,
Defendants-Appellees, and JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50;
ROE CORPORATIONS 1-50; ROE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;
DOE GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES 1-50, Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0912(2))
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant James W. Ferreira ( Ferreira)
appeals from the Final Judgment entered on July 23, 2015, in the
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court ).1
On appeal, Ferreira raises three points of error and 
contends that the Circuit Court erred when it:  (1) granted
summary judgment on Ferreira's negligence claims, which were
stated in Counts I through IV of the First Amended Complaint
against Defendant-Appellee Maui Memorial Medical Center, a
division of Hawai# i Health Systems Corporation ( MMMC), on the
1The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
grounds that the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur does not apply to
this case; (2) concluded that no genuine issue of material fact
exists due to a lack of evidence; and (3) declined to enter
findings of fact and conclusions of law.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Ferreira's points of error as follows:
(1) We first address Ferreira's contention that the
Circuit Court erroneously concluded that no genuine issue of
material fact exists in this case due to a lack of evidence, as
Ferreira's res ipsa loquitur claim was made in response to MMMC's
argument that it was entitled to summary judgment.  The Hawai #i
Supreme Court has held:
[A] summary judgment movant may satisfy his or her initial
burden of production by either (1) presenting evidence
negating an element of the non-movant's claim, or (2)
demonstrating that the nonmovant will be unable to carry his
or her burden of proof at trial. Where the movant attempts
to meet his or her burden through the latter means, he or
she must show not only that the non-movant has not placed
proof in the record, but also that the movant will be unable
to offer proof at trial.  
Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawai #i 46, 60-61, 292 P.3d 1276, 1290-91
(2013) (citations and emphasis omitted).  
In summary judgment proceedings, "only when the moving
party satisfies its initial burden of production does the burden
shift to the nonmoving party to . . . demonstrate specific facts,
as opposed to general allegations, that present a genuine issue
worthy of trial."  Id. at 56–57, 292 P.3d at 1286–87 (citation
omitted).  
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
A review of the record on appeal shows that MMMC met
its burden of production.  MMMC showed that the deadline for
expert reports had passed and that Ferreira lacked an expert
opinion as to a medical standard of care.  See Ralston , 129
Hawai#i at 57, 292 P.3d at 1287.  MMMC also submitted medical
records, provided declarations and reports by its experts
(including Dr. John Bellati's report stating to a reasonable
degree of medical probability that there was no breach in the
standard of care provided to Ferreira by MMMC and its healthcare
providers), and pointed to the lack of evidence of negligence as
alleged in the First Amended Complaint.  As MMMC met its burden
of production, the burden shifted to Ferreira to present a
genuine issue of material fact for determination at trial.  See 
id. at 56–57, 292 P.3d at 1286–87.  
Here, Ferreira did not meet his burden.  Ferreira
submitted no evidence, such as hospital records, affidavits or
declarations of witnesses, deposition transcripts, or expert
testimony to contradict the evidence presented by MMMC and raise
a genuine issue of material fact.  As discussed below, we reject
the application of res ipsa loquitur to the negligence claims in
this case.  Although Ferreira appears to argue on appeal that
issues of fact might be found in the evidence that MMMC
submitted, he does not point to any particular evidence in the
record that raises a genuine issue of material fact and we find
none.
(2) The supreme court has also held: 
Res ipsa loquitur  permits an inference of negligence when
the thing that produced a person's injury is under the
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
control and management of the defendant, and the injury
could not have occurred in the ordinary course of events but
for the defendant's failure to exercise due care.  Where an
accident could have occurred in the normal course without
negligence, or where two equally plausible inferences can be
drawn as to whether the accident was caused by negligence,
the doctrine is not applicable.  To invoke the doctrine of
res ipsa loquitur , the plaintiff must present substantial
evidence that (1) the injury was of the kind that ordinarily
does not occur in the absence of negligence, (2) the injury
was caused by an agency or instrumentality in the exclusive
control of the defendant, and (3) the injury was not due to
any voluntary action or contribution by the plaintiff.
Winfrey v. GGP Ala Moana LLC, 130 Hawai #i 262, 272-73, 308 P.3d
891, 901-02 (2013) (citations omitted); see also Carlos v. MTL,
Inc., 77 Hawai #i 269, 277–78, 883 P.2d 691, 699–700 (App. 1994).  
Here, in Count I, Ferreira alleged, inter alia , that in
light of Ferreira's condition at the time of his fall, MMMC
failed to exercise reasonable and ordinary care for Ferreira's
safety when MMMC staff left him in a wheelchair unattended. 
However, Ferreira did not present evidence that falling over in a
wheelchair does not ordinarily occur in the absence of
negligence.  Nor did Ferreira present evidence that MMMC was in
exclusive control of the circumstances contributing to the fall,
or that he did not contribute to the fall.  In addition, Ferreira
failed to submit any evidence concerning the accident, such as
medical records, a declaration from Ferreira or another witness
with personal knowledge of the event, or expert testimony.  Thus,
Ferreira did not meet his burden as to any of the elements for
invoking res ipsa loquitur .  Ferreira points generally to the
medical records submitted by MMMC, but these records do not
include evidence establishing the applicability of res ipsa
loquitur to Count I.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In Count II, Ferreira alleged, inter alia , that as a
result of MMMC's failure to exercise reasonable and ordinary care
in the diagnosis and treatment of Ferreira's left shoulder
injury, his shoulder could not be successfully treated or
repaired.  In Count III, Ferreira alleged, inter alia , that
medication negligently prescribed during his hospitalization
caused his condition to deteriorate and caused him to become
angry, aggressive, and violent towards himself and family
members.  In Count IV, Ferreira alleged, inter alia, that upon
his return to MMMC by ambulance due to significant personality
changes and behavioral abnormalities, the MMMC emergency room
doctor negligently attempted to send Ferreira home without using
standard and appropriate tests to determine whether he had
experienced another stroke, which allegedly could have resulted
in personality disorders.
"It is well settled that in medical malpractice
actions, the question of negligence must be decided by reference
to relevant medical standards of care for which the plaintiff
carries the burden of proving through expert medical testimony." 
Craft v. Peebles , 78 Hawai #i 287, 298, 893 P.2d 138, 149 (1995)
(citing Nishi v. Hartwell , 52 Haw. 188, 195, 473 P.2d 116, 121
(1970)).  Count II through IV are medical malpractice claims
requiring evidence of the applicable medical standards of care. 
We conclude that the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur  does not apply
to the negligence claims stated in Counts II through IV of
Ferreira's First Amended Complaint.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
For these reasons, we conclude that the Circuit Court
did not err in granting summary judgment in favor of MMMC on
Ferreira's negligence claims.2
(3) As MMMC contends, under Hawai #i Rules of Civil
Procedure Rule 52(a), no findings of fact or conclusions of law
are necessary for decisions on motions for summary judgment. 
Therefore, we conclude that the contentions raised in Ferreira's
third point of error are without merit.
Accordingly, the Circuit Court's July 23, 2015 Final
Judgment is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 19, 2017.
On the briefs:
Burton D. Gould,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.Chief Judge
Roy A. Vitousek III,
Kristin S. Shigemura,
Brandon M. Kimura,
(Cades Schutte)
for Defendant-Appellee
MAUI MEMORIAL MEDICAL CENTERAssociate Judge
Associate Judge
2Therefore, we need not reach other issues raised by the parties
regarding the entry of summary judgment.
6