NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000243 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
S
TATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
ANTONIO GIMBERNAT, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
WAILUKU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 2DCW-17-0000982) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Antonio Gimbernat (Gimbernat
) 
appeals from the "Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment" 
(Judgment) entered by the District Court of the Second Circuit, 
Wailuku Division1 on March 22, 2018. For the reasons explained 
below, we affirm the Judgment in part, vacate in part, and remand 
for resentencing consistent with this summary disposition order. 
Gimbernat was charged by amended complaint with one 
count of Harassment, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 711-1106(1)(b) and/or (f),
2 and one count of Disorderly 
1 The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided. 
2 HRS § 711-1106 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
§ 711-1106 Harassment . (1) A person commits the
offense of harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy, or
alarm any other person, that person: 
(continued...) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2(...continued)
. . . . 
 Conduct in violation of HRS § 711-1101(1)(c),  based on incidents 
that allegedly took place on February 22, 2017, at a McDonald's 
restaurant in Pukalani, Maui. Gimbernat pleaded not guilty. 3
A jury-waived trial began on November 17, 2017. The 
parties stipulated State's exhibits 1 and 2 (compact discs containing video camera footage) into evidence. The teenaged victims (AM and CK) testified at trial that while they were 
waiting for their food order, Gimbernat walked up behind them and 
yelled a racial epithet — with his hand raised — in an aggressive, threatening, angry tone that was loud enough for the entire restaurant to hear. They both testified that Gimbernat, an adult, was much larger then either of them. They both feared that Gimbernat was going to hurt them. 
(b) Insults, taunts, or challenges another person in
a manner likely to provoke an immediate violentresponse or that would cause the other person toreasonably believe that the actor intends tocause bodily injury to the recipient or anotheror damage to the property of the recipient oranother; [or] 
. . . . 
(f) Makes a communication using offensively coarse
language that would cause the recipient toreasonably believe that the actor intends tocause bodily injury to the recipient or anotheror damage to the property of the recipient oranother. 
(2) Harassment is a petty misdemeanor. 
3 HRS § 711-1101 (2014) provides, in relevant part: 
§ 711-1101 Disorderly conduct . (1) A person commits
the offense of disorderly conduct if, with intent to causephysical inconvenience or alarm by a member or members ofthe public, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, theperson: 
. . . . 
(c) Subjects another person to offensively coarse behavior
or abusive language which is likely to provoke aviolent response[.] 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The McDonald's employee who was working in the drive-
thru window testified that Gimbernat went over to AM and CK and 
said something "in a tone that was sort of angry and loud[.]" The employee turned "to see what was going on." Other customers also turned toward Gimbernat, who "seemed angry, mad, upset aboutsomething." The employee testified she was worried for the teens' safety "because [Gimbernat's] tone of voice, and just the way he started walking after he made the loud noise. . . . [H]e seemed very upset and mad. I was scared." She alerted her manager that something was going on. A male customer got betweenGimbernat and AM and pushed Gimbernat out of the restaurant. He did not return.  
 
No other witnesses testified. The district court found
Gimbernat guilty as charged on both counts; the court rejected 
Gimbernat's argument that the counts merged. The district court made the following findings:  
This incident occurred on February 22nd, 2017 at about
6:44 in the evening. The victims of alleged harassment were
two teenagers, [AM], age 15 years; and [CK], age 16. [AM]has brown skin complexion. [CK] has fair skin complexion. 
They were, at the time of the incident, in a dating
relationship. The couple entered a fast food restaurant inPukalani, Maui. 
Inside they were accosted by defendant, Antonio
Gimbernat, who said to them, I'm sick of you fuckingniggers. He said this in a loud aggressive angry tone. 
[AM] was stunned, shocked, confused, frightened. And 
extremely offended. He thought defendant was going to hithim. [CK] was shocked, scared, threatened and fearful thatthe defendant was going to hurt them. 
Defendant's words immediately caused the disturbance
that drew the attention of the two diners within the restaurant. Causing them to leave their seats and engagewith the defendant. 
The restaurant employee manning the drive-thru window
left her work station to enter the dining area to see whatthe disturbance was about. Defendant continued his afront [sic] of the couple saying in the same loud, aggressive,angry tone, you shouldn't be with that white girl. 
The restaurant clerk . . . was scared for herself. 
Worried that the couple, and perhaps others, would be hit,was concerned that the restaurant customers who were now getting involved in the confrontation. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
And in the span of a few seconds, between the first
and second comments, [AM] had recovered from his initial
shock and angrily approached the defendant causing one ofthe two customers to step in between to avert a physicalfight. 
This customer turned defendant around and escorted him 
out of the restaurant door while [CK] pulled her boyfriend[AM] back away from the defendant. 
(Underscoring added.) 
The district court sentenced Gimbernat to 30 days in 
jail on each count, to run concurrently, with credit for time 
served. This appeal followed. 
Gimbernat raises three points of error: 
1. there was insufficient evidence to convict 
him of harassment; 
2. there was insufficient evidence to convict 
him of petty misdemeanor disorderly conduct; and 3. even if there was sufficient evidence to 
sustain both convictions, the harassment and
disorderly conduct offenses merged. 
1. The evidence was sufficient to 
support a conviction for harassment. 
When an appellate court reviews the sufficiency of 
evidence on appeal: 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered inthe strongest light for the prosecution when the appellatecourt passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence tosupport a conviction; the same standard applies whether thecase was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is notwhether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, butwhether there was substantial evidence to support theconclusion of the trier of fact. 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai# i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) 
(citations omitted). 
Gimbernat argues that his conduct could not reasonably 
have caused AM and CK to believe that he intended to cause bodily 
injury to them or to anyone else, or to cause property damage. The evidence presented at trial, viewed in the strongest light 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for the prosecution, established that AM and CK reasonably 
believed that Gimbernat intended to cause them bodily injury. Gimbernat's first point of error is without merit. 
2. The district court did not find facts 
sufficient to support a conviction forpetty misdemeanor disorderly conduct. 
Gimbernat concedes that the district court "found that 
Gimbernat's use of offensively coarse language inconvenienced 
several customers and restaurant employees in addition to [AM] and [CK]." He argues there was no evidence he intended to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, which is an element of petty misdemeanor (as opposed to violation) disorderly conduct. 
HRS § 707-1101(3) provides: 
Disorderly conduct is a petty misdemeanor if it is the
defendant's intention to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, or if the defendant persists in disorderlyconduct after reasonable warning or request to desist.Otherwise disorderly conduct is a violation. 
The district court stated, when announcing its decision 
on the disorderly conduct count: 
Defendant's language was offensively coarse. The 
public was affected. There were four other personssubjected to this language besides the primary target ofdefendant's racist (inaudible) language, being [AM]. 
Also present were [CK], the two customers in the
restaurant, and the employee of the restaurant. All of whom were present. All of whom were drawn into this confrontation. Which did result in inconvenience or alarm by them. 
[CK]'s date was spoiled. The customer's meals were 
interrupted. The employees [sic] work duties wereinterfered with. The language was likely and did provoke aviolence -- violent response from [AM]. And defendant was fully aware of this situation and consciously disregardedthe risk that his language would be offensive. 
The Court finds the defendant guilty on count two. 
The district court made no finding that Gimbernat "intended to 
cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience." Such a finding was necessary for Gimbernat to be convicted of a petty 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
misdemeanor. Accordingly, it was error for the district court to 
sentence Gimbernat to 30 days for the petty misdemeanor disorderly conduct offense; Gimbernat should have been sentenced for a violation. 
3. The district court's finding that the
harassment and disorderly conduct offensesdid not merge was supported by substantialevidence. 
Gimbernat argues he cannot be convicted of both haras-
sment and disorderly conduct because the offenses merged under 
HRS § 701-109(1)(e). That statute provides, in relevant part: 
§ 701-109 Method of prosecution when conduct
establishes an element of more than one offense . (1) When
the same conduct of a defendant may establish an element of
more than one offense, the defendant may be prosecuted foreach offense of which such conduct is an element. The defendant may not, however, be convicted of more than oneoffense if: 
. . . . 
(e) The offense is defined as a continuing course ofconduct and the defendant's course of conduct was uninterrupted, unless the law provides thespecific periods of conduct constitute separateoffenses. 
Gimbernat claims to have committed only one crime because he 
"engaged in only one continuous and uninterrupted course of criminal conduct directed at one criminal goal, i.e. to harass one specific individual [AM] by making offensive racially chargedremarks."  
The district court stated, while addressing Gimbernat's 
merger argument: 
The Court is considering where this is a situation of
defendant's conduct was, as the cases note, one continuing
course of conduct, in which the Court would have to say thatthere was but one intention, one general impulse, one plan.And the Court will have the record reflect that in its view the evidence indicated that that was not the situation. While we have a single episode here of conduct, there wereseparate intentions. There were separate acts. 
We had the initial harassment of the male minor. And 
we had a second incident which occurred across the room, 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
bringing into the fray a restaurant employee who was nervous
and scared. The defendant was yelling at such a volume thatshe had to come out from her drive-thru window to see what was going on. 
The customers in the restaurant were alarmed, so much
so that they stood up from the table and had to intercede. 
So, there were separate things going on. Separate
proofs, separate offenses, that did not merge here. 
(Underscoring added.) 
The district court's findings are supported by State's 
Exhibit 1 (the McDonald's security video). The video (which does 
not have audio) shows Gimbernat seated in the restaurant, eating his food. He appears to be watching AM and CK, who are standing together waiting for their food order. Gimbernat stands, picking up his food tray. He does not walk toward the trash receptacle, which is to his right and across the room from where AM and CK are standing. Instead, he walks to his left, behind another table and around a woman standing nearby. He is holding his food tray in his right hand. He approaches AM and CK from behind. He appears to be yelling at the teens. The teens turn to look at him. He raises his left arm and hand. CK takes a step back. 
Gimbernat then turns his back on AM and CK. He takes 8 
or 9 steps across the restaurant to the trash receptacle. He is facing the security camera and does not appear to be speaking as he is walking toward the trash receptacle. He throws away his trash. At this time the video shows Gimbernat, AM, CK, the woman standing, and four other people seated, in the restaurant. 
After Gimbernat throws his trash in the receptacle, he 
turns to face AM and CK, who are still standing in the same spot. He raises his right hand and arm. He appears to be yelling across the restaurant. He makes a sweeping gesture with his right arm and hand. At that point, a man in a red shirt and a woman in a black outfit stand up; they appear to be speaking to Gimbernat, who turns toward them. They both begin to step toward Gimbernat and point toward the door, apparently urging that Gimbernat leave the restaurant. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
AM then begins walking toward Gimbernat, holding his 
phone as if he is filming (in fact State's Exhibit 2 is video 
from AM's phone). As Gimbernat turns to face AM, the man in the red shirt steps between Gimbernat and AM. CK pulls AM back toward her. The man in the red shirt puts his hand on Gimbernat's shoulder. Gimbernat does not resist as the man guides Gimbernat toward the door, away from AM. 
The district court's finding that Gimbernat committed 
acts independently violative of the harassment statute and the disorderly conduct statute is supported by substantial evidence and is not clearly erroneous. Under those facts, HRS § 701-109(1)(e) does not prohibit convictions under both the harassment and disorderly conduct statutes. State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai# i 1, 
21, 928 P.2d 843, 863 (1996) (noting that HRS § 701-109(1)(e) "does not apply where [the defendant's] actions constitute separate offenses under the law.") (quoting State v. Hoopii, 68 Haw. 246, 251, 710 P.2d 1193, 1197 (1985)); State v. Freeman, 70 Haw. 434, 441, 774 P.2d 888, 893 (1989) (holding that "[i]n the course of [the defendant's] criminal transaction, he committed acts independently violative of both statutes and therefore, HRS § 701–109(1)(e) does not prohibit multiple convictions for the separate and distinct offenses[.]") 
Moreover, the Hawai# i Supreme Court has held: 
Whether a course of conduct gives rise to more than
one crime depends in part on the intent and objective of the
defendant. The test to determine whether the defendant intended to commit more than one offense is whether the evidence discloses one general intent or discloses separateand distinct intents. Where there is one intention, onegeneral impulse, and one plan, there is but one offense.All factual issues involved in this determination must be decided by the trier of fact. 
State v. Alston, 75 Haw. 517, 531, 865 P.2d 157, 165 (1994) 
(underscoring added) (citations omitted). The district court did not err when it denied Gimbernat's motion to merge the harassment and disorderly conduct counts. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment entered by the 
district court on March 22, 2018, is affirmed with respect to 
Gimbernat's conviction for harassment. With respect to Gimbernat's conviction for disorderly conduct, his sentence for a petty misdemeanor is vacated and this matter is remanded to the district court for resentencing consistent with this summary disposition order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 8, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
Peter A. Hanano, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Maui, for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
Matthew K. Ka# aihue, 
Deputy Public Defender, for Defendant-Appellant./s/ Karen T. NakasoneAssociate Judge
 
9 