  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0001069
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
BARBARA S. FETUAO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 11-1-0047)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Barbara S. Fetuao (Fetuao) appeals
 
from a November 14, 2012 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 
(Judgment), which was entered by the Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit (Circuit Court).1
 
After a seven-day jury trial, Fetuao was found guilty
 
of: (1) one count of Assault in the Second Degree, in violation
 
of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-711(1)(b) (Supp. 2011)
 
(Count I); (2) two counts of Assault in the Second Degree, in
 
violation of HRS § 707-711(1)(d) (Supp. 2011) (Counts II and
 
III); and (3) two counts of Abuse of Family or Household Members,
 
in violation of HRS § 709-906(1) and (5) (Supp. 2011) (Counts IV
 
and V). 
On appeal, Fetuao does not challenge her conviction,
 
but contends that the Circuit Court abused its discretion by
 
sentencing her to consecutive terms of imprisonment on all
 counts. Fetuao claims that the Circuit Court failed to
 adequately state on the record the factors to support a
 
1
 The Honorable Edward H. Kubo, Jr., presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consecutive sentence, as required by State v. Hussein, 122
 
Hawai'i 495, 229 P.3d 313 (2010). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced, applicable authorities, and the issues
 raised by the parties, we resolve Fetuao's point of error as
 follows:
 
HRS § 706-668.5 (1993 & Supp. 2013) governs the trial
 
court's exercise of discretion with respect to concurrent and
 consecutive sentencing:
 
Multiple sentence of imprisonment.  (1) If multiple
terms of imprisonment are imposed on a defendant, whether at
the same time or at different times, or if a term of
imprisonment is imposed on a defendant who is already
subject to an unexpired term of imprisonment, the terms may
run concurrently or consecutively. Multiple terms of
imprisonment run concurrently unless the court orders or the
statute mandates that the terms run consecutively.
(2) The court, in determining whether the terms
imposed are to be ordered to run concurrently or
consecutively, shall consider the factors set forth in
section 706-606.
 
HRS § 706-606 (1993) provides:
 
Factors to be considered in imposing a sentence. The
 
court, in determining the particular sentence to be imposed,
shall consider:
 (1) The nature and circumstances of the offense and
 
the history and characteristics of the defendant;
(2) The need for the sentence imposed:
(a) To reflect the seriousness of the offense, to
promote respect for law, and to provide just punishment for
the offense;
(b) To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;
 (c) To protect the public from further crimes of
the defendant; and
(d) To provide the defendant with needed
educational or vocational training, medical care, or other
correctional treatment in the most effective manner;
(3) The kinds of sentences available; and
(4) The need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities
among defendants with similar records who have been found
guilty of similar conduct.
 
The supreme court has held that "absent clear evidence
 
to the contrary, it is presumed that a sentencing court will have
 
considered all the factors." State v. Hussein
, 122 Hawai 'i 495, 
518, 229 P.3d 313, 336 (2010) (citation, internal quotation
 marks, ellipsis, brackets, and emphasis omitted). However, the
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
supreme court further held in Hussein that "circuit courts must
 
state on the record at the time of sentencing the reasons for
 imposing a consecutive sentence." Id. at 510, 229 P.3d at 328
 
(emphasis added). In support of this holding, the court
 reasoned:
 
Such a requirement serves dual purposes. First,
reasons identify the facts or circumstances within the range
of statutory factors that a court considers important in
determining that a consecutive sentence is appropriate. An
express statement, which evinces not merely consideration of
the factors, but recites the specific circumstances that led
the court to impose sentences consecutively in a particular
case, provides a meaningful rationale to the defendant, the
victim, and the public.
 
Second, reasons provide the conclusions drawn by the
court from consideration of all the facts that pertain to
the statutory factors. It is vital, for example, for the
defendant to be specifically informed that the court has
concluded that he or she is dangerous to the safety of the
public, or poses an unacceptable risk of re-offending, or
that rehabilitation appears unlikely due to his or her lack
of motivation and a failure to demonstrate any interest in
treatment, or that the multiplicity of offenses and victims
and the impact upon the victims' lives warrant imposition of
a consecutive term. Hence, reasons confirm for the
defendant, the victim, the public, and the appellate court,
that the decision to impose consecutive sentences was
deliberate, rational, and fair.
 
Id. at 509-10, 229 P.3d at 327-28.
 
In 
State v. Kong, 131 Hawai 'i 94, 315 P.3d 720 (2013), 
the supreme court elaborated on its holding in Hussein that a
 
sentencing court must adequately state on the record the factors
 to support imposition of a consecutive sentence. The court in
 Kong held that a sentencing court adequately explained its
 reasoning for imposing its sentence by "(1) identifying the facts
 or circumstances within the range of statutory factors that the
 court considered and (2) confirming for the defendant, the
 victim, the public, and the appellate court that the decision was
 deliberate, rational, and fair." Id. at __, 315 P.3d at 728-29. 
The court explained that Hussein does not require a sentencing
 court to address every factor that can affect sentencing; rather,
 "the sentencing court is required to articulate its reasoning
 only with respect to those factors it relies on in imposing
 consecutive sentences." Id. at __, 315 P.3d at 728. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In this case, the Circuit Court explained its reasoning
 
for imposing the sentence:
 
. . . . I find that there was a breach of trust to a
 
vulnerable victim, age 13, with the use of weapons which
constituted torture and leaving multiple scars and injuries
not only physically but mentally as well.
 
The victim was treated like a slave in the house and
 
there was no hesitancy for a propensity for severe violence.
In this particular case, like I said, I don't doubt that she
is a loving mother and a loving wife. But there are some
times where punishment is deserving. This Court had the
opportunity to hear all the facts in this case and the facts
was [sic] egregious, it was horrendous, it was gut-wrenching
and, quite frankly, shocking to hear what a 13-year-old boy
could sustain.
 
This Court has determined -- has considered all the
 
factors set forth in 706-606 of the Hawai' i Revised Statutes 
as well as the factors that the Court must consider before
 imposing consecutive terms of imprisonment, which are set
forth in 706-606 of HRS.
 
This Court concludes that based on the Court's
 
findings as well as the additional features of the
seriousness of this offense or these offenses, the need to
promote respect for the law and to provide just punishment
and the need to deter the defendant from future crimes to
 protect the public, the State's motion for consecutive terms
is hereby granted.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Fetuao argues, in essence, that the Circuit Court
 
failed to: (1) take into consideration the fact that she has no
 
prior criminal history, pursuant to HRS § 706-606(1); (2) explain
 that the court had considered any alternative sentences, pursuant
 to HRS § 706-606(3); and (3) consider "the need to avoid
 unwarranted sentence disparities among defendants with similar
 records who have been found guilty of similar conduct," pursuant
 to HRS § 706-606(4).
 
However, the record supports the Circuit Court's
 
findings and conclusions that there were "use of weapons,"
 "multiple scars and injuries," the complaining witness (CW) was
 
treated like a "slave in the house," and that "there was no
 
hesitancy for a propensity for severe violence." Finally, the
 evidence presented of Fetuao's abuse of the 13-year-old CW
 supports the Circuit Court's conclusion that "the facts was [sic]
 egregious, it was horrendous, it was gut-wrenching and, quite
 frankly, shocking to hear what a 13-year-old boy could sustain."
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The evidence includes testimony regarding: Fetuao's fracturing
 
of the boy's rib with a broom handle, which resulted in lasting
 pain, but was left untreated for over a month; Fetuao's hitting
 the boy repeatedly with a hammer, to the point where his ear bled
 for two days, but he received no medical care; Fetuao's burning
 of CW with an iron, which left permanent scars; Fetuao's beating
 of CW with an extension cord, causing pain and injuries that left
 scars on his face and forehead; and Fetuao's spearing a broom
 into the boy's mouth, causing pain, cuts, and the loss of a
 tooth.
 
In imposing the consecutive sentences, the Circuit 
Court addressed the first factor of HRS § 706-606(1), the nature and circumstances of the offense and characteristics of the defendant, when noting Fetuao’s use of weapons that left multiple scars and was physically and mentally abusive. In addition, the Circuit Court addressed the factor identified in HRS § 706­606(2)(a), the need for the sentence imposed to reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote respect for the law, and to provide just punishment for the offense, when it noted that Fetuao's conduct was tortuous and treated 13-year-old CW like a slave and she did not hesitate to use violence. The Circuit Court's statements also "provide[d] the conclusions drawn by the court from consideration of all the facts that pertain to the statutory factors . . . . [and] confirm[s] for [Fetuao], . . . the public, and [this Court], that the decision to impose consecutive sentences was deliberate, rational, and fair." Hussein, 112 Hawai
'i at 509-10, 229 P.3d at 327-28. Here, the 
Circuit Court specifically weighed the interest between compassion and punishment, and it clearly related which conclusions were drawn from the evidence presented to it during trial. 
Although the Circuit Court did not specifically address
 
certain facts in the record that may have weighed in Fetuao's
 favor with respect to other HRS § 706-606 factors, the Circuit
 Court is not required to do so. See Kong, at __, 315 P.3d at
 
728. We conclude that the Circuit Court adequately stated in the
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record specific facts or circumstances within the range of
 
statutory factors that the court considered in imposing a
 consecutive sentence, and the record demonstrated that it was
 deliberate, rational, and fair. Id. at __, 315 P.3d at 729. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's November 14,
 
2012 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 28, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Phyllis J. Hironaka
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 