 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000512 29-JAN-2025 11:01 AM Dkt. 81 SO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000512 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
PERCIVAL AGTINA, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-20-0000610) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Acting C.J., and Wadsworth, J.,
with Guidry, J., dissenting) 
Defendant-Appellant Percival Agtina (Agtina) appeals 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) entered 
on August 9, 2023, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit 
(
Circuit Court).1/ After a jury trial, Agtina was convicted of 
one count of Sexual Assault in the First Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-730(1)(c)
2/ and two counts of 
1/ The Honorable Fa #auuga To #oto #o presided. 
2/ HRS § 707-730 (2014) states, in relevant part: 
Sexual assault in the first degree . (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the
first degree if: 
. . . . 
(c) The person knowingly engages in sexual
penetration with a person who is at leastfourteen years old but less than sixteenyears old; provided that: 
(i) The person is not less than five
years older than the minor; and 
(ii) The person is not legally married to   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Sexual Assault in the Third Degree (Sexual Assault 3), in 
violation of HRS § 707-732(1)(c).3/ 
On appeal, Agtina contends that: (1) the deputy 
prosecuting attorney (DPA) "committed misconduct in appealing to 
the passion[s] and prejudice[s] of the jury throughout the trial 
and misstating the law during rebuttal arguments"; (2) the Circuit Court erred in permitting the State's expert witness, Dr. Alexander Bivens (Dr. Bivens), "to give profile evidence against 
Agtina"; (3) Counts 2 and 4 of the Complaint and corresponding 
jury instructions "fail[ed] to define 'genitalia' and thus fail[ed] to give proper notice to Agtina"; and (4) "Agtina received ineffective assistance of counsel . . . ." 
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve Agtina's contentions as follows, and vacate. 
(1) In his first point of error, Agtina contends that 
the DPA engaged in multiple acts of misconduct "in appealing to the passion and prejudice of the jury throughout the trial[,]" including improper remarks during voir dire, opening statements, and her closing and rebuttal arguments. In light of our ruling on Agtina's second point of error (see infra), we do not reach the issues raised in his first point. 
(2) In his second point of error, Agtina contends that 
the minor[.] 
3/ HRS § 707-732 (2014) states, in relevant part: 
Sexual assault in the third degree.  (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the
third degree if: 
. . . . 
(c) The person knowingly engages in sexual
contact with a person who is at leastfourteen years old but less than sixteenyears old or causes the minor to havesexual contact with the person; providedthat: 
(i) The person is not less than five
years older than the minor; and 
(ii) The person is not legally married tothe minor[.] 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Circuit Court "should have precluded [Dr.] Bivens from 
testifying regarding the typical characteristics and behavior of 'child molesters.'" Agtina argues that Dr. Bivens's "testimony regarding typical child molesters amounted to improper profile evidence, and any minimal probative value that this evidence had was substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, and misleading the jury." Relatedly, Agtina argues that "the State relied heavily in closing on tying Agtina to Bivens'[s] testimony[,]" in order to brand Agtina as having the "mind of a molester." 
In State v. McDonnell, 141 Hawai# i 280, 409 P.3d 684 
(2017), the supreme court reviewed a challenge to Dr. Bivens's testimony in a different child sexual abuse case. There, Dr. Bivens "testified with regard to the dynamics of child sexual abuse, including delayed reporting and underreporting by victims of abuse, and 'grooming' techniques typically used by abusers. Bivens'[s] testimony included statistics regarding how often abuse occurs in the child's home, and how frequently it involves individuals who are known to the child." Id. at 283, 409 P.3d at 687. Like Agtina, McDonnell argued that Dr. Bivens's testimony was irrelevant, was unduly prejudicial, and improperly profiled McDonnell as a child molester. The supreme court held that the family court did not abuse its discretion in admitting most of Dr. Bivens's testimony since the testimony helped explain the interaction between the minor child and the defendant, and its probative value outweighed its prejudicial effect. Id. However, the court ruled that Dr. Bivens's use of certain statistics regarding the "personal characteristics of abusers" – i.e., that "85 percent of the time the child has a pre-existing non-sexual relationship with their molester" and "100 percent of incest offenders report molesting in their own home" – constituted improper profile testimony that was unfairly prejudicial to the defendant. Id. at 297, 409 P.3d at 701 (ellipsis omitted). 
Here, Agtina points to three portions of Dr. Bivens's 
testimony that he claims constituted improper profile evidence: 
(1) Child molesters "are people that they already
know. And unbeknownst to the child, it is 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
probably the case that the molester has
intentionally inserted themselves or affiliatedwith the child or the child's family in order toget access to the child and has established anonsexual relationship in anticipation ofeventually converting it to a molestationrelationship." 
(2) "[A] majority of molesters reported molesting
with others present. Sometimes the others were children. Sometimes they were potentiallyprotective adults. And, yeah, about a quarter ofmolesters admitted to committing molestation onthe same bed with a potentially protective adultpresent. There's some additional dynamics." 
(3) "There are two places that are most -- the
most common sites for child sex -- sexual abuse to occur. The first is the child's home, and thesecond is the molester's home. And in the case of incest, this is the same place." 
In response, the State points out that, as in 
McDonnell, Dr. Bivens testified in this case that child molesters 
do not fit a particular type of profile and that "there's no way to determine if somebody is a child molester" as "[t]here are no demographic characteristics or any sort of profiling evidence that can be used to identify a child molester." The State argues that the challenged testimony of Dr. Bivens is proper under McDonnell. 
Agtina contends that Dr. Bivens's testimony "regarding 
the behavior and character of typical child molesters" nonetheless "guided the jury to the conclusion that Agtina was guilty because he fit the profile of a child molester." Agtina notes that although Bivens did not testify using percentages, he used equivalent terms such as "probably" and "majority." Agtina further contends that the DPA relied heavily in closing on tying Agtina to Bivens's profile testimony, specifically by referencing his testimony and then repeating the phrase "mind of a molester" five times. Indeed, the DPA stated, in relevant part: 
Now, . . . you heard testimony from an expert. And he 
talked about the mind of a molester and what they think
about when they're thinking of the person, that childthey're molesting. In this case, it was a 15-year-old to --a 15-year-old -- 11- to a 15-year-old [female ( Minor)]. The 
mind of a molester, think about asking her, do you have aboyfriend? Do you still -- are you still a virgin? Right 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
before he sexually penetrates her and puts his penis into
her vagina, he's asking these questions. The mind of a 
molester. Even afterwards, the mind of a molester, when hecomforts her -- talks about comforting her, you don't need aboy, referring to someone her age. You got a man; right?You're beautiful. Mind of a molester. 
. . . . 
[Dr. Bivens] . . . doesn't know [Minor]. He's talking
to you about the studies, and that's applied to all childrenwho are subjected to child sex -- sex assault. And he said -- told you a lot of things, a lot of good information tohelp you understand what [Minor] was going through. 
Most children know their molester. Dad in the 
home. Most molesters are adults obtaining sexualgratification from sexual contact with a child. That's what 
the defendant did. Consistent. 
. . . . 
There's also studies that talk about children get
molested in the same bed with others in it. And it -- mind 
of the molester, it's that sick pleasure. Okay? It's been 
studied. You've heard the expert. It's about the total control and domination that defendant had over [Minor]. 
(Emphases added.) 
In McDonnell, the court ruled that Dr. Bivens's 
testimony on the abuse process did not constitute improper 
profile evidence. 141 Hawai# i at 296, 409 P.3d at 700. It 
reasoned in part: 
Here, Dr. Bivens explicitly testified that "there is
not" a typical child molester profile and that it is not
possible to look at "demographic characteristics" or"personality characteristics" to determine whether someoneis a child molester. Dr. Bivens did not know the specificfacts of this case, and thus could not have tailored histestimony to unfairly prejudice or profile McDonnell as achild molester. Further, the State did not argue in closingthat McDonnell was a child molester because he had certain 
characteristics or exhibited certain behaviors. Thus,
McDonnell's argument that Dr. Bivens'[s] testimony "providedthe avenue for the jury to conclude that McDonnell wasguilty merely because he fit the profile of a childmolester" is unconvincing. 
Id. (emphasis added). 
In this case, the State used Dr. Bivens's testimony to 
make the very argument it did not make in McDonnell. Indeed, the 
DPA explicitly and repeatedly argued that Agtina had the "mind of a molester" based on personal characteristics or behaviors that Dr. Bivens had testified are typical of child molesters. Whatever value Bivens's testimony on this subject served in 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
explaining the interaction between Minor and Agtina, it was far 
outweighed by the unfair prejudicial effect of the State's closing argument, which branded Agtina as a child molester based on a profile that the DPA inferred from Bivens's testimony. The evidence as argued was unfairly prejudicial to Agtina and should have been excluded under Hawai# i Rules of Evidence Rule 403. 
Further, on this record, we cannot conclude that the 
admission of this evidence was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Accordingly, Agtina's convictions must be vacated. 
(3) In his third point of error, Agtina contends that 
Counts 2 and 4 of the Complaint, which charged him with separate incidents of Sexual Assault 3, "fail[ed] to define 'genitalia' and thus fail[ed] to give proper notice to Agtina." He challenges the related jury instructions on the same basis. 
In addressing a defendant's indictment challenge, the 
supreme court recently stated: 
Under article I, section 14 of the Hawai #i 
Constitution, those accused of crimes have the right "to be
informed of the nature and cause of the accusation" againstthem. Defendants may challenge indictments for failure tocharge an offense "at any time during the pendency of theproceeding" because of "the significant consequencesassociated with omitting an essential and material elementin an oral charge" or indictment. State v. Sprattling, 99
Hawai #i 
312, 318, 55 P.3d 276, 282 (2002) (quotation
omitted). 
While indictments can be challenged at any point
during the proceeding, different standards apply to"post-conviction challenges." [State v. ]Motta, 66 Haw.[89,] 91, 657 P.2d [1019,] 1020[ (1983)]. Unde
r the 
Motta/Wells framework, "we will not reverse a convictionbased upon a defective indictment unless the defendant canshow prejudice or that the indictment cannot within reasonbe construed to charge a crime." Id.The liberal 
construction standard "essentially prescribes a presumptionof validity on indictments that are challenged subsequent toa conviction." Sprattling, 99 Hawai #i at 318, 55 P.3d at
282. 
State v. Tran, 154 Hawai# i 211, 224, 549 P.3d 296, 309 (2024). 
The same principles apply here, where Agtina challenges 
the sufficiency of Counts 2 and 4 of the Complaint for the first 
time on appeal. See id. at 226, 549 P.3d at 311 (holding that "where . . . a charge challenge is raised after a guilty verdict has been returned . . . the Motta/Wells rule applies"); see State v. Kuhane, 145 
Hawaii # 362, 370, 452 P.3d 359, 367 (2019) 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
(applying the Motta/Wells rule to the sufficiency challenge to a 
complaint). 
Applying the Motta/Wells liberal construction rule, we 
conclude that Counts 2 and 4 were not defective. First, Agtina has not established that he was prejudiced by these charges. There is nothing in the record to suggest that he was misled or would have defended the case differently if the indictment contained the definition of "genitalia." 
See Tran, 154 Hawai# i 
at 226, 549 P.3d at 311. Thus, we are not persuaded that he was prejudiced by Counts 2 and 4 of the Complaint. 
See id. 
Second, Counts 2 and 4 were sufficiently detailed to 
charge a crime. Counts 2 and 4 began with the following respective paragraphs: 
COUNT 2: On or about October 27, 2018, to and
including December 28, 2019, in the City and County of
Honolulu, State of Hawai #i, . . . AGTINA did knowingly
engage in sexual contact with [Minor], who was at leastfourteen years old but less than sixteen years old, byplacing his hand on her genitalia, and . . . AGTINA was notless than five years older than [Minor] and was not legallymarried to [Minor], and knew he was not legally married to[Minor], thereby committing the offense of Sexual Assault inthe Third Degree, in violation of Section 707-732(1)(c) ofthe Hawai #i
 Revised Statutes. 
COUNT 4: On or about December 29, 2019, in the City
and County of Honolulu, State of Hawai #i, . . . AGTINA did
knowingly engage in sexual contact with [Minor], who was atleast fourteen years old but less than sixteen years old, byplacing his hand on her genitalia, and . . . AGTINA was notless than five years older than [Minor] and was not legallymarried to [Minor], and knew he was not legally married to[Minor], thereby committing the offense of Sexual Assault inthe Third Degree, in violation of Section 707-732(1)(c) ofthe 
Hawai #i Revised Statutes. 
Immediately after these respective paragraphs, Counts 2 
and 4 each alleged: 
Pursuant to Section 707-700 of the Hawai #i Revised 
Statutes, "married" includes persons legally married, and amale and female living together as husband and wiferegardless of their legal status, but does not includespouses living apart. 
Pursuant to Section 707-700 of the Hawaii Revised 
Statutes, "sexual contact" means any touching, other than
acts of "sexual penetration", of the sexual or other
intimate parts of another, or of the sexual or otherintimate parts of the actor by another, whether directly orthrough the clothing or other material intended to cover thesexual or other intimate parts. 
Pursuant to Section 707-700 of the Hawai #i Revised 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Statutes, "sexual penetration" means: 
(1) Vaginal intercourse, anal intercourse, fellatio,
deviate sexual intercourse, or any intrusion of anypart of a person's body or of any object into thegenital or anal opening of another person’s body; itoccurs upon any penetration, however slight, butemission is not required. As used in this definition,"genital opening" includes the anterior surface of thevulva or labia majora; or 
(2) Cunnilingus or anilingus, whether or not actual
penetration has occurred. 
Pursuant to Section 707-700 of the Hawai #i Revised 
Statutes, "deviate sexual intercourse" means any act of
sexual gratification between a person and an animal or acorpse, involving the sex organs of one and the mouth, anus,or sex organs of the other. 
If convicted of this offense or any included felony
offense, . . . AGTINA may be subject to sentencing inaccordance with Section 706-661 and Section 706-662(4)(a) ofthe Hawai #i Revised Statutes where he is a multiple offender
in that he is being sentenced for two or more felonies, andan extended term of imprisonment is necessary for theprotection of the public. 
Counts 2 and 4 each included all material elements 
outlined in HRS § 707-732, citing that statute specifically. 
Each count also provided the statutory definitions of "sexual contact" and related terms. 
Generally, "where a statute sets forth with reasonable 
clarity all essential elements of the crime intended to be punished, and fully defines the offense in unmistakable terms readily comprehensible to persons of common understanding, a charge drawn in the language of the statute is sufficient." Tran
, 154 Hawai#i at 226, 549 P.3d at 311 (brackets omitted) 
(quoting 
State v. Jendrusch, 58 Haw. 279, 282, 567 P.2d 1242, 
1245 (1977)). Additonally, when reviewing "whether an offense has been sufficiently pleaded," we "interpret a charge as a whole, employing practical considerations and common sense." Sprattling
, 99 Hawai#i at 318-19, 55 P.3d at 282-83. 
Here, Counts 2 and 4 included the material elements of 
the offense and all the relevant statutory definitions. 
A person 
of common understanding would know from reading these counts that 
Agtina was accused of violating HRS § 707-732 by knowingly engaging in (1) sexual contact (2) with Minor, who was at least fourteen years old but less than sixteen years old, and to whom he was not married (3) on or about the specified dates (4) in the 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
City and County of Honolulu. The Complaint outlined the 
requisite mens rea and properly defined sexual contact according to its statutory definition. See Tran, 154 Hawai# i at 227, 549 
P.3d at 312 (citing State v. Wheeler, 121 
Hawai#i 383, 393, 219 
P.3d 1170, 1180 (2009)). Further, a person of common understanding would know that the term "genitalia," as used in Counts 2 and 4 (i.e., "by placing his hand on her genitalia"), refers to Minor's external sex organs. See Webster's Encyclopedic Unabridged Dictionary 797 (1996 ed.) (defining "genitalia" to mean "the organs of reproduction, esp. the external organs"). Counts 2 and 4 "'sufficiently apprised' [Agtina] of what he needed to 'be prepared to meet,' [State v. ]Wells, 78 Hawai# i [373,] 379-80, 894 P.2d [70,] 76-77[ 
(1995)], and 'provided him with fair notice of the offense's essential elements,' Kauhane, 145 Hawai# i at 370, 452 P.3d at 367 
(brackets and quotation omitted)." Tran, 154 Hawai# i at 227, 549 
P.3d at 312 (original brackets omitted). Liberally construed, Counts 2 and 4 each charged a crime. See id. 
Given our ruling on Agtina's second point of error (see 
supra), we do not reach his contention that the jury instructions for Counts 2 and 4 were erroneous because they did not define the term "genitalia." 
(4)
 For the same reason, we do not reach Agtina's 
contention that he received ineffective assistance of counsel. 
For the reasons discussed above, we vacate the Judgment 
of Conviction and Sentence entered on August 9, 2023, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, and remand the case for a new trial. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 29, 2025. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Henry P. Ting, Acting Chief Judge
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Stephen K. Tsushima, Associate Judge
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
9   
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
    
    
   
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
DISSENTING OPINI ON BY GUIDRY, J. 
For the reasons set forth below, I respectfully 
disagree with the majority that Dr. Bivens' testimony "should 
have been excluded under Hawaiʻi Rules of Evidence [(HRE)] 
Rule 403" because "[t]he evidence as argued was unfairly 
prejudicial to Agtina [.]" (Emphasis added). 
The question of whether expert witness testimony 
should have been excluded under HRE Rule 403 is reviewed for 
abuse of discretion. Kealoha v. County of Hawaii, 74 Haw. 308, 
323, 844 P.2d 670, 677 (1993) (reviewing a trial court's ruling 
regarding the admission of evidence,  pursuant to HRE 403, under 
the abuse of discretion standard).  
I do not think that Dr. Bivens' testimony improperly 
"profiled" Agtina . Dr. Bivens testified regarding "the general 
dynamics of child sexual abuse." See State v. McDonnell , 141 
Hawaiʻi 280, 295, 409 P.3d 684, 699 (2017) (concluding in that 
case that "Dr. Bivens was appropriately permitted to testify 
regarding the dynamics of the relationship between child victims 
of sexual abuse and their abusers"). Dr. Bivens testified that, 
"[he did not] know anything about this particular case " and that 
"[he did not] even know the defendant's name [.]" Moreover, Dr. 
Bivens expressly clarified that "there's no way to determine if 
somebody is a child molester , other than whether the individual 
molests a child or not[,] " as "[t]here are no demographic    
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
characteristics or any sort of profiling evidence that can be 
used to identify a child molester." 
I therefore disagree with the majority that Dr. 
Bivens' testimony should have been excluded because the State 
"used Dr. Bivens's testimony" to "explicitly and repeated ly 
argue[] that Agtina had the 'mind of a molester' based on 
personal characteristics or behaviors that Dr. Bivens had 
testified are typical of child molesters." It was the 
prosecutor who used Dr. Bivens' testimony to characterize Agtina 
as having the "mind of a molester" during closing argument . 
A trial court cannot  know with certainty, at the time 
expert testimonial evidence is admitted,  how a  prosecutor  might 
attempt to characterize  or use that evidence  in the closing 
argument. But it  is reasonable for a  trial court to expect that 
the prosecutor will not use and characterize otherwise 
admissible testimonial evidence in a way that "profiles" or 
otherwise unfairly prejudices  a  defendant.   See  State v. 
Underwood, 142 Hawaiʻi 317,  326,  418 P.3d 658, 667  (2018) ("A 
prosecutor, moreover, has the responsibility of a minister of justice and not simply that of an advocate.") (cleaned up).  
I cannot conclude , therefore, that the circuit court 
abused its discretion by not excluding evidence that was later 
used by the prosecutor during closing argument to create what 
the majority characterizes as an "unfair prejudicial effect ." 
2    
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
      
      
 
 
     
  
   
  
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
If a prosecutor's use or characterization of evidence during 
closing argument constitutes prosecutorial misconduct , the 
defendant's judgment of conviction may be vacated on that basis . 
For the foregoing reasons, I respectfully disagree 
with the majority's decision to vacate the Judgment on the 
ground that Dr. Bivens' testimony should have been excluded 
under HRE Rule 403. I would therefore address the remaining 
points of error , including the question of whether the 
prosecutor committed prosecutorial misconduct . 1 
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry 
Associate Judge 
1 It appears that Agtina did not object below to the prosecutor's 
closing argument. And although Agtina raised prosecutorial misconduct as a 
point of error on appeal, Agtina did not specifically argue on appeal that 
the prosecutor's use of the phrase "mind of a molester" constituted 
prosecutorial misconduct. Nevertheless, this court may review statements 
made by the prosecutor during closing argument for plain error. State v. 
Fox, 70 Haw. 46, 55, 760 P.2d 670, 675 (1988) ("[W]here plain errors were 
committed and substantial rights were affected thereby, the errors 'may be 
noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the [trial ] 
court.' . . . And we may notice 'plain error' even when 'not presented' by 
the appellant.") (quoting Hawai ʻi Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 52(b) and 
Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4) (D)). 
3 