FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
NICOLETA JACOBY, Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant, v.
BENNETT JACOBY, Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee
 
NOS. CAAP-11-0000583 and CAAP-12-0000083
 
(CONSOLIDATED)
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 08-1-281K)
 
DECEMBER 31, 2014
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, LEONARD and GINOZA, JJ.

 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY LEONARD, J.
 
Defendant-Appellant/Cross-Appellee Bennett Jacoby
 
(
Bennett) appeals from an April 14, 2011 Family Court of the
 
Third Circuit (Family Court) Order Re: Divorce Trial (Order) and
 
a July 5, 2011 Decree Granting Absolute Divorce and Awarding
 
Child Custody (Divorce Decree) that dissolved Bennett's marriage
 
with Plaintiff-Appellee/Cross-Appellant Nicoleta Jacoby
 
(Nicoleta). 1
  Nicoleta cross-appeals from the Divorce Decree.
1
 The Honorable Aley K. Auna, Jr. presided.
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bennett raises sixteen points of error, arguing the
 
Family Court erred, inter alia, in its valuation of Bennett's
 
intellectual property (IP) for his capital contribution, its
 
deviation from marital partnership principles and waiver of
 
2
 Nicoleta's equalization payment, its permanent alimony  and child
support awards, and its requirement that Bennett maintain life
 insurance in an amount far greater than necessary to give
 reasonable security for his support obligations.

 
On cross-appeal, Nicoleta raises three points of error,
 
challenging the Family Court's decision to: (1) include an

 
automatic termination clause for her permanent alimony upon her
 cohabitation; (2) include Bennett's tax-free disability earnings
 as "Monthly Gross Income" on the Child Support Guidelines (CSG)
 
worksheet; and (3) not award her one-half of Bennett's future
 
disability benefits, if we conclude that the Family Court erred
 by awarding Nicoleta permanent alimony or by waiving her
 equalization payment. 
I.	 BACKGROUND
 
On December 9, 2008, Nicoleta filed a complaint for
 
divorce against Bennett. 
On February 18, 2009, the parties filed a Stipulation
 
of the Parties Re: Temporary Custody, Visitation, Support, and
 Other Matters (Pre-trial Stipulation). Bennett and Nicoleta
 
agreed temporarily to joint legal and physical custody of their
 
two minor children and set forth temporary terms and conditions
 of their joint custody. 
On October 12, 2009, Bennett filed a motion for a pre­
trial determination regarding whether his future disability
 benefits are marital property subject to equitable distribution. 
No separate order was filed.
3
 
2
 "Alimony" and "spousal support" are used interchangeably.
 
3
 Bennett claims, without citing to the record, that the Family
Court orally ruled:
 
To the extent that [Bennett's] future disability
insurance benefits are simply to replace lost income
(continued...)
 
2
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Bennett and Nicoleta's divorce trial was held on
 
November 12, 13, 19, and 27, 2009. The date of the conclusion of
 
the evidentiary portion of the trial (DOCOEPOT) was November 27,
 
2009. Nicoleta and Bennett both testified at trial, and each
 
called an expert to testify about the value of Bennett's IP. 
Nicoleta testified that she was born in Romania in
 
1969, and in 1985, she had surgery to remove an arterio-venous
 malformation in her brain. Following surgery, she was paralyzed
 on her "whole right side." When she came to the United States in
 1990, she was still experiencing weakness in her right leg and
 hand. 
Nicoleta stated that she met Bennett in California
 
around May 1992, and they moved in together in June 1992. 
Nicoleta was twenty-three years old and Bennett was thirty-one
 years old at the time. Bennett was separated, but not yet
 divorced, from his former wife (Mary Ann) when he began living
 
with Nicoleta. Nicoleta worked at Bennett's periodontist clinic
 
in California, but Bennett did not pay her. She believed that
 they had a joint bank account, and she reported that Bennett had
 been "paying for everything."
 
Nicoleta and Bennett were married on June 12, 1993
 
(date of marriage, DOM), and Nicoleta continued to work in
 
Bennett's office thereafter. Their son was born in June 1995,
 
and their daughter was born in January 1997. 
In late 1997, Nicoleta was diagnosed with multiple
 
sclerosis (MS). Nicoleta reported that she underwent steroid
 
treatments, which caused numbness. 
The family moved to Hawai
'i in May 1998. Bennett and 
Nicoleta purchased a home in August 1998. Nicoleta testified that she continued to have MS flare-ups, which required steroid 
3(...continued)
from [his] disability, those future benefits post-
divorce are not a marital asset, and the family court
lacks legal authority to divide or equitably
distribute by way of offset his future disability
income and cannot consider the present value
calculation of his future disability income. 

3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
treatments. She continued to consult with her neurologist in 
California until 2007, and she also saw a neurologist in Hawai 'i. 
Nicoleta testified that her illness impacted her
 
employment. In 1999, she worked part time at Hualalai Academy
 for its after-school program from about 2:30 to 5:00 p.m., five
 days a week. However, she had to quit "because after a while, my
 numbness and my MS was flaring up, and I had to go to the
 hospital to have the IV steroids." In 2005, she tried to work
 with Bennett as his assistant when he started "working on the
 charity van, . . . but I did not last." She worked for less than
 a week before her MS caused her to quit. At the time of trial,
 she felt that she was unable to work because "[m]y shoulder
 hurts. My arm -- I cannot be on the computer too long. . . . I'm
 very tired." 
Nicoleta also testified that she has optic neuritis,
 
which might cause her to go blind. In April 2009, she was
 diagnosed with brain hemorrhaging and must have an annual CT scan
 "to watch that aneurysm that broke that is in my brain." She
 stated that, in May 2009, she was "diagnosed with carpal tunnel
 syndrome, the nerve on my left hand, my good hand, . . . the
 nerve is damaged" and that her left shoulder problems require
 surgery. Nicoleta's medical problems require numerous
 medications that are very costly. Even with insurance, Nicoleta
 testified that she spent about $885 per month for her
 medications. 
At DOCOEPOT, Nicoleta was receiving about $5,500 per
 
month in alimony and $1,970 per month in child support. Nicoleta
 requested that Bennett maintain his $1.5 million life insurance
 policy, which he had initiated during their marriage. 
Nicoleta further testified that the climate, single-
story design, and pool at the parties' marital residence helped
 her cope with her MS. If Nicoleta does go blind, the familiarity
 with the house would be "very good for [her]" because she knows
 "how to get around [the house] and everything." However, she
 stated that the upkeep of the house is costly. 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bennett testified that he married Mary Ann around May
 
1989. In December 1992, a judgment of divorce from Mary Ann was
 
filed in California, and he signed a marital termination
 agreement or agreement incident to divorce (AITD). The AITD
 
included a $10,000 settlement payment to Mary Ann to "sign off
 
on" his IP or "in effect release any claims that she might have
 to an interest in it." 
Bennett testified that his IP stemmed from the ideas
 
that resulted in his periodontal endoscope, which utilized fiber
 optics to allow dentists to view beneath teeth without surgery,
 and which came to him in 1987. Bennett's attorney filed patent
 applications for his ideas. Bennett created a successful working
 prototype in late 1992, and used it on patients in late 1992 or
 early 1993. Bennett testified that "a tremendous amount of
 development" occurred between when Mary Ann released claims on
 his IP in December 1992, and the DOM in June 1993. Thus, "what I
 brought into the marriage with Nicoleta was different from what
 Mary Ann signed off on." His patent allowance was issued in
 February 1993, two months after the AITD and four months before
 DOM. 
At DOCOEPOT, Bennett was receiving disability payments
 
in the amount of about $16,334 per month, tax-free. Bennett's
 disability insurance policy provides for five-percent annual
 increases. Bennett testified that he paid annual premiums for
 the policy during his marriage to Nicoleta, until his premiums
 were waived when he was found to be disabled after a diagnosis of
 myofascial pain dysfunction syndrome following a 1996 surfing
 accident. 
At DOCOEPOT, Bennett was earning about $1,500 per month
 
working part-time as a periodontist. He was also receiving about
 $1,000 per month in royalties from his invention until December
 2011, and about $9,000 per month from various investments. 
Bennett testified that the expenses for Bennett,
 
Nicoleta, and their two children from January 2007 to June 2008,
 averaged $9,348 per month.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6Both parties offered expert testimony on the value of
Bennett's IP asset.  Bennett's valuation expert was Gary Kuba
(Kuba).  Nicoleta's expert was Christian Tregillis (Tregillis ).  
Kuba valued Bennett's periodontal endoscopy device
patent applications as of DOM at $4,648,000.  To arrive at his
valuation, Kuba "ultimately relied on . . . a projection prepared
by Wendell Ebling [( Ebling)], who was the president of a company
back in 1993 called Bioview, who had dental sheaths among other
products."  Kuba explained his basic valuation model as follows:
You start off with cash flows.  What's the expected
cash flows?  You apply a discount rate to it.  Cash flows
divided by this discount rate gives you what the value is,
so it's pretty straightforward.
You're dealing with two variables.  If cash flows go
higher and the discount rate is constant, you get a higher
value.  If the cash flows remain the same, the discount rate
goes down, you get a higher value.  Conversely, if the
discount rate goes up, you get a lower value.  So, you know,
the fundamentals is [sic] pretty straightforward.  We're
dealing with two variables here.
Kuba used Ebling's projected cash flow and a twenty
percent discount rate.  Kuba said "there's no evidence that I'm
aware of" that indicated that Ebling's projections were inflated. 
However, he acknowledged that Ebling's projections may have been
"overinflat[ed]" to "entice" Bennett into a partnership.  Kuba
acknowledged that "the only relevant person that we were able to
talk to was [Bennett]" because Ebling had since passed away.  
Kuba based the twenty percent discount rate "on what's
called a capital asset pricing model."  He explained how this
model arrives at a discount rate.  Kuba's arrival at a twenty
percent discount rate "widely varies" from Tregillis's. 
Kuba explained why he thought Tregillis's valuation of
$101,000 was unreasonable.  Kuba further disagreed with
Tregillis's opinion that the property equalization of $10,000 to
Mary Ann in the AITD should be considered in the valuation
because "clearly there was no analysis establishing that it was
fair market value." 
Tregillis valued the IP asset at $101,000.  He
explained that consideration of "future information is limited"
and that he considered "information which gives insight into what FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
would have been expected by [a willing] buyer and [a willing]
 
seller as of the valuation date." Thus, he limited his analysis
 "to what was known or knowable in establishing what expectations
 were on the valuation date [DOM]." He explained:
 
[U]ltimately I wanted to look at what was expected or
knowable, what a willing buyer and a willing seller would
have expected as of the date of transaction. And looking at
that range of possibilities, success, middle of the road,
not so successful, or complete failure, those possibilities,
ultimately that's what the value is. When you do a weighted
average, combining the probabilities of each of those things
playing out, that's what drives the value.
 
Tregillis explained that he used the actual stream of
 
total revenues as the expected scenario instead of the Ebling
 
projections, which Kuba used. Tregillis thought that the Ebling
 
projections were inflated because they were created by Ebling
 
with the intention of attracting Bennett into a partnership. He
 also explained that his 42.5 percent discount rate was
 "conservative" due to Bennett's early stage of investment at DOM. 
On April 14, 2011, the Family Court filed the Order Re:
 
Divorce Trial, which set forth its findings of fact (FOFs) and
 
conclusions of law (COLs). In the Order, the Family Court found,
 
inter alia, that: (1) Bennett and Nicoleta had formed a
 
Premarital Economic Partnership (PEP) in June 1992 that had
 
lasted until DOM on June 12, 1993, and the fact that Bennett was
 
married to Mary Ann "at the commencement of the parties' PEP has
 no bearing on whether a PEP was formed"; (2) "Tregillis' findings
 and conclusions are more persuasive" than Kuba's regarding the
 value of Bennett's IP, and "Tregillis' opinion of the value of
 [Bennett's] IP at DOM of $101,000 is reasonable, trustworthy, and
 credible"; (3) "it would be just and equitable to award
 [Nicoleta] permanent spousal support of $4,000 per month" that
 will "terminate upon the death of either party or upon the
 remarriage or cohabitation of [Nicoleta]"; (4) Bennett should pay
 Nicoleta $2,069 per month in child support; (5) Bennett "has
 stipulated that he will pay the premiums" for Nicoleta's Kaiser
 HIPAA Platinum Plan health plan or a "reasonable equivalent if it
 is not available"; (6) Bennett must maintain his $1.5 million
 life insurance policy with Nicoleta "being the exclusive primary
 
7
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
beneficiary for so long as he has an obligation to pay child
 
support or alimony"; (7) Nicoleta should be awarded the marital
 residence; and (8) "sufficient valid and relevant considerations
 [(VARCs)] to deviate from marital partnership principles" exist,
 
and "[i]t would be just and equitable to not require [Nicoleta]
 
to pay the equalization payment." 
On July 5, 2011, the Family Court entered the Divorce
 
Decree, which, among other things: (1) ordered Bennett to
 directly pay Nicoleta $4,000 per month in permanent alimony; (2)
 awarded joint legal and physical custody of their two minor
 children; (3) ordered that Bennett maintain existing levels of
 medical insurance for the two children; (4) awarded the marital
 residence to Nicoleta, who is responsible for the real property
 taxes upon transfer of title to her; and (5) ordered that Bennett
 pay off Nicoleta's car loan on her 2008 Honda with existing
 marital assets.
 
On August 3, 2011, Bennett filed a timely notice of
 
appeal. On August 16, 2011, Nicoleta filed a timely notice of
 cross-appeal. 
On October 17, 2011, Nicoleta filed a post-decree
 
motion to enforce the Divorce Decree, requesting, inter alia,
 that Bennett pay for a different medical insurance plan with a
 higher monthly premium of $429.13 because the original Kaiser
 HIPPA Platinum Plan (with a premium of $290) no longer existed. 
The Family Court granted the motion and filed an order on
 November 28, 2011 (Post-Decree Enforcement Order), stating that
 
"[t]he Kaiser HIPPA Plan 20/RX (as opposed to the Kaiser HIPPA
 
Plan 30/RX)[ 
4
] is a reasonable equivalent to the Kaiser HIPPA
Platinum Plan." 
The Family Court also ordered Bennett to pay 
4
 The Kaiser HIPAA Platinum Plan was no longer available, and
Nicoleta was only eligible for two other plans: (1) Kaiser HIPPA Plan 20/RX,
which costs $429.13 per month; and (2) Kaiser HIPPA Plan 30/RX, which costs
$365.77 per month.
 
8
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5
 interest on the sum of $594,805 from July 5, 2011 through
October 5, 2011.
 
II.	 POINTS OF ERROR
 
Bennett raises the following points of error on appeal:

 
(1) The Family Court clearly erred by finding that
 
Bennett and Nicoleta had formed a PEP in June 1992 while he was
 still married to Mary Ann.
 
(2) The Family Court clearly erred in its IP valuation 
of Bennett's periodontal endoscope. The Family Court further 
erred in not applying Teller v. Teller, 99 Hawai
'i 101, 53 P.3d 
240 (2002). 
(3) The Family Court abused its discretion by awarding
 
Nicoleta permanent spousal and child support without considering
 
the effect of property division on the parties' gross monthly
 incomes and clearly erred in its FOFs:
 
(a) FOF 108: "[Nicoleta's] present household and
 
transportation expenses, excluding her automobile loan payments,
 are $3,327 ($4,153 - $826). . . . These expenses are reasonable."
 
(b) FOF 109: "[Nicoleta's] personal monthly
 
expenses, including medical and dental, is [sic] $2,910. . . .
 Given the parties [sic] present life style, these expenses are
 reasonable."
 
(c) FOF 114: "[Bennett] also receives about
 
$9,064 per month income from his bonds and Certificates of
 Deposit accrued interest."
 
(d) FOF 117: "[Bennett's] total gross monthly
 
income (without considering the increase calculation of the
 monthly tax free disability payments; [Bennett] opines that gross
 
5
 The Divorce Decree awarded Nicoleta one-half of the total value of
 
the parties' "Bank/Savings, Sec., Ret., Etc." asset (Accounts), which the
Family Court valued at $1,345,726. Nicoleta had possession of assets with a
DOCOEPOT value of $750,921, and Bennett assigned her title to these assets.
Because the Family Court waived Nicoleta's $588,677 equalization payment,
Bennett owed her $594,805 ($1,345,726 - $750,921).
The Family Court ordered that Bennett pay $14,666.40 in interest on his
post-decree payment to Nicoleta of $594,805. The interest was calculated by
multiplying $162.96 per day by 90 days. 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
monthly income would be $28,375 on the $16,343 now being
 
received) is $29,402."
 
(e) FOF 122: "Under the circumstances of this
 
case, it would be just and equitable to award [Nicoleta]
 permanent spousal support of $4,000 per month."
 
(4) The Family Court abused its discretion by
 
deviating from marital partnership principles and waiving
 Nicoleta's $588,677 equalization payment.
 
(5) The Family Court abused its discretion by
 
extending Nicoleta's inflated temporary support orders for
 nineteen months between DOCOEPOT on November 27, 2009 and the
 filing of the Divorce Decree on July 5, 2011. 
(6) The Family Court clearly erred by undervaluing a
 
2008 Honda vehicle awarded to Nicoleta at $2,488 with regard to
 its allocation of the parties' assets, as follows:
 
(a) The Family Court failed to account for
 
Bennett's payoff of the vehicle when dividing the parties' cash
 marital assets, resulting in Bennett paying off the vehicle not
 out of the total pre-division marital assets, as he agreed to do,
 but out of his own one-half share of post-division assets.
 
(b) The Allocation Chart, which was part of FOF
 
141, incorrectly valued the vehicle at $2,488 when Nicoleta's
 testimony at trial and her Asset and Debt statement, filed
 October 19, 2009, indicated that the vehicle was worth $24,300.
 
(7) The Family Court abused its discretion by allowing
 
Nicoleta to take the 2011 real property tax deductions when
 Bennett made the payments even after the Divorce Decree was filed
 on July 5, 2011.
 
(8) The Family Court abused its discretion by ordering
 
Bennett to maintain his life insurance policy because doing so
 was excessive, unduly burdensome, and not consistent with the
 Family Court's other financial orders, as follows:
 
(a) In the event that Bennett dies without the
 
required insurance, his estate should only be held liable for the
 actual dollar amount of any outstanding child support obligation,
 not the full insured value of $1.5 million as ordered.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(9) The Family Court abused its discretion by ordering
 
Bennett to pay Nicoleta's increased medical insurance premiums
 
and by not re-calculating its original child and alimony awards,
 as follows:
 
(a) The Family Court did not have jurisdiction to
 
grant Nicoleta's motion for increased monthly payments pending
 appeal.
 
(b) FOFs 124-125 are erroneous because the Family
 
Court did not adjust its original child support calculation to
 reflect the increased monthly premium payments.
 
(10) The Family Court erred by ordering Bennett to pay
 
child support directly to Nicoleta in the Divorce Decree where
 the decree did not include certain required findings and
 statutory language.
 
(11) The Family Court abused its discretion by ordering
 
Bennett to "maintain existing levels of [health] insurance for
 the parties' minor children" when he was also ordered to pay for
 all of their uncovered medical and dental costs. 
(12) The Family Court abused its discretion by
 
providing for equalization of unforeseen tax consequences of
 property division in the Divorce Decree, as follows:
 
(a) Neither Bennett nor his counsel signed
 
Nicoleta's proposed divorce decree, agreed to this language, or
 indicated that Bennett assumed or intended there to be no tax
 consequences of property division.
 
(b) Bennett did not agree to be responsible for
 
the tax consequences arising out of any of Nicoleta's decisions
 as to the assets she received pursuant to the orders.
 
(13) The Family Court clearly erred by awarding Bennett
 
and Nicoleta their individual bank savings and checking accounts,
 but then including those same assets as part of the Accounts on
 the Allocation Chart as part of the assets to be evenly divided
 between the parties.
 
(14) The Family Court abused its discretion by
 
including in the Divorce Decree nonstandard, overreaching 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
provisions concerning physical custody of the children that were
 
not discussed at trial or agreed to by the parties, as follows: 
(a) The Divorce Decree provides: "Neither party
 
shall engage in any inappropriate or sexually related conduct,
 talk, conversations, or activities in the presence or hearing of
 the children."
 
(b) "The orders at pages 3-7 of the Decree
 
concerning child custody and visitation contain numerous
 additional non-standard orders including language regarding the
 right of first refusal[.]"
 
(15) The Family Court abused its discretion by holding
 
Bennett financially responsible for the children's
 extracurricular activities and then including those same costs as
 part of Nicoleta's expenses when calculating her support needs.
 
(16) The Family Court abused its discretion by ordering
 
Bennett to pay interest on his post-decree payment of Nicoleta's
 $594,805 property distribution award, because:
 
(a) The Family Court did not have jurisdiction to
 
make such an order while this appeal was pending.
 
(b) There was no monetary judgment entered
 
against Bennett that would justify an order for statutory
 interest.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
[appellate courts] will not disturb the family court's
decisions on appeal unless the family court disregarded
rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial
detriment of a party litigant and its decision clearly
exceeded the bounds of reason. 
Kakinami v. Kakinami, 125 Hawai 'i 308, 311-12, 260 P.3d 1126, 
1129-30 (2011) (citations omitted). 
"Whether the parties cohabitated and had an economic
 
partnership prior to marriage are questions of fact. As such,
 
the court's finding regarding the partnership is reversible only
 if it is clearly erroneous." Aiona-Agra v. Agra, No. 30685, 2012
 
WL 593105, at *3 (App. Feb. 23, 2012) (citations omitted).
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
There is no fixed rule for determining the amount of
property to be awarded each spouse in a divorce action other
than as set forth in [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] § 580­47. We have said that the discretionary power of a trial
court in dividing and distributing property in a matrimonial
action under HRS § 580-47 will not be disturbed in the
absence of a showing of abuse. Further, the division and
distribution of property pursuant to a divorce need not be
equal but should be just and equitable.
 
Au-Hoy v. Au-Hoy, 60 Haw. 354, 357, 590 P.2d 80, 82 (1979)
 
(citations omitted).
 
The Partnership Model requires the family court, when
deciding the division and distribution of the Marital
Partnership Property of the parties part of divorce cases,
to proceed as follows: (1) find the relevant facts; start
at the Partnership Model Division and (2)(a) decide whether
or not the facts present any valid and relevant
considerations authorizing a deviation from the Partnership
Model Division and, if so, (b) itemize those considerations;
if the answer to question (2)(a) is "yes," exercise its
discretion and (3) decide whether or not there will be a
deviation; and, if the answer to question (3) is "yes,"
exercise its discretion and (4) decide the extent of the
deviation.
 
Collins v. Wassell, 133 Hawai 'i 34, 58, 323 P.3d 1216, 1240 
(2014) (citations omitted).
 
The family court's FOFs are reviewed on appeal under
the "clearly erroneous" standard. A FOF is clearly
erroneous when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to
support the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in
support of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless
left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has
 been made. "Substantial evidence" is credible evidence
 which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable
a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion.
 
On the other hand, the family court's COLs are
reviewed on appeal de novo, under the right/wrong standard.
COLs, consequently, are not binding upon an appellate court
and are freely reviewable for their correctness.

. . . . 
Moreover, the family court is given much leeway in its 
examination of the reports concerning a child's care,

custody, and welfare, and its conclusions in this regard, if
supported by the record and not clearly erroneous, must
stand on appeal.
 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted; format altered).
 
"It is well-settled that an appellate court will not
pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and
 
the weight of evidence; this is the province of the trier of

 
fact." Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
 
 
13
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
An appellate court
 
reviews rulings on interest pursuant to HRS §§ 478-36
 
and 636-167 for abuse of discretion. 
The trial court abuses its discretion if it
 
bases its ruling on an erroneous view of the law or on
a clearly erroneous assessment of the evidence. Stated
differently, an abuse of discretion occurs where the
trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason
or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice
to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.
 
Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps.' Ret. Sys. of Haw., 106 Hawai 'i 416, 
430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 (2005) (citation omitted; format altered).
 
IV. DISCUSSION
 A. The Pre-Marital Economic Partnership
 The Supreme Court of Hawai
'i has held: 
[A] premarital economic partnership is formed when,
"prior to their subsequent marriage, [two people] cohabit
and apply their financial resources as well as their
individual energies to and for the benefit of each other's
person, assets, and liabilities."
 
Collins, 133 Hawai 'i at 45, 323 P.3d at 1227 (quoting Helbush v. 
Helbush, 108 Hawai 'i 508, 515, 122 P.3d 288, 295 (App. 2005)). 
Here, the Family Court found that Bennett and Nicoleta
 
had formed a PEP in June 1992, even though Bennett was still
 
married to Mary Ann at the time. Bennett challenges FOFs 21 and
 22:
 
21. The parties formed a [PEP] in June 1992 and this
lasted until DOM. They contributed their financial
resources as well as their individual energies and efforts
to and for the benefit of each other's person, assets, and
liabilities.
 
22. Under the circumstances of this case, whether
[Bennett] was still married to [Mary Ann] at the
 
6 HRS § 478-3 (2008) provides:
 
§ 478-3 On judgment. Interest at the rate of ten per
cent a year, and no more, shall be allowed on any judgment
recovered before any court in the State, in any civil suit.
 
7
 HRS § 636-16 (1993) provides:
 
§ 636-16 Awarding interest.  In awarding interest in
civil cases, the judge is authorized to designate the
commencement date to conform with the circumstances of each
 case, provided that the earliest commencement date in cases
arising in tort, may be the date when the injury first
occurred and in cases arising by breach of contract, it may
be the date when the breach first occurred.
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
15commencement of the parties' PEP has no bearing on whether a
PEP was formed.  [Bennett] and [Mary Ann] were separated at
least four months before [Bennett] and [Nicoleta] began to
cohabit.
 
Although we agree with Bennett's contention that the
Family Court erred when it found that Bennett's on-going marriage
to Mary Ann had "no bearing" on whether a PEP was formed, under
the circumstances of this case, we nevertheless conclude that the
the Family Court did not err in finding and concluding that a PEP
was formed between Bennett and Nicoleta in June of 1992.
Bennett contends that the Family Court "erred in so far
as the PEP affected [Nicoleta's] claim to property yet to be
distributed between [Bennett] and [Mary Ann]."  In Chen v.
Hoeflinger, the husband similarly argued that he could not have
entered a PEP with the wife while he was still married to a prior
wife, because if "a premarital economic partnership can occur
even when a party is still married to someone else, it means that
a party can be subjected to two divisions of marital property at
the same time from different partners."  Chen v. Hoeflinger , 127
Hawai#i 346, 360, 279 P.3d 11, 25 (App. 2012) (internal quotation
marks).  Considering all of the circumstances of the case, not
just the husband's marital status at the time the PEP was
allegedly formed, this court rejected that argument:
Contrary to [husband's] argument, HRS § 580-47 does not
provide for the division of property for mere cohabitation;
therefore [a party] could not be subject to simultaneous
divisions of marital property from different partners under
the statute. . . . [I]t does not contravene a just and
equitable division of property to consider the parties'
premarital cohabitation, even though one of the parties
might have been legally married to someone else at that
time. 
Id. (internal citation omitted).  The court further held that
[Husband] and his prior wife entered into a Property
Settlement effective on January 26, 1993, six months after
the Family Court found that [husband] and [wife] established
a premarital economic partnership commencing in July 1992. 
There is nothing in the record to suggest, and [husband]
does not assert, that any of the property at issue in this
case was also subject to the Property Settlement with his
prior wife.
Id.FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In the instant case, the Family Court found that
 
Bennett and Mary Ann separated around February 1992 and divorced
 
in April 1993. Bennett and Nicoleta began to cohabit in June
 1992, and continued to live together until DOM. Bennett and Mary
 Ann were thus separated for at least four months before Bennett
 and Nicoleta began to cohabit. The fact that Bennett was still
 married to Mary Ann is certainly a relevant nonfinancial aspect
 of Bennett and Nicoleta's premarital relationship, and under
 different circumstances, might support a finding and conclusion
 that a PEP was not formed. However, as in Chen, the fact that
 Bennett's divorce was not finalized until April 1993 does not
 preclude a finding of a PEP with Nicoleta. 
Bennett financially supported Nicoleta for the majority 
of their cohabitation before marriage, if not the entire time, and Nicoleta worked about three days a week at Bennett's periodontal clinic from June 1992 until DOM without receiving any compensation. Nicoleta testified that they had joint bank accounts starting in 1992. The unchallenged FOFs demonstrate that, during the period of their premarital cohabitation, Bennett and Nicoleta "cohabit[ed] and appl[ied] their financial resources as well as their individual energies and efforts to and for the benefit of each other's person, assets, and liabilities." Chen, 
127 Hawai
'i at 358-59, 279 P.3d at 23-24 (citation omitted). 
Bennett suggests that the finding of a PEP allowed Nicoleta to claim property that might have been subject to a claim by Mary Ann, but cites no supporting evidence. Thus, we conclude: (1) the Family Court's finding that Bennett's marital status had "no bearing" on whether Bennett and Nicoleta formed a PEP was harmless error, perhaps best construed as an overstatement of Chen's holding that the existing marital status does not per se preclude the formation of a new PEP; and (2) the Family Court's finding of a PEP is supported by substantial evidence and, therefore, is not clearly erroneous.
8 
8
 The Family Court's use of the DOM in valuating the parties'
capital contributions, notwithstanding the Family Court's finding that they
(continued...)
 
16
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B. The IP Valuation
 
The Family Court relied on the IP valuation by
Nicoleta's expert, Tregillis, rather than that by Bennett's

 
expert, Kuba. We cannot conclude that the Family Court clearly
 erred by finding in FOFs 79 and 80 that Tregillis's opinion was
 "reasonable, trustworthy, and credible" and his "findings and
 conclusions [were] more persuasive" than Kuba's.   It is well
 
settled that "an appellate court will not pass upon issues
 dependent upon credibility of witnesses and the weight of the
 evidence; this is the province of the trial judge." Booth v.
 
Booth, 90 Hawai
'i 413, 416, 978 P.2d 851, 854 (1999) (citations, 
internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). Here, as in
 Booth, the Family Court
 
 
 
considered the evidence presented and determined that
[Kuba's] testimony was not a reliable representation of the
net equity of [Bennett's endoscope prototype] on the [DOM].
. . . Because the assessment of the weight of [Bennett's]
evidence properly lay within the sound discretion of the
family court, [we lack] a basis for setting aside the family
court's findings on appeal.
 
Id. (format altered).
 
We also reject Bennett's argument that the Family Court
 
erred in distinguishing Teller, wherein the supreme court stated:
 
Theories of valuation of [IP] must take into account
the highest and best usage in light of the most reasonable
and legal use of the [IP], that is physically possible,
appropriately supported, and financially feasible, and that
results in the highest value. 
Teller, 99 Hawai 'i at 112, 53 P.3d at 251 (citation, internal 
quotation marks, and brackets omitted). The court further held:
 
[F]air market value, although potentially difficult to
determine, is an appropriate method of valuation of [IP] so
long as the information is available to make an adequate
valuation. . . . We do not wish to foreclose the use of
 other valuation methodologies for [IP]. In this case,
values had already been set because the [IP] had been sold,
thus the fair market value was the most appropriate
technique. However, we can conceive of other situations
where different appraisal methodologies would surpass the
fair market value in accuracy. In future situations, it
will be incumbent upon the party with the burden of 

8(...continued)
formed a PEP, is not challenged on appeal.
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
establishing values to define the methodology utilized and why it
should be employed in place of the fair market value.
 
Id. at 115, 53 P.3d at 254 (format altered).
 
This case is distinguishable from Teller because
Bennett's periodontal endoscope had not been sold or
 
commercialized before DOM. 
Thus, the Family Court did not
 
clearly err in determining that fair market value was not the
 most appropriate technique; as the Family Court noted in FOF 58, 
"Tregillis used the Income Approach, which appears to be the most
 appropriate under the circumstances of this case[.]"  As the
 
Family Court explained in FOF 59:
  
 
 
In Teller, the product containing the invention was
being manufactured and marketed prior to DOM, unlike the
instant case. There, the court held that the "values had
already been set because the property had been sold, thusthe fair market value was the most appropriate technique."[Teller, 
99 Hawai' i at 115, 53 P.3d at 254.] However, the
Teller court indicated that it did "not wish to foreclose the use of other valuation methodologies for [IP] . . . .In future situations, it will be incumbent upon the partywith the burden of establishing values to define themethodology utilized and why it should be employed in placeof the fair market value." Id. 
The Family Court's adoption of Tregillis's "Income
 
Approach" valuation theory rather than Kuba's "Relief from
 
Royalty Approach," which is a hybrid of the income and market
 value methods of valuation, where the Family Court determined,
 inter alia, there was insufficient data supporting a fair market
 value method, was not clearly erroneous.
 
C. The Calculation of Spousal and Child Support
 The Family Court awarded permanent monthly alimony of
 
$4,000 and child support of $2,069 to Nicoleta. These awards
 were both based, in part, on its finding that Bennett's total
 gross monthly income before deductions for support awards and
 medical premiums was $29,402: $16,343 from disability payments,
 $9,064 interest and dividend income from bonds and Certificates
 of Deposit (Investment Income), $1,267 royalty income from his
 
IP, and $2,728 part-time income from his part-time periodontist
 
practice. For the purposes of calculating child support, the
 Family Court calculated Bennett's gross monthly income to be 
18
   
 
  The Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) has previously
 
identified several factual questions that the Family Court must
 
consider in calculating spousal support:  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REP ORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
$25,112: $29,402 monthly income - $4,000 for alimony - $290 for
 Nicoleta's medical insurance premiums.
 
1. Spousal Support
 
Bennett argues that the $4,000 per month spousal
 
support award "exceeded [Nicoleta's] reasonable needs[.]" He
 challenges, inter alia, FOFs 108 and 109, which state that,
 "[g]iven the parties['] present life style," Nicoleta's monthly
 household, transportation, and personal expenses of $6,237 are
 "reasonable."
 
HRS § 580-47(a) (Supp. 2013) provides, in relevant
 
part:
 
In addition to any other relevant factors considered,
the court, in ordering spousal support and maintenance,
shall consider the following factors:
 
(1)Financial resources of the parties;
(2) Ability of the party seeking support andmaintenance to meet his or her needs independently;
(3)Duration of the marriage;
(4) 
(5)
(6)(7) 
(8) (9)
(10)(11) 
(12)
 Other factors which measure the financial 
condition in which the parties will be left asthe result of the action under which the 
determination of maintenance is made; andStandard of living established during the
marriage;
Age of the parties;
Physical and emotional condition of the parties;Usual occupation of the parties during themarriage;Vocational skills and employability of the partyseeking support and maintenance;Needs of the parties;Custodial and child support responsibilities;Ability of the party from whom support andmaintenance is sought to meet his or her ownneeds while meeting the needs of the partyseeking support and maintenance;
(13) Probable duration of the need of the partyseeking support and maintenance. 
The first relevant circumstance is the payee's need.

What amount of money does he or she need to maintain the 
standard of living established during the marriage? 
The
 
second relevant circumstance is the payee's ability to meet
his or her need without spousal support. Taking into
account the payee's income, or what it should be, including
the net income producing capability of his or her property,
what is his or her reasonable ability to meet his or her
need without spousal support? The third relevant
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
circumstance is the payor's need. What amount of money does
he or she need to maintain the standard of living
established during the marriage? The fourth relevant
 circumstance is the payor's ability to pay spousal support.
Taking into account the payor's income, or what it should
be, including the income producing capability of his or her
property, what is his or her reasonable ability to meet his
or her need and to pay spousal support?
 
Wong v. Wong, 87 Hawai 'i 475, 485, 960 P.2d 145, 155 (App. 1998). 
In FOFs 92 to 107, the Family Court found that Nicoleta
 
had suffered from numerous ailments since the age of sixteen,
 
including a brain tumor, partial paralysis, optic neuritis,
 multiple sclerosis, a brain aneurysm, Hepatitis C, carpal tunnel
 syndrome, anemia, migraine headaches, and shoulder problems. The
 Family Court also found that as a result of these ailments,
 Nicoleta was "medically unable to pursue any gainful
 employment[.]" Finally, the Family Court found that the parties
 had been married for sixteen years, and that Bennett had been the
 sole financial support for the family for the majority of that
 time. Based on these FOFs, we cannot conclude that the Family
 Court's finding that "it would be just and equitable to award
 [Nicoleta] permanent spousal support" constituted clear error. 
Nor has Bennett met his burden on appeal to demonstrate that the
 Family Court clearly erred in determining the amount of
 Nicoleta's reasonable monthly expenses.
 
However, as Bennett argues, the Family Court included
 
the entire amount of the Investment Income ($9,064) as part of
 Bennett's income and none of it as part of Nicoleta's income,
 even though the Family Court awarded 50% of the Accounts, the
 underlying assets generating this Investment Income, to Nicoleta. 
The Family Court clearly erred in this regard and, therefore,
 utilized erroneous income assumptions for both parties when it
 determined that Nicoleta was entitled to $4,000 per month in
 spousal support.
 
Bennett also argues that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion in failing to consider that: (1) "when [Bennett] turns
 65, if not earlier, he will no longer be eligible to receive his
 
20
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disability income;" and (2) "because the duration of the parties'
 
marriage is over ten years, [Nicoleta] will be eligible for
 social security benefits when she reaches retirement age." These
 arguments are to no avail; HRS § 580-47(a) does not require the
 Family Court to predict changes in the parties' incomes that will
 not occur for over ten years. "'The amount of alimony is to be
 determined upon a realistic appraisal of the situation of the
 parties at the time of the divorce.'" Lumsden v. Lumsden, 61
 
Haw. 338, 343, 603 P.2d 564, 568 (quoting Richards v. Richards,
 44 Haw. 491, 516, 355 P.2d 188, 202 (1960)). Furthermore, HRS
 § 580-47(d) provides for future modification of spousal support
 orders upon a showing of material changes in circumstances or
 other good cause.
9 Although the Family Court properly exercised
 
its discretion at the time of the divorce to limit its
 consideration to the parties' present circumstances, this
 decision will not preclude a later determination that the
 termination of Bennett's disability payments could be considered
 a material change in circumstances, depending on the other
 circumstances existing at that future time.
 
The Family Court's findings show that it carefully
 
considered all of the factors provided in HRS § 580-47(a) when it
 determined that Nicoleta was entitled to spousal support. 
However, the Family Court abused its discretion in ordering
 Bennett to pay $4,000 per month in spousal support to Nicoleta
 based on the erroneous allocation of the Investment Income
 
9 HRS § 580-47(d) provides, in relevant part:
 
Upon the motion of either party supported by an
affidavit setting forth in particular a material
change in the physical or financial circumstances of
either party, or upon a showing of other good cause,
the moving party, in the discretion of the court, and
upon adequate notice to the other party, may be
granted a hearing. . . . The court, upon such hearing,
for good cause shown may amend or revise any order and
shall consider all proper circumstances in determining
the amount of the allowance, if any, which shall
thereafter be ordered.
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
generated by the parties' Accounts, which were divided equally
 
between them.
 
2. Child Support
 
Bennett argues that because the Family Court clearly
 
erred in its calculation of both parents' Monthly Gross Incomes,
 the resulting child support award was clearly erroneous, and thus
 the Family Court abused its discretion in awarding $2,069 per
 month in child support to Nicoleta. We agree. 
Child support calculations are based in part on the
 
respective Monthly Gross Incomes of the parents. See HRS §§ 571­
52.5 (2006), 576D-7 (2006), 576E-15 (2006), 2010 Hawai
'i Child 
10
 Support Guidelines  at § II.A.1.  Both HRS §§ 576E-15 and 571­
52.5
 provide that the family courts must use the CSG to calculate
 
support awards "except when exceptional circumstances warrant
 departure." In the instant case, the Family Court erroneously
 calculated both Bennett's and Nicoleta's incomes for the purpose
 of calculating child support in FOFs 124 and 125, resulting in an
 erroneous child support award. 
Based on its FOFs 112-116 regarding Bennett's sources
 
of income, the Family Court found in FOF 117 that Bennett's total
 gross monthly income before deductions for Nicoleta's spousal
 support and medical premiums was $29,402: $16,343 in disability
 payments, $9,064 in Investment Income, $1,267 in royalty income,
 and $2,728 in income from his part-time periodontist practice. 
Using this calculation, the Family Court then found in FOF 125
 that Bennett's Monthly Gross Income for the purposes of
 calculating child support was $25,112: $29,402 total monthly
 income before spousal support and medical premiums, minus $4,000
 for spousal support, minus $290 for Nicoleta's medical insurance
 premiums. The Family Court also found in FOF 124 that Nicoleta's 
10
 See 2010 Hawai' i Child Support Guidelines, available at 
http://www.courts.state.hi.us/self-help/courts/forms/oahu/ child_support.html
(last visited December 22, 2014). 
22
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
gross monthly income was $4,290: $4,000 spousal support plus
 
$290 medical insurance premiums. 
These income calculations were clearly erroneous. The
 
Family Court clearly erred in FOF 114 by attributing the total
 $9,064 Investment Income to Bennett when it had awarded Nicoleta
 one-half of the underlying income-generating assets. The Family
 
Court should have attributed to Nicoleta the monthly income
 
generated by her one-half share of these assets when determining
 her monthly income in FOF 124, and decreased Bennett's monthly
 income in FOF 125 accordingly. Accordingly, the Family Court
 erred when it calculated monthly child support in the amount of
 $2,069.
 
D. Waiver of Equalization Payment
 Bennett challenges FOF 146, which states that "[i]t
 
would be just and equitable to not require [Nicoleta] to pay the
 equalization payment" of $588,677. The Family Court arrived at
 FOF 146 after finding in FOF 145 that "there are sufficient valid
 and relevant considerations to deviate from marital partnership
 principles." The Family Court did not clearly err in finding
 sufficient VARCs authorizing a deviation from the Partnership
 Model of Division. Additionally, we conclude that its deviation
 from partnership principles by waiving Nicoleta's $588,677
 equalization payment did not constitute an abuse of discretion.
 
Noting that the Family Court determined that he was
 
entitled to a Category 1 and 3 capital contribution credit of
 $505,766, Bennett argues that "[t]he amount of deviation employed
 by the [Family Court] effectively denied [Bennett] repayment of
 100% of his Category 1 and 3 capital contribution credits
 contrary to controlling case law." As the supreme court has
 held:
 
Under the Partnership Model, absent [VARCs], each
partner is generally awarded his or her capital
contribution, while the appreciation is split fifty-fifty.
VARCs permit the family court to equitably deviate from the
Partnership Model in dividing the parties' Marital
Partnership Property. 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kakinami, 127 Hawai 'i at 130 n.4, 276 P.3d at 699 n.4 (emphasis 
added; internal citation omitted). Thus, while general
 
partnership principles dictate that, "assuming all [VARCs] are
 equal," Bennett would receive the entire value of his Category 1
 and 3 capital contribution,
11
 equitable deviations are permitted
if sufficient VARCs exist.
 
In determining whether one or more [VARCs] authorize
the family court to deviate from the Partnership Model, the
family "court shall take into consideration: the respective
merits of the parties, the relative abilities of the
parties, the condition in which each party will be left by
the divorce, the burdens imposed upon either party for the
benefit of the children of the parties, and all other
circumstances of the case." HRS § 580–47(a) (1993). Other
 than relative circumstances of the parties when they entered
into the marital partnership and possible exceptional
situations, the above quoted part of HRS § 580–47(a)
requires the family court to focus on the present and the
future, not the past.
 
Jackson v. Jackson, 84 Hawai 'i 319, 333, 933 P.2d 1353, 1367 
(App. 1997) (quoting Epp v. Epp, 80 Hawai 'i 79, 89, 905 P.2d 54, 
64 (App. 1995)).
 
Here, the Family Court found that Bennett's Category 1
 
and 3 contribution credits totaled $505,766. According to the
 
Allocation Chart, Bennett was entitled to $2,027,403, and the
 total value of the marital assets allocated to him was only
 $1,438,726. Nicoleta was entitled to only $1,537,037, but her
 allocation of marital assets was $2,125,714. Thus, under marital
 partnership principles, absent VARCs, Bennett was entitled to an
 equalization payment of $588,677 from Nicoleta. However, the
 Family Court also found in FOF 145 that "there are sufficient
 [VARCs] to deviate from marital partnership principles," based in
 part on FOFs 143 and 144:
 
11
 See also Baker v. Bielski, 124 Hawai' i 455, 466-67, 248 P.3d 221,
232-33 (App. 2011) ("The NMVs in Category 1 represent the parties' capital
contributions to the marital partnership. Under general partnership law, eachpartner is entitled to be repaid his contributions to the partnershipproperty, whether made by way of capital or advances. Category 1 . . . NMVs
are the partner's contributions to the Marital Partnership Property that,assuming all valid and relevant considerations are equal, are repaid to thecontributing spouse[.]") (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
143. [Nicoleta] does not have the ability to work. Her
 
future employment following her divorce is nil. Other than
 
investing any award following her divorce, she will not be
able to earn other types of income following her divorce.
Although receiving spousal support for her life and child
support, she will continue to have chronic medical issues
and may well face increased medical expenses, including
consultations out of state.
 
144. [Bennett] will continue to be self-sufficient. He is
 
a skilled periodontist, who continues to work part-time
despite his partial disability. He is also an inventor and
 an excellent investor. In addition, his tax free monthly
disability payments will increase at least 5% each year
according to the Cost of Living Rider in his Disability
Income insurance policy.
 
The ICA analyzed similar findings in Schiller v.
 
Schiller , 120 Hawai 'i 283, 205 P.3d 548 (App. 2009). In that 
case, the husband argued that "the family court should have
 
'ordered [wife] to make an equalization payment of $589,437.11,
 which would leave each party with equal assets of
 $327,573.61[.]'" Id. at 308, 205 P.3d at 573 (some brackets in
 
original and some added). The family court in Schiller found
 that the wife
 
ha[d] significant ongoing health problems, which include:
borderline osteoporosis, severe osteoarthritis in her
fingers with resulting pain, pain to her knee and shoulder
areas, no vision in her left eye (she is fitted with an
artificial eye), tearing in her right retina resulting in
possible sudden blindness, and ha[d] been diagnosed and
treated for squamous cell skin cancer. In addition, [wife]
ha[d] been undergoing medical tests for gastrointestinal
problems.
 
Id. at 295-96, 205 P.3d at 560-61. The family court also found
that wife's "skin cancer significantly reduced her job
 
opportunities in the real estate field due to an inability to be
 in the sun[,]" that her "age, lack of computer program knowledge,
 and the aforementioned health problems drastically limit[ed] her
 ability to work[,]" and that she "[did] not have a business
 network or resources in California in the field of real estate
 field [sic] and [did] not have any viable source of income other
 than her stock portfolio." Id. at 296, 205 P.3d at 561
 
(correction in original). The family court determined that these
 were VARCs authorizing a deviation from the Partnership Model,
 
 
25
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and did not order the wife to make an equalization payment,
 
essentially leaving the husband "with a negative net worth." Id.
 
at 308, 205 P.3d at 573.
 
The ICA held that the family court "did not err in
 
finding that [husband's] prospects for work were greater than
 [wife's]." Id. at 298, 205 P.3d at 563. The ICA also held that
 
the family court did not err in finding that this and other VARCs
 authorized a deviation from the Partnership Model of Division,
 and that "the family court's extensive FOFs clearly show that in
 dividing and distributing [wife] and [husband's] assets and
 debts, the court took into consideration the conditions each
 would be in after their divorce." Id. at 308, 205 P.3d at 573.
 
Similarly, in the instant case, the Family Court's FOFs
 
regarding Nicoleta's health problems and minimal employment
 prospects were not clearly erroneous, nor were they challenged on
 appeal. The Family Court's finding of sufficient VARCs is not
 clearly erroneous, and thus the Family Court did not abuse its
 discretion when it deviated from the marital partnership
 principles and waived Nicoleta's $588,677 equalization payment.
 
E. The Temporary Support Orders
 We reject Bennett's argument that the Family Court
 
abused its discretion when it "erroneously extended [Nicoleta's]
 inflated temporary support orders for 19 months" between DOCOEPOT
 on November 27, 2009 and the final issuance of the Divorce Decree
 on July 5, 2011.
12
 
Under HRS § 580-9 (2006), the court may award temporary
 
spousal support "pending the complaint as the court may deem fair
 and reasonable." Under HRS § 580-11 (2006), it may award 
12
 The February 5, 2009 order for temporary relief required Bennett
to pay a total of $7,470 per month to Nicoleta in temporary support ($1,970
for child support and $5,500 for spousal support). Under the Order and
 Divorce Decree, Bennett's total monthly permanent spousal and child support
was decreased to $4,000 in spousal support and $2,069 for child support, thus
totaling $6,069 per month.
 
26
   
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
pendente lite child support "[d]uring the pendency of any action
 
for divorce."
 
[W]hen the trial judge expressly reserves for future
consideration the additional question of the amount of the
permanent alimony . . . the order for temporary alimony may
properly be continued in effect until the entry of final
decree fixing the amount of the permanent alimony.
 
Ando v. Ando, 30 Haw. 80, 81 (Haw. 1927). Thus, the Family Court
 
did not abuse its discretion by extending Nicoleta's temporary
 support award during the pendency of the case.
 
Furthermore,
 
[a]n award of temporary support can be modified, for
it is a provision for reasonable support of a person. As
 
such, it is subject to adjustments prospectively when there
is a showing of a change in circumstances, as the financial
situations of the respective parties. However, indirect
recovery in a final decision through recoupment is improper
and inconsistent with the purposes of the award.
 
Farias v. Farias, 58 Haw. 227, 233, 566 P.2d 1104, 1108-09 (1977)
 
(citations omitted). Bennett does not argue, nor does it appear
 from the record, that Bennett sought a modification of the
 temporary support in the Family Court, pending the entry of the
 Divorce Decree. Absent such relief, Bennett was not entitled to
 any restitution or recoupment in the Divorce Decree.
 
F. The 2008 Honda
 Bennett does not dispute that he agreed to the pay off
 
of Nicoleta's car loan with "existing marital assets prior to any
 division thereof." However, citing to FOF 141, Bennett argues
 that the Family Court did not properly account for the payoff of
 the car in its division of the parties' marital assets, when it
 valued the Honda at $2,488 on the Allocation Chart in FOF 141,
 rather than $24,300. We agree.
 
At trial, Nicoleta testified that she had identified
 
the current market value of the 2008 Honda as $24,330. The
 $2,488 figure in FOF 141 is presumably the "equity" in the Honda
 before the loan was paid, as it can be calculated by subtracting
 the $21,842 in outstanding payments from its current value of
 $24,330 ($24,330 - $21,842 = $2,488). Nicoleta does not dispute
 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the loan was to be paid using pre-division marital assets,
 
as Bennett agreed and the Family Court ordered. Thus, the Family
 Court clearly erred when it failed to account for the full
 $24,330 value of the Honda awarded to Nicoleta; in addition, we
 reject Nicoleta's argument that the difference is so small that
 it is "irrelevant." 
G. 2011 Property Tax Deductions
 Bennett argues that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion when, in the Divorce Decree, it both ordered that
 Nicoleta "shall be entitled to the deduction for the property tax
 payments made in tax year 2011[,]" and purportedly ordered
 Bennett to make the property tax payments, even beyond the
 effective date of the Divorce Decree (until the transfer of title
 of the property to Nicoleta). First, any post-decree payment
 could have been avoided by Bennett's prompt transfer of the home
 to Nicoleta, as she was made solely responsible for all post-
transfer property taxes. In addition, Bennett does not contend
 or offer any evidence that he made any post-decree property tax
 payment. Finally, as noted by Nicoleta, for 2011, Bennett was
 allowed to claim both children as dependents and Nicoleta was
 allowed the tax deduction for the 2011 property taxes. We
 conclude that the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in
 this allocation of tax payments and deductions.
 
H. Life Insurance
 
Bennett argues that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion when it ordered him to maintain a life insurance
 policy in the amount of $1.5 million, with Nicoleta as
 beneficiary, so long as he has an obligation to pay child support
 
or alimony. In particular, Bennett challenges FOF 138:
 
It would be just and equitable that [Bennett] maintain
[his $1.5 million] life insurance policy in effect with
[Nicoleta] being the exclusive primary beneficiary for so
long as he has an obligation to pay child support or
alimony. It would also be just and equitable that in the
event [Bennett] dies without the required insurance,
[Bennett's] estate shall be liable to [Nicoleta] to the
extent that the required life insurance was not maintained. 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bennett notes that the purpose of the life insurance
 
order is to secure his support obligations should he die, but
 
argues that, pursuant to an unappealed term of the Divorce
 Decree, his spousal support obligation to Nicoleta terminates
 upon his death. He further notes that his children are in their
 teens, presumably referencing that his support obligations end at
 the latest upon their reaching age twenty-three (and possibly
 earlier), and that $1.5 million is far in excess of an amount
 reasonably necessary to secure his obligation for their support. 
He also argues, in the event of his death without such insurance,
 his estate should only be liable for the actual amount of any
 outstanding support obligation, not the full amount of $1.5
 million. Nicoleta acknowledges that the life insurance order was
 intended to secure Bennett's support obligations, but argues that
 the Family Court did not abuse its discretion in ordering it.
 
HRS § 580-13 (2006) provides:
 
§ 580-13 Security and enforcement of maintenance and
alimony.  Whenever the court makes an order or decree
 
requiring a spouse to provide for the care, maintenance, and
education of children, or for an allowance to the other
spouse, the court may require the person subject to such
order or decree to give reasonable security for such
maintenance and allowance. Upon neglect or refusal to give
the security, or upon default of the person subject to such
order or decree and such person's surety to provide the
maintenance and allowance, the court may sequester such
person's personal estate, and the rents and profits of such
person's real estate, and may appoint a receiver thereof and
cause such person's personal estate and the rents and
profits of such person's real estate to be applied towards
such maintenance and allowance, as to the court shall from
time to time seem just and reasonable. 
Thus, as acknowledged by Bennett and Nicoleta, Hawai 'i 
law grants the Family Court the discretion "to give reasonable 
security" for child support and alimony, which we construe to permit a requirement of life insurance reasonably calculated to secure those obligations. 
However, as the Divorce Decree provides that Bennett's
 
alimony obligation terminates, at the latest, upon his death, the
 Family Court abused its discretion in ordering life insurance
 
29
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
calculated to secure any alimony obligation that has not accrued
 
on or before the date of his death. Similarly, it was an abuse
 of discretion to deem his estate liable, on account of spousal
 support, for an amount that would appear to far exceed spousal
 support payments reasonably likely to be accrued at the time of
 his death. If, for example, Bennett owed one month of spousal
 support ($4,000, plus Nicoleta's medical insurance premium) at
 the time of his death, a $1.5 million payment would be patently
 excessive.
 
In addition, although the portion of the life insurance 
obligation ordered to secure the payment of Bennett's support obligation to his children was not separately identified, it appears that $1.5 million far exceeds the amount necessary "to give reasonable security" for the remaining amount of the two children's period of dependency including, inter alia, undergraduate tuition at the University of Hawai
'i or an 
equivalent, in-state, resident institution, as provided in the Divorce Decree.
13 Accordingly, we vacate the life insurance 
order. On remand, the Family Court may consider insurance or other means that would provide reasonable security for the support obligations ordered by the Family Court. 
I. Post-Decree Order re Nicoleta's Medical Insurance
 Bennett argues that the Family Court erred, in various
 
ways, when it granted Nicoleta's post-decree motion to enforce
 the Divorce Decree with respect to Nicoleta's medical insurance
 premiums. The Divorce Decree provides, inter alia: "Husband
 shall pay Wife's healthcare premiums for the Kaiser HIPPA
 Platinum Plan ($290 per month at DOCEPOT), or reasonable
 equivalent if it is not available, and any increases in premiums, 
13
 As both children are currently at or near the age of majority,
upon remand, the Family Court may also consider whether Nicoleta should remain
as the exclusive primary beneficiary of any required life insurance or other
security.
 
30
 Kakinami,FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
if any, in the ensuing years." Bennett does not challenge this
 
provision in his appeal from the Divorce Decree. 
In the Post-Decree Enforcement Order, the Family Court
 
found, inter alia:
 
16. The Kaiser HIPPA Platinum Plan is no longer available
or offered by Kaiser Permanente.
17. The Kaiser HIPPA Plan 20/RX (as opposed to the Kaiser
HIPPA Plan 30/RX) is a reasonable equivalent to the Kaiser
HIPPA Platinum Plan. It costs [Nicoleta] $429.13/month for
the Kaiser HIPPA Plan 20/RX.
18. [Bennett] has paid [Nicoleta] $290/month for her
healthcare premiums.
19. [Bennett] shall pay [Nicoleta] the sum of $695.65
($139.13/month for 5 months, July through November, 2011),
the difference in what [Bennett] paid [Nicoleta] for
healthcare insurance and the actual cost to [Nicoleta] of
the HIPPA Plan 20/RX for these 5 months.
20. [Bennett] shall pay [Nicoleta's] healthcare premiums
for the Kaiser HIPPA Plan 20/RX, in the present amount of
$429.13/month, pursuant to paragraph 4 of the Decree.
 
First, Bennett argues that the Family Court lacked
 
jurisdiction to enter the Post-Decree Enforcement Order. As the
 
supreme court has held:
 
[O]nce a party files a notice of appeal, the lower
court is generally divested of jurisdiction to proceed
further on the matter. . . . [H]owever, the family court
retains jurisdiction to enforce its own judgments and
decrees. Accordingly, the issue presented before this court
is whether the post-decree order enforced the family court's
prior order, which would be permissible, or modified the
family court's prior order, which would be impermissible.
 
 127 Hawai 'i at 143, 276 P.3d at 712 (citations 
omitted). Here, the Family Court had jurisdiction because
 
Nicoleta's post-decree motion sought enforcement rather than
 modification of the Divorce Decree. The Family Court had
 previously awarded Nicoleta her medical insurance premiums or a
 "reasonable equivalent." The Family Court did not err in
 concluding that the Post-Decree Enforcement Order "merely
 enforced an obligation that had been previously set forth in the
 [Divorce Decree]," even though the amount Bennett was ordered to
 pay was different than the amount referenced in the Divorce
 Decree. See Kakinami, 127 Hawai
'i at 144, 276 P.3d at 713. The 
Divorce Decree specifically provided for the possibility that the
 
31
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
HRS § 576D-10(e) (Supp. 2013) provides, in relevant part:14
(e)  The court may approve an alternative arrangement
for the direct payment of child support where []:
(1)The obligor or custodial parent demonstrates and
the court finds that there is good cause not to
(continued...)
32actual healthcare premiums would vary from the $290 amount that
was referenced.
Next, Bennett argues that Kaiser HIPPA Plan 20/RX is
not the "reasonable equivalent" of the $290 Kaiser Platinum Plan. 
Bennett does not, however, challenge the Family Court's finding
that the Kaiser Platinum Plan is no longer available.  Nor does
Bennett point to evidence of an alternative that he considered to
be a "reasonable equivalent."  On the record of this case, we
conclude that the Family Court did not clearly err in finding
that the Kaiser HIPPA Plan 20/RX is the "reasonable equivalent"
of the Kaiser Platinum Plan and, therefore, the Family Court did
not err in granting Nicoleta's post-decree relief on this issue.
Finally, Bennett argues that the Family Court erred
when it failed to adjust its original child support calculations
in light of the order that required him to pay a higher health
insurance premium for Nicoleta.  Bennett did not file a motion
seeking to amend the child support award and cites no authority
requiring the court to, sua sponte,  reduce child support on
account of the Post-Decree Enforcement Order.  This argument is
without merit.  
J.Direct Child Support Order
The Divorce Decree provides that Bennett must directly
pay Nicoleta $2,069 per month for child support rather than pay
through the Child Support Enforcement Agency ( CSEA).  Although
the parties initially agreed to direct payment, the Divorce
Decree failed to comply with HRS § 576D-10(f) (Supp. 2013)
because it did not "provide that either parent may void the
arrangement at any time and apply for services from the [CSEA] to
act as agent to receive payments from the obligor parent."14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bennett "had the right to void the direct payment arrangement at 
any time and apply to CSEA to collect and disburse payments." Doe v. Doe, 118 Hawai
'i 268, 280, 188 P.3d 782, 794 (App. 2008). 
Thus, the Family Court erred by ordering direct child support payment to Nicoleta without providing that either party may void the arrangement. 
K.	 The Children's Medical Insurance Premiums
 Bennett argues that the Family Court abused its 
discretion when it ordered him to "maintain existing levels" of healthcare insurance for the children, in light of the fact that he is solely responsible for the payment of all of the children's uncovered medical and dental insurance expenses. The Family Court has "wide discretion in making its decisions," which will not be disturbed unless there is a "manifest abuse of discretion." Fisher, 111 Hawai
'i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360 
(citation omitted). Ordering Bennett to maintain the children's existing level of healthcare coverage was not a manifest abuse of discretion. 
L.	 Tax Consequences of Property Division
 Bennett argues that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion when it included the italicized part of the following
 provision in the Divorce Decree:
 
Tax Consequences of Property Division. The parties assume
 
and intend that the division of property incident to their
 
divorce shall not itself result in any tax consequences,
that each party will take each property interest awarded to
him or her at its pre-divorce basis, and that any tax which
must be paid upon the subsequent sale or exchange or any
such interest shall be paid by the party who received and
 
14(...continued)
 
require immediate withholding; or

(2)	 A written agreement is reached between the
obligor and the custodial parent and signed by
both parties[.]
 
HRS § 576D-10(f) further provides, in relevant part:
 
(f) Any alternative arrangement for direct payment
shall provide that either parent may void the arrangement at
any time and apply for services from the agency to act as
agent to receive payments from the obligor parent.
 
33
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
subsequently sold or exchanged such interest. If the actual
 
tax consequences of the division of property are different
 
than assumed, a party who received an unintended benefit
 shall make payment to the other party as and for property
 division in an amount necessary to, inasmuch as possible,
 place the parties in the same relative position they would
 have enjoyed had there been no unexpected tax consequence.
 To the extent that a party possesses information necessary
to establish the basis in property awarded to the other
party, he or she shall provide that information to the other
party.
 
(Italics added.)
 
Bennett argues that he never "assumed and intended" or 
otherwise agreed to any particular tax consequences and, in fact, 
there clearly would be tax consequences associated with the "cashing in" and dividing of investment assets. This language appeared for the first time in Nicoleta's submitted form of the Divorce Decree and she points to nothing in the record supporting such an assumption, intention, or agreement. Indeed, absent an agreement to such a term, we find no statutory or legal grounds for its inclusion and Nicoleta cites none. Cf. Bienvenue v. 
Bienvenue, 102 Hawai
'i 59, 69-70, 72 P.3d 531, 541-42 (App. 
2003); Nakata v. Nakata, 3 Haw. App. 51, 56, 641 P.2d 333, 336 (1982) (if the family court decides to change an agreed-upon term before incorporating it into the decree, both parties must consent or the issue must be treated as contested).
15 Moreover, 
this provision is inherently vague and ambiguous, providing no baseline of "assumed" tax consequences or benchmark for measuring whether, when, and to what extent an adjustment should be made, rendering it problematically ripe for disputes. For these reasons, we conclude the Family Court plainly erred when it 
15
 Moreover, this provision could be construed as applying to tax
consequences arising long after the parties' divorce and property division.
The inclusion of such a provision undermines the overarching goal of achieving
a final property division, potentially exposing the parties to claims years
after the divorce that they must, in effect, make adjustments to their
property division for taxes owed by their ex-spouse. In addition, a party who
is awarded a particular asset has sole control over a later disposition of
that asset, and thus the resulting taxable gains or losses, which are also
impacted by that party's overall tax situation, planning, decisions, and
intervening changes in tax laws. 
34
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
included the italicized language, which should be stricken upon
 
the remand of this case.
 
M.	 Checking and Savings Accounts
 Bennett contends, and Nicoleta apparently
 
16
 acknowledges,  that the Family Court improperly failed to account
for the parties' respective checking and savings accounts as part
 of the final property equalization calculation. Although the
 Family Court did not abuse its discretion when it ordered that
 the parties would each keep their own separate accounts, the
 value of these accounts must nevertheless be taken into
 consideration and the Family Court erred in failing to include
 these accounts in its final calculations.
 
N.
	 Child Custody Issues
 Bennett objects to certain language in the Divorce 
Decree provision concerning the physical custody of the children. 
First, Bennett objects to the following: "Neither party shall 
engage in any inappropriate or sexually related conduct, talk, conversations, or activities in the presence or hearing of the children." He argues that it impinges on his right to have entirely appropriate conversations with his teenage children related to sexual activity, health, and birth control, for example. We agree. Absent extraordinary and/or otherwise compelling circumstances, the Family Court is not authorized to encroach upon, interfere with, and/or micro-manage parental decision-making. See Bencomo v. Bencomo, 112 Hawai
'i 511, 516­
17, 147 P.3d 67, 72-73 (App. 2006); see also, e.g., State, Child Support Enforcement Agency v. Roe, No. 28595, 2008 WL 46484353 (App. Oct. 24, 2008); cf. Carr v. Buenger, No. CAAP-11-0000545, 2014 WL 2440185 (App. May 30, 2014) (extraordinarily high level of conflict between parents, notwithstanding extensive services 
16
 Nicoleta essentially argues that any error is irrelevant because
the Family Court waived her equalization payment.
 
35
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and interim measures, supported the establishment of a detailed
 
parenting plan).
 
Bennett also objects to "orders at pages 3-7 of the
 
Decree" that concern "child custody and visitation" and "contain
 numerous additional non-standard orders including language
 regarding the right of first refusal." In light of the fact that
 the children have reached or will soon reach the age of majority,
 and thus may decide for themselves whether they want to spend a
 particular holiday with either or neither of their parents, for
 example, we need not address the Family Court's order with
 respect to holiday visitations and other visitation and
 parenting-related provisions.
 
O. Children's Extracurricular Activities
 Bennett argues that the Family Court erred when it
 
ordered that he be solely responsible for "the costs incurred in
 connection with the children's extracurricular activities" 
because this was neither agreed to or litigated and because
 Nicoleta's claim of responsibility for some of these expenses was
 part of the court's consideration of spousal and child support. 
In response, Nicoleta simply argues that Bennett agreed to this
 arrangement in the Pre-Trial Stipulation. However, it is clear
 from the language of the Pre-Trial Stipulation that it was
 intended to be a temporary agreement to minimize the impact of
 potential disputes on the children, pending resolution of the
 divorce. It is unclear what "extracurricular activities" are
 intended to be included in this provision and there is no
 explanation as to why such activities are not adequately
 supported by child support or within the parents' discretion to
 fund out of their other resources. Under these circumstances, we
 conclude that the Family Court abused its discretion in requiring
 such additional support payments.
 
P. Post-Judgment Interest
 Bennett argues that the Family Court erred when, in the
 
Post-Decree Enforcement Order, it ordered Bennett to pay Nicoleta
 
36
  
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statutory interest of 10% per annum on the sum of $594,805 from
 
July 5, 2011, the date the Divorce Decree was entered, through
 October 5, 2011, the date of payment. 
HRS § 478-3 provides: "Interest at the rate of ten per
 
cent a year, and no more, shall be allowed on any judgment
 recovered before any court in the State, in any civil suit."
 
Post-judgment interest runs from the date the judgment was
 
entered. See Richards v. Kailua Auto Mach. Serv., 10 Haw. App.
 
613, 624, 880 P.2d 1233, 1239 (1994) ("While no award for post
 judgment interest was made, interest from the date judgment was
 entered in the district court should be granted"). 
Bennett's argument that no judgment was entered is 
without merit, because the Divorce Decree, which awarded Nicoleta one-half of the parties' Accounts Assets, was a judgment 
entitling her to payment on account of the judgment. See, e.g., 
Doe v. Doe, 99 Hawai
'i 1, 7, 52 P.3d 255, 261 (2002) (holding 
that "the Divorce Decree is not a mere 'agreement;' the Decree 
constitutes a final judgment of the family court.") (emphasis in original); Pratt v. Pratt, 104 Hawai
'i 37, 40, 84 P.3d 545, 548 
(App. 2004) ("The Divorce Decree constituted a final judgment."); 27A C.J.S. Divorce § 448 (2014) ("A divorce decree is a judgment, and is not distinguishable from judgments rendered in actions other than divorce actions, in the absence of statutory provisions creating such a distinction.") (footnote omitted); see also Doe v. Doe, 97 Hawai
'i 160, 162-63, 34 P.3d 1059, 1061-62 
(App. 2001) (ex-wife entitled to post-judgment interest on child support arrearage pursuant to HRS § 478-3).
17 
17
 On remand, however, the amount of interest due may be recalculated
when the Family Court adjusts its final calculations to properly account for
the parties' respective checking and savings accounts, as discussed in Section
IV.M. above.
 
37
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q. The Co-Habitation Clause
 
Nicoleta argues that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion when it ordered that her permanent alimony and medical
 
insurance payments shall terminate upon her cohabitation.18
   
While HRS § 580-51 (2006) provides for the automatic
 
termination of spousal support upon the supported party's
 
19 20
 
 remarriage,  this provision does not apply to cohabitation.
However, this court has recognized that a family court has the
 authority to include such a provision in a Divorce Decree when it
 held that "the [spousal support] recipient's cohabitation is not
 relevant to the payor's duty to pay spousal support 
unless the
 
decree specifically makes it relevant by authorizing or requiring
 a reduction or termination of spousal support upon the
 recipient's cohabitation." Amii v. Amii, 5 Haw. App. 385, 392,
 
695 P.2d 1194, 1199 (1985) (emphasis added). 
18 FOF 123 provides: "It would be just and equitable that spousal
support shall terminate upon the death of either party or upon the remarriage
or cohabitation of [Nicoleta]." On June 2, 2011, the Family Court denied her
request to remove cohabitation as a basis for termination of her alimony.
The Divorce Decree similarly provides that alimony shall terminate upon
Bennett's or Nicoleta's death, Nicoleta's remarriage, or her cohabitation. 
19 HRS § 580-51(a) provides:
 
Upon the remarriage of a party in whose favor a final
decree or order for support and maintenance has been made,
all rights to receive and all duties to make payments for
support and maintenance shall automatically terminate for
all payments due after the date of the remarriage, unless
the final decree or order, or an agreement of the parties
approved by the final decree or order, provides specifically
for the payments to continue after such remarriage.
 
20
 In contrast, California statutes specifically mandate such a
presumption:
 
Except as otherwise agreed to by the parties in
writing, there is a rebuttable presumption, affecting
the burden of proof, of decreased need for spousal
support if the supported party is cohabiting with a
nonmarital partner.
 
Cal. Fam. Code § 4323(a)(1) (West 2014), amended by 2014 Cal. Legis. Serv. Ch.
82 (S.B. 1306) (West).
 
38
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Nicoleta argues that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion in this regard because Amii held that cohabitation was
 
not relevant in considering a request to modify the payor's duty
 to pay spousal support. Nicoleta acknowledges the Amii court's
 reservation in the case where a decree specifically authorized a
 reduction or termination upon cohabitation, but argues that it
 should be disregarded. Nicoleta also correctly notes
 distinctions between a lawful marriage and co-habitation. 
However, her argument that a future court might mistake an
 overnight guest for a cohabitation partner is without factual or
 legal support. Moreover, Nicoleta fails to acknowledge that HRS
 § 580-47(a) grants the Family Court wide discretion in
 authorizing spousal support for a limited period of time or an
 indefinite period of time. In addition, Nicoleta argues that the
 burden should be placed on Bennett, at the time of her co­habitation, to prove that co-habitation constitutes a material
 change in relevant circumstances. However, as evidenced by cases
 cited by both parties, absent a provision in the Divorce Decree
 authorizing reduction or termination of support, cohabitation
 will not be considered a material change in circumstances.
 
Nicoleta suffers from a variety of health conditions
 
that limit her ability to work, which informed the Family Court's
 award of spousal support. However, Nicoleta was also awarded the
 unmortaged family home and a considerable amount of investment
 assets that will, presumably, continue to produce income. 
Cohabitation, while not illegal or immoral or necessarily
 
21
 providing the legal consequences of marriage itself,  generally
provides an economic benefit to the cohabitators, as statutorily
 
21
 Although, as held to Nicoleta's benefit in this case, as well as
others, cohabitation, when combined with a sharing of financial resources and
individual energies and efforts, may provide evidence of a pre-marital
economic partnership.
 
39
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
recognized in California and other states.22 In Amii, the ICA
 
recognized that cohabitation may warrant a reduction or
 
termination of alimony, if it provides an economic benefit, when
 the court stated that "[t]he effect of a cohabitation situation
 on the recipient's continuing need for spousal support is
 relevant" to the payor's duty to pay spousal support. Amii, 5
 
Haw. App. at 392-93, 695 P.2d at 1199. Other states have adopted
 this economic benefit analysis as well. See, e.g., Gayet v.
 
Gayet, 456 A.2d 102, 104 (N.J. 1983) (adopting a flexible
 approach that examines the economic realities rather than the
 status of cohabitation); Dibartolomeo v. Dibartolomeo, 679 So.2d
 72, 73 (Fla. App. 1996) ("To justify a post judgment
 modification, the focus should not be so much on the cohabitation
 as on how the living situation has impacted the former spouse's
 financial condition and need for continued support."); Stevens v.
 Stevens, 492 N.E.2d 131, 136 (Ohio 1986) (cohabitation is
 properly considered only "insofar as it is relevant to the issues
 of continued need for such alimony and the amount") (citation and
 internal quotation marks omitted).
 
Bennett argues that the Family Court's order simply
 
follows the procedure set out in a number of other states, where
 it is the payor's burden to make a prima facie showing of
 cohabitation and then the burden is shifted to the payee to show
 no economic benefit. However, the Divorce Decree provides for no
 such procedure, it merely terminates both spousal support and
 healthcare coverage, in their entirety, upon Nicoleta's
 cohabitation. Indeed, it would appear to preclude consideration
 of Nicoleta's continued need for support, notwithstanding
 cohabitation, in conjunction with a motion by Nicoleta filed
 
22
 See, e.g., Cal. Fam. Code § 4323(a)(1); Conn. Gen. Stat. Ann.
 
§ 46b-86(b) (West 2013); Fla. Stat. Ann. § 61.14(b) (West 2010); N.J. Stat.
Ann. § 2A:34-23(n) (West 2014). Other state statutes, unlike HRS § 580-51(a),
specifically provide for termination of alimony upon cohabitation. See, e.g.,
Ala. Code 1975 § 30-2-55 (West 1981); N.C. Gen. Stat. Ann. § 50-16.9(b) (West
1995); 23 Pa. Cons. Stat. Ann. § 3706 (West 1990); Utah Code Ann. § 30-3-5(10)
(West 2013). 
40
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
under HRS § 580-47(d). Thus, absent a modification to the
 
support termination provision, which might, for example, allow
 Nicoleta to demonstrate her continued need for the full or merely
 a reduced amount of spousal support, we conclude that the Family
 Court abused its discretion in ordering the complete termination
 of spousal support and healthcare insurance upon Nicoleta's
 cohabitation. Upon remand, the Family Court may consider whether
 a more flexible termination or reduction provision related to
 cohabitation might be warranted under the circumstances of this
 case.
 
R. The Child Support Calculations
 Nicoleta argues that the Family Court erred by failing
 
to: (1) adjust Bennett's tax-free disability payments before
 inserting them as part of Bennett's Monthly Gross Income in the
 CSG worksheet; and (2) order automatic annual increases in child
 support to reflect the annual minimum five percent increases in
 Bennett's disability payments. 
With respect to Nicoleta's first point, we first 
consider HRS § 576D-7(a), which provides for the establishment of child support guidelines, the CSG, that may consider, among other things, "[a]ll earnings, income, and resources of both parents; provided that earnings be the net amount, after deductions for taxes, and social security." HRS § 576D-7(a)(1). HRS § 576D­7(b) requires statewide application of the CSG, simplification of calculations to the extent practicable, and the consideration of the guidelines by the family court judges in the establishment of each child support order. Generally, this "net amount" of income referenced in HRS § 576D-7(a)(1), or Monthly Net Income, is determined by inserting a parent's Monthly Gross Income into the CSG Worksheet, which then automatically makes an adjustment for a presumed rate of taxes. See 2010 Hawai
'i Child Support 
Guidelines and Worksheets. Thusly, the CSG-Worksheet-formulated adjustments satisfy the goals of making the calculations more easily reproducible (thus increasing uniformity of application), 
41
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
more user-friendly for both the parties and the courts, and
 
generally accurate, but they do not attempt to account for each
 of the myriad of ways the calculated Monthly Net Income might
 differ from a person's actual (monthly) net taxable income due to
 the countless permutations of exceptions, deductions, credits,
 and other factors that might affect a person's actual net taxable
 income under state and federal tax laws. 
Here, it is undisputed that a substantial portion of
 
Bennett's Monthly Gross Income consists of a monthly disability
 payment that is not subject to FICA, state income taxation, or
 federal income taxation. Thus, Nicoleta argues, the Family Court
 should have increased the gross amount of Bennett's income to
 adjust for this fact. At first blush, this tax-free income makes
 the use of the CSG Worksheet appear to be problematic, because
 the Worksheet formulaically reduces Monthly Gross Income by
 certain percentages according to income brackets to arrive at a
 CSG Monthly Net Income, rendering the calculated amount of
 Bennett's Monthly Net Income significantly lower than the tax-
free income that, in fact, remains at Bennett's disposal. 
However, there is no basis in the CSG for artificially increasing
 Bennett's Monthly Gross Income, and doing so would make the
 resulting "adjusted" Monthly Gross Income factually inaccurate. 
The only relief requested by Nicoleta was to adjust Bennett's
 Monthly Gross Income upward, which the Family Court ultimately
 declined to do. The Family Court did not err in failing to grant
 this relief.
 
We, nevertheless, examine this issue further, both to 
further explain our reasoning and because the child support order remains subject to the jurisdiction of the Family Court and subject to modification pursuant HRS § 576D-7(d) and (e). As noted, the CSG are implemented in most cases through the use of an automated Worksheet, but the CSG also provide step-by-step instructions to complete the Worksheet manually. See 2010 
Hawai
'i Child Support Guidelines, § II.A. For a parent with 
42
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
income up to $13,000, a Table of Incomes is provided to convert
 
Monthly Gross Income to Monthly Net Income. See id., Appendix D. 
More relevant to this case, for individuals with income over
 $13,000, §§ III.E. and III.F. of the CSG provide detailed steps
 and formulas for the calculation of the Monthly Net Income. See
 
id., §§ III.E. and III.F.
23 CSG § III.E. provides, in relevant
 
part:
 
2. For individuals employed by others with income over
$13,000 per month.
 
NET INCOME FOR GUIDELINES PURPOSES is determined by:
 
a. Adding the gross monthly income from all sources
24
 (see IV.H.1. [sic] ).
b. Subtracting all three taxes: 

(i)
 [FICA]	 $681 plus 1.45% (.0145) times income over
$8,900
 
(ii) [STATE TAX]	 $268 plus 8.25% (.0825) times income over

$4,000
(iii)
 [FED. TAX]	  for incomes up to but not over $14,295:
$1,395 plus 28% (.28) times income over$6,854

for incomes over $14,295 but not over$31,079: $3,480 plus 33% (.33) times
income over $14,295

for incomes over $31,079: $9,018
plus 35% (.35) times income over
$31,079
 
23 CSG § III.E. sets forth the steps and formula for individuals
employed by others with income over $13,000, and CSG § III.F. sets forth thesteps and formula for self-employed individuals, including those with incomegreater than $13,000. For the purposes of simplicity and brevity, we discussthe former, although the latter may well apply to Bennett, if his gross incomeis adjusted for (certain) business expenses and self-employment taxes. Our analysis using III.E. is not intended to foreclose the application of III.F.in this case, if it is determined that III.F. is applicable to part ofBennett's income. In addition, as there is no dispute, we need not addressother applicable CSG provisions, such as the "Exceptional Circumstances"provisions which allow the deduction of other payments for the children orother parent, such as Bennett's payments to Nicoleta. See 2010 Hawai' i Child 
Suppport Guidelines § II.B.2. 
24
 This reference should be to § IV.I.1.
 
43
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3. Subtracting $791 (after-tax poverty level self support
in Hawai' i). 
FORMULA GROSS INCOME PER MONTH $ 
FICA -
[STATE] TAX
FEDERAL TAX -
-
SELF-SUPPORT -$791 
NET INCOME FOR WORKSHEETS $ 
4. SOLA INCOME is Gross Income Per Month Less $1,038.

 
2010 Hawai 'i Child Support Guidelines, § III. E. 
CSG § III.E. is illuminating, as it lays out the 
calculations built into the automated CSG Worksheet. In 
addition, it cross-references CSG § IV.I.1., for the determination of gross monthly income. CSG § IV.I.1., specifically includes disability insurance benefits as part of Gross Income, as well as other types of income that might be subject to lower tax rates at either the state or federal level, such as social security benefits or investment income, or no state taxes (in Hawai
'i), such as pension income. See 2010 
Hawai'i Child Support Guidelines, §§ IV.I.1.e., h., & l. Section 
IV.I.3. of the CSG, concerning Net Income, expressly notes that
 resulting variances are to be expected:
 
Net income is not take-home pay. Net income is not actual
 
disposable net income. The taxes used in this calculation
 are not necessarily the actual taxes paid by the parent.
 
2010 Hawai 'i Child Support Guidelines, § IV.I.3. 
Thus, we conclude that the Family Court was simply
 
complying with the directives of the CSG, as the court is
 
required to do, when it included Bennett's "unadjusted"
 disability pay as part of Bennett's Monthly Gross Income.
 
We also reject Nicoleta's argument that the Family
 
Court erred when it refused to make "automatic" annual increases
 to the child support because Bennett's disability payments
 increased annually. This argument is without legal support and
 is inconsistent with HRS §§ 576D-7(d)&(e), which identify the 
44
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circumstances, timing, and procedure for seeking an increase (or
 
decrease) to the child support obligation.
 
S. Disability Payments - Assets or Income
 Nicoleta argues that the Family Court should have
 
deemed Bennett's future disability payments as Category 5 marital
 assets under HRS § 580-47(a) and awarded her half of those
 "assets" in the division of the parties' property.
 
[D]isability pay is an entitlement that is generated when
the recipient becomes disabled during the recipient's
employment and, to the extent of his disability, cannot
work. Like disability compensation under workers'
compensation laws, military disability pay is paid in lieu
of and is akin to income that is earned and received
 post-employment. Like other income that is earned and
received post-divorce, disability pay is not property
divisible in a divorce case.
 
Perez v. Perez, 107 Hawai 'i 85, 89, 110 P.3d 409, 413 (App. 
2005); see also Jones v. Jones, 7 Haw. App. 496, 499, 780 P.2d 
581, 584 (1989). Although both Perez and Jones involved military disability pay, neither case limited its holding or distinguished between military and other types of disability pay that are paid in lieu of and are akin to income. See id. 
The rule articulated in Perez and Jones relating to
 
nondivisibility of disability pay in divorce cases applies to
 Bennett's future disability benefits. These monthly benefits,
 which will continue until he reaches sixty-five years of age,
 replace income lost due to his injury, and thus constitute post-
divorce earned "income." Nicoleta did not show that Bennett's
 disability benefits include a pension or retirement component. 
Accordingly, they do not constitute a marital asset subject to
 division and distribution under HRS § 580-47(a), and Nicoleta is
 not entitled to one-half of Bennett's future disability income.
25
 
25
 The Family Court considered Bennett's future monthly disability
benefits as part of his monthly income when it calculated Nicoleta's permanent
alimony award, as well as his child support payments. 
45
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the reasons and to the extent set forth herein, the
 
Family Court's July 5, 2011 Divorce Decree is affirmed in part
 
and vacated in part. This case is remanded to the Family Court
 for further proceeding consistent with this Opinion.
 
On the briefs:
 
Michael S. Zola
 
for Defendant-Appellant/
Cross-Appellee
 
Peter Van Name Esser
 and
 
Ira Leitel
 
for Plaintiff-Appellee/
Cross-Appellant
 
46
 