NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-12-0000393
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
NOLAN FRASER, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, THOMAS READ, JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10,
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10, AND DOE
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-0709(1))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellant Nolan Fraser (Fraser) sued
 
Defendant-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) claiming that he had 
been "overdetained" -- meaning that he had been kept in prison
 
beyond his proper release date. After a bench trial, the Circuit
 
1
Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court)  ruled that Fraser
had failed to prove the required elements to support his
 negligence claim against the State and entered judgment in favor
 of the State.
2
 
1The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided over the proceedings relevant to
this appeal.
 
2Fraser also sued Defendant-Appellee Thomas Read (Read), the Offender
Management Administrator for the Department of Public Safety. Prior to trial,
the Circuit Court granted summary judgment in favor of Read as to all claims
asserted against him. On appeal, Fraser does not challenge the Circuit
Court's grant of summary judgment in favor of Read. We therefore will not
 further discuss Fraser's claims against Read. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fraser appeals from the Amended Judgment entered in
 
favor of the State that was filed on April 12, 2012. On appeal,
 
Fraser claims that the Circuit Court erred in denying his pre­trial motions for summary judgment because based on the
 undisputed facts, he was entitled to judgment as a matter of law. 
He also claims that the Circuit Court erred in denying his motion
 in limine to exclude any extrinsic evidence outside of the
 mittimus warrant.
 
As explained below, both Fraser and the State, and the
 
Circuit Court, misconstrued the law as it applies to the question
 of Fraser's entitlement to credit for time served, which
 underlies Fraser's claim against the State. As a result, the
 Circuit Court misapplied the law in resolving Fraser's claim. We
 vacate the Amended Judgment to the extent that it entered
 judgment in favor of the State, and we remand the case for
 further proceedings.
 
I. Background
 
The question of whether Fraser had been overdetained
 
depended on whether he had received the proper amount of credit
 for time served with respect to the sentences imposed on the
 offenses that determined his release date. Fraser and the State
 agree that the relevant offenses were two counts of first-degree
 assault against a law enforcement officer, Counts 2 and 3, in Cr.
 No. 05-1-0165(2). On August 9, 2005, the Circuit Court sentenced
 Fraser on the assault charges to concurrent terms of five years
 of probation, subject to a term of imprisonment of 144 days, with
 credit for time already served.
3
 
Fraser was subsequently indicted in Cr. No. 05-1­
0580(2) with attempted promoting a controlled substance in, on, 
or near a school. On or about February 27, 2006, Fraser was
 arrested for his alleged violation of the terms of his probation
 in Cr. No. 05-1-0165(2) regarding the assault charges.
 
3It appears that Fraser had already served the 144 days of imprisonment
when the Circuit Court sentenced him on August 9, 2005.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On April 25, 2006, the Circuit Court sentenced Fraser
 
on the drug charge in Cr. No. 05-1-0580(2) to five years of
 
probation, subject to a one-year term of imprisonment, with
 credit of 135 days for time already served. On the same date,
 the Circuit Court also apparently revoked Fraser's probation on
 his assault charges in Cr. No. 05-1-0165(2) and resentenced him
 to five years of probation, subject to a one-year term of
 imprisonment. The Circuit Court's judgment or order resentencing
 Fraser on the assault charges is not in the record. Nor is a
 transcript of Fraser's resentencing. However, a "Mittimus
 Warrant of Commitment to Jail" (Mittimus Warrant), signed by a
 clerk of the Circuit Court, states that the one-year jail term
 imposed on Counts 2 and 3 in Cr. No. 05-1-0165(2) are to run
 concurrent with each other and with the term imposed on the drug
 charge, with "[c]redit of 135 days of time served." The Mittimus
 Warrant was filed on April 28, 2006.
 
Fraser and the State stipulated that Fraser was
 
sentenced to a one-year jail term on the assault charges in Cr.
 No. 05-1-0165(2). The State did not give Fraser 135 days of
 credit on his one-year jail term on the assault charges. 
Instead, Gail Mirkovich (Mirkovich), the intake sergeant at the
 Maui Community Correctional Center, calculated Fraser's credit
 for time served on his assault charges as 59 days -- basically
 the number of days he spent in custody from his arrest for
 allegedly violating the terms of his probation until he was
 resentenced. After Mirkovich determined that Fraser was only
 entitled to 59 days of credit, she called a clerk for the
 sentencing judge and notified the clerk that Fraser was not
 entitled to 135 days of credit, as reflected in the Mittimus
 Warrant. After speaking with the clerk, Mirkovich "was under the
 assumption" that she should give Fraser 59 days of credit -- her
 calculation of the correct credit. However, no amended judgment
 or other Circuit Court order was filed to reflect Mirkovich's
 calculation of Fraser's entitlement to credit for time served. 
The State applied Mirkovich's calculation of the appropriate
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
credit and released Fraser on February 24, 2007. If the State
 
had granted Fraser 135 days of credit for time served, he would
 have been released on December 10, 2006 -- 76 days earlier.
 
II. Applicable Law
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 706-671(2) (2014)
 
provides:
 
(2) When a judgment of conviction or a sentence is
vacated and a new sentence is thereafter imposed upon the
defendant for the same crime, the period of detention and
imprisonment theretofore served shall be deducted from the
minimum and maximum terms of the new sentence. The officer
 having custody of the defendant shall furnish a certificate
to the court at the time of sentence, showing the period of
imprisonment served under the original sentence, and the
certificate shall be annexed to the official records of the
 defendant's new commitment.
 
(Emphasis added). 
In State v. Martin, 71 Haw. 73, 783 P.2d 292 (1989), 
the Hawai 'i Supreme Court considered whether it was required by 
HRS § 706-671(2) to credit Martin with time served for the one 
year he had served in prison as a condition of his original term of probation, when it revoked his probation and resentenced him to another one-year term of imprisonment as a condition of probation. The supreme court held that the words "minimum and maximum terms of the new sentence" as used in HRS § 706-671(2) do not apply to the discretionary imposition of imprisonment as a condition of probation, and thus, the sentencing court was not required to credit Martin with jail time he previously served as a condition of his original probation. Martin 71 Haw. at 74, 783 
P.2d at 292-93. The court held that the sentencing court had the "discretionary authority" to revoke probation and sentence Martin to another one-year term of imprisonment as a condition of probation, without crediting him with the time he served under the original probation. Id. In support of its decision, the 
court reasoned that otherwise, the sentencing court may be forced to sentence a defendant to the full term of imprisonment upon revoking his or her probation, which would be contrary to "the 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
legislative policy favoring the withholding of imprisonment where
 
inappropriate." Id., 783 P.2d at 293. 
In State v. Miller, 79 Hawai 'i 194, 900 P.2d 770 
(1995), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court elaborated on its decision in 
Martin and its interpretation of HRS § 706-671(2). Citing Martin, the supreme court stated: "We have held that our circuit courts have the discretion not to credit time served in jail as a condition of a previous probation and, therefore, need not reduce the period of imprisonment imposed as a condition of a newly imposed sentence of probation." Miller, 79 Hawai
'i at 197, 900 
P.2d at 773 (emphasis added). The supreme court further stated: "[T]he circuit courts have discretion to determine whether credit for time served will be accorded to a defendant with respect to any prison term imposed as a condition of probation." Id. at 
198, 900 P.2d at 774. 
In both Miller and Martin, the supreme court upheld the
 
sentencing court's decision not to credit the defendant with time
 served in jail as a condition of a previous probation, upon
 revoking the defendant's probation and resentencing him to
 imprisonment as a condition of probation. However, the supreme
 court made clear, particularly in Miller, that the sentencing
 court in this situation also has the discretion to credit a 
defendant with time served in jail as a condition of a previous
 probation. In other words, the sentencing court could exercise
 its discretion either way, by crediting or not crediting a
 defendant with time previously served as a condition of
 probation. We conclude that under Miller and Martin, the
 sentencing judge, upon revoking a defendant's probation and
 resentencing the defendant to imprisonment as a condition of
 probation, has the discretion to credit the defendant with all,
 part, or none of the time previously served by the defendant as a
 condition of probation.
 
In State v. Mason, 79 Hawai
'i 175, 184, 900 P.2d 172, 
181 (App. 1995), this court held that "it is the duty of the sentencing court to determine the amount of credit to be awarded 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the defendant when presented with a claim for uncredited time." 
We conclude that if the sentencing court enters a judgment or
 order establishing the amount of a defendant's credit for time
 served which the State believes is erroneous, the State cannot
 unilaterally recalculate the credit for time served but must
 obtain an amended or corrected order from the sentencing court.
 
III. Discussion
 
Applying these legal principles, we conclude that both
 
Fraser and the State relied upon erroneous legal assumptions in
 presenting their arguments to the Circuit Court and on appeal.
 
A. 
Fraser assumed that the Mittimus Warrant was the same
 
as a judgment issued by the Circuit Court in arguing that its
 terms could not be altered by parol evidence. However, the
 Mittimus Warrant was signed by a court clerk, and not by the
 sentencing judge. See In re Rhodus, 6 Haw. 343, 344-45 (Haw.
 
Kingdom 1882) (concluding that the court is not bound by
 information in the mittimus but can review the record to
 determine what the sentence was and the real character of the
 offense); Commissioner of Correction v. Gordon, 636 A.2d 799,
 802-03 (Conn. 1994) (stating that the mittimus "has come to be
 regarded only as a clerical document that is certified by the
 clerk of the court," and that if the judgment of the court and
 the mittimus conflict, the judgment controls). 
Evidence of what the Circuit Court had ordered or
 
intended to order with respect to credit for time served and
 whether Fraser was legally entitled to any such credit were
 relevant to Fraser's negligence claim against the State. We
 therefore reject Fraser's contention that the Circuit Court erred
 in denying his motion in limine to exclude any extrinsic evidence
 outside of the Mittimus Warrant itself.
4
 
4Even if a mittimus warrant had the status of a court judgment or order,
evidence of whether it reflected the credit for time served that the
 
sentencing judge intended to order and whether a defendant was legally
entitled to the credit shown would appear to be relevant in a negligence
action against the State for overdetention.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
On the other hand, the State erroneously assumed that, 
as a matter of law, Fraser was only entitled to credit for the 59 
days spent in custody from his arrest on the alleged probation violation to his resentencing on the assault charges.
5 Based on 
the Hawai 'i Supreme Court's opinions in Miller and Martin, the 
sentencing judge in resentencing Fraser had the discretion to also credit Fraser with all, part, or none of the 144 days he served in prison as a condition of his original probation. The State also apparently assumed that it could unilaterally override a decision by the sentencing judge regarding credit for time served if the State believed the judge's determination was wrong. However, if the sentencing judge exercised his or her discretion and granted Fraser credit for time served, the State could not unilaterally change the sentencing judge's determination based on the State's own view of the appropriate credit. See Mason, 79 
Hawai
'i at 184, 900 P.2d at 181 (holding that "it is the duty of 
the sentencing court to determine the amount of credit to be awarded the defendant when presented with a claim for uncredited time"). 
C.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court adopted and relied
 
upon the State's erroneous legal assumptions in entering its
 Amended Judgment in favor of the State. Accordingly, the Circuit
 Court's Amended Judgment cannot stand.
 
Unfortunately, neither party focused on or presented
 
direct evidence on the key question in this case -- what the
 sentencing judge had actually ordered with respect to credit for
 time served in resentencing Fraser. Fraser and the State did not
 make a transcript of the sentencing judge's resentencing hearing
 part of the record. They also did not make any order or judgment
 signed by the sentencing judge that reflected the judge's order
 
5The time between Fraser's arrest on the alleged probation violation
and his resentencing was actually only 57 days, but Mirkovich determined that
Fraser was entitled to an additional two days of credit.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
regarding credit for time served part of the record. Although
 
the Mittimus Warrant provided circumstantial evidence of what the
 sentencing judge may have ordered with respect to credit for time
 served, there were material issues of fact concerning what the
 sentencing judge had actually ordered or intended to order
 regarding credit for time served.
 
IV. Conclusion
 
We vacate the Circuit Court's Amended Judgment to the
 
extent that it entered judgment in favor of the State, and we
 remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this
 Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 30, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Jan K. Apo 
Mark D. Reck
 (Law Offices of Jan K. Apo)
for Plaintiff-Appellant 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Caron M. Inagaki

Kendall J. Moser
 
Deputy Attorneys General
for Defendants-Appellees
 
8
 