NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000322
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KYLE GORDON ROTHENBORG, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JOSLYN SUAN ROTHENBORG, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 02-1-3956)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
On appeal, Defendant-Appellant Joslyn Suan Rothenborg
 
(Wife) challenges the following orders entered by the Family
 
Court of the First Circuit1
 (family court):  (1) "Order Granting 
[Plaintiff-Appellee Kyle Gordon Rothenborg's (Husband)] Motion for Attorney's Fees Per [Hawai
'i Family Court Rules (HFCR)] Rule 
68" filed on February 7, 2012 (Order Granting Attorney's Fees); (2) "Order Denying [Wife's] Motion for Reconsideration, or in the
 Alternative, for Relief From Judgment of Order Granting
 [Husband's] Motion for Attorney's Fees Per Rule 68 Filed
 February 16, 2012 and [Wife's] Motion for Stay of Proceedings to
 Enforce a Judgment Pending Motion for Reconsideration Filed
 February 23, 2012" filed on March 6, 2012 (Order Denying
 Reconsideration and Stay); and (3) "Order Denying [Wife's] Motion
 for Stay Pending Appeal" filed on March 28, 2012 (Order Denying
 Stay Pending Appeal). 
1
 Except as otherwise noted, the Honorable Judge Bode A. Uale presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Wife argues that the family court abused its discretion
 
when it (1) awarded Husband attorney's fees under HFCR Rule 68;2
 
and (2) failed to indicate its reasons for granting attorney's
 
fees.3
  
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as 
well as the relevant legal authorities, we vacate the Order
 Granting Attorney's Fees to Husband. Because the other orders
 
2 HFCR Rule 68 provides:
 
Rule 68. OFFER OF SETTLEMENT.
 
At any time more than 20 days before any contested
hearing held pursuant to HRS sections 571-11 to 14
(excluding law violations, criminal matters, and child
protection matters) is scheduled to begin, any party may
serve upon the adverse party an offer to allow a judgment to
be entered to the effect specified in the offer. Such offer
may be made as to all or some of the issues, such as custody
and visitation. Such offer shall not be filed with the
 court, unless it is accepted. If within 10 days after
service of the offer the adverse party serves written notice
that the offer is accepted, any party may then file the
offer and notice of acceptance together with proof of
service thereof and thereupon the court shall treat those
issues as uncontested. An offer not accepted shall be deemed
withdrawn and evidence thereof is not admissible, except in
a proceeding to determine costs and attorney's fees. If the
judgment in its entirety finally obtained by the offeree is
patently not more favorable than the offer, the offeree must
pay the costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred
after the making of the offer, unless the court shall
specifically determine that such would be inequitable in
accordance with the provisions of HRS section 580-47 or
other applicable statutes, as amended.
 
(Emphasis added.)
3 Wife's points of error in her opening brief fails to provide record
cites to reflect where the alleged error occurred and where Wife brought theerror to the family court's attention. See Hawai' i Rules of Appellate
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b). As the Hawai' i Supreme Court has noted, however,
"noncompliance with Rule 28 does not always result in dismissal of the claims,and this court ... has consistently adhered to the policy of affordinglitigants the opportunity to have their cases heard on the merits, wherepossible." Marvin v. Pflueger, 127 Hawai' i 490, 496, 280 P.3d 88, 94 (2012)
(citation and internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). Here, to theextent that we are able to discern with reasonable clarity the alleged errorcommitted by the family court, we address Wife's arguments. However, Wife'scounsel is cautioned that future non-compliance with HRAP Rule 28 could resultin sanctions. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
challenged on appeal relate to and flow from the initial order
 
granting Husband attorney's fees, they are likewise vacated.
I. Background
 
On January 11, 2005, the family court entered a "Decree
 
Granting Absolute Divorce and Awarding Child Custody" (Divorce
 
Decree) that, inter alia, ordered Husband to pay Wife a portion
 of his retirement benefits and in turn, awarded Husband a
 percentage interest in Wife's American Airlines pension plan,
 granted that he prepare and file a Qualified Domestic Relations
 Order (QDRO). 
On June 27, 2011, Husband filed a motion for post-
decree relief requesting that the family court order Wife to sign
 a QDRO for the distribution of her pension. On July 27, 2011,
 Husband made a purported HFCR Rule 68 offer of settlement to
 Wife, demanding that she sign a QDRO rather than wait until the
 court ordered her to do so. Wife rejected Husband's offer. 
After a hearing on August 31, 2011,
4
 the family court issued an
order on November 30, 2011 granting Husband's motion and
 requiring Wife to sign a QDRO "once it is qualified by the
 administrator." 
Husband subsequently filed a motion for attorney's fees
 
pursuant to HFCR Rule 68, which the court granted on February 7,
 2012, ordering Wife to pay $2,106 to Husband's counsel. 
On
 
March 6, 2012, the family court denied Wife's motion for
 reconsideration and her motion for stay pending reconsideration. 
On March 28, 2012, the family court denied Wife's motion for stay
 pending appeal. After Wife filed her notice of appeal, the
 family court filed its Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
 (Findings and Conclusions) with respect to its Order Granting
 Attorney's Fees, Order Denying Reconsideration and Stay, and
 Order Denying Stay Pending Appeal. 
4
 The Honorable Judge Paul T. Murakami presided.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
II. Order Granting Attorney's Fees
 
Generally, we review a family court's award of 
attorney's fees for abuse of discretion. Doe v. Doe, 118 Hawai 'i 
268, 278, 188 P.3d 782, 792 (App. 2008). "[T]he family court's 
decision will not be disturbed unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of reason." In re Doe, 77 Hawai
'i 
109, 115, 883 P.2d 30, 36 (1994) (citations, internal quotation marks, brackets, and ellipsis omitted). In our view, the requirements of HFCR Rule 68 have not been met and thus it was an abuse of discretion to award Husband attorney's fees pursuant to that rule. 
In order for attorney's fees to be awarded under HFCR
 
Rule 68, certain requirements must be met.
 
First, the offer of settlement must be made at any time more
than twenty days before a contested matrimonial trial or a
contested hearing for an order is scheduled to begin.
Second, the offeror must serve upon the adverse party an
offer to allow a decree or order to be entered to the effect
 specified in the offer
. Third, the decree or order finally
obtained by the offeree must be patently not more favorable
as a whole than the offer. Finally, if all the preceding
requirements of HFCR Rule 68 have been met, the court shall
make an award of reasonable attorney's fees and costs to the
offeror unless it specifically determines that such an award
would be inequitable, considering the provisions of HRS §
580–47, as amended.
 
Criss v. Kunisada, 89 Hawai 'i 17, 23, 968 P.2d 184, 190 (App. 
1998) (emphasis added).
A. The family court erred in determining that Husband's
offer was sufficient for HFCR Rule 68 purposes
 
Husband's July 27, 2011 settlement offer letter failed 
to describe a clear offer such "that a decree or order in the 
words of the offer will fully and completely decide the claim or claims towards which the offer is directed." Owens v. Owens, 104 
Hawai
'i 292, 308, 88 P.3d 664, 680 (App. 2004) (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted). Husband's July 27, 2011 settlement offer letter stated, in relevant part: 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Husband] will not be seeking any of his Attorney's
Fees whatsoever from you if you simply sign the proposed
(pre-qualified by American Airlines) QDRO as required by
your Divorce Decree. This is a complete settlement of the
post-divorce Motion currently scheduled for hearing on
August 17th at 8:30.
 
If you think the Family Court will not order that you
must sign the QDRO after trial on the issue, and indeed the
Court orders the QDRO to be entered, the implications of
Rule 68 are that YOU will be ordered to pay for all of my
legal fees, as well as for the fees of any attorney you may
choose to hire to represent yourself in your continued
refusal to sign the required QDRO.
 
(emphasis added). This offer is insufficient for several
 
reasons.
 
First, the letter itself did not have any QDRO attached
 
for Wife to sign. Previous correspondence between counsel over
 the course of several months indicates that the parties exchanged
 draft QDROs, but Husband's offer does not establish which, if
 any, QDRO Wife should have signed to accept Husband's offer. 
Second, the record reflects that when Husband sent his
 
offer to Wife, any proposed QDRO then in existence had not been
 pre-qualified by American Airlines, contrary to the indication in
 Husband's offer letter. Thus, no decree or order could be
 entered to the effect specified in the offer, as required by HFCR
 Rule 68. We note that the Divorce Decree indicates that it was
 Husband's burden to take necessary actions to be paid under
 Wife's retirement plan. It provides in relevant part: 
Both parties acknowledge that they fully understand
that in order for [Husband] to actually obtain said share of
the [Wife's] retirement, [Husband] has to take proactive
actions in order to be paid, to include without limitation,
preparing and filing a [QDRO]. [Husband] shall be solely
responsible for the preparation and costs of the [QDRO].
 
On April 11, 2011, prior to Husband's July 27, 2011
 
settlement offer letter, QDRO Consultants Company LLC, on behalf
 
of American Airlines, advised Husband that his proposed draft
 would not qualify as a QDRO under applicable federal law:
 
We have completed our review of the draft domestic relations
order that was submitted in the subject case, pertaining to
Retirement Benefit Plan of American Airlines, Inc. for
 Flight Attendants, and have determined that it would not
qualify as QDRO under applicable federal law. As a result,
the amounts set forth under the order would not become
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
payable to the alternate payee until an amended order is
received and approved by the plan administrator. 
The areas of deficiency that require amendment or
clarification are numerous. Enclosed is model QDRO language
that you may use for this plan. While the use of this model
 language will expedite the approval process, you may find it
necessary to modify this language in order to conform with
the intent of the parties and to the applicable provisions
of the divorce decree, to the extent that the model does not
otherwise conform.
 
At the August 31, 2011 hearing, Husband's counsel represented to
 
the family court that the QDRO had been pre-qualified when it
 apparently had not. After the family court ordered Wife to sign
 a QDRO, Wife requested clarification from QDRO Consultants
 Company, LLC and discovered that Husband's QDRO had not yet been
 pre-approved. Thus, no decree or order could be entered to the
 effect specified in the offer because there was no pre-qualified
 QDRO at the time of Husband's July 27, 2011 settlement offer
 letter. The family court's Findings and Conclusions do not
 address this issue other than to note that Wife raised the
 argument in opposing Husband's motion for attorney's fees.
B.	 The family court erred by concluding that the order
finally obtained was not patently more favorable than
Husband's offer
 
HFCR Rule 68 "permits the court to award attorney's 
fees and costs to the offeror of a Rule 68 offer that is more 
favorable than the terms of the ultimate decree or order." Nakasone v. Nakasone, 102 Hawai
'i 177, 178, 73 P.3d 715, 716 
(2003). 
Husband's July 27, 2011 offer stated: "[Husband] will
 
not be seeking any of his Attorney's Fees whatsoever from you if
 you simply sign the proposed (pre-qualified by American Airlines)
 QDRO as required by your Divorce Decree." The November 30, 2011
 Order provided: "[Wife] should sign the DRO concerning her
 American Airlines' pension fund once it is qualified by the
 administrator." (Emphasis added.) Because the Order explicitly
 required the QDRO to be qualified by the administrator before
 Wife must sign, this was more favorable to Wife. Husband had not
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
previously obtained said approval of his proposed QDRO and thus
 
the family court's order provided clarity as to what Wife was
 required to sign. In granting Husband attorney's fees, it
 appears that the family court focused on Wife's opposition to
 Husband's post-decree motion in which she asserted that she
 should not have to sign any QDRO. Nonetheless, for purposes of
 analyzing fees under HFCR Rule 68, the offer from Husband
 demanded that Wife sign an unspecified QDRO that he indicated was
 pre-qualified when it was not. We conclude that the family court
 
erred in entering COL No. 20, that the "Order Granting
 
[Husband's] Motion for Post-Decree Relief (filed November 30,
 2011) is patently not more favorable than the offer made by
 [Husband]."
 
Further, because Husband's offer did not indicate the
 
form of QDRO Wife should sign, there is nothing to indicate that
 the form ultimately approved by the administrator (as
 contemplated by the family court's November 30, 2011 order) and
 signed by Wife is less favorable to Wife. Indeed, even the
 parties' efforts to resolve the final form of the QDRO after the
 family court's November 30, 2011 order demonstrate that Wife's
 proposed form of the QDRO, as opposed to Husband's, was
 ultimately approved and signed by the family court.
 
We thus conclude that the family court abused its
 
discretion by awarding Husband attorney's fees pursuant to HFCR
 Rule 68. Given that the award of fees must be vacated, the
 subsequent orders addressing Wife's motion for reconsideration
 and motions for stay must also be vacated. We need not reach
 Wife's other point of error.
III. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the (1) "Order Granting Motion
 
for Attorney's Fees Per Rule 68" filed on February 7, 2012; (2)
 
"Order Denying Defendant's Motion for Reconsideration, or in the
 Alternative, for Relief From Judgment of Order Granting Plaintiff
 Kyle Gordon Rothenborg's Motion for Attorney's Fees Per Rule 68
 Filed February 16, 2012 and Defendant's Motion for Stay of
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Proceedings to Enforce a Judgment Pending Motion for
 
Reconsideration Filed February 23, 2012" filed on March 6, 2012;
 and (3) "Order Denying Motion for Stay Pending Appeal" filed on
 March 28, 2012 entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit
 are vacated.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 8, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Dennis E. W. O'Connor, Jr.
Lahela H. F. Hite (O'Connor Playdon & Guben, LLP)for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 Michael A. Glenn 
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
8
 