NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-11-0000298
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
CHRISTOPHER LABOY, Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
CLIFFORD R. LABOY, Defendant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-0843)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Christopher Laboy (Laboy) appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence filed on
 
February 23, 2011, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (circuit court).
1 Judgment was entered against Laboy for Assault
 
in the Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) § 707-711 (Supp. 2012).
2
 
The case arises from an incident in which Laboy's
 
father, Clifford Laboy (Father), and Complaining Witness Sunil
 Joseph (CW Joseph) were playing basketball on opposing teams and
 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-711(1)(a)-(b)provides that "[a] person commits the offense
of assault in the second degree if: (a) [t]he person intentionally or
knowingly causes substantial bodily injury to another; (b) [t]he person
recklessly causes serious or substantial bodily injury to another . . . ." 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
got into an altercation. Laboy, who was watching the game from
 
the stands, became involved and ultimately struck CW Joseph.
 
On appeal, Laboy contends that the circuit court erred
 
by: (1) admitting testimony regarding CW Joseph's nonviolent
 character; (2) denying Laboy's requested instruction on the
 lesser included offense of Assault in the Third Degree;
 (3) including the phrase "immediately necessary" intervention
 rather than "necessary" intervention in the defense-of-others
 instruction; and (4) failing to instruct the jury on a mistake­of-fact defense. Laboy further contends that, if the above
 alleged errors do not individually entitle him to a new trial,
 the cumulative effect of all of the individual errors deprived
 Laboy of his due process right to a fair trial. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we affirm and
 resolve Laboy's points of error as set forth below.
I. Admission of Character Evidence
 
Laboy alleges that the circuit court violated Hawaii
 
Rules of Evidence (HRE) 404(a)(2) (Supp. 2012) by admitting
 
testimony by Jonathan Tanibe (Tanibe) regarding CW Joseph's
 nonviolent character. Tanibe testified that, during the
 confrontation between Father and CW Joseph, he jumped in front of
 Father so the situation would not escalate. He did not jump in
 front of CW Joseph because "[k]nowing [CW Joseph] in my past,
 he's not a fighter." The circuit court overruled Defense
 counsel's general objection to this testimony. 
"Evidentiary rulings are reviewed for abuse of 
discretion, unless application of the rule admits of only one correct result, in which case review is under the right/wrong standard." State v. Ortiz, 91 Hawai' i 181, 189, 981 P.2d 1127, 
1135 (1999) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Laboy did not specifically object on HRE Rule 404(a)
 
grounds and therefore failed to preserve his claim for appeal. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
See HRE Rule 103(a)(1) (Supp. 2012) (providing that to preserve a
 
claim of error over the admission of evidence, a party must
 "stat[e] the specific ground of objection, if the specific ground
 was not apparent from the context[.]"). Even assuming arguendo
 that Laboy preserved his HRE Rule 404(a) claim for appeal, the
 character evidence at issue does not fall under HRE Rule 404(a)
 because the evidence was not used "for the purpose of proving
 action in conformity therewith[.]" Rather, Tanibe's testimony
 was relevant to explain why he decided to jump in front of Father
 as opposed to CW Joseph. Tanibe's testimony is thus not
 precluded by HRE Rule 404.
 
In addition, we cannot say that the circuit court
 
abused its discretion in determining that the probative value of
 the testimony was not substantially outweighed by the danger of
 unfair prejudice. As noted, Tanibe's testimony was offered for a
 non-propensity purpose. Furthermore, during the cross-
examination of CW Joseph, Laboy asked, "You got into fights
 before playing basketball?" and CW Joseph responded, "Never in my
 life have I ever been into one fight." Given the non-propensity
 purpose for which Tanibe's testimony was offered and CW Joseph's
 unchallenged testimony, we conclude that Tanibe's testimony was
 not precluded by HRE Rule 403 (1993).
II. Requested Instruction on Assault in the Third Degree
 
Laboy asserts that the circuit court erroneously denied
 
his request to instruct the jury on the lesser included offense
 
of Assault in the Third Degree.
3 Even if we assume arguendo that
 
it was error not to provide the requested instruction, it was
 harmless error.
 
A circuit court's failure to instruct on a lesser
 
included offense is harmless "when the jury convicts the
 defendant of . . . an included offense greater than the included
 offense erroneously omitted from the instructions." State v.
 
3
 Laboy was charged with Assault in the First Degree, but convicted of
the lesser included offense of Assault in the Second Degree. 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Haanio, 94 Hawai' i 405, 415, 16 P.3d 246, 256 (2001). Here, the 
jury found Laboy guilty of the greater offense of Assault in the 
Second Degree.
III. Defense-of-Others Jury Instruction
 
Laboy contends that the defense-of-others jury
 
instruction was erroneous because it stated that Laboy's
 
intervention must have been "immediately necessary" to protect
 the other person, his Father. 
Laboy did not object at trial to the jury instructions 
on these grounds, therefore we review this point for plain error. State v. Sawyer, 88 Hawai' i 325, 330, 966 P.2d 637, 642 (1998). 
The circuit court "is not required to instruct the jury
 
in the exact words of the applicable statute but to present the
 jury with an understandable instruction that aids the jury in
 applying that law to the facts of the case." Id. (citation and
 
internal quotation mark omitted). Given the structure of HRS
 
4
§ 703-305 (1993),  the "immediately necessary" language is
implicit in a defense based on defense-of-others.
 
4 HRS § 703-305 states in relevant part:
 
§703-305 Use of force for the protection of other persons.
(1) Subject to the provisions of this section and of section 703­
310, the use of force upon or toward the person of another is
justifiable to protect a third person when:
(a)	 Under the circumstances as the actor believes them to be,
the person whom the actor seeks to protect would be
justified in using such protective force; and
(b)	 The actor believes that the actor's intervention is
 necessary for the protection of the other person.
 
In turn, HRS § 703-304 (1993) sets forth whether the third person would
be justified in using protective force. That statute states, in pertinent
part:
 
§703-304 Use of force in self protection. . . . the use of
 
force upon or toward another person is justifiable when the actor
believes that such force is immediately necessary for the purpose
of protecting himself against the use of unlawful force by the
other person on the present occasion.
 
(emphasis added).
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
[U]nder HRS § 703-305, in order to use force to protect a
third person, the actor must have a reasonable belief that,
as to the third person . . . force is immediately necessary
for the purpose of protecting himself against the use of
unlawful force by the other person on the present occasion .
. . ."
 
State v. Mark, 123 Hawai' i 205, 220, 231 P.3d 478, 493 (2010) 
(internal quotation mark omitted). 
Here, the circuit court's defense-of-others instruction
 
explained that Father would have been justified in using force
 
upon or toward CW Joseph if Father reasonably believed that such
 force was immediately necessary to protect himself against the
 use of unlawful force by CW Joseph. The phrase "immediately
 necessary" assists the jury in understanding whether Father would
 have been able to assert self-defense, and thus in turn whether
 Laboy properly acted in defense of Father.
 
Moreover, the given instruction is substantially 
similar to Hawai' i Standard Jury Instruction, Criminal ("HAWJIC") 
7.02 (Defense of Others) (2008).
5 In discussing HAWJIC 7.02, 
along with HAWJIC 7.01 (Self-Defense), the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
has used the phrase "immediately necessary" as pertaining to both defense-of-others and self-defense. State v. Augustin, 101 
Hawai'i 127, 128, 63 P.3d 1097, 1098 (2002). 
Thus, it was not plain error for the circuit court to
 
include the phrase "immediately necessary" in the defense-of­others instruction.
 
IV. Mistake-of-Fact Defense
 
Laboy contends that the circuit court plainly erred by
 
failing to include a jury instruction on the mistake-of-fact
 
defense along with the defense-of-others instruction.
6 Laboy
 
5
 HAWJIC 7.02 states in relevant part that "[t]he use of force upon or
toward another person is justified to protect a third person when . . . the
defendant reasonably believed that his/her intervention is immediately
necessary to protect the third person." HAWJIC 7.02 (2008)
6
 The mistake-of-fact defense "is a defense that the accused engaged in
the prohibited conduct under ignorance or mistake of fact if: (1) [t]he
ignorance or mistake negatives the state of mind required to establish an
element of the offense . . . ." HRS § 702-218(1) (1993). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contends that "[t]he defense never explicitly claimed that
 
[Laboy's] view of the circumstances was mistaken, but rather
 argued that [Laboy's] subjective assessment of the situation, and
 the need for [Laboy] to immediately intervene to protect Father,
 were objectively reasonable." Nonetheless, he contends that a
 mistake-of-fact instruction should have accompanied the defense­of-others instruction because it would have aided the jury in
 determining whether Laboy's beliefs were reasonable even if he
 happened to be mistaken about the circumstances.
 
When a mistake-of-fact jury instruction is not 
requested or given at trial, and its omission is asserted as error for the first time on appeal, the plain error standard applies. State v. Taylor, 130 Hawai' i 196, 205, 307 P.3d 1142, 
1151 (2013). "Plain error exists if the substantial rights of the defendant have been affected adversely." Id. (citation, 
internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
The circuit court did not plainly err in failing to 
give a mistake-of-fact instruction to the jury because a mistaken belief that protective force is necessary is already addressed by instructions on justification defenses. In State v. Smith, 91 Hawai'i 450, 984 P.2d 1276 (App. 1999), the defendant had been 
convicted of attempted murder and asserted on appeal inter alia that the trial court erred in failing to give a jury instruction on the mistake-of-fact defense because he "may have mistakenly believed that the [complainants] were coming forward to seriously harm him. In other words, [the defendant contended] that he may have intentionally engaged in the prohibited conduct because he mistakenly believed he was acting in self-defense." Id. at 463­
464, 984 P.2d at 1289-90 (some brackets added; internal quotation mark and some brackets omitted). This court determined that a mistake-of-fact instruction was not required, explaining that: 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Self-defense is a justification defense. With respect
to justification defenses, the Supplemental Commentary to
§ 702–205 (1993) notes as follows:
 
The Legislature enacted § 702–205 of the
Proposed Draft of the Code without change; however, in
Chapter 703, dealing with defenses of justification,
the Legislature departed from the Proposed Draft and
required an objective assessment of the defendant's
state of mind, or a "reasonable belief" on the
defendant's part, respecting the attendant
circumstances which justify conduct otherwise deemed
unlawful.
 
In other words, Smith's mistaken belief that the brothers
were attacking him is covered under the defense of
self-defense. The record shows that the jury was properly
instructed concerning Smith's defense of self-defense.
 
Id. at 464, 984 P.2d at 1290 (emphasis added).
 
The logic of Smith is applicable here, where Laboy is
 
asserting that his actions were justified under the theory of
 
defense-of-others. 
Moreover, the defense-of-others instruction provided by
 
the circuit court in this case, pertaining to Laboy's reasonable
 
7
belief,  is substantially similar to instructions that the
Hawai'i Supreme Court held was "fully consonant with the 
controlling statutory and case law of this state." Augustin, 101 
Hawai'i at 127, 63 P.3d at 1097. 
Thus, the circuit court did not plainly err in failing
 
to give a mistake-of-fact instruction.
V. Cummulative Weight of Errors
 
Laboy, citing to State v. Amorin, 58 Haw. 623, 631, 574
 
P.2d 895, 900 (1978), argues that the cumulative weight of the
 
errors created "such an atmosphere of bias and prejudice so as to
 deprive the defendant of a fair trial." We disagree.
 
As discussed above, we do not conclude that the circuit
 
court committed any of the errors raised by Laboy. At most, we
 assume arguendo that it was error not to give an instruction on
 
7
 The circuit court instructed the jury that "the reasonableness of the
defendant's belief shall be determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable
person in the defendant's position under the circumstances of which the
defendant was aware or as the defendant reasonably believed them to be." 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assault in the third degree, but which would be harmless under
 
Haanio. Thus, there were no cumulative errors and the
 proposition cited from Amorin is inapposite.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of
 
Conviction and Probation Sentence filed on February 23, 2011, in
 the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, November 8, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Karen T. Nakasone
 
Summer M.M. Kupau
Deputy Public Defender
Office of the Public Defender 
Chief Judge
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu Associate Judge
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
 
8
 