NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000677
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
DOUGLAS S. CHIN, Attorney General of the State of Hawai 'i,1 
Petitioner-Appellee, v. WAILUKU MAIN STREET ASSOCIATION,
INC./TRI-ISLE MAIN STREET RESOURCE CENTER, Respondent-Appellant,
and THOMAS R. CANNON, Respondent 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(S.P. NO. 12-1-0074(3))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
In an appeal arising out of a special proceeding in the
 
2
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court)  that the
State of Hawai 'i, Petitioner-Appellee David M. Louie, initiated 
pursuant to an administrative investigation of a non-profit corporation, namely Respondent-Appellant Wailuku Main Street Association, Inc./Tri-Isle Main Street Resource Center (WMSA), a non-party former attorney of WMSA, namely law firm Jenkins & Jenkins, L.L.P. (Jenkins), appeals from the Circuit Court's interlocutory Order on Receiver's Report, Accounting, and Request for Instructions entered August 20, 2015 (Receiver's Report) that, inter alia, expressly rejected Jenkins's claim for fees and its corresponding self-declared attorney's lien. 
1
 Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP)
Rule 43(c)(1), Douglas S. Chin, the current Attorney General of the State of
Hawai'i is automatically substituted as Petitioner-Appellee herein in place of
David M. Louie. 
2
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Jenkins argues the Circuit Court erred in
 
its interlocutory Order on Receiver's Report, Accounting, and
 
Request for Instructions to the extent that it adopted the
 receiver's argument that: (1) Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
3
§ 414D-246 (2004)  time-barred Jenkins's claim because it was
properly notified, its claim was properly rejected, and it failed
 to commence a proceeding within ninety (90) days; (2) WMSA's
 remaining funds derive from County of Maui grants that prohibited
 payment of legal fees and therefore could not have been used to
 pay Jenkins's fees; and (3) HRS § 507-81 (2006 and Supp. 2015)
4
 
3	 HRS § 414D-246 provides, in relevant part: 
Known claims against dissolved corporation.  (a) A dissolved
corporation may dispose of the known claims against it by
following the procedure described in this section.
 
(b) The dissolved corporation shall notify its known
claimants in writing of the dissolution at any time after
its effective date. The written notice shall:
 
(1)	 Describe information that must be included
 in a claim;
 
(2)	 Provide a mailing address where a claim may be
sent;
 
(3)	 State the deadline, which may not be fewer than
one hundred twenty days from the effective date
of the written notice, by which the dissolved
corporation must receive the claim; and
 
(4)	 State that the claim will be barred if not
 received by the deadline.
 
(c) A claim against the dissolved corporation
is barred:
 
(1)	 If a claimant who was given written notice under
subsection (b) does not deliver the claim to the
dissolved corporation by the deadline; or
 
(2)	 If a claimant whose claim was rejected by the
dissolved corporation does not commence a
proceeding to enforce the claim within ninety
days from the effective date of the rejection
notice.
 
4
 § 507-81 provides, in relevant part:
 
Attorney's lien upon actions and judgments.  (a) An attorney has a
lien upon:
 
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was inapplicable to Jenkins's claim of attorney lien because it
 
requires the attorney's service to result in an award.
 
After reviewing the parties' arguments, the record on
 
appeal, and relevant legal authorities, we resolve Jenkins's
 points on appeal as follows and affirm.
 
The Circuit Court did not err in adopting the
 
receiver's argument that claims were time-barred under HRS
 § 414D-246(c)(2). Jenkins argues that Receiver's January 21,
 2014 email rejecting Jenkins's claim was not (a) a written notice
 under and (b) did not conform to the requirements of HRS § 414D­246(b), and thus could not have triggered the HRS § 414D­246(c)(2) requirement that Jenkins commence a proceeding to
 enforce the claim within ninety (90) days or the claim would be
 barred. Jenkins's argument is not supported by the plain
 language of HRS § 414D(c)(2).
 
4(...continued)
(1) Actions, suits, and proceedings after
commencement of the action or arbitration proceeding; 
(2) Judgments, decrees, orders, settlements, andawards entered by the court or an arbitrator infavor of the client; and 
(3) Any proceeds paid in satisfaction of thejudgment, decree, order, settlement, or award. 
(b) The lien shall be for: 
(1) The fees and compensation specifically agreedupon with the client; 
(2) The reasonable value of the services of the attorney, if there is no fee agreement; 
(3) Any costs advanced by the attorney; and 
(4) Any fees or commissions taxed or allowed by thecourt. 
(c) 
Except for tax liens, prior liens of record on
the real and personal property subject to the lien created
by this section, and as provided in section (d), the
attorney's lien is superior to all other liens.
 
. . . . 

(f) To be enforceable under this section, a notice
of claim of the attorney's lien shall be filed with the
court or arbitrator, as the case may be.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
"Statutory interpretation is a question of law
 
reviewable de novo." State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai 'i 383, 390, 219 
P.3d 1170, 1177 (2009) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain and
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plain
and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task of
statutory construction is our foremost obligation to
ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself.
 
Id. (citations omitted).
 
HRS § 414D-246 provides a procedure for a dissolved
 
non-profit corporation to dispose of known claims. The procedure
 
is set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of the statute. HRS
 § 414D-246(b) specifies the content and timing of notice to known
 claimants. See note 2, supra. On October 23, 2013, Receiver
 
emailed Jenkins asking it to provide the amount of its claim and
 all paperwork supporting that claim. Later that same day,
 Jenkins filed a Notice of Claim of Attorney's Lien and supporting
 documents with the Circuit Court, and served Receiver with copies
 by mail and facsimile.
 
Jenkins disputes whether email qualifies as written
 
notice under HRS § 414D-246(b) (claim filing notice). Chapter
 414D, HRS, provides that written notice may be communicated by
 telegraph, teletype, or other form of wire or wireless
 communication and is effective when received in a comprehensible
 form. HRS § 414D-15 (Supp. 2015).
5 Therefore, email is written
 
5 HRS § 414D-15 states, in relevant part:
 
Notice.  (a) Notice may be oral, in the form of an
electronic transmission as described in subsections (i) and
(j), or written.
 
(b) Notice may be communicated in person; by
telephone, telegraph, teletype, or other form of wire or
wireless communication; by mail or private carrier; or by
electronic transmission as described in subsections (i) and
(j)[.] 
. . . .
 
(e) Except as provided in subsection (d)[regarding
notice to members], written notice, if in a comprehensible
form, is effective at the earliest of the following:
 
(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
notice under HRS § 414D-246(b) because it is a form of wired or
 
wireless communication comprehensible when received.
 
Although Jenkins argues that Receiver's claim filing
 
notice was deficient in content, the record does not contain a
 copy of Receiver's October 23, 2013 email and therefore it is not
 before us. State v. Hawaiian Dredging Co., 48 Haw. 152, 158, 397
 
P.2d 593, 598 (1964) ("It is elementary that an appellant must
 furnish to the appellate court a sufficient record to positively
 show the alleged error.") (citation omitted); Union Bldg.
 Materials Corp. v. Kakaako Corp., 5 Haw. App. 146, 151, 682, P.2d
 82, 87 (1984); see also HRAP Rule 10(e)(2). On this record, we
 cannot say that the Receiver's notice was inadequate.
 
Moreover, even assuming the claim filing notice was
 
defective, Jenkins's argument that HRS § 414D-246(c)(2) requires
 a HRS § 414D-246(b)-compliant notice in order to time-bar a late
 filing of a proceeding to enforce a claim is not supported by the
 plain language of the statute. While HRS § 414D-246(c)(1)
 specifies that if a claimant does not file a claim within 120
 days of the "written notice under subsection (b)" the claim to
 the corporation is time barred, HRS § 414D-246(c)(2) states only, 
[i]f a claimant whose claim was rejected by the dissolved
corporation does not commence a proceeding to enforce the
claim within ninety days from the effective date of the
rejection notice[, it is barred].
 
Thus, HRS § 414D-246 sets out two scenarios where a claim may be
 
time-barred: the first, if a proper claim filing notice has been
 given but the claimant does not file a claim within 120 days of
 that notice and the second, where the claimant is notified that
 the claim has been rejected but the claimant does not commence an
 enforcement action within 90 days of the rejection notice. No
 
5(...continued)
(1)	 When received;
 
(2)	 Five days after its deposit with the United
States Postal Service, as evidenced by the
postmark; provided the notice is mailed with the
correct address and with first class postage
affixed; or
 
(3)	 On the date shown on the return receipt, if sent
by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, and the receipt is signed by or on
behalf of addressee[.]
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
requirements for a rejection notice are contained in the statute,
 
and the requirements of HRS §414D-246(b) have no utility in the
 rejected claim context.
 
On January 21, 2014, Jenkins received Receiver's email
 
that, inter alia, rejected its claim, stating "I also conclude
 that you are not entitled to any additional payments from the
 WMSA."
 
Under the plain language of HRS §§ 414D-15 and -246,
 
Receiver followed the process provided by the statute to
 extinguish known claims to the corporation: (1) Jenkins filed a
 claim; (2) Receiver rejected Jenkins's claim; and (3) the time-
bar became operative when Jenkins did not commence a proceeding
 within ninety (90) days of rejection.
 
Based on the foregoing, it is unnecessary to address
 
Jenkins's other arguments.
 
For the foregoing reasons, the August 20, 2015
 
interlocutory Order on the Receiver's Report, Accounting, and
 Request for Instructions entered by the Circuit Court of the
 Second Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 30, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
J. Kevin Jenkins,
for Respondent-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Matson Kelley,
for Interested Party-
Creditor/Appellee
Starr Properties, LLC. 
6
 