NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 CAAP-11-0000609
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
  
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
'I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
RINSON PALIC, also known as JOHNNY NENA and JOHNNY NEHA,
Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 02-1-2327)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley, JJ.,
with Reifurth, JJ., dissenting separately)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Rinson Palic (Palic), also known as Johnny 
Nena and Johnny Neha, by complaint with second-degree robbery (Count 1); promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree (Count 2); and unlawful use of drug paraphernalia (Count 3). The alleged victim and complaining witness for the robbery charged in Count 1 was Thaddeus Pisarek (Pisarek).
1 Pisarek cooperated with 
the State in the initiation of the robbery prosecution against Palic. 
1/ It appears that Pisarek's name was misspelt as "Pisanek" in the
complaint and in certain other parts of the record. To avoid confusion, we
will use "Pisarek" when referring to the complaining witness for the charged
robbery.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The charges against Palic were originally resolved
 
through a plea agreement in which Palic agreed to plead guilty to
 
the reduced charge of second-degree theft in Count 1 and guilty
 as charged to Counts 2 and 3. The Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit (Circuit Court) accepted Palic's guilty pleas and
 sentenced him to probation. However, Palic subsequently violated
 the terms of his probation, which resulted in the revocation of
 his probation and his being resentenced to five years of
 imprisonment. While incarcerated, Palic filed a post-conviction
 petition to withdraw his guilty pleas. In support of the
 petition, Palic asserted, among other things, that he had not
 been adequately apprised of the immigration consequences of his
 pleas.
 
More than five years after Palic had originally pleaded 
guilty, the Circuit Court granted Palic's motion to withdraw his pleas, vacated his convictions, and set his case for trial. The State moved to continue the trial to secure the presence of Pisarek, who by this time was no longer residing in Hawai' i and 
who was an essential witness on the second-degree robbery charged in Count 1. The Circuit Court granted the motion, continued the trial, and later excluded a 92-day period of this trial continuance from the speedy-trial computation under Hawai' i Rules 
of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 48 (2000). Additional continuances largely attributable to Palic further delayed the trial for an extensive period of time. 
Immediately prior to the jury being sworn, the State
 
moved to nolle prosequi Count 1, which the Circuit Court granted. 
The jury found Palic guilty as charged of Counts 2 and 3. The
 Circuit Court sentenced Palic to concurrent five-year terms of
 imprisonment on Counts 2 and 3, with credit for time served. The
 
2
Circuit Court  filed its Judgment of Conviction and Sentence on
July 15, 2011 (July 15, 2011, Judgment).
 
2/ The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided over the proceedings relevant
to this appeal.
 
2
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Palic argues that: (1) the Circuit Court
 
3
erred in excluding under HRPP Rule 48(c)(4)(i)  a 92-day period
that the trial was continued to permit the State to secure its
 material witness Pisarek; and (2) there was insufficient evidence
 to convict Palic of Counts 2 and 3. 
As explained below, we
 
affirm the Circuit Court's July 15, 2011, Judgment.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Palic was arrested on October 15, 2002, for second-
degree robbery, promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree,
 and unlawful use of drug paraphernalia. That same day, the
 arresting officer, Honolulu Police Department Officer Alvin
 Kahawaii signed an "Affidavit in Support of Warrantless Arrest,"
 which described Officer Kahawaii's basis for believing there was
 
4
probable cause for each of Palic's  arrests and to support the
extended restraint of his liberty. Officer Kahawaii stated that
 he observed Pisarek chasing Palic at the intersection of Pauahi
 and Bethel Streets; that Pisarek shouted out to Officer Kahawaii
 that Pisarek had just been robbed; and that Officer Kahawaii and
 Officer Jack Long gave chase and apprehended Palic. In his
 affidavit, Officer Kahawaii relied upon information Pisarek
 provided to Officer Kahawaii during his investigation, including
 
3/ HRPP Rule 48(c)(4)(i) provides:
 
(c) Excluded Periods. The following periods shall be
excluded in computing the time for trial commencement:
 
. . . 
(4) periods that delay the commencement of trial and are
caused by a continuance granted at the request of the prosecutor
if:
 
(i) the continuance is granted because of the unavailability
of evidence material to the prosecution's case, when the
prosecutor has exercised due diligence to obtain such evidence and
there are reasonable grounds to believe that such evidence will be
available at a later date[.]
 
4/ Palic was identified in Officer Kahawaii's affidavit by the alias
"Johnny Nena."
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that: Palic had grabbed Pisarek's ten dollar bill that was in
 
front of Pisarek on the bar at Paradise Lost Lounge; that Pisarek
 followed Palic and attempted to retrieve the money, but Palic
 punched Pisarek in the mouth with his right fist and fled on
 foot; and that Pisarek chased Palic and flagged the officers when
 Pisarek saw them. Officer Kahawaii also stated that during
 Palic's arrest, a glass pipe with white residue was recovered
 from Palic's pants pocket, which Officer Kahawaii recognized as a
 pipe used to smoke crack cocaine that appeared to contain crack
 cocaine residue. Officer Kahawaii also recovered a ten dollar
 bill from Palic, which Palic acknowledged belonged to Pisarek.
 
On October 16, 2002, a judge of the District Court of
 
the First Circuit (District Court) signed a "Judicial
 Determination of Probable Cause for the Extended Restraint of
 Liberty of Warrantless Arrestee" regarding each of Palic's
 arrests.
 
On October 21, 2002, the District Court held a
 
preliminary hearing on the charges against Palic. Pisarek
 appeared and testified as a witness for the State. Pisarek
 testified that while at an establishment called Paradise Lost, he
 paid for drinks and received change that included a ten dollar
 bill that was in front of him on the bar; that Palic grabbed
 Pisarek's ten dollar bill and ran out of Paradise Lost and into a
 video store; that Pisarek gave chase, caught up to Palic, and
 demanded that Palic return the money; that Palic punched Pisarek
 in the mouth with a closed fist and ran away; that Pisarek
 followed Palic and asked two police officers for assistance; and
 that the officers stopped Palic and recovered the ten dollars
 Palic had stolen. Pisarek made an in-court identification of
 Palic as the person who had taken his money. The State also
 presented evidence on the drug-related charges. The District
 Court found that the State had established probable cause and
 committed the case to Circuit Court.
 
The State filed its complaint against Palic in Circuit
 
Court on October 23, 2002. On January 27, 2003, pursuant to a
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
plea agreement, Palic pleaded guilty to the reduced charge of
 
second-degree theft as to Count 1 and guilty as charged on Counts
 2 and 3. The Circuit Court entered judgment against Palic on
 April 29, 2003, sentencing him to concurrent five-year terms of
 probation on each count. Palic subsequently violated the terms
 of his probation. The Circuit Court revoked Palic's probation
 and resentenced him on December 13, 2005, to concurrent five-year
 terms of imprisonment on Counts 1, 2, and 3.
 
II.
 
While incarcerated, Palic learned that federal
 
authorities had placed an immigration detainer on him. On
 February 10, 2009, Palic filed a petition for post-conviction
 relief, seeking to withdraw his guilty pleas that were entered on
 January 27, 2003. Palic claimed that when he entered his guilty
 pleas, he had not been properly advised of the likelihood that
 deportation proceedings would be brought against him and that he
 had valid defenses to the charges which should have been raised. 
A hearing on Palic's petition set for April 27, 2009, was
 continued at Palic's request to permit Palic to obtain a
 transcript of the change of plea hearing and to obtain
 information from immigration authorities. On June 22, 2009, the
 Circuit Court held a hearing on Palic's petition, granted the
 petition, and set trial for the week of August 10, 2009. On July
 8, 2009, the Circuit Court issued its written order withdrawing
 Palic's guilty pleas, vacating his judgment, and setting trial
 for the week of August 10, 2009.
 
On August 5, 2009, the State filed a Motion for
 
Continuance of Trial to permit it to secure the presence of
 Pisarek, an essential witness on Count 1, at trial. In support
 of the motion, the State submitted the declaration of the Deputy
 Prosecuting Attorney then handling the case (DPA Young). DPA
 Young's declaration asserted that the State was utilizing an
 investigator, Kai Dodson ("Investigator Dodson"), from the
 Honolulu Prosecutor's Office to attempt to locate Pisarek and
 serve him with a trial subpoena. Investigator Dodson's efforts
 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
eventually led him to contact Mr. Bugarin, a Fireman's Union Port
 
Agent in Wilmington, California ("Agent Bugarin"), from whom
 Investigator Dodson learned that Pisarek was on a ship at sea and
 would not return to port for "several weeks." Agent Bugarin was
 unable to be more specific about the exact date of Pisarek's
 return. Investigator Dodson asked Agent Bugarin, and Agent
 Bugarin agreed, to deliver a message to Pisarek to call the
 Honolulu Prosecutor's Office when Pisarek returned to port. 
On August 10, 2009, the Circuit Court held a hearing on
 
the State's motion for continuance. Based on a plea offer
 extended to Palic by the State, a tentative change of plea
 hearing had also been scheduled for that date, but Palic advised
 the Circuit Court that he was rejecting the State's plea offer.
5
 
The Circuit Court granted the State's motion for continuance and
 set the trial for November 16, 2009. As a result of numerous 
additional continuances largely attributable to Palic, including
 continuances required to determine Palic's competency to proceed
 and necessitated by two withdrawals and substitutions of Palic's
 appointed counsel, trial did not begin until July 7, 2011.
 
In the intervening period, on December 16, 2010, Palic
 
filed a motion to dismiss the complaint with prejudice for
 violating the time limits set forth in HRPP Rule 48 (Motion to
 Dismiss). The State filed a memorandum in opposition to the
 Motion to Dismiss. The State asserted that the period from
 August 10, 2009, to November 10, 2009, of its requested
 continuance to secure the presence of Pisarek should be exculuded
 from the HRPP Rule 48 speedy-trial computation 
as it was determined that the victim in Count I, Thaddeus
Pisarek now resides on the mainland (California) and was not
available to return to Hawaii for trial as scheduled due to
 his work as a merchant marine. Pursuant to HRPP Rule
 48(c)(4)(i), Mr. Pisarek is a material and necessary witness
in the prosecution of Count I, and the State through it'[s]
diligence was able to track him down, and even make contact
 
5/ According to the Circuit Court's minutes, the State advised the
Circuit Court that the plea offer would remain open until "the complainant is
flown in for trial."
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
with him while he was at sea. At that point, it appeared
that Mr. Pisarek may be willing to participate in the
prosecution of this matter, and the State moved the Court
for a continuance of the trial in order to try and secure
Mr. Pisarek's presence at a future proceeding.
 
On June 27, 2011, the Circuit Court held a hearing on
 
Palic's Motion to Dismiss. DPA Young, who had been assigned to
 
Palic's case in August 2009 when the State moved for the trial
 continuance, testified that on June 22, 2009, the Circuit Court
 allowed Palic to withdraw his guilty pleas and reset the case for
 trial during the week of August 10, 2009. DPA Young explained
 that the State, through its investigator, attempted to locate
 Pisarek at his original 2002 Honolulu address, but determined
 that Pisarek was a merchant seaman and had moved to California. 
Attempts to locate Pisarek in California revealed that he would
 be out at sea during the period of the scheduled trial. 
Therefore, the State moved to continue the trial as it "hoped to
 make the evidence or testimony from [Pisarek] available at some
 future date," because he was a necessary witness for the robbery
 charge.
 
At the same hearing, the deputy prosecuting attorney
 
who had assumed responsibility for the case (DPA Clark) advised
 the Circuit Court that the State was "still having a very
 difficult time reaching [Pisarek]" and may not be able to secure
 his presence at trial. DPA Clark stated that the State's
 investigator "is having a hard time trying to nail down Mr.
 Pisa[r]ek as to whether he's on shore or off." Because the State
 did not have a direct connection to Pisarek, it was working
 through the merchant marine union to contact him. DPA Clark
 asserted that "[p]reviously we were able to get in touch with
 [Pisarek] on the ship . . . through [the merchant marine union],
 so I'm hoping that this means will yield that contact again."
 
On July 26, 2011, the Circuit Court issued its order
 
denying Palic's Motion to Dismiss, which contained the following
 relevant findings of fact and conclusion of law:
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Findings of Fact
 
. . . . 
11. On August 5, 2009, the State filed a Motion for
Continuance of Trial based upon its efforts to locate and
subpoena witnesses in the case and determination that the
complaining witness for the Robbery in the Second Degree
charge was working aboard a ship at sea as of August 3,
2009; would not return to port for "several weeks;" and the
Fireman's Union Port Agent Robert Bugarin, located in
Wilmington, California, did not know specifically when the
complaining witness would return to port. 
12. Hearing on the State's Motion for Continuance of Trial
was had on August 10, 2009, when a tentative Change of Plea
was scheduled based on a plea offer extended by the State
but which the Defendant rejected at that hearing. The court
 granted the State's Motion for Continuance of Trial and, at
the State's request, set trial for November 16, 2009 . . . .
 
. . . .
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
. . . .
 4. From August 10, 2009, to November 10, 2009, 92 days
elapsed, but the State's continuance was necessitated by an
unavailable material witness -- the complaining witness in
Count [1] -- as to whose location the State had exercised
due diligence, who had been located but who was working on a
ship at sea, and as to whom there were reasonable grounds to
believe that the witness would become available to testify.
Thus, the 92 days are excluded under [HRPP] Rule
48(c)(4)(i).
 
III.
 
Palic's trial commenced on July 7, 2011. The State was
 
unable to obtain Pisarek's presence and moved to nolle prosequi
 
Count 1 just prior to the jury being sworn. The Circuit Court
 granted the motion. With respect to Counts 2 and 3, the State
 presented evidence that police officers involved in Palic's
 arrest recovered a pipe with cocaine residue from Palic's pocket. 
Officer Kahawaii testified that during a search incident to
 arrest, Palic disclosed that he was in possession of a crack
 pipe, stating, "eh, I get crack pipe." Officer Spencer Andersen
 read portions of his police report into evidence, as past
 recollection recorded, which showed that Officer Anderson had
 recovered a glass pipe containing a black and white powdery
 substance, along with a lighter from Palic. The State presented
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence regarding the chain of custody for the pipe and the
 
results of a chemical analysis, which revealed that the residue
 found inside the pipe contained cocaine.
 
Palic did not testify or call any witnesses. His main
 
theory of defense was that because of the age of the case, the
 witnesses did not have a present recollection of their actions
 and therefore there was insufficient evidence and a reasonable
 doubt regarding his guilt. Palic also argued that the absence of
 the glass pipe due to its destruction prior to trial created a
 reasonable doubt. The jury found Palic guilty as charged on
 Counts 2 and 3. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Palic argues that the Circuit Court erred in excluding 
the 92-day period from August 10, 2009, to November 10, 2009, during which the trial was continued to permit the State to secure the presence of Pisarek. Palic contends that contrary to the Circuit Court's ruling, this period was not properly excludable under HRPP Rule 48(c)(4)(i) and, if included in the speedy-trial computation, resulted in the State violating the HRPP Rule 48 time limits. We review the trial court's factual findings in ruling on a motion to dismiss under HRPP Rule 48 for clear error and its determination of whether those facts fall within HRPP Rule 48's exclusionary provisions de novo. State v. 
Samonte, 83 Hawai' i 507, 514, 928 P.2d 1, 8 (1996). 
HRPP Rule 48(c)(4)(i) excludes from speedy-trial
 
computation the period of a continuance that is "granted because
 of the unavailability of evidence material to the prosecution's
 case, when the prosecutor has exercised due diligence to obtain
 such evidence and there are reasonable grounds to believe that
 such evidence will be available at a later date[.]" Palic argues
 that the Circuit Court erred in excluding the 92-day period under
 HRPP Rule 48(c)(4)(i) because "[t]here was no evidence based on
 reasonable grounds that [Pisarek] was ever personally contacted 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and may become 'available at a later date.'" We conclude that
 
the Circuit Court did not err in excluding the 92-day period.
 
It is not clear from Palic's argument whether he is
 
claiming that the State failed to exercise due diligence to
 obtain Pisarek's presence at trial prior to the requested
 continuance. If Palic is making such a claim, it is without
 merit. The record reveals that Palic had originally pleaded
 guilty and was sentenced in 2003. Thus, the State had no reason
 to keep in contact with Pisarek. However, on June 22, 2009, the
 Circuit Court orally ruled that it was granting Palic's petition
 to withdraw his guilty pleas and setting the case for trial
 during the week of August 10, 2009, and it filed a written order
 memorializing its ruling on July 8, 2009. The State assigned an
 investigator with the Honolulu Prosecutor's Office to locate
 Pisarek. The investigator attempted to locate Pisarek at his
 last known 2002 Honolulu address, learned that Pisarek was a
 merchant seaman and had moved to California, located him through
 a union agent as being aboard a ship at sea, determined that
 Pisarek was not expected to return to port until after the
 scheduled trial, and arranged through the agent to have Pisarek
 contact the Honolulu Prosecutor's Office once he returned. Palic
 does not indicate, under the circumstances, what more the State
 could have or should have done. We conclude that the State
 exercised due diligence to locate Pisarek and secure his presence
 prior to requesting the trial continuance.
 
We also conclude that there were "reasonable grounds to
 
believe" that Pisarek and his testimony would be available at a
 later date within the meaning of HRPP Rule 48(c)(4)(i). We must
 evaluate whether this requirement of HRPP Rule 48(c)(4)(i) was
 satisfied based on the information reasonably available to the
 Circuit Court and the State at the time the Circuit Court granted
 the State's motion for continuance on August 10, 2009. Prior to
 the Circuit Court's ruling on the State's continuance motion, the
 record shows that Pisarek had cooperated with the State in the
 prosecution of Palic. Pisarek requested the assistance of the
 
10
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
police in apprehending Palic. Pisarek then provided information
 
to the police in its investigation of Palic, and Pisarek
 testified for the State as a witness at the preliminary hearing
 held on the charges against Palic. At the time the Circuit Court
 ruled on the State's motion for continuance, there is nothing in
 the record to suggest that Pisarek would not continue to
 cooperate with the State in its prosecution of Palic. 
As noted, the Circuit Court orally granted Palic's
 
petition to withdraw his guilty pleas on June 22, 2009, and set
 the case for trial during the week of August 10, 2009. Prior to
 filing its motion for a continuance on August 5, 2009, the State
 had been able to locate Pisarek though a union agent, determine
 that he was at sea but would return to port at a later date, and
 obtain assurances that the union agent would deliver a message to
 Pisarek to call the Honolulu Prosecutor's Office when Pisarek
 returned to port. Because Pisarek was at sea, the State was
 limited in its ability to directly communicate with Pisarek and
 obtain definitive information regarding his availability prior to
 filing its continuance motion on August 5, 2009, and the Circuit
 Court's ruling on the motion on August 10, 2009.
6 Under these
 
circumstances, we hold that the Circuit Court did not err in
 concluding that there were reasonable grounds to believe that
 Pisarek would become available to testify at a later date.
 
II.
 
Palic contends that there was insufficient evidence to
 
support his convictions on Counts 2 and 3. Palic does not
 contest the "competency" of the evidence presented at trial, but
 argues that it was insufficient because no physical evidence of
 the pipe (which had been destroyed) was presented; testimony
 concerning the recovery of the pipe was inconsistent; and due to 
6/ We note that HRS 836-3 (1993) establishes procedures by which
witnesses from another state may be summoned to testify in Hawai' i in a 
criminal prosecution. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the passage of time, the witnesses had difficulty specifically
 
recalling the actions they had taken.
 
In evaluating the sufficiency of the evidence on 
appeal, we must consider the evidence in the light most favorable to the State. State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 
1241 (1998). "The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." Id. (block quote format and citation omitted). Applying 
the appropriate standard of review, we reject Palic's claim that the evidence was insufficient. 
CONCLUSION 
We affirm the July 11, 2011, Judgment of the Circuit 
Court. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 6, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Harrison L. Kiehm 
for Defendant-Appellant
 Chief Judge
Stephen K. Tsushima
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
Associate Judge
12
 