NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-13-0003458
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
GREGORY GARCIA, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-0541(4); FC-CR NO. 12-1-0327(4))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)

 
The issue in this appeal is whether the statements made
 
by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court)1 at
 
sentencing were sufficient to justify its imposition of
 
consecutive terms of imprisonment totaling twenty years on
 Defendant-Appellant Gregory Garcia (Garcia). As explained below,
 we conclude that the Circuit Court's statements at sentencing
 were sufficient to explain its rationale for imposing consecutive
 sentences and to demonstrate that it had considered the required
 factors. We therefore affirm the Circuit Court's sentence. 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) charged 
Garcia with multiple offenses in two separate cases. In FC-CR 
1The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
No. 12-1-0327(4), the State charged Garcia by felony information
 
and non-felony complaint with: (1) Felony Abuse (by choking) of a
 Family or Household Member; and (2) Terroristic Threatening in
 the Second Degree. In CR. No. 12-1-0541(4), the State charged
 Garcia by indictment with: (1) Sexual Assault in the First Degree
 (Count 1); (2) Kidnapping (Count 2); (3) Felony Abuse (by
 choking) of a Family or Household Member (Count 3); (4)
 Intimidating a Witness (Count 4); (5) Assault in the Second
 Degree (Count 5); (6) Violation of an Order for Protection (Count
 6); (7) Theft in the Third Degree (Count 7); (8) Promoting
 Pornography for Minors (Count 8); and (9) Violation of an Order
 for Protection (Count 9). The complaining witness (CW) for the
 charged offenses in both cases was Garcia's girlfriend.
 
The Circuit Court consolidated the two cases for trial. 
Pursuant to a plea agreement, Garcia pleaded no contest in FC-CR
 No. 12-1-0327(4) to: (1) Felony Abuse (by choking) of a Family or
 Household Member and (2) Terroristic Threatening in the Second
 Degree, and in CR. No. 12-1-0541(4) to: (1) the reduced charge of
 Unlawful Imprisonment (Count 2); (2) Felony Abuse (by choking) of
 a Family or Household Member (Count 3); (3) Intimidating a
 Witness (Count 4); (4) Assault in the Second Degree (Count 5);
 and (5) Violation of an Order for Protection (Count 6).
 
II.
 
Prior to sentencing, the State filed a "Motion for
 
Consecutive Terms of Imprisonment." In support of its motion,
 the State asserted that "[Garcia] has a long history of violence,
 violating protective orders, and manipulation and intimidation of
 women[,]" which included the following:
 
1. A conviction for Abuse of a Family or Household
 
Member in FC-CR No. 07-1-0035(4), in which Garcia punched his
 then wife in the head and threatened her life, while she was
 trapped in her vehicle, after she sought help in getting a
 temporary restraining order against him and had indicated she
 wanted a divorce. Garcia's probation for this conviction was 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
revoked when he was again convicted of Abuse of a Family or
 
Household Member in FC-CR No. 07-1-0426(4).
 
2. In FC-CR No. 07-1-0426(4), Garcia was convicted of
 
Abuse of a Family or Household Member for slapping and punching
 his then girlfriend, while she was in his car. 
3. In February 2008, Garcia was charged in FC-CR No.
 
08-1-0069(4) with Violation of an Order for Protection that had
 been granted in favor of the victim in FC-CR No. 07-1-0426(4). 
Garcia allegedly threatened the victim, who was trying to end
 their relationship, and Garcia said, "If you leave me, I'll break
 your neck." Pursuant to a plea agreement, Garcia pleaded guilty
 to, and was convicted of, Contempt of Court.
 
4. In July 2008, Garica was indicted on charges
 
involving the same victim as in FC-CR No. 07-1-0426(4) and FC-CR
 No. 08-1-0069(4) for Felony Abuse of a Family or Household Member
 (two counts), Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree, and
 Violation of an Order for Protection. Garcia allegedly head-
butted the victim twice, choked her, and picked up a sharp metal
 tool and threatened to kill her while she was holding her infant
 son. Pursuant to a plea agreement, Garcia pleaded guilty to, and
 was convicted of, the reduced charge of Misdemeanor Abuse of a
 Family or Household Member and Violation of an Order for
 Protection.
 
5. In April 2010, Garcia was arrested for Violation
 
of an Order for Protection and was subsequently found guilty of
 that charge. He was sentenced to 120 days confinement and two
 years of probation.
 
In its Motion for Consecutive Terms of Imprisonment,
 
the State also detailed the nature and circumstances of the
 offenses for which Garcia was to be sentenced. With respect to
 FC-CR No. 12-1-0327(4), the State asserted that on May 2, 2012,
 while in Garcia's car, Garica and the CW argued about why the CW
 did not want to have a baby with Garcia. Garcia slapped the CW
 in the back of the head several times, grabbed her hair and
 yanked her head back, bit the CW on the arm, choked her to the
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
point that she could not breathe, and told her to "shut the fuck
 
up" or he would kill her. Based on this incident, the CW
 obtained an Order for Protection against Garcia, and Garcia was
 eventually charged with Felony Abuse of a Family or Household
 Member and Terroristic Threatening in the Second Degree. 
With respect to CR. No. 12-1-0541(4), Garcia showed up
 
unannounced at the CW's workplace, the day before he was
 scheduled to appear in court for the charges in FC-CR No. 12-1­0327(4). Garcia pleaded with the CW to take him back; had sexual
 intercourse with the CW despite her pleas for him to stop; and
 then apologized to her. Garcia attempted to convince the CW to
 refrain from testifying against him on the pending charges or to
 lie to exonerate him. When the CW refused to do so, Garcia
 threatened to make it difficult for the CW to obtain visitation
 with her daughter by telling the CW's ex-husband that Garcia and
 the CW had continued to see each other. While the CW was
 answering a phone call to her office, Garcia grabbed the CW's
 cell phone from her purse, and he saw something that made him
 angry. Garcia grabbed the CW by the neck, choked her, punched
 her in the face, and bit her. Garcia grabbed a letter opener and
 began cutting his own wrist. The CW was able to escape, run
 outside, and call for help. Garcia fled the scene with the CW's
 cell phone. Garcia had previously taken a video of himself and
 the CW having sex while the protective order was in effect and
 had threatened to use the video against the CW. After fleeing
 the scene, Garcia used the CW's cell phone to send the video to
 the CW's 14-year-old daughter, the daughter's grandmother, and
 the CW's co-workers.
2
 
The State argued that pursuant to Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) §§ 706-606 and 706-668.5, the Circuit Court should
 impose consecutive sentences because they were warranted due to
 
2Garcia filed a "Sentencing Memorandum" in which he
acknowledged sending the "recent video of the couple engaging in
sex (taken the week before) to several people on [the CW's]
contact list, including [the CW's 14- year-old daughter]."
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(a) the nature and circumstances of the offenses; (b) the history
 
and characteristics of Garcia; and (c) the need for the
 imposition of consecutive sentences. With respect to this last
 factor, the State argued:
 
There is a need for imposition of consecutive
sentences for numerous reasons. Consecutive sentences are
 
needed to reflect the seriousness of Defendant's actions in
 these two separate violent offenses. The Defendant has a
 history of domestic violence and was on probation when he
committed the first offense in May, 2012. He knew how
 serious it was to have a new charge of Felony Abuse [of a
Family or Household Member] and Terroristic Treatening but,
even new serious charges could not stop this violent
manipulative Defendant. He went and tried to force the
 victim to change her story and not testify against him.
Witness intimidation by the use of threats or in this case,
violence, especially in a domestic violence situation, needs
to be dealt with harshly. Witness intimidation in any form
but, especially combined with violence perpetrated on the
same victim, undermines our justice system. Consecutive
 sentencing is the only way to appropriately reflect the
seriousness of Defendant's actions.
 
Additionally, consecutive sentences are needed to
promote respect for the laws relating to protection of
persons, especially in a domestic violence situation. It is
 needed to 
deter future similar conduct of this Defendant. 
The Defendant has been given every possible opportunity to
not re-offend. He has been shown leniency in his previous
jail terms, he has been put on probation, and he has
undergone counseling. Absolutely nothing else has been able
to deter his conduct therefore, it is time he is sentenced
consecutively for 2 separate violent offenses. Furthermore,
consecutive sentences are needed to protect the public from
future crimes of the Defendant[.]
 
The State recommended that the Circuit Court impose consecutive
 
sentences for a total combined sentence of ten years of
 incarceration, with the possibility of parole. 
III.

 
Garcia filed a Sentencing Memorandum in which he
 
requested that he be sentenced to probation. In his Sentencing
 Memorandum, Garcia argued:
 
Given his youth and lack of any prior felony
conviction, a prison sentence is not appropriate. Gregory
Garcia is a first time felon who deserves a chance on felony
probation. With the benefit of hindsight he now sees that
he was blinded by his emotions and the highly sexual,
abusive relationship. He acknowledges his wrongdoing in
this case and is remorseful for his foolish actions . . . . 
He knows that he has problems with anger management and is
seeking help in this area. Gregory Garcia has positive
 
5
   
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
plans for his future. He has marketable job skills and a
desire to further his education. Further, he has a strong
family support.
 
The death of his father while he was in jail was an
3
eye opener. He has profited by his lengthy confinement.[ ] 
Previously he was in denial but now realizes his problems
with anger management and life skills. The Probation
 Department has programs that will be able to address
Garcia's short-comings. His new humbled character and
 attitudes show that he will listen to and obey his probation
officer if given the chance on probation.
 
IV.
 
Garcia appeared for sentencing on August 21, 2013. The
 
Circuit Court heard argument on the State's Motion for
 
Consecutive Terms of Imprisonment from both the State and Garcia. 
The Circuit Court also heard Garcia's sentencing allocution. The
 Circuit Court then imposed sentence, stating as follows:
 
THE COURT:  You know, Mr. Garcia, I have been involved
in probably 90 percent of the cases that you've had on the
fourth floor. I know Judge August handled one of the
matters, and one of the cases I have today was originally
assigned to Judge Loo. 
And I also, when I used to do the [Temporary
Restraining Order (TRO)] calendar, handled some of the TRO
cases that you were involved in as well.
 
And I can honestly say that I have tried everything
that was within my power, except for prison, to try to help
you change. Try to help you see that you might have other
ways of handling your anger. And I can now see that nothing
has worked. None of the classes. None of the jail. None
 of the lectures, which you're not going to get a long
lecture today. You've done enough talking for all of us
today, actually.
 
But, yeah, I was the guy who gave you that five days.
And, you know, when a judge gives somebody five days for the
first offense, they think it's a long time and they think
that will shake somebody up enough to say, boy, I don't want
to do six, or seven, or eight, or nine, or ten days. 
But in that very first case I had resentenced you to
30 days thinking, well, that's six times more than the first
sentence I gave. That has to work, because he's a bright
man. He's the son of a defense attorney. He comes from a
 good family. It's got to work.
 
I was wrong again. You have proven me wrong more
times than any other defendant that has come before me. 
3Garcia was in custody pending sentencing.
 
6
   
  
  
  
  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
So, I said, well, maybe he needed more time. The last
 
sentence I gave you was 120 days. That might be the one you
did on weekends. And it didn't work.
 
You've not only been ordered to classes, you have
completed the classes with flying colors. But you see you
don't get credit for finishing the classes, you get credit
for applying the skills that you were supposed to have
learned in the class. You can't come here today with
diplomas and say -- certificates of completion, and say,
look all that I've done, because the proof is there. The
 proof is what you've done to her that tells us those
classes, in your case, have not worked.
 
And the therapy, the letter from your therapist who's
said he's treated you for two years, you have wasted your
money. And he says, you need more treatment and I'm happy
to help. You can come see me every week, every month, I'll
continue to treat it. It hasn't worked. None of it has
 worked. Because if it had worked, you wouldn't be here now. 
So I'm sorry to say, Mr. Garcia, is that I am giving
up on you today. I can't think in the last eight and a half
years that I've sat on this bench that I have said that to
any person, ever. I mean I've given people sentences they
deserved, that's for sure.
 
  
But I have never said to someone what I'm saying to
you today. I am giving up on you, Mr. Garcia. There's no
 more treatment. No more programming. Nothing that I can
do. And I've tried.
 
You know, there's an old saying, there's no such thing
as bad students, only bad teachers. Maybe I've been a bad
teacher to you, Mr. Garcia. Because maybe if I'd done
something sooner this wouldn't have happened. I don't know. 
Maybe not.
 

But today's the day we straighten everything out.
Today's the day you start this change you said you
experienced in prison, and whether it's based on fear of
other inmates, fear of the unknown, fear of how long you're
going to be in, whatever the reason is, if it's working,
then it's working.
 
In FC-CR 12 -- oh, I'm sorry, I do have to leave you
with one concern I have.
 
This is a very disturbing case to me on many levels.
While this is not the worst case of physical harm that I
have seen from the bench, this is probably one of the worst
cases of psychological harm that I have seen.
 
Your attempt to break-up this family by sending out a
video of intimate sexual acts between you and the victim to
her daughter, her employer, her ex-husband, her
mother-in-law, I can't imagine how mean-spirited someone has
to be to do that. 
Don't even say a word.
 
I can not imagine what it takes for another human
being to do that to someone. To want to win so badly that
 
7
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
you would send this to the people you sent it to with the
hope that they would view it so that they would have an
opinion of her.
 
Probably the ultimate in manipulation that you were
seeking. You tried to manipulate this Court several times,
Mr. Garcia. That was the ultimate.
 
I guess you were trying to break her spirit is what
you were doing, I think. You threatened to do that and you
followed through. And I don't know how proud you were of
yourself for doing that, or if that's included in your list
of regrets, but that, I can say, is something I have not
seen before. You hold the record.
 
And that speaks louder to your, I guess, resentment
was the word you used earlier. And the degree with which
you would go to show her how upset you were. 
It wasn't enough that you beat her physically. It
 
wasn't enough. Because that was just physical. That would
 heal. You went after her very core and her support group.
I think she's bounced back. I think it didn't work. I
 think it didn't work.
 
And so, the sentence you deserve today is on FC-CR 12­
1-0327, count one, felony abuse of a family or household
member, five years imprisonment. You are committed to the
 custody of the Department of Public Safety.
 
In count two, for the offense of terroristic
threatening in the second degree, you are sentenced to one
year. Those terms to run concurrent.
 
In Criminal Number 12-1-0541, count one, unlawful
imprisonment in the first degree, you're sentenced to five
years. Excuse me, that was count two.
 
Count three, felony abuse of family household member,
five years. Those terms to run consecutive to each other.
 
Count four, intimidating a witness, five years. That
 
term to run consecutive to the two other terms.
 
Assault in the second degree, count five, five years.
That will run concurrent.
 
And count six, violation of an order for protection,
one year, will run concurrent. That totals 15 years.
 
Those terms will run consecutive to the sentence in
 
12-1-0327 for a grand total of 20 years imprisonment, Mr.
Garcia. With four of those terms to run concurrent. Excuse
 me, four of those terms to run consecutive.
 
Hana, did you get it as I spelled it out? Five and
 
one on the first. Five, five, five on the next three.
Concurrence five and one. The total that I know you're
wanting to know is 20 years.
 
You will pay restitution in the amount of $540.95 as
determined by the Judiciary Monetary Restitution Program and
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as a freestanding order. That manner of payment will be 30
percent of all gross earnings while in custody. Ten percent
of any net earnings while not in custody.
 
You'll pay the Crime Victim Compensation Fees of
$105.00 in count one and $55.00 in count two, in 327.
$105.00 in counts two, three, four and five each. And 55 in
 count six. That total $635.00.
 
You'll provide swab samples, print or hand impressions
as required by the collecting agency's rules and regulations
or provide blood specimens as required by the collecting
agency rules and regulations for Law Enforcement
Identification Analysis.
 
You'll pay the monetary assessment of $500.00 or the
actual cost of the DNA analysis, whichever is less, to the
DNA Special Registry Fund.
 
Credit for 365 days on both criminal numbers. That is
 
all.
 
The Circuit Court entered its Judgment on August 21,
 
2013. On September 5, 2013, the Circuit Court entered its
 
written "Order Granting State's Motion for Consecutive Terms of
 Imprisonment." The Circuit Court's order states in relevant part
 as follows:
 
Pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (H.R.S.), Sections
706-606 and 706-668.5, the Court considered the nature and
circumstances of the Defendant's offenses, the history and
characteristics of the Defendant, and the need for the
sentence to reflect the seriousness of the offenses, to
promote respect for the law, to deter other criminal
conduct, and to protect the public from further crimes of
the Defendant when the Court sentenced Defendant to
 consecutive terms of imprisonment. Based on the factors set
 forth in H.R.S. §§ 706-606 and 706-668.5, the Court found
that the Defendant's offenses were of a violent and serious
 nature causing injury and involving intimidation of a
witness with violence to either change her story or refuse
to testify against him. The Court also found that the
 Defendant has a long history of violence, violating
protective orders, and intimidating women. The Court stated
 it has tried every available resource, except prison, to try
to rehabilitate the Defendant to no avail. Lastly, the
Court found consecutive sentences were needed to reflect the
 seriousness of the offenses, to promote respect for the law,
to deter other criminal conduct, and to protect the public
from further crimes of the Defendant.
 
The Circuit Court's order then sets forth the combination of
 
consecutive and concurrent sentences it imposed that resulted in
 a total of twenty years of imprisonment. 
9

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, Garcia contends that the Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion in imposing consecutive sentences because:

 
(1) the Circuit Court "failed to consider the factors under HRS 
§ 706-606 when it imposed consecutive terms of imprisonment"; and
 (2) the Circuit Court "failed to explain and articulate a
 meaningful rationale for imposing consecutive terms of
 imprisonment." As explained below, we conclude that the Circuit
 Court did not abuse its discretion in imposing consecutive
 sentences.
 
I.
 
We review a sentencing court's imposition of sentence

 
for abuse of discretion.
 
A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in
imposing a sentence. The applicable standard of review for
sentencing or resentencing matters is whether the court
committed plain and manifest abuse of discretion in its
decision. Factors which indicate a plain and manifest abuse
of discretion are arbitrary or capricious action by the
judge and a rigid refusal to consider the defendant's
contentions. And, generally, to constitute an abuse it must
appear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason
or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
substantial detriment of a party litigant.
 
State v. Kong, 131 Hawai 'i 94, 101, 315 P.3d 720, 727 (2013) 
(format altered; citations omitted). 
Under HRS § 706–668.5(1) (Supp. 2013), a sentencing
 
court has discretion to order that multiple terms of imprisonment
 
be served concurrently or consecutively. In making this
 determination, the court must consider the factors set forth in
 HRS § 706–606. HRS § 706–668.5(2) (1993). "The weight to be
 given the factors set forth in HRS § 706–606 in imposing sentence
 is a matter generally left to the discretion of the sentencing
 court, taking into consideration the circumstances of each case."
 State v. Akana, 10 Haw. App. 381, 386, 876 P.2d 1331, 1334
 (1994).
 
HRS § 706–606 (1993) provides:
 
The court, in determining the particular sentence to be
imposed, shall consider:
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1)	 The nature and circumstances of the offense and
 
the history and characteristics of the
defendant;
 
(2)	 The need for the sentence imposed:
 
(a)	 To reflect the seriousness of the offense,
to promote respect for law, and to provide
just punishment for the offense;
 
(b)	 To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;
 
(c)	 To protect the public from further crimes
of the defendant; and
 
(d)	 To provide the defendant with needed
educational or vocational training,
medical care, or other correctional
treatment in the most effective manner;
 
(3)	 The kinds of sentences available; and
 
(4)	 The need to avoid unwarranted sentence
 disparities among defendants with similar
records who have been found guilty of similar
conduct.
 
"Absent clear evidence to the contrary, it is presumed
 
that a sentencing court will have considered all factors before
 
imposing concurrent or consecutive terms of imprisonment under
 HRS § 706–606." Kong, 131 Hawai
'i at 102, 315 P.3d at 728 
(internal quotation marks, brackets, and citation omitted). 
Nevertheless, in State v. Hussein, 122 Hawai
'i 495, 510, 229 P.3d 
313, 328 (2010), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court prospectively imposed 
the requirement that "circuit courts must state on the record at
 the time of sentencing the reasons for imposing a consecutive
 sentence." In Hussein, the supreme court stated: 
Although to this point we have recognized the benefits of a
statement of reasons but not mandated it, we now conclude,
based on the reasons and circumstances set forth supra, that
a court must state its reasons as to why a consecutive
sentence rather than a concurrent one was required.
 
Such a requirement serves dual purposes. First,
reasons identify the facts or circumstances within the range
of statutory factors that a court considers important in
determining that a consecutive sentence is appropriate. An
 express statement, which evinces not merely consideration of
the factors, but recites the specific circumstances that led
the court to impose sentences consecutively in a particular
case, provides a meaningful rationale to the defendant, the
victim, and the public.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Second, reasons provide the conclusions drawn by the
court from consideration of all the facts that pertain to
the statutory factors. It is vital, for example, for the
defendant to be specifically informed that the court has
concluded that he or she is dangerous to the safety of the
public, or poses an unacceptable risk of re-offending, or
that rehabilitation appears unlikely due to his or her lack
of motivation and a failure to demonstrate any interest in
treatment, or that the multiplicity of offenses and victims
and the impact upon the victims' lives warrant imposition of
a consecutive term. Hence, reasons confirm for the
defendant, the victim, the public, and the appellate court,
that the decision to impose consecutive sentences was
deliberate, rational, and fair.
 
Consequently, after the filing date of the judgment
herein, circuit courts must state on the record at the time
of sentencing the reasons for imposing a consecutive
sentence.
 
Hussein, 122 Hawai 'i at 509-10, 229 P.3d at 327-28. 
In Kong, the supreme court held that the following
 
statements made by the circuit court at sentencing were
 
sufficient to satisfy the new requirement imposed by Hussein:
 
"Taking into consideration all of the factors set
forth in HRS § 706–606, including the extensive record of
the defendant, which includes six burglary convictions,
. . . ten felonies, which represents a lot of harm in our
community.
 
The Court is going to impose the following sentence in
this matter. The defendant will be committed to the care
 and custody of the Director of the Department of Public
Safety for a period of ten years on Count 1, five years on
Count 2.
 
. . . .

 
In view of his extensive criminality, the Court is
going to make these counts run consecutive for a total of
fifteen years, mittimus forthwith, full credit for time
served.
 
I will order that he be given an opportunity to
participate in the Cash Box drug treatment program at the
earliest convenience of the Department of Public Safety."
 
Kong, 131 Hawai 'i at 99, 315 P.3d at 725 (brackets omitted). 
In upholding the sentencing court's imposition of
 
consecutive sentences, the supreme court explained:
 
[T]he sentencing court is not required to articulate and
explain its conclusions with respect to every factor listed
in HRS § 706–606. Rather, "it is presumed that a sentencing
court will have considered all factors before imposing
concurrent or consecutive terms of imprisonment under HRS 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
§ 706–606." Thus, the sentencing court is required to
articulate its reasoning only with respect to those factors
it relies on in imposing consecutive sentences. 
Id. at 102, 315 P.3d at 728 (citations omitted). The supreme
 
court held that the sentencing court's statement regarding Kong's
 "extensive criminality" (1) "identified the specific facts or
 circumstances within the range of statutory factors that the
 court considered in imposing a consecutive sentence"; and (2)
 "provided a rational and fair basis within the range of statutory
 factors for the imposition of consecutive sentences." Id. at
 
103, 315 P.3d at 729.
 
II.
 
Here, the Circuit Court made extensive statements on
 
the record that explained its reasons for imposing consecutive
 sentences on Garcia. The Circuit Court recounted its involvement
 in Garcia's prior criminal cases, the numerous opportunities for
 rehabilitation it gave to Garcia, and the numerous attempts it
 made to help Garcia change. The Circuit Court stated that as
 Garcia's continuing criminal conduct in the instant cases had
 shown, its attempts to rehabilitate Garcia had failed, and the
 Circuit Court stated that it was "giving up on [Garcia]" and
 believed that he was not entitled to further attempts at
 rehabilitation. The Circuit Court discussed the nature and
 circumstances of Garcia's offenses and Garcia's character. The
 Circuit Court stated that Garcia's conduct resulted in "one of
 the worst cases of psychological harm" the Circuit Court had
 seen. The Circuit Court specifically referred to Garcia's
 conduct in sending a video of his intimate sexual acts with the
 CW to the CW's daughter, her employer, her ex-husband, and her
 mother-in-law. The Circuit Court stated that it "[could] not
 imagine what it takes for another human being to do that to
 someone[,]" and it characterized Garcia's sending the video tape
 to the CW's support group as "the ultimate in manipulation[.]" 
The Circuit Court prefaced its imposition of the consecutive 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sentences on Garcia by stating that it was "the sentence you
 
deserve today[.]"
 
Although the Circuit Court could have done a better job
 
of explaining its reasons for imposing consecutive sentences by
 specifically linking its statements to the factors set forth HRS
 
4
§ 707-606,  we conclude that the Circuit Court's statements were
sufficient to satisfy the requirements of 
Hussein. The purposes 
of the statement of reasons required by Hussein are to: "(1) identify[] the facts or circumstances within the range of statutory factors that the court considered, and (2) confirm[] for the defendant, the victim, the public, and the appellate court that the decision was deliberate, rational, and fair." Kong, 131 Hawai
'i at 102-03, 315 P.3d 728-29. The Circuit 
Court's statements at sentencing were sufficient to fulfill these purposes. 
The Circuit Court's statements at sentencing
 
demonstrated that in imposing consecutive sentences, it was
 relying on the statutory factors of: (1) the nature and
 circumstances of the offense and the history and characteristics
 of the defendant; and (2) the need for the sentence imposed to
 reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote respect for
 
4In this regard, we note that the Circuit Court's written
Order Granting State's Motion for Consecutive Terms of
Imprisonment, which was filed after sentencing, clearly explainedthe Circuit Court's reasons, with reference to the specificfactors under HRS § 706-606 that the Circuit Court relied upon,for determining that consecutive terms of imprisonment werenecessary. Certainly, had the Circuit Court used this sameformat at sentencing to express its views, there would be noquestion that the Circuit Court had complied with therequirements of Hussein. In Hussein, however, the supreme courtstated that circuit courts must state their reasons for imposingconsecutive sentences "on the record at the time of sentencing[.]" Hussein, 122 Hawai
'i at 510, 229 P.3d at 328.
Thus, based on Hussein, we cannot rely on the Circuit Court'spost-sentence order, but must rely on the Circuit Court'sstatements at sentencing, in determining whether the CircuitCourt sufficiently explained its reasons for imposing consecutivesentences. 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
law, to deter Garcia from additional criminal conduct, and to
 
protect the public from further crimes by Garcia. The Court
 explained that it had given Garcia numerous previous chances and
 opportunities for rehabilitation, and that Garcia had squandered
 and rejected those chances. The Circuit Court discussed the
 significant harm resulting from Garcia's conduct. The Circuit
 Court's statements reveal that it believed Garcia was not
 entitled to any more chances, and that his character was
 depraved, mean-spirited, manipulative, and lacking in compassion
 for others. The Circuit Court's statements show that it believed
 that Garcia was not amenable to rehabilitation and thus the focus
 of Garcia's sentencing should be on punishing him and deterring
 him from future crimes by imposing an extensive total term of
 incarceration. 
The Circuit Court's extensive statements at sentencing 
provided clear insight into its thinking and reasoning in imposing the consecutive sentences. We conclude that the Circuit Court's statements served the purposes of, and were sufficient to: (1) "identify[] the facts or circumstances within the range of statutory factors that the [Circuit Court] considered" in imposing consecutive sentences; and (2) "confirm[] for the defendant, the victim, the public, and the appellate court that the decision was deliberate, rational, and fair." See Kong, 131 
Hawai
'i at 102-03, 315 P.3d 728-29. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit

 
Court's Judgment.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, July 31, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Ben C. Summit 
(Summit Law Offices)
for Defendant-Appellant
 Chief Judge
Richard K. Minatoya

 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 County of Maui
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
16

 