FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
---o0o---
BERNADINE KUAHIWINUI, Individually and as
Personal Representative of the Estate of
KRISTERPHER KAUPU-KUAHIWINUI, deceased; and
KENNETH KAUPU, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
ZELO'S INC., dba SUSHI & BLUES;
TAHITI NUI ENTERPRISES, INC., dba TAHITI NUI;
and STATE OF HAWAI #I, Defendants-Appellees,
and
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE BUSINESS ENTITIES 1-10; DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10;
and DOE UNINCORPORATED ASSOCIATIONS 1-10, Defendants.
ZELO'S INC., dba SUSHI & BLUES,
Third-Party Plaintiff,
v.
SOLOMON MAKUA KUAHIWINUI,
Third-Party Defendant.
STATE OF HAWAI #I,
Third-Party Plaintiff,
v.
SOLOMON KUAHIWINUI and CHRISTOPHER FERGUSON,
Third-Party Defendants.FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
SHERYL ANN ACKERMAN, Individually;
SHERYL ANN ACKERMAN, as mother of, natural guardian and
next friend for BRITNEY ANN HARDSKY, minor; and
SHERYL ANN ACKERMAN, as Personal Representative of the
Estate of CHRISTOPHER COLE FERGUSON, deceased,
Plaintiffs,
v.
SOLOMON MAKUA KUAHIWINUI; JAMES B. EDMONDS;
TAHITI NUI ENTERPRISES, INC., dba TAHITI NUI;
ZELO'S INC., dba SUSHI & BLUES; STATE OF HAWAI #I;
THE COUNTY OF KAUAI, Defendants,
and
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10, DOE NON-PROFIT ENTITIES 1-10;
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, Defendants.
NO. CAAP-13-0001803
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NOS. 08-1-0067 and 08-1-0069)
DECEMBER 13, 2017
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE
The Hawai #i Supreme Court has established a "common law
dram shop negligence [cause of] action" (dram shop cause of
action) against liquor licensees based on requirements imposed by
Hawai#i's liquor control law.  Ono v. Applegate, 62 Haw. 131,
137, 612 P.2d 533, 539 (1980).  Based on the statutory
requirements, the supreme court has held that a liquor licensee
has a duty not to serve alcohol to a person it knows or
reasonably should know is under the influence of alcohol.  The
class of people protected by this legal duty and who may assert
this cause of action consists of "innocent third parties."  Thus,
an innocent third party injured by a drunk driver has a
negligence cause of action against a liquor licensee that,
preceding the injury, served alcohol to the drunk driver, who it
knew or reasonably should have known was intoxicated.
2FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
This appeal presents the question of who falls within
the protected class of "innocent third parties" for a dram shop
cause of action.  In particular, what criteria applies in
determining whether a person who accompanied and consumed alcohol
with the drunk driver, and later was injured by the drunk driver, 
qualifies as an innocent third party.
In this case, Kristerpher Kaupu-Kuahiwinui
(Kristerpher) was a passenger in a car driven by Solomon
Kuahiwinui (Solomon).  Kristerpher was fatally injured in a
single-car accident when the car broke through a guardrail, went
down an steep embankment, and landed in the Hanalei River.  Blood
tests conducted after the accident showed that the blood alcohol
content of both Kristerpher and Solomon significantly exceeded
the legal limit for driving.  Prior to the accident, Kristerpher
had accompanied Solomon to Sushi & Blues, an establishment owned
by Zelo's, Inc. (Zelo's), where they both consumed alcoholic
beverages.  Kristerpher was 19 years old, under the legal
drinking age of 21, and Solomon was 25 years old.
Kristerpher's mother, individually and on behalf of
Kristerpher's estate, and Kristerpher's father brought a dram
shop cause of action against Zelo's.  Zelo's moved for summary
judgment on the ground that Kristerpher was intoxicated at the
time of his death and therefore was not within the class of
"innocent third parties" protected by the dram shop cause of
action.  The Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (Circuit Court)1
granted Zelo's motion for summary judgment.
As explained below, we conclude that whether a person
injured by a drunk driver qualifies as an innocent third party
does not turn on whether the injured person was intoxicated. 
Rather, we hold that whether the injured person qualifies as an
innocent third party turns on whether the injured person actively
contributed to or procured the intoxication of the drunk driver
1The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
3FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
who injured him or her.  This holding is consistent with our
supreme court's rationale for establishing the dram shop cause of
action.  It is also consistent with the "complicity" defense to
dram shop claims recognized by certain other jurisdictions.2
Whether Kristerpher qualifies as an innocent third
party under our test raises genuine issues of material fact. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in granting
Zelo's motion for summary judgment, and we remand the case for
further proceedings.
BACKGROUND
I.
This case arises out of a single-car accident that
occurred shortly after midnight.  At the time of the accident,
Solomon was driving the car and Kristerpher and Christopher
Ferguson (Ferguson) were passengers in the car.  The car failed
to negotiate a turn, broke through a metal guardrail, went down a
steep embankment, and landed in the Hanalei River.  Solomon was
able to escape from the vehicle.  Kristerpher and Ferguson were
unable to escape and drowned.
At the time of the accident, Kristerpher was 19,
Solomon was 25, and Ferguson was 35.  Kristerpher and Solomon
were cousins, and Ferguson was Kristerpher's family friend.
Kristerpher, Solomon, and Ferguson had traveled to Kaua #i to do
work on a home owned by James Edmonds (Edmonds).  They had worked
on Kaua#i for about a week before the accident.
After finishing work on Friday, the three men, with
Edmonds' permission, used Edmonds' car.  Solomon, who was the
only one with a valid driver's license, was the driver.  The
three men stopped at a bank to cash their paychecks then headed
toward Hanalei.  Ferguson purchased a twelve-pack of beer, and
2We rely on the form of "complicity" defense from other
jurisdictions that requires proof that the person injured by the
drunk driver actively contributed to or procured the driver's
intoxication.   
4FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
they drove to Hanalei Bay.  According to Solomon, they spent
about two hours at Hanalei Bay, where they drank some but not all
of the twelve-pack.  Solomon estimated that he drank about two
beers, Kristerpher also drank beer, but Solomon was not sure how
many, and Ferguson drank the majority of the beer.  At Hanalei
Bay, the three men also smoked marijuana.  
After leaving Hanalei Bay, the three men went to eat
dinner at Sushi & Blues, which was operated by Zelo's.  At Sushi
& Blues, they were served by Zelo's employee, Serge Bullington
(Bullington).
In his deposition, Bullington testified that he
recalled serving Solomon two beers and two shots of "Flaming Dr.
Pepper," a drink consisting of 151-proof rum and Amaretto
liqueur, and serving Ferguson two beers, two shots of Flaming Dr.
Pepper, and tequila.  Bullington denied serving any alcoholic
beverage to Kristerpher and said that he only served Kristerpher
a Coke.  Bullington also stated that the three men did not appear
to be intoxicated at any time that he was serving them.
Solomon testified in his deposition that after arriving
at Sushi & Blues, Kristerpher and Ferguson ordered drinks
immediately, before their meals came, and Kristerpher drank beer
throughout dinner.  Kristerpher was not asked for identification. 
According to Solomon, Kristerpher was happy because this was the
first time he had been allowed to order drinks.  Ferguson and
Kristerpher ordered beer and mixed drinks.  Solomon did not order
any beer at Sushi & Blues, but he recalled having two drinks
after dinner, a Kahlua and Bailey's and a mixed drink that
Ferguson ordered and brought back from the bar.   The mixed drink
that Ferguson ordered contained "some kind of really strong
alcohol" that Ferguson said was tequila.  Kristerpher ordered
more of the mixed drink.  A Sushi & Blues receipt found in
Kristerpher's wallet after the accident showed a cash sale of 
one Patron Silver and one Amaretto.
At some point, the three men left Sushi & Blues. 
5FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Kristerpher and Solomon went to an establishment called Tahiti
Nui, arriving at around 10:30 p.m.  Ferguson went back to the
car.  At Tahiti Nui, Solomon ordered a beer, but before he could
finish the beer, a security guard asked him and Kristerpher to
leave.  Solomon did not see Kristerpher drink anything at Tahiti
Nui.
After leaving Tahiti Nui, Solomon and Kristerpher went
back to the car.  Ferguson was "kind of asleep already" in the
car.  The fatal accident occurred while Solomon was driving back
to Edmonds' home.  After the accident, Solomon was found to have
a blood alcohol content (BAC) of 0.13 grams of alcohol per 100
milliliters of blood, Kristerpher's BAC was 0.16 grams of alcohol
per 100 milliliters of blood, and Ferguson's BAC was 0.26 grams
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood.  The legal limit for
driving is .08 grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood.3
II.
Kristerpher's mother, Bernadine Kuahiwinui,
individually and as personal representative of Kristerpher's
estate, and Kristerpher's father, Kenneth Kaupu (collectively,
Plaintiffs) sued Zelo's, doing business as Sushi & Blues.  In
their First Amended Complaint, Plaintiffs, among other things,
asserted a negligence dram shop cause of action against Zelo's. 
Plaintiffs alleged that Zelo's "negligently permitted
Kristerpher, Solomon, and [Ferguson] to remain on the premises
and served alcoholic beverages to [them], despite the fact that
Kristerpher was underage and each of the three young men were
visibly intoxicated."  Plaintiffs further alleged that Zelo's
"knew or reasonably should have known that Kristerpher[] was
underage and that Kristerpher, Solomon, and [Ferguson] were under
the influence of liquor and/or visibly intoxicated when they were 
3Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(4) (2007)
provides: "A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates or
assumes actual physical control of a vehicle: . . . [w]ith .08 or
more grams of alcohol per one hundred milliliters or cubic
centimeters of blood."
6FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
permitted to remain on the premises and were served alcoholic
beverages.4
Zelo's moved for summary judgment on Plaintiffs' dram
shop claim.  Plaintiffs filed a motion in opposition.  In its
summary judgment pleadings and at the hearing on its motion,
Zelo's argued that people who are intoxicated are excluded from
the class of "innocent third parties" protected by the dram shop
cause of action.  Zelo's asserted that because the dram shop
cause of action does not protect intoxicated people, and because
it was undisputed that Kristerpher was intoxicated at the time of
the accident, Zelo's was entitled to summary judgment on
Plaintiffs' dram shop claim.  The Circuit Court granted Zelo's
motion, ruling that Kristerpher was not an "innocent third
part[y]."5  On June 7, 2013, the Circuit Court filed its Final
4Plaintiffs' First Amended Complaint also named other
defendants, including Tahiti Nui Enterprises, Inc., doing
business as Tahiti Nui, and the State of Hawai #i.  Ferguson's
wife, individually, as personal representative of his estate, and
on behalf of his daughter, filed a separate lawsuit, which was
consolidated with Plaintiffs' lawsuit.  Only Plaintiffs' claims
against Zelo's are at issue in this appeal.  
5The Circuit Court's precise basis for concluding that
Kristerpher was not an innocent third party is not clear.  In
rendering its decision at the hearing on Zelo's summary judgment
motion, the Circuit Court recited its understanding of the
situation as follows:
Basically, you have three individuals, Solom[o]n
Kuahiwinui and the two decedents, who gather and decide
that they are going to go drinking and they do go
drinking.  And they -- they consume liquor
intentionally.  And the amount of liquor and whether
they intentionally got intoxicated or not, those are
not as important as the fact that they are -- they end
up intoxicated.
At the hearing, the Circuit Court concluded that Kristerpher was
not an innocent third party, but it did not further elaborate on
the basis for its conclusion.  The Circuit Court's written order
granting Zelo's motion for summary judgment and its Final
Judgment did not state reasons for its decision to grant Zelo's
summary judgment motion.
7FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Judgment in favor of Zelo's and against Plaintiffs on Plaintiffs'
dram shop cause of action.  This appeal followed.
DISCUSSION
I.
Plaintiffs argue that the Circuit Court erred in
granting Zelo's motion for summary judgment on Plaintiffs' dram
shop claim.  They contend that the "sole basis" for Zelo's motion
was that Kristerpher was voluntarily intoxicated when he was
fatally injured and therefore was not in the class of innocent
third parties protected by the dram shop cause of action. 
Plaintiffs argue that contrary to Zelo's position, "the law does
not deny relief to the victims of a drunk driver merely because
they are 'intoxicated.'"  Plaintiffs claim that whether
Kristerpher was an innocent third party entitled to pursue a dram
shop cause of action was a question of fact for the jury, and
therefore, the Circuit Court erred in granting Zelo's motion for
summary judgment.
As explained below, we conclude that a person who is
intoxicated is not automatically excluded from the class of
innocent third parties entitled to pursue a dram shop cause of
action.  Whether Kristerpher qualifies as an innocent third party
in this case does not turn on whether he was intoxicated, but on
whether he actively contributed to or procured the intoxication
of Solomon, who was driving the car when Kristerpher was fatally
injured.  Because the question of whether Kristerpher qualifies
as an innocent third party raises genuine issues of material
fact, we conclude that the Circuit Court erred in granting Zelo's
motion for summary judgment. 
II.
An understanding of the development of the law on
Hawai#i's dram shop cause of action is necessary to resolve the
question of who should properly fall within the protected class
of innocent third parties under the circumstances of this case.
 A.
  
8FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"Under the old common law rule, an injured third party
could not recover against a supplier of liquor for injuries
suffered as a result of a tavern patron's intoxication."  Ono , 62
Haw. at 134, 612 P.2d at 537.  The rationales for this rule were:
(1) the proximate cause of the patron's intoxication and the
third party's subsequent injury was the patron's consumption of
liquor, not the liquor supplier's selling or serving of liquor;
and (2) the injury to the third party was an unforeseeable result
of the supplier's furnishing of the liquor.  Id.  
In Ono, however, the Hawai #i Supreme Court rejected the
old common law rule of non-liability and joined numerous other
jurisdictions in allowing "a person injured by an inebriated
tavern customer to recover from the tavern that provided liquor
to the customer."  Id.  at 136, 612 P.2d at 538.  The supreme
court established a "common law dram shop negligence [cause of]
action" for Hawai# i.  Id. at 137, 612 P.2d at 539.  The court
noted that under the Restatement (Second) of Torts, the standard
of conduct of a reasonable man may be "adopted by the court from
a legislative enactment[,]" "[e]ven where a legislative enactment
contains no express provision that its violation shall result in
tort liability[.]"  Id. at 137-38, 612 P.2d at 539 (quoting
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 285 (1965), § 285 cmt. c).  The
court held that Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 281-78(a)(2)(B)
(1976) of Hawai #i's liquor control statute, which provided that a
liquor licensee shall not sell or furnish liquor to any person
who is at that time under the influence of liquor, imposed "a
duty upon a tavern keeper not to serve a person under the
influence of liquor."  Id.  at 138, 612 P.2d at 539.6
6At the time relevant to the Ono decision, HRS § 281-
78(a)(2)(B) (1976) provided:
 
(a) At no time under any circumstances shall any
liquor: 
. . . . 
(continued...)
9FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The supreme court approved a jury instruction providing
that to establish a violation of HRS § 281-78(a)(2)(B) (1976),
and thus a licensee's breach of its duty under the dram shop
cause of action, a plaintiff must show by a preponderance of the
evidence that "[the driver who injured the plaintiff] was under
the influence of intoxicating liquor at any time [the driver] was
served by [the licensee]; and that [the licensee] knew or
reasonably should have known that [the driver] was under the
influence of intoxicating liquor at the time [the driver] was so
served."  Id. at 139, 612 P.2d at 540.
With respect to the proximate cause element of the dram
shop cause of action, the court held that "[a] tavern's sale or
service of alcohol to an intoxicated automobile driver may be the
proximate cause of injuries inflicted upon a third party by the
inebriated driver."  Id. at 140, 612 P.2d at 540.  The court
overturned the old common law theory that injury to the third
party was an unforeseeable result of the licensee's furnishing of
liquor to its customer.  The court held that
6(...continued)
(2) Be sold or furnished by any licensee to:
. . . .
(B) Any person at the time under the influence of
liquor[.] 
The current version of this provision, codified as HRS §
281-78 (b)(1)(B)(2007), similarly provides: 
(b) At no time under any circumstances shall any
licensee or its employee:
(1) Sell, serve, or furnish any liquor to, or allow
the consumption of any liquor by:
. . . .
(B) Any person at the time under the influence of
liquor[.]
10FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the consequences of serving liquor to an intoxicated
motorist, in light of the universal use of automobiles and
the increasing frequency of accidents involving drunk
drivers, are foreseeable to a tavern owner.  The
consumption, resulting inebriation and injurious conduct are
therefore foreseeable intervening acts which will not
relieve the tavern of liability. 
Id. at 141, 612 P.2d at 540-41 (citations omitted).
Ono had sued the Sand Trap bar, asserting that it had
negligently supplied alcohol to Scritchfield when she was under
the influence of liquor, which would constitute a violation of
HRS § 281-78(a)(2)(B) (1976).  Id. at 133, 612 P.2d at 536. 
Scritchfield later drove her car and collided head on with a car
containing Ono.  Id. at 132, 612 P.2d at 536.  Based on its
recognition of a common law dram shop negligence cause of action,
the supreme court upheld the jury's finding that the Sand Trap
bar was liable to Ono for injuries he sustained in the collision. 
Id. at 141, 612 P.2d at 541.  
B.
After the Ono decision, the Hawai# i Supreme Court
addressed the question of whether an intoxicated customer of a
liquor licensee can bring a dram shop cause of action against the
licensee to recover damages for the customer's own injuries,
which were suffered as the result of the customer's driving after
drinking alcohol.  In a series of cases, the supreme court held
that the protection provided by Hawai# i's dram shop cause of
action does not extend to intoxicated customers who injure
themselves.
In Bertelmann v. Taas Associates , 69 Haw. 95, 96, 735
P.2d 930, 931 (1987), Keliikoa, after drinking alcohol at a
hotel, died after he crashed his car in a single-car accident. 
Keliikoa's estate and his survivors sued the hotel, alleging that
hotel employees had furnished alcohol to Keliikoa when they knew
or should have known that he was under the influence of liquor,
and that their actions caused Keliikoa's death.  Id. at 96-97,
735 P.2d at 931-32.  The supreme court noted that the question
posed by the case was whether "after balancing the policy
11FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
considerations to allow recovery against those factors limiting
liability," it should rule that the hotel owed a duty to Keliikoa
under the guidelines established in Ono.  Id.  at 99, 735 P.2d at
933.  The court stated that in establishing the dram shop cause
of action in Ono , it "emphasized the need to deter violations of
HRS § 281-78(a)(2)(B), prevent the reasonable foreseeable
consequences of the violations (i.e. drunk driving accidents),
and compensate innocent third parties."  Id. at 100, 735 P.2d at
933.
In line with the majority of jurisdictions that had
considered the issue, the supreme court held that "liquor
consumers who are injured because of their intoxication" do not
possess a dram shop cause of action against commercial liquor
sellers who violate HRS § 281-78(a)(2)(B).  Id.  The court stated
that "[d]runken persons who harm themselves are solely
responsible for their voluntary intoxication and cannot prevail
under a common law or statutory basis."  Id.  The court found the
following reasoning highly persuasive: "To allow recovery in
favor of one who has voluntarily procured a quantity of liquor
for his or her own consumption with full knowledge of its
possible or probable results 'would savor too much of allowing
said person to benefit by his or her own wrongful act[.]'"  Id.
at 100, 735 P.2d at 933-34 (citation, brackets, italics, and
block quote formatting omitted).  
The court stated that the statutory provisions
prohibiting licensees from furnishing liquor to a person under
the influence of liquor or knowingly permitting such person to
remain on the premises "were created to protect the general
public from drunk driving accidents, not to reward intoxicated
liquor consumers for the consequences of their voluntary
inebriation."  Id. at 101, 735 P.2d at 934.  The court concluded
that "in the absence of harm to an innocent third party, merely
serving liquor to an already intoxicated customer and allowing
said customer to leave the premises, of itself, does not
12FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
constitute actionable negligence."  Id.  Accordingly, the supreme
court held that Keliikoa's estate was not entitled to pursue a
dram shop cause of action and that the wrongful death action of
Keliikoa's survivors, which were derivative of Keliikoa's claims,
were also properly dismissed.  Id. at 102-03, 735 P.2d at 934-35. 
Following Bertelmann , the supreme court adhered to the
principle that an intoxicated customer cannot recover from the
liquor licensee for the customer's own injuries suffered while
driving.  See Feliciano v. Waikiki Deep Water, Inc. , 69 Haw. 605,
752 P.2d 1076 (1988) (holding that an intoxicated customer, who
had been actively solicited to buy drinks by the licensee, could
not sue the licensee to recover for his own injuries sustained
while driving); Winters v. Silver Fox Bar , 71 Haw. 524, 797 P.2d
51 (1990) (holding that where an underage customer was sold
liquor by a liquor licensee and later lost control of his vehicle
and died, the underage customer's estate could not bring a dram
shop cause of action against the licensee for the customer's
injuries).  In Winters, the court stated: "[W]e have refused to
further modify the common law dram shop action to permit recovery
against commercial suppliers of liquor by inebriated liquor
consumers who sustain injuries because of their voluntary
intoxication."  Winters, 71 Haw. at 527, 797 P.2d at 52-53.
C.
In Reyes v. Kuboyama , 76 Hawai #i 137, 141, 870 P.2d
1281, 1285 (1994), the Hawai# i Supreme Court addressed two
questions: "(1) whether there is a duty to innocent third parties
on the part of a licensee not to sell liquor to a minor in
violation of HRS § 281-78(a)(2)(A) [(1985)]";7 and (2) if there
7At the time relevant to the Reyes decision, HRS § 281-
78(a)(2)(A) (1985) provided:
(a) At no time under any circumstances shall any
liquor: 
. . . . 
(continued...)
13FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
is such a duty, whether it covers a situation "where an innocent
third party is injured by an intoxicated minor other than the
minor to whom the liquor was sold."  
In Reyes, Kuboyama, a liquor licensee who owned and
operated a package store, sold at least two cases of cold beer to
two nineteen year old minors, Jose and Howard, in violation of
HRS § 281-78(a)(2)(A) (1985).  Reyes, 76 Hawai #i at 139, 870 P.2d
at 1283.  Corey, who was eighteen, drove Jose and Howard to
Kuboyama's store, but Corey did not enter the store.  Id.   After
leaving Kuboyama's store, the boys bought more beer at another
store, then went to Howard's home for a party.  Id.  Tiffany, who
was fifteen years old, was at the party, but there did not appear
to be any evidence that Tiffany drank alcohol at the party.  Id.
There was evidence that Corey was inebriated by the end of the
party, but it was agreed that he would drive several people home,
including Tiffany.  Id.  After leaving the party, Corey allegedly
lost control of his vehicle and crashed off the road, causing
Tiffany to sustain injuries.  Id.  Tiffany's mother, Reyes, on
behalf of herself and Tiffany, sued Kuboyama.  Id. at 139-40, 870
P.2d at 1283-84.  The trial court granted summary judgment in
7(...continued)
(2) Be sold or furnished by any licensee to: 
(A) Any minor.
  
The current version of this provision, codified as HRS §
281-78(b)(1)(A) (2007), similarly provides: 
(b) At no time under any circumstances shall any licensee
or its employee: 
(1) Sell, serve, or furnish any liquor to, or allow
the consumption of any liquor by: 
(A) Any minor[.]
At the time relevant to the Reyes and currently, for
purposes of HRS Chapter 281, a "minor" is defined as "any person
below the age of twenty-one years."  HRS § 281-1 (2007).   
14FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
favor Kuboyama, apparently on the theory that Kuboyama did not
owe a duty to Tiffany under the circumstances presented, and
Reyes appealed.  Id.  at 140, 870 P.2d at 1284. 
With respect to the first question of whether a
licensee has a duty to innocent third parties not to sell liquor
to a minor in violation of HRS § 281-78(a)(2)(A) (1985), the
supreme court answered the question in the affirmative.  The
supreme court noted that in Ono , it had imposed a duty on liquor
licensees not to serve a person under the influence of liquor
based on HRS § 281-78(a)(2)(B).  Id.  at 142, 870 P.2d at 1286. 
The court further stated that "[w]e have made it explicit, in
subsequent decisions, that the protected class we recognized in
Ono comprises any innocent third persons, that is, the general
public."  Id.  The court observed that similar to the situation
in Ono, where there was a national trend toward recognition of a
dram shop duty not to serve alcohol to an intoxicated customer,
there was a clear national trend toward recognition of a
licensee's duty to innocent third parties not to sell liquor to a
minor in violation of a liquor control statute.  Id.  at 142-43,
870 P.2d at 1286-87.
The supreme court was unpersuaded by Kuboyama's
argument that its prior decisions in Bertelmann, Feliciano , and
Winters demonstrated the court's reluctance to extend the holding
in Ono to other situations.  The supreme court explained:
The issue in the present case concerns a putatively innocent
third party who was injured by an intoxicated driver.  In
this regard, the facts are closer to those presented in Ono
and are distinguishable from 
Bertelmann, Feliciano, and
Winters wherein the injured persons were not within the
class protected by the statute because their injuries were
essentially self-inflicted.
Id.
 at 144, 870 P.2d at 1288 (emphasis added).
The supreme court concluded that the rationale for
recognizing a duty to innocent third parties under HRS § 281-
78(a)(2)(B) also applied to HRS § 281-78(a)(2)(A).  Id. at 145,
870 P.2d at 1289.  It thus held that licensees have a duty to
innocent third parties not to sell alcohol to minors in violation
15FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of HRS § 281-78(a)(2)(A).   Id.
Having recognized this duty, the court addressed the
question of whether it includes the situation where an innocent
third party is injured by an intoxicated minor other than the
minor to whom the liquor was sold.  Id.  The supreme court held
that the HRS § 281-78(a)(2)(A) duty it recognized includes this
situation, but that liability would be "subject to determinations
by the trier of fact on the issue of reasonable foreseeability."
Id. at 146, 870 P.2d at 1290.  As applied to the case before it,
the court concluded that to establish liability, Reyes "would
have to produce sufficient evidence to show that it was
reasonably foreseeable to Kuboyama that minors other than those
to whom the liquor had been sold would consume the liquor, become
intoxicated, and drive a vehicle."  Id. at 146-47, 870 P.2d at
1290-91.  The supreme court vacated the trial court's grant of
summary judgment in favor of Kuboyama and remanded the case for
further proceedings.  Id. at 147, 870 P.2d at 1291. 
III.
Zelo's contends that "Ono  and its progeny makes clear
that a liquor consumer is not within the intended class of
protected persons for [whom] a duty has been imposed upon dram
shop owners."  Zelo's argues that because Kristerpher was
intoxicated at the time he was fatally injured, he was
automatically excluded from the class of innocent third parties
entitled to pursue a dram shop cause of action.  We disagree.
Contrary to Zelo's contention, liquor consumers who are
injured by drunk drivers are not automatically precluded under
Hawai#i precedents from pursuing a dram shop cause of action
against a liquor licensee.  The Hawai# i precedents establish that 
an intoxicated customer of a liquor licensee who injures himself
or herself while driving drunk cannot bring a dram shop cause of
action against the licensee to recover damages for the customer's
own injuries.  This is because the dram shop cause of action was
established to protect innocent third parties against drunk
16FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
driving accidents, and not to protect customers who become
intoxicated and then harm themselves or suffer self-inflicted
injuries.  See Bertlemann , 69 Haw. at 100-01, 735 P.2d at 933-34;
Reyes, 76 Hawai #i at 144, 870 P.2d at 1288.  But, a consumer of
alcohol who is injured by the actions of a drunk driver is not
suing to recover for self-inflicted injuries.  Nor is that person
seeking to recover for injuries caused by his or her own
intoxication.  Hawai #i precedents do not support Zelo's claim
that liquor consumers who are injured by a drunk driver are
barred from pursuing a dram shop cause of action.8          
Indeed, a rule barring liquor consumers, including
intoxicated consumers, who are injured by drunk drivers from
bringing a dram shop cause of action would lead to absurd
results.  For example, say a licensee served alcohol to a
customer it knew was intoxicated and the customer thereafter
drove his car while drunk and collided with another car with two
passengers, one who had consumed alcohol and the other who had
not, severely injuring both passengers.  Under Zelo's proffered
rule that precludes any liquor consumer from bringing a dram shop
cause of action, the passenger who did not consume alcohol could
8In its answering brief, Zelo's cites a statement in
Bertelmann  that "[l]iquor consumers are not within the class of
persons for whose benefit [the statutory provisions prohibiting
licensees from serving intoxicated customers or permitting them
to remain on the premises] were enacted."  Bertlemann, 69 Haw. at
101, 735 P.2d at 934.  Zelo's reliance on this statement is
misplaced.  In Bertelmann , the supreme court addressed the
question of whether intoxicated customers could bring a dram shop
cause of action to recover for their own injuries.  Thus, read in
context, the reference to "liquor consumers" was clearly a
reference to liquor consumers who were seeking to recover for
their own injuries.  This is made clear by the preceding
sentence, which notes that the cited statutory provisions were
not created "to reward intoxicated liquor consumers for the
consequences of their voluntary inebriation," and the subsequent
sentence, which states that the hotel's statutory violations "did
not create a cause of action in favor of [the intoxicated
customer who injured himself]."  Id.   Thus Bertelmann does not
support Zelo's claim that all liquor consumers are automatically
barred from pursuing a dram shop cause of action.
17FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
sue the licensee but the alcohol-consuming passenger could not. 
But there is no rational reason for distinguishing between the
two passengers.  Both would have been injured through no fault of
their own, and the consumption of alcohol by the alcohol-
consuming passenger would not have caused or contributed to that
passenger's injuries.  
The supreme court's purpose for establishing the dram
shop cause of action would not be furthered by distinguishing
between the two passengers.  In establishing the dram shop cause
of action, the supreme court "emphasized the need to deter
violations of HRS § 281-78(a)(2)(B), prevent the reasonable
foreseeable consequences of the violations (i.e. drunk driving
accidents), and compensate innocent third parties."  Bertlemann,
69 Haw. at 100, 735 P.2d at 933.  The first two purposes apply
equally to both passengers.  The third purpose -- compensate
innocent third parties -- would also be served by allowing the
alcohol-consuming passenger to sue.  There is no reason why the
passenger's consumption of alcohol would render him or her non-
innocent with respect to the injuries sustained or the licensee's
violation of the statutory requirements.  As noted, the
passenger's consumption of alcohol would not have caused or
contributed to the accident.  This is true even if the passenger
had consumed alcohol to the point of being intoxicated.  The law
prohibits driving while intoxicated, not being a passenger while
intoxicated.  In the context of dram shop claim, we do not see
why a passenger's consumption of alcohol would make him or her
any less innocent than a passenger who did not consume alcohol.
In support of its motion for summary judgment, Zelo's
argued that Kristerpher's intoxicated when the fatal accident
occurred automatically excluded him from the class of innocent
third parties protected by the dram shop cause of action.  The
Circuit Court erred to the extent it relied on this argument in
granting Zelo's motion for summary judgment.  We conclude that
Kristerpher's intoxication did not preclude Plaintiffs from
18FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
bringing a dram shop cause of action against Zelo's.
IV.
We now turn to the question of who falls within the
protected class of "innocent third parties."  Our supreme court
has used this phrase to define the class of people entitled to
pursue a dram shop cause of action, but has not provided much
direct guidance on what it means or how it should be applied to
the circumstances of this case.  Given the purpose of the phrase
"innocent third parties," the term "innocent" should not be
construed generically, but with specific reference to the supreme
court's reasons and intent in establishing the dram shop cause of
action and in restricting its application to exclude intoxicated
customers who injure themselves.
A.  
In establishing the dram shop cause of action, the
supreme court recognized the grave societal costs attributable to
injuries caused by drunk drivers.  The supreme court imposed dram
shop liability to deter licensees from violating the prohibition
against serving intoxicated customers, prevent drunk driving
accidents, and compensate "innocent" third party victims. 
However, in excluding intoxicated customers who injure themselves
from the protected class, the court embraced the rationale that
allowing customers who voluntarily become intoxicated to recover
for their own injuries would enable them to benefit from their
own voluntary acts and wrongdoing.  A customer who voluntarily
consumes alcohol while intoxicated directly participates and
joins with the licensee in the licensee's violation of the
statutory prohibition against serving intoxicated customers.  The
customer who voluntarily becomes intoxicated and then drives does
so with full knowledge of the possible dangerous consequences of
his or her actions and engages in a wrongful act.  The supreme
court has held that a person who engages in such conduct and then
injures himself or herself is not an innocent third party
entitled to protection.
19FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Given the supreme court's reasons for defining the
protected class as innocent third parties, the question of who
falls within the protected class should focus on the extent to
which the injured third party was responsible for the
intoxication of the customer who drove drunk and injured the
third party.  We conclude that in the context of this case, the
appropriate test for who qualifies as an innocent third party is
whether the injured person actively contributed to or procured
the intoxication of the drunk driver who injured him or her.  An
injured person who actively contributes to or procures the drunk
driver's intoxication directly participates and joins with the
licensee in creating the danger that the dram shop cause of
action was intended to deter and prevent.  In addition,
permitting an injured person who engages in such conduct to
recover for injuries inflicted by the drunk driver would in
effect allow the injured person to benefit from his or her own
wrongdoing.  Thus, the test we adopt is supported by and is fully
consistent with the supreme court's rationale for excluding
intoxicated customers who drive drunk and harm themselves from
the protected class.
In balancing the policy considerations for allowing 
recovery against those for limiting liability, we conclude that
the injured person must "actively" contribute to or procure the
drunk driver's intoxication to be excluded from the protected
class.  The mere fact that the injured person accompanied and was
present when the drunk driver consumed alcohol at the licensee's
establishment, or the fact that the injured person consumed
alcohol with the drunk driver at the licensee's establishment,
without more, would be insufficient to exclude the injured person
from the protected class.  Although active contribution to or
procurement of the drunk driver's intoxication is necessary to
exclude an injured person from being eligible to bring a dram
shop cause of action, passive knowledge of the driver's
intoxication would be relevant to whether an injured person was
20FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
contributorily negligent in becoming a passenger in the drunk
driver's vehicle.9
B.
Our test for who falls within the protected class for
Hawai#i's dram shop cause of action is consistent with the
"complicity" defense certain other jurisdictions have recognized
for their dram shop causes of action.  See Nelson v. Araiza , 372
N.E.2d 637, 641 (Ill. 1978) ("[O]ne who actively contributes to
or procures the intoxication of the inebriate is precluded from
recovery."); Craig v. Larson , 439 N.W.2d 899, 902 (Mich. 1989)
(holding that a "plaintiff who actively participates in the
intoxication of the person who thereafter injures her," is barred
from recovery in a dram shop action); Mitchell v. Shoals, Inc. ,
227 N.E.2d 21, 23 (N.Y. 1967) ("As long as the [plaintiff] does
not himself cause or procure the intoxication of the other, there
is no basis, under the statute, for denying him a recovery from
the party unlawfully purveying the liquor."); see also K.R. v.
Sanford, 605 N.W.2d 387, 391 (Minn. 2000) (applying complicity
doctrine under comparative fault principles to situations where
"a plaintiff injured by an intoxicated person . . . participated
knowingly and affirmatively in the illegal sale that contributed
to the intoxication"); Cote v. Gay , CV 136015822S, 2014 WL
3893086 (Conn. Super. Ct. June 26, 2014) (describing the
complicity defense and the participation required to invoke it
as: "[P]articipation in this sense requires that the plaintiff
actively procure or cause the tortfeasor's intoxication; that is,
the plaintiff cannot merely participate in the drinking
activities but must be actively involved in bringing about the
inebriate's intoxication").
The rationale for this type of complicity defense has
9In other words, a person falling within the protected class
and entitled to bring a dram shop cause of action would still be
subject to negligence defenses, including comparative negligence. 
See Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 663-31 (2016).
21FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
been explained as follows: "A party complaining of the wrongful
act of a saloonkeeper in causing the intoxication of another,
from which damage or injury results to him, must not be an active
and willing agent with the saloonkeeper, assisting in causing
such intoxication."  Nelson, 372 N.E.2d at 639 (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted); Cote, 2014 WL 3893086
("[T]o allow a cause of action to a party who actually aided and
brought about the condition of intoxication (along with the
vendor) would in effect encourage rather than discourage such
overindulgence and the type of aiding and abetting activity that
contributes to the presence of intoxicated drivers on our roads."
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted)).  In applying
such complicity defense and assessing who qualifies as an
innocent third party, courts have focused on the plaintiff's
actions in actively contributing to or procuring the drunk
driver's intoxication, and not on other factors such as whether
the plaintiff assumed the risk of his or her own injuries by
riding in a car driven by a drunk driver.  See Nelson, 372 N.E.2d
at 641; Cote 2014 W.L. 3893086.1
0
V.
In this case, there are genuine issues of material fact
regarding whether Kristerpher actively contributed to or procured
10We note that in a footnote in Reyes, the supreme court
suggested that a person's actions in accepting a ride from a
drunk driver may be relevant to whether the person qualifies as
an innocent third party.  The footnote states: "[T]he issue of a
plaintiff's 'innocence' may also present a question of fact for
the trier of fact to determine.  For example, whether a plaintiff
was himself or herself negligent for accepting a ride with a
driver determined to have been intoxicated."  Reyes, 76 Hawai #i
at 146 n.8, 870 P.2d at 1290 n.8.  However, in rendering its
decision in Reyes, the supreme court did not address the scope of
the protected class of innocent third parties or the meaning of
the term "innocent."  Thus, we do not read the comment in the
supreme court's footnote as binding authority.  For the reasons
previously stated, we conclude that the "innocent third party"
analysis must focus on whether the injured person actively
contributed to or procured the intoxication of the drunk driver
who injured him or her.
22FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the intoxication of Solomon and thus, whether Kristerpher falls
within the protected class of innocent third parties entitled to
bring a dram shop cause of action.  Accordingly, the Circuit
Court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Zelo's and
against Plaintiffs based on its determination that Kristerpher
was not an innocent third party.  We vacate the Circuit Court's
Final Judgment to the extent that it entered judgment in favor of
Zelo's and against Plaintiffs, and we remand the case for further
proceedings consistent with this Opinion.
On the briefs:
James J. Bickerton
Nathan P. Roehrig
(Bickerton Lee Dang 
   & Sullivan)
for Plaintiffs-Appellants
Michele-Lynn E. Luke
(Kessner Umebayashi Bain
    & Matsunaga)
for Defendant-Appellee
Zelo's, Inc. dba Sushi & Blues
23