NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-15-0000656 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN THE MATTER OF HAWAII STATE TEACHERS ASSOCIATION,
Complainant-Appellant-Appellant, v.
BOARD OF EDUCATION, DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, STATE OF HAWAII
and BETH SCHIMMELFENNIG, DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION,
STATE OF HAWAII, Respondents-Appellees-Appellees, and
HAWAII LABOR RELATIONS BOARD; JAMES B. NICHOLSON;
SESNITA A.D. MOEPONO; and ROCK B. LEY (2008-024),
Agency-Appellees-Appellees 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-2050) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.) 
In this secondary appeal, Complainant/Appellant-
Appellant Hawai# i State Teachers Association (HSTA) appeals from 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's (
Circuit Court's) Final 
Judgment (Judgment), which was entered on August 25, 2015.1 HSTA 
also challenges the Circuit Court's Order Reversing in Part and 
Affirming in Part Hawai# i Labor Relations Board [(HLRB)] Order 
No. 3015 [(
HLRB's Decision)], also entered on August 25, 2015 
(Circuit Court's Order). 
1 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
HSTA raises four points of error on appeal, contending 
that the Circuit Court erred in: (1) affirming HLRB's Decision 
in that it granted summary judgment in favor of Respondents/Appellees-Appellees the Board of Education, Department of Education, State of Hawai# i (the Board), and Susan 
Kitsu (
Kitsu),2 then-Director of the Office of Civil Rights 
Compliance (OCRC) (collectively, Respondents), on HSTA's 
allegations of a violation of the statutory duty to provide 
information under the duty to bargain, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 89-13(a)(5) (2012), and willfully 
violated terms and conditions of the unit 5 agreement, in 
violation of HRS § 89-13(a)(8); (2) applying the deferral doctrine to the Board's determination of what information was so confidential as to be excluded from its duty to bargain, as a matter of law; (3) affirming HLRB's Decision in that it denied HSTA summary judgment on the allegations of violations of HRS § 89-13(a)(5) and (8); and (4) affirming HLRB's Decision in that it granted the Respondents summary judgment on the allegations of interference with employees' rights, and refusal or failure to comply with other Chapter 89 and contractual provisions, where material facts were in dispute. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
2 Pursuant to Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 43(c)(1),
the current Director of the Office of Civil Rights Compliance Branch should be
substituted for Susan Kitsu, the Director at the time this case was decided bythe Circuit Court. 
According to the Department of Education's website, Beth
Schimmelfennig is the current Director, by temporary assignment (last visitedJanuary 29, 2019). 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we 
resolve HSTA's points of error as follows: 
In Points of Error 1, 2, and 3, HSTA argues that HLRB 
erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Respondents with respect to HSTA's allegations that Respondents violated HRS § 89-13(a)(5) and (8). HSTA argues that the Board breached its duty to bargain in good faith with HSTA, in violation of HRS § 89-13(a)(5), which provides in relevant part:      
§ 89-13 Prohibited practices; evidence of bad faith.
(a) It shall be a prohibited practice for a public employer
or its designated representative wilfully to:
. . . . (5) Refuse to bargain collectively in good faithwith the exclusive representative as required insection 89-9 [
3] . . . 
It appears, consistent with well-established federal 
labor law principles, that HLRB recognized that an employer's 
duty to bargain in good faith with a union under HRS § 89-13(a)(1)  & (5) implicitly includes an obligation to furnish the 
union, upon request, with relevant information the union needs to fulfill its statutory obligations as the bargaining unit employees' exclusive bargaining representative. See Detroit 4
3 HRS § 89-9 (2012) provides, in relevant part: 
§89-9 Scope of negotiations; consultation.  (a) The
employer and the exclusive representative shall meet at
reasonable times . . . and shall negotiate in good faithwith respect to wages, hours, the amounts of contributionsby the State and respective counties to the Hawaiiemployer-union health benefits trust fund to the extentallowed in subsection (e), and other terms and conditions ofemployment which are subject to collective bargaining andwhich are to be embodied in a written agreement as specifiedin section 89-10, but such obligation does not compel eitherparty to agree to a proposal or make a concession[.] 
4 Under HRS § 89-13(a)(1), an employer may not willfully
"[i]nterfere, restrain, or coerce any employee in the exercise of any rightguaranteed under this chapter[.]" 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Edison Co. v. NLRB, 440 U.S. 301, 303 (1979) (duty to 
collectively bargain under National Labor Relations Act (NLRA), 
§ 8(a)(5) as amended 29 U.S.C.A. § 158(a)(5), "includes a duty to 
provide relevant information needed by a labor union for the proper performance of its duties as the employees' bargaining representative"). See also Thomas Fusco, Annotation, Employer's duty to furnish particular information, other than financial or wage information, to employees' representative under [NLRA], 29 U.S.C.A. § 151 et seq., 113 A.L.R. Fed. 425 (2017). The parties generally agree to this statement of the law. 
A union has the initial burden to establish relevancy 
before an employer must comply with the information request. Sara Lee Bakery Grp., Inc. v. NLRB, 514 F.3d 422, 430 (5th Cir. 2008). Thus, "[a] union's bare assertion that it needs information to process a grievance does not automatically oblige the employer to supply all the information in the manner requested. The duty to supply information under § 8(a)(5) turns upon 'the circumstances of the particular case,' and much the same may be said for the type of disclosure that will satisfy that duty." Detroit Edison Co., 440 U.S. at 314-15 (quoting NLRB v. Truitt Mfg. Co., 351 U.S. 149, 153 (1956)). 
In deciding whether requested information is of the 
type an employer must disclose (i.e., relevant), the United States Supreme Court has adopted the National Labor Relations Board's (NLRB's) use of a "discovery-type" standard; there must 
only be a "probability that the desired information is relevant." 
NLRB v. New Jersey Bell Tel. Co., 936 F.2d 144, 150 (3d Cir. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1991) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting NLRB v. Acme 
Indus. Co., 385 U.S. 432, 437 (1967)). 
Certain information is "presumptively relevant" under 
federal law. Namely, wage-related information pertaining to employees in the bargaining unit is "presumptively relevant" because the nature of its relevance is obvious; therefore, the union need not explain its specific requests unless the employer provides effective rebuttal. Emeryville Research Ctr., Shell Dev. Co. v. NLRB, 441 F.2d 880, 887-88 (9th Cir. 1971); Curtiss-Wright Corp., Wright Aeronautical Div. v. NLRB, 347 F.2d 61, 69 (3d Cir. 1965). The NLRB has also applied this rule to the names and contact information of the union's own members. See Prudential Ins. Co. of Am. v. NLRB, 412 F.2d 77, 84 (2d Cir. 1969). In these cases, the duty to provide information is not limited to that which is pertinent to a particular dispute or pending grievance; the union is entitled to information "which would enable it to properly and understandingly perform its duties as such in the general course of bargaining." NLRB v. Whitin Mach. Works, 217 F.2d 593, 594 (4th Cir. 1954). For example, in Whitin, the employer produced lists of data related to union-employees and a list of the hourly wage rates paid at the plant; from this information, however, the union could not determine what each individual union-employee was earning. Id. Because the NLRA entitled the union to "all wage information essential to the intelligent representation of the employees," the employer was required to turn over reasonably-available 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
records showing the individual wage-rates of union-employees; it 
was no defense that there was no pending dispute over wages. Id. 
Consistent with this rule is a limitation on the 
obligation to produce information; a requirement that the request pertain to a mandatory subject of collective bargaining. The NLRB has held, "[w]hen the request pertains to a subject that is nonmandatory . . . then neither employers nor labor organizations are obliged under the [NLRA] to furnish information requested for bargaining on [that] subject." Serv. Emps. Local 535, 287 N.L.R.B. 1223, 1225 (1988) (quoting Am. Stores Packing Co., 277 N.L.R.B. 1656, 1658 (1986) (internal quotation marks omitted)). The NLRB has explained that the "duty to furnish . . . information stems from the underlying statutory duty imposed on employers and unions to bargain in good faith with respect to mandatory subjects of bargaining." Id. (quoting Cowles Commc'ns, Inc., 172 N.L.R.B. 1909, 1909 (1968)). In 
Hawai# i, like under 
the NLRA, mandatory subjects of collective bargaining include "wages, hours, . . . and other terms and conditions of employment." HRS § 89-9(a); see also 29 U.S.C.A. § 158(d). 
HSTA argues that HLRB erred as a matter of law in 
concluding that Respondents had provided HSTA with sufficient basic information to enable HSTA to perform its duties. 
HSTA 
does not cite any authority supporting the proposition that its requests to the OCRC pertained to wages, hours, or "other terms and conditions of employment." Rather, HSTA relies on a broad assertion that it has a duty to "represent" and "assist" the 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
teachers,5 without explaining how that assistance relates to its 
statutory duties under HRS Chapter 89. HSTA also asserts that 
the Teacher 1 and Teacher 2's "employment and terms and conditions of employment were in question[.]" However, HSTA does not explain which terms or conditions of employment those were or otherwise support its assertion. 
We reject HSTA's reliance on cases related to a union's 
"role" during an investigatory interview for the proposition that such representation entitles it to information under the duty to bargain in good faith. It is well-established under federal law that Teacher 1 and Teacher 2 had a right to have an HSTA representative at the meeting with the OCRC. Specifically, the right to organize includes the right to have a union representative present at an employer-meeting or interview that the employee reasonably believes could result in disciplinary action. NLRB v. J. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. 251, 260-62 (1975). 
This right is not founded on the duty to bargain in good 
faith, but in the employee's right to act in concert with others for "mutual aid and protection." Id. (interpreting NLRA §§ 7, 8(a)(1) as amended 29 U.S.C.A. §§ 157 & 158(a)(1)). See HRS § 89-3 (2012).  This includes instances where the investigator 
6
5 This case arises out of unrelated student allegations of sexual
harrassment/misconduct against two different teachers, who will be referred to
as Teacher 1 and Teacher 2. 
6 HRS § 89-3 provides: 
§ 89-3 Rights of employees. Employees shall have the
right of self-organization and the right to form, join, orassist any employee organization for the purpose ofbargaining collectively through representatives of their ownchoosing on questions of wages, hours, and other terms andconditions of employment, and to engage in lawful, concerted
(continued...) 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
does not impose discipline but seeks a statement from an employee
to generate a report that will be forwarded to a supervisor in charge of discipline. Exxon Co., 223 N.L.R.B. 203, 207 (1976).  
However, the employer is still entitled to investigate 
an employee's alleged misconduct without interference from union officials and, further, is free to insist on hearing the employee's own account of the matter under investigation. 
Howard 
Indus., Inc., 362 N.L.R.B. No. 35 (Mar. 23, 2015) (citing Weingarten, 420 U.S. at 260). This is because, as the NLRB has recognized, the employer "has no duty to bargain with any union representative who may be permitted to attend the investigatory interview." Weingarten, 420 U.S. at 259 (quoting the NLRB's interpretation with approval). The role of the union representative includes providing assistance and counsel to employees who may lack the ability to express themselves or may be "too fearful or inarticulate . . . to raise extenuating factors." Howard, 362 N.L.R.B. at 2 (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting id. at 260-63, 263 n.7). Accordingly, the union representative is entitled to give the employee "active assistance" during the interview. Id.
On one hand, HSTA argues that Weingarten is irrelevant 
because it does not "dictat[e] the limits of a union's role during an investigation process or discuss[] the union's role in the context of a duty of fair representation." On the other 
6(...continued)
activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other
mutual aid or protection, free from interference, restraint,or coercion. 
8  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hand, HSTA cites cases analyzing these issues for the proposition 
that HSTA's "role" was to provide representation and does not provide us with any other authority that HSTA had a statutory "duty to assist in gather [sic] relevant information[.]" HSTA cites no authority supporting that an employee's right to act in concert for "mutual aid and protection" implicates an employer's duty to bargain in good faith such that a union is entitled to specific information during a disciplinary investigation. We find no error in HLRB's conclusion that HSTA had basic information to enable it to fulfill its duties (i.e., the duty to provide "active" representation at a meeting with the OCRC). 
We also reject HSTA's contention that its requests were 
"presumptively relevant." Here, HSTA did not request information about its own membership related to wages, contact information, or any other topic that could be so central to the relationship between the parties that it is obviously relevant. 
We also reject HSTA's assertion that HLRB erred by 
relying on the nature and timing of the OCRC's investigation. HSTA cites Whitin, where the union was entitled to wage-related information of its own members, regardless of the existence of a related dispute, because the information was "presumptively reasonable." Whitin Mach. Works, 217 F.2d at 594. HSTA invites us to compare Whitin with a completely unrelated case, Arnold v. Air Midwest, Inc., 100 F.3d 857, 863 (10th Cir. 1996). There, the relevant issue was whether an attorney-client relationship existed between a union-attorney and a former union employee where the employee brought claims for breach of fair 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
representation against a union under the Railway Labor Act and 
for breach of fiduciary duty and legal malpractice against the attorney. Id. at 858-61. Next, HSTA cites to Acme, 385 U.S. at 435-36, for the general proposition that the duty to bargain in good faith includes an obligation to provide information relevant to the collective-bargaining process. Again, HSTA fails to explain how its requests were related to the "collective-bargaining process." 
HSTA quotes Lee v. UPW, 125 Hawai# i 317, 329, 260 P.3d 
1135, 1147 (App. 2011), as follows: 
"[I]t is the public policy 
of the State to promote harmonious and cooperative relations between government and its employees and to protect the public by assuring effective and orderly operations of government." HSTA does not explain how this statement relates to its argument. In sum, we cannot conclude, based on the authorities cited by HSTA, that HLRB erred in considering the nature and timing of OCRC's investigation. 
HSTA also argues that the "refusal to produce the 
documents and information was a wilful violation of Article IV section A" and that HSTA is entitled to summary judgment on its claim regarding HRS § 89-13(a)(8)
7. Article IV, Section A of the 
collective bargaining agreement covering the period from July 1, 2007, through June 30, 2009 (CBA), provides: 
7 HRS § 89-13(a)(8) prohibits an employer from willfully violating
"the terms of the collective bargaining agreement." 
10  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ARTICLE IV - ASSOCIATION RIGHTS 
A. EMPLOYER INFORMATION 
In addition to any obligation under Chapter 89, HRS,
to furnish information in its possession, the Employerwill furnish such other information in its possession,in response to reasonable requests by the Associationwhich will assist the Association in effectivelyrepresenting the teacher in the collective bargainingprocess and in the processing of grievances[ ]. . . .
The Employer need not perform compilation of facts orinformation for the purpose of responding to suchAssociation requests. 
8
(Emphasis added). 
HSTA failed to establish how its requests were related 
to assisting it in representing a teacher "in the collective 
bargaining process" or in the "processing of grievances." Grievances are expressly defined in the CBA as claims by HSTA or employees that the Board is not abiding by terms in the CBA. HSTA fails to demonstrate that its requests related to either of these processes. 
8 Within the CBA, Article V governs the "Grievance Procedure" and
provides in relevant part: 
ARTICLE V - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 
A. DEFINITION.  Any claim by the Association or a teacher
that there has been a violation, misinterpretation or
misapplication of a specific term or terms of thisAgreement shall be a grievance. 
GRIEVING PARTY.  Only teachers or their certified
bargaining representative, shall have the right to
institute and process grievances under this Article.. . . 
L. The Employer has the right to suspend, demote,discharge or take other disciplinary action against ateacher for proper cause. 
M. Disciplinary action taken against any teacher shall befor proper cause and shall be subject to the GrievanceProcedure. An expedited grievance procedure shall beused for suspensions or terminations of teachers. Theinformal discussion and/or Step 1 of the grievanceprocedure shall be waived. 
If the grievance goes to arbitration, the arbitration
process may be either conventional or expedited. Ifexpedited arbitration is used, either party shall havethe right to file closing briefs. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Finally, HSTA argues that HLRB erred in granting 
summary judgment "in favor of respondents on the merits related 
to the remaining allegations in CE-05-669, i.e., interference of employees' rights, refusal or failure to comply with other Chapter 89 and contractual provisions, where material facts were in dispute." HSTA asserts that "[t]he facts related to claims in the complaint such as the prior rights and incorporation provision of the unit 5 agreement (Article XXI) were not ripe for determination given the uncertainty with respect to the scope of the school code, the transition to the standard practices under Article XXI" and therefore, should not have been decided by summary judgment. 
HSTA fails to identify what "material facts" were still 
in dispute regarding these topics, or explain how those facts relate to its argument pursuant to HRS § 89-13(a). HSTA submitted hundreds of pages of argument, declarations, policies, letters, administrative rules, and other evidence to support and defend its position. HLRB received this evidence and argument in advance of the July 29, 2008 hearing, and then HLRB heard both parties' arguments regarding all of the claims. HSTA does not indicate what evidence it did not have the opportunity to produce, or how its "substantial rights" may have been prejudiced. See HRS § 91-14(g) (provided that the "court may . . . reverse or modify the decision and order if the substantial rights of the petitioners may have been prejudiced" by legal or factual errors by the administrative agency). 
12  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Also, it appears that HSTA argues that provisions in 
HAR Chapter 41 constitute "Standard Practices" within the meaning 
of Article XXI, Section A, of the CBA which provides that the teachers "shall retain all rights, benefits and privileges pertaining to their conditions of employment contained in the Standard Practices at the time of the execution of this Agreement." Yet, Section B of that article also provides that "nothing contained herein shall be interpreted as interfering with the Employer's right to make, amend, revise, or delete any portion of the Standard Practices; provided, however, that the Association shall be consulted on any changes to be made." Thus, as HLRB concluded, even if HAR Chapter 41 was "incorporated" into the agreement, HLRB has a contractual right to change those practices after consulting with HSTA.  HSTA did 
not allege that Respondents violated this part of the CBA by 
failing to consult with HSTA regarding "Standard Practices." 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's August 25, 2015 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 30, 2019. 
On the briefs: Herbert R. Takahashi,
Rebecca L. Covert,(Takahashi and Covert),for Complainant-Appellant-
Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge 
James Halvorson,
Richard H. Thomason,Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Respondents-Appellees-
Appellees. Associate Judge 
13 