NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000908
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
ERNESTO VERDUGO, JR., Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
BUBBA GUMP SHRIMP CO. RESTAURANTS, INC.
Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-1747-10)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee Ernesto Verdugo, Jr. (Verdugo)
 
brought this action against Defendant-Appellant Bubba Gump Shrimp
 
Co. Restaurants, Inc. (Bubba Gump) claiming that he sustained
 
serious injuries from a slip and fall at the Mai Tai Bar (Mai
 
Tai), which is owned by Bubba Gump and located in the Ala Moana
 
Shopping Center. Bubba Gump appeals from a Judgment filed on
 
June 17, 2014, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit
 
court).
 
In this case, a jury trial was held which resulted in a
 
verdict awarding over $2 million to Verdugo. The trial judge
 
granted Bubba Gump's request for a new trial. Subsequently,
 however, after the case had been re-assigned to another judge,
 the circuit court filed an "Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion to 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Reinstate Judgment Filed February 4, 2013", which in turn lead to
 
the Judgment entered on June 17, 2014.1
 
Bubba Gump contends that the circuit court erred: (1)
 
by "instructing the jury on premises liability absent evidence
 that defendant had actual or constructive notice of the
 transitory, unsafe condition of the premises"; (2) by
 "instructing the jury on general negligence in a condition-of­premises case"; (3) by "instructing the jury on mode-of-operation
 premises liability in a case in which the defendant is not a big-
box store or self-service establishment, and where reasonable
 precautions were taken to protect against the risk created by the
 mode of operation"; (4) because "Judge Castagnetti abused her
 discretion by overruling Judge Border's order granting a new
 trial on the ground of attorney misconduct"; and (5) because,
 prior to reinstating the original judgment, Judge Castagnetti
 precluded further discovery and new experts for the anticipated
 new trial absent a motion and court order.
 
For the reasons set forth below, we affirm the Judgment
 
entered on June 17, 2014.
 
I. Background
 
On March 1, 2005, Verdugo attended a birthday party at
 
Mai Tai. As Verdugo was exiting Mai Tai, he slipped and fell due
 
to liquid on the floor, which was believed to be beer because a
 puddle was later found and cleaned by the manager. Several
 people assisted Verdugo out of the bar because he was unable to
 walk on his left foot.
 
On October 10, 2006, Verdugo filed a Complaint against
 
Bubba Gump alleging that due to his fall at Mai Tai, he sustained
 serious injuries including, inter alia, a blood clot in his leg
 and chronic swelling and pain. After extensive pretrial
 
1 The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided over the jury trial and
certain proceedings following trial, including the granting of a new trial and
an order denying a motion for reconsideration as to the grant of a new trial.
The case was then reassigned to the Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti.
Ultimately, Judge Castagnetti reinstated the jury verdict and entered the
Judgment filed on June 17, 2014.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
proceedings, a jury trial commenced on August 20, 2012. Judge
 
Border presided over the trial.
 
On September 6, 2012, the jury returned a verdict for
 
Verdugo. In the Verdict Form, the jury found that Bubba Gump was
 negligent and that Bubba Gump's negligence was a legal cause of
 injuries to Verdugo. The jury awarded Verdugo $144,000 in
 special damages and $2,000,000 in general damages. On January
 18, 2013, Judge Border issued an order that awarded Verdugo
 $8,326.45 in costs. On February 4, 2013, Judge Border entered a
 Judgment pursuant to the verdict and cost award, thereby awarding
 Verdugo a total of $2,152,326.45.
 
On February 22, 2013, Bubba Gump filed "Defendant Bubba
 
Gump Shrimp Co. Restaurants, Inc.'s Motion for a New Trial or 
2
Remittitur" (Motion for a New Trial).  Bubba Gump argued for a
 
new trial due to, inter alia, conflicting jury instructions and
 attorney misconduct.
 
On May 10, 2013, Judge Border filed a "Memorandum

 
Opinion and Order Regarding Defendant's Motion For a New Trial or
 Remittitur" (Order Granting a New Trial). Judge Border granted a
 
new trial because, inter alia, (1) the jury instructions on
 
general premises liability and mode of operation were
 conflicting; (2) the mode of operation instruction was
 incomplete; and (3) Verdugo's attorney made inappropriate
 comments during closing argument.
 
On March 28, 2014, after several motions and orders
 
were filed concerning the new trial, Verdugo filed a "Motion to
 Reinstate Judgment Filed February 4, 2013" (Motion to Reinstate
 
Judgment). 
2 Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure ( HRCP) Rule 59(b) provides: "A motion
for a new trial shall be filed no later than 10 days after entry of the
judgment." Bubba Gump's Motion for a New Trial falls within the ten-dayrequirement in HRCP Rule 59(b) because it was stamped as received within tendays, even though it was not filed until later. See Yuen v. Bd. of Appeals,
No. 29192, 2012 WL 902231, at *4 (Haw. App. Mar. 19, 2012) ("The Hawai' i 
Supreme Court has held that submission of a document to a circuit court clerkand the clerk's acceptance and date stamping of it as 'received' constitutes afiling sufficient to satisfy jurisdictional requirements.") 
3
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On May 27, 2014, Judge Castagnetti filed an "Order
 
Granting Plaintiff's Motion to Reinstate Judgment Filed February
 
4, 2013" (Order to Reinstate Judgment). Judge Castagnetti found
 
that cogent reasons existed to reinstate the judgment because,
 
inter alia: (1) the jury instruction regarding the mode of
 operation rule was not an erroneous statement or incomplete; (2)
 the premises liability instruction and the mode of operation
 instruction were not conflicting, and any mistake in giving both
 instructions was not prejudicial; and (3) Bubba Gump never
 objected to the misconduct of Verdugo's attorney during closing
 arguments and did not ask for a curative instruction, thus
 waiving this argument as grounds for a new trial.
 
On June 17, 2014, Judge Castagnetti entered another
 
Judgment in favor of Verdugo, in the total amount of
 $2,152,326.45 plus interest. On June 26, 2014, Bubba Gump timely
 appealed.
II.	 Standards of Review
 A.	 Jury Instructions
 
When jury instructions, or the omission thereof, are at
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptively
harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it
affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the
error was not prejudicial.
 
Nelson v. Univ. of Haw., 97 Hawai 'i 376, 386, 38 P.3d 95, 105 
(2001) (internal citations and quotation marks omitted).
B.	 Plain Error
 
In civil cases, the plain error rule is only invoked when
"justice so requires." We have taken three factors into
account in deciding whether our discretionary power to notice
plain error ought to be exercised in civil cases: (1) whether
consideration of the issue not raised at trial requires
additional facts; (2) whether its resolution will affect the
integrity of the trial court's findings of fact; and (3)
whether the issue is of great public import.
 
Montalvo v. Lapez, 77 Hawai 'i 282, 290, 884 P.2d 345, 353 (1994) 
(citation omitted).
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C.	 Modification of a Prior Ruling of Another Court of 
Equal and Concurrent Jurisdiction
"Unless cogent reasons support the second court's action,
 
any  modification  of  a  prior  ruling  of  another  court  of  equal and
 
concurrent jurisdiction will be deemed an abuse of discretion."
 
Wong v. City & Cty. of Honolulu,  66 Haw. 389,  396, 665 P.2d 157,
 
162 (1983) (emphasis omitted).
D.
	 Trial Misconduct
 
Generally, an improper appeal by an opposing party to the
prejudices and sympathies of the jury is a ground for
granting a motion for a new trial where 1) the moving party
has been injured by the improper appeal; 2) the moving party
took proper steps to preserve his or her right to relief; 3)
the moving party sought to have the harmful effect of the
improper appeal remedied by an appropriate jury instruction;
and 4) the effect of the improper appeal was not adequately
dissipated by the steps taken; or 5) the error was so
fundamental that gross injustice would result if a new trial
is not granted.
 
State by Bronster v. U.S. Steel Corp., 82 Hawai 'i 32, 55-56, 919 
P.2d 294, 317-18 (1996) (internal citations and emphasis 
omitted).
III. Discussion
 
A.	 Jury Instruction on Premises Liability
 
Bubba Gump contends that there was no evidence that any
 
Mai Tai staff member was actually aware of the spilled liquid
 
where Verdugo slipped and there was no evidence how long the
 liquid was on the floor before Verdugo slipped and fell. Bubba
 Gump thus argues "[t]here is a complete failure of proof of
 actual or constructive notice[,]" and hence asserts it was error
 to give the premises liability instruction to the jury.
 
The premises liability instruction was given by 
agreement of the parties. Thus, we review Bubba Gump's contention for plain error. See Montalvo, 77 Hawai
'i at 288, 884 
P.2d at 351 ("[E]ven the complete failure to object to a jury instruction does not prevent an appellate court from taking cognizance of the trial court's error if the error is plain and may result in a miscarriage of justice." (citation and internal quotation marks omitted)). 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bubba Gump relies on  Gelber v. Sheraton-Hawaii Corp.,
 
49 Haw. 327, 417 P.2d 638 (1966), for the proposition that it was
 
prejudicial error to instruct the jury on an issue or state of
 facts not supported by the evidence, even if the instruction was
 a correct statement of the law. Id. at 329-30, 417 P.2d at 640. 
In short, Bubba Gump appears to contend that without evidence
 that Mai Tai staff members were aware of the spill prior to
 Verdugo's slip and fall, or without evidence of how long the
 spill existed before Verdugo slipped, no premises liability
 instruction should have been given. We conclude it was not plain
 error to give the premises liability instruction.
 
Bubba Gump does not contest that the premises liability
 
instruction was a correct statement of the prevailing law. The
 instruction as given states:
 
A tenant of commercial property has a duty to exercise
reasonable care to maintain the property in a safe condition
or to give adequate warning to persons reasonably
anticipated to be on the property.
 
To prevail on his claim, plaintiff must prove all of

the following elements:
 
1. 	People like plaintiff were reasonably anticipated to be
on the property; and
2. 	A condition on the property posed an unreasonable risk
of harm; and
3. 	Defendant knew or should have known of the unreasonable
 risk of harm; and
 
4. 	Defendant had sufficient control over the property to
take reasonable steps to remove the unreasonable risk of
harm or to give adequate warning of that risk; and
5. 	Defendant failed to take reasonable steps to remove the
unreasonable risk of harm or to give adequate warning of
that risk; and
6. 	Defendant's failure was a legal cause of injury to
plaintiff.
 
Defendant need not have exclusive control to have
 
sufficient control over the property. Several persons or
entities may each have sufficient control as lessees or
tenants, even though their control is only partial or joint.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
As noted in the instruction, the relevant issue is
whether Mai Tai staff "knew or should have known" about the
 
spilled liquid on the floor which led to Verdugo's slip and fall. 
Even without actual knowledge of the spill prior to Verdugo's
 

 
6

  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fall, it was not error to give the above instruction because –­
contrary to Bubba Gump's argument -- constructive notice did not require evidence as to how long the spill was on the floor before Verdugo slipped. Rather, in this case there is a different type of evidence in the record that Mai Tai staff "should have known" of the unreasonable risk of harm. As discussed infra, we believe the mode of operation rule applies given the specific circumstances in this case, and thus, the Mai Tai staff had constructive notice that spilled liquid could create a potential safety hazard and lead to the type of slip and fall experienced by Verdugo. See Gump v. Walmart Stores, Inc. (Gump I), 93 
Hawai
'i 428, 5 P.3d 418 (App. 1999), aff'd in part and rev'd in 
part on other grounds Gump v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. (Gump II) 93 
Hawai'i 417, 5 P.3d 407 (2000). 
Thus, it was not plain error to give the premises
 
liability instruction to the jury.
B. Jury Instructions on Negligence
 Bubba Gump next contends that the circuit court erred
 
by instructing the jury on general negligence, because the
 
general negligence instructions obviated the need for Verdugo to
 prove actual or constructive notice of the unsafe condition. 
Again, Bubba Gump's contention is without merit because under the
 mode of operation rule, the manner in which Mai Tai conducted its
 operation provided constructive notice of the potential hazard.
 
Additionally, even assuming it was error to give the
 
general negligence instructions, it was invited error. Bubba
 Gump proposed two instructions regarding negligence, burden of
 
3 4 
proof regarding negligence and negligence defined,  and both
3 Bubba Gump's proposed instruction regarding the burden of proof for
negligence was agreed to as modified:
 
Burden of Proof–Re Negligence
Plaintiff(s) must prove by a preponderance of the
evidence that defendant(s) was/were negligent and that such
negligence was a legal cause of plaintiff's(s') injuries
and/or damages. Plaintiff(s) must also prove the nature and
extent of his/her/their injuries and/or damages.
 
(continued...)
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
instructions were given by agreement. An appellant who invites
 
an error by requesting that the trial court give particular jury
 instructions, "should not be permitted to avail herself of the
 error." Struzik v. City & Cty. of Honolulu, 50 Haw. 241, 245,
 
437 P.2d 880, 883 (1968) (citation omitted); see also Richardson
 v. Sport Shinko (Waikiki Corp.), 76 Hawai
'i 494, 505, 880 P.2d 
169, 180 (1994) ("Having accepted the instruction, as modified, the [plaintiffs] waived any objection to it."). 
We thus disagree with Bubba Gump's contention that the
 
general negligence instruction was in error, and in any event, it
 was invited error because Bubba Gump proposed and agreed to the
 instructions.
 
C. Jury Instruction on Mode of Operation
 
Bubba Gump contends that the circuit court erred when
 
it instructed the jury, over Bubba Gump's objection, regarding
 
the mode of operation rule. Bubba Gump contends that the mode of
 operation rule does not apply to Bubba Gump because Mai Tai is
 not a big box store or self-service establishment and even if the
 mode of operation rule applied, Bubba Gump took reasonable steps
 to protect against the risk created by its mode of operation.
 
3(...continued)
Defendant(s) must prove by a preponderance of the
evidence that plaintiff(s) was/were negligent and that such
negligence was a legal cause of plaintiff's(s') injuries
and/or damages.
 
4 Bubba Gump's proposed instruction for negligence defined was agreed to
as follows:
 
Negligence Defined
Negligence is doing something which a reasonable
person would not do or failing to do something which a
reasonable person would do. It is the failure to use that
care which a reasonable person would use to avoid injury to
himself, herself, or other people or damage to property.
In deciding whether a person was negligent, you must
consider what was done or not done under the circumstances
 as shown by the evidence in this case.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1. The mode of operation rule generally
 
The mode of operation rule was adopted by this court in 
Gump I and the Hawai 'i Supreme Court affirmed adoption of the 
rule in Gump II. The plaintiff in that case was injured after 
she slipped on a french fry and fell in a Wal-Mart store, near to where a McDonald's restaurant operated within the Wal-Mart store. Gump I, 93 Hawai
'i at 433, 5 P.3d at 423. This court began the 
analysis regarding Wal-Mart's potential liability with the traditional rule of premises liability, which provides: 
if a condition exists upon the land which poses an
unreasonable risk of harm to persons using the land, then
the possessor of the land, if the possessor knows, or should
have known of the unreasonable risk, owes a duty to the
persons using the land to take reasonable steps to eliminate
the unreasonable risk, or adequately to warn the users
against it.
 
Id. at 436, 5 P.3d at 426 (quoting Corbett v. Ass'n of Apartment 
Owners of Wailua Bayview Apartments, 70 Haw. 415, 417, 772 P.2d 693, 695 (1989)). Under the traditional rule of premises liability, "a defendant cannot be held responsible for its acts or omissions without notice or knowledge, or without reasonably being chargeable with knowledge." Id. This court recognized, 
however, that the required notice for liability "may stem, not from the specific instrumentality of the accident . . . but from the general mode of operation of a business, if the specific hazardous instrumentality is a reasonably foreseeable consequence of that mode of operation." Id. at 441, 5 P.3d at 431. Thus, 
this court adopted, and the Hawai
'i Supreme Court affirmed, the 
mode of operation rule which provides: 
where a plaintiff is able to demonstrate that the business
proprietor adopted a marketing method or mode of operation
in which a dangerous condition is reasonably foreseeable and
the proprietor fails to take reasonable action to discover
and remove the dangerous condition, the injured party may
recover without showing actual notice or constructive
knowledge of the specific instrumentality of the accident. 
Id. at 441-42, 5 P.3d at 431-32 (citation omitted). As the
 
supreme court noted in Gump II, "[b]ecause the commercial
 establishment should be aware of the potentially hazardous
 conditions that arise from its mode of operation, an injured
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
plaintiff need not prove that the defendant had actual notice of
 
the specific instrumentality causing his or her injury. Notice is
 imputed from the establishment's mode of operation." Gump II, 93
 
Hawai
'i at 420-21, 5 P.3d at 411-12. 
In Gump II, the supreme court also clarified this
 
court's opinion 
by holding that the application of the rule is limited to
circumstances such as those of this case. Wal–Mart chooses,
as a marketing strategy, to lease store space to McDonald's
in order to attract more customers and encourage them to
remain in the store longer. Wal–Mart also chooses, for the
most part, not to prevent patrons from carrying their
McDonald's food into the Wal–Mart shopping area. This mode
of operation gave rise to the hazard that caused Gump's
injury. Under the mode of operation rule, Gump was not
required to prove that Wal–Mart had actual notice of the
specific instrumentality that caused her injury. 
Id. at 421, 5 P.3d at 411. Thus, the supreme court limited the
 
mode of operation rule to circumstances such as those in Gump,
 but did not limit the rule's application to only big box stores
 or self-service establishments.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court also considered whether the 
mode of operation rule applied in Moyle v. Y & Y Hyup Shin, Corp., 118 Hawai
'i 385, 191 P.3d 1062 (2008), decided eight years 
after Gump II. There, in the early morning hours after having beers at a club, the plaintiff was assaulted and robbed by another club patron on the sidewalk outside the club. Id. at 
388, 191 P.3d at 1065. The plaintiff argued on appeal that the trial court should have given the jury a mode of operation instruction because the owners of the club testified they were aware of the need for security but continued to operate without security as part of their mode of operation. Id. at 396, 191 
P.3d at 1073. The supreme court disagreed, explaining: 
Gump II focused on Wal–Mart's “marketing strategy,” which
inherently led to a foreseeable risk of danger. In line
 with this reasoning, the “mode of operation” doctrine has
been limited almost entirely to “self-service” and “big box”
store slip and fall cases, as the convenience offered to
customers through their ability to serve themselves, a
marketing strategy, is also fraught with the danger of
spills causing hazardous floor conditions. See Gump v.
 Wal–Mart Stores, Inc., 93 Hawai‘i 428, 442–43, 5 P.3d 418,
432–33 (App.1999) (“Gump I ”) (“‘While the self-service
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
marketing method has economic advantages for the store owner
or business proprietor and permits consumers the freedom to
browse, examine, and select merchandise that they desire,
certain problems are inherent in the method which are
infrequently encountered under traditional merchandising
methods that involve individual customer assistance.’ ”
 
(quoting Donald M. Zupanec, Annotation, Store or Business
 Premises Slip–and–Fall: Modern Status of Rules Requiring
 
Showing of Notice of Proprietor of Transitory Condition
 Allegedly Causing Plaintiff's Fall, 85 A.L.R.3d 1000,
 
1004–05 n. 14 (1978))); id. at 444, 5 P.3d at 434
(explaining that the mode of operations rule applies “‘when
the operating methods of a proprietor are such that
dangerous conditions are continuous'” (quoting Pimentel v.
 Roundup Co., 100 Wash.2d 39, 666 P.2d 888, 892 (1983))).
 
By contrast, in the present matter, the [Defendants]
had not chosen, as a marketing strategy or a mode of
operation, to invite individuals with criminal tendencies
onto their premises in order to generate business. In other
words, they did not hold out their lack of security as an
enticement to potential patrons. Any ostensibly dangerous
condition, particularly the possibility of violent
individuals attacking patrons outside the club, was simply
not traceable to the defendants. See Gump II, 93 Hawai‘i at
421, 5 P.3d at 411 (observing that the mode of operation
rule is “consistent with the exception to the notice
requirement where the dangerous condition is traceable to
the defendant or its agents”).
 
Id. at 396-97, 191 P.3d at 1073-74 (footnote and some citations
 
omitted)(emphasis added). The supreme court in Moyle thus held
 
that the circuit court had not erred in refusing to give the mode
 of operation instruction to the jury "because the rule did not
 apply to the facts of this case." Id. at 397, 191 P.3d at 1074.
 
In another case from Hawai
'i, Munguia v. Grelyn of 
Maui, LLC, Civ. No. 09-00058 HG-BMK, 2011 WL 1364026 (D. Haw.
 Apr. 8, 2011), aff'd 473 Fed. App'x. 643 (9th Cir. 2012), the
 United States District Court, District of Hawai
'i, analyzed the 
application of the mode of operation rule in light of a jury
 verdict for a slip and fall incident that occurred at a
 McDonald's restaurant on Maui. In addressing a motion for
 judgment as a matter of law and the sufficiency of the evidence
 for liability under the mode of operation rule, the District
 Court stated:
 
Defendant knowingly allows customers to serve themselves and
dispose of their food products, creating a risk of falling
food in the dining area of its restaurant. This is precisely
the same risk that the Gump court identified. The risk of
 
falling food inherent in Wal–Mart's mode of operation
 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(maintaining a McDonald's restaurant within the store) is
even greater in the McDonald's restaurant itself, where the
food is produced and "self-served."
 
Id. at *8. The District Court ruled that McDonald's "utilized a
 
mode of operation involving the 'self-service' of greasy food
 products, and that this mode of operation created a reasonably
 foreseeable and regularly occurring slip and fall danger." Id.
 
Ultimately, the District Court concluded: 
There was sufficient evidence at trial to support each of
the necessary elements of a finding of liability for
negligence under the mode of operation rule. There was
sufficient evidence that: (1) Defendant utilized a mode of
operation with a reasonably foreseeable dangerous condition;
(2) Defendant's mode of operation resulted in a dangerous
condition (a slippery floor) that caused Mrs. Munguia to be
injured; and (3) Defendant failed to take reasonable action
to discover and remove the dangerous condition.
 
Id. at 25.
 
Moreover, in Sarkisian v. Concept Restaurants, Inc., 32
 
N.E.3d 854 (Mass. 2015), the Supreme Judicial Court of
 
Massachusetts applied the mode of operation rule to a nightclub.5
 
The court determined that the mode of operation rule applied to
 the nightclub even though the nightclub fell outside of the
 context of a self-serve establishment. Id. at 859. 
In Sarkisian, the plaintiff slipped and fell on a wet
 
surface and suffered two fractures in her leg. Id. at 856. 
Patrons of the bar could purchase beverages served in plastic
 cups and were permitted to consume the beverages on the dance
 floor while dancing. Id. The nightclub's staff of security
 
guards, barbacks, and a manager were all collectively responsible
 for cleaning up spills. Id. In addition, the nightclub's
 
manager testified that "spills on the dance floor are part of the
 business." Id. at 861.
 
5
 We note that in its briefs on appeal, Bubba Gump cited to the lower
court rulings in Sarkisian
mstances , which had refused to extend the mode of operation
rule to the circu of that case. See Sarkisian v. Concept Rest., Inc.
,
No. 11-ADMS-70010, 2012 WL 5337230 (Mass. App. Div. October 19, 2012);
Sarkisian v. Concept Rest., Inc., No. 13-P-154, 2014 WL 5285600 (Mass. App.
Ct. October 17, 2014). The Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts
subsequently reversed the lower court rulings. Sarkisian, 32 N.E.3d at 856,
 
861.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6  The jury instruction on mode of operation read to the jury in this
case was based on Hawai# i Civil Jury Instructions, Instruction 17.4.  This
jury instruction arguably omits a material element of the mode of operation
rule because it does not require the jury  to determine whether the business
proprietor, Bubba Gump, adopted a marketing method in which a dangerous
condition was reasonably foreseeable.  See Gump II, 93 Hawai# i at 420, 5 P.3d
at 410 (stating " where a plaintiff is able to demonstrate that the business
proprietor adopted a marketing method or mode of operation in which a
dangerous condition is reasonably foreseeable and the proprietor fails to take
reasonable action to discover and remove the dangerous condition, the injured
party may recover without showing actual notice or constructive knowledge of
the specific instrumentality of the accident" (Emphasis added.)); see also
Fisher v. Big Y Foods, Inc., 3 A.3d 919, 924 n.13 (Conn. 2010) (stating in the
jury instruction "[u]ltimately the burden is upon the plaintiff to prove that
the defendant's mode of operation created a foreseeable risk of injury");
Chiara v. Fry's Food Stores of Arizona, Inc.,  733 P.2d 283, 286 (Ariz. 1987)
("We think, therefore, that a jury should determine if Fry's reasonably could
have anticipated that sealed bottles regularly were opened and spilled.  Of
course, that conclusion alone would not support a finding of liability.  If
Fry's exercised reasonable care under the circumstances, it will prevail at
trial.").  However, Bubba Gump did not raise this issue on appeal and it is
(continued...)
13The court noted with regard to the facts of the case:
The nightclub's mode of operation included the sale of
beverages in plastic cups from bars located on a dance
floor. The patrons were then permitted to dance while
holding their beverages. It was reasonably foreseeable that
such a mode of operation would result in a recurring theme
of cups being jostled and liquid being jettisoned by patrons
onto the dance floor. Where that liquid is spilled on a
floor, crowded with dancers, in a dimly lit setting with
flashing strobe lights, and the only route of travel to and
from the lounge area is across that dance floor, common
sense tells us that the spill creates an unsafe condition
that a patron such as the plaintiff is ill-suited to
discern, except, perhaps, by the happenstance of a slip and
fall.
Id. at 860.  The court also recognized that "in cases such as
this, the owner has scarce incentive to act reasonably, because
the injured patron will seldom be able to discern the origin of
the unsafe condition and, thus, satisfy the notice requirement
under the traditional approach to premises liability."  Id. 
Therefore, the court concluded "that summary judgment was
improperly granted and that the defendant had notice of the
inherent risks associated with its chosen mode of operating its
dance floor."  Id. at 861.
2.The mode of operation rule applies in this case
In this case, the jury instruction regarding the mode
of operation rule read as follows:6     NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A business has a duty to exercise reasonable care to
maintain its premises in a safe condition and remove
unreasonable risks of harm that arise from the way in which
a business is conducted or operated.
To prevail on his claim, plaintiff must prove all of
the following elements:
1.
	 A condition on the property posed an unreasonable risk
of harm; and
2.	 Defendant failed to take reasonable steps to remove
the unreasonable risk of harm or to give adequate
warning of that risk; and
3.	 Defendant's failure was a legal cause of injury to
plaintiff.
 
The mode of operation rule applies to Bubba Gump in
 
this case because the undisputed evidence regarding the manner in
 
which Mai Tai was operated established that patrons were
 knowingly allowed to carry pitchers of drinks throughout the
 premises, even though it was known that liquids will foreseeably
 be dropped onto the floor. 
See Gump II , 93 Hawai 'i at 421, 5 
P.3d at 411. For example, Francine Cekada (Cekada), the General
 
Manager for Mai Tai, testified that customers walk up to the bar
 
and order pitchers of beer and carry the pitchers back to their
 tables, including the standing table where Verdugo slipped and
 fell. Cekada also testified that drinks are carried throughout
 the bar. In addition, Cekada testified that no one person is
 responsible for cleaning up the spills at Mai Tai and instead all
 
6(...continued)
therefore waived.

 
In addition to the issue being waived, the undisputed evidence in this
case establishes that Bubba Gump adopted a marketing method in which a
dangerous condition was reasonably foreseeable (that is, by allowing customersto order pitchers at the bar and proceed to walk around the premises with fullpitchers knowing that spills are an ongoing occurrence). Thus, any error innot presenting this question to the jury was harmless. See State v. Aplaca, 
96 Hawai' i 17, 26, 25 P.3d 792, 801 (2001)(holding that the failure to submit
an essential sentencing factor to the jury was subject to harmless erroranalysis) (citing Neder v. United States, 527 U.S. 1 (1999)).
We make one further observation about the instruction in this case. In 
granting a new trial, Judge Border noted that the mode of operationinstruction given to the jury included "an alternate requirement to 'giveadequate warning of the risk' - a requirement which admittedly is not included
in either Gump appellate decision." Judge Border was correct that giving
adequate warning is not part of the mode of operation rule as adopted in Gump. As set forth in Gump I and Gump II, the mode of operation rule requires thatthe proprietor "take reasonable action to discover and remove the dangerouscondition." Gump I, 93 Hawai' i at 442, 5 P.3d at 432 (emphasis added); Gump 
II, 93 Hawai' i at 420-21, 5 P.3d at 410-11 (emphasis added). We do not 
address this issue because Bubba Gump did not raise it on appeal. 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
staff must take care of them when they are found. 
Paul David Braden (Braden), the manager on duty on the
 
night of the incident, also testified that customers can walk up
 
to the bar and walk away with a pitcher of beer and many people
 walk around the bar with the pitcher. In a deposition that was
 read to the jury, Braden stated that no one specifically saw the
 beer get spilled on the floor, however, based on his opinion
 "people are playing around or they're moving around in general.
 The pitchers are full, they slosh their beer. It's an ongoing
 thing, all night long, drying the floors and keeping people from
 making puddles." After Verdugo slipped and fell, Braden and
 another waitress cleaned up a puddle of beer that measured
 approximately two feet by two feet in the area where Verdugo's
 accident occurred.
 
Given the facts of this case, Bubba Gump, through its
 
mode of operation of knowingly allowing patrons to order their
 beer at the counter and then move around the premises with full
 pitchers, while knowing that spills are an "ongoing thing,"
 created a foreseeable risk that liquid would be spilled on the
 floor causing dangerous conditions to exist. Given the specific
 and undisputed evidence in this case, application of the mode of
 operation rule is appropriate.
3.	 Substantial evidence was presented that Bubba Gump
failed to take reasonable steps to prevent injury
 
Bubba Gump also contends that even if the mode of
 
operation rule applies in this case, Verdugo did not prove that
 
Bubba Gump failed to take reasonable care to prevent the injury. 
In Gump I, this court noted that under the mode of 
operation rule, if the plaintiff meets its burden to link "the specific instrumentality of the accident to the proprietor's mode of operation" and proves "that the proprietor's mode of operation was such that it was reasonably foreseeable that the dangerous instrumentality would occur," the "plaintiff must still prove that the defendant failed to take reasonable care to prevent injury." Gump I, 93 Hawai
'i at 445, 5 P.3d at 435 (emphasis 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
added).
 
Whether Bubba Gump failed to take reasonable care to
 
prevent injury to Verdugo is a question of fact for the jury to
 
decide. See Sheehan v. Roche Bros. Supermarkets, Inc., 863
 
N.E.2d 1276, 1286 (Mass. 2007) ("Thus, because the determination
 of reasonableness is a question of fact, the trier of fact must
 determine whether the owner could reasonably foresee or
 anticipate that a foreseeable risk stemming from the owner's mode
 of operation could occur and whether the owner exercised
 reasonable care in maintaining the premise in a safe condition
 commensurate with these foreseeable risks."); Kelly v. Stop &
 Shop, Inc., 918 A.2d 249, 263-64 (Conn. 2007) ("The defendant may
 rebut the plaintiff's evidence by producing evidence that it
 exercised reasonable care under the circumstances. Of course,
 the finder of fact bears the ultimate responsibility of
 determining whether the defendant exercised such care."). 
A jury verdict "will not be set aside where there is 
substantial evidence to support the jury's findings." Stanford 
Carr Dev. Corp. v. Unity House, Inc., 111 Hawai
'i 286, 296, 141 
P.3d 459, 469 (2006). Substantial evidence means "credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a [person] of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Id. (brackets in original). 
In this case, there was substantial evidence to support
 
a jury finding that Bubba Gump failed to take reasonable care to
 prevent the injury. The patrons at Mai Tai were allowed to order
 beer and walk around the bar with the beer in their hand. As
 stated above, Braden testified that people at Mai Tai "are
 playing around or they're moving around in general." When asked:
 "You're saying that it's a frequent occurrence that there would
 be puddles or liquid on the floor?" Braden responded: "Frequent
 occurrences like people slosh their drinks around, yes. They're
 having fun. They are relaxed." Although spills are inevitable,
 on the night of the injury, there was no one assigned
 specifically to cleaning up spills on the floor. In addition,
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the path to the exit of the bar may not have been clear and
 
unobstructed on the night that Verdugo fell because the bar was
 crowded with patrons. Finally, Verdugo testified that on the
 night of the accident the security guards did not have
 flashlights to clear the way to the exit. Thus, there was
 credible evidence for a reasonable person to conclude that Bubba
 Gump did not take reasonable precautions to prevent the injury to
 Verdugo.
D. Attorney Misconduct
 
Bubba Gump contends that Judge Castagnetti applied an
 
erroneous legal standard when she overruled the Order Granting a
 
New Trial based on Verdugo's attorney's improper statements
 during closing arguments. Bubba Gump did not object to the
 comments during closing argument and thus brought the issue
 before the circuit court for the first time when it filed its
 Motion for a New Trial.
 
In general, "the trial court has inherent power to 
reconsider interlocutory orders." Cho v. State, 115 Hawai
'i 373, 
383, 168 P.3d 17, 27 (2007). The Supreme Court of Hawai 'i, in 
Wong articulated the standard regarding the modification of a prior ruling of another judge of equal jurisdiction. The supreme court stated that: 
A judge should generally be hesitant to modify, vacate
or overrule a prior interlocutory order of another judge who
sits in the same court. Judicial restraint in this situation
 stems from considerations of courtesy and comity in a court
with multiple judges, where each judge has equal and
concurrent jurisdiction. 
The normal hesitancy that a court would have in
modifying its own prior rulings is even greater when a judge
is asked to vacate the order of a brother or sister judge.
The general rule which requires adherence to a prior
interlocutory order of another judge of the same court thus
commands even greater respect than the doctrine of 'law of
the case' which refers to the usual practice of courts to
refuse to disturb all prior rulings in a particular case,
including rulings made by the judge himself.
 
Wong, 66 Haw. at 395-96, 665 P.2d at 162 (internal citations
 
omitted). Thus, a court must have "cogent reasons" to support
 "any modification of a prior ruling of another court of equal and
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
concurrent jurisdiction." Id. at 396, 665 P.2d at 162. As an
 
example, exceptional circumstances may warrant a modification of

 
a prior order of a fellow judge to correct any patent errors. 
Tradewinds Hotel, Inc. v. Cochran, 8 Haw. App. 256, 264-65, 799
 P.2d 60, 66 (1990). 
Bubba Gump contends that Verdugo's attorney, during
 
closing and rebuttal argument, made inappropriate comments 

 
regarding: (1) the testimony of Bubba Gump's medical expert
 witness because Verdugo's attorney repeatedly stated that the
 doctor was a liar; and (2) Verdugo's attorney improperly made
 comments regarding the fact that it is possible to die from a
 slip and fall injury.
 
First, at various points in closing argument and
 
rebuttal argument, Verdugo's attorney made the following comments
 regarding Dr. Schneider, Bubba Gump's witness:
 
[Opposing counsel is] going to try to tell you that all the
accident caused was a sprained ankle, and his reliance is
100 percent on Dr. Schneider, who is one of the biggest
liars you've ever seen because he's one of the biggest liars
I've ever seen and I've been doing this for 32 years.
 

. . . .
 
There isn't a single witness who testified on the other side
who told you nothing but the truth. And there's one of them
that's the biggest --Dr. Schneider is as big a liar as I've
ever seen anywhere. Doctor, no doctor, witness, no witness.
It doesn't matter. He's the biggest -- he's as big of a liar
as I've ever seen.
 
. . . .
 
Dr. Schneider is a liar. What possible motivation Mr.
Estes says could he have to lie. You know, that's a really
good question. I got two. One is money, okay, charging $600
an hour for his deposition, okay, not answering the
questions just like he didn't hear. Right? But that's not a
sufficient explanation because why would someone -- why
would a surgeon like that with -- why would he display such
a complete lack of human empathy and to come into a
courtroom and talk stink about someone that he's never met
 and say that it couldn't possibly have come from that? Why
would a person do that? The reason a person would do that is
they're a bad -- that's a bad person. That's a bad person
who would do that.
 
. . . .
 
And if you buy Dr. Schneider, I'm in the wrong line of work.
I mean, I'm in the wrong line of work.
You know, I used to think that I'd be able to spot
liars. I'm not as good at spotting liars as I thought I was, 

but I can spot that one. You don't have to be Clarence
Darrow to know that guy was lying.
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In the Order Granting a New Trial, Judge Border stated
 
that "[a]lthough Plaintiff's counsel's closing statements
 
regarding Dr. Schneider crossed the line from 'hard' to 'foul,'
 they are not enough, standing alone, to overturn the results of
 an eight day jury trial." (Footnote omitted.)
 
Judge Border instead based his granting of a new trial
on comments made by Verdugo's attorney at the end of the rebuttal
 argument:
 
 
You're here to decide this case, and in deciding this
case, you are going to determine what the rest of Ernie
Verdugo's life looks like one way or the other. One function
of a verdict in a case like this is to change behavior. It's
obvious that these people are not going to otherwise. You
would not be surprised if you read in the paper tomorrow
morning that somebody slipped and fell and died at the Mai
Tai Bar. It won't be Ernie Verdugo this time. Maybe it's
going to be a 22-year-old UH medical student who admires Dr.
Masuda and wants to be a doctor. Maybe she's going to drop
dead. Okay.
You have a great obligation. You have a great
responsibility, and that great responsibility is also a
great opportunity. And the responsibility and the
opportunity have the same name, and that name is justice.
You're here to do justice. You have a rare opportunity in
this lifetime to do justice, so do justice. Go and do
justice.
 
Based on the above statements, Judge Border found that
the "clear intent of the remarks was to arouse the most maudlin
 
of emotional sentiments." In addition, Judge Border stated
 "[n]ot only does the argument have the effect of inflaming juror
 emotions, but it misstates the role of causation and
 foreseeability in the law of negligence."
 
 
In the Order to Reinstate Judgment, Judge Castagnetti
 
concluded: 
By failing to object during closing argument, by
failing to request a curative instruction and/or by failing
to move for a mistrial, Defendant did not properly preserve
its objections to counsel's remarks as a basis for a new
trial. Defendant's objections to counsel's remarks were
clearly waived. As such, the court's decision to grant a new
...trial based on conduct and arguments that were not
properly preserved and were waived is not sufficient legal
cause to grant a new trial.
 
Thus, Judge Castagnetti found it was patent error to grant a new
 
trial.
 
19

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Supreme Court of Hawai 'i articulated the standard 
for statements made by an opposing counsel meant to appeal to the 
prejudices and sympathies of the jury: 
Generally, an improper appeal by an opposing party to the
prejudices and sympathies of the jury is a ground for
granting a motion for a new trial where 1) the moving party
has been injured by the improper appeal; 2) the moving party
took proper steps to preserve his or her right to relief; 3)
the moving party sought to have the harmful effect of the
improper appeal remedied by an appropriate jury instruction;
and 4) the effect of the improper appeal was not adequately
dissipated by the steps taken; or 5) the error was so
fundamental that gross injustice would result if a new trial
is not granted.
 
State by Bronster, 82 Hawai 'i at 55-56, 919 P.2d at 317-18 
(citations and emphasis omitted); see also Young v. Price, 48 
Haw. 22, 29, 395 P.2d 365, 370 (1964) ("The failure to make objections to the argument of plaintiff's counsel precludes our consideration of the contended errors in accordance with the fundamental rule that misconduct occurring upon a trial must be brought to the attention of the court when it occurs or is discovered, and unless objected to cannot be relied upon as error upon a motion for new trial or upon appeal."); Stewart v. Brennan, 7 Haw. App. 136, 148, 748 P.2d 816, 824 (1988) ("A party may not rely on alleged trial misconduct as a ground for new trial unless the party had objected to that conduct and brought it to the attention of the court."). 
In this case, Bubba Gump did not object during trial
 
and thus failed to preserve its right to relief. Bubba Gump also
 did not request a curative jury instruction to remedy any harmful
 effects of the comments. 
Furthermore, a gross injustice would not occur if a new
 
trial was not granted. First, Judge Border determined that the
 comments regarding Dr. Schneider's credibility were not
 prejudicial enough to grant a new trial. Second, the statements
 alluding to the fact that a person could die due to a slip and
 fall at Mai Tai were stated after an eight day trial and at the
 very end of Verdugo's rebuttal argument, a small fraction of the
 hour and a half allotted to each party for closing argument. 
20
NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore, Judge Castagnetti did not abuse her
 
discretion when she reinstated the original judgment.
E. Limitation on Discovery
 
Bubba Gump contends that Judge Castagnetti erred when
 
she filed an "Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for Protective
 
Order, Precluding All Discovery, New Experts and Depositions
 Absent a Court Order, and Taking Under Advisement All Other
 Relief Requested." Because the order addresses discovery for a
 new trial, and we conclude it was not error to reinstate the
 original judgment, we do not reach this point of error.
IV. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Judgment filed on
 
June 17, 2014.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 15, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Wayne M. Sakai,
Michiro Iwanaga, Richard C. Sutton, Jr.,
Max J. Kimura,
(Sakai Iwanaga Sutton Law Group)
and 
Andrea M. Gauthier,
S. Thomas Todd,
(Horvitz & Levy, LLP),
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
Howard Glickstein,

for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
21
 