NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000643 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
MARLIN L. LAVOIE, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 13-1-0236(3))
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Marlin L. Lavoie (Lavoie) appeals
from a Judgment, Conviction and Sentence entered on August 13,
2015 in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit ( circuit court).1 
Lavoie was convicted of: Murder in the Second Degree in violation
of Hawai #i Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 707-701.5 (2014)2 subject to
HRS § 706-656 (1993 & Supp. 2013); Carrying or Use of Firearm in
the Commission of a Separate Felony in violation of HRS § 134-
1  The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
2  HRS § 707-701.5 provides: 
[§707-701.5]  Murder in the second degree .  (1) Except
as provided in section 707-701, a person commits the offense
of murder in the second degree if the person intentionally
or knowingly causes the death of another person.
(2) Murder in the second degree is a felony for which
the defendant shall be sentenced to imprisonment as provided
in section 706-656.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
21(a) (2011);3 Ownership or Possession Prohibited of Any Firearm
or Firearm Ammunition (Count III or felon-in-possession ) in
violation of HRS §§ 134-7(b) and (h) (2011);4 and Place to Keep
Loaded Firearms Other than Pistols and Revolvers ( Count IV or
3  HRS § 134-21(a) provides:
[§134-21]  Carrying or use of firearm in the
commission of a separate felony; penalty.   (a) It shall be
unlawful for a person to knowingly carry on the person or
have within the person's immediate control or intentionally
use or threaten to use a firearm while engaged in the
commission of a separate felony, whether the firearm was
loaded or not, and whether operable or not; provided that a
person shall not be prosecuted under this subsection when
the separate felony is:
(1) A felony offense otherwise defined by this
chapter;
(2)
The felony offense of reckless endangering in
the first degree under section 707-713;
(3) The felony offense of terroristic threatening in
the first degree under section 707-716(1)(a),
707-716(1)(b), or [707-716(1)(e)]; or
(4) The felony offenses of criminal property damage
in the first degree under section 708-820 or
criminal property damage in the second degree
under section 708-821 and the firearm is the
instrument or means by which the property damage
is caused.
4  HRS §134-7(b) and (h) provide: 
§134-7  Ownership or possession prohibited, when;
penalty.
. . . .
(b) No person who is under indictment for, or has
waived indictment for, or has been bound over to the circuit
court for, or has been convicted in this State or elsewhere
of having committed a felony, or any crime of violence, or
an illegal sale of any drug shall own, possess, or control
any firearm or ammunition therefor.
. . . .
(h) Any person violating subsection (a) or (b) shall
be guilty of a class C felony; provided that any felon
violating subsection (b) shall be guilty of a class B
felony. Any person violating subsection (c), (d), (e), (f),
or (g) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
place-to-keep) in violation of HRS § 134-23(a) (2011).5 
On appeal, Lavoie argues that the circuit court erred
when it: (1) instructed the jury on Lavoie's affirmative defense
of extreme mental or emotional disturbance ( EMED) and permitted
an instruction on self-control, but did not, sua sponte ,6
instruct the jury on the definition of EMED; (2) did not, sua
sponte,7 provide a jury instruction on pathological intoxication
based on testimony that Lavoie may have been suffering from
symptoms of low blood sugar  at the time of the shooting; (3) did
not provide the jury with an instruction on the merger doctrine
5  HRS § 134-23(a) provides:
[§134-23]  Place to keep loaded firearms other than
pistols and revolvers; penalty.   (a) Except as provided in
section 134-5, all firearms shall be confined to the
possessor's place of business, residence, or sojourn;
provided that it shall be lawful to carry unloaded firearms
in an enclosed container from the place of purchase to the
purchaser's place of business, residence, or sojourn, or
between these places upon change of place of business,
residence, or sojourn, or between these places and the
following:
(1) A place of repair;
(2) A target range;
(3) A licensed dealer's place of business;
(4) An organized, scheduled firearms show or
exhibit;
(5) A place of formal hunter or firearm use training
or instruction; or
(6) A police station.
"Enclosed container" means a rigidly constructed
receptacle, or a commercially manufactured gun case, or the
equivalent thereof that completely encloses the firearm.
6  Lavoie acknowledges that his defense counsel did not request an EMED
definition.  However:
it is the duty of the circuit judge to see to it that the
case goes to the jury in a clear and intelligent manner, so
that they may have a clear and correct understanding of what
it is they are to decide, and he or she shall state to them
fully the law applicable to the facts[.]
State v. Adviento, 132 Hawai #i 123, 137, 319 P.3d 1131, 1145 (2014) (quoting
State v. Hoey, 77 Hawai #i 17, 38-39, 881 P.2d 504, 525-526 (1994) (quotation
marks, brackets, and citations omitted)). 
7  Lavoie again acknowledges that defense counsel did not request this
instruction at trial or object to the court's failure to give it.  However,
Adviento applies.  Adviento, 132 Hawai #i at 137, 319 P.3d at 1145.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
for Counts III and IV;8 (4) gave a limiting instruction on bad
acts evidence which erroneously provided that such evidence went
towards determining Lavoie's intent in the charged offenses; and
(5) held that defense counsel opened the door to Hawai #i Rules of
Evidence ( HRE) Rule 404(b) evidence of Lavoie's prior bad acts.  
Lavoie also argues that he was deprived of effective
assistance of counsel because his trial attorney: (1) failed to,
in pursuance of Lavoie's EMED and insanity defenses, present
evidence from Lavoie's father, Edward Lavoie ( Edward), and
Lavoie's acquaintance, Kaipo Poepoe (Kaipo); (2) failed to hire
an investigator to follow up with witnesses; and (3) failed to
request that the circuit court bar the State's use of bad acts
evidence for failure to provide HRE Rule 404(b) notice. 
For the reasons stated below, we affirm.
I. Background
On March 20, 2013, Lavoie shot and killed his longtime
girlfriend, Malia Kahalewai ( Kahalewai ), with a rifle.  
Kahalewai died at the scene.  Following the shooting, Lavoie
drove to his father's house where he resided, spent the night,
and turned himself in to the police the next day. 
Prior to trial, Lavoie stipulated that he was a
convicted felon at the time of the shooting.  The circuit court
also granted Lavoie's motion in limine, which sought to exclude
evidence of Lavoie's prior criminal record and any other prior
bad acts.  Lavoie and the State agreed, however, that if the door
were opened at trial, the State could pursue evidence of Lavoie's
prior bad acts. 
During opening arguments, defense counsel asserted,
inter alia , Lavoie's EMED defense.  
As part of its case-in-chief, the State called several
of Kahalewai's friends and/or acquaintances to testify.  These 
8  Defense counsel did not object to the court failing to instruct the
jury on merger at the time of trial, but did file a "Motion to Compel State to
Dismiss Count 3 or 4 Due to Merger" on August 10, 2015 after the verdict. 
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
witnesses included Nicole Aea ( Aea), Barbara Haliniak ( Barbara),
Alexis Haliniak (Alexis) , and Jaimie Maikui ( Maikui).
During defense counsel's cross-examination of Aea, Aea
testified, inter alia , that Kahalewai and Lavoie "had plenty of
arguments" over the course of their eight- to nine-year
relationship.  Further, defense counsel asked to approach the
bench during cross-examination of Aea at which time he stated:
Judge, there was a motion in limine about what we're
calling potential prior bad acts and what's been defined as
what could be conceivably construed as a prior bad act is
that the decedent leaving my client in the aftermath of
arguments for some period of time.  So I want to get into
that area with this witness now, that after arguments
throughout their relationship, there were periods of
separation, where [Kahalewai] would distance herself from
the family for days or weeks.
The prosecutor replied that this would "open the door" to why
Kahalewai would leave, to which defense counsel replied, "[t]hat
may be the case."  Defense counsel then proceeded with his cross-
examination of Aea.
Aea further testified during cross-examination about
arguments between Lavoie and Kahalewai, Kahalewai's leaving
Lavoie following those arguments for a period of days to over a
week at a time, and that, as of the night of the shooting,
Kahalewai had left Lavoie for approximately four days.  Aea also
described the interaction between Lavoie and Kahalewai
immediately prior to the shooting. 
After Aea's cross-examination, a bench conference was
held during which the prosecutor asserted that the defense had
opened the door to Lavoie's prior bad acts, namely past arguments
with Kahalewai involving abuse by Lavoie and then Kahalewai
leaving to get away from Lavoie.  The circuit court held that
Because [the defense's] line of questioning has
suggested that [Kahalewai's] departure caused a reaction
which caused [Lavoie] to lose control of his thoughts and
his actions, ultimately it's going to be for the trier of
fact to determine whether or not, from the defendant's
standpoint, if he's been inflicting abuse on [Kahalewai],
whether it would be reasonable, from his standpoint, to then
become upset or enraged by her departure, such that it would
mean that the -- that defense would be a viable one.  And
then there's the whole 704 issues [sic].
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
So I do think that the door has been opened in a
variety of layers or levels.
After further discussion with counsel, the circuit court noted
that it would allow evidence regarding Lavoie's objection to
Kahalewai socializing with others.  On re-direct examination of
Aea and later direct examination of Barbara, Alexis, and Maikui,
the State elicited further testimony regarding incidents where:
Aea testified that in 2007, after Kahalewai had stayed away
overnight to help prepare for a friend's funeral, Lavoie
threatened Kahalewai and Aea while holding a gardening pick axe;
Barbara testified that in 2012, during a poker game at her house,
Lavoie had been sleeping, and when he woke he was very upset that
Kahalewai did not wake him to play, punched a wooden beam and
tried to grab Kahalewai but was blocked by another person; Alexis
testified that in 2012, at an apartment building where she was
living, she heard Kahalewai yelling, saw Lavoie with his hands
around Kahalewai's neck, and Alexis's boyfriend had to go down
and stop the incident; and Maikui testified that on March 16,
2013, four days before the shooting incident, Maikui and
Kahalewai were driving to pick up food for a bachelorette party
when they saw Lavoie coming into town, he followed them, and
after they parked on the side of the road Lavoie reached into
their car to grab the key, Lavoie elbowed Kahalewai and hit
Maikui, and Maikui hit Lavoie. 
At the close of the State's case-in-chief, the circuit
court gave a limiting instruction to the jury on the use the
prior bad acts evidence, stating:
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you have heard
evidence during this trial that the defendant, Marlin
Lavoie, at another time may have engaged in or committed
other crimes, wrongs or acts.  This evidence, if believed by
you, may be considered only on the issue of the defendant's
intent to commit the offenses charged in this case.
During the defense's case-in-chief, defense counsel
called three mental health expert witnesses who each had
diagnosed Lavoie with some type of mood disorder or mental
defect.  One expert witness additionally testified that Lavoie's
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
not eating before the shooting contributed to his actions.
Lavoie's father, Edward, was also called to testify
about Lavoie's behavior immediately following the shooting.  
At the close of trial, the circuit court's instructions
to the jury included its instruction on EMED and Jury Instruction
36 regarding self-control.  Lavoie's counsel objected to Jury
Instruction 36,9 which stated: "The question of the defendant's
self control or the lack of it, at the time of the offense is a
significant factor in deciding whether he was under the influence
of extreme mental or emotional disturbance."  Defense counsel
argued that this instruction "unnecessarily highlights and
isolates this aspect of the law to the jury by including it in an
instruction." 
Prior to its deliberations, the circuit court further
instructed the jury regarding the prior bad acts evidence that:
During this trial, you have heard evidence that the
defendant at other times may have engaged in or committed
other crimes, wrongs or acts.  This evidence, if believed by
you, may be considered only on the issue of defendant's
intent to commit the offenses charged in this case.  Do not
consider this evidence for any other purpose.  You must not
use this evidence to conclude that because the defendant, at
other times, may have engaged in or committed other crimes,
wrongs or acts, that he is a person of bad character and,
therefore, must have committed the offenses charged in this
case.
The jury found Lavoie guilty as charged after one day
of deliberations.  Following the verdict,  the circuit court
granted defense counsel's motion to withdraw and appoint
substitute counsel, and denied Lavoie's "Motion to Compel State
to Dismiss Count III or Count IV Due to Merger."
The circuit court subsequently entered its "Judgment
Conviction and Sentence."  Lavoie's timely appeal followed.  
9  Jury Instruction 36 had been the State's proposed instruction #13.
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
II. Standard of Review
A. Plain error
Plain error may be recognized "when the error committed
affects substantial rights of the defendant."  State v. Cullen,
86 Hawai# i 1, 8, 946 P.2d 955, 962 (1997) (citation omitted).
B. Jury instructions not objected to at trial
In the case of an unrequested jury instruction on a
defense raised for the first time on appeal:
HRS § 701-115(2) [(1993)] and its accompanying Commentary
place the burden of production on the defendant to present
evidence of the specified fact or facts going to the
defense.  In other words, the defendant must have come
forward at trial with credible evidence of facts
constituting the defense, unless those facts were supplied
by the prosecution's witnesses.  Further, "credible
evidence" in this context means that the circuit court
should have concluded, based on the record that existed at
trial, that the evidence "offered reasonable grounds for
being believed," i.e., that "a reasonable juror could harbor
a reasonable doubt" as to the defendant's guilt, and should
have given the unrequested . . . jury instruction.  Failure
to give the . . . jury instruction under these circumstances
constitutes plain error.
. . . .
[S]uch an error "seriously affects the fairness, integrity,
or public reputation of judicial proceedings," and it would
"serve the ends of justice" and "prevent the denial of
fundamental rights" to address [it]. [State v.] Kikuta, 125
Hawai#i[ 78,] 95, 253 P.3d[ 639,] 656 [(2011) (citation
omitted)]. . . . [W]here the omission of the . . . jury
instruction constitutes plain error, it shall be a basis for
reversal of the defendant's conviction only if an
examination of the record as a whole reveals that the error
was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
State v. Taylor, 130 Hawai #i 196, 207-08, 307 P.3d 1142, 1153-54
(2013) (footnotes omitted). 
For jury instructions that were not objected to at
trial, the Hawai #i Supreme Court explained in State v. Nichols ,
111 Hawai# i 327, 141 P.3d 974 (2006), that:
although as a general matter forfeited assignments of error
are to be reviewed under the [Hawai #i Rules of Penal
Procedure (HRPP)] Rule 52(b) plain error standard of review,
in the case of erroneous jury instructions, that standard of
review is effectively merged with the HRPP Rule 52(a)
harmless error standard of review because it is the duty of
the trial court to properly instruct the jury.  As a result,
once instructional error is demonstrated, we will vacate,
without regard to whether timely objection was made, if
there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to the defendant's conviction, i.e., that the erroneous jury
instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
Id. at 337, 141 P.3d at 984 (footnote omitted).  Thus, the
appellant must first demonstrate instructional error by rebutting
the "presumption that unobjected-to jury instructions are
correct[.]"  Id.  at 337 n.6, 141 P.3d at 984 n.6; accord State v.
Eberly, 107 Hawai# i 239, 250, 112 P.3d 725, 736 (2005).  If the
appellant is able to rebut this presumption, the burden shifts to
the State to prove that the error was harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt, because:
[e]rroneous instructions are presumptively harmful and are a
ground for reversal unless it affirmatively appears from the
record as a whole that the error was not prejudicial. 
However, error is not to be viewed in isolation and
considered purely in the abstract.  It must be examined in
the light of the entire proceedings and given the effect
which the whole record shows it to be entitled.
Nichols, 111 Hawai# i at 334, 141 P.3d at 981 (brackets in
original omitted) (quoting State v. Gonsalves , 108 Hawai #i 289,
293, 119 P.3d 597, 601 (2005)). 
C. Admissibility of prior bad acts evidence
By its plain language, [HRE] Rule 404(b) generally prohibits
the admission of other crimes, wrongs, or acts, which
negatively impacts a defendant's character or shows
propensity to commit a crime.  Evidence of other crimes,
wrongs, or acts may, however, be admissible for other
purposes when relevant to an issue in a case, e.g., to show
"motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge,
identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake or
accident."
State v. Fetelee, 117 Hawai# i 53, 80-81, 175 P.3d 709, 736-737
(2008); HRE Rule 404(b).
"Prior bad act" evidence under HRE Rule 404(b) is admissible
when it is 1) relevant and 2) more probative than
prejudicial.  A trial court's determination that evidence is
"relevant" within the meaning of HRE Rule 401 is reviewed
under the right/wrong standard of review.  However, a trial
court's balancing of the probative value of prior bad act
evidence against the prejudicial effect of such evidence
under HRE Rule 403 is reviewed for abuse of discretion.  An
abuse of discretion occurs when the court clearly exceeds
the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of
law to the substantial detriment of a party litigant.
State v. Behrendt, 124 Hawai# i 90, 102, 237 P.3d 1156, 1168
(2010) (brackets and ellipses omitted) (citing Fetelee , 117
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Hawai#i at 62–63, 175 P.3d at 718–19).
D. Ineffective assistance of counsel
The proper standard for claims of ineffective
assistance of counsel is whether, when "viewed as a whole, the
assistance provided was within the range of competence demanded
of attorneys in criminal cases."  Dan v. State, 76 Hawai# i 423,
427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994) (internal brackets, citation, and
quotation marks omitted).  Furthermore:
[g]eneral claims of ineffectiveness are insufficient and
every action or omission is not subject to inquiry. 
Specific actions or omissions alleged to be error but which
had an obvious tactical basis for benefitting  the
defendant's case will not be subject to further scrutiny. 
If, however, the action or omission had no obvious basis for
benefitting the defendant's case and it "resulted in the
withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially
meritorious defense," then it will be evaluated as
information that an ordinarily competent criminal attorney
should have had.  
Id. (brackets and internal ellipses omitted, emphasis in
original) (quoting Briones v. State , 74 Haw. 442, 462-63, 848
P.2d 966, 976 (1993)).  "[M]atters presumably within the judgment
of counsel, like trial strategy , will rarely be second-guessed by
judicial hindsight."  State v. Richie , 88 Hawai #i 19, 39-40, 960
P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998) (internal citation and quotation marks
omitted, emphasis in original).
III. Discussion
A. Jury instructions
1. EMED
Lavoie argues that the EMED instruction given to the
jury was prejudicially incomplete because it included an
instruction on self-control but the circuit court did not, sua
sponte, provide a definition of EMED -- extreme mental or emotion
disturbance.
We conclude that State v. Haili , 103 Hawai #i 89, 79
P.3d 1263 (2003) is dispositive.  In Haili, the Hawai #i Supreme
Court rejected the defendant's assertion that jury instructions
related to the EMED defense were erroneous because the
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
instructions did not define "extreme mental or emotional
disturbance."  Id. at 107-09, 79 P.3d at 1281-83.  Moreover, the
jury instructions in Haili regarding EMED contained an almost
identical instruction regarding "self-control" as Jury
Instruction 36 in this case.  Id. at 107, 79 P.3d at 1281.  The
court in Haili noted that "EMED" was not defined by the
legislature, and, accordingly, the courts need not define the
term in their jury instructions.  Id. at 108, 79 P.3d at 1282. 
Instead, jurors should give the phrase its plain meaning.  Id. at
108-109, 79 P.3d at 1282-1283 (citing, inter alia , Roise v.
State, 7 S.W.3d 225, 242 (Tex. App. 1999) (holding that "[i]f a
phrase, term, or word is statutorily defined, the trial court
should submit the statutory definition to the jury. . . .  Words
that are not statutorily defined are to be given their common,
ordinary, or usual meaning.")). 
Furthermore, although HRS § 707-702(2) (2014)10 does
not refer to "self-control," Hawai #i courts have repeatedly
recognized that it is a significant factor in EMED defense
determinations.  State v. Aganon, 97 Hawai# i 299, 304, 36 P.3d
1269, 1274 (2001), State v. Sawyer , 88 Hawai #i 325, 333, 966 P.2d
637, 645 (1998).
Based on the foregoing, Lavoie has not demonstrated
that the court erred by failing to define EMED for the jury. 
Nichols, 111 Hawai# i at 337 n.6, 141 P.3d at 984 n.6.
2. Pathological intoxication
Lavoie argues that the circuit court erred by failing,
10  HRS § 707-702(2) (2014) titled "Manslaughter" provides:
(2) In a prosecution for murder or attempted murder in the
first and second degrees it is an affirmative defense, which
reduces the offense to manslaughter or attempted
manslaughter, that the defendant was, at the time the
defendant caused the death of the other person, under the
influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance for
which there is a reasonable explanation.  The reasonableness
of the explanation shall be determined from the viewpoint of
a reasonable person in the circumstances as the defendant
believed them to be.
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
sua sponte , to provide a jury instruction on pathological
intoxication pursuant to HRS § 702-230 due to evidence from his
medical expert that he may have been suffering from symptoms of
low blood sugar.11 
"Pathological intoxication" is defined as "intoxication
grossly excessive in degree, given the amount of the intoxicant,
to which the defendant does not know the defendant is susceptible
and which results from a physical abnormality of the defendant." 
HRS § 702-230(5).  Moreover, "intoxication" is defined as "a
disturbance of mental or physical capacities resulting from the
introduction of substances into the body ."  Id. (Emphasis
added.).
In this case, Lavoie contends there is evidence he may
have suffered low blood sugar from not eating , which may have
compounded the factors preventing him from controlling himself
and behaving in a way that would be expected.  However, Lavoie's
refraining from eating is the opposite of "the introduction of
substances into the body," which is required under the definition
of "pathological intoxication" and "intoxication".  Cf. State v.
Eager, 140 Hawai #i 167, 169, 398 P.3d 756, 758 (2017) (ruling
that the "circuit court's holding that [defendant's] failure  to
take his medication caused his psychotic behavior is inconsistent
with the plain language of [HRS § 702-230(5)] which requires the
introduction of substances into the body." (Emphasis in
original)).
Because no basis existed for a pathological
intoxication instruction, the circuit court did not err in
failing to provide it.  Adviento, 132 Hawai #i at 137, 319 P.3d at
1145, Nichols, 111 Hawai# i at 337 n.6, 141 P.3d at 984 n.6.
3. Merger  
Lavoie argues that the circuit court erred in not
11  Lavoie again acknowledges that defense counsel did not request this
instruction at trial or object to the court's failure to give it.  But see
Adviento, 132 Hawai #i at 137, 319 P.3d at 1145. 
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
giving a jury instruction on merger for Counts III and IV because
the jury was required to determine if there were distinct facts
to constitute the separate offenses,12 pursuant to HRS § 701-
109(1)(e) (2014).13 
Hawai#i case law indicates that felon-in-possession and
place-to-keep charges are often intertwined, in turn
necessitating a merger instruction.  State v. Padilla, 114
Hawai#i 507, 517, 164 P.3d 765, 775 (App. 2007) (holding that
felon-in-possession and place-to-keep charges would, "in
virtually every instance, be entitled to merger instruction . . .
because both offenses would intrinsically arise out of the same
conduct and attendant circumstances.") (quoting State v. Matias,
102 Hawai #i 300, 306 n.10, 75 P.3d 1191, 1197 n.10 (2003)).
However, in circumstances akin to this case, we have held
that a merger instruction was not necessary.  See State v.
Stangel, No. CAAP-13-0003941, 2015 WL 836928 (Hawai #i App. Feb.
26, 2015) cert. denied, SCWC-13-0003941 (Haw. Jul. 9, 2015).  In
Stangel, the defendant fired multiple shots at motorists and was
charged with, inter alia , Place to Keep in violation of HRS  §
134-25 and several other firearm-related charges.  Id. at *1. 
Relying on HRS § 701-109(1)(e), Stangel argued that the circuit
court erred in failing to give a merger instruction to the jury
12  Defense counsel did not object to the court failing to instruct the
jury on merger at the time of trial, but did file a "Motion to Compel State to
Dismiss Count 3 or 4 Due to Merger" on August 10, 2013 after the verdict. 
13  HRS § 701-109(1)(e) (2014) provides:
§701-109  Method of prosecution when conduct
establishes an element of more than one offense.   (1) When
the same conduct of a defendant may establish an element of
more than one offense, the defendant may be prosecuted for
each offense of which such conduct is an element. The
defendant may not, however, be convicted of more than one
offense if:
. . . 
(e) The offense is defined as a continuing course of
conduct and the defendant's course of conduct was
uninterrupted, unless the law provides that specific
periods of conduct constitute separate offenses.  
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
as to whether his firearms charges constituted separate and
distinct culpable acts or were an uninterrupted continuous course
of conduct.  Id.  at *8.
This court held:
[Place to Keep] is not defined as a continuing course of
conduct; it is a prohibition against transporting firearms.
Once the person takes the firearm out of a place of
business, residence, or sojourn—but for certain
exceptions—the offense is complete.  The fact that the
offense may continue beyond this point does not change the
character of the offense.
. . . .
Stangel committed the offense of Place to Keep when he left
his home with the loaded firearm.  That he continued to have
the firearm during the entire episode of June 3, 2011 and
committed other offenses with that same firearm was not
necessary to the commission of the Place to Keep offense. 
As Place to Keep is not defined by statute as a continuing
course of conduct offense, HRS § 701–109(1)(e), the Circuit
Court was not required to instruct the jury to decide
whether Stangel engaged in an uninterrupted course of
conduct as a matter of fact.
Id. at *10.  This court additionally noted that Stangel's
citation to Matias and Padilla  was not persuasive, because he
completed commission of the offense of Place to Keep "as soon as
he left his residence with the firearm and without a permit.  His
subsequent actions in committing each of the underlying felonies
in each of the Use of Firearm offenses were therefore separate
from the Place to Keep offense."  Id. at *10, n.11.  
In the instant case, Lavoie purchased his rifle two
years before transporting it to shoot Kahalewai.14   The circuit
court explained at trial:
The evidence in this case demonstrated that the
defendant had purchased the firearm in question several
years before the incident in question and was still in
possession of that weapon prior to leaving his home on the
date of the offenses charged.  The defendant then
transported that firearm to the scene of the murder, used
the firearm in the commission of the offense, then left the
area with the firearm, and returned it to an area adjacent
to where he resided.
In the Court's view, the offense of felon in
14  A witness testified at trial that he sold the rifle to Lavoie on
February 17, 2011, and that Lavoie took possession of the rifle that day.  The
shooting incident occurred on March 20, 2013.
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
possession, even if restricted to the day in question, had
been committed before the defendant had ever left his home,
and the carrying -- the place to keep loaded firearms, that
offense occurs with the firearm being loaded and then
transporting it in a place other than his place of business,
residence, or sojourn, and transporting it after the
commission of a homicide.
We agree with the circuit court's analysis.  Thus, the
circuit court did not err in failing to provide a merger
instruction with regard to Counts III and IV.
4. HRE Rule 404(b) evidence usage
Lavoie argues that the circuit court's instruction on
prior bad acts evidence at the close of the State's case-in-chief
was improper because it "advised the jury that the bad acts
evidence can be circumstantial evidence to determine whether
intent is proven."15 
"By its plain language, [HRE] Rule 404(b) generally
prohibits the admission of other crimes, wrongs, or acts, which
negatively impacts a defendant's character or shows propensity to
commit a crime."  Fetelee , 117 Hawai #i at 80, 175 P.3d at 736. 
HRE Rule 404(b) does, however, permit prior bad acts evidence if
it is probative of another fact that is of consequence to the
determination of the action, such as proof of intent.  See also
Addison M. Bowman, Hawai #i Rules of Evidence Manual § 403–2G at
4-54 (2016-17 ed.)
Furthermore, the circuit court also gave Jury
Instruction 21 at the end of trial:
During this trial, you have heard evidence that the
defendant at other times may have engaged in or committed
other crimes, wrongs or acts. This evidence, if believed by
you, may be considered only on the issue of defendant's
intent to commit the offenses charged in this case. Do not
consider this evidence for any other purpose. You must not
use this evidence to conclude that because the defendant, at
other times, may have engaged in or committed other crimes,
wrongs or acts, that he is a person of bad character and,
therefore, must have committed the offenses charged in this
case.
In considering the evidence for the limited purpose
for which it has been received, you must weigh it in the
15  Lavoie did not object to this instruction at trial.  But see
Adviento, 132 Hawai #i at 137, 319 P.3d at 1145.
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
same manner as you would all other evidence in this case and
consider it along with all other evidence in this case.
(Emphasis added.) 
Jury Instruction 21 limited the jury's use of Lavoie's
prior bad acts evidence in compliance with HRE Rule 404(b).  Any
ambiguity created by the prior limiting instruction was therefore
cured.  See State v. Acker , 133 Hawai #i 253, 278, 327 P.3d 931,
956 (2014).
B. HRE Rule 404(b) evidence
Lavoie argues the circuit court erred in allowing the
prosecution to introduce evidence of his prior bad acts, in
contravention of HRE Rule 404(b).16  We conclude that Lavoie's
various arguments on this issue are not persuasive.
1. Opening the door on cross-examination
Lavoie argues that the circuit court erred in ruling
that defense counsel opened the door to prior bad acts evidence
following cross-examination of Aea. 
Defense counsel informed the court at a bench
conference that in his forthcoming cross-examination of Aea he
wanted to address the area that had previously been described in
a motion in limine as Lavoie's prior bad acts.  After the
prosecutor noted that such examination would "open the door,"
defense counsel stated "[t]hat may be the case."  Defense counsel
then subsequently questioned Aea about arguments between Lavoie
16  As to the prior bad acts evidence, Lavoie argues in his opening
brief that the circuit court erred because:
The trial court allowed witnesses to testify about prior incidents
of alleged bad acts that included: in 2007, Lavoie holding a
gardening pick axe in his hand and saying to [Kahalewai] and
witness Nicole Aea, "nobody going to find you, you guys."; Witness
Alexis Haliniak testifying that in 2012 she saw defendant yell and
threaten [Kahalewai] at a poker game, and that another instance
saw defendant with his hands around  [Kahalewai's] neck and throat
squeezing it; witness Jamie Maikui testified that 4 days before 
[Kahalewai's] death, defendant reached into the car when 
[Kahalewai] was parked and a struggle ensued where witness and
[Kahalewai] got struck by defendant.
(Internal citations omitted.)  
16NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and Kahalewai during the course of their relationship, and about
Kahalewai leaving Lavoie for periods of time following such
arguments.  Prior to the State's re-direct examination of Aea,
the circuit court held that defense counsel had opened the door
to such evidence, because defense counsel's line of questioning
was relevant to Lavoie's EMED defense.  The circuit court
explained:
[b]ecause [defense counsel's] line of questioning has
suggested that [Kahalewai's] departure caused a reaction
which caused [Lavoie] to lose control of his thoughts and
his actions, ultimately it's going to be for the trier of
fact to determine whether or not, from the defendant's
standpoint, if he's been inflicting abuse on [Kahalewai],
whether it would be reasonable, from his standpoint, to then
become upset or enraged by her departure, such that it would
mean that the -- that defense would be a viable one.
Given the record in this case and Lavoie's reliance on
the EMED defense, we conclude the circuit court did not err in
ruling that the defense opened the door for the State to
introduce the prior bad acts evidence.
2. Motion in limine
Lavoie argues that there was "no specific indication as
to why" the circuit court disregarded its prior order on the
motion in limine barring evidence of Lavoie's prior bad acts.
At the hearing on Lavoie's motion in limine, the
circuit court noted that such motions are "preliminary in nature
and subject to the manner in which the record develops during
trial."  Both the State and defense counsel agreed that if Lavoie
opened the door to evidence of his prior bad acts, the State
could request to pursue such evidence despite the motion.  At
trial, defense counsel opened the door.  Thus, the circuit court
was not barred from allowing the prior bad acts evidence
notwithstanding Lavoie's prior motion in limine.  
3. HRE Rule 404(b) notice
Lavoie argues that the prior bad acts evidence was
admitted in error because the State did not comply with the HRE
Rule 404(b) notice requirement.  
Hawai#i and other jurisdictions have held that HRE Rule
17NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
404(b) notice may be excused if (1) the opposing party opens the
door to the otherwise inadmissible evidence on cross-examination,
and (2) the proponent did not intend to use that evidence prior
to trial.  State v. Oshiro , CAAP-11-0000043, 2013 WL 5823772 at
*4 (Hawai# i App. Oct. 30, 2013); see also Commonwealth v. Mineau ,
77 Mass. App. Ct. 1123, 933 N.E.2d 1033 (2010) (holding that
defense counsel could open the door on cross-examination of the
complaining witness to evidence barred by a motion in limine);
Espinoza v. State , 969 P.2d 542 (Wyo. 1998) (holding that a
defendant may open the door on cross-examination to evidence of
prior bad acts barred by a pretrial motion in limine, and that
the prosecution may pursue such evidence on re-direct without the
required notice).
In the instant case, defense counsel opened the door to
the prior bad acts evidence.  Therefore, the circuit court did
not err in admitting the prior bad acts evidence without notice
from the State.
4. HRE Rule 404(b) evidence to establish intent
Lavoie argues that his prior bad acts were material to
neither his murder nor his firearms charges, and thus were not
properly brought up during the State's case-in-chief.
HRE Rule 404(b) permits prior bad acts evidence if it
is relevant to, among other things, intent.  In State v. Maelega ,
the Hawai #i Supreme Court held that testimony about defendant's
spousal abuse was admissible because it could provide proof of,
inter alia , defendant's motive, intent, and plan, and serve to
rebut his EMED defense to his second-degree murder charge. 80
Hawai#i 172, 183-184, 907 P.2d 758, 769-770 (1995).  At trial,
the prosecution argued that defendant's feeling of losing control
over his wife inspired the killing, not a loss of self-control
stemming from the disturbance of discovering an affair.  Id.   To
support its theory, the State elicited testimony from several
individuals describing defendant's domestic abuse and control
over his wife.  Id. at 175, n.3, 907 P.2d at 761, n.3.  The
Hawai#i Supreme Court held that the circuit court applied the
18NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
appropriate analysis in determining whether to admit the prior
bad acts evidence and did not abuse its discretion in doing so. 
Id. at 184, 907 P.2d at 770.
Pursuant to Maelega , evidence of Lavoie's prior bad
acts was relevant to rebut Lavoie's EMED defense because those
acts were probative of Lavoie's intent.  
5. HRE Rule 403
Lavoie argues that the circuit court failed to conduct
HRE Rule 403 analyses on the evidence of his prior bad acts.  
Lavoie specifically challenges the testimony of two witnesses:
Aea and Alexis. 
Before re-direct examination of Aea when the State
sought to elicit testimony about Lavoie's bad acts, the circuit
court evaluated: (1) the State's offer of proof detailing Aea's
knowledge; (2) defense counsel's counter-arguments regarding the
probative value of Aea's knowledge, the lack of corroboration,
and the incident in 2007 being so prejudicial it should be
excluded; and (3) the State's rebuttal.  The circuit court held
that Aea could testify about certain incidents because her
knowledge was relevant to (1) Lavoie's EMED defense, and (2)
Kahalewai's reasons for leaving him.  The court also precluded
Aea from testifying as to certain other incidents. 
The circuit court also considered both the State's and
defense counsel's arguments about Alexis' testimony, and found
that Alexis' testimony carried "significant probative value
concerning the reasonableness of the [EMED] explanation."  The
circuit court also held that, contrary to Lavoie's argument,
Alexis' testimony was within an acceptable temporal range from
the date of the shooting. 
The circuit court found Aea and Alexis' testimony as to
certain incidents to be relevant.  The circuit court considered
the arguments of counsel, including as to potential prejudice.
Absent an abuse of discretion, which we conclude does not exist
here, we will not disturb the circuit court's ruling.  Behrendt,
124 Hawai #i at 102, 237 P.3d at 1168.
19NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6. Burden shifting
Lavoie argues that admitting prior bad acts evidence
during the State's case-in-chief impermissibly shifted the burden
onto him to prove his own innocence.  
At the close of his opening argument, however, defense
counsel explicitly stated that the evidence will "show that due
to his extreme emotional disturbance, [Lavoie] cannot be
convicted of murder."  Given the reliance on the EMED defense
from the start, and the defense opening the door during its
cross-examination of Aea, the circuit court did not shift the
burden of proof in this case. 
C. Ineffective assistance of counsel
1. Witnesses Edward and Kaipo
Lavoie argues that he was denied effective assistance
of counsel because his attorney did not elicit testimony about
Lavoie's actions immediately following the shooting from
witnesses Edward and Kaipo.  Lavoie argues such testimony would
have been relevant to his EMED and insanity defenses, based on
"[e]xperts [who] testified that the conduct of defendant at
around and after the time of the shooting is especially important
to evaluate the scope, degree and extent of his mental
illness/disorder." 
The Hawai #i Supreme Court has held:  
[i]f counsel does not adequately investigate the underlying
facts of a case, including the availability of prospective
defense witnesses, counsel's performance cannot fall within
the 'wide range of reasonable professional assistance.' 
This is because a decision not to investigate cannot be
considered a tactical decision.  It is only after an
adequate inquiry has been made that counsel can make a
reasonable decision to call or not to call particular
witnesses for tactical reasons.
State v. Aplaca, 74 Haw. 54, 71, 837 P.2d 1298, 1307 (1992)
(citing State v. Templin , 805 P.2d 182, 188 (Utah 1990)). 
However, "[t]he decision whether to call witnesses in a criminal
case is normally a matter within the judgment of counsel and,
accordingly, will rarely be second-guessed by judicial
hindsight."  Richie, 88 Hawai #i at 40, 960 P.2d at 1248. 
20NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Furthermore, "[i]neffective assistance of counsel claims based on
the failure to obtain witnesses must be supported by affidavits
or sworn statements describing the testimony of the proffered
witnesses."  Id.  at 39, 960 P.2d at 1247.
Both Edward and Kaipo were subpoenaed by the defense to
appear on June 2, 2015 at trial.  On June 3, 2015, the defense
called Edward to testify and he testified briefly regarding
Lavoie's demeanor following the shooting.  Defense counsel did
not call Kaipo to testify.  With regard to Lavoie's contentions
on appeal as to areas in which Edward or Kaipo could have
testified that would have benefitted the defense, it does not
appear that the record on appeal contains any affidavit or
declarations from either Edward or Kaipo regarding such potential
testimony.  We note that Lavoie's current counsel did not serve
as his trial counsel and was appointed after the circuit court
had entered its Judgment, Conviction and Sentence.  Thus,
Lavoie's current counsel had no opportunity to obtain affidavits
or declarations from Edward or Kaipo while the case was pending
in the circuit court such that they would be part of this record. 
Moreover, without such information, Lavoie's trial counsel had no
meaningful opportunity to address Lavoie's claim that he provided
ineffective assistance of counsel.
Inasmuch as the record on appeal does not support
Lavoie's ineffective assistance of counsel claim with affidavits
or sworn statements, his claim fails on direct appeal.  However,
the Hawai #i Supreme Court has expressed that:
not every trial record is sufficiently developed to
determine whether there has been ineffective assistance of
counsel; indeed, a defendant is often only able to allege
facts that, if proved, would entitle him or her to relief.
Therefore, we hold that where the record on appeal is
insufficient to demonstrate ineffective assistance of
counsel, but where: (1) the defendant alleges facts that if
proven would entitle him or her to relief, and (2) the claim
is not patently frivolous and without trace of support in
the record, the appellate court may affirm defendant's
conviction without prejudice to a subsequent Rule 40
petition on the ineffective assistance of counsel claim.
State v. Silva , 75 Haw. 419, 439, 864 P.2d 583, 592-93 (1993)
21NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(footnote omitted).  Pursuant to Silva, our ruling is without
prejudice to Lavoie filing a petition under Rule 40 of the
Hawai#i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) as to his claim of
ineffective assistance of trial counsel related to testimony that
he asserts should have been presented by Edward and Kaipo.
2. Investigator
Lavoie argues, without supporting authority, that a
"criminal defendant has the right to have an investigator help in
the preparation or the defense of his case."  Lavoie next argues
that defense counsel's failure to hire an investigator to "follow
up with witnesses" was in error because an investigator "could
have located witness statements to help with [Lavoie's] defense
and related claims."  
First, Lavoie's argument fails to demonstrate
substantial impairment to his defense.  See Dan, 76 Hawai# i at
427, 879 P.3d at 532 (citations omitted).  
Second, while conducting zero pretrial investigation
would fall outside the range of reasonable professional
assistance, that is not the case here.  See Aplaca , 74 Haw. at
71, 837 P.2d at 1307.  Defense counsel subpoenaed ten witnesses
and called several to testify, in addition to more rebuttal
witnesses.  Electing not to further investigate Lavoie's case or
hire an investigator was within defense counsel's tactical
discretion.  Lastly, in accordance with Richie, it does not
appear from the record that Lavoie obtained affidavits or sworn
statements describing the testimony that might have been obtained
if his counsel had hired an investigator.  See Richie, 88 Hawai# i
at 39, 960 P.2d at 1247 (holding that, absent affidavits or sworn
statements by potential witnesses, the record lacked reliable
evidence indicating what certain witnesses would have testified
to, and thus could not support defendant's claim of ineffective
assistance of counsel).
Similar to our ruling above, Lavoie has not established
his ineffective assistance of trial counsel claim in this direct
22NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
appeal.  However, our ruling is without prejudice to Lavoie
filing a petition under HRPP Rule 40 as to his claim of
ineffective assistance of trial counsel related to potential
witnesses that could have been located if trial counsel had
retained an investigator.  See Silva , 75 Haw. at 439, 864 P.2d at
592-93.
3. HRE Rule 404 notice
Lavoie argues that defense counsel erred by failing to
request that the circuit court bar the State's use of bad acts
evidence for failure to file HRE Rule 404(b) notice.17 
Trial counsel is "not required to make futile
objections merely to create a record impregnable to assault for
claimed inadequacy of counsel."  State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346,
351, 615 P.2d 101, 106 (1980) (citation, ellipses, and quotation
marks omitted).  In the instant case, HRE Rule 404(b) notice was
not required for admission of Lavoie's prior bad acts. 
Therefore, Lavoie was not denied effective assistance of trial
counsel on this basis.
IV. Conclusion
Based on the above, the Judgment, Conviction and
Sentence entered on August 13, 2015 in the Circuit Court of the
Second Circuit is affirmed, without prejudice to a subsequent
HRPP Rule 40 petition as to Lavoie's claim of ineffective
assistance of trial counsel as set forth above.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 23, 2018.
Matthew S. Kohm,
for Defendant-Appellant. 
 Presiding Judge
Renee Ishikawa Delizo, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Associate Judge
17  At trial, defense counsel only objected to the bad acts evidence on
the basis that the door had not been opened. 
23