 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-13-0005313
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
SCOTT B. SMITH, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P.
 NO. 13-1-0008(2))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Scott Brian Smith (Smith) appeals
 
from the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Judgment
 
Denying Rule 40 Petition for Post-Conviction Relief (Order
 
Denying Relief), filed on November 7, 2013, in the Circuit Court
 
of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).1
 
On November 20, 2002, Smith was convicted of Assault in 
the First Degree, Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree, 
four counts of Sexual Assault in the First Degree, Kidnapping, and Use or Threatened Use of a Deadly or Dangerous Weapon While Engaged in the Commission of a Crime. State v. Smith, 106 
Hawai
'i 365, 368-69, 105 P.3d 242, 245-46 (App. 2004), cert. 
denied, 106 Hawai 'i 477, 106 P.3d 1120 (2005). 
On direct appeal, Smith argued, inter alia, that there
 
was insufficient evidence to support his convictions for sexual
 
1
 The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assault and that he received ineffective assistance of counsel. 
Id. Smith also argued that "if he had sexual intercourse with
 
the CW and ejaculated in her as the CW alleged, the vaginal
 sample would have contained DNA from his spermatozoa. . . .
 [G]iven the absence of his DNA in the vaginal sample, no
 reasonable jury could have found sufficient evidence to convict
 him of the sexual assaults." Id. at 373, 105 P.3d at 250
 
(footnote omitted). This court noted that Smith had made this
 argument to the jury and the jury rejected it based on its
 assessment of the trial evidence. Id.
 
Another ground that Smith advanced in his direct appeal
 
was that his trial attorney was ineffective for failing to timely
 submit a list of trial witnesses, resulting in four witnesses
 being excluded from testifying. Id. at 377, 105 P.3d at 254. 
The four witnesses in question were Smith's family members. Id. 
Prior to jury selection, the State objected to the four witnesses
 on Smith's witness list because it had not received discovery
 about them. Id. The Circuit Court excluded the four witnesses
 
after Smith's counsel stated that he was not going to call them
 at trial. Id. However, the Circuit Court also stated that the
 
ruling would be subject to reevaluation based on developments at
 trial. Id. Thereafter, Smith did not seek to call his four
 
family members during trial. Id. This court found that Smith's
 
trial counsel made a strategic decision not to call Smith's
 family members as witnesses and their failure to testify was not
 the result of a late filing of the witness list. Id. This court
 
affirmed Smith's convictions. Id. at 380, 105 P.3d at 257.
 
On July 29, 2013, Smith filed a Petition to Vacate, Set
 
Aside or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from Custody
 (Petition). Smith stated seven grounds for relief in his
 
Petition: denial of the right to an impartial judge; ineffective
 
assistance of trial counsel; ineffective assistance of counsel at
 sentencing; ineffective assistance of appellate counsel;
 violation of discovery and access to evidence; jury tampering;
 and erroneous jury instructions regarding reasonable doubt. 
2
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On November 7, 2013, the Circuit Court entered the
 
Order Denying Relief.
 
Smith's Opening Brief is non-compliant with Hawai 'i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28. It appears, however, that 
Smith contends that DNA evidence presented at trial conclusively excluded him as the source of a vaginal sample from the complaining witness (CW), thus, he was not guilty of sexual 
assault. Smith also states: "It is impossible my trial attorney 
had no witness, no evidence, at trial. He waived several things that could have declared a mistrial like jury tampering by prosecution in all the transcript." In his Reply Brief, Smith 
also claims that his trial attorney had his witness list thrown 
out because he filed it late. Smith also contends that he did not receive a fair trial and that the trial judge was biased by failing to exclude jurors when it was revealed that a witness knew some jurors.  Lastly, Smith complains that his trial 
attorney did not appear when the verdict was delivered. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Smith's points of error as follows:
 
In his direct appeal, Smith claimed that the DNA 
testing showed that his DNA was not present. Smith now claims that testing showed that he could not have sexually assaulted the CW. This claim was effectively raised and ruled upon by this court in Smith's direct appeal. See Smith, 106 Hawai
'i at 373, 
105 P.3d at 250. Therefore, Smith is not entitled to post-conviction relief on his DNA testing claim. 
Smith also previously claimed that his trial counsel
 
was ineffective in his direct appeal. Thus, the issue was
 previously raised and ruled upon by this court. Id. at 377-78,
 
105 P.3d at 254-55. Therefore, relief is not available pursuant
 to Rule 40 of the Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP). HRPP
 
Rule 40(a)(3). However, addressing Smith's new claims of
 
ineffective assistance of counsel, the record does not reflect
 that he received ineffective assistance of trial counsel. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Contrary to Smith's assertion, the record reflects that his trial 
counsel called four witnesses and cross-examined each of the State's witnesses. This court also previously addressed Smith's claim regarding the late filing of his witness list by trial counsel. Smith, 106 Hawai
'i at 377, 105 P.3d at 254. 
Smith's claim regarding the lack of an impartial judge,
 
jury tampering, failure to exclude jurors, and an unfair trial
 stem from the testimony of a witness, Darna Miguel (Miguel). The
 
substance of Miguel's testimony was quite limited. She testified
 
that there were three latent fingerprints recovered and she was
 asked to compare them to Smith's fingerprints. She testified
 that two of them were not identifiable and the third one, which
 was recovered from a tequila bottle, did not match Smith. 
The next morning, at Smith's request, Smith's trial
 
counsel alerted the Circuit Court that, after Miguel's testimony,
 Miguel notified the Deputy Prosecutor that she knew one or two
 jurors and Smith's brother alleged that Miguel gave the jurors
 the "high sign."
2 The Deputy Prosecutor stated that Miguel
 
mentioned to her, after testifying, that she knew a couple of the
 jurors or that a couple of them knew her, but the Deputy
 Prosecutor did not remember anyone giving a high sign. The
 Deputy Prosecutor requested that individual jurors be questioned
 if it was going to be an issue. Smith's trial counsel responded: 
"I'm not interested in that to tell you the truth, your Honor." 
Smith's counsel further stated: "I don't see any problem. If
 anything, I thought her testimony was helpful to the defendant." 
The Circuit Court then stated: "I don't think its necessary to
 make any further inquiry then," and trial continued. Smith
 contends that the judge was not impartial because the judge
 stated at the beginning of trial that he would declare a mistrial
 if the witnesses knew the jurors. On this basis, Smith claims
 the trial was also lopsided and unfair.
 
2
 We note that, although the transcript says "high," it could have
been "hi," which is phonetically indistinguishable.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
First, we note that, in his direct appeal, Smith relied
 
upon the fact that his fingerprints were not found on a utility
 
knife and tequila bottle, a fact established through Miguel's
 testimony, when he argued that there was insufficient evidence to
 convict him. Id. at 373, 105 P.3d at 250. This court noted that
 
"Smith's trial counsel knew that the fingerprints found on the
 utility knife and tequila bottle did not match Smith's
 fingerprints." Id. Thus, Miguel's brief testimony cannot
 
possibly be considered harmful, and in fact tended to be helpful
 to Smith, as his trial counsel claimed and as Smith argued on
 direct appeal. Although not claiming any prejudice, Smith
 implies that the Circuit Court should have removed the jurors who
 were familiar with Miguel and that failure to do so deprived him
 of a fair trial.
 
As the Hawai
'i Supreme Court recently explicated, 
however, when the issue of an improper influence is raised, the proper procedure is: "(1) an initial determination that the outside influence is of a nature that could substantially prejudice a defendant's right to a fair trial and, once that general nature has been established, (2) an investigation of the totality of the circumstances." State v. Chin, No. SCWC-13­
0002469, 2015 WL 3936962, slip op. at *19 (Haw. June 25, 2015) (citations omitted). If the outside influence presents a potential for substantial prejudice, there is a rebuttable presumption of prejudice. Id., slip op. at *27. In this case, 
where a witness gave limited testimony that cannot possibly be considered inculpatory, and rather tended to be exculpatory, the fact that the witness knew a couple of the jurors (or vice versa), is not an influence of a nature that could substantially prejudice the defendant's right to a fair trial.
3 Thus, we 
conclude that a further investigation (which was expressly disfavored by Smith's counsel due to the helpful nature of 
3
 Assuming it took place, the alleged nonverbal wave of "hi" in the
hallway after Miguel's testimony was trivial.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Miguel's testimony) was not necessary and Smith's contention is
 
without merit.
 
Lastly, Smith asserts no resulting prejudice or denial
 
of his rights when his trial counsel failed to appear when the
 verdict was delivered. The record indicates that on June 20,
 2001, Smith's trial counsel appeared by telephone twice in
 connection with two separate questions from the jury. At that
 time, Smith's trial counsel informed the Circuit Court that he
 would be in court at 1:30 that day but he was available by
 telephone and another attorney, David Sereno (Sereno), was
 
available. The record does not indicate the time that the jury
 
returned the verdict, but the case was recalled and Sereno made a
 special appearance for Smith's trial counsel. Smith does not
 claim that Sereno provided ineffective assistance of counsel
 during his special appearance. Smith's request for relief based
 on Sereno's appearance is without merit.
 
Accordingly, we conclude that all of Smith's claims on
 
appeal from the Order Denying Relief were either previously
 raised and ruled upon or are without merit. Therefore, the
 Circuit Court's November 7, 2013 Order Denying Relief is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, July 31, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Scott B. Smith 
Petitioner-Appellant Chief Judge 
Peter A. Hanano Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Respondent-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 