____________________________ NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NOS.
 
CAAP-13-0000635 and CAAP-13-0001138
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
NO. CAAP-13-0000635
 
(FC-S NO. 11-00063)
IN THE INTEREST OF DS
 
NO. CAAP-13-10001138
 
(FC-S NO. 11-00063)
IN THE INTEREST OF DS
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In CAAP-13-0000635, Father-Appellant (
Father) appeals
 
from the Family Court of the First Circuit's (Family Court's)
 
Decision and Order, filed on April 8, 2013.1 In CAAP-13-0001138,
 
Mother also appeals from the April 8, 2013 Decision and Order, as
 
well as a May 28, 2013 order denying reconsideration, and the
 Family Court's Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
 (FOFs/COLs). The Family Court terminated Mother's and Father's
 
(Parents') parental rights to their child, DS, awarded custody of
 
DS to the Department of Human Services (DHS), and ordered that
 
DHS's Permanent Plan is in the best interests of DS. 
Parents' appeals were consolidated for decision on
 
February 5, 2014, as the appeals have common facts and issues.
 
1
 The Honorable Karen M. Radius presided.
  (3) Mother demonstrated that she would be willing and
 
able to provide DS with a safe family home within the reasonably
 
foreseeable future where pediatric home care nurse Ontai
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Father argues that the Family Court abused
 
its discretion in terminating his parental rights for the
 following reasons:
 
(1) DHS failed to provide him with a reasonable
 
opportunity to reunite with DS where his service plan omitted
 services to help him address DS's special needs;
 
(2) Pediatric home care nurse Penny Ontai's (Ontai's)
 
testimony at the permanency hearing that DS's Mother (Mother) was
 
60% able to care for DS's special needs showed that he and Mother
 
would become able to care for DS in the reasonably foreseeable
 future;
 
(3) He was not given a reasonable amount of time to
 
demonstrate he could provide a safe home for DS, where he had
 less than two years to reunify, and DS had special needs, the
 service plan failed to include services to help him address those
 needs, and Ontai failed to schedule regular training sessions
 from September, 2011 to October 15, 2012; and
 
(4) He showed that he was willing and able to provide a
 
safe home for DS by making significant progress in learning to
 care for her. 
Father also argues that FOFs 57, 78-83, 85, and 90-91
 
are clearly erroneous.
 
Similarly, Mother argues that the Family Court abused
 
its discretion in terminating her parental rights for the
 following reasons:
 
(1) DHS failed to provide her with a reasonable
 
opportunity to reunify with DS where (a) her service plan did not
 recommend services that would have given her a meaningful or
 reasonable opportunity to do so, and (b) DHS did not provide her
 with tools or training to enable her to care for DS;
 
(2) Mother demonstrated that she was willing and able
 
to provide DS with a safe family home where she complied with her
 service plan, and made significant progress in her services;
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testified that Mother was 60% able to care for DS, Mother showed
 
great progress in her ability to care for DS, and Mother
 
testified that she would be willing to quit her job to devote
 herself to caring for DS full time.
 
Mother also argues that FOFs 57, 58, 62, 65, 79, 80,
 
and 90 are clearly erroneous and COLs 9-12 are wrong. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Parents' appeals as follows:
 
The background of this case is undisputed. Mother has
 
a history of chronic mental health, substance abuse, and domestic
 violence problems, and involvement in child welfare services both
 as a child and as a parent. She started using marijuana at the
 age of thirteen and methamphetamines at the age of nineteen. She
 admitted to using crystal methamphetamine (crystal meth) six days
 
before DS was born. She was convicted of terroristic threatening
 
and incarcerated from 2002 to 2005. In 2005, she completed a
 Salvation Army substance abuse treatment program while in prison,
 then relapsed. Nevertheless, Mother successfully completed,
 among other programs, a dual diagnosis substance abuse treatment
 program during the course of the proceedings below and has
 continued to test clean on drug tests required by DHS.
 
Mother has three children, including DS. The older two
 
children were adopted by different relatives when Mother's
 parental rights were terminated. Mother remains in contact with
 the older two children.
 
Father also has a long history of substance abuse, as
 
well as a conviction for terroristic threatening. Father has
 participated in various treatment programs, but has not been able
 to complete all of them. At the time of trial, Father was in the
 HOPE Probation program. He was unemployed, but attending
 Honolulu Community College. Father also has three children,
 including two with Mother, none of whom are currently in his
 care.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mother did not seek prenatal care during her pregnancy
 
with DS. DS was born at home, then taken to the hospital, where
 
she remained for roughly six weeks due to severe health problems. 
She was born with a cleft palate and a shortened chin, which
 resulted in feeding difficulties requiring a nasogastric tube,
 then a gastronomy tube. She also has been diagnosed with Down
 Syndrome, suffers from respiratory difficulties, chronic ear
 infections, vision and hearing problems, dental difficulties, a
 heart murmur, orthopedic problems, and other genetic
 abnormalities. Due to her special needs, it is anticipated that
 DS will require 24-hour care throughout her life.
 
The central issue in this appeal is whether Parents
 
were given a reasonable opportunity to reunify with DS. HRS §
 587A-2 (Supp. 2012) provides in relevant part (emphasis added):
 
The policy and purpose of this chapter is to provide
children with prompt and ample protection from the harms
detailed herein, with an opportunity for timely
reconciliation with their families if the families can
 provide safe family homes, and with timely and appropriate
service or permanent plans to ensure the safety of the child
so they may develop and mature into responsible, self-
sufficient, law-abiding citizens. The service plan shall
effectuate the child's remaining in the family home, when
the family home can be immediately made safe with services,
or the child's returning to a safe family home. The service
 plan shall be carefully formulated with the family in a
timely manner. Every reasonable opportunity should be
provided to help the child's legal custodian to succeed in
remedying the problems that put the child at substantial
risk of being harmed in the family home. Each appropriate
resource, public and private, family and friend, should be
considered and used to maximize the legal custodian's
potential; for providing a safe family home for the child.
Full and careful consideration shall be given to the
religious, cultural, and ethnic values of the child's legal
custodian when service plans are being discussed and
formulated. Where the court has determined, by clear and
convincing evidence, that the child cannot be returned to a
safe family home, the child shall be permanently placed in a
timely manner.
 
HRS § 587A-4 (Supp. 2012) defines "service plan" as "a
 
specific, comprehensive  written plan prepared by an authorized
 
agency pursuant to section 587A-27." (Emphasis added.) § 587A­
27 provides the following:
 
(a) The service plan shall provide:
 
(1) The specific steps necessary to facilitate the
return of the child to a safe family home, if the proposed
placement of the child is in foster care under foster
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
custody. These specific steps shall include treatment and
services that will be provided, actions completed, specific
measurable and behavioral changes that must be achieved, and
responsibilities assumed;
 
(2) Whether an ohana conference will be conducted for
family finding and family group decision making;
 
(3) The respective responsibilities of the child, the
parents, legal guardian or custodian, the department, other
family members, and treatment providers, and a description
and expected outcomes of the services required to achieve
the permanency goal;
 
(4) The required frequency and types of contact
between the assigned social worker, the child, and the
family;
 
(5) The time frames during which services will be
provided, actions must be completed, and responsibilities
must be discharged;
 
(6) Notice to the parents that their failure to
substantially achieve the objectives described in the
service plan within the time frames established may result
in termination of their parental rights;
 
(7) Notice to the parents that if the child has been
in foster care under the responsibility of the department
for an aggregate of fifteen out of the most recent twenty-
two months from the child's date of entry into foster care,
the department is required to file a motion to set a
termination of parental rights hearing, and the parents'
failure to provide a safe family home within two years from
the date when the child was first placed under foster
custody by the court, may result in the parents' parental
rights being terminated; and
 
(8) Any other terms and conditions that the court or
the authorized agency deem necessary to the success of the
service plan.
 
(b) Services and assistance to the family that are
required by a service plan shall be presented in a manner
that can be understood by and does not overwhelm the
parties.
 
(c) The court shall ensure that each term, condition,
and consequence of the service plan has been thoroughly
explained to, understood by, and agreed to by each member of
the child's family whom the authorized agency deems to be
necessary to the success of the service plan. The court
 shall thereafter order the service plan into effect and
order the distribution of copies to each family member or
person who is a party to the service plan. If a member of a
 child's family whom the authorized agency deems to be
necessary to the success of the service plan cannot
understand or refuses to agree to the terms, conditions, and
consequences of the service plan, the court shall conduct a
hearing to determine the terms, conditions, and consequences
of a service plan that will ensure a safe home for the
child.
 
(Formatting altered; emphasis added.) 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, Parents argue that they were not provided with a
 
reasonable opportunity to reunify with DS where their service
 
plans did not indicate that they were required to demonstrate
 they could address DS's medical needs, and the service plans did
 not include medical-therapeutic training, which was necessary for
 them to assume the responsibility for DS's care.
 
Although it was decided at a 2/2/12 'Ohana Conference
 
that Parents would participate in weekly medical-therapeutic
 training, and DHS considered the training to be a requirement for
 reunification, DHS never amended the 10/13/11 Service Plan to
 indicate what specific steps DHS required Parents to take, what
 outcomes DHS expected, and the consequences if Parents failed to
 realize those outcomes, all of which are required by HRS § 587A­27. The record on appeal reveals that from the time the 10/27/11
 Service Plan was issued to the 10/3/12 termination hearing,
 Parents complied with the services indicated in the plan and may
 not have understood the significance of the medical-therapeutic
 training and what DHS expected of them with regard to it. The
 10/27/11 Service Plan did not address, in any way, DS's special
 needs.
 
On November 29, 2011, Mother completed parenting
 
education with PARENTS, Inc., and on January 26, 2012, she
 completed outreach counseling through Catholic Charities
 Comprehensive Counseling and Support Services (CCSS). Through
 
those services, it appears that Mother learned basic child­
rearing skills, rather than how to address DS's special medical
 needs. On December 27, 2011, Father completed PARENTS, Inc.;
 then, he declined outreach services and his case was closed. 
Like Mother, it appears that he learned through his services
 basic child-rearing skills, rather than how to address DS's
 special medical needs. 
All parties agreed at the 6/28/12 Pretrial Hearing that
 
Parents had complied with the 10/27/11 Service Plan. However,
 reports and testimony subsequently submitted reflected that DHS,
 DS's court-appointed child advocate, and the service providers
 did not perceive that Parents had demonstrated that they were
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
able to provide DS with the necessary level of care, given her
 
complex medical conditions.
 
Mother's testimony at the 10/3/12 termination hearing
 
suggests that she failed to appreciate the significance of the
 requirement to train with Ontai, what the expected outcomes were,
 what were her responsibilities, and what was her role relative to
 Ontai and Foster Mother. Ontai's schedule was irregular and
 based primarily on DS's needs. Although there was some attempt
 by Ontai to overlap with Mother's limited visitation schedule,
 there is no evidence in the record that Mother was informed of or
 failed to attend any scheduled training concerning DS's special
 needs.
 
The DHS social worker's testimony at the termination
 
hearing underscores DHS's failure to properly inform Parents of
 their obligations with regard to the medical-therapeutic
 training. She testified that Parents' failure to demonstrate
 they could address DS's medical needs was an important factor in
 her decision to recommend terminating parental rights, yet she
 never amended the 10/27/11 Service Plan to include the medical-
therapeutic training, appeared at any training sessions, or told
 Parents she was concerned about their inability to tube-feed DS. 
Apparently, the social worker assumed that Parents would realize
 what their obligations were through her conversations with them,
 and their participation at the 2/2/12 'Ohana Conference, among
 other things. However, neither her conversations nor the other
 sources of information she mentioned would have informed Parents
 of their obligations or expected outcomes with the degree of
 specificity required of a statutorily-compliant service plan. 
See HRS § 587A-27. 
After the 10/3/12 termination hearing, it appears that
 
Parents understood they were expected to meet with Ontai each
 week, and Mother, at least, knew that she was supposed to
 demonstrate she could care for DS the way that Ontai and Foster
 Mother did during visits. Nevertheless, the 10/27/11 Service
 Plan still was not amended to provide specific expectations and
 outcomes.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In addition, other factors that clearly contributed to
 
the Family Court's decision were not addressed in the service
 
plans. For example, Mother's housing situation in public
 housing, as a caretaker for Grandmother, with potential exposure
 to a visiting uncle who was identified as a possible threat to
 the child, was identified as "unclear" in the Decision and Order,
 but Mother was never informed that she needed to secure
 alternative housing arrangements and no assistance was provided
 to that end. Mother's full-time job was referenced as indicative
 of Mother being unrealistic about how she would provide competent
 care for DS; yet her employment, including positive work reviews
 and a promotion, was clearly a positive demonstration of her
 "clean" lifestyle. Mother testified that she would be willing to
 quit her job, or presumably work less, if she had an opportunity
 to care for DS. No goals, expectations, or achievable outcomes
 for Mother's work-versus-child-care time management were 
addressed, or even raised, in any service plan. 
Given the foregoing, we conclude that the service plans
 
provided to Parents were not fair, appropriate, and
 comprehensive, and, accordingly, FOF 91 (which found that the
 service plans were fair, appropriate, and comprehensive) is
 clearly erroneous.
 
A thorough review of the record's many reports and
 
recommendations, including prior to DHS's motion for termination
 of Parents' parental rights and permanent placement, but
 especially after the filing of DHS's motion, tends to show that
 efforts to provide Parents with the clear goals and the services
 necessary for a possible reunification with DS were lacking,
 notwithstanding Parents' significant and sustained progress in
 virtually all of the identified "Tasks for Parents" that were set
 forth in the service plans.
 
We note however, that neither Mother or Father 
contested their service plans. As noted in In re Doe, 100 Hawai
'i 335, 344, 60 P.3d 285, 294 (2002), "a claim for 
additional services and accommodations must be timely made." Even assuming Mother and Father were somehow hampered in their 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ability to ask for assistance, they were represented by counsel
 
who could have notified DHS on their behalf. Id.
 
Further, notwithstanding the deficient service plans,
 
we must conclude that the record before the Family Court was
 replete with evidence constituting clear and convincing evidence
 satisfying the HRS § 587A-33(a) (Supp. 2012) criteria, and
 therefore warranting, inter alia, the termination of Parents'
 parental rights pursuant to HRS § 587A-33(b) (Supp. 2012). DS is
 a particularly medically-fragile child whose vulnerability and
 special needs are complex, and still emerging as she gets older. 
Her 24-hour-a-day care not only involves heightened observational
 skills and specialized techniques for feeding, bathing, and a
 high-level of support for her development, psychological,
 medical, and dental needs, but also interaction with a complex
 regimen of doctors and other professional care providers that are
 needed to provide DS with the best possible quality of life. 
While Parents have made tremendous personal progress, including
 their sustained sobriety and educational and vocational
 achievements, their historical and repeated problems with
 substance abuse, their criminal histories, Mother's uncertain
 housing situation, Mother's psychological and cognitive
 assessment, Mother's history of abuse as a child, the potential
 threats to DS in Mother's living situation, the circumstances
 involved in the removal of DS and her two siblings from Mother's
 care, and Parents' lack of the kind of well-developed support
 system that would provide an adequate safety net for them and DS,
 support the Family Court's findings and conclusions that Parents
 are not able to provide DS with a safe family home, even with the
 assistance of a service plan, and it is not reasonably
 foreseeable the Parents will be able to provide DS with a safe
 family home, even with the assistance of a service plan, within a
 reasonable period of time. See HRS § 587A-7 (safe family home
 
factors). Virtually all members of the multi-disciplinary team
 that participated in DS's care and the assessment of Parents'
 abilities to provide DS with a safe family home, including
 medical professionals, DS's guardian ad litem, and the DHS social
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
worker, were in agreement that Parents were not able to provide 
DS with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan, and that it is not reasonably foreseeable the Parents will be able to provide DS with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable period of time. See also HRS § 587A-7 (Safe Family Home Factors). Stated differently, we cannot conclude that the service planning caused substantial prejudice to Mother or Father. In re Doe, 100 
Hawai
'i at 343, 60 P.3d at 293; Hawaii Family Court Rules, Rule 
61.
 
Father and Mother were given a reasonable amount of 
time to demonstrate they could provide for DS. DHS was not required to provide two full years to reunify; rather, two years is the outside limit for reunification. HRS § 587A-339(a)(2) (Supp. 2012); In re Doe, 89 Hawai
'i 477, 492, 974 P.2d 1067, 1082 
(App. 1999). Neither parent provides any authority for the contention that, under the circumstances of this case, the Family Court was required to give them additional time to reunify in light of DS's special needs, and/or due to the inadequacies of the service plans, and we find none. 
DHS delayed filing its termination motion for nearly
 
ten months to give Parents more time to engage in services,
 despite the existence of aggravated circumstances (see HRS §§
 587A-4 (Supp. 2012) & -28(e)(4) (Supp. 2012)); the Family Court
 continued the termination hearing twice so Parents could have
 more time for medical-therapeutic training and ultimately gave
 them nearly two years to reunify; and by the time of the final
 termination hearing, Parents were still unable to demonstrate
 their ability, individually or collectively, to care for DS.
 
For these reasons, we conclude that the Family Court
 
did not abuse its discretion in terminating Parents' parental
 rights. The Family Court did not clearly err by finding that
 Parents were unable to provide DS with a safe home, even with the
 assistance of a service plan, and would not become able and
 willing to do so in the reasonably foreseeable future. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, the Family Court's April 8, 2013 Decision
 
and Order is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, March 19, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Herbert Hamada 
for Father-Appellant
 Chief Judge
Patricia A. Brady
for Mother-Appellant 
Associate Judge
 
Mary Anne MagnierKurt Jamie Shimamoto Deputy Attorneys General State of Hawai
'i 
for Petitioner-Appellee Associate Judge
11
 