 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000852
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
THOMAS L.V. LODI, M.D., Appellant-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I BOARD OF MEDICAL EXAMINERS, Appellee-Appellee, 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0014-01 RAN)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
In this secondary appeal, Petitioner-Appellant-
Appellant Thomas L.V. Lodi, M.D. (Lodi) appeals from (1) the 
"Decision and Order Affirming Board's Final Order Filed December 12, 2011, and Dismissing Appellant's Appeal" and (2) the Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court) on September 19, 2012.
1 This case arises out of 
the State of Hawai 'i Board of Medical Examiners' (BME) denial of 
Lodi's application for a license to practice medicine in the State of Hawai
'i (Hawai 'i) and subsequent denials of his various 
administrative and court appeals. 
On appeal before this court, Lodi argues that the
 
Circuit Court erred when it failed to: (1) remand and order BME
 to enter a ruling on each of Lodi's proposed findings of fact,
 pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 91-12 (2012); (2)
 remand and order BME to give Lodi written notice of the specific
 reasons for which it denied his application, pursuant to HRS
 § 436B-9(a)(2) (2013), and conclude that BME erred in entering
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
its Conclusion of Law F, that the BME is not required to issue
 
Findings of Fact; (3) conclude that BME erred in entering its
 Conclusions of Law A, B, and C, which held that Lodi's
 application was denied on the basis of HRS § 453-8(a)(5), (a)(4),
 and (a)(9) (1993), respectively; (4) remand and order BME to
 accept and consider evidence of Lodi's sobriety, pursuant to
 Hawaii Administrative Rules (HAR) § 16-201-32.5; and (5) conclude
 that BME policies and procedures violated Lodi's procedural due
 process rights.
 
After a careful review of the points raised and
 
arguments made by the parties, the record on appeal and the
 applicable authority, we resolve Lodi's appeal as follows and
 affirm.
 
1. Lodi argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
2
failed to conclude that BME violated HRS § 91-12  because BME
failed to rule on Lodi's proposed findings of fact. 
However, HRS
 
§ 92-12 has been construed as not requiring the agency to make a
 separate ruling on every proposed finding of fact so long as the
 findings it makes are reasonably clear. 
Outdoor Circle v. Harold

 
K.L. Castle Trust Estate, 4 Haw. App. 633, 644-45, 675 P.2d 784,
 792 (1983). Moreover, BME's adoption of Officer Maile's
 Recommended Order impliedly rejected Lodi's proposed findings of
 fact. Id. Finally, HRS § 91-12 applies to a final decision and
 
order resulting from a contested case hearing, not the initial
 decision or requested reconsiderations, and therefore did not
 mandate findings of fact and conclusions of law until the
 
2 § 91-12 Decisions and orders.  Every decision
and order adverse to a party to the proceeding,
rendered by an agency in a contested case, shall be in
writing or stated in the record and shall be
accompanied by separate findings of fact and
conclusions of law. If any party to the proceeding
has filed proposed findings of fact, the agency shall
incorporate in its decision a ruling upon each
proposed finding so presented. The agency shall
notify the parties to the proceeding by delivering or
mailing a certified copy of the decision and order and
accompanying findings and conclusions within a
reasonable time to each party or to the party's
attorney of record.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contested case hearing was had. The Circuit Court did not err
 
when it failed to conclude that BME violated HRS § 91-12.3
 
2. Lodi argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
failed to conclude that BME violated HRS § 436B-9(a)(2) or § 92-9
 (2012) because BME's board minutes are not a true and accurate
 reflection of the matters discussed by BME.
 
Lodi asserts that BME violated HRS § 92-94
 because
"[BME] executive session reports were never approved or adopted

 
by [BME] as board minutes" and therefore apparently cannot serve
 as a basis for denial of Lodi's application. We reject this
 argument as HRS § 92-9 does not require an agency to formally
 adopt executive session reports as official minutes and Lodi
 provides no other legal authority for this proposition.
 
Lodi also contends that BME meeting minutes do not

 
contain "any record of any votes by the member [sic] of [BME] to
 adopt any specific facts or basis for denial." HRS § 92-9
 requires that meeting minutes contain "a record, by individual
 member, of any votes taken[.]" HRS § 92-9(a)(3) (emphasis
 added). Although the minutes do not specifically reflect the
 votes of each individual member, they show for each meeting
 during which Lodi's application or requests for reconsideration
 were denied, the members who were present, the existence of a
 quorum, that a majority of the members voted to deny Lodi's
 application or request for reconsideration, the reasons for the
 
3 Lodi fails to present any argument in support of his point that
BME's failure to rule on each of his proposed findings of fact also violated
HRS § 91-14(g)(1) and (3) (2012). We decline to consider this point and deemit waived. Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7). 
4 § 92-9 Minutes.  (a) The board shall keep
written minutes of all meetings. Unless otherwise
required by law, neither a full transcript nor a
recording of the meeting is required, but the written
minutes shall give a true reflection of the matters
discussed at the meeting and the views of the
participants. The minutes shall include, but need not
be limited to:
 
. . . .
 
(3) 	The substance of all matters proposed,
discussed, or decided; and a record, by
individual member, of any votes taken[.]
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
denial, and the individual members who voted against the majority
 
or abstained from voting. Lodi has not shown that any failure to
 record the votes of the individual members resulted in any
 prejudice to him or warrants invalidating the BME's decision. 
The minutes also serve to refute Lodi's contention that letters
 sent to him by the Executive Director did not reflect the
 decision of the BME. The minutes confirm that a majority of the
 BME in each instance voted to deny Lodi's application and
 requests for reconsideration. At the contested case hearing,
 Executive Officer Cabral testified that the BME's May 14, 2004
 minutes were "adopted and confirmed" and Lodi's counsel stated,
 "Board minutes are ratified as being correct and accurate at
 subsequent meetings. These minutes, as I understand it, are
 accurate."
 
3. Lodi argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
failed to hold erroneous BME's Conclusions of Law A, B, and C,
 holding that Lodi's application was denied on the basis of HRS
 § 453-8(a)(5), (a)(4), and (a)(9), respectively.
 
First, Lodi asserts that "the testimony of the
 
Executive Officer was that [BME] withdrew [HRS § 453-8(a)(4) and
 (5)] as a basis to deny [Lodi]." Lodi provides no citation to
 the record on appeal for this assertion, nor does he indicate who
 the Executive Officer is. The original application and first
 reconsideration were, in fact, denied pursuant to HRS § 453­8(a)(4) and (5), and so Lodi's assertion is false as to those
 decisions. While the second reconsideration denial was based on
 HRS § 453-8(a)(6), (7) and (9), it is not in conflict with BME's
 prior decisions and letters to Lodi. Nothing in Chapter 436B
 requires an agency use the exact same grounds to deny a license
 in the first instance and upon reconsideration. 
Second, Lodi asserts that "BME's refusal to address the
 
factual matters addressed in [Lodi's] proposed Findings of Fact
 attempts to keep out those facts which would show the error of
 [BME's] alleged and claimed reliance on those statutory
 sections." Again, an agency need not address every proposed
 finding of fact provided that its findings are reasonably clear. 
See Outdoor Circle, 4 Haw. App. at 644-45, 675 P.2d at 792. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Third, Lodi appears to assert that there was
 
insufficient evidence to support Conclusions of Law A, B, and C
 
but fails to provide authority or factual support for his
 argument, which we must reject.
 
Fourth, Lodi asserts that BME never adopted HRS § 453­
8(a)(9) as a basis for denying his application, an allegation not

 
well-founded in the record.
 
Finally, Lodi argues that "[BME] has offered no 
testimony as to veracity[] of the information in the documents upon which they relied despite the uncontradicted testimony of [Lodi] and the evidence offered by his health care providers[,]" essentially arguing against the sufficiency of the evidence underlying BME's decision. Lodi's argument lacks merit as it is merely an invitation to reassess the weight given to the evidence by the fact-finder, which we decline to do. Ass'n of Apartment 
Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., Ltd., 100 Hawai
'i 97, 
58 P.3d 608 (2002). 
The Circuit Court did not err when it failed to hold
 
erroneous BME's Conclusions of Law A, B, and C.
 
4. Lodi challenges the decision of the hearing
 
officer to exclude the proffered statements of Dr. Nicholas A.
 Pace (Dr. Pace) and Dr. Robert E. Larson (Dr. Larson) under HAR
 § 16-201.32.5 "on the grounds that the offered evidence had not
 been presented to [BME.]" HAR § 16-201-32.5 provides that "in
 hearings where the issue for determination is whether the
 authority properly denied an application for licensure, the
 record shall consist of only the information presented to the
 authority for consideration in reviewing the application." The
 exclusion of the proffered affidavits was not in error. 
5. Lodi argues that his due process rights were
 
violated because BME failed to follow statutorily mandated
 procedures.
5 "The basic elements of procedural due process of
 
law require notice and an opportunity to be heard at a meaningful
 
5
 We initially note that Lodi's point on appeal fails to comply with
HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) insofar as it fails to provide record references
documenting where the alleged errors occurred. Nevertheless, due to ourpreference for addressing appeals on the merits, where possible, we willexamine Lodi's points insofar as we can ascertain them. O'Connor v. Diocese ofHonolulu, 77 Hawai' i 383, 386, 885 P.2d 361, 364 (1994). 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
time and in a meaningful manner." Korean Buddhist Dae Won Sa
 
Temple of Hawaii v. Sullivan, 87 Hawai 'i 217, 243, 953 P.2d 1315, 
1341 (1998) (citations omitted). 
First, Lodi argues that timely notice of the reasons
 
for denying his application was not provided to him prior to the
 
notice of denial, in alleged violation of HRS § 436B-9(a)(2).6
 
However, HRS § 436B-9(a)(2) does not require that the BME inform
 Lodi of its reasons before issuing its decision, but rather with
 the notification of denial. Lodi does not deny that the
 notification of the BME's denial contained their reasons. 
Second, Lodi argues that BME "has several times drawn
 
conclusions from statements of faceless and unknown authors in
 reports[] without even a preliminary examination of the
 truthfulness and accuracy of the statements" in alleged violation
 of HAR § 16-201-21.
7 Our review of the record reveals that the
 
6 § 436B-9 Action on applications; abandoned
applications.  (a) Unless otherwise provided by law,
each licensing authority shall take the following
actions within one year after the filing of a complete
application for licensure:
 
. . . .
 
(2) 	Notify the applicant in writing by mail of the
decision regarding the application for
licensure. If the application has been denied,
written notice of the decision shall state
 specifically the reason for denying the
application and shall inform the applicant of
the right to a hearing under chapter 91.
 
7 § 16-201-21 Evidence.  (a) The admissibility of
evidence at the hearing shall not be governed by the
laws of evidence and all relevant oral or documentary
evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of
 evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to
rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Irrelevant,
immaterial, or unduly repetitious material shall not
be admitted into evidence. The authority or hearings
officer shall give effect to the privileges recognized
at law.
 
. . . .
 
(d) Except as otherwise provided by law, the burden of
proof, including the burden of producing the evidence and
the burden of persuasion, shall be upon the party initiating
the proceeding. Proof of a matter shall be by a
preponderance of the evidence.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
BME demonstrated at length that it did examine the truthfulness
 
and accuracy of statements relied upon.
 
Third, Lodi apparently argues that BME improperly
 
employed HAR § 16-201-32.5 to prevent consideration of relevant
 evidence at the contested case hearing. The Hearings Officer 
sustained BME's objection to Lodi's introduction of those
 affidavits and/or letters because that evidence was not
 "information presented to the authority for consideration in
 reviewing the application" as required by HAR § 16-201-32.5. 
Lodi, as the applicant, had the burden of proving that he
 possessed the necessary qualifications for licensure, HRS § 453-4
 (2014) ("Before any applicant shall be eligible for licensure,
 the applicant shall furnish proof satisfactory to the board that: 
(1) The applicant is of demonstrated competence and professional
 knowledge. . . ."), and therefore, it was incumbent upon him to
 present all relevant materials to the BME before the licensure
 decision was made. Moreover, in this case, Lodi requested, and
 was granted two reconsiderations of the BME's decision to deny
 his application spanning more than three years after the denial,
 giving him ample opportunity to present these materials before
 the contested case hearing. On this record, Lodi fails to
 support his claim that by excluding Dr. Pace's and Dr. Larson's
 affidavits, the hearing officer deprived him of his rights to due
 process. 
Fourth, Lodi argues that the "[HRS § 436B-9(a)(2)]
 
letters prepared by the Executive Officers are not reports of
 'Board action' but the author's lay opinion of discussions of
 [BME]." Lodi fails to provide legal authority for his
 proposition that letters of notification, produced by employees
 of the BME who were present at the time the decision were made,
 violated his rights to due process. 
Lodi further asserts (1) that the HRS § 436B-9 letters
 
must be timely so that "[Lodi] can respond before a decision is
 made" and also (2) that "those letters mislead [sic] [Lodi.]" As
 to the first contention, by its plain language, HRS § 436B­9(a)(2) is only triggered after the licensing authority makes a
 decision. The second assertion is not supported by the record as
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST’S HAWAI' I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
each letter accurately reflects the action taken by the BME
 
according to BME Minutes of Meeting. Moreover, as is discussed
 above, BME is not required to make findings of fact until the
 contested case hearing.
 
Fifth, Lodi argues that "[n]o cursory examination of
 
the credibility and trustworthiness of the information was done
 by [BME] for the evidence that they considered in arriving at
 their decisions." Again, BME demonstrated at length that it did
 examine the truthfulness and accuracy of statements relied upon.
 
Finally, Lodi has failed to demonstrate errors in BME's
 
minutes or letters to him, or how these alleged defects violated
 his due process rights. 
Lodi has failed to show how any of his complaints
 
deprived him of due process.
 
Based on the foregoing, the (1) "Decision and Order
 
Affirming Board's Final Order Filed December 12, 2011, and
 Dismissing Appellant's Appeal" and (2) Judgment entered by the
 Circuit Court of the First Circuit on September 19, 2012 are
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 31, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Lorrin A. Kau,
for Appellant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Lei S. Fukumura,Special Deputy AttorneyGeneral,Department of Commerce andConsumer Affairs,for Appellee-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8

 