NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0000048
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
LMR, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
JT, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 11-1-80K)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant LMR appeals from the (1) February
 
17, 2012 "Order Regarding Temporary Custody"; (2) December 28,
 
2012 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law; Order Granting
 
Divorce"; and (3) December 28, 2012 "Divorce Decree" all entered
in the Family Court of the Third Circuit1
 (family court). The
 
family court's orders awarded sole legal and physical custody of
 LMR's son (Minor), to Defendant-Appellee JT, Minor's mother and
 
LMR's ex-wife.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude LMR's
 
appeal is without merit.
 
1
 The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-46 (Supp. 2013)
 
provides in relevant part:
§571-46 Criteria and procedure in awarding custody and
visitation; best interest of the child . (a) In actions for
divorce, separation, annulment, separate maintenance, or any
other proceeding where there is at issue a dispute as to the
custody of a minor child, the court, during the pendency of
the action, at the final hearing, or any time during the
minority of the child, may make an order for the custody of
the minor child as may seem necessary or proper. In awarding
the custody, the court shall be guided by the following
standards, considerations, and procedures:
 
. . . . 
(9) 	 In every proceeding where there is at issue a
dispute as to the custody of a child, a
determination by the court that family violence
has been committed by a parent raises a
rebuttable presumption that it is detrimental to
the child and not in the best interest of the
 child to be placed in sole custody, joint legal
custody, or joint physical custody with the
perpetrator of family violence. In addition to
other factors that a court shall consider in a
 proceeding in which the custody of a child or
visitation by a parent is at issue, and in which
the court has made a finding of family violence
by a parent:
 
(A) 	 The court shall consider as the primary
factor the safety and well-being of the
child and of the parent who is the victim
of family violence;
 
(B) 	 The court shall consider the perpetrator's
history of causing physical harm, bodily
injury, or assault or causing reasonable
fear of physical harm, bodily injury, or
assault to another person; and
 
(C) 	 If a parent is absent or relocates because
of an act of family violence by the other
parent, the absence or relocation shall
not be a factor that weighs against the
parent in determining custody or
visitation[.]
 
LMR first contends the family court erred by concluding
 
that LMR was "a perpetrator of family violence." Whether LMR's
 
acts constituted family violence presents a mixed question of
 
fact and law that is reviewed under a clearly erroneous standard. 
See In re Doe , 100 Hawai 'i 335, 344, 60 P.3d 285, 294 (2002). 
In concluding that LMR was a perpetrator of family
 
violence, the family court relied on testimony from: (1) Alice
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Berkowitz Ph.D, an expert in the field of custody evaluation and
 
forensic psychology, who "testified that in her opinion [LMR]
 
sexually abused [Minor] on more than one occasion and also
 
physically abused [Minor;]" and (2) Julia Klamon, an expert in
 
marriage and family therapy and child sex abuse, who testified
 
that there was "no indication that [Minor's] disclosures of abuse
 
were implanted or influenced by [JT]." JT, Minor's maternal
 
grandmother, and the parties' former marriage counselor also
 
testified to assessments or incidents concerning LMR's alleged
 
violent and abusive behavior towards JT and Minor. The family
 
court did not reversibly err by concluding that LMR was a
 
perpetrator of family violence. 
Second, LMR contends the family court should have 
granted him custody and/or visitation rights with Minor without 
conditions. 
A family court's conclusions regarding a "child's 
care, custody, and welfare . . . if supported by the record and not clearly erroneous, must stand on appeal." In re Doe, 101 
Hawai
'i 220, 227, 65 P.3d 167, 174 (2003) (citation, internal 
quotation marks, and brackets omitted). The family court was 
required to award custody according to Minor's best interests. 
See HRS § 571-46(a)(1). Because LMR failed to rebut the 
presumption that he was a perpetrator of family violence, the 
family court was required to presume that awarding legal or 
physical custody to LMR would not be in Minor's best interest. 
See HRS § 571-46(a)(9). The family court was further prohibited 
from awarding LMR visitation rights unless it found that adequate 
provision could be made for the physical safety and psychological 
well-being of Minor and for the safety of JT. See HRS § 571­
46(a)(10). The family court concluded that four material changes in circumstances may warrant revisitation of the issue of LMR's 
visitation rights, if he: (1) completed a perpetrator 
intervention program, (2) completed a parenting class, (3) 
completed therapy for family violence perpetrators, and (4) filed 
a motion for post-decree relief. The family court did not 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
reversibly err by awarding custody to JT or by imposing the
 
foregoing conditions on revisiting LMR's visitation rights. See
 
HRS § 571-46(a)(10). 
Third, LMR contends the family court reversibly erred 
by refusing to rely on the testimony of Harold Hall, Ph.D (Dr. Hall) concerning the results of a violence risk analysis 
performed on LMR. Dr. Hall testified that he could not "come to 
any predictions [of LMR's physical or sexual acting out] without 
the polygraph [test results]." "[T]he results of polygraph tests 
are inadmissible for any purpose." Doe v. Doe, 120 Hawai
'i 149, 
176, 202 P.3d 610, 637 (App. 2009). The family court thus appropriately excluded Dr. Hall's testimony regarding his 
violence risk results because they relied on inadmissible 
polygraph evidence. 
LMR's fourth contention concerns the family court's 
decision to disallow LMR's witness, CF, to testify at the 
November 9, 2012 hearing after she had testified on January 11, 
2012. LMR appears to contend that CF's second testimony would 
have rebutted the presumption that he was a perpetrator of family 
violence. Rezentes v. Rezentes, 88 Hawai
'i 200, 208, 965 P.2d 
133, 141 (App. 1998) ("[T]he HRS § 571-46[(a)](9) presumption may be rebutted by the introduction of any evidence which would 
support a finding of the presumption's nonexistence."). LMR 
alleges CF would have testified to "her current relationship with 
[LMR], and whether he currently displayed any of the behaviors he 
had been accused of by [JT] . . . ." The family court found such 
testimony was irrelevant to the question of whether LMR had 
earlier abused Minor and JT. 
The family court's decision to prohibit CF from
 
testifying at the November 9, 2012 hearing was also supported by
 
the cumulative nature of that testimony because it was
 
substantially similar to that offered on January 11, 2012. See
 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule 403 (1993) (a court may exclude
 relevant testimony if its "probative value is substantially
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
outweighed" by considerations of the needless presentation of
 
cumulative evidence). We conclude the family court did not abuse
 
its discretion by refusing to permit CF to testify on November 9,
 
2012. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the (1) February 17, 2012
 
"Order Regarding Temporary Custody"; (2) December 28, 2012
 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law; Order Granting Divorce";
 
and (3) December 28, 2012 "Divorce Decree" all entered in the
 
Family Court of the Third Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 18, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Daniel S. Peters 
for Plaintiff-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Madeline M. Reed for Defendant-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
5
 