NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000169
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
RICHARD J. HOEHN, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ANTONIO B. SIMON, MARIETTA A. SIMON, JOHN DOES 1-5,
and JANE DOES 1-5, Defendants-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(DC-CIVIL NO. 11-1-0367)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
  
(By: 
Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendants-Appellants Antonio B. Simon and Marietta A.
 
Simon (Simons) appeal pro se from the March 28, 2011 Judgment for
 
1
Possession,  entered by the Lahaina Division of the District
2
Court of the Second Circuit (District Court),  in this ejectment
action.
 
On appeal, the Simons raise two points of error:
 
1. "The court below erred in tacitly deciding that it
 
acquired jurisdiction to adjudicate Appellants as contract law
 
violators contrary to HRS ยง667-5, ยง656 and Rule 17 
Id.,
 
notwithstanding the fact that governments provide defendants an
 
affirmative defense against a plaintiff missing the
 
ratification"; and
 
1
 Although the Simons erroneously identify another document as the
matter appealed from, we will construe their appeal as stemming from the
appealable Judgment for Possession.
 
2
 The Honorable Blaine J. Kobayashi presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. "On March 8, 2011, pursuant to the Rules of the
 
lower court, Appellants moved court for its findings, as
 
Appellants timely initiated government's affirmative Rule 17 Id.
 
defense and moved for relief from Appellee's negligent suit. (DC
 
Doc 7), which court failed to adjudge."
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve the Simons' points of error as follows:
 
1. The Simons' first point of error is without merit. 
Plaintiff-Appellee Richard J. Hoehn (Hoehn) filed a complaint for 
ejectment in the District Court after purchasing the property at 
a non-judicial foreclosure auction. The Hawai' i Supreme Court 
has held that: 
(1) where, in an ejectment proceeding filed in district
court, a defendant seeks to raise a defense to the court's
jurisdiction pursuant to District Court Rules of Civil
Procedure (DCRCP) Rule 12.1, on the ground that the action
is one in which title to real estate will come into
 question, the defendant must set forth in the affidavit 'the
source, nature, and extent of the title claimed by
defendant' with sufficient detail or specificity to 'fully
apprise the court of the nature of' its claim to title of
the property in question; (2) additionally, the defendant
may include in the affidavit any other particulars that
would enable the court to be fully apprised of the
defendant's claim; but (3) [where] the affidavit of [the
defendant] neither included specificity or detail regarding
the source, nature, and extent of title claimed nor other
particulars that would fully apprise the District Court of
the Second Circuit, Lahaina Division (the court), of his
claim to title . . . his defense failed under DCRCP Rule
 12.1 and the court properly exercised its jurisdiction over
the ejectment action[.] 
Deutsche Bank Nat. Trust Co. v. Peelua, 126 Hawai' i 32, 33, 265 
P.3d 1128, 1129 (2011) (footnotes omitted). 
The affidavit in this case, the "Affidavit of
 
Defendants' Agent," signed by Antonio Simon, and filed in the
 
District Court on February 18, 2011, as part of a document
 
captioned "Defendants Simon Verified Restricted Answer;
 
Memorandum in Support of Motion to Dismiss for Improper Venue and
 
Failure to Join an Indispensable Party; Affidavit, Certificate of
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Service", neither included the specificity or detail regarding
 
the source, nature, and extent of title claimed nor other
 
particulars that would fully apprise the District Court of the
 
Simons' claim to title. [ROA p. 30 et seq.] Therefore, their
 
defense of lack of jurisdiction failed under District Court Rules
 
of Civil Procedure Rule 12.1 and the District Court properly
 
exercised its jurisdiction in the ejectment action filed by
 
Hoehn.
 
2. The Simons have failed to provide a discernible 
argument in support of their second point of error. Therefore, 
this issue is deemed waived and will not be further addressed. 
See, e.g., Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 Hawai' i 126, 144 n.16, 276 
P.3d 695, 713 n.16 (2012); see also Hawaii Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b). 
For these reasons, the District Court's March 28, 2011 
Judgment for Possession is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 17, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Antonio B. Simon 
Marietta A. Simon Pro Se Defendants-Appellants Presiding Judge 
Matson Kelleyfor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3 