NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000684
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
R2B INVESTORS, LLC, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
SALLY RAE REYNOLDS and JOSEPH STEVENSON BEALE,
Defendants-Appellants
 
and
 
THE LEADERS BANK; FREDERICK D. PABLO, in his official
capacity as Director of the Department of Taxation,
State of Hawai 'i; MICHAEL R. HANSEN, in his official
capacity as Director of Budget and Fiscal Services
Department, City and County of Honolulu,1 
Defendants-Appellees, 
and
 
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; and DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50,
Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-1890)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
This case arises out of a $1.5 million loan made by
 
Plaintiff-Appellee R2B Investors, LLC (R2B), to Defendant­
1
Pursuant to Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 43(c)(1)
(2010), Frederick D. Pablo, the current Director of the Department of Taxation
of the State of Hawai' i, is automatically substituted as a party for Stanley
Shiraki, the former Director, and Michael R. Hanson, the current Director ofBudget and Fiscal Services Department of the City and County of Honolulu, isautomatically substituted as a party for Rix Maurer, III, the former Director. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellant Sally Rae Reynolds (Reynolds), which was secured by a
 
mortgage on Reynolds' real property and guaranteed by Reynolds'
 husband, Defendant-Appellant Joseph Stevenson Beale (Beale). 
Reynolds defaulted on her loan, R2B obtained an interlocutory
 decree of foreclosure with respect to Reynolds' property, and the
 property was sold at a foreclosure auction. 
Beale appeals from the Judgment filed by the Circuit
 
2
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  on August 25, 2011,
which confirmed the sale of Reynolds' property to a third party.
 The Judgment was entered pursuant to the Circuit Court's August
 25, 2011, "Order Granting [R2B's] Motion for (1) Approval of
 Commissioner's Report; (2) Confirmation of Sale; (3)
 Determination of Commissioner's Fees and Expenses; (4)
 Determination of [R2B's] Attorneys' Fees, Costs and Expenses; (5)
 Writ of Possession and Authority to Dispose of Personal Property;
 and (6) Deficiency Judgment Filed March 22, 2011" (Order
 Confirming Sale). 
The Order Confirming Sale determined that a
 
deficiency existed between the amounts owed to R2B and the
 proceeds of the sale, and it ordered the entry of a deficiency
 judgment in favor of R2B and against Reynolds and Beale, jointly
 and severally.
 
On appeal, Beale contends that the Circuit Court erred
 
in ordering the entry of a deficiency judgment against Beale in
 the Order Confirming Sale because a prior order granting summary
 judgment, on which the interlocutory decree of foreclosure was
 based, only specifically referred to a deficiency judgment
 against Reynolds.
3 However, as explained below, Beale and
 
Reynolds signed a stipulation, filed in the Circuit Court, in
 which they waived their right to appeal the Order Confirming Sale
 
2The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.
 
3The notice of appeal was filed by both Reynolds and Beale and also
identified the Judgment for Possession and Writ of Possession as among the
matters being appealed. However, the opening brief makes clear that the
appeal only raises the issue of whether the Circuit Court erred in ordering
the entry of a deficiency judgment against Beale in the Order Confirming Sale.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in the event it was entered. Based on this stipulated waiver, we
 
hold that Beale is not entitled to challenge the provision in the
 Order Confirming Sale that ordered the entry of a deficiency
 judgment against him. Since Beale's challenge to this provision
 is the only issue he raises on appeal, we dismiss Beale's appeal
 and do not reach the merits of his challenge to the Order
 Confirming Sale.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
As consideration for a $1.5 million loan (Loan) in
 
2007, Reynolds gave R2B a promissory note (Original Note) and a
 first mortgage (Original Mortgage) on her real property
 (Property) located in Honolulu. As an inducement to R2B to make
 the Loan to Reynolds, Beale, Reynolds' husband, guaranteed the
 full performance of Reynolds' obligations (Guaranty) with respect
 to the Loan. On August 1, 2008, R2B and Reynolds amended the
 Original Note, and Beale, as guarantor, agreed to the amendments.
 
As the result of Reynolds' failure to repay the
 
Original Note, as amended, on its maturity date, and Beale's
 failure to perform under his Guaranty, R2B filed a foreclosure
 action on December 26, 2008 (2008 Foreclosure Action). After the
 
Circuit Court issued a decree of foreclosure, the 2008
 
Foreclosure Action was resolved pursuant to the terms of a
 September 30, 2009, Settlement Agreement (Settlement Agreement). 
As part of the Settlement Agreement, R2B dismissed the 2008
 Foreclosure Action and reinstated its Loan, and Reynolds and
 Beale agreed to pay overdue interest and other amounts. 
Reynolds, as "Borrower," and Beale, as "Guarantor," signed a
 Modified and Reinstated Promissory Note, and Reynolds signed an
 amendment to the Original Mortgage. 
In the Settlement Agreement, Reynolds and Beale
 
affirmed that the documents related to the Loan, which included
 the Guaranty, "are valid enforceable and binding on them." The
 Settlement Agreement provided that in the event of a future
 foreclosure action brought to enforce the obligations of Reynolds
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and Beale under the Settlement Agreement, the Original Note, as
 
amended, the Original Mortgage, as amended, and the Guaranty,
 Reynolds and Beale "hereby waive any right to appeal from an
 order granting R2B's motion for summary judgment, interlocutory
 decree of foreclosure and order of sale or a judgment entered
 thereon, provided that such waiver of the right to appeal does
 not apply to any subsequent dispute limited solely to the
 interpretation of the terms and conditions of this [Settlement]
 Agreement." The Settlement Agreement also provided that Reynolds
 and Beale agree that in any such future action, "service of the
 Complaint and Summons upon them may be effected through their
 counsel, Gary Victor Dubin . . . and Mr. Dubin is hereby
 authorized to accept service on their behalf." 
On May 5, 2010, Reynolds and Beale executed a "First
 
Amendment to Modified and Restated Promissory Note," which, among
 other things, amended the schedule of principal payments and
 default provisions of the Modified and Restated Promissory Note. 
Beale, as guarantor, agreed to these amendments and confirmed
 that his guaranty "shall remain in full force and effect" as to
 the Loan and the documents related to the Loan, as amended. 
Hereinafter, we will refer to the Original Note, as amended, as
 the "Note" and the Original Mortgage, as amended, as the
 "Mortgage." We will also hereinafter collectively refer to the
 Note, the Mortgage, the Guaranty, and the Settlement Agreement as
 the "Loan Documents." 
II.
 
When Reynolds and Beale fell into default under the
 
Loan Documents, R2B filed a complaint on September 1, 2010, and a
 "First Amended Complaint for Foreclosure" (Amended Complaint) on
 September 20, 2010. The Amended Complaint, among other things,
 alleged that:
 
1. As an inducement to and part of the consideration
 
for R2B making a $1.5 million loan to Reynolds, Beale executed
 the Guaranty, which guaranteed Reynolds' full performance of her
 obligations under the Loan.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. Demand has been made on Reynolds and Beale for
 
amounts due and owing to R2B, but they have failed to make
 
payments under the Note, the Mortgage, and the Guaranty.
 
3. As of September 1, 2010, Reynolds and Beale were
 
indebted to R2B under the Settlement Agreement, the Note, the
 Mortgage, and the Guaranty, in the total amount of $1,533,078.54.
 
4. "By virtue of the Guaranty, Defendant Beale is
 
jointly and severally liable to [R2B] for the amount due under
 the Note." 
The Amended Complaint requested that the Circuit Court
 
grant relief against Beale as follows:
 
In the event such foreclosure or other sale of the
 
[Property] results in proceeds insufficient to satisfy all
amounts determined to be due and owing to [R2B] and there
remains a deficiency, directing entry of a deficiency
judgment in favor of [R2B] and against Defendants Reynolds
and Beale, jointly and severally, in the amount of such
deficiency and that [the Circuit Court] allow [R2B]
immediate execution thereof[.]
 
Beale did not file an answer to the Amended Complaint,
 
and according to R2B, Beale "has never denied the allegations of
 
the [Amended Complaint]."
 
On September 22, 2010, R2B filed a "Motion for Summary
 
Judgment as to All Claims and All Parties, Interlocutory Decree
 of Foreclosure and Order of Sale" (Motion for Summary Judgment).
 R2B specifically moved that the Circuit Court: (1) find that
 Reynolds had defaulted on her obligations under the Note, the
 Mortgage, and the Settlement Agreement and that Beale had
 defaulted "under the terms of the Settlement Agreement and
 Guaranty, as described in the [Amended] Complaint"; and (2)
 "direct that summary judgment and an interlocutory decree of
 foreclosure enter in favor of [R2B] against all Defendants for
 the relief demanded in the [Amended Complaint.]" In its
 memorandum in support of the Motion for Summary Judgment, R2B
 stated that it was seeking "summary judgment against Defendant
 Beale as to the claims in the [Amended] Complaint relating to the
 Guaranty, for his failure to fulfill his obligations under said
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Guaranty of guaranteeing the full performance of Defendant
 
Reynolds' obligations under the Note and Mortgage and that
 Defendant Beale be held liable to [R2B] in accordance with the
 Guaranty and the Settlement Agreement."
 
R2B also attached a copy of the Guaranty to its Motion
 
for Summary Judgment. The Guaranty provides, in relevant part,
 that the Guarantor:
 
e. Agrees that Lender, without notice to Guarantor, .
. . may . . . (vi) exercise any right or remedy Lender may
have with respect to the Indebtedness or any collateral
securing the Indebtedness, including without limitation
judicial foreclosure, . . . and Guarantor shall be liable to
Lender for any deficiency resulting from the exercise by
Lender of any such remedy, even though any rights which
Guarantor may have against any other person or party,
including without limitation Borrower, might be diminished
or destroyed; and
 
f. Agrees that the obligations of Guarantor hereunder
are joint and several, and independent of the obligations of
Borrower . . . ."
 
Beale did not file an opposition to the Motion for Summary
 
Judgment and did not appear at the hearing on the motion.
 
On October 7, 2010, the clerk of the Circuit Court
 
entered default against Reynolds, and in favor of R2B, for
 Reynolds' failure to answer or otherwise respond to the Amended
 Complaint. 
The Circuit Court granted R2B's Motion for Summary
 
Judgment, and on December 21, 2010, issued its "Findings of Fact,
 Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting Plaintiff R2B Investors,
 LLC's Motion for Summary Judgment as to All Claims and All
 Parties, Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure and Order of Sale
 Filed September 22, 2010" (Order Granting Motion for Summary
 Judgment). The Circuit Court's findings of fact included a
 
finding that:
 
notwithstanding due and proper demand made upon Defendant
Reynolds, as borrower, and Defendant Beale, as guarantor,
for payment of the amounts due and owing to [R2B],
Defendants have failed, neglected, refused, and continue to
fail, neglect and refuse, to pay the amounts due to [R2B]
under the Note, Mortgage, Guaranty and Settlement Agreement
("Loan Documents") and are consequently in material default
of said Loan Documents.
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court further found that as of September 1, 2010,
 
Reynolds and Beale were indebted to R2B under the Loan Documents
 in the total amount of $1,533,078.54. The Circuit Court
 concluded that R2B was entitled to have "its Mortgage foreclosed
 on the Property" and "to have the Property sold in the manner
 prescribed by law and any of the proceeds arising from such sale
 applied to the sums due and owing to [R2B.]"
 
The Circuit Court appointed a Commissioner to take
 
possession of the Property and ordered that the Property be sold. 
The Circuit Court further ordered:
 
If it appears that proceeds of the sale of the Property are
insufficient to pay all amounts due and owing to [R2B],
[R2B] shall be granted a Deficiency Judgment against
Defendant Reynolds for the amount of the deficiency which
shall be determined upon filing of an appropriate affidavit
or declaration. The Court reserves jurisdiction to
determine the party or parties to whom the surplus may be
awarded.
 
On December 21, 2010, pursuant to the Order Granting 
Motion for Summary Judgment, the Circuit Court filed a judgment 
that entered "summary judgment and an interlocutory decree of foreclosure . . . in favor of [R2B] and against all Defendants on all claims in the [Amended Complaint]." The Circuit Court 
certified this judgment as a final judgment pursuant to Hawai
'i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 54(b) (2000). Beale did not 
appeal from this judgment. 
III.
 
On March 15, 2011, the Commissioner sold the Property
 
to a third-party. On March 22, 2011, R2B filed a "Motion for (1)
 Approval of Commissioner's Report; (2) Confirmation of Sale; (3)
 Determination of Commissioner's Fees and Expenses; (4)
 Determination of [R2B's] Attorneys' Fees, Costs and Expenses; (5)
 Writ of Possession and Authority to Dispose of Personal Property;
 and (6) Deficiency Judgment" (Motion to Confirm Sale). The
 Motion to Confirm sale requested, among other things, that the
 Circuit Court "reserve for later determination . . . the amount
 of deficiency judgment to be entered against Defendants Sally Rae
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Reynolds and Joseph Stevenson Beale[.]" Beale did not oppose the 
Motion to Confirm Sale or appear at the hearing on the motion.
 The Circuit Court orally granted the Motion to Confirm Sale at
 the hearing held on April 14, 2011.
 
On April 19, 2011, counsel for R2B circulated a
 
proposed Order Confirming Sale to Beale and others. R2B asserts
 that Paragraph 11 of the proposed Order Confirming Sale stated:
 
11. A deficiency exists, and a deficiency judgment
in favor of R2B and against Defendants Sally Rae Reynolds
and Joseph Stevenson. Beale, [ 4
] jointly and severally, for
any deficiency between the amounts owed to R2B as determined
herein and the sales proceeds applied thereto, shall be
entered upon filing by R2B of an appropriate declaration or
affidavit in support of such deficiency judgment and R2B
shall have execution thereon against Defendants Sally Rae
Reynolds and Joseph Stevenson Beale according to law.
 
On April 25, 2011, a "Notice of Defendant Sally Rae 
Reynolds' Bankruptcy" (Bankruptcy Notice) was filed in Circuit 
Court by Reynolds' bankruptcy attorneys. The Bankruptcy Notice indicated that Reynolds had filed for bankruptcy that same day in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of Hawai
'i 
(Bankruptcy Court). At a Bankruptcy Court hearing on R2B's 
motion to lift the automatic stay, R2B, Reynolds, and Beale 
reached a settlement regarding the conditions under which R2B would agree to the automatic stay remaining in effect, which the Bankruptcy Court memorialized in its "Stipulated Order Regarding Secured Creditor's Motion for Relief from Automatic Stay." As part of the settlement, Reynolds and Beale agreed to sign a stipulation, for filing in Circuit Court at R2B's discretion, in which they would stipulate that: 
In the event the stay is lifted, Reynolds and Beale shall
not interfere with the entry of the Order granting R2B's
Motion to Confirm Sale or take any act to delay its
execution, and without limiting the foregoing, hereby
irrevocably waive any rights they may have to appeal or seek
reconsideration of or relief from such Order[.]
 
(Emphasis added.) Reynolds and Beale signed the stipulation,
 
which was dated July 11, 2011, and submitted it to R2B's counsel. 
4The period after "Stevenson" is in the original.
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On August 24, 2011, R2B filed this stipulation in the Circuit
 
Court.
 
Meanwhile, on August 12, 2011, the Bankruptcy Court
 
entered an order lifting the automatic stay in Reynolds'
 bankruptcy with respect to the Property. On that date, R2B
 submitted the proposed Order Confirming Sale to the Circuit
 Court. On August 15, 2011, Reynolds filed in Bankruptcy Court an
 Ex Parte motion seeking temporary emergency relief regarding the
 lifting of the stay, which the Bankruptcy Court granted on August
 16, 2011. However, on August 18, 2011, the Bankruptcy Court
 entered its "Order Lifting Automatic Stay and/or Temporary
 Emergency Stay," which again lifted the automatic stay as well as
 the temporary emergency stay it had granted on August 16, 2011. 
This August 18, 2011, order provided that "[n]o deficiency
 judgment or other money judgment may be entered against the
 Debtor [(Reynolds)] unless and until the bankruptcy court enters
 an order (1) denying the Debtor a discharge, (2) determining that
 the debt owed to the moving party is non-dischargeable, (3)
 dismissing the case prior to the entry of a discharge, or (4)
 expressly authorizing the entry of such a judgment."
 
On August 22, 2011, Gary Victor Dubin (Dubin), Long H.
 
Vu (Vu), and Frederick J. Arensmeyer (Arensmeyer) entered their
 appearance as counsel for Reynolds in Circuit Court. Counsel for
 Reynolds objected to the proposed Order Confirming Sale submitted
 by R2B because counsel claimed it failed to account for recent
 payments made by Beale, which affected the computation of the
 principal and interest owed to R2B, and because it violated
 federal bankruptcy laws with respect to the disposition of
 Reynolds' personal property and the entry of a deficiency
 judgment against Reynolds. Counsel for Reynolds further objected
 
to the proposed Order Confirming Sale on the ground that it
 
provided for the entry of a deficiency judgment against Beale,
 when the Order Granting Motion for Summary Judgment only directed
 the entry of a deficiency against Reynolds, and not Beale. 
9
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On August 25, 2011, the Circuit Court filed its Order
 
Confirming Sale. The Circuit Court confirmed the sale of the
 
Property to third-party purchasers for $1,523,000.00, and it
 
ordered that the sums received from the sale of the Property
 shall pay (1) all delinquent and accrued real property taxes; (2)
 the Commissioner's fee and expenses of the sale in the amount of
 $7,755.10; (3) attorneys' fees and costs in the amount of
 $39,233.16; and (4) the debt owed to R2B in the amount of
 $1,715,838.70 plus interest at the rate of $898.16 per day until
 paid. The Order Confirming Sale further ordered that
 
A deficiency exists, and a deficiency judgment in favor of
R2B and against Defendants Sally Rae Reynolds and Joseph
Stevenson Beale, jointly and severally, for any deficiency
between the amounts owed to R2B as determined herein and the
 sales proceeds applied thereto, shall be entered upon filing
by R2B of an appropriate declaration or affidavit in support
of such deficiency judgment and R2B shall have execution
thereon against Defendants Sally Rae Reynolds and Joseph
Stevenson Beale according to law. Such declaration shall
 not be filed until the conditions of the August 18, 2011
Bankruptcy Court Order Lifting Automatic Stay and/or
Temporary Emergency Stay are satisfied.
 
R2B asserts that the only differences between the
 
August 25, 2011, Order Confirming Sale filed by the Circuit Court
 
and the proposed Order Confirming Sale circulated to Beale in
 April 2011 was that: (1) the Circuit Court corrected a five
 hundred dollar addition error; (2) in light of the bankruptcy
 proceedings commenced after the proposed order was circulated,
 the Circuit Court (a) deleted language authorizing the third-
party purchasers to dispose of personal property remaining on the
 Property after closing, and (b) inserted language requiring that
 the declaration of R2B's counsel in support of a deficiency
 judgment not be filed until the requirements of the Bankruptcy
 Court's August 18, 2011, order were satisfied; and (3) the
 spelling of the name of one of the third-party purchasers was
 
5
corrected  and approvals as to form by the Commissioner and the
Department of Taxation were noted. In particular, R2B asserts
 
5
It appears that other typographical errors were also corrected. See
 
footnote 4, supra.
 
10
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that both the Order Confirming Sale filed by the Circuit Court
 
and the proposed Order Confirming Sale circulated to Beale in
 April 2011 provided that "[a] deficiency exists, and a deficiency
 judgment in favor of R2B and against Defendants Sally Rae
 Reynolds and Joseph Stevenson Beale, jointly and severally, 
. . . shall be entered[.]" 
On August 25, 2011, pursuant to the Order Confirming
 
Sale, the Circuit Court filed its Judgment confirming the sale of
 the Property. The Circuit Court certified the August 25, 2011,
 Judgment as a final judgment pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b). On
 September 9, 2011, the Circuit Court filed a Judgment for
 Possession and a Writ of Possession in favor of the third-party
 purchasers and against Reynolds and Beale effective as of
 September 19, 2011. The Writ of Possession was executed on
 
September 19, 2011.
 
IV.
 
On September 19, 2011, Reynolds and Beale, through
 
their counsel Dubin and Arensmeyer, filed a notice of appeal 
which identified the matters being appealed as the Circuit
 Court's: (1) Judgment filed on August 25, 2011; (2) Order
 Confirming Sale filed on August 25, 2011; (3) Judgment for
 Possession filed on September 9, 2011; and (4) Writ of Possession
 filed on September 9, 2011. Before the appellate briefs were
 filed, R2B filed a "Motion to Dismiss Appeal and For Sanctions"
 with this court, arguing among other things that the appeal was
 barred by Reynolds' and Beale's stipulated waiver of their right
 to appeal the entry of the Order Confirming Sale. We denied
 R2B's motion without prejudice to R2B presenting any arguments in
 its answering brief.
 
DISCUSSION
 
Beale contends that the Circuit Court erred in ordering
 
the entry of a deficiency judgment against Beale in the Order
 Confirming Sale because its prior Order Granting Motion for
 Summary Judgment, on which the interlocutory decree of
 foreclosure was based, only specifically referred to a deficiency
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judgment against Reynolds. R2B argues that there is no dispute
 
that Beale was obligated under the Guaranty to pay any deficiency
 remaining after the foreclosure sale, and that the Circuit Court
 properly granted summary judgment against Beale after finding him
 in breach of the Guaranty. More importantly, R2B argues that
 this court should not even reach the merits of Beale's appeal
 because the appeal is barred by his stipulated waiver of his
 right to appeal the Order Confirming Sale.
 
We agree that Beale's appeal is barred by his
 
stipulation to waive his right to appeal the Order Confirming
 Sale. R2B asserts that before Beale signed the stipulation, it
 circulated a proposed Order Confirming Sale to Beale, which
 specifically provided for the entry of a deficiency judgment in
 favor of R2B and against Reynolds and Beale, jointly and
 severally, for any deficiency between the amounts owed to R2B and
 the sale proceeds. Beale does not dispute that he had notice of
 the contents of the proposed Order Confirming Sale when he signed
 the stipulation agreeing to "irrevocably waive any rights
 [Reynolds and Beale] may have to appeal or seek reconsideration
 of or relief from [the Order Confirming Sale]." In particular,
 Beale does not dispute that he had notice of the provision in the
 Order Confirming Sale which states that "[a] deficiency exits,
 and a deficiency judgment in favor of R2B and against Defendants
 Sally Rae Reynolds and Joseph Stevenson Beale, jointly and
 severally, . . . shall be entered[,]" at the time he signed the 
stipulation waiving his right to appeal the Order Confirming
 Sale.
 
Under the circumstances of this case, where Beale had
 
notice that the Order Confirming Sale would order the entry of a
 deficiency judgment against him and he thereafter expressly
 agreed to waive his right to appeal the Order Confirming Sale, we
 conclude that Beale's waiver of his right to appeal is valid and
 should be enforced. See Van Duren v. Rzasa-Ormes, 926 A.2d 372,
 
378 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 2007) ("The general rule . . . is
 that a party may, by express agreement or stipulation before
 trial, or judgment, waive his right to appeal[.]" (block quote
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
format and citation omitted)); McConnell v. Merrill Lynch,
 
Pierce, Fenner & Smith, Inc., 222 Cal. Rptr. 228, 232 (Cal. Ct.
 App. 1985) (concluding that a party may waive its right to
 appeal, if the waiver is authorized by the party, is express not
 implied, and is not improperly coerced by the trial judge).
 
Based on Beale's stipulated waiver of his right to
 
appeal the Order Confirming Sale, we dismiss Beale's appeal. 
Given our decision, we need not address the merits of Beale's
 challenge to the provision in the Order Confirming Sale that
 ordered the entry of a deficiency judgment against him, which is
 the only issue Beale raises on appeal.
6
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 14, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Gary Victor Dubin
Frederick J. Arensmeyer (Dubin Law Offices)
for Defendants-Appellants
 Chief Judge
Louise Y.K. Ing Pamela W. Bunn
 (Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
6R2B requests that we find that this appeal was frivolous under HRAP
Rule 38 (2000). We are not convinced that this appeal was "manifestly and
palpably without merit[.]" Hawaii Teamsters & Allied Workers, Local 996 v.
Dep't of Labor & Indus. Relations, 110 Hawai' i 259, 269, 132 P.3d 368, 378
(2006) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). We therefore decline to find that this appeal was frivolous under HRAP Rule 38. 
13
 