  MEMORANDUM OPINION
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-11-0000641
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CINDY CHURAN KODAMA, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ALAN HARUO KODAMA, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 08-1-2862)
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this divorce case, Defendant-Appellant Alan Kodama
 
(Husband) appeals from the "Decree Granting Absolute Divorce and
 
Awarding Child Custody" (Divorce Decree) entered by the Family
 Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).
1 The Divorce Decree
 
was entered pursuant to the Family Court's "Findings of Facts and
 Conclusions of Law." The Divorce Decree dissolved Husband's
 sixteen-year marriage with Plaintiff-Appellee Cindy Kodama
 (Wife), divided the parties' marital assets, awarded custody of
 the parties' two minor children, and awarded Wife alimony and
 child support.
 
The primary issue raised by Husband on appeal involves
 
the Family Court's valuation of Husband's financial services
 
1The Honorable Gale L. F. Ching presided over the proceedings
relevant to this appeal.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
business. Husband and Wife each called an expert at trial on the
 
question of the proper valuation of Husband's business, and the
 Family Court ultimately adopted the valuation recommended by
 Wife's expert. On appeal, Husband contends that the Family Court
 erred by improperly valuing Husband's financial services
 business. Husband also contends that the Family Court erred in:
 (1) awarding Wife $5,000 a month in alimony for five years; (2)
 holding an additional hearing after the divorce trial to
 determine Husband's income in rendering its decision on child
 support; (3) requiring Husband to pay $200,000 to Wife for her
 equity in a property on Maui awarded to Husband, even though the
 stipulated valuation of the Maui Property, which the Family Court
 accepted, showed only negative equity; (4) making an "illusory"
 award to Husband of his life insurance policy (Policy 80004) that
 was controlled by Wife; and (5) failing to credit Husband with
 the value of investment accounts he owned at the date of
 marriage.
 
As explained below, with respect to the primary issue
 
raised by Husband on appeal, we conclude that the Family Court
 did not err in valuing Husband's business. With respect to the
 remaining issues, we conclude that the Family Court erred in its
 decisions regarding the division of the Maui Property, the award
 of Husband's Policy 80004, and the valuation of the investment
 accounts owned by Husband at the date of marriage. We therefore
 vacate the provisions of the Divorce Decree that relate to, or
 are affected by our decision regarding, these matters and remand
 for further proceedings. We affirm the Divorce Decree in all
 other respects.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
Husband and Wife were married on November 20, 1993. 
They have two children together: Daughter, born in 1995, and Son,
 born in 2000. Wife was a "stay at home" mother responsible for
 the care of the parties' children and household, while Husband
 was the family's primary income earner. At the time of their
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
marriage, Husband was an independent contractor for Ameriprise
 
2
Financial, Inc. (Ameriprise),  providing financial advice and
services. In 2000, he signed a franchise agreement with 
Ameriprise and his financial services business, Alan Kodama & Associates, became a franchisee of Ameriprise. Husband's business was successful, and the parties accumulated substantial wealth while married, including their marital home (Marital Home); 50% share in a beach house in Mokul
e'ia (Mokul e'ia 
Property); two condominium units on Kaua 'i (Kaua 'i Condos 1 and 2 
or collectively, "Kaua 'i Condos"); a property located in Wailuku, 
Maui used to service Husband's Maui clients (Maui Property); bank accounts containing substantial sums; security and investment accounts; and life insurance and retirement policies. 
A. Pre-Trial

 
On September 2, 2008, Wife filed a complaint in the
 
Family Court seeking dissolution of the parties' marriage.
 Shortly after Wife filed her complaint, Husband moved out of the
 Marital Home.
 
In January 2009, Wife found part-time employment as a
 
receptionist at Downtown Dental Associates earning $12 per hour. 
On May 24, 2010, the parties filed a stipulation regarding child
 custody and the valuation of the marital real property. The
 parties agreed that they would share joint legal custody of both
 children: Husband would assume primary physical custody of Son;
 Wife would assume primary physical custody of Daughter; and each
 parent would have reasonable visitation with the child in the
 primary physical custody of the other parent. The parties also
 stipulated to the valuation of their marital real property, as
 follows:
 
2Ameriprise Financial, Inc. (Ameriprise) is the successor to various
companies, including American Express Financial Advisors Inc. and IDS, with
which Husband was involved. For purposes of simplicity, we will use
"Ameriprise" to refer not only to Ameriprise but to American Express Financial
Advisors Inc. and IDS.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Marital Home -- $1,275,000
Mokule'ia Property -- $447,5003
 
Kaua'i Condo 1 -- $92,500
Kaua'i Condo 2 -- $92.500
 
Maui Property -- $400,000
 
B. Trial
 
A five day trial was held on July 12, 13, 19, 30, and
 
August 27, 2010. The primary disputes at trial were related to
 
the valuation of Husband's financial services business, alimony,
 and the distribution of the marital assets, particularly the Maui
 Property. The following pertinent evidence was presented at
 trial.
 
1. Business Valuation
 
Husband's financial services business was an Ameriprise 
franchisee and a sole proprietorship servicing approximately 900 clients on O
'ahu and Maui. Through his business, Husband managed 
approximately $175 million in assets and had six employees. The business regularly had gross income of over $1 million per year. 
Husband's business was governed by a franchise
 
agreement between Husband and Ameriprise. Under this agreement,
 Ameriprise controlled the type of products Husband sold and
 required Husband to generate a minimum number of financial plans
 and meet certain client satisfaction ratings. Ameriprise also
 controlled all advertising done by or for franchisees. Husband
 received payment from Ameriprise, not directly from his clients,
 and Husband was required to pay fees to Ameriprise. If Husband
 stops working as a franchisee of Ameriprise, "he must turnover
 all original client lists, client data, financial plans and other
 data base files." 
At trial, both parties presented expert testimony
 
regarding the valuation of Husband's business. Wife's expert,
 Kimo Todd (Todd), valued Husband's business at $1.524 million. 
3
The parties stipulated that the value of the Mokule 'ia Property was
$895,000. However, because the parties only owned a 50% interest in the
Mokule 'ia Property, the stipulated value has been reduced to reflect the
parties' share of the property. 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In his analysis, Todd relied upon three prior transactions in
 
which Husband had bought or sold Ameriprise financial services
 franchisees. Todd testified that Husband indicated that in
 determining the purchase and sale price in these transactions,
 Husband had used a pricing multiplier of 1.45 times gross sales.
4
 
Todd utilized a lower pricing multiplier of 1.35 times gross
 sales to determine the fair market value of Husband's business. 
According to Todd, the value of Husband's business was basically
 attributable to client lists and data rather than Husband's
 personal goodwill.
 
On the other hand, Husband's expert, Michael McEnerney
 
(McEnerney), claimed that the fair market value for Husband's
 business was $94,500. According to McEnerney, the value of
 Husband's business should be limited to its physical assets
 because any intangible assets related to the business were
 attributable solely to Husband's personal goodwill and were
 therefore not divisible in divorce.
 
2. Alimony
 
Both Husband and Wife are college graduates. Husband
 
received his degree in finance and Wife received her degree in
 interior design. During the marriage, Wife did not utilize the
 skills learned in obtaining her degree and was "primarily a stay
 at home mother." The parties enjoyed a relatively high standard
 of living that included numerous trips to the mainland and
 neighbor islands each year, dining at high-end restaurants,
 membership at a country club, and the use and enjoyment of a
 beach house. Wife did not have limits on her ability to spend
 for the family or the household.
 
Wife presented expert testimony from Frances William
 
McRoberts (McRoberts) with regard to her need for alimony. 
According to McRoberts, Wife would need $9,000 a month in pretax
 
4Todd used the terms "gross sales" and "gross income" interchangeably
with respect to the pricing multiplier as his report explaining his valuation
analysis applies the pricing multiplier to "gross sales" and "gross income"
interchangeably. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dollars to meet her needs and continue a lifestyle similar to the
 
lifestyle she enjoyed during the marriage.
 
After the parties separated, Wife sought employment and
 
was hired in January 2009 as a receptionist at Downtown Dental
 Associates making $12 an hour. She was subsequently promoted to
 Director of Patient Relations and received a raise to $13 an
 hour. However, Wife had not developed job skills prior the
 parties' separation that would qualify her for employment at a
 higher paying job.
 
3. Maui Property
 
Husband was using the Maui Property as an office to
 
service his Maui clients. The appraisal used to obtain the
 stipulated value of the Maui Property appraised the Maui Property
 as residential and valued it at $400,000. However, during her
 trial preparation, Wife determined that the property was actually
 zoned commercial and that the property tax assessed value of the
 property was $959,300. Therefore, Wife sought to have the Maui
 Property awarded to her, even though it was used by Husband in
 his business, or to have the Family Court redetermine the value
 of the property.
 
4. Other Matters 
After separating from Wife, Husband gave a female
 
friend $30,000 to "deposit and hold for him." However, Husband's
 friend spent the money. Although he initially denied giving any
 money to third-parties to hold in a pre-trial interrogatory, 
Husband at trial admitted giving his friend the $30,000 to hold
 for him.
 
During the trial, discrepancies were revealed regarding 
the income and expenses Husband had reported in the divorce proceedings. For example, Husband initially denied having a tenant paying rent for use of the Maui Property, but later stipulated to evidence showing that he did have a tenant that paid $500 a month for use of the Maui Property. Husband similarly received income from the rental of the Mokul
e'ia 
Property and the Kaua 'i Condos, which he failed to report. In 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
addition, during the divorce proceedings, Husband increased the
 
debt on the family's home equity line of credit (secured by an
 asset which Wife was to be awarded) from $147,063 to $215,059 (an
 increase of approximately $68,000) while allowing his own
 checking account to grow from $56,240 to $137,830 (an increase of
 approximately $83,000).
 
C. Post Trial
 
The Family Court entered its Order Re: Trial (Trial
 
Order) on March 31, 2011. In the Trial Order, the Family Court
 determined that: (1) the value of Husband's business was $1.524
 million, (2) the value of the Maui Property was $400,000 as
 stipulated to by the parties, (3) valid and relevant
 considerations existed to deviate from the partnership model of
 property division, and (4) Wife was entitled to $5,000 in alimony
 per month for five years. The Family Court also determined child
 custody and educational expenses for the children and ordered the
 parties "to submit their respective child support request
 pursuant to the child support guidelines[.]" The Family Court
 attached Court's Exhibit 1 to the Trial Order, which was a copy
 of a Property Division Chart submitted by Wife during trial. 
According to this exhibit, Wife would be granted the Maui
 Property subject to it's outstanding mortgage of $574,161.63.
 
Husband moved for clarification of the Trial Order,
 
seeking clarification as to: (1) which party was awarded the Maui
 Property because the Trial Order did not specifically award the
 property to either party, but the property was allocated to Wife
 under the Court's Exhibit 1; (2) whether the Family Court
 intended to award Policy 80004 to Husband; and (3) the Family
 Court's determination of the parties' income for purposes of
 preparing the child support guidelines worksheet. On May 13,
 2011, the Family Court filed its "Order Re: Motion for
 Clarification" (Clarification Order), which: (1) determined that
 there was "insufficient evidence to render a decision as to child
 support"; (2) awarded the Maui Property and its associated
 mortgage debt to Husband and required Husband to pay Wife
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
$200,000 as part of the award; and (3) left the award of Policy
 
80004 to Husband unchanged.
 
Pursuant to the Family Court's Clarification Order, a
 
hearing was held on June 1, 2011, to address child support. Over
 Husband's objection, the Family Court received additional
 evidence on Husband's income, including business income that had
 been reported on the parties' joint 2010 federal tax return,
 which had been filed after the divorce trial. On July 5, 2011,
 the Family Court adopted Wife's proposal regarding child support
 and ordered Husband to pay Wife monthly child support of $2,413.
 
On August 22, 2011, the Family Court issued its
 
Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law as well as the Divorce
 Decree. This appeal followed.
 
STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
In reviewing the Family Court's decisions that Husband
 
challenges in this appeal, we apply the following standards set
 forth by the Hawai
'i Supreme Court in Fisher v. Fisher , 111 
Hawai'i 41, 137 P.3d 355 (2006): 
A. Family Court Decisions
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decision will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
we will not disturb the family court's decisions on appeal
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of
reason.
 
B. Family Court's Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law
 
The family court's [findings of fact (FOFs)] are
reviewed on appeal under the "clearly erroneous" standard.
A FOF is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despite
substantial evidence in support of the finding, the
appellate court is nonetheless left with a definite and firm
conviction that a mistake has been made. "Substantial
 evidence" is credible evidence which is of sufficient
 quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable
caution to support a conclusion.
 
On the other hand, the family court's [conclusions of
law (COLs)] are reviewed on appeal de novo, under the
right/wrong standard. COLs, consequently, are "not binding
upon an appellate court and are freely reviewable for their
correctness.["]
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
C. Credibility of Witnesses
 
"It is well-settled that an appellate court will not
pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses
and the weight of evidence; this is the province of the
trier of fact."
 
Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360 (block quote format 
altered; citations omitted). 
DISCUSSION
 
I. Business Valuation
 
Husband asserts that his main issue on appeal concerns
 
the Family Court's valuation of his financial services business,
 
Alan Kodama & Associates, an Ameriprise franchisee. Husband
 contends that the Family Court erred in valuing his business and
 in distinguishing this case from Antolik v. Harvey, 7 Haw. App.
 313, 761 P.2d. 305 (1988). In Antolik, this court adopted the
 view that the goodwill of the business of a professional that is
 accumulated during the marriage is marital property and subject
 to division when it is "true" enterprise goodwill, which is a
 marketable business asset, but not when it is "personal"
 goodwill, which is dependent on the continued presence of the
 professional involved. Antolik, 7 Haw. App. at 317-18, 761 P.2d
 
at 308-09. As explained below, we disagree with Husband's
 contentions.
 
Husband and Wife each called an expert to testify
 
regarding the valuation of Husband's business. The methodology
 used and the opinion on valuation reached by each expert differed
 dramatically. Husband's expert used an asset-based valuation
 method in concluding that the fair market value of the business
 was $94,500. Wife's expert used a market-based approach in
 concluding that the fair market value of the business was
 $1,524,000. Each expert explained the basis for his opinion and
 was subject to thorough cross-examination. After hearing the
 evidence, the Family Court found Wife's expert to be more
 persuasive and accepted his valuation of $1,524,000. Given the
 evidence in the record, the lack of definitive proof on either
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
side, and because the Family Court's decision was largely 
dependent on its assessment of the credibility of the valuation experts and its weighing of the evidence presented, we affirm the Family Court on this issue. See Fisher, 111 Hawai
'i at 46, 137 
P.3d at 360. 
A.
 
Todd, Wife's expert, utilized a market-based approach
 
to value Husband's business. Todd focused on three recent
 transactions in which Husband bought or sold financial services
 businesses that were Ameriprise franchisees. In 2003, Husband
 and Tom Lodico (Lodico), purchased a Hilo financial services
 company from Chuck Lopez (Lopez). In determining the purchase
 price, the parties utilized a multiplier of 1.45 times the
 company's gross sales. The sales agreement included a one-year
 non-competition provision, and Lopez provided little assistance
 in transitioning his clients to Husband and Lodico. Almost all
 of Lopez's clients were retained by Husband and Lodico. Husband
 maintained very little contact with the Hilo clients, and instead
 hired Barry Mark (Mark) to service the Hilo clients. Despite
 Husband's failure to build personal relationships with the Hilo
 clients, when Mark left the Hilo practice without a restriction
 on competition, Mark was only successful in converting
 approximately 30% of the Hilo clients to his new business.
 
In 2007, Husband sold the Hilo practice to David Hall
 
(Hall), utilizing a 1.45 multiplier times gross sales to
 establish the sales price. The sales agreement included a one
 year non-competition clause that restricted Husband's ability to
 solicit or accept business from any of the Hilo clients. Hall
 purchased the practice sight unseen with little or no client
 introduction or transfer support. Most of the clients
 successfully transferred to Hall while no clients subsequently
 resumed their relationship with Husband.
 
In 2003, Husband purchased a financial services
 
business on Maui from Dean Badoyen (Badoyen). The purchase price
 was $450,000, which was established using a 1.45 multiplier times
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
gross sales. The sales agreement included a one year non-
competition clause restricting Badoyen from providing financial
 advisory services within 50 miles of Wailuku, Maui.
 
Todd also considered succession agreements between
 
Husband and two of his employees. Under these succession
 
5
agreements, Sandra Yorong and John Araki  had the option to
purchase Husband's business upon his death, disability, or
 termination of his affiliation with Ameriprise. Under the
 agreements, the purchase price was determined by using a 1.5
 multiplier times the average gross sales for the three years
 prior to Husband's death, disability, or disaffiliation from
 Ameriprise.
 
Wife introduced evidence indicating that Husband placed

 
little value on personal goodwill in both the Hilo and Maui
 transactions. For example, in a 2007 tax return with respect to
 his Hilo practice, Husband amortized $285,000 in "Intangibles"
 while only amortizing "Goodwill" in the amount of $2,088. With
 regard to his purchase of the Maui practice, the parties
 allocated the purchase price as follows:
 
Client files, etc. ("Business")  -- $449,000.00
Covenant not to compete  -- $1,000.00
Total -- $450,000.00

 
In his valuation report, Todd explained his market-
based analysis as follows:
 
It appears that what determines the value of Ameriprise
franchises in Hawaii is the client lists owned by the
franchisee company rather than the "personal goodwill" of
the advisor. Based on our conversation with [Husband], this
seems to be the case for Ameriprise franchises that he
purchased and sold. [Husband] indicated that when he
purchased the Hilo-based practice (roughly 300 client
accounts), all of the transferred clients were retained with
normal shrinkage due to causes such as the death of clients.
[Husband] also stated that when he purchased the Maui
practice (roughly 700 client accounts) all of the
transferred clients were retained with normal shrinkage due
to causes such as the death of clients. [Husband] also
stated that when he eventually sold the Hilo practice in
 
5
Sandra Yorong has the option to buy the O' ahu portion of Husband's
business, while John Araki has the option to buy the Maui portion of Husband'sbusiness. 
11
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2007, all the client accounts were transferred to the buyer
with no clients returning to [Husband]. All of the above
 sales/purchases included some seller provided transition
assistance and a one year, non-compete agreement with the
buyer following the transfer. Accordingly, Ameriprise
practices that have viable client lists are successfully
transferable in the [sic] Hawaii.
 
. . . . 
These facts indicate that the value of these Ameriprise
practices are grounded in their respective client lists and
are easily transferable in orderly sale and transition. As
 [Husband's] records confirm, we believe the amounts paid by
for these Ameriprise practices are allocable predominantly
to the value of the transferable client lists rather than
 personal goodwill.
 
Todd testified that the franchise relationship between
 
Husband's business and Ameriprise benefitted the business because
 
Ameriprise provided substantial name recognition to clients as
 well as marketing and advertising. Wife also adduced evidence
 that Ameriprise apparently imposed surrender charges on its
 insurance and annuity products and some stock accounts, which
 would create an impediment to clients following Husband if he
 quit his Ameriprise franchisee business to work for a competitor. 
Todd indicated that his adoption of a "more conservative"
 multiplier of 1.35 (rather than 1.45 used by Husband in his
 transactions or 1.5 used in the succession agreements) served to
 exclude Husband's personal goodwill from his valuation of
 Husband's business. Todd also explained why he believed that,
 under the circumstances of this case, the market approach was the
 best approach to use in valuing Husband's business:
 
Being that -- in this case, you know, what we're trying to
find out is what fair market value is, what -- the amount at
which, you know, willing buyers and willing sellers would --
would transact at. And in this case we have three examples
not just of, you know, anybody -- any random person out
there, but we have three transactions involving [Husband]
and his clients. There is no better indication of what -­what the business could be bought or sold for than looking
at the actual transactions involving the subject business.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
Husband's expert, McEnerney, disagreed with Todd's
 
analysis. According to McEnerney, except for the physical assets
 
of the business, the entire value of Husband's business was based
 on Husband's personal goodwill. There was no enterprise goodwill
 attributable to the business or its franchise relationship with
 Ameriprise. Accordingly, McEnerney utilized the asset-based
 approach and only considered the value of the physical assets of
 Husband's business in arriving at a fair market value of $94,500.
 
C.
 
Faced with the divergent opinions of the parties'
 
experts, the Family Court chose to credit Wife's expert. The
 Family Court concluded as follows:
 
8. The Court concludes that the value of
 
[Husband's] financial planning franchise practice depends
more on client lists and data than on [Husband's] personal
goodwill.
 
9. The Court further concludes that based on
 
[Husband's] prior purchase and sale transactions; the fact
that a pricing multiplier was used in those transactions and
in [Husband's] succession plans; the fact that [Husband's]
financial planning practice is a franchise with significant
involvement in the practice and controls imposed on
[Husband] by the franchisor; that the departure of Barry
Mark from the Hilo practice, who without a non-compete and
with little involvement by [Husband] in the practice, taking
less than 30% of the clients, shows the existence of
enterprise goodwill; the dependence on [Husband's] testimony
for evidence of client personal goodwill; that the precepts
announced in Antolik do not apply to the facts of this case.
 
10. The Court further concludes that the proper way to
value [Husband's] financial planning franchise practice is to
apply a pricing multiple of 1.35 to [Husband's] gross income [ 6
]
from the business.
 
There is substantial evidence in the record to support
 
the Family Court's ruling. The Family Court considered the
 
credibility of the experts and weighed the evidence presented in
 reaching its conclusion. We defer to the Family Court's 
6As noted, Todd, Wife's expert, used the terms "gross sales" and "gross
income" interchangeable. See note 4, supra.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
assessment regarding these matters and decline to overturn its
 
decision.
 
D.
 
We reject Husband's claim that the Family Court erred
 
as a matter of law in failing to apply this court's decision in
 Antolik. The Family Court concluded that Antolik was
 distinguishable and did not control the decision in this case.
 
In Antolik, the husband in a divorce proceeding owned a
 
sole proprietorship chiropractor business. Antolik, 7 Haw. App.
 
at 313, 761 P.2d at 307. This court addressed the question of
 whether goodwill of the business of a professional that is
 accumulated during the marriage is marital property. We
 described goodwill as follows:
 
Goodwill is an attribute of a business. An "income­
producing entity, regardless of the nature of the business
organization, may have an asset of recognized value beyond
the tangible assets of such entity, an intangible asset
generally characterized as goodwill." 
Taylor v. Taylor,  222
Neb. 721, 728, 386 N.W.2d 851, 857 (1986). "Goodwill is a
 marketable and transferable asset." 
Prahinski v. Prahinski
,
75 Md. App. 113, 129, 540 A.2d 833, 841 (1988).
 
Id. at 317, 761 P.2d at 308 (brackets omitted). We noted that
 
other courts had adopted different views on whether the goodwill
 of a business constitutes marital property. We generally adopted
 the view that "distinguishes between true goodwill [(also know as
 enterprise goodwill)] which is a marketable business asset and
 the goodwill which is dependent on the continued presence of the
 professional involved. The former constitutes marital property,
 while the latter does not." Id. at 317-18, 761 P.2d at 308-09.
 
In Antolik, we concluded that the family court did not
 
err in accepting the valuation of husband's expert, which was
 based on adjusted book value, over the valuation of wife's
 expert, which was based on an estimate of future earnings. Id.
 
at 315-16, 321, 761 P.2d at 307, 311. However, we made clear
 that "[w]hether the intangible assets of the business of a
 professional constitute true goodwill or not should be determined
 by the trier of fact on a case-by-case basis." Id. at 318, 761
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
P.2d at 309. We also did not mandate that a particular approach
 
be used in valuing a closely-held business, but made clear that
 different approaches or a combination of approaches could be
 used. We stated:
 
Whatever approach or combination of approaches is used to
support an amount, it must always be remembered that (1) in
divorce cases the sole object of the exercise is to
determine the [fair market value] of the business on the
relevant date and (2) absent special circumstances, the
value of a sole proprietorship professional business does
not include, and must be separated from, the value
attributable to the sole professional who operates it.
 
Id. at 319, 761 P.2d at 309.
 
Thus, Antolik simply established a rule that a spouse's
 
personal goodwill is excluded in determining the value of a
 
business that is subject to division as marital property. It did
 not decide whether, or the extent to which, personal goodwill was
 a component of the value of particular businesses. Contrary to
 Husband's suggestion, Antolik does not mandate that a particular
 valuation method be used. Nor does it hold that the intangible
 assets or goodwill associated with a sole proprietorship
 professional business are necessarily or significantly personal
 goodwill. Instead, we concluded in Antolik that "[w]hether the
 intangible assets of the business of a professional constitute
 true goodwill or not should be determined by the trier of fact on
 a case-by-case basis." Id. at 318, 761 P.2d at 309. 
Here, Wife's expert and the Family Court were aware of
 
the distinction made in Antolik between enterprise or true
 goodwill and personal goodwill. Wife's expert explained: (1) why
 he believed that Husband's personal goodwill was not a
 significant factor in the value of Husband's Ameriprise
 franchisee business; (2) why he believed the value of the
 business was basically derived from its ownership of client lists
 and data; (3) and how his use of a conservative multiplier served
 to exclude Husband's personal goodwill from the expert's
 valuation of the business. Wife's expert also explained why his
 method of valuation properly captured the fair market value of
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Husband's business for purposes of the marital property division. 
Under the particular facts presented, the Family Court chose to
 credit the opinion of Wife's expert over that of Husband's
 expert. We conclude that nothing in the Antolik decision
 precluded the Family Court from making this choice. 
II. Alimony
 
Husband argues that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion in awarding Wife $5,000 per month in alimony for five
 years. We disagree.
 
The Family Court's decision to award alimony is guided
 
by the factors enumerated in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 580­47(a).
7 At trial, Wife presented evidence that Husband and Wife
 
7At the time relevant to this case, HRS § 580-47(a) (2006) provided in
relevant part:
 
Upon granting a divorce, . . . the court may make any further
orders as shall appear just and equitable . . . (2) compelling
either party to provide for the support and maintenance of the
other party . . . . In making these further orders, the court
shall take into consideration: the respective merits of the
parties, the relative abilities of the parties, the condition in
which each party will be left by the divorce, the burdens imposed
upon either party for the benefit of the children of the parties,
and all other circumstances of the case. . . .
 
In addition to any other relevant factors considered, the
court, in ordering spousal support and maintenance, shall consider
the following factors:
 
(1) Financial resources of the parties; 
(2) Ability of the party seeking support and maintenanceto meet his or her needs independently; 
(3) Duration of the marriage; 
(4) Standard of living established during the marriage; 
(5) Age of the parties; 
(6) Physical and emotional condition of the parties; 
(7) Usual occupation of the parties during the marriage; 
(8) Vocational skills and employability of the partyseeking support and maintenance; 
(9) Needs of the parties; 
(10) Custodial and child support responsibilities; 
(continued...) 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
enjoyed a high standard of living during their sixteen-year
 
marriage; that Husband had a successful financial services
 business and a high capacity for earning substantial income in
 the future; and that Wife's future employment prospects and
 ability to earn substantial income were limited. Wife also
 called McRoberts, an expert on alimony, who examined Wife's
 income from employment and her projected expenses and opined that
 Wife would need approximately $9,000 before taxes per year to
 maintain a lifestyle similar to that which she enjoyed while
 married. McRoberts opined that Wife should receive $9,000 per
 month in alimony for eight years. McRoberts' alimony analysis
 did not consider amounts necessary to provide for maintenance of
 the Marital Home or to pay for the children's private school
 tuition. McRoberts also admitted that an unequal distribution of
 the marital assets in the amount of $520,000 in Wife's favor may
 relieve Wife's need for alimony. 
Husband argues that the Family Court's disproportionate
 
award of the marital estate in favor of Wife and the substantial
 assets she received show that the Family Court erred in its award
 of alimony. We are not persuaded. 
The Family Court found as follows:
 
163. That during the marriage, the parties enjoyed a
relatively high standard of living . . . .
 
. . . .
 
167. That [Wife] is unlikely to obtain employment
that will generate sufficient income to meet her needs at
the marital standard of living.
 
7(...continued)
(11)	 Ability of the party from whom support and maintenance
is sought to meet his or her own needs while meeting
the needs of the party seeking support and
maintenance;
 
(12)	 Other factors which measure the financial condition in
 which the parties will be left as the result of the
action under which the determination of maintenance is
 made;
 
(13)	 Probable duration of the need of the party seeking
support and maintenance.
 
17
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . .
 
169. That based on the parties' tax returns,
[Husband] generates sufficient income to satisfy his needs
and also pay [Wife] alimony.
 
170. That taking into account [Husband's] current
expenses and income, as well as his child support
responsibilities, [Husband] has sufficient resources to pay
[Wife] $5,000.00 per month in alimony.
 
171. That based on [Husband's] abilities, resources
and assets to be awarded to him, [Husband] should be in a
position to accumulate substantial assets in the future.
 
172. That there is little likelihood that [Wife] will
advance further in her employment and that [Wife] will need
all the resources to be awarded to her to maintain her
 standard of living.
 
173. That taking into account [Wife's] needs, her
current earnings and assets to be awarded to her, the Court
finds that [Wife] will need $5,000.00 per month in alimony
to meet her needs for five (5) years.
 
. . . . 
209. The Court accepts Mr. McRobert's opinions and
finds that [Wife] will need additional income by way of
alimony to augment what she earns from her employment and
what she may earn from assets awarded to her. 
210. That [Wife] will be left in a position that will
not provide for her future and well-being unless she is
awarded alimony in division of the marital estate.
 
211. That [Wife] will need $5,000.00 per month for
five (5) years to meet her needs.
 
We conclude that there was substantial evidence to
 
support the Family Court's findings and that these findings were
 
not clearly erroneous. We also conclude that based on the
 evidence presented and its findings, the Family Court did not
 abuse its discretion in its decision to award Wife $5,000 in
 alimony per month for a period of five years. 
See Sabol v.
 
Sabol, 2 Haw. App. 24, 31-32, 624 P.2d 1378, 1383-84 (1981)
 (reviewing family court's award of alimony under the abuse of
 discretion standard).
 
III. Child Support

 
After the divorce trial was completed, the Family Court
 
held an additional evidentiary hearing to determine the parties'
 child support obligations. At the hearing, Wife introduced
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
additional evidence regarding Husband's income, including income
 
reported on their joint 2010 federal tax return filed after the
 divorce trial. The 2010 tax return showed a substantial increase
 in Husband's business income over that reported on the parties'
 2009 tax return. The Family Court considered Husband's updated
 income in determining its award of child support, which required
 Husband to pay monthly child support of $2,413 to Wife. 
Husband contends that the Family Court erred in 
holding an additional hearing after the divorce trial and
 considering the updated evidence regarding Husband's income
 presented at the hearing in rendering its decision on child
 support. We disagree.
 
We review the Family Court's determination of child 
support for an abuse of discretion. See Doe v. Doe, 118 Hawai
'i 
268, 278, 188 P.3d 782, 792 (App. 2008). We find no basis to conclude that the Family Court abused its discretion in rendering its decision on child support. Husband cites no authority to support the basic premise of his argument -- that the Family Court was precluded from holding an additional hearing after the divorce trial to gather evidence relevant to its decision in awarding child support. We also note that the determination of child support is a separate part of the a divorce case from the determination of alimony. See Eaton v. Eaton, 7 Haw. App. 111, 
118-19, 748 P.2d 801, 805 (1987). We therefore disagree with Husband that the determination of child support must be based on the same evidence used to determine alimony. We affirm the Family Court's child support award. 
IV. Maui Property
 
A. 
Prior to trial, the parties stipulated to the valuation
 
of the Maui Property as $400,000. The appraisal used to obtain
 the stipulated value of the Maui Property appraised the Maui
 Property as residential. However, in preparing for trial, Wife
 discovered that the Maui Property was zoned commercial and that
 the property tax assessed value of the property was $959,300. 
19

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Wife asked the Family Court to award the Maui Property to her, or
 
alternatively, that the Family Court redetermine the value of the
 property to more accurately reflect its actual value.
 
In the Trial Order, the Family Court refused to change
the value of the Maui Property from the parties' stipulated value
 because the "Stipulation was not set aside and remained as is at
 trial although [Wife] later disputed [the Maui Property's]
 value." In its Clarification Order, the Family Court awarded the
 Maui Property and its outstanding mortgage of $574,161.63 to
 Husband, but also ordered Husband to pay Wife $200,000.
8
 

 
In its findings of fact, the Family Court found:
 
215. The Court finds the value of [the Maui Property]
to be $400,000.00 and the balance of the mortgage to be
$574,161.63 and awards that property and debt to [Husband],
subject to [Husband's] payment of $200,000.00 cash to [Wife]
within ninety (90) days after the entry of this decree for
[Wife's] interest in the property.
 
216. The Court finds [Wife], at trial, disputed the
stipulated value of that property claiming it was under
appraised.
 
217. The property was appraised as residential not
commercial property.
 
218. That [Husband] admitted the property was used
for commercial purposes and had leased part of it out.
 
In the Divorce Decree, the Family Court further
 
explained:
 
The commercial real property of the parties located . . .
[in] Wailuku, Hawaii [(the Maui Property)], currently held
by [Husband] in his revocable living trust, is awarded to
[Husband's] trust as his solely held property as Tenant in
Severalty. . . . 
[Husband] shall pay to [Wife] the sum of TWO HUNDRED
THOUSAND AND NO/DOLLARS ($200,000.00) within three (3)
months of the effective date of this Divorce Decree, which
sum represents payment in full for [Husband's] purchase of
 
8Specifically, the Clarification Order provides:
 
The Maui Commercial Property shall be given to [Husband] who shall
be responsible for all debts. In addition, [Husband] shall pay
[Wife] the sum of $200,000.00 within ninety (90) days unless
extended by mutual agreement by the parties once the divorce is
final.
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and [Wife's] release of, the full present value of [Wife's]
current equity interest in the subject property.
 
B.
 
Husband argues that the Family Court erred in requiring
 
him to pay $200,000 to Wife for her "equity interest" in the Maui
 
Property, when the stipulated valuation of the Maui Property,
 which the Family Court accepted, showed only negative equity. We
 agree.
 
The Family Court's findings are internally
 
inconsistent. Based on the parties' stipulation, the Family
 Court found that the value of the Maui Property was $400,000. 
The Family Court also found that the Maui Property was subject to
 a $574,161.63 mortgage, which would mean that the parties' equity
 in the property was a negative $174,161.63. Based on these
 findings, there was no positive equity interest held by Wife to
 distribute and no basis for the Family Court to require Husband
 to pay $200,000 to Wife to compensate her for her "current equity
 interest in the subject property."
9
 
Wife suggests that the Family Court's decision in
 
dividing the Maui Property can be justified as an equalization
 payment resulting from the Family Court's deviation from marital
 partnership principles. However, the Family Court did not
 justify its decision in dividing the Maui Property as a deviation
 from marital partnership principles, and we decline to uphold the
 Family Court's decision on this basis. We vacate the portion of
 the Divorce Decree that divided the Maui Property and required
 Husband to pay Wife $200,000 for her "equity interest." On
 remand, the Family Court may consider all the issues related to
 the Maui Property as it deems necessary.
 
9The Family Court's actions would make sense if the Family Court
adopted the property tax appraised value rather than the stipulated value as
the value of the Maui Property. Using the property tax appraised value would
have left approximately $385,000 in positive equity to divide between the
parties. The Family Court, however, did not set aside the parties'
stipulation as to the value of the Maui Property and instead adopted the
parties' stipulated value as the value of the Maui Property.
 
21
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
V. Life Insurance Policy 80004
 
The Family Court awarded Policy 80004 to Husband as an
 
asset worth $53,627.66. Policy 80004 insured Husband's life only
 
and had a cash surrender value of $53,627.66.10 Husband argues
 
that the Family Court's award of Policy 80004 to him was
 "illusory" and that the policy has no value to him because it is
 owned by an irrevocable trust, over which Wife is sole trustee,
 the irrevocable beneficiaries of the policy are his Wife and
 children, and Husband has no control over any cash proceeds. 
Wife responds to Husband's argument by contending that it "is not
 supported by any case law, fact or logical argument," but Wife
 does not explain why Husband's argument is wrong. We conclude
 that under the circumstances presented, the Family Court's award
 to Husband of Policy 80004, over which he is unable to exert any
 control, was indeed illusory and constituted error. We therefore
 vacate the Divorce Decree to the extent that it awarded Policy
 80004 to Husband and assigned the value of Policy 80004 to
 Husband in its property division calculation.
 
VI. Husband's Pre-Marital 
Investment Account Holdings
 
Husband argues that the Family Court erred in failing
 
to credit him with the value of investment accounts he owned at
 the date of marriage as part of his capital contribution to the
 marital partnership. Husband was unable to present evidence of
 the precise value of his investment accounts on November 20,
 1993, the date of marriage. However, he presented evidence of
 his account balances at the end of 1993 and his account
 transactions during that year, and he explained how he used the
 available account information to extrapolate the value of his
 investment accounts, which he determined to be $169,546 at the
 date of marriage. The Family Court, citing the lack of
 documentary evidence showing the specific values for Husband's
 
10The Family Court's findings of fact erroneously list the cash
surrender value of Policy 80004 as $63,627.66.
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
account holdings on the date of marriage, concluded that Husband
 
was not entitled to any credit for the value of his investment
 accounts at the date of marriage. In effect, the Family Court
 valued the investment accounts Husband owned at the date of
 marriage at $0. 
Although Husband was unable to prove the precise value
 
of his investment accounts on the date of marriage, there was no
 dispute that he owned investment accounts with substantial value
 at the date of marriage. We conclude that the Family Court erred
 in failing to credit Husband with any amount for his investment
 accounts at the date of marriage. On remand, the Family Court
 shall use the available evidence to determine a reasonable value
 for Husband's investment accounts at the date of marriage.
 
A.
 
Husband was entitled to reimbursement for capital 
contributions he made to the marital partnership in the form of pre-martial investment accounts he owned at the date of marriage. See Baker v. Bielski, 124 Hawai
'i 455, 459, 248 P.3d 221, 225 
(App. 2011) ("[E]ach partner is entitled to be repaid his or her contributions to the partnership property[.]" (internal quotation marks, citation, and block quote format omitted)). 
Prior to trial, Wife agreed that Husband "may have
 
owned investment accounts at date of marriage whose value has not
 yet been established." In a property division chart that Wife
 attached to her settlement conference statement, Wife proposed
 that these investment accounts be valued at $157,341.18 at the
 date of marriage.
 
At trial, Husband introduced Exhibit 3P, a 46-page
 
exhibit which consisted of (1) a table prepared by Husband
 showing his proposed valuation at the date of marriage of seven
 investment accounts he owned and (2) supporting statements from
 each account. The account statements showed account transactions
 and balances over a number of years, including the account
 balance at the end of 1993 (the year of marriage) and account
 transactions, number of shares, and share prices at various times
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
near to but not on the date of marriage. Husband explained how
 
he used the account statements to extrapolate the number of
 shares he owned in each investment account and the value of those
 shares at the date of marriage, in preparing the table showing
 his proposed valuation of his investment accounts on the date of
 marriage. The table in Husband's Exhibit 3P valued his
 investment accounts at the date of marriage at $163,979.20, which
 Husband amended to $169,546 in his trial testimony. Wife did not
 dispute the authenticity of Husband's account statements, but
 objected to Husband's proposed extrapolated valuations because
 the account statements did not provide the value of the accounts
 on the date of marriage. 
The Family Court found that the account statements did
 
not identify any specific values for Husband's investment
 holdings as of the date of marriage and that there was no
 credible evidence of Husband's proposed valuations of his
 premarital stocks and mutual funds on the date of marriage. The
 Family Court therefore concluded that Husband failed to introduce
 sufficient evidence of his premarital securities holdings to
 justify giving him a capital contribution credit.
 
B.
 
The record establishes that there was no dispute that
 
Husband owned substantial investment accounts at the date of
 marriage. Wife did not dispute the authenticity of the account
 statements Husband introduced, which showed that his accounts had
 substantial value both before and shortly after the date of
 marriage. Indeed, Wife agreed that Husband "may have owned
 investment accounts at date of marriage," and she proposed a
 valuation for these accounts as $157,341.18 at the date of
 marriage in the property division chart she attached to her
 settlement conference statement. 
We conclude that the Family Court erred in relying on
 
Husband's inability to establish the precise value of his
 investment accounts at the date of marriage to deny Husband any
 credit for his premarital investment accounts. While the Family
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court was entitled to consider the absence of precise valuations
 
in determining a fair valuation for Husband's accounts, it could
 not use the absence of precise valuations to justify denying
 Husband any credit for his accounts, and effectively valuing the
 accounts at $0. The undisputed account statements provided the
 Family Court with a clear basis for determining a reasonable
 valuation for Husband's investment accounts. We direct the
 Family Court on remand to use the available evidence to determine
 a reasonable value for Husband's investment accounts at the date
 of marriage.
 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the provisions of
 
the Divorce Decree that relate to, or are affected by our
 decision regarding, the division of the Maui Property, the award
 of Policy 80004, and the valuation of the investment accounts
 owned by Husband at the date or marriage, and we remand the case
 for further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion. 
On remand, the Family Court will be entitled to make all
 necessary adjustments in its property division to address the
 errors we have determined were made by the Family Court in this
 appeal. We affirm the Divorce Decree in all other respects. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 31, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Peter Van Name Esser 
Edward R. Lebb for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
R. Steven Geshell for Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
25
 