NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000932
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
PARIS NEWBERRY, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 13-1-0028)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Paris Newberry (Newberry) appeals
 
from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's (Circuit Court's)1
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered on June 27, 2014
 
(Judgment). After a jury trial, Newberry was convicted of two
 
counts, Abuse of Family or Household Members, in violation of
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 709-906(1) (2014), and Abuse of
 
Family or Household Members HRS ยง 709-906(1) and (5) (2014).
 
Newberry raises four points of error on appeal,
 
contending that: (1) the Circuit Court erred when it denied his
 
motion for mistrial when the complaining witness (CW) testified
 
twice that she was threatened by Newberry, in violation of the
 
court's ruling on a motion in limine; (2) the Circuit Court
 plainly erred when it failed to sua sponte declare a mistrial
 when the court observed CW sobbing and crying as she left the
 
1
 The Honorable Judge Edward H. Kubo presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
courtroom, which caused several jurors to turn their heads and
 
look at her as she departed; (3) the Circuit Court erred when it
 denied Newberry's second motion for mistrial when CW testified
 that she saw Newberry holding a bolo knife when he first arrived
 at the house, purportedly in violation of the court's ruling on
 the motion in limine; and (4) the cumulative effect of CW's
 alleged misconduct amounted to prejudice too substantial for any
 cautionary instructions to overcome.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Newberry's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Newberry argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
denying his motion for mistrial when CW testified that she had
 been threatened by Newberry, in violation of the court's ruling
 in limine. Newberry argues that CW's testimony concerning prior
 threats substantially prejudiced his right to a fair trial,
 notwithstanding the Circuit Court's instructions to the jury.
 
In determining whether a witness's improper comments
 
warrant a new trial, the reviewing court considers: (1) "the
 nature of the misconduct;" (2) "the promptness of a curative
 instruction;" and (3) "the strength or weakness of the evidence
 against the defendant." State v. Samuel, 74 Haw. 141, 148-49,
 
838 P.2d 1374, 1378 (1992) (quoting State v. Senteno, 69 Haw.
 363, 366, 742 P.2d 369, 372 (1987)).
 
In the present case, the Circuit Court granted
 
Newberry's motion in limine to exclude testimonial or documentary
 evidence of Newberry's bad acts, pursuant to Hawaii Rules of
 Evidence (HRE) Rule 404. The following testimony constitutes the
 
alleged misconduct: 
[Defense counsel]:  Did you allow Mr. Newberry to
take Herbert to things that he had to go to, like

let's say he had to go to get his hair cut? 
[CW]: I'm sorry, can I response to that? 

[Defense counsel]:  Yeah, you can.

 
[CW]: The reason for that was because -- am I

allowed to? 
2

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Court]:  Yes. 
[CW]: He was already threatening me prior to
this July 14th incident. That's one of the reason why

I cant -- there are times that I can't do my
responsibility with Herbert. There's few times that,
yes, I remember he did took Herbert to the hair cut
because of the reason that I --
[Defense counsel]: Okay. Wait, wait. So you let
him stay with Mr. Newberry even after breaking up from

February '13, you let him stay with Mr. Newberry on
July 14th and he's threatening you?
 
[CW]: I ask him to leave. 

[Defense counsel]:  No. Did Herbert ask him to

leave? 
[CW]: What I remember, that Herbert was asking

the nephew -- no, I'm sorry, the niece to take care
the situation, like to write a letter to Paris to move
out the property. 
[Defense counsel]: Okay. Well, I'll move on,

because -- isn't it true that Mr. Newberry had to take
Mr. Won on occasion to his things because you
couldn't, correct?
 
[CW]: As I remember, sir, only those -- the hair

cut time, that one particular time that I cant get
there because Paris was threatening me. 
The first factor requires consideration of the nature
 
of the misconduct. The record reflects CW's hesitation when
 
responding to defense counsel's questions. On two occasions in
 this exchange, CW asks whether she can respond to the question. 
It is only after CW receives confirmation from both defense
 counsel and the Court that she testified about the prior threats. 
Indeed, after her first mention of the prior threats, defense
 counsel specifically asked, ". . . you let him stay with Mr.
 Newberry on July 14th and he's threatening you?" It does not
 appear that CW's testimony was a blatant attempt to violate the
 Court's ruling on the motion in limine; on the contrary, CW was
 clearly concerned about whether she was permitted to respond. 
The second reference to Newberry's threat followed defense
 counsel's repeat of essentially the same question that elicited
 the first reference. We conclude that the witness's "misconduct" 
appeared to be inadvertent and was not egregious. 
As to the second factor, a curative instruction was
 
provided the following day, when the issue was raised (for the
 
3
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
first time) by the defense. In Webster, the Hawai 'i Supreme 
Court held that the trial court's curative instructions, made at 
the end of the witness's testimony and after a recess, were sufficiently prompt. State v. Webster, 94 Hawai
'i 241, 248-49, 
11 P.3d 466, 474 (2000). Here, defense counsel did not immediately object to the testimony concerning prior threats. It was not until the following day that defense counsel orally moved for a mistrial. The Circuit Court denied the motion, but then instructed the jury that it was striking CW's testimony "that she could not take [Herbert] to other places because [D]efendant had in essence threatened her in the past." The Circuit Court 
informed the jury that such testimony was irrelevant and further 
instructed the jury to "absolutely disregard that part of the testimony in [its] consideration of th[e] cases as jurors" meaning that the jurors "must in no way consider that part of the testimony . . . and that [they] will completely disregard it in [their] deliberations of this case." In our view, the Circuit Court's curative instructions to the jury, which were delivered prior to the end of CW's testimony, were sufficiently prompt and very clear. 
The third factor requires consideration of the strength
 
or weakness of the evidence against Newberry. The State's case
 primarily depended on the testimony of CW and her young daughter,
 AA. CW testified that Newberry had choked her neck three times
 and had hit her in the abdomen with his knee. CW also testified
 
about the contents of a letter that Newberry put in her car
 
immediately after the incident. In the letter, which was in
 
evidence, Defendant wrote that he was "about to snap" and "you
 
are walking on dangerous ground." AA testified that Newberry
 "got mad" and choked CW by the neck with his two hands. AA
 testified that CW "was moving her lips. She was trying to say
 words, because I heard 'eeks,' coming out." AA testified that
 Newberry then "kicked [CW] three times in the stomach with his
 knee[.]" The State presented exhibits depicting a scratch to
 CW's neck and bruising to her arm and shoulder, as well as
 testimony from the examining physician who confirmed that the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
injuries he observed on CW's neck were consistent with the
 
mechanism she described concerning Newberry grabbing her neck,
 that he did not find any obvious signs of abdominal trauma, but
 that being kneed in the abdomen would not necessarily leave
 obvious signs. In addition, the evidence included a video
 recording from inside the house on the day of the incident, the
 audio portion of which adds to the strength of the evidence
 against Newberry. Based on our review of the record, there was
 ample evidence to support the jury's verdict that Newberry
 physically abused CW. 
After considering the three Samuel factors, we conclude
 
that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in denying
 Newberry's motion for mistrial based on CW's testimony.
 
(2) 
Although no motion or objection was raised below,
 
Newberry argues on appeal that the Circuit Court erred in failing
 to declare a mistrial sua sponte when it witnessed CW sobbing and
 crying as she was leaving the courtroom. The trial transcript
 includes the following:
 
[Court]:  The Court notes for the record that the Court
instructed the prosecutor to go outside and isolate the
complaining witness from the jury, because as the
complaining witness was leaving the stand, she began to
break down emotionally, pulled a tissue from the tissue box,
and before exiting this courtroom, she began an emotional
outburst in terms of sobbing and crying, which was clearly
heard not only by this Court, but caused several jurors to
turn their heads looking at her as she departed this
courtroom. That's why the Court instructed the prosecutor to
get her into a witness room hopefully and out of the jury's
path before the jury could be sent out to lunch . . .
 
[Defense counsel]:  Well, Your Honor, I realize that
there was an outburst, I was totally distracted with my own
ongoings, and I appreciate the Judge's observations of what
had transpired. I hope that it wasn't done by the
complainant in a manner that was contrived. 
[Court]:  I hope not, and I don't think it was. But
it's not good to have instances like that done in front of
the jury because it plays on emotions, and it could
backfire. But its basically feeding the jury information not
during a court proceeding, and I consider that to be
improper.
 
Under these circumstances, I'm going to deny any motions for
a mistrial, but I want -- and again I find no fault in the
prosecutor in this respect, she has no control over these
witnesses who come into court charged emotionally because of the
events which they perceive may have happened. 
5

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In State v. Lagat, 97 Hawai 'i 492, 496, 40 P.3d 894, 
898 (2002), Defendant argued that the sight of complainant's 
crying, throughout her testimony, so inflamed the jury that his right to a fair trial was compromised. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court 
acknowledged that other jurisdictions have indicated that "outbursts of emotion by witnesses do not automatically prejudice a defendant's right to a fair trial." Id. at 497, 40 P.3d at 
899. Ultimately, the Lagat court held that the Defendant was not
 
entitled to a mistrial due to complaining witness's crying. Id. 
As in Lagat, Newberry's bald assertion that he was
 
denied the right to a fair trial based on CW's emotional
 outburst, "standing alone, is insufficient to establish a prima
 facie showing of prejudice." Id. at 497, 40 P.3d at 899. In
 
Lagat, the Supreme Court refused to second guess the trial court
 concerning the prejudice, if any, that occurred as a result of
 CW's crying. Id. Although the Circuit Court did not provide any
 
instruction to the jury, the Circuit Court did instruct the
 prosecutor to isolate the witness from the jury and discussed the
 potential for prejudice. The court noted that CW's emotional
 outburst did not appear to be contrived. In addition, CW's
 tearful episode occurred as she was leaving the courtroom, as
 opposed to during her testimony, making it unclear what
 engendered her reaction. There is no evidence in the record that
 CW repeated this behavior when she later resumed her testimony. 
Based on our review of the record, we conclude that the Circuit
 Court did not plainly err in failing to declare a mistrial sua
 sponte.
 
(3) Newberry argues that the CW's mention of a bolo
 
knife violated the Circuit Court's ruling in limine regarding bad
 acts and deprived Newberry of his right to a fair trial. 
Newberry argues that, although the mere fact that Newberry was
 holding a knife does not constitute a prior bad act, the
 implication was that the CW felt threatened. The State notes
 that the CW did not testify that Newberry brandished the bolo
 knife in a threatening manner or that he threatened her in any
 way with it.
 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On cross-examination, CW testified "that when she
 
arrived at Herbert's house, she saw [Defendant] holding a bolo
 
knife[.]" The exchange took place as follows: 
[Defense counsel]:  Okay. When you first got to the
residence, where was Mr. Newberry? 
[CW]: He was in the garage, sir. 

[Defense counsel]: Where exactly in the garage? 

[CW]: I recall he was standing by the corner of that
cement wall, against the wall going inside the house where
the door is. And I recall as well --
[Defense counsel]:  He was -- wait, let me see if
I got you correctly. He was standing next to the
screen door that's leading into the house? 
[CW]: Not the screen door, sir. 

[Defense counsel]:  Okay. Where? 

[CW]: In my recollection after looking back to

that, he was standing against the wall. 
[Defense counsel]:  Which wall do you mean? 

[CW]: By that corner of the wall. I recall he

was holding a bolo knife that was --
Defense counsel objected and asked to approach the
 
bench. Defense counsel then moved for a mistrial. In response,
 
the State requested that the Circuit Court deny the motion and to
 instruct the jury to strike CW's testimony regarding the bolo
 knife. The Circuit Court declined to grant a mistrial, noting
 that: 
In this particular case, it's my take from the
evidence presented thus far, the complaining witness has a
cultural inability to articulate due to what I perceive as
her cultural Filipino national background in trying to
enunciate herself clearly to a question, whichever question
that's being asked. That's my take, and when pressed, it
seems to me as if she seems to feel that she needs to
 explain.
 
Now, in this particular case it's also my take
that the positions of the parties, where they were at
when she entered the garage was asked and answered;
that's an area that had been touched previously on
cross examination. And I don't know if the witness
 believed that more explanation was necessary. 
Now, having said that, I turn to the fact that
the defendant is entitled to a fair trial, and
mistakes whether intentional, inadvertent or just
based on communication or error, may still affect the
defendant's due process rights before the Court. I
 
7

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
agree with the defense attorney that the cumulation of
these mistakes is growing, but I do not yet believe
that the aggregate number of mistakes have affected
the rights to such an extent where a fair trial still
cannot be had. Under these circumstances, the motion
for mistrial is hereby denied.
 
The following day, prior to the resumption of
 
testimony, the Court struck CW's testimony "as to what she might
 
have seen in Mr. Newberry's hands as she entered the carport;
 namely, a bolo knife or something like that." The court said,
 "That's irrelevant," and instructed the jury to "absolutely
 disregard that part of the testimony."
 
We first consider the nature of the alleged misconduct. 
The question that sparked defense counsel's objection was "which
 wall do you mean?" The question itself was apparently intended
 to clarify Defendant's physical position when CW arrived at the
 house. Although the CW's mention of a bolo knife could have
 raised a question in the juror's minds, it did not necessarily
 create an inference that Newberry was threatening CW with the
 bolo knife. The CW's mention of the bolo knife seemed
 inadvertent and, without more, did not necessarily violate the
 Circuit Court's ruling on Newberry's motion in limine. 
As to the second factor, the Circuit Court promptly
 
provided a clear, curative instruction to the jury at the
 beginning of the next day, after the end of the CW's testimony. 
Finally, as discussed, there was ample evidence to
 
support the jury's verdict that Newberry physically abused CW.
 Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 discretion in denying Newberry's motion for mistrial based on
 CW's brief testimony that Newberry was holding a bolo knife.
 
(4) Finally, Newberry argues that, although each error 
standing alone may not warrant a mistrial, the cumulative effect of CW's testimony and actions resulted in bias and prejudice against Newberry that deprived him of a fair trial. The Hawai
'i 
Supreme Court has recognized that the cumulative weight of errors may create such an atmosphere of bias and prejudice so as to deprive the defendant of a fair trial. State v. Amorin, 58 Haw. 
623, 631, 574 P.2d 895, 900 (1978). This court has also 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
articulated that a motion for mistrial may be granted when there
 
is an "occurrence of such character and magnitude that a party is
 denied the right to a fair trial." Stewart v. Brennan, 7 Haw.
 
App. 136, 149, 748 P.2d 816, 825 (1988) (citation omitted ).
 
However, for the reasons stated above, and considering
 
the record in its entirety, we conclude that CW's testimony and
 actions were not of "such character and magnitude," and the
 related potential harm to Newberry was not so substantial, that
 Newberry was denied his right to a fair trial. 
Therefore, the Circuit Court's June 27, 2014 Judgment
 
is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 30, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Michael J. Park 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Stephen K. TsushimaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 