NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000892
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
IN THE INTEREST OF GC
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(FC-S NO. 18-0036)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
Father-Appellant (Father), a self-represented litigant,
appeals from the October 16, 2018 "Order Re: Chapter 587A H.R.S.
as Amended" (Amended Order), entered by the Family Court of the
Third Circuit (family court),  which awarded foster custody of
Father's child, GC, to the Department of Human Services (DHS).
Father also challenges the family court's ordering of the
September 11, 2018 Family Service Plan (9/11/18 Family Service
Plan) prepared and submitted by DHS.21
1The Honorable Dakota K.M. Frenz presided.
2The Family Service Plan attached to Father's Notice of Appeal is
dated September 21, 2018.  In his Opening Brief, Father refers to the Family
Service Plan dated November 13, 2018.  The record, however, does not indicate
that the family court ever ordered the September 21, 2018 Family Service Plan
or the November 13, 2018 Family Service Plan.  It appears that DHS submitted
the November 13, 2018 Family Service Plan to the family court on November 15,
2018.  On that same day, the family court held a periodic review hearing.  The
record does not contain a transcript for that hearing, but the minutes for
that hearing do not indicate that the family court ordered the November 13,
2018 Family Service Plan.
The minutes for the September 21, 2018 service plan hearing
reflect that the family court ordered the 9/11/18 Family Service Plan.  As theNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Father argues the family court erred by awarding DHS
foster custody of GC (1) based on an erroneous presumption that a
parent who is the sole legal and physical custodian of a child
and out on bail pending a criminal trial that would not occur for
months, is irrebuttably unable to care for the child, (2)  after
erroneously prohibiting Dr. Reneau Kennedy from testifying at the
contested-jurisdiction hearing, (3)  based on a clearly erroneous
finding that there was reasonable cause to believe placement in
foster custody was necessary to protect GC from imminent harm,
(4) after erroneously applying a preponderance-of-the-evidence
standard of proof, (5) based on insufficient evidence, and (6)
where neither DHS's "argument" nor the family court's oral or
written orders fully considered the entire range of factors set
forth in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 587A-7, as required.
Father argues the family court erred by ordering the
9/11/18 Family Service Plan because it erroneously (1)
recommended continuing foster custody rather than returning GC to
Father, (2)  recommended that Father participate in a
Comprehensive Counseling and Support Services Assessment (CCSSA)
and Comprehensive Psychological Evaluation (Psychological
Evaluation), (3)  failed to recommend a CCSSA and Psychological
Evaluation for GC's mother, Mother-Appellee (Mother),  (4) failed
to recommend unsupervised visits between GC and Father, and (5)
granted an "assigned therapist" authority to approve visitation.3
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
substance of Father's challenges raised on appeal are relevant to the 9/11/18
Family Service Plan, we believe he intends to challenge that document here.
3The 9/11/18 Family Service Plan was between DHS and Father and did
not include Mother.  Although Mother is involved in the November 13, 2018
Family Service Plan, which Father references in his Opening Brief, as we
discussed supra in footnote 2, the record does not reflect that the family
court ordered the November 13, 2018 Family Service Plan and Father's challenge
is thus limited to the 9/11/18 Family Service Plan.  Therefore, we decline to
address this point of error because it pertains to an issue not covered by the
9/11/18 Family Service Plan.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Father's
appeal as follows:
I.
Father argues there was insufficient evidence to divest
him of custody of GC.  Related to this argument is his contention
that findings of fact (FOFs) "A"-"F" and part of "K"  are
erroneous.4
A. FOF "D" is wrong.
Father argues the family court erroneously found in FOF
"D" that there was reasonable cause to believe placement in
foster custody was necessary to protect GC from imminent harm.
Father points out that "'[i]mminent harm' means that without
4FOFs "A"-"F" and "K" provide, in relevant part:
A.Continuation in the family home would be contrary to the
immediate welfare of the child;
B.Under the circumstances presented in this case, the DHS
made reasonable efforts to prevent or eliminate the need
for removal of the child from the family home;
C.Under the circumstances presented in this case, the DHS
made reasonable efforts to finalize the permanency plan
which, in this case, is reunification;
D.There is reasonable cause to believe that placement in
foster custody is necessary to protect the child from
imminent harm;
E.Presently, [Father], cannot provide a safe family home
for the child, even with the assistance of a service
plan;
F.Based upon the testimony of the witnesses, report(s)
submitted pursuant to §§ 587A-7 and 587A-18, HRS, as
amended, the exhibits that were received into evidence,
and the record herein, there is an adequate basis to
sustain the petition in that the child's physical or
psychological health or welfare has been harmed or is
subject to threatened harm by the acts or omissions of
the child's family--to wit:  on May 7, 2018, [Father]
was arrested by law enforcement officials and taken into
custody, pursuant to an arrest warrant, in CR. NO. 18-
0059, USA v. [Father];
. . . .
K. The current placement of the child is . . .
appropriate[.]
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
intervention within the next ninety days, there is reasonable
cause to believe that harm to the child will occur or reoccur."
HRS § 587A-4 (2018).  At trial, the family court was clear that a
presumption of innocence applied.  However, separate and apart
and without any facts in the record before this court, the family
court took into consideration the possibility that Father's
pretrial bail release could be revoked.  This presupposition
without evidentiary support is clearly erroneous.  Because FOF
"D" is based on this clearly erroneous presupposition, it is
wrong.5
B. FOFs "A," "E," and "K" are wrong and there was insufficient
evidence to support the family court's award of foster
custody as to Father.
 Because FOF "D" is wrong, there is insufficient
evidence to support the family court's conclusions in FOFs "A,"
"E," and "K," and they are wrong.   Therefore, there is
insufficient evidence to support the family court's order of
foster custody to DHS as to Father.76
5FOF "D" is actually a conclusion of law (COL) and we review it
according to the right/wrong standard.  In re Doe, 95 Hawai#i 183, 190, 20 P.3d
616, 623 (2001).
6FOFs "A," "E," and "K" are actually COLs and we review them
according to the right/wrong standard.  Id.
7In light of our conclusion that the family court erred in awarding
DHS foster custody of GC as to Father, we need not reach Father's remaining
points of error as they also relate to the custody determination as to Father.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
II.
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Family Court
of the Third Circuit's award of foster custody of GC to DHS as to
Father in the October 16, 2018 "Order Re: Chapter 587A H.R.S. as
Amended" is reversed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 4, 2020.
On the briefs:
Father,
Self-Represented, Appellant.
Asami M. Williams,
Julio C. Herrera,
and Erin L.S. Yamashiro,
Deputy Attorneys General,
for DHS, Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
5