 
      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI R EPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000167 09-APR-2026 07:58 AM Dkt. 72 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000167 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
STATE OF 
HAWAI ‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
EDMUND POLIDO, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3DCW-23-0000301) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.) 
In this appeal, Defendant-Appellant Edmund Polido 
(Polido) challenges his trespass conviction on grounds that his 
conduct was constitutionally protected as a native Hawaiian 
practice, the improper denial of a continuance, and for 
ineffective assistance by his trial defense counsel. We affirm. 
Polido appeals from the February 16, 2024 "Judgment 
and Notice of Entry of Judgment," ( Judgment ) entered by the 
District Court of the Third Circuit ( District Court ).1 Following 
1 The Honorable Kimberly Tsuchiya presided.  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
  
 a bench trial, Polido was convicted of second-degree trespass 
for entering Kap āpala Ranch on Hawaii ‘ island. 
On appeal, Polido raises five points of error ( POEs),2 
contending that the District Court erred by (1) denying Polido's 
motion to dismiss, which argued that his conduct of hunting pig 
constituted a native Hawaiian practice under State v. Hanapi, 89 
Hawaiʻi 177, 970 P.2d 485 (1998),  and challenging certain 
findings of fact ( FOFs) and conclusions of law ( COLs) in the 
order denying the motion;  (2) denying Polido's trial counsel's 
continuance of the trial "to secure a relevant and material 
witness"; and (3) finding Polido guilty when sufficient evidence 
established Polido engaged in a constitutionally protected native Hawaiian practice. Polido additionally contends that (4) his trial counsel violated his "fundamental right to 43
2 We have numbered Polido's points "A" through "E". See Hawai ʻi 
Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4) (requiring numbered POEs). 
3   Hanapi sets forth three factors ( Hanapi factors ) that defendants
asserting a constitutionally protected native Hawaiian practice must show:
(1) they qualify as a native Hawaiian "within the guidelines set out in" Pub.
Access Shoreline Haw. v. Haw. Cnty. Plan. Comm'n ( PASH), 79 Hawai ʻi 425, 448-
49, 903 P.2d 1246, 1269-70 (1995); (2) their "claimed right is
constitutionally protected as a customary or traditional native Hawaiianpractice"; and (3) "the exercise of the right occurred on undeveloped or
'less than fully developed property.'" 89 
Hawaiʻi at 185-86, 970 P.2d at 493-
94 (citations omitted). "Once a criminal defendant satisfies the three-prong
showing required by Hanapi, there remains a balancing test before the
defendant's assertion of the native Hawaiian privilege negates any possiblecriminal conviction." State v. Palama, No. CAAP-12-0000434, 2015 WL 8566696,
at *8 (Haw. App. Dec. 11, 2015) (mem. op.) (brackets omitted) (quoting State 
v. Pratt, 127 Hawai ʻi 206, 216, 277 P.3d 300, 310 (2012)). "In performing the
balancing test, a court must look to the totality of circumstances and
balance the State's interest in regulating the activity against thedefendant's interests in conducting the traditional or customary practice"
(balancing test ). Id. (citing Pratt, 127 Hawai ʻi at 216-18, 277 P.3d at 310-
12).  
4 Polido does not present specific argument related to his
challenges to FOFs 14-16 and COL 27. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). We address COL 
26 infra. 
2  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
 
  
 effective assistance of counsel"; and (5) "[t]he multitude of 
errors" set forth supra "had the cumulative effect" of denying 
Polido his "due process right to a fundamentally fair trial." 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Polido's points of error as follows. 
On January 31, 2023, Plaintiff-Appellee State of 
Hawaiʻi (State) charged Polido with "knowingly enter[ing] or 
remain[ing] unlawfully in or upon premises, located at 
Kap[ā
]pala Ranch, which were fenced or enclosed in a manner 
designed to exclude intruders," committing second-degree 
criminal trespass in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) 
§ 708-814(1)(a). Following a July 13, 2023 hearing on Polido's motion to dismiss and defense continuations of trial to secure witnesses, trial was conducted on November 17, 2023 and February 
16, 2024, after which Polido was found guilty. 
1. Sufficiency of evidence for conviction 
Polido argues he should not have been found guilty 
because he presented sufficient evidence at trial to establish a constitutionally protected native Hawaiian practice. Polido 
asserts that both he and Palikapu Dedman ( Dedman) testified that 
"hunting has been traditionally and customarily practiced in the Kap
āpala Ranch area for generations." 
The record reflects that the State did not present any 
evidence at trial because the parties "stipulated to all the essential facts necessary to warrant conviction[,]" similar to 
the procedure in Pratt. 
127 Hawaiʻi at 212, 277 P.3d at 306. 
Here, the trial focused on Polido's attempt to prove that his 
trespass offense was a constitutionally protected native Hawaiian practice. The parties' factual stipulation established 
3  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
 that Polido's trespass "occurred within an area known as 
Kapāpala Ranch"; "the entire perimeter of Kap āpala  Ranch is 
fenced"; there are two forest reserves "across the mauka perimeter of [Kap āpala] [R]anch" where hunting is allowed; 
Kapāpala Ranch has a procedure to permit access through "gates that allow the public access to the reserves"; access through Kapāpala Ranch's gates is allowed for members of the public who register with Kap āpala Ranch and call in the morning of the day 
they want access to obtain the gate code; Polido was aware of the procedure to obtain public access to Kap āpala Ranch and had 
previously registered; and Polido "entered Kap āpala Ranch" on 
July 11, 2023 with his cousin and shot two pigs with a rifle. Thus, similar to the procedural posture of Pratt, this court must affirm the trespass conviction unless Polido "can prove his defense that the privilege for native Hawaiian practice applies 
in this case." See id.; Hanapi, 89 Hawai ʻi at 183, 970 P.2d at 
491 ("When a criminal defendant claims to have been engaged in a 
constitutionally protected activity, the burden is placed on him or her to show that his or her conduct fell within the prophylactic scope of the constitution's provision.") (citation omitted). Here, the District Court found Polido guilty and concluded the constitutional privilege did not apply based on 
the second Hanapi factor.
 Assuming, arguendo , that Polido satisfied the three 
Hanapi factors, a defendant asserting a constitutionally 
protected native Hawaiian practice must also prevail on the balancing test. See Palama, 2015 WL 856696 at *8. In this 
regard, the State argues in its Answering Brief that Polido did not show that his exercise of the claimed privilege outweighed 
the State's interest as follows: 
4
  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
  
 Even assuming [Polido] satisfied the three factors of
Hanapi, under the totality of the circumstances his
exercise of the native Hawaiian practice was unreasonable.[Polido] went hunting without consultation or notice on anactive, working ranch, and he did so with a firearm. . . .He failed to utilize the valid method of hunting in thearea of the ranch, which he had utilized previously[.]
. . . 
Polido's Reply Brief responds that Hanapi requires a balancing 
"of the State's regulatory interests," and that here, the private lessees "– not the State – are regulating conduct." (Emphasis omitted.) 
Polido asserts a constitutional privilege. "We answer 
questions of constitutional law by exercising our own independent judgment based on the facts of the case." Pratt, 
127 Hawaiʻ i at 212, 277 P.3d at 306. "[W]e review questions of 
constitutional law under the right/wrong standard." Hanapi, 89 Hawaiʻi
 at 182, 970 P.2d at 490 (citation omitted). "It is only 
after the prosecution meets [its] burden" of proving the crime 
charged "that any offered affirmative defense becomes relevant." 
Pratt, 127 Hawai ʻi at 212, 277 P.3d at 306. Thus, this court 
"must affirm the judgment" of conviction unless Polido "can 
prove his defense that the privilege for native Hawaiian practices applies in his case." Id.
Here, Polido was charged with one count of Criminal 
Trespass in the Second Degree under HRS § 708-814(1)(a) (2014 & 2019 Supp.), which provides that "a person commits the offense of criminal trespass in the second degree if . . . [t]he person knowingly enters or remains unlawfully in or upon premises that are enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders or are fenced[.]" 
The record reflects that Kap ā
pala Ranch's property was 
fenced. 
The record also shows, however, that Kap āpala Ranch 
permitted daily public access through three gates to adjoining 
5  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   lands where hunting was allowed. Polido was aware of the 
procedure for requesting access through Kap āpala  Ranch's gates 
and had previously registered for such access. Polido testified 
at trial that he felt he should be able to access the area 
without restriction and at any time, to exercise his native 
Hawaiian gathering privilege and that "there shouldn't be a gate there." 
On this record, we conclude Polido's native Hawaiian 
practice was not "reasonably exercised," and the balance weighs in favor of the State's interest in prohibiting unlawful entry 
on fenced property, where Polido made no attempt to avail 
himself of the procedures available to lawfully enter Kap āpala 
Ranch's property. See State v. Armitage, 132 
Hawaiʻi 36, 54-55, 
319 P.3d 1044, 1062-63 (2014) (affirming defendants' convictions for illegal entry into a protected reserve, where defendants "did not 'reasonably exercise' their constitutionally protected 
native Hawaiian rights" because they "made no attempt to avail 
themselves of the applicable procedures to obtain lawful entry"; and "the balance weighs in favor of the State's interest in protecting the health and safety" of those traveling to the 
reserve (brackets and citation omitted)); Pratt, 127 Hawai ʻi at 
218, 277 P.3d at 312 (affirming conviction for residing in a 
closed area of a state park, where "the balancing of interests" 
weighed in favor of the State's interest in limiting visitors to the park "for health and safety reasons, and to protect park resources[,]" and against the defendant's claimed native Hawaiian privilege of unrestricted access, where the defendant "did not show any attempts to engage in his native Hawaiian 
practice within the limits of state law"); State v. Au, No. 
CAAP-23-0000002, 2025 WL 3046208, at *2-3 (Haw. App. Oct. 31, 2025) (SDO) (affirming conviction for possessing an illegal 
6  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
  
  
  fishing net, where "the balance weighed in favor of the State's interest to regulate net size and protect smaller fish" and did not "unreasonably  regulate" the exercise of defendant's claimed 
native Hawaiian right, and where the defendant did not show that 
he attempted to fish "in accordance with applicable regulations 
by using a scoop net or obtain a permit to use a fine mesh throw net" (citations omitted)). 
Thus, there was sufficient evidence to support 
Polido's trespass conviction, where Polido did not prevail on the balancing test necessary to "prove his defense that the 
privilege for native Hawaiian practices applie[d]" in this case. 
See Pratt, 127 Hawai ʻi at 212, 277 P.3d at 306. 
For the same reasons discussed above, we conclude that 
based on the record pertinent to the motion to dismiss, the 
circuit court did not abuse its discretion in denying Polido's motion to dismiss. 
2. Ineffective assistance of counsel Polido argues that trial counsel was ineffective for 
failing "to prepare evidence to support" the motion to dismiss and for failing "to request a continuance" of the hearing to engage in such preparation. These alleged omissions do not establish ineffective assistance because they did not prevent 
Polido from presenting his defense at trial. See State v.
DeLeon, 131 Hawai ʻi 463, 478-79, 319 P.3d 382, 397-98 (2014) 
(requiring that the "specific errors or omissions reflecting 
counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence" result in "either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense" to establish ineffective 
assistance of counsel). 
Polido also argues that trial counsel provided 
ineffective assistance at trial for "fail[ing] to subpoena 
7  
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
   
  
 
 civilian and/or expert witnesses" to testify on "whether pig 
hunting was a Native Hawaiian traditional and customary practice." We need not address this argument in light of our disposition above, where Polido's failure to prevail on the 
balancing test renders any challenge based on the second Hanapi 
factor immaterial. We also need not reach Polido's remaining POEs. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the February 16, 
2024 Judgment entered by the District Court of the Third Circuit. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai ‘i, April 9, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
 
Kirsha K.M. Durante, 
Court-Appointed Counsel,
Native Hawaiian Legal 
Corporation, 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
 
Charles E. Murray, III 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai ‘i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Chief Judge
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge
 
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry
Associate Judge
8 