NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000442 26-AUG-2024 07:51 AM Dkt. 67 SO 
CAAP-21-0000442 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I  
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DAKOTA HOLLAND-DORNATH, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1PC151001241) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(
By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Dakota Holland-Dornath (Holland-
Dornath
) appeals from the (1) May 5, 2021 Order of Resentencing, 
Revocation of Probation, Notice of Entry and (2) June 7, 2021 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Re: Motion for Revocation of Probation, Filed on February 11, 2021 (Order re 
Motion for Revocation), entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 
Holland-Dornath raises a single point of error on 
appeal, contending that the Circuit Court erred in granting 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawaii's [(State's)] February 11, 
2021 Motion for Revocation of Probation (Motion for Revocation) because none of the post-resentencing motions (except one filed 
on February 21, 2020) were tolling motions, and therefore 
1 The Honorable Matthew J. Viola presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Holland-Dornath's probationary term had expired before the Motion 
for Revocation was filed. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Holland-Dornath's point of error as follows: 
Holland-Dornath argues that HRS §§ 706-625(1), (4) 
(2014) and 706-627(1) (2014), read in pari materia, exclude "motions to modify" from motions that toll a defendant's probation. HRS § 706-625 provides, in pertinent part: 
§ 706-625 Revocation, modification of probation
conditions. (1) The court, on application of a probation
officer, the prosecuting attorney, the defendant, or on its
own motion, after a hearing, may revoke probation except asprovided in subsection (7), reduce or enlarge the conditionsof a sentence of probation, pursuant to the provisionsapplicable to the initial setting of the conditions and theprovisions of section 706-627. 
. . . . 
(4) The court may modify the requirements imposed on
the defendant or impose further requirements, if it findsthat such action will assist the defendant in leading alaw-abiding life. 
HRS § 706-627 provides: 
§ 706-627 Tolling of probation. (1) Upon the filing
of a motion to revoke a probation or a motion to enlarge theconditions imposed thereby, the period of probation shall betolled pending the hearing upon the motion and the decisionof the court. The period of tolling shall be computed fromthe filing date of the motion through and including thefiling date of the written decision of the court concerningthe motion for purposes of computation of the remaining
period of probation, if any. In the event the court fails 
to file a written decision upon the motion, the period shallbe computed by reference to the date the court makes adecision upon the motion in open court. During the periodof tolling of the probation, the defendant shall remainsubject to all terms and conditions of the probation exceptas otherwise provided by this chapter. 
(2) In the event the court, following hearing,
refuses to revoke the probation or grant the requestedenlargement of conditions thereof because the defendant'sfailure to comply therewith was excusable, the defendant may 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
be granted the period of tolling of the probation for
purposes of computation of the remaining probation, if any. 
This court recently rejected this argument in State v. 
Wilbur-Delima, CAAP-23-0000409, 2024 WL 3563240, *1 (Haw. App. 
July 29, 2024). Based on the reasoning set forth in Wilbur-Delima, we reiterate that a motion to modify probation that seeks to enlarge a condition of probation is a tolling motion. 
Like the appellant in Wilbur-Delima, Holland-Dornath 
had entered the HOPE Probation Program. Although the subject motions to modify Holland-Dornath's probation were not entitled as motions to enlarge sentence, in each instance, the State moved for an enlarged probation condition, i.e., more jail time was sought; Holland-Dornath stipulated to the violations of one or more conditions of probation, the motions were granted, and Holland-Dornath was ordered to serve additional jail time. Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not err in treating the State's motions to modify as tolling motions. 
Based on the foregoing, and this court's Opinion in 
Wilbur-Delima, the Circuit Court's May 5, 2021 Order of Resentencing and the June 7, 2021 Order re Motion for Revocation are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai#i, August 26, 2024. 
On the briefs: /s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Acting Chief Judge
Phyllis J. Hironaka,Deputy Public Defender, /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
for Defendant-Appellant. Associate Judge 
Donn Fudo, /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, Associate JudgeCity and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
3 