 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000562
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
DARIN YAMASHIRO, Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellee, v.
TERRY HAY, Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CIVIL CASE NO. 1RC10-1-3188)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/Appellant Terry Hay
 
(Hay) appeals from a District Court of the First Circuit,
 
Honolulu Division, (District Court) June 23, 2011 Judgment in
 favor of Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellee Darin
 Yamashiro (Yamashiro).
1 The District Court found that landlord
 
Yamashiro proved his damages by a preponderance of the evidence
 and was entitled to (1) damages for outstanding rent and damages
 due to tenant Hay's failure to maintain and care for the
 property, (2) attorneys' fees and court costs. The District
 court also credited Hay for a small claims judgment for withheld
 security deposit against Yamashiro, resulting in a total judgment
 
amount of $7,865.40 in favor of Yamashiro.
 
On appeal, Hay maintains that the District Court: (1)
 
erred in awarding Yamashiro damages due Hay's turning off the
 
power to the water sprinklers; (2) erred in concluding that
 Yamashiro's entries onto the property did not violate the lease
 or the Residential Landlord-Tenant Code (Landlord-Tenant Code),
 
1
 The Honorable Hilary Benson Gangnes presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
set forth in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 521 (2006 &
 
Supp. 2013); (3) erred in awarding damages for February 2010 rent
 after Yamashiro had seized possession of the property for his own
 use; (4) erred in denying Hay damages and awarding Yamashiro
 damages for Hay's alleged breach of the lease because Yamashiro
 engaged in self-help; and (5) exceeded its jurisdiction in
 exercising authority over Hay's security deposit and the small
 claims judgment.
 
After reviewing the record on appeal, the points
 
raised, the parties' arguments and the applicable legal
 authority, we resolve Hay's arguments as follows and affirm.
 
1. The District Court did not err in awarding
 
$1,050.00 for landscaping damage due to Hay turning off power to
 the water sprinklers. Hay argues that "[t]he District Court's
 award of damages for not watering the landscape is not supported
 by the evidence."
 
The District Court found that:
 
[A]lthough the lease clearly states that the defendant is
not responsible for the pool or the landscaping, [ 2
] the
damage to the plants here caused by what the Court views as,

and what I think any reasonable person would view as, Mr.
Hay unreasonably turning off the electricity -- the power
source to the sprinkler system and the pool pump.
 
Here, there is sufficient evidence to support the
 
District Court's findings that Hay unreasonably turned off the
 
electricity to the water sprinklers, resulting in the loss of
 about half of Yamashiro's 400 lawai ferns due to lack of water,
 and $1,050.00 in landscaping damage. Hay admitted to turning off
 the water sprinklers on January 29, 2010, and "did not turn them
 back on." Hay understood that when he turned off the water
 sprinklers, "[i]t would no longer be my water watering the
 landscaping." On February 3, 2010, when Hay gave Yamashiro's
 agent, CG&A, permission to go onto the property, he specifically
 instructed them not to turn on the electricity. When Yamashiro
 visited the property on February 8, 2010, the main circuit
 breaker and thus the sprinklers were off. Even where there is
 
2
 Under the "Tenant's Responsibilities" provision of the
Yamashiro/Hay lease, Hay "is responsible for ordinary maintenance including .
. . lawn/yard care." Moreover, Hay "is responsible for . . . any damage
caused by" him.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conflicting evidence in the record, we will not set aside a
 
determination of the trier of fact, here the trial judge, who had
 the opportunity to judge the credibility of the witnesses, unless
 it is clearly erroneous. Mitchell v. Branch, 45 Haw. 128, 139,
 
363 P.2d 969, 977 (1961). 
2. The District Court did not err in concluding that
 
Yamashiro's entries onto the property did not violate the
 landlord-tenant code or the lease. Hay argues that the District
 Court's conclusion that Yamashiro's entries onto the property
 
3
were permitted under the Landlord-Tenant Code  and the lease was
erroneous and that Yamashiro is thus not entitled to recover any
 damages for breach of the lease.
 
The District Court concluded that Yamashiro reasonably
 
went onto the property to ensure that there would not be any
 damage to the pool, sprinkler system or landscape in light of Hay
 turning off the electricity. The District Court further found
 that Hay had failed to show that Yamashiro unlawfully entered the
 
3
 HRS § 521-53 (2006), which allows a landlord to enter a dwelling
unit for limited purposes, provides:
 
[§521-53] Access. (a) The tenant shall not
unreasonably withhold the tenant's consent to the landlord
to enter into the dwelling unit in order to inspect the
premises; make necessary or agreed repairs, decorations,
alterations, or improvements; supply services as agreed; or
exhibit the dwelling unit to prospective purchasers,
mortgagees, or tenants.
 
(b) The landlord shall not abuse this right of access
nor use it to harass the tenant. 
Except in case of
emergency or where impracticable to do so, the landlord
shall give the tenant at least two days notice of the
landlord's intent to enter and shall enter only during
reasonable hours.
 
(c) The landlord shall have no other right of entry,
except by court order, unless the tenant appears to have

abandoned the premises, or as permitted by section
521-70(b).
 
HRS § 521-70 (2006) provides in relevant part:
 
§521-70 Landlord's remedies for absence, misuse,
abandonment and failure to honor tenancy before occupancy. .
 
. .
 
(b) The landlord may, during any extended absence of
the tenant, enter the dwelling unit as reasonably necessary
for purposes of inspection, maintenance, and safe-keeping or
for the purposes permitted by section 521-53(a).
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
property or trespassed under the Landlord-Tenant Code or the
 
lease. Based on our review of the record, we agree.4
 
3. The District Court did not err in awarding damages
 
for Hay's failure to pay the February 2010 rent. Hay argues that
 the District Court erred as a matter of law in awarding Yamashiro
 rent for the period after Yamashiro took possession of the
 property for his own use on February 12, 2010.
 
Under the lease, if Hay failed to pay rent by the
 
first-of-the-month due date, Yamashiro could give Hay "written
 
5
notice demanding payment,"  and Yamashiro could terminate the
lease if Hay did not pay the rent within the time specified after
 receipt of the written notice. The District Court found that Hay
 unreasonably failed to pay February 2010 rent.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated that under common 
law, if the tenant breaches a lease the landlord may terminate the lease and retake possession which releases the tenant from lease obligations, but not for damages arising out of the breach. Hi Kai Inv., Ltd. v. Aloha Futons Beds & Waterbeds, Inc., 84 Hawai
'i 75, 80-81, 929 P.2d 88, 93-94 (1996). 
Under the common law, if a tenant breaches a lease, a
landlord may: (1) terminate the tenancy and sue for damages
under breach of contract theory; (2) elect to continue the
tenancy, and sue periodically for rent as it accrues; or (3)
terminate the lease, retake possession, and absolve tenant
from all liability. Under the first option, the landlord
must mitigate damages. Termination of the tenancy releases
the tenant from lease obligations, including the payment of
rent. A landlord, however, still may recover damages for
breach of contract.
 
Furthermore, a basic precept of contract law is that a
party who sustains a loss by the breach of another is
entitled to compensation that will actually or as precisely
as possible compensate the injured party.
 
Hi Kai Inv., Ltd., 84 Hawai 'i at 80-81, 929 P.2d at 93-94 
(citations and quotation marks omitted). It has been recognized 
by this jurisdiction and others that the measure of damages for a 
4
 Hay's contention that Yamashiro misled him "into believing that
they had an agreement to end the Lease on February 19, 2010" is unsupported by
the record. Hay admitted that he had never come to a final agreement with
Yamashiro for early termination of the lease and that he had understood that
this final written termination agreement was required by the lease.
 
5
 A landlord's remedies for a tenant's failure to pay rent are set
forth in the Landlord-Tenant Code at HRS § 521-68 (2006).
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
breach is future rents less mitigation. Hi Kai Inv., Ltd., Inc., 
84 Hawai 'i at 81 n.13, 929 P.2d at 94 n.13. 
Here, the February 2010 rent had been due under the
 
lease on February 1, 2010. Because Hay failed to pay rent within
 five days of the February 3, 2010 written demand, Yamashiro
 terminated the lease on February 11, 2010. Yamashiro was
 entitled to the rents due under the lease less rent collected if
 he had been able to secure a new tenant for that period. There
 was less than a month left on the lease, and Hay did not carry
 his burden of proving that Yamashiro failed to reasonably
 mitigate his damages. Malani v. Clapp, 56 Haw. 507, 517, 542
 
P.2d 1265, 1271 (1975). 
4. The District Court did not err in denying Hay's
 
requested damages because Yamashiro did not engage in self-help
 and had cause to exclude Hay. Hay argues that the District Court
 
6
erred in denying his claim under HRS § 521-63(c) (2006)  and in
awarding Yamashiro damages for Hay's alleged breach of the lease
 because Yamashiro's self-help eviction violated the Landlord-
Tenant Code and the lease.
 
We cannot find that the District Court erred in finding
 
that Hay acted unreasonably by turning off the electricity to the
 property and that Hay failed to prove that he is entitled to
 damages. Given the circumstances in this case, Yamashiro had
 cause to end Hay's tenancy and to exclude Hay from the property. 
6
 HRS § 521-63 provides in relevant part:
 
§521-63 Tenant's remedy of termination at any time;
unlawful removal or exclusion. . . .
 
(c) If the landlord removes or excludes the tenant
 
from the premises overnight without cause or without court
order so authorizing, the tenant may recover possession or
terminate the rental agreement and, in either case, recover
an amount equal to two months rent or free occupancy for two
months, and the cost of suit, including reasonable
attorney's fees. If the rental agreement is terminated, the
landlord shall comply with section 521-44(c). The court may
also order any injunctive or other equitable relief it deems
proper. If the court determines that the removal or
 exclusion by the landlord was with cause or was authorized
by court order, the court may award the landlord the cost of
suit, including reasonable attorney's fees if the attorney
is not a salaried employee of the landlord or the landlord's
assignee.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hay turned off the power on January 29, 2010, despite knowing the
 
potential damage to the pool and landscape. As the District
 Court stated: 
All the plaintiff was reasonably trying to do here was to
make sure that once he had been told by Mr. Hay, or his
agents had been told, that he was turning off -- actually
told directly that he was turning off the power, that that
in fact did not happen and there was not damage to the
property. And luckily in this case the damage sustained was
basically limited to the plants that didn't get sprinkled.
 
5. The District Court did not err in applying Hay's
 
small claims award as an offset to the award in this case. Hay
 
argues that the District Court exceeded its jurisdiction in
 asserting control over Hay's small claims judgment for his
 security deposit and in failing to award him post-judgment
 interest on the $6,366.00 small claims award. However, Hay did
 not object to the District Court applying the small claims award
 as a credit to the award in this case and therefore the point is
 
7
waived. Moreover, HRS § 604-7 (1993)  gives the district courts
the authority to enforce judgments and take such other actions in

 
furtherance of this authority. By giving Hay a credit for his
 award in the small claims matter against the judgment in this
 case, the District Court enforced his judgment against Yamashiro.
 
Hay further claims, without support, that the District

 
Court awarded to Yamashiro attorneys' fees for work performed by
 Yamashiro's counsel in small claims court, contrary to HRS § 521­
7
 HRS § 604-7 provides, in pertinent part, 
(a)	 The district courts may
 
. . . .
 
(4)	 Enforce judgments; and punish contempts
according to law;
 
. . . .
 
(e) 	The several district courts shall have power to make
and award judgments, decrees, orders, and mandates,
issue such executions and other processes, and do such
other acts and take such other steps as may be
necessary to carry into full effect the powers which
are or shall be given them by law or for the promotion
of justice in matters pending before them.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
44(h)(4) (2006).8 Hay fails to identify specific time entries
 
that he alleges are related to the small claims action, and based
 
on this record we cannot conclude that the District Court abused
 its discretion in finding reasonable and awarding $5,230.25 in
 attorney's fees to Yamashiro.
9
 
Based on the foregoing, June 23, 2011 Judgment entered
 
by the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 30, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Paul A. Schraff
 
(Dwyer Schraff Meyer Grant &
Green)for Defendant/Counterclaim-
Plaintiff/Appellant.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Randall K. Schmitt and 
Jordon J. Kimura

 
(McCorriston Miller Mukai
MacKinnon)
for Plaintiff/Counterclaim­Defendant/Appellee. 
8
 HRS § 521-44(h)(4) states that in any action in the small claims
court where the landlord and tenant disagree about the landlord's right to
retain the security deposit, "neither the landlord nor the tenant may be
represented by an attorney[.]"
 
9
 Yamashiro requested $5,476.70 in attorney's fees.
 
7
 