 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000687 12-DEC-2024 07:51 AM Dkt. 49 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000687  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻI  
RENELDO RODRIGUEZ, individually and on behalf of all others 
similarly situated, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
MAUNA KEA RESORT LLC; HAWAII PRINCE HOTEL WAIKIKI LLC; PRINCE 
RESORTS HAWAII, INC., Defendants-Appellants,  
and  
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-50, Defendants  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 1CC161002191)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION  ORDER  
(By: Leonard, Acting Chief Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendant s-Appellants Mauna Kea Resort LLC , Hawaii 
Prince Hotel Waikiki LLC, and Prince Resorts Hawaii , Inc.   
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
  
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(collectively Mauna Kea ), appeal from the "Stipulation for Entry 
of Judgment Under [ Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil Procedure ( HRCP) Rule] 
54(B) and Order" (Judgment ), filed on November 12, 2021 by the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit ( circuit court ). 1 
I. BACKGROUND 
This is a class action brought by Plaintiff -Appellee 
Reneldo Rodriguez ( Rodriguez ), individually and on behalf of all 
others similarly situated, against Mauna Kea.2 From June 17 to 
August 16, 2016, Rodriguez worked at a hotel operated by Mauna 
Kea as a banquet department food server/waiter. It is 
undisputed that , during the period of time relevant to this 
matter, 3 Mauna Kea charge d its hotel customers a "service charge" 
or "gratuity" on food and beverage sales, which it calculated as 
a percentage of the total cost of food and beverage purchased . 
For banquets, events, meetings, room service, and other 
instances, Mauna Kea added a predetermined "service charge" for 
food and beverage provided by its hotels, which was generally 
calculated as 15% to 21% of the total food and beverage cost. 
It is further undisputed that Mauna Kea did not distribute the 
entire amount of the service charge collected to its employees 
1 The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang presided. 
2 Rodriguez moved for class certification in April 2017, and the 
circuit court certified the class in August 2017. 
3 At issue are Mauna Kea 's disclosures, in their catering 
contracts, between 2010 and 2017. 
2   
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
 
   
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as tip income , and that Mauna Kea provided written disclosures 
to customers that the service charges would not be distributed 
in full to employees. Most of these disclosures did not specify 
the actual percentage or amount of the service charge that would 
be distributed to employees. 
Rodriguez alleged in his complaint that Mauna Kea 
violated Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 481B -14 (Supp. 2023 ), 
which provides in relevant part that, 
(a)  Any:  
(1)  Hotel or restaurant that applies a service 
charge for the sale of food or beverage 
services; or 
(2)  Hotel that applies a service charge for 
porterage services;   
shall distribute the service charge directly to its 
employees as tip income or clearly disclose to the 
purchaser of the services that the service charge is being 
used to pay for costs or expenses other than wages and tips 
of employees . 
HRS § 481B-14 (emphasis added) . Rodriguez alleged that, due to 
its failure to "clearly disclose" its retention of a certain 
portion of the service charge, Mauna Kea engaged in unfair 
methods of competition, in violation of HRS § 480 -2 (2008), and 
the unauthorized withholding of wages, in violation of HRS 
§ 388-6 (2015). 
Rodriguez and Mauna Kea both filed motions for summary 
judgment ( MSJ) in July 2018. Mauna Kea contended that Rodriguez 
could not prove, as required pursuant to HRS §§ 480 -2 and 388 -6, 
that Mauna Kea failed to satisfy the disclosure requirements set 
forth in HRS § 481B -14. Rodriguez contended that, because Mauna 
3   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kea did not "clearly disclose" that its service charge would be 
used for costs other than tips, he was entitled to judgment on 
liability and damages as a matter of law. 
The circuit court, limiting its ruling to the question 
of liability – i.e., whether Mauna Kea's disclosures were 
adequate pursuant to HRS § 481B -14 – granted summary judgment in 
favor of Rodriguez and against Mauna Kea. In its "Amended Order 
Granting in Part and Denying in Part [Rodriguez's] Motion for 
Summary Judgment[,]" the circuit court ruled, 
1. The Court GRANTS in part [Rodriguez's MSJ] as to the 
issue of [Mauna Kea's] liability to [Rodriguez] on the 
claim based upon [Mauna Kea's] violation of HRS §481B -14 
due to [Mauna Kea's] failure to specify the portion of 
the service charge that was distribu ted to employees. 
2. The Court DENIES in part [ Rodriguez's MSJ] as to the 
issues set forth in [Rodriguez's] Supplemental 
Memorandum. Withdrawing their prior request for a 
ruling on damages, that portion of [Rodriguez's] Motion 
is denied without prejudice. 
The circuit court denied Mauna Kea's MSJ. 
The circuit court entered an HRCP Rule 54(b) Judgment 
as to its summary judgment ruling on liability, and this appeal 
followed.  
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Mauna Kea raises two points of error on appeal, 
contending that : (1) the circuit court erred when it granted 
Rodriguez's MSJ and denied Mauna Kea's MSJ ; and (2) the circuit 
court's conclusion with respect to the disclosure requirements 
under HRS § 481B -14 was wrong as a matter of law. 
4   
 
 
  
   
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and relevant legal 
authorities , and having given due consideration to the arguments 
advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we resolve Mauna 
Kea's contentions as follows :4 
(1) Mauna Kea contends that the circuit court's 
conclusion as to the meaning of HRS § 481B -14 was wrong because 
"HRS § 481B -14 does not require specificity of the precise 
amounts being distributed and retained." The appellate court 
reviews the trial court's c onclusions of law de novo under the 
right/wrong standard. State v. Eager , 140 Hawaiʻi 167, 173, 398 
P.3d 756, 762 (2017) (citation omitted). 
We conclude that the circuit court wrongly 
interpreted HRS § 481B -14 to require service charge disclosures 
to specify the actual amount distributed to employees. We start 
by considering the plain language of HRS § 481B -14, which 
requires hotels and restaurants to either distribute the entire 
amount of the service charge to employees, or to "clearly 
disclose to the purchaser of the services that the service 
charge is being used to pay for costs or expenses other than 
wages and tips of employees." As the Hawaiʻi Supreme Court has 
explained, 
[T]he plain language of HRS § 481B -14 requir e[s] 
[d]efendants to either distribute one -hundred percent of 
the service charge to employees as "tip income" or disclose 
4 We take Mauna Kea's points of error out of order, so as to first 
address the underlying question of HRS § 481B -14's interpretation. 
5   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
their retention of a portion of the service charge to 
customers. 
Gurrobat v. HTH Corp. , 133 Hawaiʻi 1, 18, 323 P.3d 792, 809 
(2014). 
Prior cases have exhaustively considered the 
legislative intent of HRS § 481B-14 as follows,  
HRS § 481B -14's requirements set the expectancy or 
performance interest for the purchasers of food or beverage 
services to which a hotel or restaurant applies a service 
charge. Under the statute, those purchasers are entitled to 
expect that the service charge will be distributed directly 
and entirely to service employees as tip income. That 
expectancy interest can be overcome or negated only if the 
hotel or restaurant clearly dis closes to those purchasers 
that the hotel or restaurant follows a pattern of 
distributing the proceeds of a service charge in a way that 
diverges from the distribution pattern specified by the 
statute. 
 . . . . 
In essence, HRS § 481B -14 gives legal force and form to the 
ordinary consumer expectation that service charges are to 
be distributed in their entirety to service personnel and 
not diverted to other uses by the hotel or restaurant. HRS 
§ 481B-14 authorizes a departure from the distribution 
pattern based on the ordinary consumer expectation only 
where the hotel or restaurant "clearly discloses" that its 
pattern of distributing service charges diverges from the 
pattern specified by the statute. As noted, those two 
"either/or" alternatives, incorporated into contracts 
governed by HRS § 481B -14 as implied terms, set the 
expectancy interest of purchasers of the relevant services. 
 . . . . 
By enacting HRS § 481B -14, the legislature intended to 
require hotels and restaurants to 'meet the consumer 
expectations' that the service charge will be distributed 
to service personnel in lieu of a voluntary gratuity, not 
dedicated to some other purpose or diverted to some other 
party. Thus, the statute aims to structure the relevant 
transactions such that a hotel or restaurant's pattern of 
distributing proceeds from service charges to its service 
employees will accord with normal consumer expectations. 
The statute accomplishes that aim by setting up a baseline 
distribution pattern for service charges, together with a 
means by which a hotel or restaurant can escape being bound 
by that baseline by clearly disclosing to the purchaser 
that it does not follow the baseline distribution pattern. 
6   
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kawakami v. Kahala Hotel Invs., LLC, 142 Hawaiʻi 507, 514—15, 421 
P.3d 1277, 1284—85 (2018)  (emphasis added)  (cleaned up).  
Neither the plain language, legislative history, nor 
the case law interpreting the legislative history of HRS § 481B -
14, instructs that a hotel or restaurant must specify with 
particularity the fraction or percentage of the service charge 
that is distributed to employees. Rather, the statutory 
language, as interpreted by the Hawai ʻi appellate courts, 
contemplates that a hotel or restaurant "clearly disclose" to 
customers if it is not following the baseline statutory pattern 
of distributing service charges directly and entirely to its 
employees . 
We thus conclude that the circuit court wrongly 
interpreted HRS § 481B -14 as requiring Mauna Kea to disclose the 
specific percentage or amount of the service charge distributed 
to employees, thus imposing requirements beyond the scope of the 
statutory language. 
(2) We review the circuit court's summary judgment 
rulings de novo, applying the following standard, 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, 
depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions on 
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there 
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the 
moving party is entitled to jud gment as a matter of law. A 
fact is material if proof of that fact would have the 
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential 
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the 
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most 
favorable to the non -moving party. In other words, we must 
7   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
view all of the evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in 
the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion. 
Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawaiʻi 46, 55—56, 292 P.3d 1276, 1285—86 
(2013) (citation omitted).  
"[A] summary judgment movant may satisfy his or her 
initial burden of production by either (1) presenting evidence 
negating an element of the non -movant's claim, or (2) 
demonstrating that the nonmovant will be unable to carry his or 
her burden of proof at tria l." Id. at 60, 292 P.3d at 1290 
(citations omitted) . 
For the reasons discussed in section (1) supra, we 
find that Rodriguez failed to meet his burden of establishing a 
genuine dispute as to the alleged insufficiency of Mauna Kea's 
service charge disclosures. We further find that Mauna Kea met 
its burden of establishing that its service charge disclosures 
were sufficient pursuant to HRS § 481B -14. On this basis, t he 
circuit court erred in granting Rodriguez's MSJ, and in denying 
Mauna Kea's MSJ. 
8   
 
 
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
III. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we  vacate the circuit  
court's Judgment and remand for further proceedings consistent 
with this summary disposition order.  
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, December 12 , 2024. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Katherine G. Leonard  
 Acting Chief Judge  
Richard M. Rand,   
for Defendants-Appellants.  /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
 Associate Judge  
Brandee J.K. Faria,   
for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Associate Judge  
9 