NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000898
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
ROMAN SEMES, Defendant-Appellant
A
PPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(Case No. 2PC151001014(3))
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.)
Pursuant to a plea agreement, Defendant-Appellant Roman
Semes (Semes ) pleaded guilty to, and was convicted of, two counts
of first degree negligent homicide, two counts of first degree
negligent injury, and one count of failing to give information
and render aid after an accident involving death or serious
bodily injury.  He appeals from the Judgment; Conviction and
Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit  on
April 2, 2018.  For the reasons explained below, we affirm.1
I.
On July 6, 2015, while under the influence of alcohol,
Semes negligently drove a truck into another car.  Two persons
died and two others were seriously injured by the collision. 
Semes failed to render aid to the occupants of the car and failed
to stop and exchange personal information.  Semes was
subsequently indicted on two counts of manslaughter, two counts
1The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of first degree negligent injury, one count of failure to give
information and render aid after an accident involving death or
serious bodily injury, one count of operating a vehicle under the
influence of an intoxicant, one count of excessive speeding, and
one count of driving while his license was suspended or revoked.
Semes pleaded not guilty on all counts.
The State offered Semes a plea agreement.  He accepted. 
Accordingly, on January 8, 2018, Semes changed his plea to guilty
on two counts of negligent homicide (reduced from manslaughter),
two counts of first degree negligent injury, and one count of
failure to render aid.  The circuit court accepted Semes's change
of plea.  The State agreed to dismiss the remaining counts with
prejudice.  Sentencing was set for April 2, 2018.
The State submitted a sentencing memorandum on
March 29, 2018.  The State requested imposition of consecutive
prison terms totaling 40 years.  On March 31, 2018, Semes filed a
notice demanding a jury trial on the State's request for
consecutive sentencing.
On April 2, 2018, Semes was sentenced to prison for ten
years on each of the negligent homicide counts, five years on
each of the negligent injury counts, and ten years on the count
for failure to render aid.  His demand for jury trial was denied.
He filed a notice of appeal, but we dismissed the appeal for lack
of appellate jurisdiction.  On October 26, 2018, the circuit
court entered an order dismissing the remaining counts.  This
appeal followed.
II.
Semes contends that the circuit court's denial of his
demand for a jury trial on the issue of consecutive sentences
violated his constitutional right to due process,  because he was
not given notice that the State would request the imposition of2
2The State incorrectly contends that Semes waived his due process
argument.  Semes asserted his due process right — albeit in cursory fashion —
by filing his notice demanding a jury trial on the State's request for
consecutive sentencing, and again during his sentencing hearing.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
consecutive prison terms.   An appellate court answers questions
of constitutional law "by exercising its own independent judgment
based on the facts of the case, under the right/wrong standard." 
State v. Kahapea, 111 Hawai# i 267, 278, 141 P.3d 440, 451 (2006)
(cleaned up).3
The record is clear that Semes had actual notice that
he faced potential consecutive sentences totaling 40 years. 
During Semes's change-of-plea hearing, the following exchange
took place:
THE COURT:  The next thing I'm going to do is discuss
with you the possible penalties for each of these five
charges.  And I will begin with the charge of negligent
homicide in the first degree.
Those two charges each -- each one carries a maximum
of ten years in prison, a maximum extended term of 20 years
in prison, and a maximum fine of $25,000.00.
Do you understand all of that?
THE INTERPRETER:[ ]  Yes, sir.4
THE COURT:  There are two charges of negligent injury
in the first degree.  Each of those charges carries a
maximum of five years in prison, a maximum extended term of
ten years in prison, and a maximum fine of $10,000.00.
Do you understand that?
THE INTERPRETER:  Yes, sir.
THE COURT:  Count five, accidents involving death or
serious bodily injury, carries a maximum of ten years in
prison, a maximum extended term of 20 years in prison, and a
maximum fine of $25,000.00.  
Do you understand that?  
THE INTERPRETER:  Yes, sir, I understand.   
THE COURT:  In looking at the charges against you I
will note that there is no indication that the State of
Hawaii is asking for an extended term of imprisonment for
these five charges.  
3Semes does not argue that the circuit court's imposition of
consecutive sentences constituted an abuse of discretion.  See State v.
Barrios, 139 Hawai #i 321, 328, 389 P.3d 916, 923 (2016) ("A sentencing judge
generally has broad discretion in imposing a sentence.  The applicable
standard of review for sentencing or resentencing matters is whether the court
committed plain and manifest abuse of discretion in its decision.").
4Semes was provided with a Pohnpeian interpreter for all circuit
court proceedings.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
I told you about the maximum term of imprisonment
because we have a rule here in the State of Hawaii that says
I must inform you of the extended terms of imprisonment.  
Do you understand that?   
THE INTERPRETER:  Yes, sir, I understand.   
THE COURT:  I want you to understand that terms of
imprisonment can be ordered to be served consecutively.  In
other words, one after the other.   Let me give you an
example that in this case of how that can work.  
If I ordered that you serve a maximum of ten years in
prison for count one, negligent homicide in the first
degree, and ten years in prison for count two, negligent
homicide in the first degree, and a maximum -- and a maximum
of five years in prison for count three, negligent injury in
the first degree, and a maximum of five years in prison for
the offense of negligent homicide in the first degree in
count four, and a maximum of ten years in prison for the
offense of accidents involving death or serious bodily
injury, count five, and I ordered that you serve these
prison terms consecutively, in other words, one after the
other, then, you would have count one, ten years, and then
added to that would be count two, ten years, for 20 years.  
Added to that count for count three, five years.  That
would be 25 years.  Added to that count four, another five
years.  That would add up to 30 years.  And then added to
that, count five, another ten years.  That would make the
total, maximum term a maximum of 40 years in prison.   
Do you understand all of that?   
THE INTERPRETER:  Yes, sir, I understand .  
THE COURT:  And I believe that the government may ask
that you be sentenced up to a maximum term of imprisonment
of 40 years.   
Do you understand that?   
THE INTERPRETER:  Yes, sir, I understand .
. . . .
 THE COURT:  Do you understand that the Court has not
promised you leniency in return for your pleas of guilty?  
THE INTERPRETER:  Yes, I understand.  
THE COURT:  Do you understand that under this plea
agreement you can ask for a sentence of probation and the
government can ask for a sentence of up to 40 years in
prison?  
Do you understand that?   
THE INTERPRETER:  Yes, I understand it .
. . . .
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
THE COURT:  Now, I'm going to ask you a few other -- a
couple other questions at least.  And that is, I just want
to make sure that, you know, you're -- you're understanding
all of this.  
If you plead guilty today is there going to be any
kind of a trial in this case, a jury or a judge trial?  Will
there be a trial if you plead guilty today?  
THE INTERPRETER:  So, no.  No, sir.   
THE COURT:  And up to how many years in prison can you
be sentenced if I gave you the harshest sentence?  In other
words, the most number of years that you could receive, up
to how many years could you receive?  
I'm not saying you're going to receive that, but how
many years could you receive if you received the greatest
number of years you could get?  
THE DEFENDANT:  40.   
THE INTERPRETER:  40.   
THE COURT:  If you plead guilty today . . . will you
be found guilty or not guilty of each of these five charges? 
THE DEFENDANT:  Guilty.   
THE INTERPRETER:  Guilty.   
THE COURT:  If you plead guilty today, can the Federal
government come in 40 years from now and take you out of
this country never to return?  
THE INTERPRETER:  Yes, sir .  
THE COURT:  Have you understood everything we have
discussed today?  
THE INTERPRETER:  Yes, sir, I understand.  
THE COURT:  Do you have any questions for me
concerning what we have discussed today?  
THE INTERPRETER:  Nothing.
(Cleaned up.) (Footnote and emphases added.)  There was no denial
of due process concerning the 40-year consecutive sentence.
Semes also argues that the State's request for imposi-
tion of consecutive prison terms was a "calculated subterfuge" to
avoid the Apprendi requirement for extended term sentencing.  5
5In Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466 (2000), the Supreme Court
held that "[o]ther than the fact of a prior conviction, any fact that
increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must
(continued...)
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The only authority cited by Semes is State v. Hussein, 122
Hawai#i 495, 229 P.3d 313 (2010).  That case involved a thirty-
nine count guilty plea by a repeat offender who, at the time of
sentencing, was already serving a ten-year prison term running
concurrently with two five-year terms.  The State moved for
repeat offender sentencing, consecutive term sentencing, and
extended term sentencing.  The circuit court denied the State's
request for an extended term, and imposed ten year repeat-
offender-mandatory-minimum terms.  The terms were to run
concurrently with each other, but consecutive to the prior ten-
year term.  The supreme court noted:
Thus, by virtue of adding the mandatory minimum repeat
offender ten-year term for the instant matter to the
previous ten-year term already being served, as recognized
by the [circuit] court, "in all of her cases, Petitioner
will be serving a twenty-year term of incarceration."
Id. at 499, 229 P.3d at 317 (cleaned up).  The defendant appealed
her sentence.  We affirmed, No. 28617, 2008 WL 5307813 (Haw. App.
Dec. 22, 2008) (SDO).  The defendant petitioned for a writ of
certiorari.  The supreme court affirmed and held (among other
things) that the trial court did not abuse its discretion — under
the statutes and case law in effect at that time — in imposing a
sentence consecutive to the prior term.  It was in that context
that the supreme court noted:
Foreseeably, the less burdensome procedural alternative of
consecutive term sentencing may be viewed as a way to obtain
the same sentencing result as would be reached in extended
sentences, but without the necessity of convening the more
lengthy jury procedures required by Apprendi. See Kahapea,
111 Hawai #i at 285, 141 P.3d at 458 (Acoba, J., concurring
in part, joined by Duffy, J.) ("It would appear plain, then,
that our sentencing law does not sanction the circumvention
by a judge of the extended term sentencing procedure by
resort to the consecutive term provision.  Such subterfuge
would violate the provisions of the penal code and
potentially raise serious due process considerations.").
. . . .
5(...continued)
be submitted to a jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt."  Id. at 490. 
Both the United States Supreme Court and the Hawai #i Supreme Court have held
that Apprendi does not apply to consecutive term sentencing.  Oregon v. Ice,
555 U.S. 160 (2009); State v. Kahapea, 111 Hawai #i 267, 141 P.3d 440 (2006).
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In many instances the term of imprisonment would be the same
under consecutive term sentencing as under extended term
sentencing.  Consequently, if consecutive term sentencing
may be employed as a possible alternative to extended
sentencing and the jury fact-finding requirements imposed in
Apprendi, such a possibility warrants closer scrutiny of
consecutive sentences.
Id. at 508-09, 229 P.3d at 326-27.  In this case, the circuit
court expressly addressed the Hussein issue and stated, during
Semes's sentencing hearing:
THE COURT:  Here defendant has requested a trial by
jury on the question of the imposition -- possible
imposition of consecutive sentences.
The Court has considered the record herein, the
current state of the law in relation to consecutive
sentencing, the plea agreement entered into by the parties,
and the responses of the defendant at the time that he
changed his plea in each count.
Furthermore, I'm satisfied that the government has not
used this as a means of avoiding the extended term
requirements .  Based on the foregoing, I will deny
defendant's request for trial by jury on the question of
consecutive sentencing.
(Cleaned up.) (Emphasis added.)
Semes does not argue that the circuit court abused its
discretion by imposing consecutive terms of imprisonment, or that
in doing so the court failed to comply with the requirement "to
explain on the record its reasoning based on the HRS § 706–606
factors to ensure that its 'decision to impose consecutive
sentences was deliberate, rational, and fair.'"  Barrios, 139
Hawai#i at 335, 389 P.3d at 930 (quoting Hussein, 122 Hawai# i at
510, 229 P.3d at 328).  Moreover, the court's on-the-record
explanation of its decision shows that it did not abuse its
discretion by imposing consecutive sentences, and that the
State's request for imposition of consecutive sentences was not a
"calculated subterfuge" to avoid the Apprendi requirement for
extended term sentencing.  After hearing impact statements from,
and on behalf of, the victims and their family members, and an
allocution by Semes, the court stated:
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
THE COURT:  Thank you.
All right. [B]efore the Court today is Mr. Semes,
stands having been found guilty of five criminal offenses.
. . . .
There are a range of options before the Court in terms
of sentencing Mr. Semes.  [T]he options include everything
from a sentence of . . . probation, probation with a jail
term, concurrent prison terms, and consecutive prison terms. 
Here, the defendant has not requested a sentence of
probation, but has requested concurrent terms of imprison-
ment.  In other words, terms of imprisonment that would run
at the same time.  
The State of Hawaii, on the other hand, has requested
consecutive terms of imprisonment.  In other words, terms of
imprisonment that will run one after the other.
Hawaii law provides that when determining whether
terms of imprisonment are to be imposed concurrently or
consecutively that the Court shall consider factors set
forth in Hawaii Revised Statutes Section 706-606.  
There have been statements made today regarding
justice and a just sentence.  [T]he law of the State of
Hawaii provides guidance in terms of what a just sentence in
this case should be.  Section 706-606 of the Hawaii Revised
Statutes states that the Court, in determining the
particular sentence to be imposed, shall consider a number
of factors.  
These factors include the nature and consequences of
the offenses; the history and characteristics of the
defendant; the need for the sentence imposed to reflect the
seriousness of the offenses; to promote respect for the law;
to provide just punishment for the offenses; to afford
adequate deterrence to criminal conduct; to protect the
public from further crimes of the defendant; and to provide
the defendant with medical, educational or vocational
training medical needed -- I should say needed educational
or vocational training, medical care or other correctional
treatment in the most effective manner.  
The Court is also to consider the kinds of sentences
available.  And the Court is to consider the need to avoid
unwarranted sentence disparities among defendants with
similar records who have been found guilty of similar
conduct.  
In terms of the last factor, I know there have been
various arguments made by both the prosecution and the
defense concerning other types of cases, -- I shouldn't say
types of cases, but other cases, these -- of course, these
-- these presentations by both the State and the defense do
not reflect any type of statistical or -- or scientific
study, but rather, the individual experiences of counsel
and/or specific types of cases.  Cases of this nature often
present very unique fact patterns and consequences.  
The Court has examined and considered the nature and
circumstances of the offenses. [H]ere, Mr. Semes, we have
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
conduct that really begins well before the actual accident
itself and -- and before the day of the offenses here.  
Your traffic record reflects that you had encountered
the system of justice here in Hawaii having operated a
vehicle on more than one occasion at a very high rate of
speed.  That you had operated a vehicle without a valid
license.  That you had had your -- your license suspended. 
In other words, you were not able to operate a vehicle for a
period of time that preceded in other words, was before this
incident.  
That you had had the opportunity to undergo a
substance abuse assessment before the day in question.  You
must have known that speeding and operating a vehicle under
the influence of an intoxicant involved serious risk to
yourself and to others, including risk of -- sorry. 
Including risk of death or serious bodily injury to others
and yourself.  
On the day in question you, following work, consumed
alcohol and after having consumed that alcohol arranged for
the purchase of more alcohol, consumed that alcohol, and
then participated in a phone call that appeared to have left
you upset about something.  And then caused you to -- or you
chose to get in your truck and drive that vehicle under the
influence.  
You operated your truck at a very high rate of speed. 
You operated it in a manner which was contrary to -- clearly
contrary to the law in terms of your driving pattern.  And
you caused a horrific and violent crash at an intersection
when you ran a red light, after others at the inter -- after
another at the intersection had already been stopped,
waiting for that red light to turn green.
 The crash resulted in the death of two individuals
and ser -- and -- and extremely serious and life-altering
injuries to another, as well as having injured yet another
person.  
You have forever changed the lives of many individuals
whose lives have been touched in a very positive and warm
way by individuals killed and injured in this horrific
crash.  
Following the crash you left the scene and hid in that
-- in the brush area, pretending to be sleeping in that
area, until you were found by the police.  
The nature and circumstances of these offenses is
extreme.  In terms of the history and -- and characteristics
you are not a person who has a series of property and/or
violent crimes on your record, but the operation of a
vehicle has been a consistent problem in your life.  
The offenses here are extremely serious in nature. 
All classified as felonies under Hawaii law, and involved
the death and/or injury to others, as well as failing to
render aid to others who had been injured by your conduct.  
Respect for the law and affording adequate deterrents
to conduct of this nature is extremely important in cases of
this nature.  A person operating a vehicle contrary to law
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
and while under the influence of an intoxicant is a
potential killer on the highway.  And that is precisely what
happened in this case.  
In terms of the type of educational, vocational
training or correctional treatment that you might need here,
given what I am to consider, I don't know that that is a --
a factor that changes the analysis dramatically.  
[Y]ou have had prior encounters with the justice
system that should have caused you to understand the
significance and dangerousness of the conduct that you were
engaging in.  There has been reference to the negligence
standard here.  I think it's also significant to note that
criminal negligence is not civil negligence.  In criminal
negligence involves a gross deviation from the standard of
care the law -- that a law-abiding person would follow.  
Here there was a extremely gross deviation from the
standard of care that a law-abiding person would follow. 
And the harm that has been done will never be able to be
undone.  
Accordingly, based on the factors that I must
consider, the factors that are set forth in the law, not any
type of subjective factor of justice or just -- just being
just, but rather the guidance that the law provides, the
Court, Mr. Semes, will be sentencing you as follows.
. . . .
As to count one, I will order that you be committed to
the custody of the Director of the Department of Public
Safety for a maximum period of ten years.  
As to count two, I will order that you be committed to
the custody of the Director of the Department of Public
Safety for a maximum period of ten years.  
As to count three, I will order that you be committed
to the custody of the Director of the Department of Public
Safety for a maximum period of five years.  
As to count four, I will order that you be committed
to the custody of the Director of the Department of Public
Safety for a maximum period of five years.  
And as to count five, I will order that you be
committed to the custody of the Director of the Department
of Public Safety for a maximum period of ten years.  
Given all of the factors set forth in the law, and I
should mention that the -- as to count five there's the
additional factor of having that -- that offense having
occurred after the first four offenses occurred, I will
order that these terms be served consecutively.  Mittimus
will issue forthwith.  And you will receive credit for time
served as provided for by law.   
(Cleaned up.)
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
We conclude that the State's request for imposition of
consecutive sentences in this case was not a "calculated
subterfuge" to avoid the Apprendi requirement for extended term
sentencing.
III.
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment; Conviction and
Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit on
April 2, 2018, is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 6, 2019.
On the briefs:
Keith S. Shigetomi,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Presiding Judge
Don S. Guzman,
Renee Ishikawa Delizo,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
11