NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000500 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CHRISTINA K. CLARKE, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
KONA WONG, Respondent-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(FC-DA NO. 16-1-0084)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Christina K. Clarke (Petitioner)
 
appeals from an Order Dissolving Temporary Restraining Order for
 
Protection, filed on June 3, 2016, in the Family Court of the
 Fifth Circuit (family court).
1
 
On appeal, Petitioner contends that the family court
 
abused its discretion when it did not grant an order for
 protection because: (1) it did not consider evidence of past acts
 of abuse by Respondent-Appellee Kona Wong (Respondent); and (2)
 
it found that no recent act of abuse occurred.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced, the issues raised, and the applicable
 legal authorities, we resolve Petitioner's points of error as
 
1
 The Honorable Edmund D. Acoba presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
follows and affirm.
 
On May 19, 2016, Petitioner filed a Petition for an
 
Order for Protection (Petition), pursuant to Hawaii Revised
 
Statutes (HRS) Chapter 586 (Domestic Abuse Protective Orders) in
 
which Petitioner alleged several instances of abuse by
 
Respondent, her ex-husband, starting in 2007 and including an
 incident on May 13, 2016. Based on the Petition, the family
 court issued a Temporary Restraining Order to Respondent.
 
Subsequently, a two day evidentiary hearing was held
 
and the family court ruled that there was insufficient evidence
 to grant a protective order. On June 3, 2016, the family court
 filed the Order Dissolving Temporary Restraining Order for
 Protection. Petitioner timely appealed from the order.
(1) Petitioner contends that the family court failed 
to consider a past act of alleged abuse by Respondent in 2007, citing to Hill v. Inouye, 90 Hawai
'i 76, 976 P.2d 390 (1998). In 
Hill, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court concluded that a petitioner 
requesting a protective order is not required to show recent acts of abuse. Id. at 84-85, 976 P.2d at 398-99. The supreme court 
further concluded that "[a] showing of 'recent' acts may be an indicator of imminent abuse or damage, but the family court must take into consideration all facts presented by the petitioner and the respondent to determine whether 'a protective order is necessary to prevent domestic abuse or a recurrence of abuse[.]'" Id. at 85, 976 P.2d at 399. 
This case is unlike Hill. In Hill, the family court
 
required the petitioner to show recent acts of abuse at the
 hearing. Id. at 78, 84, 976 P.2d at 392, 398. By contrast, in
 
this case, the family court did not require Petitioner to show
 only recent acts of abuse, but rather allowed her to present
 evidence of the alleged 2007 incident. Moreover, during the
 hearing, the family court affirmatively noted that the Petition
 alleged incidents dating back to 2007 and that evidence of the
 parties' interaction after 2007 was relevant to show how the
 relationship has been since then. Thus, the record does not
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
support Petitioner's contention that the family court failed to
 
consider the alleged 2007 incident.
(2) Petitioner further contends the family court erred
 
when it "simply decided to believe" Respondent's version of an
 incident that occurred on May 13, 2016.
 
"[A]n appellate court will not pass upon issues 
dependent upon [the] credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trial judge." Kie v. 
McMahel, 91 Hawai
'i 438, 444, 984 P.2d 1264, 1270 (App. 1999) 
(citation omitted). 
Here, Petitioner and Respondent presented conflicting
 
evidence about the incident on May 13, 2016. At the conclusion
 of the two-day hearing on the Petition, the family court stated
 that the incident started with Petitioner interfering with
 Respondent's allocated time with their daughter. The family
 court further noted that the video evidence that Petitioner
 presented was actually damaging to Petitioner because it shows
 that she provoked the incident by not driving away after she
 dropped their daughter off with Respondent and instead stopped
 her car and entered Respondent's vehicle with her phone and
 without Respondent's permission. Further, although Petitioner
 testified that Respondent used unreasonable force against her, a
 witness who knows both Petitioner and Respondent and who was
 present near the scene, testified that she did not see any
 physical altercation between Petitioner and Respondent. The
 family court also noted that Petitioner did not present evidence
 corroborating her alleged injuries from the incident. Thus, the
 family court concluded that there was insufficient evidence to
 grant the protective order.
 
There is substantial evidence to support the family
 
court's ruling that there was no abuse by Respondent on May 13,
 2016. Moreover, it is the province of the family court to weigh
 the credibility of the witnesses. We do not disturb the family
 court's conclusion in this case.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order
 
Dissolving Temporary Restraining Order for Protection, filed on
 
June 3, 2016, in the Family Court of the Fifth Circuit, is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 14, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Rosa Flores,
for Petitioner-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Lisa R. Arin,for Respondent-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
4
 