FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--–
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
vs.
 
MICKENSIE P. SOULENG, Defendant-Appellant
 
CAAP-12-0000196
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTC-11-002605)
 
JANUARY 22, 2015
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND REIFURTH AND GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Mickensie P. Souleng (Souleng) by complaint
 
with the offenses of (1) Accidents Involving Bodily Injury, in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291C-12.6 (2007 &
 
1
 Supp. 2013); and (2) Driving Without a License, in violation of
1HRS § 291C-12.6 provides in relevant part:
 
(a) The driver of any vehicle involved in an
accident resulting in bodily injury to any person shall
immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the
accident or as close thereto as possible but shall then
forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at
(continued...)
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HRS § 286-102 (2007 & Supp. 2010).2 After a bench trial, the
 
3
District Court of the First Circuit (District Court)  found
Souleng guilty as charged of both offenses. 
On appeal, Souleng argues that: (1) both charges
 
against him were defective for failing to allege a mens rea; (2)
 
1(...continued)
the scene of the accident until the driver has
 
fulfilled the requirements of section 291C-14. Every
such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic
more than is necessary.
 
(b) Any person who violates subsection (a) shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
 
HRS § 291C-14 (2007 & Supp. 2013) provides in relevant part:
 
(a) The driver of any vehicle involved in an
accident resulting in injury to or death of any person
or damage to any vehicle or other property which is
driven or attended by any person shall give the
driver's name, address, and the registration number of
the vehicle the driver is driving, and shall upon
request and if available exhibit the driver's license
or permit to drive to any person injured in the
accident or to the driver or occupant of or person
attending any vehicle or other property damaged in the
accident and shall give such information and upon
request exhibit such license or permit to any police
officer at the scene of the accident or who is
 investigating the accident and shall render to any
person injured in the accident reasonable assistance,
including the carrying, or the making of arrangements
for the carrying, of the person to a physician,
surgeon, or hospital for medical or surgical treatment
if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary, or
if such carrying is requested by the injured person;
provided that if the vehicle involved in the accident
is a bicycle, the driver of the bicycle need not
exhibit a license or permit to drive.
 
2HRS § 286-102 provides in relevant part:
 
(a) No person . . . shall operate any category of
motor vehicles listed in this section without first
 being appropriately examined and duly licensed as a
qualified driver of that category of motor vehicles.
 
3The Honorable Russel S. Nagata presided.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the Accidents Involving Bodily Injury charge was additionally
 
defective for failing to allege essential elements under HRS 
§ 291C-14; (3) based on Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts, 557 U.S.
 305 (2009), the District Court violated his constitutional right
 to confront witnesses against him by admitting, over Souleng's
 objection, a letter signed by the Supervising Driver License
 Clerk (Exhibit 2), certifying that Souleng lacked a valid
 driver's license on the date in question; (4) without Exhibit 2,
 there was insufficient evidence to prove the charged Driving
 Without a License offense; and (5) there was insufficient
 evidence to support his conviction for the offense of Accidents
 Involving Bodily Injury.
 
As explained below, we hold that: (1) the charges were
 
defective for the reasons articulated by Souleng; (2) based on 
Melendez-Diaz, the District Court violated Souleng's Sixth
 Amendment confrontation rights by admitting Exhibit 2 without
 requiring the Supervising Driver License Clerk who signed it to
 testify; (3) without Exhibit 2, there was insufficient evidence
 to support Souleng's conviction for Driving Without a License;
 and (4) the State presented sufficient evidence to support
 Souleng's conviction for Accidents Involving Bodily Injury. We
 reverse Souleng's conviction for Driving Without a License. We
 vacate his conviction for Accidents Involving Bodily Injury, and
 we remand the case with instructions to dismiss the charge for
 Accidents Involving Bodily Injury without prejudice.
 
BACKGROUND
 
At trial, the State called Wencheslao Sabio (Sabio),
 
the complaining witness with respect to the charge of Accidents
 Involving Bodily Injury. Sabio testified that he was at a
 friend's house on Kopke Street, drinking and talking story on the
 sidewalk, when a vehicle, driven by Souleng, backed up and hit
 him on the side of his leg and knee. According to Sabio, he
 shouted for the vehicle to stop and moved towards a chair, when
 the vehicle "hit me again, so I told 'em, 'Oh, you know how to
 drive or what?'" Sabio did not see the vehicle coming towards
 
3
  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
him until he first got hit. Sabio's friend, Antonio Abellanosa
 
(Abellanosa), told a neighbor to call the police. Sabio was
 later taken to Kaiser Hospital, and although there were no
 further injuries, he experienced physical pain.
 
Sabio testified that the vehicle stopped after hitting
 
him twice and that Souleng got out of the vehicle and spoke to
 Sabio. However, Souleng did not provide Sabio with Souleng's
 
name, address, and insurance information. Souleng did not
 
provide Sabio with any information, but got back into his car and
 drove away. Sabio testified that on the night of the incident,
 he had consumed two small cups of vodka, but was not intoxicated.
 
Sabio's friend, Abellanosa, testified that he lived on
 
Kopke Street, and on the night of the charged incident, he was
 standing on the sidewalk in front of his house drinking with his
 friends when a vehicle backed up and "hit or bang" Sabio. 
Abellanosa did not know the driver's name, but identified Souleng
 in court as the driver. According to Abellanosa, he confronted
 
Souleng and told Souleng that Souleng had struck Sabio, but
 
Souleng responded that Sabio was "a liar[.]" Souleng did not
 give any information or offer to help Sabio, and when Abellanosa
 called the police, Souleng left. On cross-examination,
 
Abellanosa testified that he had seen Souleng around before, but
 
was not aware of where he lived.
 
At trial, the State offered Exhibit 2, which was a
 
letter signed by Supervising Driver License Clerk Jacqueline
 Windrath as Custodian of Records for the Driver License Section. 
In the letter, Windrath certified, based on records of the Driver
 License Section, that "OUR RECORDS INDICATE THAT ON THE VIOLATION
 DATE, DEFENDANT DID NOT HAVE A VALID HAWAII DRIVER'S LICENSE." 
Windrath further certified and attested that the information in
 her letter was a "true, full, and correct summary of the
 voluminous original public records in the custody of the Driver
 License Section[.]" Souleng objected to Exhibit 2, arguing,
 among other things, that Exhibit 2 was testimonial and that its
 admission would violated his "[Sixth] Amendment right to confront
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the witness." The District Court, over Souleng's objection,
 
admitted Exhibit 2 into evidence. Jacqueline Windrath, the
 person who signed the Exhibit 2 letter, did not testify. 
The District Court found Souleng guilty of both the
 
Driving Without a License and Accidents Involving Bodily Injury
 offenses, and it sentenced Souleng to fines totaling $400 and
 also imposed various fees and assessments. The District Court
 entered its Judgment on February 22, 2012, and this appeal
 followed. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Souleng was charged with Accidents Involving Bodily 
Injury, in violation of HRS § 291C-12.6, and Driving Without a License, in violation of HRS § 286-102. Souleng did not object to the charges in the District Court and is challenging the sufficiency of the charges for the first time on appeal. Because Souleng did not challenge the sufficiency of the charges until his appeal, we apply the liberal construction standard. State v. 
Tominiko, 126 Hawai
'i 68, 76, 266 P.3d 1122, 1130 (2011). Under 
this standard, "'we will not [vacate] a conviction based on a defective [charge] unless the defendant can show prejudice or that the [charge] cannot within reason be construed to charge a crime." Id. (quoting State v. Motta, 66 Haw. 89, 91, 657 P.2d 
1019, 1020 (1983)). 
II.
 
A.
 
Souleng argues that the charges against him for
 
Accidents Involving Bodily Injury and Driving Without a License
 were defective for failing to allege a mens rea. The State does
 not dispute that to establish these offenses, it was required to
 prove that Souleng acted intentionally, knowingly, or
 recklessly.
4 See HRS §§ 702-204, 702-212 (1993) (imposing
 
4In its answering brief, the State agrees that the Accidents
Involving Bodily Injury offense requires proof of an intentional,
(continued...)
 
5

 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly as the default states of 
mind for criminal offenses in which no state of mind is specified, unless a legislative purpose to impose absolute liability plainly appears); State v. Ngo, 129 Hawai
'i 30, 38-39, 
292 P.3d 1260, 1268-69 (2013) (noting that the State acknowledged its obligation to set forth the applicable states of mind in the charge for an HRS § 291C-12 offense); State v. Matautia, 81 Hawai
'i 76, 82, 912 P.2d 573, 579 (App. 1996) (noting the State's 
assertion that there was no legislative intent to impose absolute liability for an HRS § 286-102 offense and therefore the applicable states of mind were intentional, knowing, or reckless). 
The statutes prescribing the offenses of Accidents
 
Involving Bodily Injury and Driving Without a License do not
 specify a required state of mind. See notes 1 and 2, supra. 
Because a legislative purpose to impose absolute liability does
 not plainly appear, we conclude that the default states of mind
 of intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly apply to these
 offenses. See HRS §§ 702-204, 702-212.
 
B.
 
The State failed to allege a mens rea in either of the 
charges against Souleng for Accidents Involving Bodily Injury or for Driving Without a License. As noted, Souleng challenges the sufficiency of these charges for failing to allege the requisite mens rea for the first time on appeal. However, in State v. Apollonio, 130 Hawai
'i 353, 357-59, 365, 311 P.3d 676, 680-82, 
688 (2013), the Hawai 'i Supreme Court considered a challenge to 
the sufficiency of a charge for failing to allege the requisite mens rea, which was raised for the first time in the defendant's application for writ of certiorari, and it concluded that the 
4(...continued)
knowing, or reckless mens rea, but argues that the Accidents

Involving Bodily Injury charge, which failed to allege a mens
rea, was sufficient under the liberal construction standard. The
 State did not address Souleng's claim that the Driving Without a
License charge was deficient for failing to allege a mens rea.
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
charge was insufficient. In rendering its decision, the supreme
 
court stated: "[W]e adhere to this core principle: A charge that
 fails to charge a requisite state of mind cannot be construed
 reasonably to state an offense and thus the charge is dismissed
 without prejudice because it violates due process." Id. at 359,
 
311 P.3d at 682 (footnote omitted). The supreme court vacated
 the defendant's conviction and remanded the case to the trial
 court with instructions to dismiss the charge without prejudice.
 Id. at 363, 311 P.3d at 686. 
Based on Apollonio, we conclude that the charges
 
against Souleng for Accidents Involving Bodily Injury and Driving
 Without a License were insufficient for failing to allege a mens
 rea and therefore are subject to dismissal without prejudice.
 
III.
 
Souleng argues that the charge for Accidents Involving
 
Bodily Injury was additionally defective "for failing to allege
 essential elements under HRS § 291C-14." We agree.
 
The count charging Souleng with the offense of 
Accidents Involving Bodily Injury alleged that he failed to "fulfill the requirements of [HRS §] 291C-14[,]" but did not specify the requirements of HRS § 291C-14 that Souleng allegedly failed to fulfill. In Ngo, 129 Hawai
'i at 41, 292 P.3d at 1271, 
the Hawai 'i Supreme Court concluded that a similar charge was 
defective. Based on Ngo, we conclude that the Accidents Involving Bodily Injury charge was defective for failing "to allege the specific requirements set forth under HRS § 291C-14(a) and (b) that [Souleng] was alleged to have contravened." See id. 
However, because we have already concluded that this charge is subject to dismissal without prejudice for failure to allege the requisite mens rea, we do not address whether the failure to allege the specific HRS § 291C-14 requirements that Souleng allegedly contravened would also require dismissal under the liberal construction standard. 
IV. 
Although we conclude that both the charges for
 
Accidents Involving Bodily Injury and Driving Without a License
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
were insufficient and are subject to dismissal without prejudice 
for failing to allege the requisite mens rea, based on the Hawai
'i Supreme Court's recent decision in State v. Davis, 133 
Hawai'i 102, 324 P.3d 912 (2014), we address Souleng's 
insufficiency of evidence claims. In Davis, the supreme court held that "a reviewing court is required under article I, section 10 of the Hawai
'i Constitution to address a defendant's express 
claim of insufficiency of the evidence prior to remanding for a new trial based on a defective charge." Davis, 133 Hawai
'i at 
120, 324 P.3d at 930. Here, Souleng has made express claims that the evidence was insufficient to support both of his convictions. 
Moreover, when reviewing the sufficiency of the 
evidence to determine whether retrial is precluded on double jeopardy grounds, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has mandated that the 
"sufficiency of the evidence is reviewed based only on the evidence that was properly admitted at trial." State v. Wallace, 
80 Hawai
'i 382, 414 n.30, 910 P.2d 695, 727 n.30 (1996).5 In 
other words, evidence which an appellate court determines was erroneously admitted by the trial court cannot be considered in deciding a defendant's sufficiency of the evidence claim on appeal. We therefore must first address Souleng's argument that Exhibit 2 was improperly admitted before we can decide his claim that there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction for Driving Without a License. 
V.
 
5In Wallace, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court acknowledged that the
United States Supreme Court had interpreted the Double Jeopardy
Clause of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution to permit retrial "where the evidence offered by [theprosecution] and admitted by the trial court -- whethererroneously or not -- would have been sufficient to sustain aguilty verdict[.]" Wallace, 80 Hawai
'i at 414 n.30, 910 P.2d at
727 n.30. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court, however, stated that it was
interpreting the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Hawai 'i 
Constitution to give broader protection than the United StatesConstitution to criminal defendants. Id. 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Souleng argues that based on Melendez-Diaz, 557 U.S.
 
305 (2009), the District Court violated his rights under the
 
Sixth Amendment's Confrontation Clause by admitting Exhibit 2
 without requiring testimony by its author. He then argues that
 without Exhibit 2, there was insufficient evidence to show that
 he drove without a valid driver's license, proof that was
 essential to convict him of Driving Without a License.
 
The State concedes that under Melendez-Diaz, the
 
District Court erred in admitting Exhibit 2. As explained below,
 we agree with the State's concession of error. We further
 conclude that without Exhibit 2, there was insufficient evidence
 to support Souleng's conviction for Driving Without a License. 
A.
 
Exhibit 2 was a letter signed by Supervising Driver
 
License Clerk Jacqueline Windrath (Windrath), as Custodian of
 Records for the Driver License Section. In the letter, Windrath
 certified information based on the records of the Driver License
 Section. Next to the headings "Driver's License Number" and
 "Date Issued/Expiration/Type," Windrath stated: "NONE." Next to
 the heading "Additional Information," Windrath stated: "OUR
 RECORDS INDICATE THAT ON THE VIOLATION DATE, DEFENDANT DID NOT
 HAVE A VALID HAWAII DRIVER'S LICENSE." 
Above Windrath's signature, the letter contains the
 
following statement:
 
The undersigned legal Custodian of Records does hereby
certify under seal and attest that this summary has been
compared with the original and that this is a true, full and
correct summary of the voluminous original public records in
the custody of the Driver License Section, Division of Motor
Vehicle, Licensing and Permits, Department of Customer
Services, City & County of Honolulu[.] 
Souleng objected to the admission of Exhibit 2, arguing
 
that it was testimonial and that its admission would violate his
 
"[Sixth] Amendment right to confront the witness." The District
 Court admitted Exhibit 2 over Souleng's objection, ruling that it
 was non-testimonial and fell within the hearsay exception
 permitting proof of the nonoccurrence or nonexistence of a matter
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
through the absence of public record or entry.6 Windrath did not 
testify at trial.
 
B.
 
In Melendez-Diaz, the police seized plastic bags
 
containing substances which they submitted for chemical analysis.
 
Melendez-Diaz, 557 U.S. at 308. The trial court admitted
 certificates of forensic analysis which reported that the
 substances seized by the police contained cocaine as well as the
 weight of the seized bags. Id. at 308-09. The authors of the
 
certificates did not testify at trial. Id. at 309. The Supreme
 
Court considered whether the admission of the certificates of
 forensic analysis violated the defendant's rights under the
 Confrontation Clause. 
The Court concluded that the certificates of analysis
 
fell within the "core class of testimonial statements" because
 they were affidavits, functionally identical to live, in-court
 testimony by the authors of the certificates, made for the
 
6The District Court cited the "[a]bsence of public record or
entry" hearsay exception set forth in Hawaii Rules of Evidence
Rule 803(b)(10) (1993), which provides:
 
The following are not excluded by the hearsay rule,
even though the declarant is available as a witness:
 
. . . .
 (b) Other exceptions.
 
. . . .
 (10) Absence of public record or entry. 	 To prove the
absence of a record, report, statement, or data
compilation, in any form, or the nonoccurrence or
nonexistence of a matter of which a record,
report, statement, or data compilation, in any
form, was regularly made and preserved by a public
office or agency, evidence in the form of a
certification in accordance with rule 902, or
testimony, that diligent search failed to disclose
the record, report, statement, or data
compilation, or entry.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
purpose of proving a fact in question, namely, whether the
 
substance seized by the police was cocaine, and "made under
 circumstances which would lead an objective witness reasonably to
 believe that the statement would be available for use at a later
 trial[.]" Id. at 310-11 (internal quotation marks and citations
 
omitted). The Court emphasized that the certificates were
 prepared for trial purposes, noting that "the sole purpose of the
 [certificates] was to provide 'prima facie evidence of the
 composition, quality, and the net weight' of the analyzed
 substance[.]" Id. at 311 (citation omitted). The Court held
 
that because the certificates were testimonial statements, absent
 a showing that the analysts were unavailable to testify at trial
 and that the defendant had a prior opportunity to cross-examine
 them, the admission of the certificates violated the defendant's
 rights under the Confrontation Clause. Id.
 
Relevant to our case, the Court in Melendez-Diaz
 
addressed the argument that "the analysts' affidavits are
 admissible without confrontation because they are 'akin to the
 types of official and business records admissible at common
 law.'" Id. at 321. The Court rejected this argument, concluding
 
that "the affidavits do not qualify as traditional official or
 business records, and even if they did, their authors would be
 subject to confrontation nonetheless." Id.
 
The Court explained that "[d]ocuments kept in the
 
regular course of business may ordinarily be admitted at trial
 despite their hearsay status. But that is not the case if the
 regularly conducted business activity is the production of
 evidence for use at trial." Id. (citation omitted). The Court
 
stated that the analysts' certificates, like police reports
 generated by law enforcement officials, do not qualify as
 business or public records because they are "'calculated for use
 essentially in the court, not in the business.'" Id. at 321-22
 
(citation omitted).
 
The Court further stated:
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The dissent identifies a single class of evidence
which, though prepared for use at trial, was traditionally
admissible: a clerk's certificate authenticating an official
record -- or a copy thereof -- for use as evidence. But a
 clerk's authority in that regard was narrowly circumscribed.
He was permitted "to certify to the correctness of a copy of
a record kept in his office," but had "no authority to
furnish, as evidence for the trial of a lawsuit, his
interpretation of what the record contains or shows, or to
certify to its substance or effect." . . . A clerk could by
affidavit authenticate or provide a copy of an otherwise
admissible record, but could not do what the analysts did
here: create a record for the sole purpose of providing
evidence against a defendant. 
Id. at 322-23 (citations and footnote omitted).
 
The Court then discussed evidence directly analogous to
 
the State's Exhibit 2 in Souleng's case:
 
Far more probative here are those cases in which the
prosecution sought to admit into evidence a clerk's
certificate attesting to the fact that the clerk had
searched for a particular relevant record and failed to find
it. Like the testimony of the analysts in this case, the
clerk's statement would serve as substantive evidence
 against the defendant whose guilt depended on the
nonexistence of the record for which the clerk searched. 
Although the clerk's certificate would qualify as an
official record under respondent's definition -- it was
prepared by a public officer in the regular course of his
official duties -- and although the clerk was certainly not
a "conventional witness" under the dissent's approach, the
clerk was nonetheless subject to confrontation.
 
Id. at 323 (footnote and citations omitted) (emphasis added).
 
The Court explained the relationship between the 
business-and-official-records hearsay exceptions and the
 
Confrontation Clause:
 
As we stated in Crawford: "Most of the hearsay exceptions
covered statements that by their nature were not testimonial
-- for example, business records or statements in
furtherance of a conspiracy." 541 U.S., at 56, 124 S.Ct.
1354. Business and public records are generally admissible
absent confrontation not because they qualify under an
exception to the hearsay rules, but because -- having been
created for the administration of an entity's affairs and
not for the purpose of establishing or proving some fact at
trial -- they are not testimonial. Whether or not they
qualify as business or official records, the analysts'
statements here -- prepared specifically for use at
petitioner's trial -- were testimony against petitioner, and
the analysts were subject to confrontation under the Sixth
Amendment.
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Id. at 324.7
 
7In Melendez-Diaz, the Court observed that the burden of
having to call live witnesses may be reduced by "notice-and­
demand" statutes, which "require the prosecution to provide
notice to the defendant of its intent to use an analyst's report
as evidence at trial, after which the defendant is given a period
of time in which he may object to the admission of the evidence
absent the analyst's appearance live at trial." Melendez-Diaz,
 
557 U.S. at 326. The Court indicated that these statutes, which
require a defendant "to assert (or forfeit by silence)" his or
her Confrontation Clause rights before trial, were permissible
under the United States Constitution. Id. at 326-27. In
 
response to Melendenz-Diaz, Rule 803(10) of the Federal Rules of
Evidence (FRE) was amended in 2013 to incorporate the substance
of the "notice-and-demand" procedure approved by the Melendez-
Dias Court. See FRE Rule 803 Advisory Committee Notes regarding
2013 Amendments. As amended, FRE Rule 803(10) provides: 
The following are not excluded by the rule against
hearsay, regardless of whether the declarant is
available as a witness:
 
. . . .
 
(10) Absence of a Public Record. Testimony -- or
a certification under Rule 902 -- that a diligent
search failed to disclose a public record or statement
if: 
(A) the testimony or certification is admitted to
prove that 
(i) the record or statement does not exist;
or 
(ii) a matter did not occur or exist, if a
public office regularly kept a record or
statement for a matter of that kind; and 
(B) in a criminal case, a prosecutor who intends
to offer a certification provides written
notice of that intent at least 14 days before
trial, and the defendant does not object in
writing within 7 days of receiving the notice
-- unless the court sets a different time for
 the notice or the objection.
 
No similar amendment has been made to Hawaii Rules of Evidence
 Rule 803(b)(10) (1993).
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C.
 
Based on Melendez-Diaz, we conclude that Exhibit 2 was
 
a testimonial statement and that the District Court's admission
 
of Exhibit 2 violated Souleng's Sixth Amendment confrontation
 rights. 
Windrath, the person who signed the Exhibit 2 letter,
 
certified that Souleng did not have a valid driver's license on
 the "violation date." It appears that this certification was
 based on the absence of records showing that Souleng had a
 driver's licence. Exhibit 2 therefore appears to closely match a
 specific example of evidence that the Court in Melendez-Diaz
 concluded would be subject to confrontation, namely: "a clerk's
 certificate attesting to the fact that the clerk had searched for
 a particular relevant record and failed to find it[,]" where "the
 clerk's statement would serve as substantive evidence against the
 defendant whose guilt depended on the nonexistence of the record
 for which the clerk searched." Id. at 323. 
We conclude that Exhibit 2 was testimonial in that it
 
was prepared for use at trial; created "for the sole purpose of
 providing evidence against [Souleng]"; set forth Windrath's
 "interpretation of what the record[s] [of the Driver License
 Section] contain[] or show[]"; and served as "substantive
 evidence against [Souleng]." Id. at 321-23. Windrath, who
 
signed the Exhibit 2 letter and certified the accuracy of the
 information contained in the letter, did not testify at trial,
 and the State did not show that Windrath was unavailable and that
 Souleng had a prior opportunity to cross-examine Windrath. Id.
 
at 311. Accordingly, the District Court erred in admitting
 Exhibit 2.
 
D.
 
Because Exhibit 2 was improperly admitted in evidence, 
we cannot consider it in determining whether there was sufficient evidence to support Souleng's conviction for Driving Without a License. Wallace, 80 Hawai
'i at 414 n.30, 910 P.2d at 727 n.30. 
Exhibit 2 was the only evidence offered by the State to prove the 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
essential element that Souleng did not have a valid driver's
 
license on the date he was charged with committing the Driving
 Without a License offense. The State does not argue otherwise. 
We conclude that without Exhibit 2, there was insufficient
 evidence to support Souleng's conviction for Driving Without a
 License. Accordingly, we reverse this conviction.
 
VI.
 
Souleng argues that there was insufficient evidence to
 
convict him of the Accidents Involving Bodily Injury offense
 because the State did not prove that he "knew that Sabio received
 bodily injury." We disagree.
 
As noted, the Accidents Involving Bodily Injury offense
 
requires proof of an intentional, knowing, or reckless mens rea.
 Thus, the State was not required to prove that Souleng acted with
 a knowing state of mind with respect to whether Sabio had
 "received" bodily injury. Instead, the State could establish the
 requisite mens rea by showing that Souleng acted recklessly
 regarding whether he had been "involved in an accident resulting
 in bodily injury to any person[.]" See HRS § 291C-12.6(a). 
For purposes of the Accidents Involving Bodily Injury
 
offense, "[b]odily injury" is defined to include "physical
 pain[.]" HRS § 291C-1 (2007). The evidence showed that Souleng
 struck Sabio twice when Souleng backed his vehicle into Sabio;
 that Souleng's vehicle hit Sabio on the side of Sabio's leg and
 knee; that Sabio's friend confronted Souleng about hitting Sabio;
 and that Sabio experienced physical pain and was taken to the
 hospital. We conclude that when viewed in the light most
 favorable to the State, there was sufficient evidence to show
 that Souleng acted with at least a reckless state of mind
 regarding whether he had been "involved in an accident resulting
 in bodily injury to any person[.]" See HRS § 291C-12.6(a). 
CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we reverse the District Court's
 
Judgment with respect to Souleng's conviction for Driving Without
 a License. We vacate the District Court's Judgment with respect
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to Souleng's conviction for Accidents Involving Bodily Injury,
 
and we remand the case with instructions to dismiss without
 prejudice the charge against Souleng for Accidents Involving
 Bodily Injury.
 
On the briefs:

 
Pedric T. Arrisgado
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant
 
James M. Anderson
 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
 
16
 