NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000701
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CHARLES GOEBEL, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-CR NO. 15-1-1288)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Charles Goebel appeals from the
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence; Notice of Entry ("Judgment")
entered by the Family Court of the First Circuit ("Family
Court")1/ on August 31, 2015.2/  Goebel was convicted by a jury on
the criminal offense of Violation of an Order for Protection,3/
1/The Honorable Jeffrey P. Crabtree presided.
2/On June 22, 2018, an Amended Judgment of Conviction and Sentence;
Notice of Entry ("Amended Judgment") was entered by the Honorable Matthew J.
Viola on temporary remand to the family court because the August 31, 2015
Judgment did not sufficiently comply with the requirements for judgments under
Rule 32(c)(1) of the Hawai #i Rules of Penal Procedure.  Hereafter, we deem the
appeal to be from the June 22, 2018 Amended Judgment.   
3/The July 18, 2012 Amended Order for Protection provided, in part:
B. CONTACT BETWEEN THE PARTIES
1. [Goebel] is prohibited from contacting [his mother].
2. [Goebel] is prohibited from telephoning, writing,
electronically communicating . . . or communicating
through third parties with [his mother] and any children
who reside with [his mother] or any children of the
parties, unless allowed by this order.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes section 586-11(a)(1)(A),
and was sentenced to 181 days in jail.  On appeal, Goebel argues
that the Family Court erred in: (1) denying his motion for
mistrial and failing to rule on his request to exclude any
reference to his incarceration; (2) its conduct of the colloquy
required under Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai# i 226, 900 P.2d 1293
(1995) and its progeny; and (3) instructing the jury that "[w]hen
a court order prohibits communications with a protected person by
using third parties, the prosecution is not required to prove
that the third party actually transmitted or that the protected
person actually received the communication." 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments they advance and the issues they raise, we address
Goebel's points of error as follows, vacate the Judgment, and
remand to the Family Court for a new trial.
We begin by addressing Goebel's second point of error
with regard to whether he "knowingly, intelligently, and
voluntarily" relinquished his right to testify under Tachibana . 
Prior to the presentation of evidence (the "pre-trial
advisement"), the Family Court addressed Goebel as follows:
THE COURT: Okay.  Good morning.  All right.  Let's do
our Tachibana  colloquy.  Mr. Goebel.
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, Your Honor.
THE COURT: You do not -– I'm about to talk with you
about your right to either testify or not testify in this
trial.
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, Your Honor.
THE COURT: You do not have to make a decision now.  This
is more in the way of a heads up and advance warning.  You'll
get till later in the trial before you have to make an actual
decision.  Okay?  But you -– you have a constitutional right
to testify in your own defense in this case.
You should of course consult with Ms. Domingo about
whether or not you should testify.
But it's important to understand that it's ultimately
your choice.  Your choice.  Not her choice.  Your choice.  And
no one can prevent you from testifying if you decide you want
to.  Your attorney can't stop you, I can't stop you.  I just
want to be clear about that.  Okay?
If you do decide to testify, okay, there's no special
protections for you.  You get cross-examined by the State's
attorney just as vigorously as any other witness.  Okay?  Do
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
you understand what I said so far?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, sir.
THE COURT: All right.  Thank you.  All right.  Next you
also have a constitutional right not to testify and to remain
silent.  Just as no one can force you to testify in this case,
no one can force you not to testify in this case.  Again, it's
entirely your choice, which again you should certainly consult
with your counsel about.  She's an experienced attorney.  She
knows what she's doing.  You should listen to her.  But again,
ultimately this is your choice.  Okay?
All right.  Now, if you choose not to testify, I will
give the jurors a strong instruction that they cannot hold
that against you in any way, shape, or form.  You have a
constitutional right to remain silent.  You should in no way
be penalized for it.  And I will make sure the jury
understands that.
All right.  Do you have any questions about that?
THE DEFENDANT: No, sir.
THE COURT: All right.  All right.  So again, you don't
have to decide now.  We'll revisit this issue later.  All
right.
All right.  Let's go do our immigration warning next.
Goebel does not contest the adequacy of the pre-trial advisement. 
Once the State rested its case, the Family Court
conducted the "ultimate colloquy" required under Tachibana :
THE COURT: Okay.  Let me just explain it to him again
though so it's fresh.  Mr. Goebel, I'm not asking you for a
decision right now.  I will let you talk to [your attorney]
first.  But I just wanted to go back over this.
You do have a constitutional right to testify in this
case if you want to. It is ultimately your choice and no one
can stop you. But you of course should consult with your
attorney about that.
If you do decide to testify, [the] prosecutor can cross-
examine you the same way any other witness is cross-examined.
You don't get any special protection.
You also have a constitutional right not to testify and
to remain silent. If you decide to remain silent, that is fine
and I will instruct the jurors that they cannot hold that
against you in any way, shape, or form.
All right. Do you have any questions about any of that?
THE DEFENDANT: No, Sir.
THE COURT: All right.  Then please consult with [your
attorney] and then we'll visit this one last time after you
two talk.
* * * 
THE COURT: All right.  So let the record reflect [that
defense counsel] and Mr. Goebel had a chance to talk and now
they are back here in court.  The jury is not present. 
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
State's attorney is here.
And has a decision been reached?
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Yes, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Okay.  And Mr. Goebel, what is your decision?
THE DEFENDANT: I choose not to testify, Your Honor.
THE COURT: All right.  And -– and as promised, I will
give the jurors an instruction that they're not to hold that
against you, okay?  So you don't have to worry about that.  I
assume they will follow my instruction.
All right.  Anything else?
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: No, Your Honor.  At this time[, the]
defense rests.
Goebel contends that he did not voluntarily and
knowingly waive his right to testify because the Family Court
failed to conduct a proper Tachibana  colloquy.  Specifically,
Goebel argues that the Family Court failed to engage him in the
"true colloquy" as required in State v. Han, 130 Hawai# i 83, 90,
306 P.3d 128, 135 (2013) or a "true exchange" as required in
State v. Pomroy , 132 Hawai #i 85, 93, 319 P.3d 1093, 1101 (2014). 
We agree that the Family Court "did not engage in a
sufficient verbal exchange with [Goebel] to ascertain whether
[his] waiver of the right to testify was based on [his]
understanding of the principles related by the [Family C]ourt." 
State v. Celestine, 142 Hawai# i 165, 172, 415 P.3d 907, 914
(2018) (citing Han, 130 Hawai #i at 91–93, 306 P.3d at 136–38);
contra Celestine, 142 Hawai# i at 175, 415 P.3d at 917
(Recktenwald, C.J., dissenting) ("Respectfully, such formalism is
not the best method to protect a defendant's right to
testify. . . . Reducing our review of waivers of the right to
testify to a checklist detaches the Tachibana  colloquy from the
vital constitutional concerns that led to its creation.")4/
The majority and the dissent in  disagreed
concerning the proper application of Han .  The dissent
distinguished Han on the basis that (1) the Lewis pre-trial
advisement, which included the court asking "[o]kay, you
understand?" and "[a]ny questions?" mitigated any harm and (2)Celestine
4/The Honorable Paula A. Nakayama joined in the dissent.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
the absence of any need for a translator or any similar salient
fact.  Celestine , 142 Hawai #i at 176, 415 P.3d at 918.  The
dissent contended that "[t]he salient fact was an integral part
of the totality of the circumstances upon which we concluded that
the defendant in Han had not made a knowing, intelligent, and
voluntary waiver of the right to testify."  Id. at 174, 415 P.3d
at 916.  The majority disagreed and explained that Han  supported
the conclusion of an insufficient verbal exchange.  Id . at 171
n.14, 415 P.3d at 913 n.14.  With regard to Han's need for an
interpreter, the Celestine majority concluded that "the presence
of a salient fact—the defendant's need for an interpreter—only
made the court's error in failing to ensure Han's understanding
'more egregious.'"  Id. (emphasis omitted) (citing Han, 130
Hawai#i at 92, 306 P.3d at 137).   "The salient fact therefore
only exacerbated the trial court's failure."  Id . (citing Han ,
130 Hawai # at 92, 306 P.3d at 137).  Furthermore, the majority
disregarded any effect that the pre-trial advisement might have
had.  It is the majority's view, of course, which we must apply.
Although the Family Court asked Goebel if he had "any
questions" at the close of the Tachibana  colloquy, the court did
not ask Goebel if he understood the rights that the court had
described to him.  Addressing a similar factual context, the
Celestine  court explained the inadequacy of that approach:
Thus, as in Han and Pomroy, the district court in this
case simply advised Celestine of her rights without any
discussion or exchange to "ascertain[] the defendant's
understanding of the proceedings and of the defendant's
rights."  Han, 130 Hawai #i at 90, 306 P.3d at 135 (emphasis
omitted); accord Pomroy , 132 Hawai #i at 94, 319 P.3d at 1102.
Id. at 171, 415 P.3d at 913 (footnote omitted).
Thus, the record does not demonstrate that Goebel's
waiver of the right to testify was knowingly, intelligently, and
voluntarily made.  See Han, 130 Hawai #i at 91–93, 306 P.3d at
136–38.  Furthermore, we cannot conclude from the record that the
Family Court's error was harmless because it is not knowable
whether Goebel's testimony, had he given it, could have
established reasonable doubt that he knowingly or intentionally
violated the Order for Protection.  Thus, Goebel's conviction
must be vacated.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
In light of that conclusion, we need not address
Goebel's remaining points of error.  
Based on the foregoing, the June 22, 2018 Amended
Judgment entered in the Family Court of the First Circuit is
vacated, and the case is remanded for further proceedings.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 27, 2018.
On the briefs:
Merlinda F.R. Garma,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City & County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
6