NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000243
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
WILLIAM A. DANIELS, JR., Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-10-01712)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant William A. Daniels (Daniels)
 
appeals from the December 8, 2010 Judgment and Notice entered in
 
the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division
 
1 (district court). Daniels was charged by complaint with
 
operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII),
 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 291E-61(a)(1)
 
and/or (a)(3) (Supp. 2009), as a first-time offender under HRS ยง
 
291E-61(b)(1) (Supp. 2009). 
Prior to trial, Daniels filed two
 
motions to dismiss the complaint. Daniels filed a Motion to
 Dismiss Re: Failure to Allege an Essential Fact (Motion to
 
Dismiss Regarding Mens Rea), seeking to dismiss the OVUII charge
 
on the ground that it was deficient for failure to allege a mens
 
rea. Apparently Daniels also filed a Motion to Dismiss Re:
 
Failure to Properly File a Written Complaint (Motion to Dismiss
 
1
 The Honorable William A. Cardwell presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Improperly Filed Complaint), seeking to dismiss the complaint 
unless Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) could prove 
that it was properly signed by the prosecutor. The district court denied both the Motion to Dismiss Regarding Mens Rea and 
the Motion to Dismiss Improperly Filed Complaint. After a 
stipulated facts bench trial, the district court found Daniels 
guilty of the OVUII charge and imposed sentence. 
On appeal, Daniels argues that the district court erred
 
in: (1) denying his Motion to Dismiss Regarding Mens Rea because
 
he claims the OVUII charge was defective for failing to allege
 
that he committed the OVUII offense intentionally, knowingly, or
 
recklessly; (2) denying his Motion to Dismiss Improperly Filed
 
Complaint because he claims that the State failed to meet its
 
burden of proving that the complaint was properly signed by the
 
prosecutor, and (3) convicting him on the charges despite the
 
foregoing errors. We affirm.
2
 
We resolve the arguments raised by Daniels as follows:
 1. We conclude that the OVUII charge was not required 
to allege a mens rea in order to be sufficient, and we reject Daniels's challenge to the sufficiency of the OVUII charge. 
State v. Nesmith, 125 Hawai' i 232, 257 P.3d 245 (App. 2011) 
(holding that a complaint which did not allege a mens rea was sufficient to charge the defendant with OVUII in violation of HRS 
ยง 291E-61(a)(1) and/or (a)(3), as a first-time offender under HRS 
ยง 291E-61(b)(1)). Accordingly, the district court properly 
denied Daniels's Motion to Dismiss Regarding Mens Rea. 
2. At the time the complaint in this case was filed 
on March 10, 2010, the Hawai' i Supreme Court's "Third Amended 
Order Establishing Pilot Project for Submitting Written Criminal Complaints by Electronic Mail in the District Courts of the 
First[,] Third[,] and Fifth Circuits of the State of Hawai' i" 
2
 In light of our disposition of this appeal, we need not address
the State's claim that we should dismiss the appeal because Daniels failed to
comply with the Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure; however, Daniels's
counsel is cautioned that future violations of the rules may result insanctions. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Pilot Project Order) filed on December 21, 2009, was in effect. 
The Pilot Project Order allows duly authorized prosecutors to
 
submit, and the clerks of the designated district courts to
 
accept, written criminal complaints in Adobe Portable Document
 
Format (Adobe PDF format) or locked Word format (locked Word
 
complaint) transmitted by email as an attachment. The Pilot
 
Project Order provides in pertinent part that:
 
An Adobe PDF or locked Word complaint submitted by
email that bears the facsimile signature of a prosecutor and
the prosecutor's attorney identification number has the same
force and effect as the prosecutor's handwritten signature
on any written complaint, provided the email by which the
complaint was submitted originates from an official email
address known to the Clerk. For purposes of this order and
any rules of court, the facsimile signature may either be an
image of a handwritten signature or the software printed
name of the prosecutor preceded by /s/.
 
The complaint against Daniels is valid on its face. 
The complaint contains the name and attorney identification 
number of Deputy Prosecuting Attorney Thomas C. Koenig and bears 
a facsimile signature in the form of the software printed name of 
"THOMAS C. KOENIG" preceded by "/s/." It is Daniels, and not the 
State, that bears the burden of setting forth a prima facie case 
showing that he is entitled to the dismissal of the charge. See 
State v. Almeida, 54 Haw. 443, 448, 509 P.2d 549, 552 (1973) (concluding that a defendant who files a motion to dismiss bears 
the burden of presenting a prima facie case showing that he or 
she is entitled to dismissal); State v. Layton, 53 Haw. 513, 516, 
497 P.2d 559, 561-62 (1972) (noting that an indictment has a 
presumption of validity); State v. Rodrigues, 63 Haw. 412, 417, 
629 P.2d 1111, 1115 (1981) ("In challenging the validity of an 
indictment, the defendant has the burden to establish 
prejudice."); State v. Chong, 86 Hawai' i 290, 295, 949 P.2d 130, 
135 (App. 1997) (stating that "the defendant bears the burden of proof when challenging an indictment"). 
The Motion to Dismiss Improperly Filed Complaint was 
not part of the record on appeal. Pursuant to Rule 11(a) of the 
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure, Daniels, as appellant, has 
the duty to provide a complete record for this court's review of 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
his points of error. Review of the transcript and the remainder
 
of the record does not reflect that Daniels provided the district
 
court with any basis for believing that the facsimile signature
 
that appears on the complaint failed to comply with the Pilot
 
Project Order. A facsimile signature of a prosecutor that
 
complies with the requirements of the Pilot Project Order "has
 
the same force and effect as the prosecutor's handwritten
 
signature on any written complaint[.]" Daniels failed to meet
 
his burden of setting forth a prima facie case that he is
 
entitled to the dismissal of the complaint based on a claim that
 
it was not properly signed. Accordingly, it appears that the
 
district court properly denied Daniels's Motion to Dismiss
 
Improperly Filed Complaint, and did not err in convicting Daniels
 
thereon.
 
Therefore, the District Court of the First Circuit,
 
Honolulu Division's December 8, 2010 Judgment and Notice is
 
affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 24, 2011. 
On the briefs:
 
Timothy I. MacMaster
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
 
Delanie D. Prescott-Tate
 Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plantiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
4
 