NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000052
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JACQUES RAYMOND MONTEIL, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
KONA DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 3P711-1171)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jacques Raymond Monteil (Monteil)
 
appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order,
 
entered on January 10, 2012 in the District Court of the Third
 
Circuit, Kona Division (District Court).1 Monteil was found
 
guilty of Prostitution, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
(HRS) § 712-1200(1) (1993 and Supp. 2013)2.
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph P. Florendo, Jr. presided.
 
2
 HRS § 712-1200(1) states:
 
§712-1200 Prostitution. (1) A person commits the
offense of prostitution if the person:
 
(a)	 Engages in, or agrees or offers to engage in,
sexual conduct with another person for a fee; or
 
(b)	 Pays, agrees to pay, or offers to pay a fee to
another to engage in sexual conduct.
 
(continued...)
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Monteil's points of error as follows and affirm.
 
At base, Monteil challenges the sufficiency of the 
evidence presented at trial. Monteil claims the District Court 
erred by finding that the term "GFE" as used in this case meant 
engaging in sex as a boyfriend and girlfriend without 
contraceptives, that there was no agreement to pay a fee to 
another to engage in sexual conduct because the term "GFE" is 
uniformly recognized by federal courts to mean "good faith 
estimate," there is no legally recognized definition of the term 
"GFE" in Hawai 'i, the term "GFE" is not a commonly understood 
slang term, and the term "GFE experience" was used (not "GFE") and "GFEE" is a recognized acronym for "good fun everywhere 
experience." Monteil contends there was insufficient evidence to 
convict him because there was no evidence that he paid, agreed to 
pay, or offered to pay a fee to another to engage in sexual 
conduct. Monteil also contends that the District Court erred by 
finding that he did pay a fee to engage in sexual conduct with 
another person because there was no evidence that any funds or 
money was paid. 
2(...continued)
(2) As used in subsection (1), "sexual conduct" means
"sexual penetration," "deviate sexual intercourse," or
"sexual contact," as those terms are defined in section
707-700.
 
HRS § 707-700 (Supp. 2013) defines sexual penetration as:
 (1)	 Vaginal intercourse, anal intercourse, fellatio,
deviate sexual intercourse, or any intrusion of any
part of a person's body or of any object into the
genital or anal opening of another person's body; it
occurs upon any penetration, however slight, but
emission is not required. As used in this definition,
"genital opening" includes the anterior surface of the
vulva or labia majora; or
 
(2)	 Cunnilingus or anilingus, whether or not actual
penetration has occurred.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) With regard to the District Court's finding that 
use of the term "GFE" was sufficient to convey the intent to 
engage in sex for a fee, we conclude that the evidence was 
sufficient to support such a finding. "A finding of fact is 
clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence 
to support the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in 
support of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left 
with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been 
made." State v. Locquiao, 100 Hawai 'i 195, 203, 58 P.3d 1242, 
1250 (2002) (citation omitted). 
Officer Chad Taniyama (Officer Taniyama) conducted the 
sting operation on behalf of the Hawai 'i Police Department in 
this case. He testified that he placed an advertisement on the 
website "backpage.com" for escort services. He engaged in email 
correspondence with a person responding to this advertisement. 
In the course of this correspondence and in response to Officer 
Taniyama's question "what kind of party u want," the person 
responded, "gfe experience for an hour or two." Officer Taniyama 
replied that, "my party for a hour will b $300" and the person 
agreed, writing, "k . . . .perfect then." Monteil appeared at 
the time and place later specified in emails.3 Officer Taniyama 
testified that the term "GFE" has a literal meaning of girlfriend experience, but that the meaning of girlfriend experience within 
the context of the escort industry was the equivalent of having 
sex as boyfriend and girlfriend without contraceptives, and 
Monteil agreed to an amount of money in exchange for this 
experience. 
Monteil argues that there are many other definitions
 
for the acronym GFE, including "good faith estimate" that he
 
testified he was familiar with as a realtor and that he was not
 
3
 Monteil testified that he did appear at the appointed time and
place and did not deny engaging in the email correspondence but maintained
that his intent was to pick "somebody to go and have dinner."
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
familiar with the term's meaning in the "prostitute world." 
However, even assuming that there are other meanings for the term 
and that the meaning testified to by Officer Taniyama has not 
been recognized by the courts of Hawai 'i as Monteil argues, 
Officer Taniyama testified that GFE is understood as referring to unprotected sex in the escort context, and when Monteil used the 
term in that context, it was to convey that meaning. The 
District Court credited Officer Taniyama's testimony. Moreover, 
the context of the email exchange supported Officer Taniyama's 
testimony. "It is well-settled that an appellate court will not 
pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and 
the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of 
fact." State v. Mattiello, 90 Hawai
'i 255, 259, 978 P.2d 693, 
697 (1999) (citation, internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). See also State v. Connally, 79 Hawai
'i 123, 126-27, 
899 P.2d 406, 409-10 (App. 1995) (Officer's testimony regarding the meaning of a term and other circumstances of the offense was 
sufficient to support conviction for prostitution). When the 
evidence adduced at trial is considered in the strongest light 
for the prosecution, State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 
1227, 1241 (1998) (citation omitted), there was substantial evidence as to every material element of the offense charged to 
support Monteil's conviction. Id. 
Finally, we reject Monteil's argument that the District
 
Court found Monteil actually paid a fee to another to engage in
 
sexual conduct. Rather, taken in context it appears the District
 
Court tracked the language of the statute when finding Monteil
 
guilty. Even if we were to construe the District Court's
 
statement as a finding that Monteil actually paid a fee and such
 
a finding is erroneous, it is harmless because there was evidence
 
of Monteil's agreement to pay a fee to engage in sexual conduct
 
with another person which is also a violation of HRS § 712­
1200(1).
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(2) Monteil's contention that the District Court
 
convicted him using the preponderance of the evidence rather than
 
proof beyond a reasonable doubt standard is not supported by the
 
record. The District Court stated that "the Court will find that
 
the State has proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant
 
intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly, paid or agreed to pay or
 
offered to pay a fee to another to engage in sexual conduct,"
 
(emphasis added). That the District Court did make a specific
 
finding as to its basis for finding Monteil guilty--that Monteil
 
agreed to pay a fee to another to engage in sexual conduct-­
further refutes Monteil's argument that the District Court's
 
verdict was ambiguous.
 
(3) Monteil also cites Rules 23(c) and 32(c)(2) of the
 
Hawaii Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) to support his claim that
 
the District Court failed to make specific findings of fact
 
instead of a general finding of guilt. However, Monteil failed
 
to invoke HRPP Rule 23(c)4
 by requesting findings at the time of
the District Court's general finding. Moreover, HRPP Rule
 32(c)(2)
5
 was not violated as the District Court signed and
entered a written Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order after
 
4 HRPP Rule 23(c) states:
 
(c) Trial without a jury. In a case tried without a
 
jury the court shall make a general finding and shall in
addition, on request made at the time of the general
finding, find such facts specially as are requested by the
parties. Such special findings may be orally in open court
or in writing at any time prior to sentence.
 
5
 HRPP Rule 32(c)(2) states:
 
(2) IN THE DISTRICT COURT. A judgment of conviction
in the district court shall set forth the disposition of the
proceedings and the same shall be entered on the record of
the court. The filing of the written judgment, or in the
event of oral judgment, the filing of the written notice of
entry of judgment, in the office of the clerk constitutes
entry of judgment. The judgment or notice of entry shall be
signed by the judge or by the clerk, if the judge so
directs.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
orally finding Monteil guilty which states that Monteil was found
 
guilty of violating HRS § 712-1200(1).
 
Therefore,
  
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of Entry of
 
Judgment and/or Order, entered on January 10, 2012 in the District Court of the Third Circuit, Kona Division, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, January 30, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Robert D.S. Kim
 
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Jason R. Kwiat,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Hawai
'i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
6
 