NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000308
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MYRLEEN K. KALOI, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
COUNTY OF HAWAI 'I, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-0293)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Myrleen K. Kaloi (Kaloi) appeals
 
from the (1) January 28, 2015 "Order Granting Defendant County of
 
Hawai'i's Motion to Dismiss Filed December 1, 2014"; (2) March 6, 
2015 "Final Judgment"; and (3) March 6, 2015 "Notice of Entry of
 Judgment/Order" all entered in the Circuit Court of the Third
 
1
Circuit  (circuit court).
 
2
On appeal,  Kaloi contends the circuit court erred in
1 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided.
2
 Kaloi's opening brief fails to comply with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4), which provides, in pertinent part: 
Rule 28. BRIEFS.
 
. . . .
 
(b) Opening brief. Within 40 days after the filing of
the record on appeal, the appellant shall file an opening
brief, containing the following sections in the order here
indicated:
 
. . . .
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dismissing her second amended complaint under Hawai 'i Rules of 
Civil Procedure Rule 12(b)(6) and in granting summary judgment in 
favor of Defendant-Appellee County of Hawai 'i (County) because 
there was evidence of pretext sufficient to create a genuine issue of material fact. 
I. BACKGROUND
3
 
Kaloi began working for the County in the Mass Transit
 
Agency around August 2009. Gloria Kalamau (Kalamau) was hired by
 
the County in May 2010 through the Older American Community
 
Service Employment Program, and worked in close proximity to
 Kaloi. Kaloi and Kalamau had difficulty working with each other,
 and both believed the other was hostile and a bully.
 
On April 14, 2011, Kalamau and Kaloi engaged in a
 
physical altercation. The record leaves the details of the
 altercation unclear, but as best we can surmise, Kaloi had
 attempted to lock up the office when Kalamau refused to leave.
 Kalamau eventually left the building. Kaloi and Kalamau then
 physically fought. Kaloi's daughter, who was present at the
 scene, called the police. Following the altercation, Kalamau did
 
2(...continued)
 
(4) A concise statement of the points of error set
forth in separately numbered paragraphs. Each point shall
state: (i) the alleged error committed by the court or
agency; (ii) where in the record the alleged error occurred;
and (iii) where in the record the alleged error was objected
to or the manner in which the alleged error was brought to
the attention of the court or agency. . . .
 
. . . . 
Points not presented in accordance with this section
will be disregarded, except that the appellate court, at its
option, may notice a plain error not presented. Lengthy
parts of the transcripts that are material to the points
presented may be included in the appendix instead of being
quoted in the point.
 
(Emphasis added.) Kaloi's counsel is warned that future violations of HRAP
 may result in sanctions.
 
3 We note that the record is sparse because there was no discovery
conducted. Counsel for Kaloi did not object to the circuit court treating the
County's motion to dismiss as a motion for summary judgment and does not raise
this issue on appeal. Because there is little evidence in the record beyond
that contained in the pleadings, the background facts are based in part on
allegations contained in the pleadings.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not return to work, and consequently, her employment with the
 
Mass Transit Agency was terminated.
 
On July 11, 2011, Kaloi filed a claim for workers'
 
compensation benefits based on the injuries she sustained in the
 altercation with Kalamau. Her claim was denied on January 20,
 2012 by the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations (DLIR)
 
on the basis that Kaloi's injuries did not arise in the course of
 
her employment. Kalamau also submitted a workers' compensation
 claim for injuries arising out of the April 14, 2011 incident,
 which were deemed compensable.
 
On March 27, 2013, Kalamau filed a civil lawsuit
 
against the County and named Kaloi as a defendant.
 
In a letter dated October 28, 2013, Kaloi's insurance
 
company requested the County provide for Kaloi's defense in the
 lawsuit filed by Kalamau. The County responded to Kaloi's
 insurance company by stating, "The County has no obligation to
 provide a defense or indemnification to Ms. Kaloi since she was
 acting outside of the course and scope of her employment at the
 time of the assault." In a letter dated November 12, 2013,
 Kaloi's insurance company urged the County to reconsider,
 stating, "We believe that the decision [by the DLIR] for Kalamau
 and Kaloi contradict each other. If one is found to be
 compensable under worker's compensation [(WC)], then clearly the
 
other would also fall under WC." The County replied that the
 
decisions were not incompatible because under Hawaii Revised
 
4
Statutes (HRS) § 386-3 (2015 Repl.),  Kaloi was ineligible for
workers' compensation because she was found to have been the

 
aggressor in the altercation. Additionally, the County stated,
 "the [DLIR] already found Ms. Kaloi was outside of the course and
 scope of employment and this decision is binding. As a result,
 
4 HRS § 386-3 provides, in relevant part:
 
§386-3 Injuries covered. . . .
 
(b) No compensation shall be allowed for an injury
incurred by an employee by the employee's willful intention
to injure oneself or another by actively engaging in any
unprovoked non-work related physical altercation other than
in self-defense, or by the employee's intoxication.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[the County] has no obligation to provide a defense or
 
indemnification to Ms. Kaloi since she was acting outside of the
 course and scope of her employment at the time of the assault."
 
Kaloi filed a charge of discrimination with the Equal
 
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) on April 30, 2014
 
alleging that she had been discriminated against on the basis of
 
her age, which she noted in the charge was fifty-four years, and
 that the County had retaliated against her. The EEOC closed
 investigation on Kaloi's charge on May 7, 2014. The Hawaii Civil
 Rights Commission issued Kaloi a right to sue letter on June 26,
 2014, noting that Kaloi had filed a complaint with the EEOC and
 that the complaint had been dismissed.
 
Kaloi filed her complaint against the County on August
 
4, 2014, seeking damages for age discrimination, hostile work
 environment, and negligent infliction of emotional distress.
 
On September 2, 2014, the County submitted a motion to
 
dismiss. Attached to the County's motion were exhibits that had
 not been included in Kaloi's complaint. Kaloi submitted her
 opposition to the County's motion to dismiss on October 3, 2014.
 Kaloi also attached exhibits to her opposition that were not
 attached to the complaint.
 
At the hearing on the motion to dismiss held January 9,
 
2015, the circuit court asked the parties whether they had any
 objections to the court treating the motion to dismiss as a
 motion for summary judgment because both parties had relied on
 evidence outside of the pleadings. Neither party objected.
 
The circuit court granted the County's motion to
 
dismiss on January 28, 2015. The circuit court entered its final
 judgment on March 6, 2015.
 
Kaloi filed her notice of appeal on April 2, 2015.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
Motion for Summary Judgment
5
  
"We review a circuit court's award of summary judgment
 
5 The circuit court treated the County's motion to dismiss as a motion
for summary judgment, so we review the circuit court's actions under the
summary judgment standard.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
de novo under the same standard applied by the circuit court." 
Adams v. CDM Media USA, Inc., 135 Hawai 'i 1, 12, 346 P.3d 70, 81 
(2015) (quoting Shoppe v. Gucci Am., Inc., 94 Hawai 'i 368, 376, 
14 P.3d 1049, 1057 (2000)). 
Summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.
A fact is material if proof of that fact would have the
effect of establishing or refuting one of the essential
elements of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light most
favorable to the non-moving party. 
Adams, 135 Hawai 'i at 12, 346 P.3d at 81 (citations, internal 
quotation marks, and brackets omitted) (quoting Shoppe, 94 
Hawai'i at 376, 14 P.3d at 1057).
III. DISCUSSION
 
Kaloi and the County dispute whether Kaloi established 
a prima facie case of unlawful discrimination on the basis of Kaloi's age sufficient to shift the burden of production to the County to articulate legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the alleged adverse employment actions. They also disagree on whether the County articulated legitimate non-discriminatory reasons for the alleged adverse employment actions and whether Kaloi presented sufficient evidence of pretext to create a genuine issue of material fact. Kaloi alleges the County intentionally treated her differently than it treated Kalamau, an older worker, a theory of discrimination known as "individual disparate treatment." See Shoppe, 94 Hawai
'i at 377-78, 14 P.3d 
at 1058-59 ("Generally, an individual alleging employment discrimination under the [Age Discrimination in Employment Act 
6
(ADEA)]  may pursue one or more of three available theories of
discrimination . . . [including] intentional discrimination

 
against an individual who belongs to a protected class (also
 
6 The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, 29 U.S.C. §§ 621-34
(2012).
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
known as individual 'disparate treatment' discrimination).").7
 
HRS § 378-2(a)(1)(A) (2015 Repl.) states, "It shall be 
an unlawful discriminatory practice . . . [b]ecause of . . . age 
. . . [f]or any employer to refuse to hire or employ or to bar or discharge from employment, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual in compensation or in the terms, conditions, or privileges of employment[.]" Where a plaintiff does not have direct evidence of discrimination, the "plaintiff can prove age discrimination 'by adducing circumstantial evidence of discrimination.'" Adams, 135 Hawai
'i at 13, 346 P.3d at 82 
(quoting Shoppe, 94 Hawai 'i at 378, 14 P.3d at 1059). "When 
analyzing a claim of age discrimination relying on circumstantial evidence, [the Hawai
'i Supreme Court] has set forth a three-step 
analysis, modifying the test adopted in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, [411 U.S. 792 (1973)]." Adams, 135 Hawai
'i at 13, 346 
P.3d at 82 (citing Shoppe, 94 Hawai 'i at 378-79, 14 P.3d at 1059­
60.
 
First, the plaintiff must establish a prima facie case of
discrimination by demonstrating, by a preponderance of the
evidence, the following four elements: (1) that plaintiff is
a member of a protected class; (2) that plaintiff is
qualified for the position for which plaintiff has applied;
(3) that plaintiff has suffered some adverse employment
action; and (4) that the position still exists.
 
Adams, 135 Hawai 'i at 13, 346 P.3d at 82 (ellipses omitted) 
(quoting Shoppe, 94 Hawai 'i at 378, 14 P.3d at 1059). 
Unlike a plaintiff in a failure to hire case like Adams
 
or an employment termination case like Shoppe, who is required to
 
establish that the position he or she applied for still exists,
 where a plaintiff alleges that he or she has suffered an adverse
 employment action but continued to be employed by the employer,
 the plaintiff may satisfy the fourth element of the prima facie
 case of discrimination by demonstrating that a similarly situated
 
7 The other two theories of discrimination under the federal ADEA are:
 
"(1) intentional discrimination against a protected class to which the
plaintiff belongs (also known as 'pattern-or-practice' discrimination); and
(2) unintentional discrimination based on a neutral employment policy that hasa disparate impact on a protected class to which the plaintiff belongs (alsoknown as 'disparate impact' discrimination)." Shoppe, 94 Hawai' i at 377, 14
P.3d at 1058 (footnotes omitted). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
employee8
 outside of his or her protected class was treated more
favorably.9 See Cornwell v. Electra Cent. Credit Union, 439 F.3d 
1018, 1028 (9th Cir. 2006) (articulating that the fourth element 
of a prima facie case of discrimination under Title VII requires plaintiff to prove "that the plaintiff's employer treated the plaintiff differently than a similarly situated employee who does not belong to the same protected class as plaintiff"); see e.g., You v. Longs Drugs Stores California, LLC, 937 F. Supp. 2d 1237, 1252 (D. Haw. 2013) (holding that a woman plaintiff alleging disparate treatment on the basis of sex failed to identify any men who were treated more favorably); but cf. Furukawa, 85 Hawai
'i at 15, 936 P.2d at 651 ("Although proof regarding 
similarly situated employees outside the protected class may be one way of raising an inference of intentional discrimination, it is not the only way." (quoting Heard v. Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Inc., 52 Cal. Rptr. 2d 620, 632 (Cal. Ct. App. 1996))). 
Second, "once the plaintiff establishes a prima facie 
case of discrimination, the burden of production shifts to the defendant to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action." Adams, 135 Hawai
'i at 13, 
346 P.3d at 82 (brackets omitted) (citing Shoppe, 94 Hawai 'i at 
378, 14 P.3d at 1059). 
Third, "if the employer rebuts the prima facie case,
 
the burden reverts to the plaintiff to demonstrate that the
 
8 "Generally, similarly situated employees are those who are subject to
the same policies and subordinate to the same decision-maker as the
plaintiff. . . . We hold that [a plaintiff] must prove that all of therelevant aspects of [her or] his employment situation were similar to thoseemployees with whom [she or] he seeks to compare [her or] his treatment."Furukawa v. Honolulu Zoological Soc'y, 85 Hawai' i 7, 14, 936 P.3d 643, 650
(1997). 
9 Federal law on the prima facie case of age discrimination under the
ADEA is inapplicable and unpersuasive in our interpretation of age
discrimination under HRS § 378-2 because elements of a prima facie case under
the ADEA are tailored to employees over forty years of age. See Diaz v. Eagle
Produce Ltd. P'ship, 521 F.3d 1201 (9th Cir. 2008) ("Each plaintiff can
establish a prima facie case of disparate treatment by demonstrating that he
[or she] was (1) at least forty years old, (2) performing his [or her] job
satisfactorily, (3) discharged, and (4) either replaced by substantially
younger employees with equal or inferior qualifications or discharged under
circumstances otherwise 'giving rise to an inference of age discrimination.'"
(quoting Coleman v. Quaker Oats Co., 232 F.3d 1271, 1281 (9th Cir. 2000)).
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defendant's proffered reasons were 'pretextual.'" Adams, 135 
Hawai'i at 14, 346 P.3d at 83 (citing Shoppe, 94 Hawai 'i at 379, 
14 P.3d at 1060).
A.	 The County's Legitimate, Nondiscriminatory Reason for Its
Challenged Actions
 
We need not decide whether Kaloi established a prima
 
facie case of discrimination. This is because assuming arguendo
 
that Kaloi established a prima facie case, we conclude that the
 County articulated legitimate non-discriminatory reasons for the
 alleged adverse employment actions, and that Kaloi failed to
 present sufficient evidence that the proffered reasons were
 pretextual to create a genuine issue of material fact. 
"In applying the second step of the analysis, 'the 
employer's explanation must be in the form of admissible evidence and must clearly set forth reasons that, if believed by the trier of fact, would support a finding that unlawful discrimination was not the cause of the challenged employment action.'" Adams, 135 
Hawai
'i at 15, 346 P.3d at 84 (brackets omitted) (quoting Shoppe, 
94 Hawai 'i at 378, 14 P.3d at 1059). "[I]f the employer's 
articulated reason is not legitimate (or is discriminatory) or if the articulated reason is not in the form of admissible evidence, then the burden of production has not been met." Adams, 135 
Hawai
'i at 15, 346 P.3d at 84. "The employer's burden to 
articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason is not a burden to prove the truth of the legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason. That is, the requirement in the second step is that the 'explanation' articulated be legitimate, not that the employer prove that the reason was true or correct." Id. at 23, 346 P.3d 
at 92 (internal citation omitted). 
Kaloi contends that she suffered two adverse employment
 
actions. First, Kaloi argues that she was denied workers'
 compensation benefits arising from the altercation between her
 and Kalamau. Second, Kaloi argues that the County refused to
 provide counsel for her in contravention of its explicit policy
 to provide employees with legal counsel. The policy in effect at
 the time Kaloi asked the County to provide a defense required the
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
County to "provide legal counsel for an Employee upon request
 
when . . . [t]he Employee is sued for actions taken in the course
 of employment and within the scope of the Employee's duties and
 responsibilities."
 
The County asserts that the undisputed facts
 
demonstrate that it was the DLIR that determined that Kaloi's
 claim for workers' compensation benefits was non-compensable. It
 was also the DLIR that determined that Kalamau's claim was
 compensable. Therefore, the County was not responsible for those
 decisions. 
The County also asserts that it denied Kaloi legal
 
counsel because Kaloi "was not acting in the course and scope of
 employment at the time of the fight[.]" The County's position is
 supported by letters dated November 4, 2013 and November 15, 2013
 in which the County explained its decision, stating, "[T]he
 [DLIR] already found Ms. Kaloi was outside of the course and
 scope of employment and this decision is binding. As a result,
 [the County] has no obligation to provide a defense or
 indemnification to Ms. Kaloi since she was acting outside of the
 course and scope of her employment at the time of the assault."
 
For the purposes of summary judgment, the County has 
met its burden to produce evidence of legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the denial of Kaloi's claim for workers' compensation benefits and for failing to provide legal counsel to Kaloi under its policy. The DLIR denied Kaloi's claim for workers' compensation benefits. In addition, under the County's policy, employees are provided legal representation only if the employee's actions from which a lawsuit arises or is related to were within the scope of the employee's duties or responsibilities. As such, the burden shifted to Kaloi "to demonstrate that [the County's] proffered reasons were 'pretextual.'" Adams, 135 Hawai
'i at 14, 346 P.3d at 83 (citing 
Shoppe, 94 Hawai 'i at 379, 14 P.3d at 1060).
B. Whether the County's Proffered Reasons were Pretextual
 
"A plaintiff may establish pretext 'either directly by
 
persuading the court that a discriminatory reason more likely
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
motivated the employer or indirectly by showing that the 
employer's proffered explanation is unworthy of credence." Shoppe, 94 Hawai
'i at 379, 14 P.3d at 1060 (citing Texas Dep't of 
Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981)). "At all times, the burden of persuasion remains on the plaintiff." Shoppe, 94 Hawai
'i at 379, 14 P.3d at 1060 (quoting Sam Teague, 
Ltd. v. Hawai 'i Civil Rights Comm'n, 89 Hawai 'i 269, 279 n.10, 971 
P.2d 1104, 1114 n.10 (1999)). 
Kaloi contends the County's stated justifications for
 
the denial of her claim for workers' compensation benefits and
 failing to provide Kaloi with legal representation were
 pretextual. With respect to workers' compensation benefits,
 Kaloi argues that she should have received workers' compensation
 benefits because Kalamau was awarded benefits arising out of the
 same incident. However, it was the DLIR that determined that
 Kalamau's claim was compensable and that Kaloi's claim was not. 
Accordingly, Kaloi failed to present sufficient evidence of
 pretext to prevent summary judgment regarding the denial of her
 workers' compensation claim. 
With respect to legal representation, Kaloi argues on
 
appeal, 
In making the decision not to provide [Kaloi] with legal
representation, the [County's] representative, Ms. Martin,
intentionally ignored:
 
(1)
 The fight was, at best, a mutual affray.
 
(2) The older worker, Ms. Kalamau, had been terminated
because of her participation in the affray.
 
(3) The older worker had been charged and prosecuted
for assault against [Kaloi] and her daughter.
 
(4) [Kaloi] received no discipline arising from the
affray.
 
(5) The apparent contradiction in terms of allowing
the older worker, Ms. Kalamau, workers' compensation
benefits and denying [Kaloi] similar benefits arising from
the affray.
 
(6) The violation of the applicable collective
bargaining agreement.
 
(7) Any violation of [HRS § 89-13(a)(8)], arising from
the denial of legal representation.
 
(8) The statutory mandate of [HRS § 89-19], using
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
false legal analysis under [HRS § 386-3] to override a
collectively bargained privilege of employment. 
(Citations to the record omitted.)10 Additionally, Kaloi argues,
 
"[t]he only difference between the two women involved in the
 
mutual affray, in denying [Kaloi] the 'privileges of employment'
 including workers' compensation and providing legal counsel to
 her in a personal injury lawsuit, was that [Kaloi] was younger in
 age."
 
Even viewing all of the evidence and inferences in a 
light most favorable to Kaloi, none of the facts Kaloi points to are sufficient to raise doubt as to the credibility of the County's proffered explanation for not providing Kaloi with legal representation. Cf. Simmons v. Aqua Hotels and Resorts, Inc., 
130 Hawai
'i 325, 331, 310 P.3d 1026, 1032 (App. 2013) ("Plaintiff 
pointed to specific facts sufficient to raise doubts as to the credibility of Defendants' proffered explanations."). Kaloi also fails to point to any facts or provide evidence that would indicate the County unlawfully relied on or referred to Kaloi's age in deciding not to provide her with legal representation in Kalamau's lawsuit. Kaloi suggests that Kalamau, an older worker, was treated more favorably, but Kalamau was never provided legal representation, and so Kaloi's comparison to Kalamau's treatment is inapplicable to whether Kaloi was treated unfairly because of her age. 
Kaloi has failed to demonstrate a single basis on which
 
a reasonable fact-finder could conclude that the County's alleged
 adverse employment actions were motivated by Kaloi's age. 
Because Kaloi could not establish any genuine issue of material
 fact as to whether the County's proffered reasons for the denial
 of her claim for workers' compensation benefits and failing to
 provide her with legal representation were pretextual, the County
 was entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. See Shoppe,
 
10 Although Kaloi argues in her brief that Kalamau "had been terminated
because of her participation in the affray," she alleged in her second amended
complaint that "Following the date of the assault, Kalamau did not return to
work, and consequently, was terminated by MASS TRANSIT." In her civil
 lawsuit, Kalamau alleged that she was acquitted of the charges of assault
against Kaloi and her daughter.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
94 Hawai 'i at 382, 14 P.3d at 1063. The circuit court did not 
err in its decision to grant summary judgment in favor of the 
County. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Therefore, the (1) January 28, 2015 "Order Granting 
Defendant County of Hawai 'i's Motion to Dismiss Filed December 1, 
2014"; (2) March 6, 2015 "Final Judgment"; and (3) March 6, 2015 "Notice of Entry of Judgment/Order" all entered in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 8, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Ted H.S. Hong
for Plaintiff-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Laureen L. Martin Deputy Corporation CounselSection Chief,County of Hawai
'i 
for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
12

 