NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000783 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
JOHN S. GAILLIARD and JODI L. GAILLIARD,
Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v. 
ELIZABETH RAWSTHORNE and WILLIAM BATES,
Defendants-Appellants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-366K) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendants-Appellants Elizabeth Rawsthorne and 
William Bates (
Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates) appeal from the 
Final Judgment Against Defendants Elizabeth Rawsthorne and 
William Bates (Final Judgment) entered on August 24, 2016, by the
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).  In this 
appeal, Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates also challenge the 
following: 1 
1. Order Denying Defendants' Motion for Summary
Judgment filed on February 12, 2016 (Order Denying
Motion for Summary Judgment
); 
2. Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and OrderRegarding Jury Waived Trial filed on March 30,2016 (Findings, Conclusions and Order); and 
1 The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3. Order Denying Defendants Elizabeth Rawsthorne and
William Bates' Motion for Reconsideration of thisCourt's Judgment Entered August 24, 2016, filed onOctober 17, 2016 (Order Denying Motion for
Reconsideration).
Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates assert on appeal that 
the Circuit Court erred by: (1) denying their motion for summary 
judgment; (2) concluding that Section 3.14 of the Declaration is not ambiguous; (3) concluding that protected view planes are determined by the height of the roofline of a residence on a lot, if any; (4) finding or concluding that Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates breached Section 3.14 of the Declaration by interference with protected view planes; (5) concluding that Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates were in breach of Section 3.14 based on heights of plants on their lot; and (6) awarding damages for diminution in value for a finite period of time. 
Moreover, Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates argue that 
the Circuit Court abused its discretion in denying their motion for reconsideration of the Final Judgment (Motion for 
Reconsideration).
2
Upon careful review of the record, arguments 
presented, and relevant law, we affirm. 
Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates and Plaintiffs-
Appellees John S. Gailliard and Jodi L. Gailliard (Plaintiffs Gailliards) own homes adjacent to each other in the Ali# i Heights
residential subdivision in Kailua-Kona, Hawai# i. The parties are
bound by a Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and 
2 Plaintiffs Gailliards argue that Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates
argue certain issues for the first time on appeal regarding the meaning of
Section 3.14; thus, these arguments should not be considered. In their replybrief, Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates list the instances in which theypresented some of these arguments before the Circuit Court. "Generally, the
failure to properly raise an issue at the trial level precludes a party from
raising that issue on appeal." State v. Hoglund, 71 Haw. 147, 150, 785 P.2d
1311, 1313 (1990) (citation omitted). 
Thus, the arguments that were not
raised below are not addressed here. 
Moreover, Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates make certain arguments
regarding the sufficiency of evidence. However, the trial transcripts werenot included in the record and were therefore struck when Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates appended them to their Reply Brief ( Order Striking
Transcript ). Thus, it is not possible to address these arguments. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Restrictions (Declaration). Section 3.14 in the Declaration 
states: 3
Trees/Shrubs:  Trees, shrubs, bushes, hedges and all other
plants on every lot shall be maintained at a reasonable
height so as not to interfere with the view planes availableto any other lot. 
On December 22, 2014, the Plaintiffs Gailliards filed 
their First Amended Verified Complaint, seeking monetary and 
injunctive relief, and attorneys' fees and costs, alleging that Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates were in breach of contract, as they were obstructing the Plaintiffs Gailliards' view planes with their trees and plants. (Complaint). 
On December 24, 2015, Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates 
filed a Motion for Summary Judgment. On February 12, 2016, the Circuit Court filed its Order Denying Motion for Summary Judgment, stating that "there is a genuine issue of material fact as to what is an interference with the [view plane]". 
A jury-waived trial was held on February 16 and 17, 
2016. After trial concluded, the Circuit Court conducted a site visit to the properties. 
On March 30, 2016, the Circuit Court filed its 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order. 
On August 24, 2016, the Circuit Court filed its Final 
Judgment. 
On September 2, 2016, the Defendants Rawsthorne and 
Bates filed a Motion for Reconsideration. On October 17, 2016, the Circuit Court filed its Order Denying Motion for Reconsideration. 
Points of error (1) through (5): Defendants Rawsthorne 
and Bates argue that the Circuit Court erred when it determined that Section 3.14 is not vague and ambiguous. In addition, Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates contend that the Circuit Court erred when it concluded that plants are at a reasonable height if they are at or below the roof line of their home and in not determining how much of a view or view plane an owner is entitled 
3 See Finding of Fact ( FOF) 9, in the Circuit Court's Findings,
Conclusions and Order, which has not been challenged on appeal. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to be protected. Moreover, they argue that the Circuit Court 
erred in finding4 or concluding that they breached the 
Declaration because there was no definition of a view plane provided by the Circuit Court, and there was no finding that their plants were above their roof line. 
Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates argue that, because 
"reasonable height," "view planes," and "available" are not defined, Section 3.14 is vague and ambiguous. Thus, they contend, the Circuit Court erred when it denied their Motion for Summary Judgment and Conclusions of Law (COL) 2, 3, and 4 are 
wrong. COLs 2, 3, and 4 state, in relevant part: 
2. Here the intent of the [sic] Section 3.14 of the
Declaration is clear and unambiguous[.] 
3. "The case at bar is distinguishable from [Hiner v.Hoffman, 90 Haw[ai #i] 188, 977 P.2d 878 (1999)], in
that the evidence here clarifies the meaning of thecovenant", see [DeMund v. Lum, 5 Haw. App. 336, 690P.2d 1316 (1984).] 
4. The covenant in this case, "provides clarificationresulting in a measurable height; it provides furtherlanguage limiting the height, other than just stating'reasonable height;' it continues to state 'so as not
to interfere with view planes." 
[] 
(Some brackets in original) . As with COL 4, the Circuit Court 
stated in its Order Denying Motion for Summary Judgment that 
"[t]he covenant here provides clarification resulting in a measurable height; it provides further language limiting the height, other than just stating 'reasonable height;' it continues to state 'so as not to interfere with view planes.'" 
"[T]he determination of whether a contract contains 
ambiguous terms is a threshold question of law for the court to decide. A contract term or phrase is ambiguous only if it is capable of being reasonably understood in more than one way." Wittig v. Allianz, A.G., 112 Hawai# i 195, 201, 145 P.3d 738, 744 
(App. 2006), (citations omitted). 
"If the language of a contract 
is unambiguous . . . the interpretation of the contract presents a question of law to be decided by the court." Id. (citations 
omitted). 
"The fundamental rule is that the intent of the 
4 Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates list a number of FOFs when they make
this argument. However, they do not argue that they are clearly erroneous. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
parties, as gleaned from the entire context of the covenant, 
governs. As long as the terms of a covenant are not ambiguous . . . we are required to interpret the terms 'according to their plain, ordinary, and accepted sense in common speech.'" Pelosi 
v. Wailea Ranch Est., 10 Haw. App. 424, 436, 876 P.2d 1320, 1327 (1994) (citations omitted). 
Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates, citing to Hiner, 
contend that "'[a]n ambiguity may arise from words plain in themselves but uncertain when applied to the subject matter of the instrument.'" Hiner, 90 Hawai# i at 190–91, 977 P.2d at 
880–81 (quoting Midkiff v. Castle & Cooke, Inc., 45 Haw. 409, 421, 368 P.2d 887, 894 (1962)). They argue this case is similar to Hiner, where the Hawai# i Supreme Court held that the "covenant 
at issue provid[ing] that 'no dwelling shall be erected, altered, placed or permitted to remain . . . which exceeds two stories in height[,]'" was ambiguous. Id. at 190, 977 P.2d at 880 (ellipses 
in original) (internal brackets and emphasis omitted). See also 
Fong v. Hashimoto, 92 Hawai# i. 568, 573, 994 P.2d 500, 505 (2000) 
(determining that "[b]ecause of this court's recent decision in [Hiner] (holding that a 'two-story in height' restriction was ambiguous and therefore unenforceable), the restriction over the Hashimotos' Lot 11, worded as a 'one-story in height' restriction, is likewise ambiguous, and therefore unenforceable." (footnote omitted)). 
Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates argue that in this 
case, like Hiner, without a numerical measurement, residents must guess what constitutes a "reasonable height" and "available view plane." Moreover, they argue that because a "measurement is stated in units such as feet and inches," COL 4 is wrong that the language in Section 3.14, "so as not to interfere with view planes," "provides clarification resulting in a measurable height." In our view, when Section 3.14 is read as a whole, and considering the plain, ordinary, and common meaning of the terms, we agree with the Circuit Court's determination that the intent is unambiguous - plants must be at a height "so as not to interfere with the view planes available to any other lot." In Hiner, the majority opinion made a point to note: 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In suggesting that the 1966 covenant should have utilized an
absolute height restriction (e.g., in feet or by some othernumerical measure), we are not saying that all covenantsmust conform to a specific formula. Our decision todaymerely requires drafters of covenants to use language that,in light of the purpose of the covenant, provides greatercertainty and is more susceptible to uniform enforceabilitythan that found in the 1966 covenant. For example, therestrictive covenant could have been worded to restrict the height of subsequently-built homes so as to protect the view 
planes  of earlier-built homes. 
90 Hawai# i at 194, 977 P.2d at 884 (emphasis added) (citation 
omitted). 
Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates also argue that because 
there were no findings that their plants were taller than their 
roof line, there was nothing to support the Circuit Court's conclusions that they breached the Declaration and were required to trim their plants accordingly. Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates thus take issue with COLs 7, 8, and 9, which state: 
7. Plaintiffs have proved by a preponderance of the
evidence that Defendants' plantings interferewith Plaintiffs' view planes and have meet [sic]their burden of proving that Defendants haveviolated Section 3.14 of the Declaration and have breached said term of the contract. 
8. Defendants' [sic] shall trim and maintain [theplants] in defendants' front yard to a height notaller than the roofline of the House on defendants' property. 
9. Defendants' [sic] shall trim and maintain [the plants] inDefendants' backyard to a height no taller than theroofline of the House on defendants' property. 
In our view, COLs 7, 8, and 9 are not wrong. After a 
bench trial and a site visit to the properties, the Circuit Court 
determined that, in this particular case, the plants growing above the roofline, located within Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates' lot, were obstructing Plaintiffs Gailliards' view plane, and that therefore Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates breached the Declaration. Furthermore, contrary to Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates' assertion, there were FOFs that supported the conclusion that the Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates breached the Declaration: 
13. Plaintiffs contend that the plantings on
Defendants' Property block their view and 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
therefore violate Section 3.14 of the 
Declaration. [] 
14. Plaintiffs' Exhibits, including P-1 on September22, 2014 and P-9 on November 6, 2012,demonstrate some of the ocean view planesavailable to Plaintiffs on those dates from their front and back yard, respectively. [] 
. . . . 
25. David Nelsen[
5] testified. . .he has observed
the Plaintiffs' loss of view planes during his
visits to their home. [] 
These FOFs reflect that Plaintiffs Gailliards' view plane was 
obstructed by Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates' plants. Thus, Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates' argument is without merit. See 
Scott v. Contractors License Bd., Prof'l & Vocational Licensing Div., Dep't of Reg. Agencies, 2 Haw. App. 92, 94, 626 P.2d 199, 201 (1981) ("While there is no necessity for over elaboration of detail or particularization of facts, the findings must include as much of the subsidiary facts as would be necessary to disclose to the reviewing court the steps by which the trial court reached its ultimate conclusion on each issue." (citations omitted)). 
Consequently, the Circuit Court was not wrong when 
it denied Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates' Motion for Summary Judgment and in COLs 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, and 9. 
Point of error (6): Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates 
argue that the Circuit Court erred in awarding $40,000 in damages for diminution in value for a finite period of time. They also argue that the Circuit Court ordered a prohibited double recovery -specific performance and monetary damages – and thus COL 11 was 
wrong. 
Conclusion of Law 11 states: "This Court finds by a 
preponderance of the evidence, the [Plaintiffs Gailliards'] property value was diminished by $40,000 for the period of [Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates'] breach of contract, specifically of Section 3.14 of the Declaration." Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates contend there was no finding that they had 
5 David Nelsen also resides in the Ali #i Heights subdivision. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
breached the Declaration for a specific period of time. However, 
there were photographs referenced in the FOFs regarding Plaintiffs Gailliards' view planes in 2012 and in 2014. The FOFs further detail communications, including demand letters to Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates in 2013 and 2014, to trim their trees to restore Plaintiffs Gailliards' view planes. Additionally, as part of the trial in 2016, the Circuit Court conducted a site visit to assess whether Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates were in fact obstructing Plaintiffs Gailliards' view plane. There also was testimony referenced in the FOFs that the decrease in property value because of the obstruction was between $40,000 to $100,000. Thus, the Circuit Court made sufficient findings to support COL 11 that "[Plaintiffs Gailliards'] property value was diminished by $40,000 for the period of [Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates'] breach of contract." COL 11 is not wrong. 
Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates argue further that 
there was double recovery because the Circuit Court concluded that Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates were required to both cut their plants and compensate Plaintiffs Gailliards for the loss of their property value. There was no double recovery in this instance because the Circuit Court awarded damages and ordered specific performance for different periods of time. That is, the Circuit Court required that Plaintiffs Gailliards be compensated for a breach of the Declaration that had already occurred and also required Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates to cut their plants so they would not continue to breach the Declaration. Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates' argument is without merit. 
Point of error (7): Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates 
argue that the Circuit Court abused its discretion when it denied their Motion for Reconsideration on the basis that there was no new evidence and/or arguments that were presented which could not have been presented previously. 
"Motions for reconsideration are reviewed for abuse of 
discretion. An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a 
party-litigant." Pancakes of Hawaii, Inc. v. Pomare Props. Corp., 85 Hawai# i 286, 296, 944 P.2d 83, 93 (App. 1997) 
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
As discussed 
supra, the Circuit Court was not wrong when it concluded that Defendants Rawsthorne and Bates violated the Declaration nor when it awarded specific performance and monetary damages. Thus, the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion when it denied the Motion for Reconsideration. 
Therefore, based on the foregoing, we affirm the 
following: 
1. Order Denying Defendants' Motion for Summary
Judgment filed on February 12, 2016; 
2. Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and OrderRegarding Jury Waived Trial filed on March 30,2016; 
3. Final Judgement Against Defendants ElizabethRawsthorne and William Bates filed on August 24,2016; and 
4. Order Denying Defendants Elizabeth Rawsthorne andWilliam Bates' Motion for Reconsideration of this Court's Judgment Entered August 24, 2016, filed onOctober 17, 2016. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 29, 2020. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge
Robert D. Triantos,Michelle Chi Dickinson, /s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
for Defendants-Appellants. Associate Judge 
Peter Van Name Esser, /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
for Plaintiffs-Appellees. 
Associate Judge 
9 