 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001030
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
ESTATE OF ROBERT FREY, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
ROBERT P. MASTROIANNI, M.D., Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 07-1-0206(1))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Chan, JJ.)
 
In this appeal arising out of a medical malpractice
 
action, Plaintiff-Appellant Estate of Robert Frey (Estate of
 
Frey) appeals from the Judgment, filed on July 25, 2014, in the
 Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (circuit court).
1 Judgment
 
was entered against the Estate of Frey and in favor of Defendant-
Appellee Robert P. Mastroianni, M.D. (Dr. Mastroianni) on all
 claims asserted by Frey in the Complaint.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. Facts alleged by the Estate of Frey are as follows:
 
On June 11, 2004, Robert Frey (Frey) ingested an
 
unknown quantity of Gamma-Hydroxybutyrate (GHB), a sedative. As
 a result of his GHB ingestion, Frey fell, sustaining a contusion
 and laceration to his forehead. An ambulance was called and Frey
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was taken to the emergency room at Maui Memorial Medical Center.
 
Frey was then transferred to the intensive care unit and treated
 by Dr. Mastroianni over the next two days. On June 13, 2004,
 Dr. Mastroianni discharged Frey in stable condition on oral
 antibiotics with a diagnosis of bronchitis.
 
After Frey's release, his condition worsened and he was
 
readmitted to the hospital the next day on June 14, 2004, with a
 diagnosis of pneumonia and sepsis caused by bacteria in his
 lungs, Klebsiella, which the Estate of Frey contends entered his
 lungs when Frey had vomited while unconscious before
 hospitalization and/or when Frey was intubated to assist with
 breathing during his first hospitalization. Frey died on
 June 15, 2004 as a result of the pneumonia.
 B. Procedural Background
 
Pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 671,
 
the Estate of Frey filed a claim against Dr. Mastroianni with the
 Medical Claims Conciliation Panel (MCCP) on June 13, 2006.
 
On June 12, 2007, after the case was heard and decided
 
by the MCCP, a Complaint was filed on behalf of the Estate of
 Frey and various family members
2, against Dr. Mastroianni for
 
medical malpractice and wrongful death. The Estate of Frey
 alleged in its Complaint that the medical treatment rendered by
 Dr. Mastroianni fell below the standard of care and that his
 negligence was a substantial factor causing Frey's death due to
 Dr. Mastroianni's: (1) misdiagnosis of Frey's condition as
 bronchitis rather than the proper diagnosis of pneumonia, despite
 the evidence of the presence of infiltrates in his chest x-ray,
 his persistent fever, and his probable aspiration of vomit while
 he had been unconscious; (2) failure to start Frey on broad
 spectrum intravenous antibiotics soon after his first admission;
 
2
 Family members, Michael Frey, Mary Frey, Elizabeth Koether, Audrey
Frey, and Albert Frey's claims against Dr. Mastroianni were dismissed pursuant
to the Order Granting Defendant Robert P. Mastroianni, M.D.'s Motion for
Partial Summary Judgment, Filed Herein on 03/17/09, filed on May 6, 2009 and
the Order Granting Defendant Robert P. Mastroianni, M.D.'s Motion to Dismiss
Claims of Plaintiffs Albert Frey and Audrey Frey, Filed Herein on December 21,
2011, filed on January 27, 2012.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) failure to obtain another chest x-ray the day Frey was
 
discharged; and (4) discharge of Frey on June 13th without
 
determining the reason for his fever. After several
 continuances, the circuit court set the matter for jury trial on
 July 7, 2014. Jury trial commenced on July 8, 2014.
 
On July 9, 2014, after the presentation of the Estate
 
of Frey's case-in-chief, Dr. Mastroianni moved for judgment as a
 matter of law (JMOL) arguing that the Estate of Frey failed to
 present any expert testimony that the care and treatment provided
 by Dr. Mastroianni caused Frey's death and the Estate of Frey
 should not be allowed to pursue an alternative claim for lost
 chance of survival. The circuit court granted Dr. Mastroianni's
 JMOL motion, holding that:
 
In addition to establishing the relevant medical
standard of care through expert testimony, a plaintiff must
produce expert medical testimony to establish with a
reasonable degree of medical certainty that a physician's
care and conduct towards a patient was a proximate or
contributory cause of the plaintiff's death.
In this case, the Court pored over the deposition
transcripts that were read to the jury yesterday and re-read
the Court's notes from Dr. Schultz's testimony, and the
Court finds that none of the Plaintiff's experts opined to a
reasonable degree of medical probability as to whether Mr.
Frey would have survived had he not been discharged by Dr.
Mastroianni.
 
Judgment in favor of Dr. Mastroianni was entered on
 
July 25, 2014.
 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
The Estate of Frey alleges the following points of
 
error on appeal:
 
(1) The circuit court erred in holding that it did not
 
have jurisdiction over its loss of chance claim;
 
(2) The circuit court erred in ignoring a loss of
 
chance theory of causation;
 
(3) The circuit court improperly granted Dr.
 
Matroianni's motion for Judgment as a Matter of Law without a
 
sufficient basis in the record;
 
(4) The circuit court abused its discretion when it
 
granted Dr. Mastroianni's motion in limine to exclude portions of
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the expert evidence as "new opinions;"
 
(5) The circuit court abused its discretion when it
 
excluded expert opinions on radiology, based on an improper
 
application of Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule 702;
 
(6) The circuit court improperly excluded expert
 
evidence as speculative;
 
(7) The circuit court improperly ruled that Pneumonia
 
Severity Index testimony was not proper rebuttal testimony;
 
(8) The circuit court improperly failed to take
 
judicial notice of a Life Expectancy Table;
 
(9) The circuit court improperly excluded portions of
 
Donald Regalmuto's testimony at trial.
 
III.
 DISCUSSION
 
A. Circuit Court's Jurisdiction over "Loss of Chance" Claim
 
1. Medical Claim Conciliation Panel (MCCP) Process 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 671 was enacted 
to facilitate efficiency and stability in the resolution of medical malpractice actions. Lee v. Hawaii Pacific Health, 121 
Hawai'i 235, 243-44, 216 P.3d 1258, 1266-67 (App. 2009) (citing 
Kaiser Found. Hosps., 90 Hawai' i 425, 438-39, 978 P.2d 863, 876­
77 (1999)). "The MCCP process was created to encourage early settlement of claims and to weed out unmeritorious claims through review, rendering of findings, and issuance of advisory opinions on issues of liability and damages by panels with both medical and legal expertise." Id. 
At the time of Frey's death, HRS § 671-12(a) (1993)
 
stated that:
 
[A]ny person or the person's representative claiming that a
medical tort has been committed shall submit a statement of
 the claim to the medical claim conciliation panel before a
suit based on the claim may be commenced in any court of
this State. Claims shall be submitted to the medical claim
 conciliation panel in writing. The claimant shall set forth
facts upon which the claim is based and shall include the
names of all parties against whom the claim is or may be
made who are then known to the claimant.
 
HRS § 671-1(2)(1993) defines "medical tort" as "professional
 
negligence, the rendering of professional service without
 informed consent, or an error or omission in professional
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
practice, by a health care provider, which proximately causes
 
death, injury, or other damage to a patient."
 
The applicable version of HRS § 671-16 provides the
 
circumstances under which claims may be filed in court as
 follows:
 
§ 671-16 Subsequent litigation; excluded evidence.  The
 
claimant may institute litigation based upon the claim in an
appropriate court only after a party to a medical claim
conciliation panel hearing rejects the decision of the
panel, or after the twelve-month period under section 671-18
has expired.
 
HRS § 671-16 (Supp. 2003). Therefore, in order for a party to
 
file suit against a health care provider arising from a "medical
 tort", they must first submit a written statement of "the claim"
 setting forth the "facts upon which the claim is based" to the
 MCCP for review.
 
Dismissal of a civil suit based on a medical tort claim 
is proper where a claimant files a suit before first having submitted a statement of the claim to the MCCP. See Dubin v. 
Wazukawa, 89 Hawai' i 188, 198, 970 P.2d 496, 506 (1998)(affirming 
a dismissal of plaintiff's first amended complaint where plaintiff "chose to sidestep the requirements of HRS §§ 671-12 and 671-16 by filing the present lawsuit, rather than first seeking resolution of his claims by an MCCP, as required by those statutes."); See also Buenafe v. Kiehm, No. 29237 (App. May 4, 2011)(SDO)(holding that because HRS § 671-12 requires that "the claim" being presented to the MCCP be set forth in a written statement of the claim, oral testimony during the MCCP hearing about an informed consent claim was not sufficient to grant the circuit court jurisdiction over such claim). 
The Estate of Frey contends that the circuit court
 
improperly dismissed its medical negligence claim based on a loss
 of chance theory of causation when it ruled the Estate of Frey
 failed to specifically plead "loss of chance" in its statement of
 the claim to the MCCP. The Estate of Frey argues that the
 circuit court improperly characterized its "loss of chance"
 theory as a separate cause of action rather than a theory of
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
causation and that HRS § 671-12 does not require a party to fully 
develop the theories of its case at the MCCP level. Therefore, our inquiry is not only whether the theory of recovery for loss of chance to survive predicated upon alleged medical malpractice is actionable in Hawai' i, but also whether the loss of chance 
doctrine is a distinct compensable injury creating a separate cause of action or rather a form of causation for a medical malpractice claim. 
2. Loss of Chance
 
The loss of chance doctrine places a value on a
 
patient's likelihood of achieving a more favorable outcome.
 Matsuyama v. Birnbaum, 452 Mass. 1, 3, 890 N.E.2d 819, 823 (2008)
 (explaining that "the loss of chance doctrine views a person's
 prospects for surviving a serious medical condition as something
 of value"). Under this doctrine, when a medical provider's
 negligence diminishes or eliminates a patient's prospect for a
 more favorable outcome or deprives a patient of an opportunity of
 survival, the medical provider has harmed the patient and is
 liable for damages. Dickhoff ex rel. Dickhoff v. Green, 836
 
N.W.2d 321, 334 (2013). Hicks v. U.S., was one of the first
 
cases to acknowledge the significance of losing a chance to
 survive and is cited by many jurisdictions that have adopted some
 form of the doctrine. 368 F.2d 626 (4th Cir. 1966). In Hicks,
 the Fourth Circuit addressed the concept of loss of a substantial
 possibility of survival holding that a physician's failure to
 diagnose a condition that led to the death of the patient
 constituted negligence. Id. at 632-33. The court explained:
 
When a defendant's negligent action or inaction has
effectively terminated a person's chance of survival, it
does not lie in the defendant's mouth to raise conjectures
as to the measure of the chances that he has put beyond the
possibility of realization. If there was any substantial
possibility of survival and the defendant has destroyed it,
he is answerable. Rarely is it possible to demonstrate to
an absolute certainty what would have happened in
circumstances that the wrongdoer did not allow to come to
pass. The law does not in the existing circumstances
require the plaintiff to show to a certainty that the
patient would have lived had she been hospitalized and
operated on promptly.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 632.
 
States remain divided in determining whether to adopt
 
the loss of chance theory of recovery in an action for medical
 
malpractice. See Matsuyama, 452 Mass. at 10 n.23 890 N.E.2d at
 
828 n.23 (listing states that have adopted, declined to adopt, or
 have not addressed the loss of chance doctrine). Jurisdictions
 rejecting the loss of chance doctrine choose to adhere to the
 traditional rules of causation or "all-or-nothing approach". See
 
Kramer v. Lewisville Memorial Hosp., 858 S.W.2d 397, 399-400
 (1993)(declining to adopt the loss of chance doctrine as part of
 the common law of Texas in favor of traditional causation
 principles); Gooding v. University Hosp. Bldg., Inc., 445 So.2d
 1015 (Fla. 1984); Smith v. Parrott, 175 Vt. 375, 833 A.2d 843
 (2003). In such jurisdictions, a plaintiff is required to show
 that the medical professional's negligence more likely than not
 caused the injury. Kramer, 858 S.W.2d at 400. In other words,
 
if the plaintiff can show that the patient was negligently
 deprived of a greater-than-even or greater than 50% chance of
 avoiding the injury, in this case death, then the plaintiff can
 recover all damages resulting from the outcome. Id. In
 
contrast, if the plaintiff can only show that the defendant's
 negligence caused the loss of a 50% chance or less chance of
 avoiding the ultimate harm, the plaintiff recovers nothing. Id. 
States that have adopted some form of the loss of chance doctrine
 have done so in response to their dissatisfaction with the
 sometimes harsh effects of the "all or nothing" rule in medical
 malpractice claims. See Matsuyama, 452 Mass. at 12-13, 890
 
N.E.2d at 829-30 ("So long as the patient's chance of survival
 before the physician's negligence was less than even, it is
 logically impossible for her to show that the physician's
 negligence was the but-for cause of her death, so she can recover
 nothing. Thus, the all or nothing rule provides a 'blanket
 release from liability for doctors and hospitals any time there
 was less than a 50 percent chance of survival, regardless of how
 flagrant the negligence.'")
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Matsuyama, the Supreme Judicial Court of
 
Massachusetts explained that the "all or nothing" approach
 
undermines the cost allocation and deterrence functions of tort
 law.
 
Fundamentally, the all or nothing approach does not serve
the basic aim of "fairly allocating the costs and risks of
human injuries[.]" The all or nothing rule "fails to deter"
medical negligence because it immunizes "whole areas of
medical practice from liability." It fails to provide the
proper incentives to ensure that the care patients receive
does not slip below the "standard of care and skill of the
average member of the profession practising [sic] the
specialty." And the all or nothing rule fails to ensure
that victims, who incur the real harm of losing their
opportunity for a better outcome, are fairly compensated for
their loss.
 
Matsuyama, 452 Mass. at 13, 890 N.E.2d at 830 (citations and
 
footnote omitted). The Matsuyama Court, in adopting the loss of
 chance doctrine, agreed with the Supreme Court of Wyoming's
 reasoning in McMackin v. Johnson County Healthcare Ctr., which
 stated:
 
First, the loss of an improved chance of survival or
improvement in condition, even if the original odds were
less than fifty percent, is an opportunity lost due to
negligence. Much treatment of diseases is aimed at
 extending life for brief periods and improving its quality
rather than curing the underlying disease. . . . Second,
immunizing whole areas of medical practice from liability by
requiring proof by more than fifty percent that the
negligence caused the injury fails to deter negligence
conduct. As Judge Posner wrote in DePass v. United States ,
[721 F.2d 203, 208 (7th Cir. 1983)] 'A tortfeasor should not
get off scot free because instead of killing his victim
outright he inflicts an injury that is likely though not
certain to shorten the victim's life.'
 
Matsuyama, 452 Mass. at 13-14, 890 N.E.2d at 830-31 (quoting
 
McMackin v. Johnson County Healthcare Ctr., 73 P.3d 1094, 1099
 (Wyo. 2003)).
 
The application of the loss of chance doctrine has
 
varied among jurisdictions that have adopted the theory.
 Dickoff, 836 N.W.2d at 334. Some jurisdictions have applied the
 loss of chance doctrine as a relaxed form of causation.
 McKellips v. Saint Francis Hosp. Inc., 741 P.2d 467 (Okla. 1987)
 (explaining that the relaxed causation approach permits recovery
 when the plaintiff establishes a "substantial possibility of
 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
causation."); See also Delaney v. Cade, 255 Kan. 199, 873 P.2d
 
175, 185-86 (1994); Hamil v. Bashline, 481 Pa. 256, 268-69, 392
 
A.2d 1280, 1286 (1978). While other jurisdictions that have
 adopted the doctrine recognize the patient's lost chance as a
 distinct compensable injury creating a separate cause of action. 
See Alexander v. Scheid, 726 N.E.2d 272, 279 (Ind. 2000);
 DeBurkarte v. Louvar, 393 N.W.2d 131, 136-37 (Iowa 1986);
 Matsuyama, 452 Mass. at 16-17, 890 N.E.2d at 832. 
We agree with those courts that recognize loss of
 
chance as a distinct compensable injury resulting from a medical
 provider's negligence. When one is deprived of a chance to
 survive due to a medical provider's negligence, the actual loss
 suffered is the lost chance itself and not the ultimate injury or
 death. Under this approach, damages recoverable are limited to
 the value of the lost chance. A plaintiff would need to prove
 that he or she initially had at least some chance of a more
 favorable outcome before the medical provider's negligence
 occurred. However, a plaintiff would not recover for loss of
 chance if the plaintiff is able to establish that the defendant's
 negligence caused the ultimate injury or death, instead the
 plaintiff would recover all damages compensable under a
 traditional negligence claim.
 
Recognizing loss of chance as the injury itself is
 
consistent with the traditional rules of negligence.
3 If the
 
injury is established -- i.e., that the patient lost a chance of
 surviving or lost a chance of a substantial increase in the
 length of such survival, the plaintiff must also prove that the
 
3
 In order to prevail on a negligence claim the plaintiff is required
to prove: 
(1) A duty, or obligation, recognized by the law, requiring
the defendant to conform to a certain standard of conduct,
for the protection of others against unreasonable risks; (2)
A failure on the defendant's part to conform to the standard
required: a breach of the duty; (3) A reasonably close
causal connection between the conduct and the resulting
injury[;] and (4) Actual loss or damage resulting to the
interests of another.
 
Takayama v. Kaiser Foundation Hosp., 82 Hawai 'i 486, 498-99, 923 P.2d 903,
915-16 (1996). 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
medical provider breached his or her duty of care. Additionally,
 
the theory of loss of chance as a distinct injury is consistent
 with the traditional rules of causation. A plaintiff must prove
 by a preponderance of the evidence that the medical provider's
 breach of duty caused the plaintiff's likelihood of achieving a
 more favorable outcome to be diminished. As such, damages are
 then limited to only those proximately caused by the medical
 provider's breach of duty.
 
The Estate of Frey relies primarily on McBride v. U.S., 
462 F.2d 72 (9th Cir. 1972), where the Ninth Circuit applied Hawai'i law in a wrongful death suit. In McBride, Robert McBride 
had undergone testing to diagnose the source of pain in his lower chest at the hospital, which ultimately revealed no evidence of heart disease. Id. at 73. A few days later, McBride went to the 
emergency room upon experiencing severe chest pain. Id. The 
physician on duty attributed the chest pain to gastrointestinal disturbances but did not rule out heart disease, advising McBride be admitted to the coronary care unit. Id. McBride expressed a 
preference to return home, which the physician allowed on the condition that he return to the hospital immediately should the pain recur. Id. McBride died shortly after returning home from 
the hospital. Id. 
McBride's widow and minor children commenced a wrongful
 
death action against the United States claiming that McBride's
 death was proximately caused by the negligent failure of the duty
 doctor at the hospital to admit McBride to a coronary care unit.
 Id. The trial judge dismissed the claim on the grounds that the
 
plaintiffs had not established the requisite causal proximity
 between nonadmittance to the coronary care unit and McBride's
 death. Id. at 74. On appeal, the Ninth Circuit reversed and
 
held that
 
[w]hen a plaintiff's cause of action rests upon an allegedly
negligent failure to give necessary treatment, he must show,
with reasonable medical probability, that the treatment
would have successfully prevented the patient's injury. He
 need not prove with certainty that the injury would not have
occurred after proper treatment. . . . the absence of
positive certainty should not bar recovery if negligent
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failure to provide treatment deprives a patient of a
significant improvement in his chances for recovery.
 
Id. at 75.
 
McBride has been cited approvingly by the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court in Craft v. Peebles, 78 Hawai' i 287, 305, 893 P.2d 
138, 156 (1995). In Craft, the supreme court discussed the
 
necessity of basing medical opinions upon reasonable medical
 probabilities for the purpose of establishing causation:
 
That opinion, however, must be based on reasonable medical
probability. See McBride v. United States, 462 F.2d 72, 75
(9th Cir. 1972)(In a medical malpractice action, a plaintiff
must show with reasonable medical probability a causal nexus
between the physician's treatment or lack thereof and the
plaintiff's injury.); Duff v. Yelin, 721 S.W.2d 365
(Tex.App. 1986)(The opinion testimony of a medical expert
providing the causal nexus must be grounded upon reasonable
medical probability as opposed to a mere possibility because
possibilities are endless in the field of medicine.)
 
Id.
 
Dr. Mastroianni argues that this court has expressly 
declined to recognize the loss of chance doctrine in its holding 
in Barbee v. Queen's Medical Center, 119 Hawai' i 136, 164, 194 
P.3d 1098, 1126 (2008). We disagree. In Barbee, children of a deceased patient brought a medical malpractice action alleging negligent medical treatment which ultimately led to the patient's death. Id. at 143-44, 194 P.3d at 1106. The circuit court 
entered judgment against plaintiffs and in favor of the physician based in part on the plaintiffs' failure to provide expert medical testimony to establish causation. Id. at 145, 194 P.3d 
at 1107. On appeal, plaintiffs argued that they had proved causation by a preponderance of the evidence under the 'loss of chance doctrine'. Id. at 164, 194 P.3d at 1126. This court 
affirmed the circuit court's judgment concluding that "the fundamental requirement of establishing causation by expert medical testimony remains" and that the loss of chance doctrine does not relieve the plaintiffs of their burden of providing expert medical testimony to establish causation. Id. This 
court's holding in Barbee does not expressly decline to adopt the loss of chance doctrine, but rather reiterates the requirement of 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
providing expert medical testimony to establish causation in a
 
medical malpractice action, including those actions based on the
 loss of chance doctrine.
 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the loss of
 
chance doctrine is consistent with Hawai' i law and should be 
recognized as a separate compensable injury in circumstances such
 as this case. We note that our decision in recognizing loss of
 chance as a theory of recovery is thus limited to medical
 malpractice actions that result in death.
 
3. The Estate of Frey's MCCP Claim Letter
 
Based on our holding that loss of chance is a distinct
 
compensable injury and as such is a separate claim based on
 alleged medical malpractice, we now turn to whether the Estate of
 Frey asserted its loss of chance claim at the MCCP level in order
 to institute litigation based upon this claim. The circuit court
 stated at trial on July 10, 2014 that:
 
The Court finds that the requirements of HRS Chapter 671 are
jurisdictional and upon review of records submitted, the
Plaintiff has failed to raise a loss of chance claim before
 the medical claims conciliation panel; therefore, the Court
lacks subject matter jurisdiction over loss of chance claim
irrespective of whether this claim is recognized in Hawaii
as a valid distinction claim.
 
The Estate of Frey's MCCP Claim Letter submitted to the
 
MCCP, stated in relevant part:
 
Pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes, 671-1, et seq.,
Claimants Estate of Robert Frey, Albert Frey, Audrey Frey,
Michael Frey, Mary Frey, and Elizabeth Koether, by and
through their attorney, Anthony L. Ranken of Ranken &
Drewyer, hereby present a claim for damage resulting from
Robert Frey's death, which occurred as a result of the
negligence of the following respondent:
Robert P. Mastroianni, M.D.
 . . . .
 
Claimants allege that Robert P. Mastroianni, M.D., fell
below the applicable standard of care in multiple respects,
including but not limited to the following: (1) failing to
start Mr. Frey on broad spectrum intravenous antibiotics
soon after the first admission, when it became clear that he
had pneumonia; (2) discharging the patient on June 13
th
 
without determining the reason for his fever; (3) not
repeating the chest X-ray on June 13
th, which would clearly
have shown pneumonia; and (4) misdiagnosing Mr. Frey's
condition as bronchitis, despite the evidence of his chest
x-rays, his fever of 102, and his probable aspiration of
vomit while he had been unconscious.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
If Dr. Mastroianni had administered antibiotics in the
 
hospital on June 11th or 12th, repeated the chest x-ray on
June 13th, and kept Mr. Frey in the hospital for further
observation and treatment, then with the benefit of closer
observation and care it is likely that he would have
survived.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
We determine that the Estate of Frey's statement of its
 
claim to the MCCP did not assert a loss of chance claim. The
 
Estate of Frey's statement that if not for Dr. Mastroianni's
 inaction, "it is likely that [Frey] would have survived," at
 most, indicates a wrongful death action based upon alleged
 medical malpractice, i.e. the statement included facts necessary
 to support a professional negligence claim against a health care
 provider that proximately caused death. By comparison, the
 Estate of Frey's Complaint alleged not only that Dr.
 Mastroianni's actions were a substantial factor in causing Frey's
 death, but also alleged that "[i]n the alternative, Defendant's
 negligent treatment deprived [Frey] of a significant improvement
 in his chances for recovery, and/or resulted in a loss of an
 increased chance of recovery, which loss of chance is compensable
 in and of itself." The statement of the claim to the MCCP did
 not put Dr. Mastroianni on notice that a loss of chance claim
 based upon the alleged medical malpractice was being asserted.
 As such, the Estate of Frey did not satisfy the requirements set
 forth in HRS § 671-12(a), for purposes of instituting a claim for
 loss of chance. Therefore, the circuit court did not err when it
 dismissed the Estate of Frey's loss of chance claim because it
 lacked subject matter jurisdiction over the claim.
 B. Judgment as a Matter of Law
 
The Estate of Frey further contends that the circuit
 
court erred when it granted Dr. Mastroianni's Motion for JMOL on
 grounds that the Estate of Frey failed to provide expert medical
 testimony to establish with a reasonable degree of medical
 probability that Dr. Mastroianni's care and conduct was a
 proximate or contributory cause of Frey's death.
 
Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 50 states, 
13
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in pertinent part:
(a) Judgment as a Matter of Law.
 
(1) If during a trial by jury a party has been fully heard
on an issue and there is no legally sufficient evidentiary
basis for a reasonable jury to find for that party on that
issue, the court may determine the issue against that party
and may grant a motion for judgment as a matter of law
against that party with respect to a claim or defense that
cannot under the controlling law be maintained or defeated
without a favorable finding on that issue.
 
We review the circuit court's grant of Dr.
 
Mastroianni's JMOL Motion de novo and apply the same standard as
 
the trial court. Aluminum Shake Roofing, Inc. v. Hirayasu, 110
 
Hawai'i 248, 251, 131 P.3d 1230, 1233 (2006) (quoting Miyamoto v. 
Lum, 104 Hawai' i 1, 6–7, 84 P.3d 509, 514–15 (2004) (internal 
citations omitted)).
 
"A [motion for JMOL] may be granted only when afterdisregarding conflicting evidence, giving to the non-movingparty's evidence all the value to which it is legallyentitled, and indulging every legitimate inference which maybe drawn from the evidence in the non-moving party's favor,it can be said that there is no evidence to support a jury
verdict in his or her favor." [ Miyamoto , 104 Hawai 'i] at 7,
84 P.3d at 515 (quoting Tabieros [v. Clark Equipment Co. ],
85 Hawai 'i [336,] 350, 944 P.2d [1279,] 1293 [(1997)]). 
Ray v. Kapiolani Med. Specialists, 125 Hawai' i 253, 262, 259 P.3d 
569, 578 (2011).
 
This court in Bernard v. Char, 79 Hawai' i 371, 903 P.2d 
676 (App. 1995) has previously explained that:
 
Traditionally, medical malpractice cases have been
predicated on the negligent failure of a physician or
surgeon to exercise the requisite degree of skill and care
in treating or operating on a patient. As with other
 negligence actions, the plaintiff in a medical malpractice
case based on negligent treatment has the burden of
establishing a duty owed by the defendant to the plaintiff,
a breach of that duty, and a causal relationship between the
breach and the injury suffered.
 
Bernard, 79 Hawai' i at 377, 903 P.2d at 682 (footnote and 
citations omitted). The plaintiff must demonstrate that "the
 
defendant's treatment deviated from any of the methods of
 treatment approved by the standards of the profession." Id. 
Additionally, in medical negligence cases, "a plaintiff
 
must establish proximate or contributory causation through the
 introduction of expert medical testimony." Barbee, 119 Hawai' i 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 158-59, 194 P.3d at 1120-21. That opinion must be grounded 
upon a reasonable degree of medical probability as opposed to mere possibility. Craft, 78 Hawai' i at 305, 893 P.2d at 156. 
Expert opinion is generally required because "lay jurors are ill prepared to evaluate complicated technical data for the purpose of determining whether professional conduct conformed to a reasonable standard of care and whether there is a causal relationship between the violation of a duty and an injury to the patient." Bernard, 79 Hawai' i at 377, 903 P.2d at 682 (citation 
omitted). 
The Estate of Frey contends that Dr. Mastroianni's
 
misdiagnosis and early discharge was negligent and Dr.
 Mastroianni's negligence was a substantial factor in Frey's
 death. The Estate of Frey presented three medical doctors as
 expert witnesses for trial: an internal medicine doctor and
 hospitalist, Peter Schultz, M.D.(Dr. Schultz); an infectious
 disease specialist, Darvin Scott Smith, M.D. (Dr. Smith); and a
 general practitioner/internist who had worked in the emergency
 ward of a hospital, Bradley Jacobs, M.D. (Dr. Jacobs), all of
 whom based their opinions upon a reasonable degree of medical
 probability.
 
Through the testimony of its expert witnesses, the 
Estate of Frey was required to establish with a reasonable degree of medical probability that a causal nexus existed between the physician's treatment or lack thereof, and the patient's death. Barbee, 119 Hawai' i at 163, 194 P.3d at 1125. However, in this 
case, the expert medical testimony fell short of providing a causal nexus between Dr. Mastroianni's alleged negligence and Frey's death. 
Dr. Schultz testified that in his medical expert
 
opinion, it was not an appropriate decision to discharge Frey
 from the hospital on June 13, in light of his condition at that
 time and that Dr. Mastroianni's improper diagnosis and early
 discharge fell below the standard of care expected of a
 physician. Dr. Schultz indicated that his opinion was based on
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"looking at the totality of the clinical picture, all of the
 
factors that led up to his being hospitalized and his condition
 at the time . . . of discharge." Dr. Schultz further testified
 that it was his opinion that if Robert Frey had remained in the
 hospital, that it would have improved his chances of survival
 significantly.
 
Dr. Jacobs testified that Dr. Mastroianni's early
 
discharge and misdiagnosis of Frey fell below the standard of
 care expected of a physician. In his testimonial deposition
 presented to the jury at trial, Dr. Jacobs was questioned
 regarding the basis for his opinions as follows:
 
[By counsel for the Estate of Frey] Q. In that regard, what
specific conclusions did you reach from your review of this
case as to the care that Dr. Mastroianni rendered to Robert
 Frey and in what ways it fell short of the standard of care?
 
A. The doctor discharged the patient too early and gave him
an inappropriate diagnosis of bronchitis.
The patient should have been kept in the hospital and
monitored until it was clear that his infection had
 
resolved, that he was stable to be discharged home.
 
Q. So what factors led you to conclude that the patient
should not have been discharged at the time he was on June
13th?
 
A. The patient's vital signs, which we take routinely.
Vital signs are when you get -- identify someone's
temperature, their blood pressure, their pulse, their oxygen
level, and their breathing. Those can help us figure out
someone's clinical status and those are very important.
Hence, they're called the vital signs. In this patient, he
remained febrile.
 
Q. Meaning?
 
A. Meaning he had a fever. And remember, he did not have a
fever when he came to the emergency room. Now he had a
 fever. Now that fever could be attributable to a chemical
 burn in one's lung or it could be attributed to an
infection.
 
So then you look at the other vital signs to think
through whether or not this could be an infection or a
chemical burn.
 
The second important vital sign, this one is blood
pressure. When he came into the emergency room, his blood
pressure had a systolic, the top number, blood pressure of
155.
 
Throughout his hospital stay, his blood pressure
dropped to a systolic blood pressure of 105. That's
 
concerning. Why would someone have a drop in their blood
pressure?
When you're worried about a chemical burn versus
pneumonia, you think bacteria causes pneumonia. Bacteria
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
also makes the body dilate those blood vessels, which makes
you lower the blood pressure. That makes you think this
person could have pneumonia, an infection in his body,
making you lower your blood pressure.
The next vital sign is the pulse. His pulse was up,
which could occur in a setting of a fever.
So then you look at his breathing status. Is he
 
breathing regular and calm? Is he breathing more rapidly?
If you look at the vital signs, his breathing and his
respiratory rate was up. It was increased. That's a little bit
 concerning.
. . . .
 
If you combine all of those vital signs together, it was
clear this person has pneumonia, not a chemical burn.
 
Similarly, Dr. Smith testified that Dr. Mastroianni's
 
treatment of Frey did not comply with the standard of care and
 
that based on the observed vital signs of Frey throughout his
 hospitalization, "it would have been best practice and standard
 of care to continue to observe [Frey] closely and address . . .
 those observations in a timely way such that he would have
 responded appropriately." Upon discharge by Dr. Mastroianni,
 Frey was prescribed an antibiotic, Levofloxacin, to be taken
 orally, to treat Dr. Mastroianni's bronchitis diagnosis. In Dr.
 Smith's testimonial deposition presented to the jury at trial, he
 opined as to the following regarding Frey's treatment:
 
[By counsel for the Estate of Frey] Q. Now, he did get a
prescription when he left the hospital that he had to go
fill, Levofloxacin; is that correct?
 
A. That's right. Levofloxacin orally.
 Q. Would there have been any advantage to having him in the
hospital administering these empiric broad spectrum
antibiotics?
 
A. Absolutely. There would be an advantage if he were in
the hospital to give him IV antibiotics, which would get
into the blood stream and would be a higher dose and a
higher more biologically accessible medicine, if it's
through the IV as opposed to oral.
At the same time, he could get resuscitated, as I was
mentioning before, with the fluids to maintain his blood
pressure, to maintain his normal pulse.
 
Q. And any other antibiotics, would they have helped as
well?
 
A. Well, other antibiotics could have been given and would
have been give had the correct diagnosis been even
considered.
 Q. In light of the fact that he did turn out to have this
Klebsiella pneumonia, would there have been any use to
giving him other antibiotics as well as the intervenous
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Levofloxacin?
 
A. So it turns out, in retrospect, that the Klebsiella was
indeed sensitive to most antibiotics including Levofloxacin.
But my contention is that if he were given antibiotic IV,
but also at a higher dose and maybe with other antibiotics,
but importantly with fluids and observation of his status -­close observation of his status, that would have all
happened.
 
Q. Now, what would have been different? I mean, you've
listed some things that lists observations and fluids and IV
antibiotics. Is there anything else that would have been
different under competent treatment in the hospital, if he
had remained on June 13th instead of being discharged?
 
. . . . 
THE WITNESS: Yes. I think the main fact that it would be different
 
is just the timing. It's all about the timing, and it was
critical that he got all of those things that you listed I went
through sooner.
Sooner is better when you're dealing with a critical
illness like this. And so he would have responded much
better had that been addressed right away.
 
The expert medical testimony provided at trial, at 
most, established that had Frey remained in the hospital, his 
chance of a better outcome would have improved. This evidence only indicates that it was merely a possibility that Dr. Mastroianni caused Frey's death, "a showing which the Hawai' i 
supreme court explicitly found to be insufficient in Craft, 78 Hawai'i at 305, 893 P.2d at 156." Barbee, 119 Hawai' i at 163, 194 
P.3d at 1125. The Estate of Frey failed to provide any expert medical testimony establishing that Dr. Mastroianni caused Frey's death "to a reasonable degree of medical probability." In short, there was no evidence from which a jury reasonably could have concluded that Dr. Mastroianni committed a breach of the standard of care in his treatment of Frey and that Dr. Mastroianni's breach of duty caused Frey's death. 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the circuit
 
court did not err in granting Dr. Mastroianni's Motion for JMOL.
 D. Exclusion of Expert Testimony
 
The Estate of Frey contends that the circuit court
 
improperly curtailed the opinion testimony of its expert
 witnesses through its rulings on various motions in limine. The
 circuit court granted Dr. Mastroianni's motions in limine ruling
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that, inter alia, the Estate of Frey's expert witnesses would be
 
precluded from “providing any opinions that were not previously
 disclosed in [their] reports or discovery depositions which were
 submitted on or before the deadline to produce expert reports”
 and the plaintiff’s experts would be precluded “from offering
 expert opinions in the area of radiology.” Specifically, the
 circuit court ordered that testimony of Dr. Smith, which goes
 beyond his previously disclosed opinions, including opinions
 regarding sepsis, cause of death, impact of Tylenol, additional
 tests during hospitalization, and opinions outside the area of
 Dr. Smith’s expertise, such as testimony concerning radiology or
 his review of the chest x-ray are precluded. In regards to Dr.
 Jacobs’s testimony, the circuit court precluded his opinions on
 Frey's chest x-rays and speculative testimony concerning the
 outcome of treatment provided to Frey had he stayed in the
 hospital.
 
Because the granting or denying of a motion in limine 
is within the trial court's inherent power to exclude or admit evidence, we review the court's ruling for abuse of discretion. State v. Kealoha, 95 Hawai' i 365, 379, 22 P.3d 1012, 1026 (App. 
2000) (internal quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted). An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 
Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26 (1992). 
In view of the foregoing, we determine that the circuit
 
court did not abuse its discretion in granting Dr. Mastroianni's
 motions in limine which excluded portions of the Estate of Frey's
 expert witnesses' testimony at trial. As such, upon careful
 review of the record, the Estate of Frey failed to provide any
 expert witness testimony establishing, with a reasonable degree
 of medical probability, a proximate or contributory causal nexus
 between a breach of duty owed by Dr. Mastroianni and Frey's
 death.
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Inasmuch as we have determined on appeal that the grant
 
of Dr. Mastroianni's JMOL Motion was proper under the
 
circumstances, we need not address the Estate of Frey's remaining
 points on appeal relating to the exclusion of the Pneumonia
 Severity Index, Life Expectancy Table, and the exclusion of
 portions of Donald Regalmuto's Testimony as these issues would
 have no bearing on the outcome of the case.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, the Judgment filed on July 25,
 
2014, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 29, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
Anthony L. Ranken,
and Samuel P. Shnider,(Anthony Ranken & Associates),for Plaintiff-Appellant. 
Thomas E. Cook,
and Bradford F. K. Bliss,(Lyons Brandt Cook &Hiramatsu),for Defendant-Appellee. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
20
 