NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000860
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JEROME A. PAYNE, ALSO KNOWN AS
HAROLD J. COLLINS II, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 13-1-0621(3))

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jerome A. Payne aka Harold J.
 
Collins, II (Payne) appeals from the Judgment, Conviction and
 
Probation Sentence (Judgment) filed on April 29, 2014, in the
 
1
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).  Following
 a jury trial, Payne was found guilty of Assault Against a Law
 
Enforcement Officer in the First Degree, Hawaii Revised Statutes 
1
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided. 
 
State v. Matavale , 115 Hawai 'i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 
(2007) (citation and brackets omitted). 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(HRS) § 707-712.5(1)(a) (2014).2
  Payne was sentenced to five
 
years probation and 250 days of jail as a special condition.

 
Payne raises a single point of error on appeal,
 
contending that there was insufficient evidence for the jury to
 
find that Payne intentionally or knowingly caused bodily injury
 to Maui Police Department (MPD) Officer Craig Stephens (Officer
 
Stephens).
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Payne's point of error as follows: 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has long held that: 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or a jury. The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact. Indeed, even if it could be
said in a bench trial that the conviction is against the
weight of the evidence, as long as there is substantial
evidence to support the requisite findings for conviction,
the trial court will be affirmed.
 "Substantial evidence" as to every material
element of the offense charged is credible evidence
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion. And as trier of fact, the trial judge is
free to make all reasonable and rational inferences
 under the facts in evidence, including circumstantial
evidence.
 
2
 §707-712.5 Assault against a law enforcement officer in the first
degree. (1) A person commits the offense of assault against a law enforcement
officer in the first degree if the person:
(a)	 Intentionally or knowingly causes bodily injury to a
law enforcement officer who is engaged in the
performance of duty[.] 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Additionally, the supreme court has recognized that 
"[g]iven the difficulty of proving the requisite state of mind by 
direct evidence in criminal cases, proof of circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences arising from circumstances surrounding the defendant's conduct is sufficient." State v. 
Eastman, 81 Hawai
'i 131, 141, 913 P.2d 57, 68 (1996) (citation 
omitted). "The mind of an alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct and inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances." Id. (citation omitted). Moreover, "appellate 
courts will give due deference to the right of the trier of fact 'to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw reasonable inferences from the evidence adduced.'" State v. 
Agard, 113 Hawai
'i 321, 324, 151 P.3d 802, 805 (2007) (quoting In 
re Doe, 107 Hawai 'i 12, 19, 108 P.3d 966, 973 (2005)). 
In order to convict Payne of Assault Against a Law
 
Enforcement Officer in the First Degree, the State was required
 to present substantial evidence that he intentionally or
 knowingly caused bodily injury to Officer Stephens, a law
 enforcement officer who was engaged in the performance of duty. 
HRS §§ 707-712.5(1)(a), 702-206 (2014).
3 On appeal, Payne argues
 
3 §702-206 Definitions of states of mind.  (1) "Intentionally."
(a) 	A person acts intentionally with respect to his
conduct when it is his conscious object to engage in
such conduct.
 
(b)	 A person acts intentionally with respect to attendant
circumstances when he is aware of the existence of
 such circumstances or believes or hopes that they
exist.
 
(c)	 A person acts intentionally with respect to a result
of his conduct when it is his conscious object to
cause such a result.
 
(2)	 "Knowingly."
(a)	 A person acts knowingly with respect to his conduct
when he is aware that his conduct is of that nature.

 
(continued...)
 
3

  
  
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that the "evidence adduced at trial is not of any sufficiency to
 
support the state of mind necessary under the statute to find
 either intentional or knowing activity." We disagree. 
The State elicited testimony from airport district
 
manager for the Maui Airports, Marvin Moniz (Moniz), Officer
 
Stephens, and MPD Officer Grant Nakamura (Officer Nakamura). 
On August 21, 2013, Moniz observed Payne sitting on a
 
planter box near the baggage claim area of the Kahului airport. 
Moniz observed Payne smoking cigarettes in a no-smoking area. 
Moniz testified that when MPD Officers asked Payne "if he needed
 help or if he needed anything and how he was doing, and he just
 told them, you know, 'Fuck you,' and that was it." Moniz
 described Payne's tone as "snappy" and louder than normal. Moniz
 testified that MPD Officers asked Payne "to stand up so they
 could put the handcuffs on him, and he said no, and then shaking
 his arms trying to not get the handcuffs on." Moniz stated that
 
"when [MPD] finally got the cuffs snapped -- was snapping the
 
cuffs, and [Payne] reached over and bent over and bit [Officer
 Stephens] on the hand[.]" Moniz testified that he called the
 
custodial department "to bring some sanitation wipes so [Officer
 
Stephens] can wipe his hand from the blood and the bite[.]" 
Officer Stephens testified that he arrived at Kahului
 
airport at approximately 5:25 p.m. on August 21, 2013. Officer
 
3(...continued)
(b)	 A person acts knowingly with respect to attendant
circumstances when he is aware that such circumstances
 exist.
 
(c)	 A person acts knowingly with respect to a result of
his conduct when he is aware that it is practically
certain that his conduct will cause such a result.
 
4
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Stephens approached Payne, introduced himself as an officer with
 
the MPD, and asked Payne for his identification. Payne responded
 
"Fuck you. You figure it out." Officer Stephens testified that
 he "again asked [Payne] I need some type of identification. 
What's your name? If you don't have identification, give me your
 name, date of birth." Payne again responded "Fuck you. You
 
figure it out." Officer Stephens informed Payne that he "needed
 to move along, and if he wasn't going to move along, he was going
 
to be placed under arrest." Payne responded in an angry voice,
 "I ain't going anywhere." When Officer Stephens removed his
 handcuffs from his duty belt, Payne stated "You ain't putting
 those on me." Officer Stephens told Payne he was under arrest,
 
and grabbed Payne's arm. Officer Stephens testified that the
 "minute I grabbed his arm, Officer Nakamura, I believe, went to
 
grab his other arm, and then he pulled away, so I informed him
 stop resisting, went to grab his arm again, and then we fell
 backwards that the planter." Officer Stephens stated: 
[A]s I was trying to grab his arm, at some point, I felt
pain in my hand, my left hand, and I looked down, and he was
biting on to my hand. And then I immediately pulled my hand
from his mouth, and I said, 'Hey, don't bite me.' And I told
Officer Nakamura that he's biting.
 
Officer Stephens observed Payne trying to bite Officer
 
Nakamura's leg. Officer Stephens struck Payne three times with a
 
closed fist on the side of his face to prevent him from biting
 Officer Nakamura's leg. Officer Nakamura removed his taser, and
 told Payne that "if he didn't stop resisting, he was going to get
 tasered." Payne then stopped resisting. Officer Stephens and
 
Officer Nakamura handcuffed Payne and placed him in a seated
 
5
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
position. Officer Stephens testified that "[w]hen [Payne] was
 
sitting up, Officer Nakamura was leaning over him, and he spit up
 
into Officer Nakamura's face." Officer Stephens related that
 
Payne's bite left two puncture marks near the "web" between his
 
left thumb and pointer finger. Officer Stephens testified that
 
he noticed blood on his left hand. Officer Stephens related that
 
his hand was sore for a couple of days.
 
Officer Nakamura testified that he arrived at the
 
Kahului airport at approximately 5:20 p.m. on August 21, 2013.
 Officer Nakamura related that after Officer Stephens informed
 Payne that he was under arrest, Payne began swearing in a loud
 tone of voice. Officer Nakamura testified that "Officer Stephens
 then grabbed [Payne's] left hand, and I grabbed [Payne's] right
 hand to put him in cuffs, and then [Payne] began fighting with
 us." Officer Nakamura further testified that he "tried to gain
 
compliance by grabbing [Payne's] hands and securing his arms, but
 
he was swinging and kicking wildly at us." Officer Nakamura
 observed Payne bite Officer Stephens's left hand. Officer
 Nakamura testified that Payne tried to bite his leg a couple
 times. Officer Nakamura removed his taser, "pointed it at
 
[Payne's] chest and gave him verbal commands to stop
 
resist[ing]." Payne complied with Officer Nakamura's commands. 
After Payne was placed in handcuffs, he spit directly into
 Officer Nakamura's face.
 
Based on the testimony of Moniz, Officer Stephens, and
 
Officer Nakamura, and a photograph admitted into evidence
 depicting the puncture marks on Officer Stephens's left hand, the
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
jury could reasonably infer that Payne intentionally or knowingly
 
caused bodily injury to Officer Stephens. Viewing the evidence
 in the light most favorable to the prosecution, with the fact
 finder determining credibility, the State presented substantial
 evidence that Payne committed the offense of Assault Against a
 Law Enforcement Officer in the First Degree. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's April 29, 2014
 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 31, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
Ben C. Summit,
(Summit Law Offices)for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Artemio C. Baxa,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Maui,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7
 