FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
---o0o--­
IN THE INTEREST OF AS 
NO. CAAP-11-0001065 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(FC-S NO. 08-11941) 
MARCH 28, 2013 
NAKAMURA, C.J., FOLEY AND FUJISE, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J. 
The Department of Human Services (DHS) appeals from the 
"Order Re: Trial on Placement" (Placement Order) entered on 
November 18, 2011, in the Family Court of the First Circuit1 
(family court). The Placement Order provides the following, in relevant part: 
1. DHS shall maintain [AS's] placement in [her foster
parents' (Foster Parents') home (Foster Home)].
 
2. [AS] shall not be removed from [Foster Home]
except if there is imminent harm.
 
3. DHS shall continue to provide visitation with
[AS's maternal aunt (Maternal Aunt)] and with [AS's]
biological family on Oahu and her half-siblings
 
1
 The Honorable Matthew J. Viola issued the order. 
FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[(collectively, Maternal Relatives)], in consultation with
the [Volunteer Guardian Ad Litem] Program.
 
4. DHS's oral motion to be relieved as [AS's]
permanent custodian made after the [family court] announced
its decision is denied.
 
5. All prior consistent orders remain in full force
and effect.
 
On appeal, DHS argues that the family court abused its
 
discretion when it ordered DHS not to place AS with Maternal Aunt
 
or remove AS from Foster Home. DHS maintains that the court:
 
(1) erred as a matter of law when it failed to follow 
and apply Hawai' i and federal child protective laws that create a 
preference for placing children in state foster care with their families, if appropriate, in accordance with "the liberty interest of familial association" protected by the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, and instead focused on DHS's application of its 2005 family placement preference policy; 
(2) erred as a matter of law by applying a
 
contradictory and unlawful standard of proof that first required
 DHS to prove that its proposed placement with Maternal Aunt was
 in AS's best interest, and then, if DHS did not do so, required
 the parties opposing DHS's recommendation to prove DHS abused its
 discretion in making its proposed placment;
 
(3) erred as a matter of law by failing to consider how
 
various orders it issued delayed commencement of the permanency
 trial, which negatively impacted DHS's efforts to place AS with
 Maternal Aunt;
 
(4) clearly erred in finding that DHS abused its
 
discretion by deciding to place AS with Maternal Aunt; and
 
(5) erred as a matter of law by denying DHS's request
 
to be discharged as AS's permanent custodian, after ordering DHS
 not to place AS with Maternal Aunt.
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. Pre-trial
 
1. Foster Family and Home
 
AS was drug-exposed in utero, and weighed five pounds,
 
10.9 ounces when she was born in 2008. On July 24, 2008,
 pursuant to her biological mother (Mother) and father's
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(Father's) voluntary custody agreement, she was taken into foster
 
custody. The same day, DHS placed her with Foster Parents.
 
Foster Parents are not biologically related to AS. At 
the time of the placement trial, in October 2011, the foster mother (Foster Mother) had been a foster parent/resource care­giver to approximately twenty-four children, mostly babies, since 2005. In 2008, she adopted a foster daughter, who was eight years old by the time of trial. Also in 2008, DHS approved Foster Home, located on O' ahu, as an emergency shelter. 
Foster Mother had a biological daughter who lived at
 
Foster Home when AS was placed there.
2 Foster Mother also had an
 
adult biological son, who lived on the Mainland at all relevant
 times. Foster Mother owned her own business. In 2009, she
 married AS's foster father (Foster Father), who was a handyman
 and had two children from a prior relationship.
 
Maternal Aunt lived on Maui and worked as a special
 
education teacher. She was divorced in 2009. Her five-year-old
 daughter lived with her. Maternal Aunt had been a foster mother
 to her nephews from 2003 to 2007.
2. Petition for Foster Custody 
On August 7, 2008, DHS filed a Petition for Foster
 
Custody. In August 2008, AS's case was assigned to social worker
 Judith Tarpley (Tarpley).
 
On August 28, 2008, DHS removed AS from Foster Home and
 
placed her in the home of family friends (Family Friends) who had
 previously fostered one of AS's half-siblings.
 
On September 25, 2008, DHS convened an Ohana Conference
 
attended by Mother, Father, a maternal uncle, two maternal aunts,
 Foster Parents, and Tarpley, but not Maternal Aunt.
 
On February 3, 2009, DHS removed AS from the home of
 
Family Friends at their request and returned AS to Foster
 Parents. AS remained with Foster Parents continuously from that
 time on.
 
2
 Foster Mother's biological daughter had gone to college in California
by the time of the placement trial.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3. Motion for Permanent Custody
 
In June 2009, Tarpley asked Foster Parents if they were
 
interested in adopting AS, and they said that they were. On June
 
29, 2009, DHS filed a Motion for Order Awarding Permanent Custody
 and Establishing A Permanent Plan (Motion for Permanent Custody). 
DHS submitted a proposed permanent plan, in which DHS recommended
 that the court award it permanent custody of AS, whom Foster
 Parents wanted to adopt.
 
In October 2009, Maternal Aunt applied to be AS's
 
3
foster parent,  and DHS approved her for placement.  At a
 
pretrial hearing on October 28, 2009, counsel for DHS stated that
 although DHS had determined that Maternal Aunt was a possible
 viable placement option, DHS wanted to give Father more time to
 reunify with AS before placing her with Maternal Aunt. The
 family court granted the request.
 
Mother stipulated to the termination of her parental
 
rights, and after a trial on DHS's Motion for Permanent Custody,
 Father's parental rights were terminated.
4
 
On April 8, 2010, DHS filed a Motion for Immediate
 
Review to Move Child to Maui, in which it recommended placement
 of AS with Maternal Aunt because "DHS strives to place children
 with relatives." On April 16, 2010, the Volunteer Guardian Ad
 Litem (VGAL), Michelle Dean (Dean), filed a Motion to Retain
 Placement, in which she moved the family court to keep AS in
 Foster Home on the ground that removal could disrupt AS's primary
 attachment development process. At a hearing on the motions, the
 court denied DHS's motion without prejudice and granted Dean's
 motion.
 
In a report dated July 22, 2010, Department of Health,
 
Early Intervention Section clinical psychologist Dr. Jennifer
 Takahashi (Takahashi) reported that AS was referred to her for
 consultation, even though AS did not qualify for developmental
 
3
 Maternal Aunt testified that she contacted Tarpley in February 2009
and told her she was ready to care for AS, but that point is contested. 
4
 Father later appealed from the order awarding permanent custody, and
this court entered a summary disposition order affirming the order.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
services, because there were concerns about her behavior
 
following her visit with a maternal uncle. AS's behavior had
 improved, and she seemed happy and secure. Dr. Takahashi made
 recommendations regarding AS's future contact with and possible
 transition to the home of Maternal Aunt, and continued to observe
 AS and report on her observations for some time thereafter.
4.	 Foster Home Certification and Maternal Aunt's 
Motion to Intervene
 
The family court set a placement trial for October 4, 
2010. Prior to trial, DHS advised the court that it would be 
revoking Foster Parents' certification pursuant to the Hawai' i 
5
Administrative Rules (HAR) § 17-1625-17(d)(1)(A)  because Foster
Father had a 1990 conviction for robbery. The court continued
 the trial due to the licensing issue.
6
 
On October 13, 2010, Foster Parents filed a motion for
 
an order requiring DHS to certify their home and for a placement
 trial (Motion to License Home and for Trial).
 
Also on October 13, 2010, Foster Parents filed an Ex
 
Parte Motion for Restraining Order (Motion for Restraining
 Order), in which they sought to prevent DHS from revoking their
 certification and removing AS from their home without evidence
 that she was in danger of imminent harm. They asked to keep AS
 until the family court held a hearing on their Motion to License
 Home and for Trial. In an order dated October 13, 2010, the
 
5 HAR § 17-1625-17(d)(1)(A) provides:
 
(d) The resource family and all adult household
members shall be of reputable and responsible character and
shall not have a criminal history record or background which
poses a risk to the health, safety, or well-being of
children in care.
 
(1) The resource family and adult household members
shall not have any of the following:
 
(A) A felony conviction, at any time, for
child abuse or neglect, for spousal abuse,
for a crime against children (including
child pornography), or for a crime involving violence,
including rape, sexual assault, or homicide, but not
including other physical assault or battery[.]
6
 The trial was continued multiple times and was eventually held on
October 3, 5, and 6, 2011.
 
5
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court granted the Motion for Restraining Order.
 
On October 18, 2010, the family court held a hearing on
 
the Motion to License Home and for Trial where they orally
 
granted the motion and stayed de-certification of Foster Home
 until further order. The court set the trial for December 15,
 2010.
 
On December 15, 2010, the family court conducted a
 
hearing on the Motion to License Home and for Trial. The court
 held that robbery, which was a crime against property, was not a
 crime of violence within the context of HAR § 17-1625­17(d)(1)(A). The court set aside trial for that day and ordered
 DHS to keep AS in Foster Home and not revoke Foster Parents'
 license until a hearing to be held on January 12, 2011. The same
 day, the family court filed an order reflecting its oral rulings. 
On December 22, 2010, DHS filed a motion for reconsideration of
 the order.
 
On December 30, 2010, the family court filed an order
 
granting the Motion to License Home and for Trial. The court
 stayed DHS's revocation of Foster Parents' certification until
 further order, ruled that AS would remain with Foster Parents,
 and rescheduled the placement trial.
 
On January 12, 2011, the family court heard DHS's
 
motion for reconsideration of the December 15, 2010 order
 rejecting DHS's argument that robbery was a crime of violence
 pursuant to HAR § 17-1625-17(d)(1)(A). The family court filed an
 order denying the motion. 
On or about April 29, 2011, DHS sent Foster Parents a
 
letter (Certification Letter), stating that DHS had allowed the
 foster home certification to lapse on April 4, 2011 and could not
 renew it because of the robbery conviction. On May 18, 2011,
 Foster Parents filed a Motion for Immediate Review, in which they
 asked the family court to order DHS to rescind its Certification
 Letter.
 
On May 31, 2011, Maternal Aunt moved to intervene in
 
the case. On June 15, 2011, the family court filed an order
 granting the motion.
 
6
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On June 27, 2011, the family court filed an order in
 
which it granted Foster Parents' Motion for Immediate Review and
 
ordered DHS to "keep the foster home license in effect through
 the conclusion of the placement trial . . . ."
 
DHS later conceded that its position regarding de­
certification had been incorrect, and issued Foster Parents an
 unconditional foster home certification retroactive to April
 2011.
 
5. Standard of Proof
 
On September 15, 2011, DHS filed a trial memorandum 
regarding the standard of proof to be applied at trial. DHS argued that although the family court had broad statutory authority to enter orders that were in the "best interests of the child," that authority was limited by legal and constitutional requirements. Given those parameters, DHS asserted, the following standard of proof applied: the party challenging a DHS determination regarding a child's permanent placement must prove that DHS abused its discretion in determining that the recommendation was in the child's best interests. DHS cited to In re Doe, 100 Hawai' i 335, 346 n.19, 60 P.3d 285, 296 n.19 
7
(2002) ; In re Doe, 7 Haw. App. 547, 784 P.2d 873 (1989) (1989Doe); In re Doe, 101 Hawai' i 220, 231, 65 P.3d 167, 178 (2003) 
8
(March 2003 Doe) ; and In re Doe, 95 Hawai' i 183, 189-90, 20 P.3d 
616, 622-23 (2001) (2001 Doe).9 
On September 15, 2011, Foster Parents filed a trial
 
7 Footnote 19 provides in relevant part that "[a]fter termination of
rights, custody is given to DHS which is charged with finding a suitable home
for the child." (Citation omitted.)
8
 There, the Supreme Court of Hawai' i held that "by ordering DHS
illegally to place Jane in an unlicensed foster family boarding home, webelieve that the family court "disregarded rules or principles of law orpractice to the substantial detriment of DHS and that its decision clearlyexceeded the bounds of reason." 101 Hawai' i at 231, 65 P.3d at 178 (internal
quotation marks, brackets, ellipsis, and citation omitted).
9
 There, the supreme court set forth the abuse-of-discretion standard
to be followed when assessing a family court decision on appeal. 95 Hawai' i 
189-90, 20 P.3d at 622-23 ("[W]e will not disturb the family court's decisionson appeal unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of law orpractice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant and its decisionclearly exceeded the bounds of reason."). 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
brief in which they argued:
 
If the preponderance of the evidence indicates that [AS's]
best interests will be served by remaining with Foster
Parents[,] that should be the ruling of the Court.
. . . . 
If the Court finds by a preponderance of the evidence that
it is [AS's] best interest to remain with Foster Parents,
that decision amounts to a finding that the position of the
DHS constitutes an abuse of discretion. Were this not the
 case then the absurd result would be that the Court would be
 prevented from taking action that it has found to be in the
best interests of a child because the DHS has the discretion
 to make decisions that are not in the best interests of the
 child. Such a result would not be in keeping with the
policy of the Child Protective Act [(CPA)].
10 The DHS asks
 
the Court to focus upon its power and authority; Foster
Parents ask the Court to focus upon [AS's] best interests.
In construing the acts of the legislature the courts are to
seek a construction that does not create an absurd result. 
Flores v. Rawlings Co., LLC., 117 Haw. 153, 164, 177 P.3d
341, 352 (2008). It is clear from the language of Chapter
587A that the Court is vested with the final say over what
outcome is in the best interests of a child. The language
that has been quoted by the DHS is the standard by which the
Court's findings will be reviewed on appeal. In making its
argument, the DHS is telling the Court that the best
interests of the child should be subordinated to the
 interest of the DHS in doing whatever it wants. The policy
of the [CPA] states:
 
This chapter shall be liberally construed to serve the
best interests of the children affected and the
 purpose and policies set forth herein.
 
HRS §587A-2. Any DHS' [sic] position that is determined not
to be in [AS's] best interests is an abuse of the discretion
that has been vested in the Department by the legislature. 
Foster Parents maintained that keeping AS with them was in her
 
best interest.
 
B. Trial
 
1. Standard of Review
 
The placement trial was held on October 3, 5, and 6,
 
2011. The main issue at trial was whether AS should continue
 living at Foster Home, as Foster Parents and Dean argued, or be
 moved to Maternal Aunt's home, as DHS and Maternal Aunt argued.
 
At the beginning of trial, the family court heard
 
arguments regarding the relevant standards of review. Counsel
 for DHS maintained that the court should apply an abuse-of­discretion standard; if the family court found DHS clearly erred
 in finding that placing AS with Maternal Aunt was in AS's best
 
10 The CPA is codified in HRS Chapter 587A.
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
interest, the family court should conclude that DHS's placement
 
decision was an abuse of discretion. Counsel for Maternal Aunt
 argued that Foster Parents and Dean had the burden to prove that
 DHS abused its discretion in making its placement decision.
 
Counsel for Foster Parents argued that the family court
 
had the authority to determine what was in AS's best interest,
 regardless of whether the evidence showed DHS abused its
 discretion in making its placement decision. 
Counsel contended,
 
"[I]f the Court finds that it's in [AS's] best interest to . . .
 remain with [Foster Parents] . . . that should be the decision
 and that is in and of itself a finding that [DHS] has abused its
 discretion." Counsel distinguished the circumstances in this
 case from those in 1989 Doe by arguing that this court's ruling
 in that case was appropriate in 1989, when the "best-interest"
 standard was still developing. 
Counsel for the VGAL program agreed with Foster Parents
 
and argued that the applicable statute was HRS § 587A-33(b)(5)
 (Supp. 2010).
11 Counsel stated that the VGAL Program's position
 
11 HRS § 587A-33 provides in relevant part:
 
§587A-33 Termination of parental rights hearing.  (a) At
a termination of parental rights hearing, the court shall
determine whether there exists clear and convincing evidence that:
 
(1) 	A child's parent whose rights are subject to
termination is not presently willing and able to
provide the parent's child with a safe family home,
even with the assistance of a service plan;
 
(2) 	It is not reasonably foreseeable that the
child's parent whose rights are subject to
termination will become willing and able to provide
the child with a safe family home, even with the
assistance of a service plan, within a reasonable
period of time, which shall not exceed two years from
the child's date of entry into foster care;
 
(3) 	The proposed permanent plan is in the best interests
of the child. In reaching this determination,
the court shall:
 
(A) 	Presume that it is in the best
 interests of the child to be promptly and
permanently placed with responsible and competent
substitute parents and family in a safe and secure
home; and
 
(B) 	Give greater weight to the presumption that
(continued...)
 
9
      
     
     
          
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had not changed since it filed its Trial Memorandum on September
 
28, 2010. There, citing to March 2003 Doe, the VGAL Program
 argued that "DHS's discretion in placement is always subject to
 judicial review. If this Court decides adoption by [Foster
 Parents] is in [AS's] best interests, it per se finds that DHS
 abused its discretion in selecting [Maternal Aunt's] home."
 
The family court made its ruling regarding the standard
 
of review:
 
THE COURT: Let me tell you what I've concluded with
respect to what the -- the relevant standards are for the
Court to apply in this case. . . . I believe that the
standard of review would be best interest. . . . And
 although I think the -- in every case, whoever is making the
decision as to placement of a child or who should have
custody of a child, that the best interest . . . is the only
consideration. But I have to take into account what the
 statutory scheme is and what the still good law controlling
case law is from our appellate courts. And 587A-15(d)(2)
[(Supp. 2010)]
12 gives [DHS] the authority to make placement
 
11(...continued)
 the permanent plan is in the child's best
interest, the younger the child is upon the
child's date of entry into foster care; and
 
(4) 	The child consents to the permanent plan if the child
is at least fourteen years old, unless the court
consults with the child in camera and finds that it is
 in the best interest of the child to proceed without
the child's consent.
 
(b) If the court determines that the criteria set forth in 
subsection (a) are established by clear and convincing evidence and the
goal of the permanent plan is for the child to be adopted or remain in
permanent custody, the court shall order:
 
(1) 	That the child's parent's parental rights be terminated;
 
(2) 	Termination of the existing service plan and revocation of
the prior award of foster custody;
 
(3) 	That permanent custody of the child be awarded to an
appropriate authorized agency;
 
(4) 	An appropriate permanent plan; and
 
(5) 	The entry of any other orders the court deems to be in the
best interests of the child, including restricting or
excluding unnecessary parties from participating in adoption
or other subsequent proceedings.
12 HRS § 587A-15(d)(2) provides, "[i]f an authorized agency has
permanent custody, it has the following duties and rights:
. . . 
(2) Determining where and with whom the child shall live;
provided that the child shall not be placed outside the State
(continued...)
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
decisions as to a child. However, . . . that decision is
reviewable.
 
And under [1989 Doe, 7 Haw. App. at 558-59,] the Court
makes clear that the Family Court reviews [DHS's] placement
decisions under the clearly erroneous standard. And -- and
therefore, I will apply that standard in this case.
  
But the -- just so we're -- everybody has got full
notice of what I believe the relevant standards are, the
placement decision is an ultimate fact that [DHS] has made
its own determination of or assessment of. In reviewing
that decision for this trial, the Court will review that
finding under the clearly erroneous standard. And the
 burden of proof, therefore, would be on the parties that
disagree with [DHS's] determination. And the relevant
 evidentiary standard would be preponderance of the evidence.
 
But clearly erroneous could be established in one of
two ways. One is that there lacks substantial evidence to
 support [DHS's] decision or despite substantial evidence,
the review in [sic] court is left with the definite and firm
conviction that a mistake has been made. And I think that ­- standard, those relevant considerations require the Court
to determine on its own whether the placement -- what the
best interests of [AS] in this case are and then in light of
that to apply the established standards for review and
decisions under the clearly erroneous standard. That would
 require the Court then to determine whether that decision
[DHS] made . . . lacks substantial evidence or whether
despite there being substantial evidence a mistake has been
made in [DHS's] assessment of what is in [AS's] best
interest. Okay?
 
2. Testimony
 
Dina Koyanagi's (Koyanagi's) testimony
 
Koyanagi testified that in January 2010, she was the
 
case management social worker assigned to AS's case. Annabell
 Togle-Wilson (Togle-Wilson) was the case worker before Koyanagi,
 and Tarpley was the case worker before Togle-Wilson. In
 reviewing the case history and records, Koyanagi found out that
 Maternal Aunt had a "courtesy child specific license." Koyanagi
 asked about possibly placing AS with Maternal Aunt and was told
 that a court order prevented DHS from placing AS at that time. 
Maternal Aunt was not initially considered as a foster
 
parent for AS. Maternal Aunt did not attend an August 2008 Ohana
 Conference, but it may have been because she was not contacted. 
In February 2009, Maternal Aunt first contacted DHS regarding the
 possibility of caring for AS. She said she would not be
 
12(...continued)
without prior order of the court[.]" 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
available until that summer, when she had earned her Master's
 
degree. Despite what Maternal Aunt told Koyanagi, in an April 8,
 2009 licensing log of contacts, Tarpley stated she was filing for
 permanency as no family members had expressed interest in caring
 for AS. According to a May 2009 permanent plan, Maternal Aunt
 was not interested in being considered as a resource parent.
 
In the Fall of 2009, AS may have had telephone contact
 
with Maternal Aunt. Maternal Aunt visited AS when she was in
 town.
 
In October 2009, DHS issued to Maternal Aunt a "child
 
specific license" for the purpose of moving AS to her home in
 November. For some reason, AS was not placed with Maternal Aunt.
 
On October 28, 2009, the family court ordered DHS to
 
make its best or reasonable efforts to increase AS's visits with
 Father. In researching the case, Koyanagi assumed the court
 order prevented DHS from placing AS with Maternal Aunt because
 Maternal Aunt lived off-island, making it nearly impossible to
 increase visits with Father.
 
Perhaps in February 2010, Foster Mother reported to
 
Koyanagi that Tarpley told Foster Mother that DHS had ruled out
 family members for possible placement with AS. Tarpley asked
 Foster Mother if she was interested in adopting AS. DHS decided
 to move AS on or around April 16, 2010, to Maternal Aunt's home.
 
In 2004-2005, then-director of DHS, Lillian Koller,
 
publicly pronounced that DHS had a policy of placing children
 with relatives. DHS did not blindly adhere to a policy of
 placing foster children with relatives but believed that such
 placements were better for children. Koyanagi personally thought
 it was best in the long-run for children to have family
 connections. DHS preferred to place AS with Maternal Aunt
 because she was a relative and would provide AS with access to
 her extended family.
 
In June 2010, DHS transferred AS's case to its
 
permanency unit. In July 2011, Koyanagi took over as supervisor
 of the permanency unit at DHS. From June 2010 to July 2011, AS
 continued to have contact and visits with Maternal Aunt. AS made
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
transitional visits to Maternal Aunt's home, under the auspices
 
of Dr. Takahashi. The visits helped AS's transition because they
 were planned out and consistent.
 
AS spent two continuous years with Foster Parents,
 
since February 2009, and no more than a month or two total with
 Maternal Aunt. AS considered Foster Parents her parents and had
 bonded with their other daughters (collectively, Foster Sisters). 
AS's relationship with Foster Parents was stronger than her
 relationship with Maternal Aunt; however, a child who had formed
 an attachment and bond with parents could later attach and bond
 with a new parent.
 
Koyanagi believed that a child's contact with relatives
 
was important because it could provide information about the
 child's family history, roots, heritage, and culture; however,
 Koyanagi could cite to no definitive study showing that children
 adopted by relatives do better than children adopted by non-
relatives.
 
Koyanagi testified that DHS considers whether a
 
potential foster parent has a history of childhood abuse and
 emotional neglect, which bears on their parenting abilities. If
 a potential foster parent has unresolved issues, it could impact
 their ability to care for a child. Koyanagi did not know if
 Maternal Aunt had suffered any childhood abuse or neglect,
 despite Maternal Aunt's statement in a DHS questionnaire that she
 suffered physical neglect and abuse, sexual and emotional abuse,
 and major emotional neglect as a child. Koyanagi testified that
 Foster Father's childhood sexual abuse would also be a concern
 for DHS.
 
Nothing regarding the Foster Home or changes in AS's
 
needs made her removal to Maternal Aunt's home necessary. If it
 were not for AS and Maternal Aunt's blood relationship, there
 would be no reason for DHS to recommend placing AS with Maternal
 Aunt.
 
DHS's position was that AS should maintain contact with
 
Foster Parents if she were adopted by Maternal Aunt, and vice-
versa. However, because Foster Parents and Maternal Aunt's
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
relationship had deteriorated, Koyanagi was no longer sure that
 
Maternal Aunt would encourage and foster AS's contact with Foster
 Parents.
 
Julie Tsutsui's (Tsutsui's) testimony
 Tsutsui, a DHS social worker assigned to the Central
 
Permanency Unit, testified she was assigned to AS's case in July
 2011. Koyanagi was her supervisor.
 
Tsutsui prepared a supplemental report dated September
 
12, 2011, which included the basis for DHS's recommendation,
 beginning in October 2009, that AS be placed with Maternal Aunt. 
On direct examination, Tsutsui testified that the recommendation
 was based mainly on Maternal Aunt's status as a relative, but
 also on the bond between her and AS, her willingness to
 accommodate AS, and the opportunity she would provide for AS to
 continue her relationship with her extended family and learn
 about her family background. On cross-examination, Tsutsui
 stated that it was DHS's policy to favor relative placements that
 distinguished Maternal Aunt's home from Foster Home. The
 decision to place AS with Maternal Aunt was made before Tsutsui
 ever became involved in the case.
 
Tsutsui had observed AS's interactions with Maternal
 
Aunt during two visits and four pick-ups and drop-offs, for a
 total of about two-and-a-half to three hours. The interactions
 were positive. AS was excited to see Maternal Aunt and tell her
 things. When she was with Maternal Aunt, AS, of her own
 volition, referred to her as "Mommy." AS had formed an
 attachment with Maternal Aunt through monthly overnight stays
 with her. On cross-examination, however, Tsutsui testified that
 the attachment AS had to Maternal Aunt was no different from the
 attachment a child would have to a regular babysitter. 
If AS were placed with Maternal Aunt, AS would have
 
therapeutic support if she needed it. DHS would not recommend
 immediate adoption but instead would continue to assess the
 placement.
 
When AS visited with Maternal Aunt on O' ahu, AS saw her 
extended family, including Maternal Aunt's brother and his wife, 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
who had adopted AS's older siblings. However, none of AS's blood
 
relatives, besides her Maternal Aunt, lived on Maui.
 
DHS's assessment was that Foster Family and Maternal
 
Aunt's family were both good. The relationship between Foster
 Parents and Maternal Aunt was at that point very tenuous,
 stressful, and untrusting.
 
On July 4, 2011, there was an incident at the Foster
 
Home in which a neighbor with a drinking problem came over and
 started talking negatively about his wife in front of Foster
 Family, including AS. When Foster Father tried to escort him
 out, he scratched Foster Father's face, and Foster Father punched
 him. DHS's position was that Foster Father had acted
 appropriately to protect Foster Family. A psychological
 evaluation showed that Foster Father had an anger problem and
 needed therapy. Tsutsui thought he was undergoing treatment but
 was not sure. In September 2011, AS mentioned the incident to
 her therapist.
 
On cross-examination, Tsutsui acknowledged that
 
Maternal Aunt had made inconsistent statements to DHS regarding
 her father. On one hand, she spoke of her father in purely
 positive terms. On the other hand, in reports she filled out for
 Foster PRIDE (a certification training program), she indicated
 that she had been subjected to childhood physical neglect and
 abuse, sexual and emotional abuse, and major emotional neglect. 
She also reported that her brothers and sisters ran away to her
 mother's home because of abuse. Tsutsui testified that it was
 important to DHS that potential foster parents reveal whether
 they experienced trauma growing up, but people were not always
 forthcoming initially about negative aspects of their personal
 backgrounds. They wanted to present themselves in a positive
 light and may have difficulty talking about negative experiences.
 
Tsutsui testified that she was unaware of Maternal
 
Aunt's report that during her prior marriage, her husband abused
 drugs and alcohol, even though that would be important
 information for DHS to know about a prospective resource parent.
 
On redirect examination, Tsutsui testified that Foster
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Father also had inconsistently reported his childhood abuse and
 
neglect. In psychological evaluations of Foster Mother, Foster
 Father, and Maternal Aunt respectively, the psychologist stated
 that each of the parties had been guarded. 
On cross-examination, Tsutsui testified that it would 
be traumatic for AS to be removed from Foster Home and separated from Foster Sisters, and AS would need support from Maternal Aunt and her family throughout that process. AS had formed attachments to her preschool and Sunday school teachers on O' ahu. 
If AS were denied contact with Maternal Aunt and Maternal Relatives, it would be a loss to AS as well. 
Since Tsutsui had been on the case, Foster Parents had 
not offered to let AS visit with her relatives on O' ahu. However, 
there had been an incident in which a maternal uncle surprised Foster Parents by keeping AS overnight when he was supposed to only have her for a short time. The incident caused AS to have significant behavioral problems when she returned to Foster Family and may have made Foster Parents leery of having AS visit with Maternal Relatives on O' ahu. 
Carleen Nakata's (Nakata's) testimony
 Nakata testified that she was a "matcher" at Foster
 
Home Licensing and recommended placement homes to the assigned
 social worker. Nakata met Foster Parents in 2007, when Foster
 Home was recommended as an emergency shelter. Nakata approved
 Foster Home as an emergency shelter for a year, starting on April
 1, 2008. Foster Mother did a "pretty good job" providing an
 emergency shelter, and there were no complaints about her or
 Foster Father.
 
When AS was placed with Foster Parents on February 3,
 
2009, Foster Mother indicated that she did not trust Maternal
 Aunt or want to work with her.
 
Nakata noted in a report that Foster Father had 
eighteen prior convictions, seven of which were for violating a
 restraining order.
 
On April 8, 2009, Tarpley told Nakata that she would be
 
filing for permanent placement of AS with Foster Parents, since
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
no family members had come forward or expressed interest in
 
taking AS, and Foster Mother wanted to prevent AS from being
 moved again. Foster Mother told Nakata that she was surprised
 when Tarpley asked her if she wanted to adopt AS because she
 thought AS was going to be reunified with family members, but
 Foster Mother was very willing to adopt her.
 
On June 18, 2009, Foster Mother told Nakata that family
 
members who were supposed to take AS fell through, and Father
 wanted her. At that point, Foster Mother would have gone along
 with placement of AS with a relative, although she did not think
 any relative would take her. If no other relative could care for
 AS, Foster Mother was prepared to adopt her.
 
In a March 29, 2010 report, Nakata indicated that
 
Foster Mother was experiencing stress as a result of news that AS
 may be removed to be placed with Maternal Aunt. Foster Mother
 stated that Maternal Aunt had brought AS home twice at about
 11:30 p.m. and never called to see how she was doing. Foster
 Mother stated that AS would be better off with Foster Mother and
 Foster Mother did not trust Maternal Aunt. Foster Mother did not
 want to work with Maternal Aunt and was upset that AS would be
 placed with a family that DHS had determined was unsuitable a
 year earlier. She believed AS's family only wanted AS once they
 realized she would not suffer from dwarfism, like her Father.
 
Nakata testified that AS was bonding to Foster Parents
 
and Foster Sisters. AS called Foster Mother "Mom" and appeared
 to thrive and improve while she was living with Foster Family.
 
Foster Mother's testimony
 Foster Mother testified that she had a history of drug
 
abuse, but had been sober for nearly ten years. 
From February 2009, when AS was returned to Foster
 
Mother from her placement with family, through June 2009, no
 family member contacted her about AS. In June 2009, Tarpley
 asked Foster Mother if she was interested in adopting AS, and she
 said yes without hesitation because AS fit in perfectly with
 Foster Family, and they loved her. At that point, Foster Mother
 was under the impression that if Mother and Father's parental
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rights were terminated, Foster Mother would be the one to adopt
 
AS.
 
In the past, Foster Mother had supported the transition
 
of her other foster children to other homes or their biological
 parents; however, it was different with AS, whom Foster Mother
 had begun considering a prospective adoptee.
 
In the Summer of 2009, Foster Mother personally invited 
AS's relatives to call and visit with AS, but they never did so. Foster Mother testified that it was important for AS to visit with her half-siblings on O' ahu, but their parents never 
contacted Foster Mother. Foster Mother never contacted them because she was not sure she was allowed to do so. Maternal Aunt took AS to visit with her half-siblings. 
When Tarpley left in July 2009, the new social worker,
 
Togle-Wilson, never visited. Foster Mother believed it was
 because DHS had already decided that she would be adopting AS. 
In November 2009, right before Togle-Wilson left her position,
 she told Foster Mother that DHS planned to remove AS from Foster
 Home and place her on Maui. Foster Mother did not think removal
 would be good for AS due to the various connections she had to
 Foster Family and her life with them. DHS did not remove AS in
 November 2009.
 
Maternal Aunt did not attempt to contact AS until
 
Christmas 2009, when she visited with AS twice. After both
 visits, Maternal Aunt returned AS to Foster Family's home at
 11:30 p.m., which Foster Mother thought was inappropriate. From
 that time on, Maternal Aunt called AS about once a month.
 
Foster Mother once took AS to Maui, and AS was very
 
naughty in the airport on the way home.
 
When Foster Mother told Maternal Aunt that she wanted
 
to adopt AS, Maternal Aunt asked Foster Mother how she would
 explain to AS why she was the only cousin no longer in the
 family. Maternal Aunt said that her family took care of their
 own. Foster Mother responded, in part, that AS was never in
 Maternal Aunt's family.
 
Foster Mother told a psychologist during an evaluation
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that she had spanked AS twice. It may have been a tap over her
 
diaper or on her hand, and Foster Mother had not been very angry
 at the time.
 
The time when the maternal uncle unexpectedly took AS
 
overnight, Foster Mother allowed AS to go with him because she
 was completely caught off-guard and thought it was the right
 thing to do in light of DHS's desire that she maintain AS's
 family ties. However, she was uncomfortable with it. She did
 not call a social worker because it was a Saturday and none was
 available.
 
Foster Father's testimony
 Foster Father testified that he wanted to adopt AS. He
 
had no problem with AS visiting her family. He believed it would
 possibly be harmful for her to be removed from Foster Home
 because of the many relationships she had established with Foster
 Family and the community.
 
When he was younger, he was convicted for committing a
 
number of criminal offenses and used drugs. He spent six years
 in jail, then went to treatment and made an effort to get better. 
He had been sober for seven years.
 
Foster Father did not mention his child abuse on his
 
Foster Pride questionnaire. He received help and counseling from
 his family, church, friends, and psychologist to help him deal
 with the issues. He was also addressing his anger problem. 
During the July 4th incident, when he punched his neighbor, he
 was not acting out of anger but to protect his family.
 
Maternal Aunt's testimony
 Maternal Aunt was one credit away from earning her M.A. 
in Special Education at the University of Hawai' i at Manoa, but 
already eligible for her license. She hoped to earn her degree by the end of the year. She had been working as a special education teacher for four years and had been a volleyball coach since 2003. She quit coaching, however, in anticipation of AS's placement with her. 
Maternal Aunt's daughter was enrolled in a Hawaiian
 
immersion school and involved in numerous extracurricular
 
19
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
activities. She and Maternal Aunt spoke Hawaiian.
 
Maternal Aunt had seven siblings and twenty-one nieces 
and nephews, most of whom lived on O' ahu, while the rest lived on 
the Mainland. Maternal Aunt tried to visit family on O' ahu once 
a month. 
Maternal Aunt first heard that AS was in foster care 
around September 2008. Tarpley was looking for family willing to 
take AS and called to see if she was interested. Maternal Aunt said she was unable to care for AS because she was going through a divorce and in the middle of her Master's program, and did not have her own place yet, but she would be ready to take AS by the end of the summer of 2009. Maternal Aunt first saw AS in November or December 2008, at Maternal Aunt's brother's house on O'ahu. 
Maternal Aunt's divorce was finalized on January 15,
 
2009. On February 19, 2009, she called Tarpley and told her that
 she finally had her own place and was ready to care for AS. 
Tarpley asked Maternal Aunt a number of questions about her
 ability to care for AS, then told Maternal Aunt she was already
 in the process of doing a home study on Maternal Aunt's niece in
 North Carolina. Maternal Aunt did not tell Tarpley that she was
 unable to care for AS at that time.
 
Between February and May or June, 2009, Maternal Aunt
 
tried two or three times to reach Tarpley, leaving her messages,
 but never heard back from her. She called DHS to inquire into
 her status and report that she could not reach Tarpley.
 
Although Maternal Aunt was close to her sister and
 
sister-in-law, neither of them told her before-hand about the
 Ohana Conference they attended. Maternal Aunt's sister told her
 she mentioned Maternal Aunt at the conference.
 
Around July or August 2009, Togle-Wilson contacted
 
Maternal Aunt and was surprised to hear that she was still
 interested in fostering AS. Togle-Wilson said that Tarpley had
 resigned.
 
In September or October 2009, Maternal Aunt filled out
 
an application to become AS's foster parent. She wanted to take
 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
AS because AS was her niece and ties to family were extremely
 
crucial. AS would have connections to her culture, including
 Hawaiian language, and would feel more secure if she had a strong
 sense of her ethnic identity and family connections. Maternal
 Aunt had three cousins who lived nearby on Maui. Also, when
 Mother was pregnant with AS, she asked Maternal Aunt to take AS
 "if anything was to happen."
 
DHS did a home study at Maternal Aunt's home in October
 
2009. Around the end of that month, DHS told Maternal Aunt they
 would place AS with her the following month. Maternal Aunt did
 not know why, but DHS did not place AS with her.
 
Maternal Aunt saw AS around December 2009. She tried
 
to reach her by phone but did not talk to her until January 2010
 or see her until March 2010.
 
From the time she first visited AS until the time of 
trial, Maternal Aunt visited with AS about twenty-four times, including two times on Maui. She had about ten or twelve overnight visits with AS, including two on Maui. At first, AS had to get used to her, but by March 2010, AS was excited to see her and called her "Mommy." During the O' ahu visits, Maternal 
Aunt would pick up AS at Foster Home around 9 or 10 a.m. and drop her off around 5 p.m. AS's visits to Maui in September and October 2010, were without incident. Maternal Aunt did not know why AS did not visit her on Maui again. 
Maternal Aunt's daughter and AS had an immediate
 
connection and were excited around and protective of each other,
 although during the first couple of visits they argued about
 whose mommy Maternal Aunt was. AS referred to Maternal Aunt's
 daughter as her "sister." AS's cousins played with her during
 the visits. Maternal Aunt felt strongly that AS should have a
 connection to them.
 
During AS's first couple of visits with Maternal Aunt,
 
Maternal Aunt had to put her in time-outs for not sharing toys. 
Maternal Aunt would talk to her about the need to share, etc. At
 times, she would need to scold AS.
 
Maternal Aunt believed it was extremely important for
 
21
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
AS to continue seeing Foster Parents, although it was harder for
 
Maternal Aunt to accept them than it had been. In the prior
 year, Foster Parents had hurt her feelings by failing to invite
 her over or return her phone calls to AS around the time of AS's
 birthday.
 
When Maternal Aunt was between the ages of three and
 
nine, her father would give her "lickings" with his hand or rope
 or sometimes a belt. The childhood sexual abuse she suffered was
 at the hands of her brothers' friends. They would rub her legs
 when she sat on the couch. She had experienced childhood
 emotional abuse when her mother left the house and never
 explained why. Her ex-husband also was verbally and emotionally
 abusive. She experienced major emotional neglect from her
 parents. She had never gotten treatment for her childhood abuse
 and neglect.
 
Dean's testimony
 Dean testified that it was in AS's best interest to
 
remain with Foster Parents. AS had lived at the Foster Home
 consistently for two-and-a-half years and identified with Foster
 Family, who were everything to her. Dean was concerned that
 removal would traumatize AS.
 
Dean had observed a wonderful bond between AS and
 
Foster Family, and the interactions among them were loving,
 nurturing, and compassionate. In the four interactions she had
 observed between AS and Maternal Aunt, Dean had seen affection,
 interest, and respect. Dean had spent a lot more time at the
 Foster Home, which she had visited at least once a month. No DHS
 worker had visited Maui in connection with the case. Dean had
 expressed interest in doing so, but DHS lacked the funds.
 
Dean filed a motion opposing DHS's decision to place AS
 
with Maternal Aunt because initially the transition plan was not
 good. By October 4, 2010, when the family court ordered DHS, in
 conjunction with Dr. Takahashi, to develop a plan to transition
 AS from Foster Family to Maternal Aunt, the VGAL Program did not
 oppose it because at that time it was trying to facilitate a
 connection between AS and Maternal Aunt.
 
22
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dean wrote in a report that she believed Maternal Aunt
 
was seeking foster custody of AS because Mother and their family
 
wanted it, not because she was truly committed or it would be in
 AS's best interest.
 
3. Family Court's Ruling
 
On October 31, 2011, after the parties had submitted
 
written closing arguments, the family court orally ruled the
 following with regard to its standard of review:
 
As I ruled at the start of the trial, I believe that
the legal analysis I must apply is as follows: First I must
 
make an independent determination as to which placement is
in [AS's] best interest. If I find that placement with
[Maternal Aunt] is in her best interest, the analysis
essentially ends because that's consistent with [DHS's]
assessment.
 
If, however, I determine that it is in [AS's] best
interest that she maintain her placement with her [Foster
Parents], I must then decide whether the [DHS] has abused
its discretion in reaching the ultimate factual finding that
it is in [AS's] best interest to be placed with [Maternal
Aunt].
 
I can only find an abuse of discretion if the foster
parents and the VGAL program have proved that [DHS's]
determination is clearly erroneous either because it lacks
substantial evidence to support it or, even if there is
substantial evidence to support the finding, I am left with
the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been
 made.
 
The court noted that in DHS's own Policy Directive No. 2005-7
 
regarding standards for relative placement, DHS states that all
 placement decisions are subject to family court review and does
 not interfere with the court's discretion to decide what is in a
 child's best interests. DHS's policy of placing children with
 relatives when possible had to be applied on a case-by-case basis
 and take into account all of the circumstances, i.e. what was in
 the children's best interests.
 
The family court ruled that it was not in AS's best
 
interest to be placed with Maternal Aunt, for the following
 reasons:
 
•	 AS had lived thirty-four of her thirty-nine months
of life with Foster Parents.
 
•	 AS considered Foster Home her home, was bonded
with Foster Family, and was deeply attached to
Foster Mother. 
23
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
•	 AS's friends, church, school, therapist, and
doctors were all tied to her current placement. 
•	 AS's relationship with Foster Family was deeper
than her relationship with Maternal Aunt.
 
•	 AS had thrived with Foster Family.
 
•	 Foster Parents had shown great commitment to AS
and had followed through on and actively engaged
in numerous services for themselves and AS and had
 been receptive to advice from service providers.
They were responsible and competent. 
•	 Foster Family had provided a safe, secure, loving
and nurturing home. 
•	 The testimony showed that if AS were removed from
Foster Home, she would experience a sense of loss
and trauma; it would harm AS if her contact with
Foster Family were not maintained; and if
placement with Maternal Aunt failed, it would be
extremely traumatic to AS. 
•	 DHS offered no specific research or studies
showing that foster children do better with
relatives in the long-run.
 
•	 Maintaining placement with Foster Parents did notmean that AS would have no contact with or connection to her biological family. Foster Parents credibly testified that they believed itwas important for AS to maintain contact with andvisit her relatives and would ensure that AS did so. In some ways, Foster Parents would be betterpositioned logistically to provide AS with accessto her relatives, including Father, who were onO'ahu. 
The family court found that DHS abused its discretion
 
in determining that AS should be placed with Maternal Aunt based
 
on a finding that it was in AS's best interests, which was
 clearly erroneous even though it was based on substantial
 evidence because a mistake had been made ("I find that the
 application of [DHS's] policy in this case for [AS] under these
 facts and at this time in [AS's] life is not in her best interest
 and is therefore a mistake.").
 
The family court ordered DHS to maintain and make
 
permanent AS's placement with Foster Parents. The court ordered
 
24
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
DHS to continue providing AS visitation with Maternal Aunt and
 
other relatives on O' ahu, in DHS's discretion and in consultation 
with the VGAL Program.
4. DHS's Motion to Be Relieved as Permanent Custodian
 
After the family court announced its ruling, counsel
 
for DHS and the court engaged in the following discussion:
 
[Counsel]: Your Honor, as standing practice in my
office, at this time [DHS] wishes to be relieved as
permanent custodian of [AS] based on the Court's ruling.
 
THE COURT: To be relieved?
 
[Counsel]: 
Yes. And appoint . . . [Foster Parents]
as [AS's] permanent custodian.
 
THE COURT: 
Can you explain to [sic] why [DHS] is
making that motion?
 
[Counsel]: Well, it's basically the Court's ruling
that we did abuse our discretion and it's basically a
reflection on our fitness as permanent custodian, Your
Honor. So it's standard practice coming out of my office in
these situations to ask to be relieved of that -­
THE COURT: 
Okay.
 
[Counsel]:  -- [DHS] be relieved of its obligation and
appoint the resource parents as the permanent custodians.
 
THE COURT:  
At this point the Court will deny the
motion.
 
[Counsel]:  
Pardon me, Your Honor?
 
THE COURT: 
The Court will deny the motion. Okay.
 
C.	 Findings of Fact (FOFs), Conclusions of Law
(COLs), and Placement Order
 
On November 18, 2011, the family court filed its
 
Placement Order.
 
On February 6, 2012, the family court filed its
 
FOFs/COLs. In its COLs, the court found the following:
 
1. Pursuant to HRS § 587A-15(d)(2), DHS has the
authority to determine where and with whom a child in its
permanent custody shall live.
 
2. DHS's determination that a placement for a child
in its permanent custody is in the child's best interests isan ultimate finding of fact that is reviewable by the family
court under the clearly erroneous standard of review. In re 
Doe, 89 Hawai' i 477, 487 (App. 1999) [(1999 Doe)]; [1989 
Doe]. 
3. The court can only find that DHS has abused its
 
25
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
discretion in exercising its authority to determine where
and with whom a child in its permanent custody shall live if
DHS's ultimate factual finding that a placement for the
child is in his/her best interests is clearly erroneous.
 
4. A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when (1)
the record lacks substantial evidence to support thefinding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support ofthe finding, the reviewing court is nonetheless left with adefinite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. [1999 Doe,] 89 Hawai' i at 487. 
5. It is in [AS's] best interests to remain in her
placement with Foster Parents.
 
6. It is not in [AS's] best interests to be removed
from her placement with the Foster Parents and placed with
[Maternal Aunt] on Maui.
 
7. DHS's ultimate finding of fact that placement of
[AS] with [Maternal Aunt] is in her best interests is
clearly erroneous, insofar as the court is left with
definite and firm conviction that, despite substantial
evidence in support of DHS's finding, a mistake has been
made by DHS.
 
8. DHS has abused its discretion in exercising its
authority to determine where and with whom [AS] shall live,
because its determination that placement of [AS] with
[Maternal Aunt] is in her best interests is clearly
erroneous.
 
9. The court has the authority to direct DHS to
maintain [AS's] placement with Foster Parents. [March 2003 Doe, 101 Hawai' i at 230-31]. 
10. Notwithstanding the court's findings and
conclusions that DHS has abused its placement discretion in
this case, there is not good cause to remove DHS as [AS's]
permanent custodian.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Family Court Decisions
 
Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion. Thus,
we will not disturb the family court's decisions on appeal
unless the family court disregarded rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant and its decision clearly exceeded the bounds of
reason.
 
March 2003 Doe, 101 Hawai' i at 227, 65 P.3d at 174 (quotation 
marks, brackets, ellipsis, internal block quotation format, and
 
citations omitted).
B. Family Court's FOFs and COLs
 
The family court's FOFs are reviewed on appeal under
the clearly erroneous standard. A FOF is clearly erroneous
when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support
the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support
of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with
 
26
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.
 
Substantial evidence is credible evidence which is of
 sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
reasonable caution to support a conclusion.
 
March 2003 Doe, 101 Hawai' i at 227, 65 P.3d at 174 (quotation 
marks, ellipsis, and citations omitted).
 
The family court's FOFs, as well as its determinations
pursuant to HRS § 587–73(a),13 are reviewed under the
 
clearly erroneous standard . . . . Thus, the question on
appeal is whether the record contains substantial evidence
supporting the family court's determinations, and appellate
review is thereby limited to assessing whether those
determinations are supported by credible evidence of
sufficient quality and probative value. In this regard, the
testimony of a single witness, if found by the trier of fact
to have been credible, will suffice. Because it is not the
 province of the appellate court to reassess the credibility
of the witnesses or the weight of the evidence, as
determined by the family court, the family court is given
much leeway in its examinations of the reports concerning a
child's care, custody, and welfare.
 
2001 Doe, 95 Haw. at 196-97, 20 P.3d at 629-30 (quotation marks,
 
brackets, and citations omitted). 
"[T]he family court's COLs are reviewed on appeal de 
novo, under the right/wrong standard. COLs, consequently, are not binding upon an appellate court and are freely reviewable for their correctness." March 2003 Doe, 101 Hawai' i at 227, 65 P.3d 
at 174 (internal quotation marks, brackets, block quotation format, and citations omitted). "Moreover, the family court is given much leeway in its examination of the reports concerning a child's care, custody, and welfare, and its conclusions in this regard, if supported by the record and not clearly erroneous, must stand on appeal." Id. (internal quotation marks, brackets, 
and citations omitted).
C. Statutory Interpretation
 
"The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
reviewable de novo." March 2003 Doe, 101 Hawai' i at 227, 65 P.3d 
at 174 (internal quotation marks, ellipsis, block quotation format, and citation omitted). 
13 During the 2010 regular session, the legislature passed Bill No.
2716, which was enacted as Act 135, Session Law of Hawaii 2010, and codified
as the Child Protective Act, HRS Chapter 587A. Act 135 was a comprehensive
update of the former Child Protective Act, HRS Chapter 587. HRS § 587-73
("Permanent plan hearing") is now codified in HRS § 587A-31 (Supp. 2010)
("Permanency hearing"). 
27
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
When construing a statute, our foremost obligation is
to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the
legislature, which is to be obtained primarily from the
language contained in the statute itself. And we must read
 statutory language in the context of the entire statute and
construe it in a manner consistent with its purpose . . . .
 
Id. at 228, 65 P.3d at 175 (internal block quotation format and
 
citation omitted). This court may also consider "[t]he reason
 and spirit of the law, and the cause which induced the
 legislature to enact it . . . to discover its true meaning." HRS
 § 1–15(2) (2009 Repl.). 
"Laws in pari materia, or upon the same subject matter,
 
shall be construed with reference to each other. What is clear
 in one statute may be called upon in aid to explain what is
 doubtful in another." HRS § 1–16 (2009 Repl.).
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Mootness
 
In their Answering Brief, Foster Parents argue that
 
except for DHS's appeal from the family court's order regarding
 their Motion for Discharge, this appeal is moot because Maternal
 Aunt has not appealed from the court's decision and, thus, there
 is no actual controversy. We disagree. 
"It has been stated that a case is moot if it has lost 
its character as a present, live controversy[.]" In re Doe, 81 
Hawai'i 91, 99, 912 P.2d 588, 596 (1996) (internal quotation 
marks, brackets in original, and block quotation format omitted). "Thus, the mootness doctrine is properly invoked where events have so affected the relations between the parties that the two conditions for justiciability relevant on appeal — adverse interest and effective remedy — have been compromised." Id. 
(internal quotation marks, ellipsis, citation, and block quotation format omitted). 
In this case, whether the family court applied an
 
incorrect standard of review when reviewing DHS's placement
 determination and erred in overriding that determination remain
 "present, live controversies," regardless of Maternal Aunt's
 failure to appeal from the court's rulings. If we were to
 conclude that the court applied the wrong standard of review
 and/or erred in determining that DHS abused its discretion in
 
28
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
deciding to place AS with Maternal Aunt, an effective remedy
 
would be available. For example, we might remand with
 instructions to the court to hold a new placement trial applying
 the correct standard of review; or we could reverse the court's
 rulings and instruct the court to permit DHS to place AS with
 Maternal Aunt (or another appropriate care-giver if Maternal Aunt
 were no longer willing and able to care for her). We note that
 Maternal Aunt's failure to appeal does not necessarily mean she
 is no longer interested in becoming AS's foster parent.
B. Standard of Proof
 
1. Parties' Arguments
 
DHS argues that the family court erred as a matter of
 
law by applying a contradictory and unlawful standard of proof
 that first required DHS to prove that its proposed placement with
 Maternal Aunt was in AS's best interest, and then, if DHS did not
 do so, required Foster Parents and Dean to prove that DHS abused
 its discretion in making its proposal. DHS argues that the court
 ultimately applied a "pure 'best interests of the child'"
 standard, where the abuse-of-discretion standard applied. 
Related to this point of error is DHS's contention that COLs 2-8
 are wrong.
 
COLs 2-8 provide:
 
2. DHS's determination that a placement for a child
in its permanent custody is in the child's best interests is
an ultimate finding of fact that is reviewable by the family
court under the clearly erroneous standard of review. [1999
 Doe; 1989 Doe.]
 
3. The court can only find that DHS has abused its
discretion in exercising its authority to determine where
and with whom a child in its permanent custody shall live if
DHS's ultimate factual finding that a placement for the
child is in his/her best interests is clearly erroneous.
 
4. A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when (1)
the record lacks substantial evidence to support thefinding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support ofthe finding, the reviewing court is nonetheless left with adefinite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. [1999 Doe,] 89 Hawai' i at 487. 
5. It is in [AS's] best interests to remain in her
placement with Foster Parents.
 
6. It is not in [AS's] best interests to be removed
from her placement with the Foster Parents and placed with
[Maternal Aunt] on Maui.
 
29
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
7. DHS's ultimate finding of fact that placement of
[AS] with [Maternal Aunt] is in her best interests is
clearly erroneous, insofar as the court is left with a
definite and firm conviction that, despite substantial
evidence in support of DHS's finding, a mistake has been
made by DHS.
 
8. DHS has abused its discretion in exercising its
authority to determine where and with whom [AS] shall live,
because its determination that placement of [AS] with
[Maternal Aunt] is in her best interests is clearly
erroneous.
 
DHS argues that we must reverse the family court's
 
placement ruling and order the court to authorize DHS to place AS
 
with Maternal Aunt or remand the case to the court to issue such
 orders. 
In their Answering Brief, Foster Parents argue that the
 
family court applied the proper standard because throughout HRS
 Chapter 578A, the court is vested with authority to review DHS
 placement decisions according to what is in a child's best
 interests. See HRS §§ 587A-30(b)(7), -31, and -33 (Supp. 2010). 
The VGAL Program argues that the court applied the correct
 standard of review, which was to "determine on its own what
 placement was in AS's best interests and then apply the
 established clearly erroneous standard of review."
2.	 Best-interest of the Child as Appropriate Standard
Of Review by the Family Court
 
In the proceedings below, Foster Parents and the VGAL
 
Program urged the family court to apply a "best-interest"
 
analysis only. They argued that a finding that DHS's placement
 decision was not in AS's best interest amounted per se to a
 finding that the decision constituted an abuse of discretion. 
DHS argued that the court must review DHS's placement decision
 for an abuse of discretion, and could find DHS abused its
 discretion if it found clearly erroneous DHS's determination that
 placing AS with Maternal Aunt was in AS's best interest.
 
The family court ultimately applied a two-prong
 
standard of review that involved (1) independently deciding
 
30
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
whether DHS's placement decision was in AS's best interest;14
 
and (2) if the court found the placement was not in AS's best
 
interest, reviewing DHS's placement decision for an abuse of
 discretion, which meant deciding whether DHS's "best-interests"
 determination was clearly erroneous based on a preponderance of
 the evidence.
 
The family court based its standard of review
 
determination largely on 1989 Doe. There, DHS petitioned the
 family court for the termination of the parents' physical
 custody, an award of foster custody to DHS, and possible
 permanent termination of parental rights leading to adoption. 7
 Haw. App. at 549, 784 P.2d at 876. DHS appointed a Guardian Ad
 Litem (GAL) and placed the child in temporary foster care with
 caretakers (Foster Caretakers). Id. 
The family court awarded foster custody to DHS and
 
later, orally awarded DHS permanent custody. Id. Foster
 
Caretakers intervened, wanting to adopt the child. Id. at 550,
 
784 P.2d at 876. 
The family court held a permanency review hearing, at
 
which DHS expressed doubts that Foster Caretakers reacted
 properly to certain events that occurred prior to the child's
 placement with them but did not suggest that they were unfit or
 improper people or that their home was unstable or unwholesome. 
Id. DHS stated in writing that Foster Caretakers had not been
 
neglectful, but DHS had found a better life-time placement in an
 adoptive home where the child's two brothers lived. Id. DHS
 
stated that it had a CPA-compatible policy of placing children
 with relatives whenever possible. Id. DHS argued that although
 
a child may become emotionally tied to his or her foster parents,
 it does not mean the child should remain with them if a better
 placement is found. Id. at 551, 784 P.2d at 876-77.
 
The family court entered an order authorizing DHS to
 
transfer the child from Foster Caretakers to the proposed
 adoptive family. Id. at 551, 784 P.2d at 877. The court later
 
14 The family court did not place upon DHS a burden to prove that its
placement decision was in AS's best interest.
 
31
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
entered an Order Awarding Permanent Custody and Establishing a
 
Permanent Plan in which it, among other things, terminated some
 of the birth mother's parental rights and appointed DHS permanent
 custodian. Id. The court also entered a Stipulation Awarding
 
Permanent Custody and Establishing a Permanent Plan which, among
 other things, terminated some of the birth father's parental
 rights. Id. The court found that although Foster Caretakers had
 
provided good care, the court's sole consideration must be what
 was in the child's best interests, and it was in her best
 interests to be transferred to the DHS-proposed adoptive home to
 be united with her brothers. Id. at 552, 784 P.2d at 877. 
The GAL appealed from the order and stipulation,
 
arguing that absent a finding that Foster Caretakers were not fit
 and proper persons or that their home was not stable and
 
15
wholesome, HRS § 571-46(2) (1985)  required DHS and the family
court to award custody to Foster Caretakers. Id.
 at 556, 784
 
P.2d at 879. DHS responded by citing to, among other things, HRS
 § 587-1 (Supp. 2002), which provided that the purpose of Chapter
 587 was to provide children with an opportunity to be reconciled
 with their families when practicable, and permanent planning that
 effectuated placement with a child's own family when possible.
16
 
Id. at 553-54, 784 P.2d at 878. 
On appeal, this court stated the following:
 
Under HRS § 571-46, the determining factor with
respect to child custody is the best interests of the child.
On the subject of best interests, HRS § 571-46(1) accords
priority to the child's parents. HRS Chapter 587 accords
priority to the child's family as defined in HRS 
15 HRS § 571-46(2) provided in relevant part that custody may be
awarded to persons other than the mother or father whenever such award serves
the child's best interest, and "[a]ny person who has had de facto custody of
the child in a stable and wholesome home and is a fit and proper person shall
be entitled prima facie to an award of custody." Id. at 553, 784 P.2d at 878.
16 In 1998, HRS § 587-1 was amended to emphasize an interest in
promoting a child's safety and best interest over a preference for relativeplacements. See Nov. 2003 Doe, 103 Hawai' i at 136-37, 80 P.3d at 26-27; HRS
§ 587-1. The legislature has since repealed Chapter 587 and replaced it withChapter 587A, and the purpose and construction of Chapter 587A is now providedfor in 587A-2 (Supp. 2010). 
32
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
§ 587-2 . . . .17 There are no other statutory priorities.
Thus, when HRS § 571-46(d) authorizes the award of custody to
any person who has had de facto custody of the child in a stable
and wholesome home and is a fit and proper person it does so
only whenever such award serves the best interest of the child,
subject to statutory priority in favor of the child's parents and
family. 
Id. at 556, 784 P.2d at 879 (internal quotation marks, citation
 
and brackets omitted). This court noted that Foster Caretakers
 were neither parents nor family and found that pursuant to
 HRS § 587-2, DHS had the authority to remove the child without
 family-court approval. Id. 
This court went on to state:
 
In well-developed areas of the law, findings of
specified material elements or criteria mandate one
conclusion of law. In these areas, the matters or questions
of fact are decided by the fact finder and the conclusion of
law is decided by the court. On appeal, the [FOFs] are
reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard of review and
the [COLs] is reviewed under the de novo or right/wrong
standard of review. DeMund v. Lum, 5 Haw. App. 336, 690
P.2d 1316 (1984).
 
In less-developed areas of the law, the facts permit
more than one conclusion in the discretion of the court. In
 
these areas, the matters or questions of fact are decided by
either the fact finder or the court and the conclusion is
 decided by the court. If [FOFs] are entered, they are
reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard of review.
The conclusion is reviewed under the abuse of discretion
 
standard of review. Heston v. Heston, 49 Haw. 521, 423 P.2d
437 (1967).
 
Child custody is an area where the law has not
determined the specific material elements or criteria that
mandate a conclusion as to what custodial arrangements are
in the best interests of the child. HRS § 571–46(5) (1985)
infers that best interests mean "the best physical, mental,
moral, and spiritual well-being of the child[.]" The
 definition of "family home" in HRS § 587–2 suggests that
best interests mean "the provision of care for the child's
physical and psychological health and welfare." When the
 child's family is unwilling or unable to provide the child
with a safe family home, HRS § 587–73(a)(3)(A) (Supp. 1988)
indicates that best interests means "to be promptly and
permanently placed with responsible and competent parents
and families in safe and secure homes[.]"
 
Some considerations are universally accepted as being
relevant. There is, however, no agreement as to the
relative priority of each of these considerations.
Consequently, currently in Hawaii, Fujikane v. Fujikane,
 supra; Sabol v. Sabol, 2 Haw. App. 24, 624 P.2d 1378 (1981),
 
17 HRS § 587-2 (Supp. 1988) defined "permanent custody" as the legal
status created by court order based in part on clear and convincing evidence
that a permanent plan was in a child's best interest. 1989 Doe at 554-55, 784
 
P.2d at 878-79.
 
33
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and in most other states, see 63 N.D.L. Rev. 481, 530 n.199
(1987), the decision as to what custodial arrangements are
in the best interests of a specific child is a matter for
the court's discretion. In practice, each trial judge
identifies, prioritizes, and applies the considerations he
or she deems relevant. Under this system, the range of
permissible choices available to the trial court is
virtually unlimited.
 
If we want to initiate the case law process of
identifying, prioritizing, and standardizing the relevant
considerations and their application, we must characterize
the best interests decision either as a question of ultimate
fact or a conclusion of law. Since we have not yet
developed specific material elements or criteria, we cannot
characterize it as a conclusion of law. Thus, the only
alternative is to characterize it as a question of ultimate
fact. That is what the courts did in In Re Maria C., 527
A.2d 318 (Me. 1987), and Ferguson v. Ferguson, 202 N.W.2d
760 (N.D. 1972).
 
In light of the above considerations, we conclude that
the decision as to what custodial arrangements are in the
best interests of the child is a matter or question of
ultimate fact reviewable under the clearly erroneous
standard of review.
 
Our decision is consistent with HRS § 587–41 (Supp.
1988). It provides, in relevant part, as follows:
 
Evidentiary determination; burden of proof.
. . . . 
(b)
 In an adjudicatory hearing, a determination
that the child has been harmed or is subject to
threatened harm shall be based on a preponderance of
the evidence[.]
 
(c) In subsequent hearings, other than a
permanent plan hearing, any determination shall be
based on a preponderance of the evidence[.]
 
(d) In a permanent plan hearing:
 
(1) A determination that permanent custody
of a child be awarded to an appropriate
authorized agency shall be based upon clear and
convincing evidence; and
 
(2) A determination that a child should be
the subject of an adoption shall be based upon a
preponderance of the evidence.
 
Since matters of law and discretion do not involve
 
such degrees of proof, HRS § 587–41's requirement of the
preponderance and clear and convincing degrees of proof
corresponds with our decision that DHS's decision that it
was in Doe's best interests to remove her from Foster
 Caretakers' home and transfer her to the proposed adoptive
home was an ultimate finding of fact.
 
In essence, GAL appealed DHS's adverse foster care
placement decision to the family court, contending that
DHS's ultimate finding of fact was clearly erroneous. Since
 the family court made the same finding, it obviously
concluded that DHS's finding was not clearly erroneous.
 
34
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Whether a finding of fact is clearly erroneous is a question
of law. Consequently, the dispositive issue is whether the
family court was right or wrong in concluding that DHS's
ultimate finding was not clearly erroneous. Upon a review
of the record, we conclude that the family court's
conclusion was right.
 
7 Haw. App. at 556-58, 784 P.2d at 880-81.
 
1989 Doe held that "the decision as to what custodial
 
arrangements are in the best interests of the child is a matter
 
or question of ultimate fact reviewable under the clearly
 erroneous standard of review." Id. at 558, 784 P.2d at 880. 
This holding appears to apply to family court review of a DHS
 best-interest finding, as well as appellate review of a family
 court's best-interest finding.
 
In its Answering Brief, the VGAL program asks us to
 
consider overruling 1989 Doe, "to clarify that appellate
 standards should not apply to DHS placement recommendations, and
 every party may come before the family court on an equal
 footing." It contends that a party challenging a DHS
 recommendation does not have to show clear error with regard to
 the multitude of duties and rights vested in DHS through the CPA
 and should not have to do so with regard to a placement decision.
 
DHS is authorized "to receive children for control,
 
care, maintenance, or placement." HRS § 587A-4 (Supp. 2010). 
When DHS has permanent custody, it possesses certain duties and
 rights set forth in HRS § 587A-15(d) (Supp. 2010); however, HRS
 Chapter 587A vests "exclusive original jurisdiction in a child
 protective proceeding" in the family court. HRS § 587A-5 (Supp.
 2010). 
Nowhere in the CPA is the family court required to
 
review a DHS decision or recommendation for clear error. Rather,
 throughout the Act, the court is vested with the authority to
 issue orders and make decisions according to what is in a child's
 best interests. See, e.g., HRS §§ 587A-30(b)(7) (stating that at
 
each periodic review hearing, the family court is authorized to
 "[i]ssue such further or other appropriate orders as it deems to
 be in the best interest of the child"); 587A-31(c)(2) (stating
 that at permanency hearings, the family court is to determine
 "[w]hether the current placement of the child continues to be
 
35
    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
appropriate and in the best interest of the child or if another
 
in-state . . . placement should be considered"); 587A-33(a)(3)
 (stating that in a termination of parental rights hearing, if the
 family court finds that there is clear and convincing evidence to
 support a decision to terminate parental rights, the court should
 determine if a proposed permanent plan is the a child's best
 interests). 
Hawai'i appellate courts have cited to the subject 
holding in 1989 Doe only in the context of appellate review of family court best-interest determinations. See, e.g. In re Doe, 
95 Hawai' i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 (2001); Maeda v. Maeda, 8 
Haw. App. 139, 143, 794 P.2d 268, 270 (1990). We can find no Hawai'i case besides 1989 Doe in which an appellate court has 
held that the family court should review for clear error a DHS determination that a placement decision is in a child's best interest. 
In the interest of clarifying the law on this point,
 
this court overrules the holding in 1989 Doe that "the decision
 as to what custodial arrangements are in the best interests of
 the child is a matter or question of ultimate fact reviewable
 under the clearly erroneous standard of review," Id. at 558, 784
 P.2d at 880, insofar as it applies to a family court's review of
 a DHS determination that its placement decision is in a child's
 best interest.
18 We conclude that the family court, based on the
 
evidence presented, must make its own determination regarding
 whether the placement of the child is in the child's best
 interest.
 
Although it was issued when HRS Chapter 587 was still 
in effect, March 2003 Doe supports our holding. There, the GAL and DHS disagreed about what foster placement was in the child's best interest. 101 Hawai' i at 228, 65 P.3d at 175. DHS argued 
that HRS § 587–2 (1993) expressly vested in DHS the duty and right to determine where and with whom a foster child shall be 
18 This court does not disturb the holding in 1989 Doe as far as it
 
applies to an appellate court's review of a family court's decision that a
custodial arrangement is in a child's best interest. 
36
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
placed in foster care, and the family court could "not award
 
foster custody to an authorized agency and simultaneously
 restrict that agency's statutory placement authority as a foster
 custodian." Id. (footnote omitted). 
The GAL responded that the family court possessed the
 
authority to review and restrict DHS's placement authority
 according to what was in a child's best interest, notwithstanding
 the court's award of foster custody to DHS. Id. at 229, 65 P.3d
 
Tat 176. 
he Hawai
'i Supreme Court stated the following: 
The legislature enacted HRS chapter 587 "to make
paramount the safety and health of children who have been
harmed or are in life circumstances that threaten harm." 
See HRS § 587–1 (Supp. 2002). The legislature expressly
found that "children deserve and require competent,
responsible parenting and safe, secure, loving, and
nurturing homes" in order to provide them with the greatest
opportunity "to realize their full educational, vocational,
and emotional potential." Id. In order to effectuate the
 
foregoing purposes, HRS § 587–1 states that "[t]his chapter
shall be liberally construed to serve the best interests of
the children . . . ."
 
Moreover, HRS § 571–11(9), see supra note 5, provides
that "the [family] court shall have exclusive original
jurisdiction in proceedings . . . [f]or the protection of
any child under chapter 587." The primary goal of the
family court's jurisdiction in HRS chapter 587 cases is to
"prevent harm to the child," see In re Doe Children, 96
 
Hawai'i 272, 285, 30 P.3d 878, 891 (2001), by ascertaining
what custodial arrangements are in the best interests of the
child — i.e., the "best physical, mental, moral, and
spiritual well-being of the child," see HRS § 571–46(5)
(Supp. 2002). See also In re Jane Doe, Born on June 4,
 
1987, 7 Haw. App. 547, 557, 784 P.2d 873, 880 (App. 1989)
("[T]he range of permissible choices available to the
[family] court is virtually unlimited."). HRS § 587–71(d),
see supra note 2, provides that, "[i]f the court determines
that the child's family home is not a safe family home, . .
. the court shall vest foster custody of the child in an
authorized agency and enter such further orders "as the
 court deems to be in the best interests of the child."
 (Emphasis added.) See also In re Doe Children, 96 Hawai' i 
at 286, 30 P.3d at 892.
 
In the event that the family court designates DHS as
the authorized agency to receive a child for placement, the
designation endows DHS, as the foster custodian of a child,
with certain rights and duties . . . . In addition, the CPA
vests DHS with the authority to adopt rules and regulations
to effectuate the purposes of all public assistance
programs, including foster child placement.
 
Id. at 229-30, 65 P.3d at 176-77 (footnote omitted).
 
The supreme court held that pursuant to its authority
 
under HRS § 587-1 to enter "such further orders as the court
 
37
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
deems to be in the best interests of the child," the family court
 
could require DHS to refrain from moving the child. Id. at 231,
 
65 P.3d at 178. 
Since 1989 Doe was issued, the purpose of the CPA as
 
described in the HRS has remained substantially similar in all
 relevant respects. See HRS § 587A-2. Further, as we have
 
discussed, the family court still retains exclusive, original
 jurisdiction in cases falling under the CPA. HRS § 587A-5. 
Although the "further orders" language is no longer included in
 the CPA, HRA § 587A-31 vests the court with the authority to
 determine at permanency hearings "whether the current placement
 of the child continues to be appropriate and in the best interest
 of the child or if another in-state . . . placement should be
 considered."
 
3.	 The Court's Application of the Abuse-of-discretion
Standard Was Harmless Error
 
DHS argues that it has discretion to determine a
 
child's permanent placement pursuant to HRS § 587A-15(d)(2) and
 
March 2003 Doe; thus, an opposing party must prove that the
 determination was an abuse of discretion.
 
HRS § 587A-15(d)(2) characterizes DHS's permanent
 
placement authority as a "duty" and a "right," but nowhere
 suggests that DHS may exercise that authority in its
 discretion.
19 This contrasts with other parts of the Act that do
 
vest DHS with discretion. See HRS §§ 587A-9 (Supp. 2010)
 
(vesting DHS with the discretion to assume temporary foster
 custody of a child if it determines the child is subject to
 imminent harm while in the custody of his or her family); 587A­15(c)(1) (Supp. 2010) (stating that a child's family retains the
 right of reasonable visitation at the discretion of the
 authorized agency or the court); 587A-26(e)(3) (Supp. 2010)
 (stating that the court may order reasonable visitation to a
 child's family at the discretion of the GAL, DHS, or another
 
19 HRS § 587A-15(d)(2) provides, "[i]f an authorized agency has
permanent custody, it has the following duties and rights: . . . (2)
Determining where and with whom the child shall live; provided that the child
shall not be placed outside the State without prior order of the court." 
38
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
authorized agency). We presume the legislature intentionally 
declined to vest DHS with discretion to make placement decisions. See In re Water Use Permit Applications, 94 Hawai' i 97, 9 P.3d 
409 (2000) (internal quotation marks, brackets, and citations omitted) (stating that "where the legislature includes particular language in one section of a statute but omits it in another section of the same Act, it is generally presumed that the legislature acts intentionally and purposely in the disparate inclusion or exclusion."). 
March 2003 Doe is inapposite on this point. There, the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court held that DHS's licensing authority, not 
DHS's placement authority, was discretionary. 101 Hawai' i at 
231, 65 P.3d at 178. 
In this case, the family court provided no authority
 
for its application of the abuse-of-discretion standard. It
 appears that the court assumed the standard was part-and-parcel
 of the clear-error standard. DHS cites to no persuasive
 authority to support the notion that it had discretion to make
 placement decisions, and we find none. The court erred in
 reviewing DHS's placement decision for an abuse of discretion. 
However, the court's error was harmless in that its application
 of the abuse-of-discretion standard did not affect the result. 
C. Scope of Review
 
DHS argues that the family court exceeded its scope of
 
review in independently deciding what was in AS's best interests:
 
While the Hawaii ICA ruled [in 1989 Doe] that the
family court's review of DHS' decision was tantamount to an
appeal, it is different from standard appeals, including
administrative appeals to circuit court because the family
court hears evidence while in other appeals the review is
limited to the record. The family court's review of DHS'
discretionary placement decision must be based on the
evidence that DHS considered in making its decision, not the
family court's "independent" determination of what the
family court believes to be in the child's best interests. 
DHS appears to argue that although a family court's review of a
 
DHS decision is different from an administrative appeal, the
 court is still bound by HRS § 91-14(f)(2012 Repl.) ("Judicial
 review of contested cases"), which limits judicial review to the
 record in agency appeals. HRS § 91-14 does not apply in this
 
39
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
case. 1989 Doe did not hold that the family court's
 
consideration of the evidence was limited to what was before the
 
DHS. DHS provides no authority to support its argument, and we
 find none. The court did not err by independently determining
 what placement was in AS's best interests.
D.	 Ultimate Ruling and FOFs
 
DHS argues in the alternative that even if the family
 
court applied the correct standard of review, its ultimate ruling
 that AS should remain with Foster Parents is clearly erroneous
 and COLs 5-8 are wrong because they are based on clearly
 erroneous FOFs 113, 114, and 116.
 
FOFs 113, 114, and 116 provide:
 
113. It is in the best interests of [AS] to remain in
her placement with Foster Parents.
 
114. It is not in [AS's] best interests to be removed
from her placement with the Foster Parents and placed with
[Maternal Aunt] on Maui.
. . . .
 
116. Based upon all of the evidence, the court is
left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has
 
been made by DHS in determining that that [sic] it is in
[AS's] best interests for her to be removed from Foster
[Home] and placed with [Maternal Aunt].
 
FOFs 113, 114, and 116, which are ultimate findings of fact, are
 
not clearly erroneous because they are based on substantial
 evidence in the record on appeal, including the transcripts of
 the permanency trial.
E.	 Federal and State Law Preference for Relative 
Placements
 
DHS argues that the family court erred as a matter of 
law when it failed to follow and apply Hawai' i and federal child 
protective laws that create a preference for placing children in 
state foster care with their families, if appropriate, in accordance with "the liberty interest of familial association" protected by the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. DHS maintains that the court "erred by focusing on DHS' family placement policy preference (that is in accord with Federal and Hawaii law)." 
40
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1. Hawai'i Law 
21 22 23 24
DHS argues that HRS §§ 587A-2,  -7, -9, and -10 
 
21 HRS § 587A-2 provides:
 
§587A-2 Purpose; construction.  This chapter creates within the
jurisdiction of the family court a child protective act to make
paramount the safety and health of children who have been harmed or are
in life circumstances that threaten harm. Furthermore, this chapter
makes provisions for the service, treatment, and permanent plans for
these children and their families.
 
The legislature finds that children deserve and require competent,
responsible parenting and safe, secure, loving, and nurturing homes. The
legislature finds that children who have been harmed or are threatened
with harm are less likely than other children to realize their full
educational, vocational, and emotional potential, and become law-
abiding, productive, self-sufficient citizens, and are more likely to
become involved with the mental health system, the juvenile justice
system, or the criminal justice system, as well as become an economic
burden on the State. The legislature finds that prompt identification,
reporting, investigation, services, treatment, adjudication, and
disposition of cases involving children who have been harmed or are
threatened with harm are in the children's, their families', and
society's best interests because the children are defenseless,
exploitable, and vulnerable. The legislature recognizes that many
relatives are willing and able to provide a nurturing and safe placement
for children who have been harmed or are threatened with harm.
 
The policy and purpose of this chapter is to provide children with
prompt and ample protection from the harms detailed herein, with an
opportunity for timely reconciliation with their families if the
families can provide safe family homes, and with timely and appropriate
service or permanent plans to ensure the safety of the child so they may
develop and mature into responsible, self-sufficient, law-abiding
citizens. The service plan shall effectuate the child's remaining in the
family home, when the family home can be immediately made safe with
services, or the child's returning to a safe family home. The service
plan shall be carefully formulated with the family in a timely manner.
Every reasonable opportunity should be provided to help the child's
legal custodian to succeed in remedying the problems that put the child
at substantial risk of being harmed in the family home. Each appropriate
resource, public and private, family and friend, should be considered
and used to maximize the legal custodian's potential for providing a
safe family home for the child. Full and careful consideration shall be
given to the religious, cultural, and ethnic values of the child's legal
custodian when service plans are being discussed and formulated. Where
the court has determined, by clear and convincing evidence, that the
child cannot be returned to a safe family home, the child shall be
permanently placed in a timely manner.
 
The policy and purpose of this chapter includes the protection of
children who have been harmed or are threatened with harm by:
 
(1) Providing assistance to families to address the causes for
abuse and neglect;
 
(2) Respecting and using each family's strengths, resources,
culture, and customs;
 
(continued...)
 
41
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
21(...continued)
(3) Ensuring that families are meaningfully engaged and children
are consulted in an age-appropriate manner in case planning;
 
(4) Enlisting the early and appropriate participation of family
and the family's support networks;
 
(5) Respecting and encouraging the input and views of caregivers;
and
 
(6) Ensuring a permanent home through timely adoption or other
permanent living arrangement, if safe reunification with the
family is not possible.
 
The child protective services under this chapter shall be provided
with every reasonable effort to be open, accessible, and communicative
to the persons affected by a child protective proceeding without
endangering the safety and best interests of the child under this
chapter.
 
This chapter shall be liberally construed to serve the best
interests of the children affected and the purpose and policies set
forth herein.
22 HRS § 587A-7 provides:
 
§587A-7 Safe family home factors.  (a) The following factors
shall be fully considered when determining whether a child's family is 
willing and able to provide the child with a safe family home:
 
(1) Facts relating to the child's current situation, which
shall include:
 (A) The child's age, vulnerability, and special needs that
affect the child's attachment, growth, and development;
 (B) The child's developmental, psychological, medical,
and dental health status and needs, including the names of
assessment and treatment providers;
 (C) The child's peer and family relationships and bonding
abilities;
 (D) The child's educational status and setting, and the
department's efforts to maintain educational stability for
the child in out-of-home placement;
 (E) The child's living situation;
 (F) The child's fear of being in the family home;
 (G) The impact of out-of-home placement on the child;
 (H) Services provided to the child and family; and
 (I) The department's efforts to maintain connections
between the child and the child's siblings, if they are
living in different homes;
 
(2)
 The initial and any subsequent reports of harm and
threatened harm to the child;
 
(continued...)
 
42
     FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
22(...continued)
(3) Dates and reasons for the child's out-of-home placement; 
description, appropriateness, and location of the
placement; and who has placement responsibility;
 
(4) Facts regarding the alleged perpetrators of harm to the
child, the child's parents, and other family members who
are parties to the court proceedings, which facts shall
include:
 (A) Birthplace and family of origin;
 (B) Manner in which the alleged perpetrator of harm was
parented;
 (C) Marital and relationship history; and
 (D) Prior involvement in services;
 
(5) Results of psychiatric, psychological, or developmental
valuations of the child, the alleged perpetrators, and other
family members who are parties;
 
(6) Whether there is a history of abusive or assaultive
conduct by the child's family members and others who have
access to the family home;
 
(7) Whether there is a history of substance abuse by the
child's family or others who have access to the family home; 
 
(8) Whether any alleged perpetrator has completed services
in relation to any history identified in paragraphs (6) and
(7), and acknowledged and accepted responsibility for the harm
to the child;
 
(9) Whether any non-perpetrator who resides in the family
home has demonstrated an ability to protect the child from
further harm and to ensure that any current protective orders
are enforced;
 (10) Whether there is a support system available to the
child's family, including adoptive and hanai relatives,
friends, and faith-based or other community networks;
 (11) Attempts to locate and involve extended family, friends, and
faith-based or other community networks;
 (12) Whether the child's family has demonstrated an
understanding of and involvement in services that have been
recommended by the department or court-ordered as necessary to
provide a safe family home for the child;
 (13) Whether the child's family has resolved identified safety
issues in the family home within a reasonable period of time;
and
 (14) The department's assessment, which shall include the
demonstrated ability of the child's family to provide a safe
family home for the child, and recommendations.
 
(b) The court shall consider the likelihood that the current
(continued...)
 
43
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(Supp. 2010) clearly express a legislative preference in favor of
 
22(...continued)
situation presented in the safe family home factors set forth in
subsection (a) will continue in the reasonably foreseeable future.
23 HRS § 587A-9 provides:
 
587A-9 Temporary foster custody without court order.  (a) When
 
the department receives protective custody of a child from the police,
the department shall:
 
(1) Assume temporary foster custody of the child if, in the
discretion of the department, the department determines
that the child is subject to imminent harm while in the
custody of the child's family;
 
(2) Make every reasonable effort to inform the child's
parents of the actions taken, unless doing so would put
another person at risk of harm;
 
(3) Unless the child is admitted to a hospital or similar
institution, place the child in emergency foster care while
the department conducts an appropriate investigation, with
placement preference being given to an approved relative;
 
(4) With authorized agencies, make reasonable efforts to
identify and notify all relatives within thirty days of
assuming temporary foster custody of the child; and
 
(5) Within three days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays:
 (A) Relinquish temporary foster custody, return the child
to the child's parents, and proceed pursuant to section
587A-11(3), 587A-11(4), or 587A-11(5);
 (B) Secure a voluntary placement agreement from the child's
parents to place the child in foster care, and proceed
pursuant to section 587A-11(5) or 587A-11(7); or
 (C) File a petition with the court.
 
(b)
 Upon the request of the department and without regard to
parental consent, any physician licensed or authorized to practice
medicine in the State shall perform an examination to determine the
nature and extent of harm or threatened harm to the child under the 
department's temporary foster custody.
24 HRS § 587A-10 provides:
 
§587A-10 Relatives; foster placement.  (a) The department shall
provide the child's relative an application to be the child's resource
family within fifteen days of the relative's request to provide foster
placement for the child. If the application is submitted and denied, the
department shall provide the applicant with the specific reasons for the
denial and an explanation of the procedures for an administrative
appeal.
 
(b) The department and authorized agencies shall make
reasonable efforts to identify and notify all relatives of the
child within thirty days after assuming foster custody of the
child.
 
44
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
placements with relatives at all stages of a case falling under
 
HRS Chapter 587A.
 
We agree with Foster Parents, who argue that except for
 
HRS § 587A-9, none of the HRS provisions cited to by DHS contains
 an explicit or mandatory preference in favor of relative
 placements. HRS § 587A-9 pertains only to "temporary foster
 custody without court order" and provides for "placement
 preference being given to an approved relative" when a child is
 placed in emergency foster care. HRS §§ 587A-10 and -26(e)(2)
 
25
(Supp. 2010),  which concern relative placements, provide that
any relatives shall be identified, if possible, and given the
 opportunity to apply for foster custody, if they express interest
 in taking a child, within the first thirty days after the child
 is taken into foster custody by DHS. 
Chapter 578A does not
 
require that relatives must be given preference in placing a
 child after the birth parents' rights have been terminated. 
Although placement with a relative after termination of parental
 rights may have certain advantages, the paramount and overriding
 consideration is the best interests of the child.
 
Regardless, assuming there was a preference for 
relative placement, it would not supercede "best interest" considerations. See
, e.g., HRS §§ 587A-30(b)(7), -31, and ­
33(a)(3); March 2003 Doe, 101 Hawai' i at 231, 65 P.3d at 178. 
Also, as the VGAL Program argues, this court already
 
ruled in Nov. 2003 Doe that there is no kinship preference that
 requires the family court to give relatives placement priority. 
26
There, the mother argued that HRS § 587-1  gave priority to the
25 HRS § 587A-26(e)(2) provides that at temporary foster custody
hearings, the court may order that "[t]he child's family members who are
parties provide the department or another authorized agency the name and
addresses of other relatives and friends who are potential visitation
supervisors or resource families for the child[.]
26 HRS § 587-1 set forth the policy of § 587-73(e), which provided that
the "court shall order a permanent plan for the child within three years ofthe date upon which the child was first placed under foster custody by thecourt, if the child's family is not willing and able to provide the child witha safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan." Nov. 2003 
Doe, 103 Hawai' i at 136, 80 P.3d at 26. HRS § 587-1 provided the following in
relevant part: 
(continued...)
 
45
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
family with respect to the permanent placement of the children
 
and that there were no other statutory priorities. 103 Hawai' i 
at 136, 80 P.3d at 26. This court held that in 1998 the
 legislature amended § 587-1 and the policy of the law to
 emphasize an interest in protecting the safety and best interests
 of the child over a preference for reunification with the
 family.
27 103 Hawai' i at 136-37, 80 P.3d at 26-27. 
26(...continued)
This permanent planning should effectuate placement with a child's
own family when possible and should be conducted in an expeditious
fashion so that where return to the child's family is not possible
as provided in this chapter, such children with [sic] be promptly
and permanently placed with responsible, competent, substitute
parents and families secured by adoption or permanent custody
orders. 
Nov. 2003 Doe
, 103 Hawai' i at 136, 80 P.3d at 26.
27 Pursuant to 1998 Act 134, HRS § 587-1 then stated: 
Purpose; construction.  This chapter creates within
the jurisdiction of the family court a child protective act
to make paramount the safety and health of children who have
been harmed or are in life circumstances that threaten harm.
 Furthermore, this chapter makes provisions for the service
treatment, and permanent plans for these children and their
families.
 
The legislature finds that children deserve and
require competent, responsible parenting and safe, secure,
loving, and nurturing homes. The legislature finds that
children who have been harmed or are threatened with harm
 are less likely than other children to realize their full
educational, vocational, and emotional potential, and become
law-abiding, productive, self-sufficient citizens, and are
more likely to become involved with the mental health
system, the juvenile justice system, or the criminal justice
system, as well as become an economic burden on the State. The
legislature finds that prompt identification, reporting,
investigation, services, treatment, adjudication, and disposition
of cases involving children who have been harmed or are threatened
with harm are in the Children's, their families', and society's
best interests because the Children are defenseless, exploitable,
and vulnerable.
 
The policy and purpose of this chapter is to provide
children with prompt and ample protection from the harms detailed
herein, with an opportunity for timely reconciliation with their
families if the families can provide safe family homes, and with
timely and appropriate service or permanent plans to ensure the
safety of the child so they may develop and mature into
responsible, self-sufficient, law-abiding citizens. The service
 plan shall effectuate the child's remaining in the family home,
when the family home can be immediately made safe with services,
or the child's returning to a safe family home. The service plan
should be carefully formulated with the family in a timely manner.
Every reasonable opportunity should be provided to help the
(continued...)
 
46
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The purpose and construction of the CPA is now codified
 
in HRS § 587A-2. Nothing in that statute or its legislative
 
history suggests that the emphasis on a child's safety and best
 interests no longer takes precedence over a preference for family
 placements. 
DHS cites to 1989 Doe to support this point, arguing 
that "case law give[s] the preference to place children in foster care with their family." 1989 Doe held that the family court was right to find that DHS did not clearly err in deciding to remove the child from the home of non-relative foster caretakers and place her in an adoptive home where her brothers resided. 7 Haw. App. at 558, 784 P.2d at 881. The holding was based in large part on a statutory preference for relative placements, which, has since been superceded by an interest in promoting a child's safety and best interests. See Nov. 2003 Doe, 103 Hawai' i at 
136-37, 80 P.3d at 26-27. 
2. Federal Law
 
DHS maintains that Congress has conditioned federal
 
funding to states that comply with federal child
 protection/welfare laws that require them to give placement
 preference to relatives over non-relatives. DHS does not cite to
 
27(...continued)
child's legal custodian to succeed in remedying the problems which
put the child at substantial risk of being harmed in the family
home. 
Each appropriate resource, public and private, family and
friend, should be considered and used to maximize the legal
custodian's potential for providing a safe family home for the
child. Full and careful consideration should be given to the
religious, cultural, and ethnic values of the child's legal
custodian when service plans are being discussed and formulated.
Where the court has determined, by clear and convincing evidence,
that the child cannot be returned to a safe family home, the child
will be permanently placed in a timely manner.
 
The department's child protective services provided under
this chapter shall make every reasonable effort to be open,
accessible, and communicative to the persons affected in any
manner by a child protective proceeding; provided that the safety
and best interests of the child under this chapter shall not be
endangered in the process.
 
This chapter shall be liberally construed to serve the best
interests of the Children and the purposes set out in this
chapter.
 
103 Hawai' i at 137, 80 P.3d at 27. 
47
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
any authority to support the notion that this exercise of
 
Congress's Spending Power required the family court to accept
 DHS's placement recommendation, and nothing in HRS Chapter 587A
 or in any case law construing Chapter 587A suggests that it does.
3.	 Right to Family Association under U.S.
Constitution
 
DHS also maintains that its placement decision was in
 
accord with the right of familial association protected by the
 
Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution.
 
In United States v. Wolf Child,  699 F.3d 1082, 1091-92
 
(9th Cir. 2012), the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth
 Circuit summarized the constitutional right to familial
 association as follows:
 
The substantive due process right to family integrity or to
familial association is well established. A parent has a
fundamental liberty interest in companionship with his or
her child. It is perhaps the oldest of the fundamental
liberty interests recognized by the Supreme Court. This
 interest occupies a unique place in our legal culture, given
the centrality of family life as the focus for personal
meaning and responsibility. Far more precious than property
rights, parental rights have been deemed to be among those
essential to the orderly pursuit of happiness by free men,
and to be more significant and priceless than liberties
which derive merely from shifting economic arrangements.
. . . .
 
The parents' fundamental right to familial association is not
absolute and must be balanced against the interests of the state,
and when conflicting, against the interests of the children.
Interference with that right, however, requires a powerful
countervailing interest and strict adherence to procedures is
required.
 
(Quotation marks, citations and brackets omitted.) 
[T]he constitutional liberty interest in the maintenance of
the familial relationship is not absolute. The interest of
 
the parents must be balanced against the interests of the
state and, when conflicting, against the interests of the
children. 
McCue v. South Fork Union Elementary School, 766 F. Supp. 2d
 
1003, 1008 (E.D. Cal. 2011) (internal quotation marks and
 citations omitted).
 
In Osborne v. County of Riverside, 385 F. Supp. 2d
 
1048, 1053 (2005), the United States District Court for the
 Central District of California, Eastern Division examined whether
 the right to familial integrity and association extended to a
 
48
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
child's close relatives, such as a grandmother or aunt. The
 
District Court held that a close relative possessed a liberty
 interest in familial integrity and association with respect to a
 child, where the relative and child had a long-standing custodial
 relationship such that together they constituted an existing
 family unit. Id. at 1054-55. A mere genetic link was not
 
enough. Id. at 1054-55. 
Assuming arguendo that the right to familial 
association extends to Maternal Aunt, which is an issue we do not address, DHS lacks the right to vicariously assert that right on her behalf. See Freitas v. Admin Dir. of the Courts, 104 Hawai' i 
483, 486, 92 P.3d 993, 996 (2004) (internal quotation marks omitted) ("Constitutional rights may not be vicariously asserted."); Powers v. Ohio, 499 U.S. 400, 410 (1991) ("In the ordinary course, a litigant must assert his or her own legal rights and interests, and cannot rest a claim to relief on the legal rights or interests of third parties."). 
The United States Supreme Court has "recognized the
 
right of litigants to bring actions on the part of third parties,
 provided three important criteria are satisfied": (1) the
 litigant has suffered an injury in fact, thus giving him or her a
 sufficiently concrete interest in the outcome of the issue in
 dispute, (2) the litigant has a close relationship to the third
 party, and (3) there is some hindrance to the third party's
 ability to protect his or her own interests. Powers, 499 U.S. at
 
410-11. 
In its Reply Brief, DHS argues that it meets the three-
part test set forth in Powers. DHS argues that it meets the
 first exception, due to its "obligation to enforce and follow the
 laws regarding family/relative placements that are in accord with
 the protected liberty interest of family association." Regarding
 the second exception, DHS argues that it is in a close
 relationship with AS and Maternal Aunt, given its status as AS's
 permanent custodian. With regard to the third exception, DHS
 argues that "AS's VGAL advocates against this proposed
 family/relative placement."
 
49
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Without addressing DHS's arguments regarding the first
 
and second exceptions, we hold that DHS fails to meet the third
 
exception. The right to familial association would belong to
 Maternal Aunt. DHS has not shown that Maternal Aunt is somehow
 hindered from asserting this right, e.g., prevented from
 appealing from the family court's ruling or intervening in the
 instant appeal.
 
Given the foregoing, we hold that DHS lacks standing to
 
assert this argument.
4. DHS's Kinship Policy
 
DHS argues that the family court erred "by focusing on
 
DHS' family placement policy preference (that is in accord with
 Federal and Hawaii law)." Related to this point is DHS's
 contention that FOFs 89 and 115 are clearly erroneous. FOF 89
 provides, "DHS supports placement of [AS] with [Maternal Aunt]
 because of its policy in favor of kin placements." FOF 115
 provides, "The application in this case of DHS's policy regarding
 placement with kin, considering all of the circumstances in this
 case, is not in [AS's] best interests." 
In the proceedings below, the family court received
 
into evidence the following exhibits submitted by Dean: "DHS
 Policy Directive PA 2005-5" (2005-5 Policy), "DHS Policy
 Directive PA 2005-7" (2005-7 Policy), and "DHS Policy Directive
 PA 2005-8" (2005-8 Policy) (collectively, Policy Directives). 
The 2005-5 Policy states, "This policy directive affirms [the
 Child Welfare Services Branch's (CWSB's)] policy to seek and
 assess relatives or kin as foster, adoptive, and/or permanent
 placement resources for children under the Department's
 voluntary, court-ordered foster or permanent custody and that
 relatives or kin placement is preferred to maintain family
 connections." The 2005-7 Policy states that "[P]lacement with
 kin meeting CWSB licensing requirements shall be a priority in
 
order to maintain life-long and enduring family connections and
 
as a permanent resource for children." Finally, the 2005-8
 Policy states that "[the 2005-5 Policy] reaffirms [DHS's] policy
 to seek and assess kin as foster, adoptive, and/or permanent
 placement for children under [DHS's] custody and that kin
 
50
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
placement shall be a priority to maintain life-long family
 
connections." The 2005-8 Policy includes maternal relatives in
 
its definition of "kin."
 
At trial, Koyanagi testified that in 2004 and 2005,
 
then-director of DHS Lillian Koller publicly pronounced that DHS
 had a policy of placing children with relatives. DHS did not
 blindly adhere to a policy of placing foster children with
 relatives but believed that such placements were better for
 children. DHS preferred to place AS with Maternal Aunt because
 she was a relative and would provide AS with access to her
 extended family. If it were not for AS and Maternal Aunt's blood
 relationship, there would be no reason for DHS to recommend
 placing AS with Maternal Aunt.
 
Tsutsui testified that DHS recommended that AS be
 
placed with Maternal Aunt primarily based on Maternal Aunt's
 status as a relative. It was DHS's policy to favor relative
 placements alone that distinguished Maternal Aunt's home from
 Foster Home.
 
The family court was within its discretion to consider 
the Policy Directives when making its "best-interest" determination regarding DHS's placement recommendation.
28 See 
2001 Doe, 95 Hawai' i at 190, 20 P.3d at 623 (internal quotation 
marks, ellipsis, brackets and citations omitted) ("It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact."). There is substantial evidence to support FOFs 89 and 115, and they are not clearly erroneous. 
If DHS means to argue that the family court erred in 
focusing on the Policy Directives without considering that they were based on federal and Hawai' i law establishing a preference 
for placements with family, as we have discussed, DHS lacks standing to assert a constitutional right on behalf of Maternal 
28 We note that DHS, itself, relies on its Policy Directives in its
opening brief to support its assertion that its decision that placing AS with
Maternal Aunt was in line with federal and state law establishing a preference
for family placements.
 
51
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Aunt, and HRS Chapter 587A does not create a preference for a
 
relative placement after parental rights have been terminated.
 
DHS also cites to FOF 90 to support this point. FOF 90
 
provides, "DHS did not proffer any specific research or studies
 that show that foster children do better in the long run in
 relative placements than in non-relative placements." DHS argues
 that the FOF is clearly erroneous because "research supporting
 family placement, provided by DHS to [Foster Parents], is part of
 the record. [R. 1036-1037.]" The pages to which DHS cites do
 not contain any research findings. The first page is a "Notice
 of Termination or Reduction of Service," notifying Foster Parents
 that DHS was revoking their foster home license. The second page
 is a "Notice of Hearing Motion." DHS has not met its burden to
 show that the FOF is clearly erroneous.
F. Passage of Time
 
DHS argues that the family court erred as a matter of
 
law by failing to consider the length of time AS lived with
 Foster Parents -- along with associated issues, such as AS's
 relationships -- when "[t]here was a two-year delay from when DHS
 approved Maternal Aunt for placement on Maui and made its initial
 plans to place AS in October, 2009 to the placement trial and
 decision in October, 2011, to the detriment of Maternal Aunt, who
 in large part did not cause the delays." DHS has not shown and
 we find no evidence that the court failed to consider any of the
 delays.
 
1. Delay in Setting Initial Trial Date
 
DHS argues that the family court's October 2009 and
 
April 2010 order resulted in a delayed initial trial date of
 October 2010.
 
October 2009 Order
 DHS argues that the family court failed to consider how
 
its October 28, 2009 Orders Concerning Child Protective Act
 (October 2009 Order) -- which "required" DHS to give Father a
 reasonable opportunity to reunify with AS and "prevented" DHS
 from placing AS with Maternal Aunt -- created a delay that
 negatively impacted DHS's efforts to place AS with Maternal Aunt.
 
We agree with Foster Parents that DHS mis-characterizes
 
52
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the facts by arguing that the family court prevented it from
 
placing AS with Maternal Aunt, when DHS asked the court at an
 October 28, 2009 pre-trial hearing for more time before placing
 AS with Maternal Aunt to allow Father to reunify with AS. The
 order that "DHS shall make best efforts to increase visits
 between Father & [AS]" merely memorialized the court's oral
 granting of DHS's request at the October 28, 2009 hearing.
 
DHS cites to no authority to support the notion that
 
the family court had to consider how this delay negatively
 impacted DHS's efforts to place AS with Maternal Aunt, and we
 find none. 
DHS alternatively argues that its duty to make 
reasonable efforts to effectuate AS's reunification with Father, who lived on O' ahu, in accordance with his constitutional liberty 
and privacy interests, is what prevented DHS from placing AS with Maternal Aunt, who lived on Maui. DHS attributes this conflict with a problem in the "system"; however, DHS does not associate this systemic problem with any error or omission by the family court. 
April 2010 Order
 DHS argues that the family court's April 21, 2010 oral
 
denial of DHS's motion for immediate removal of AS to Maui, in
 which the family court declined to address the placement issue
 until after the completion of DHS's Motion for Permanent Custody,
 further prevented DHS from exercising its placement discretion. 
At an April 21, 2010 hearing, the court orally denied without
 prejudice DHS's motion for immediate review to move AS to Maui,
 stating that the permanency trial would be held in two weeks and
 removal of AS to Maternal Aunt's home "may be an issue . . .
 after the permanency trial . . . ." DHS cites to no authority to
 support the notion that the court had to consider how this delay
 negatively impacted DHS efforts to place AS with Maternal Aunt,
 and we find none. 
2. Trial Continuances
 
DHS argues that the family court's October 2010 order
 
53
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
29
(October 2010 Order)  and March 23, 2011 Orders Concerning Child
Protective Act (March 2011 Order) caused delays that prevented AS
 
from developing a relationship with Maternal Aunt.
 
October 2010 Order
 In the October 2010 Order, the family court ordered DHS
 
not to "remove [AS] from Foster [Home] except in the case of
 imminent harm." 
DHS cites to no authority to support the notion
 
that the court had to consider how this delay negatively impacted
 DHS's efforts to place AS with Maternal Aunt, and we find none. 
Regardless, the delay was related to the Foster Home licensing
 issue, which resulted from DHS's own error.
 
March 2011 Order
 In the March 2011 Order, the family court continued the
 
permanency trial to June 2011 and, among other things, denied
 DHS's motion to increase visits between AS and Maternal Aunt or
 place AS with Maternal Aunt, authorized DHS to review and copy
 documents related to Maternal Aunt's divorce, and ordered Foster
 Parents to participate in psychological evaluations. Again, DHS
 cites to no authority to support the notion that the family court
 had to consider how this delay prevented DHS from placing AS with
 Maternal Aunt, and we find none.
 
G. Continuing DHS's Status as Permanent Custodian
 
DHS argues that the family court erred as a matter of
 
law by denying DHS's request to be discharged as AS's permanent
 custodian, after ordering DHS not to place AS with Maternal Aunt. 
Related to this point is DHS's contention that COL 10 is wrong. 
That COL provides, "Notwithstanding the court's findings and
 conclusions that DHS has abused its discretion in this case,
 there is not good cause to remove DHS as [AS's] permanent
 custodian." 
DHS maintains:
 
While the DHS concedes that the family court has the legal
authority to review the placement decisions made by DHS or
any other designated foster or permanent custodian under
 
29 When referring to an "October 2010" order, DHS cites to page 911 in
the record on appeal, which is part of the court's December 30, 2010 order, in
which the court grants Foster Parents' Motion to License Home and for Trial.
It appears that the order was filed and dated in December 2010, but issued in
October 2010.
 
54
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Chapter 587A, the family court cannot award foster custody
or permanent custody to DHS and simultaneously restrict
DHS's statutory placement authority as a foster or permanent
custodian. If the family court finds that DHS or any other
authorized agency abuses its placement authority it must
vest foster or permanent custody in another authorized
agency.
. . . . 
The clear intent of the Hawaii Legislature is that if the
family court vests foster custody or permanent custody in an
authorized agency, that the family court gives that
authorized agency the authority to determine where and with
whom the child shall live. 
As we have already discussed, pursuant to case law and HRS
 
Chapter 587A, the family court can "restrict DHS's statutory
 placement authority as a foster or permanent custodian," where it
 is in a child's best interest. See Part III.B.2 in this
 discussion. Further, HRS § 587A-15(b) (Supp. 2010) provides that
 "[t]he court, in its discretion, may vest foster custody of a
 child in any authorized agency . . . if the court finds that it
 is in the child's best interests to do so."
 
DHS cites to March 2003 Doe, 101 Hawai' i at 229, 65 
P.3d at 176, to support this point, arguing that there, the Hawai'i Supreme Court agreed with DHS's contention that "if the 
family court finds that an authorized agency abused it's [sic] placement authority, the family court should revoke its award of custody to DHS . . . ." In March 2003 Doe, DHS's main point was that the family court had exceeded its statutory authority by awarding foster custody of the child to DHS and simultaneously ordering DHS to place the child with her aunt in an unlicensed foster boarding home against DHS's recommendation. Id. at 228­
29, 65 P.3d at 175-76. DHS argued that the supreme court's order prohibited DHS from exercising its placement authority as foster custodian. Id. at 229, 65 P.3d at 176. DHS also argued that 
because the family court rejected DHS's recommendation, the supreme court "should have revoked its award of foster custody to DHS and vested foster custody in Aunt." Id. However, it is 
clear from the opinion as a whole that when the supreme court stated that it "agree[d] with DHS," it was agreeing with DHS's main point, not its point regarding revocation of DHS's custody. The supreme court never held that where the family court rejects 
55
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a DHS placement recommendation, the supreme court should revoke
 
DHS's custody. 
DHS cites to no persuasive authority to support the
 
notion that the family court could not order DHS to continue
 acting as AS's permanent custodian, and we find none. COL 10 is
 not wrong.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The "Order Re: Trial on Placement" filed on November
 
18, 2011 in the Family Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
On the briefs:
 
Patrick A. Pascual
 
Mary Anne Magnier
Jay K. Goss
Deputy Attorneys General
for Petitioner-Appellant
Department of Human Services.
 
Francis T. O'Brien
 
for Respondent-Appellee
for Foster Parents.
 
Kimberly S. Towler
for Respondent-Appellee
Volunteer Guardians Ad Litem
 Program.
 
56
 