FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
---o0o---
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
HERWIN MAGBULOS, Defendants-Appellees.
NO. CAAP-14-0001337
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 13-1-0696)
FEBRUARY 20, 2018
NAKAMURA, C.J., and FUJISE and GINOZA, JJ.
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawaii (State) charged
Defendant-Appellant Herwin Magbulos (Magbulos) with second-degree
murder for intentionally or knowingly causing the death of
Darryle Wong (Wong).  Wong resided in an improvised structure in
a homeless encampment underneath a freeway viaduct.  While in
Wong's dwelling, Magbulos stabbed Wong in the stomach and back
with two different knives, causing Wong's death.  The State
asserted that the stabbings were unprovoked and constituted
murder; Magbulos asserted that he stabbed Wong in self-defense.#FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The jury found Magbulos guilty as charged.  The Circuit
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)1 sentenced Magbulos to
life imprisonment with the possibility of parole.
On appeal, Magbulos contends: (1) the prosecutor
committed misconduct during opening statement by stating that
despite Wong's homelessness and drug use, Wong's life mattered;
(2) the prosecutor committed misconduct in closing argument by
improperly vouching for the credibility of the State's witnesses
and inviting jurors to consider Magbulos' interest in the case in
evaluating his credibility; and (3) the Circuit Court erred by
failing to instruct the jury on the lesser included offenses of
second-degree assault, third-degree assault, and third-degree
assault by mutual affray.  As explained below, we conclude that
the alleged misconduct by the prosecutor and alleged error by the
Circuit Court did not violate Magbulos' right to a fair trial by
an impartial jury, and we affirm Magbulos' conviction. 
BACKGROUND
The stabbing that led to Wong's death took place at
about daybreak on Sunday morning at a homeless encampment
underneath the Nimitz/Dillingham interchange in Mapunapuna.   
Wong lived there in a separate enclosed structure that used the  
cement foundation of the viaduct for its ceiling and a portion of
its walls and wooden pallets for the remaining walls.  Wong's
enclosed structure contained an opening in the wooden pallets for
a door, a bed, a toilet area with a bucket, and cardboard and
pieces of carpet on the floor.  Magbulos stabbed Wong while they
were in Wong's dwelling.  
The State's witnesses at trial included people who
lived at or frequented the encampment, and who, like Wong, were
homeless and used drugs.  Magbulos had previously stayed at the
encampment with one of Wong's neighbors, and Magbulos was also a
drug user.        
1The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
2FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
I. 
The State presented the following evidence at trial.
A.
Michael Lund (Lund) testified that on Friday, May 3,
2013, he went to visit Wong at the encampment.  Lund had known
Wong for at least three years, but had not seen Wong for some
time.  Lund was homeless and brought some of his possessions with
him and stayed with Wong. 
According to Lund, he asked Wong to procure drugs, and
Wong provided what Lund believed was a "twenty dollar paper of
methamphetamine."  Lund injected the drugs on Friday afternoon,
which made him feel sick.  Lund stayed in or around Wong's
dwelling through Saturday morning.  During that time, Lund did
not sleep and did not see Wong sleep.  Lund remained at Wong's
dwelling on Saturday.  He observed Wong leave the dwelling
several times and return after being gone for hours.  
Lund began feeling better on Saturday and that night,
after midnight, he left Wong's dwelling to get something to eat
and drink.  Lund returned to Wong's dwelling at around 1:30 to
2:00 a.m. on Sunday.  When Lund returned, Wong left the dwelling
and did not come back until hours later, when "daybreak was
starting."  When Wong came back, Lund tried to talk to Wong, but
Wong was tired and lay down on his bed.  Lund had not seen Wong
sleep at all between Saturday and when Wong came back on Sunday
morning. 
Shortly after Wong lay down on his bed, Magbulos
entered Wong's dwelling.2  Magbulos asked Lund for a cigarette,
and then Magbulos sat on a cooler next to Wong's bed and smoked
2Lund was unable to identify Magbulos at trial, but without
objection by Magbulos, the prosecutor referred to the person Lund
testified had entered Wong's dwelling as "the defendant" and
"Herwin" (Magbulos' first name).  There was no dispute at trial
that this person was Magbulos as Magbulos himself acknowledged
that he had stabbed Wong in Wong's dwelling while Lund was
present.  So for purposes of simplicity, in recounting Lund's
testimony, we will refer to this person as "Magbulos."
3FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
it.  Magbulos did not appear agitated, and Wong did not react to
Magbulos' entering the dwelling.  Magbulos tried to talk to Wong,
but Wong remained on his bed and "just kind of mumbl[ed]" in
response.  Another person, whom Lund did not know, called from
outside without entering the dwelling, asking to talk to Wong. 
However, Wong would not get up, and Lund told the person to
leave.
Magbulos, Wong, and Lund remained in the dwelling. 
Wong was tossing and turning in his bed, and Lund was next to his
possessions that had been placed in a corner of Wong's dwelling. 
Lund's attention was drawn back to Wong when he heard something
that sounded like a grunt.  Lund looked towards Wong and saw him
"going into the fetal position[.]"  Lund then saw Magbulos strike
Wong in the back with a "pummeling overhand" motion.  Wong jumped
up in his bed and began shouting and "yelling at the top of his
lungs[.]"  Magbulos then backed away from Wong and towards Lund. 
Prior to Magbulos striking Wong, Lund did not observe Wong do or
say anything to provoke Magbulos, and during the incident, Lund
did not see Wong strike or do anything to Magbulos. 
After striking Wong, Magbulos left the dwelling, but
then stepped back into the dwelling because a crowd had gathered
outside.  At that point, Lund observed a knife, with a "long
blade," which was a "little under a foot," in Magbulos' left
hand.  Lund could not see Magbulos' other hand.  Wong kept
yelling, "Get him out of here.  Get him out of here[,]" and
Magbulos subsequently left the dwelling.
After Magbulos left, Wong said to call 911 and fell to
the ground.  Lund saw a wound on Wong's chest and another on his
back.  The wound on Wong's back was bleeding, and Lund applied
pressure to it.  While doing so, Lund also saw injuries on Wong's
left arm.  After a while, police and other emergency personnel
arrived and took over. 
B.
Derek Vesper (Vesper) testified that he had known Wong
4FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
for a little over a year.  According to Vesper, Wong had helped
Vesper when Vesper was homeless, and he felt indebted to Wong. 
On the day of the stabbing incident, before daylight, Vesper went
to visit Wong to bring him food, because Vesper heard that Wong
had not eaten in some time.  Vesper saw Wong outside.  Wong
looked "[v]ery tired and exhausted," and Wong asked whether
Vesper could help Wong by buying a bike from Wong.  Vesper test
drove the bike for about fifteen minutes.  When Vesper returned,
Wong was no longer outside, so Vesper called into Wong's
dwelling.  A voice Vesper did not recognize told him to come back
later.  Before leaving, Vesper negotiated with and paid the
unknown speaker fifty dollars for the bicycle.  
As he was leaving, Vesper was confronted by Nelson
Cablay (Cablay), one of Wong's neighbors in the encampment, who
scolded Vesper for making noise while others were still sleeping. 
Vesper apologized.  Vesper again started to leave.  When he was
about twenty feet away from Wong's dwelling, he heard a "loud 
. . . excruciating scream" coming from the dwelling.  The screams
continued, and Cablay told Vesper to go help Wong.  Vesper headed
back to Wong's dwelling, and numerous people living in the
encampment came out and went towards Wong's dwelling to
investigate. 
Then, someone told Vesper to "watch out . . . [h]e's
behind you."  Vesper turned and saw Magbulos bending down with
"[t]wo knives in his hands" looking back towards Wong's dwelling. 
The knife in Magbulos' right hand appeared to be a large
"kitchen" knife with a blade that was a little over twelve
inches.  The knife in Magbulos' left hand was smaller, and "maybe
about three, four inches" of the blade were sticking out of
Magbulos' hand.  Magbulos' hands and arms were covered with
blood. 
Vesper told Magbulos, "I don't want no trouble[,]" and
Magbulos responded, "[D]on't make no sudden moves."  Cablay came
over and said to Magbulos, "[W]hat you doing?" . . . [G]et out of
5FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
here."  Cablay also told Magbulos that "the police are coming."  
Magbulos yelled, "Let that fucker die," and then Magbulos fled
the scene.  
Vesper went with Cablay to check on Wong.  Vesper saw
Wong on the ground, going into convulsions, spurting blood from
different wounds, and breathing "really fast."  Vesper got on the
bicycle to find a phone so he could call the police.  As Vesper
was pedaling towards a U-Haul business, he saw Magbulos.  At that
point, Magbulos did not have any knives in his hands.  Vesper
found someone with a phone who called the police.  When the
police arrived, Vesper led them to Wong's dwelling.  
C.
Cablay testified that on the day in question, he was
living in the encampment underneath the viaduct about twenty
yards away from Wong's dwelling.  Cablay had been living there
for four years and had known Wong for seven years.  Cablay had
known Magbulos for about four months, and Magbulos had previously
stayed with Cablay off and on for "maybe two, three months."   
According to Cablay, sometime in the late night or
early morning before the stabbing incident, when it was still
dark outside, Magbulos came to Cablay's dwelling and woke Cablay
up.  Magbulos told Cablay that "he was gonna fight somebody." 
Cablay did not think that Magbulos was talking about Wong. 
Magbulos then left, and Cablay went back to sleep. 
Later that morning, Cablay's girlfriend woke Cablay up 
and said, "They fighting over there."  Cablay testified that he
heard Wong "screaming . . . for help," and he did not hear Wong
say anything else.3  After he heard Wong screaming, Cablay went
to Wong's dwelling and saw Magbulos inside.  Magbulos walked out
of Wong's dwelling and came within five feet of Cablay.  Cablay
3On cross-examination, Cablay acknowledged that in his
statement to the police, he stated that he heard Wong say, "Get
the fuck out of the tent already.  I told you, I gonna take care
of it already." 
6FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
saw Magbulos holding two knives, one in each hand.  The longer
knife, with a blade about ten inches, was in Magbulos' right
hand, and the shorter knife, with a blade about three or four
inches, was in his left hand.  Cablay later recognized the longer
knife as a knife from his kitchen when Cablay checked his kitchen
and the knife was missing. 
As Magbulos was leaving Wong's dwelling, Cablay asked
Magbulos, "[W]hat you doing there?"  Cablay testified that
Magbulos replied, "F you, Let him die."4
D. 
Magbulos' brother, Hermangildo Magbulos (Hermangildo),
testified that Magbulos was his oldest brother.  Hermangildo
testified that at about 9:00 to 9:15 a.m. on the day of the
incident, Magbulos showed up at Hermangildo's residence. 
Magbulos appeared scared and nervous and asked to be allowed to
come inside the residence.  Because Hermangildo's mother told him
not to let his brother come in, Hermangildo told Magbulos that he
could not come inside and asked Magbulos to leave. 
After receiving a description of Magbulos, Honolulu
Police Department Officer Tyler Parson (Officer Parson)
apprehended Magbulos at a laundromat at approximately 1:30 p.m.
on the day of the stabbing.  Officer Parson testified that it is
standard procedure for the police to determine the nature and
extent of an arrestee's injuries.  Officer Parson did not observe
any injuries on Magbulos, Magbulos did not complain of any
injuries, and Magbulos did not move, act, or behave as though he
was injured. 
Wong was taken by ambulance to the Queen's Medical
Center at approximately 6:36 a.m., and he was pronounced dead at
approximately 6:49 a.m.  The following morning, William Goodhue,
M.D. (Dr. Goodhue), a forensic pathologist, performed an autopsy
4On cross-examination, Cablay acknowledged that in his
statement to the police, he stated that Magbulos said, "Fuck him. 
Let him die.  He like fuck me up." 
7FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
on Wong.  Dr. Goodhue testified that Wong had sustained a stab
wound to his front upper abdomen, two slash wounds to his left
arm, and a stab wound to his back near his left shoulder blade. 
The direction of the stab wound to Wong's upper abdomen was from
front to back, up to down, and left to right, and it penetrated
Wong's body to a depth of 3.5 inches.  The wound had a "forked"
appearance, which indicated that the knife was twisted in Wong's
body or that Wong moved while the knife was inside him.  This
wound did not cut into any vital organs or blood vessels and was
not fatal. 
Dr. Goodhue next described two incised or slash wounds
to Wong's left forearm and the crease of his left elbow.  Dr.
Goodhue opined that these wounds were consistent with defensive
wounds -- wounds that "[w]ould reasonably be interpreted as
occurring as Mr. Wong tried to defend himself by interposing his
left arm between the oncoming blade and his body[.]"  
Dr. Goodhue concluded that the stab wound to Wong's
left upper back was the "fatal" wound and the cause of Wong's
death.  This wound was 7.5 inches deep.  The direction of the
wound was from Wong's back to his front, up to down, and left to
right.  The wound went through Wong's diaphragm and through his
spleen, and it cut into his aorta, which is "the main blood
vessel taking blood from the heart to the rest of the body."  As
a result of the cut to his aorta, Wong bled to death.
Dr. Goodhue testified that the wounds Wong sustained
were consistent with being inflicted by a knife that was
sharpened on one side.  Dr. Goodhue did not find any abrasions or
contusions to Wong's hands, elbows, or knees that would be
consistent with Wong attacking or assaulting someone. 
Wong's postmortem toxicology blood tests were positive
for methamphetamine and cannabis.  Dr. Goodhue testified that
Wong's methamphetamine level was 330 nanograms per milliliter. 
Dr. Goodhue concluded that the methamphetamine contributed to
Wong's death because it accelerated the bleeding from his aorta. 
8FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
However, this did not alter Dr. Goodhue opinion that the stab
wound to Wong's back was the cause of his death.  Dr. Goodhue
determined that given the severity of the stab wound to Wong's
back, Wong would have died even if there was no methamphetamine
in his system when he was stabbed.  Dr. Goodhue noted that Wong
had a documented history of mental illness, including
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. 
II.
Magbulos presented the following evidence at trial.
A.
Hanin Davalos (Davalos) lived in the encampment
underneath the viaduct and knew Wong.  About a month prior to
Wong's stabbing, Davalos witnessed an incident between Wong and a
woman who had stolen Wong's cooler which contained all his food. 
Wong hit the woman with a "two-by-four," "[n]ot as hard as he
could," but still "one good crack" that caused the woman to
return the cooler.5 
B. 
Magbulos, with the aid of an Ilocano interpreter,
testified in his own defense.  Magbulos immigrated to Hawai# i
from the Phillippines when he was 12 years old.  Magbulos
testified that he was 25 and acknowledged that Wong was
significantly older than him.  After dropping out of high school
in tenth grade, Magbulos worked at food establishments.  At some
point, he got into drugs. 
Magbulos testified about his version of the events
which led to Wong's stabbing.  According to Magbulos, after
midnight, he went to the encampment underneath the viaduct to buy
drugs from Cablay.  Magbulos went to Cablay's place, but no one
answered.  As Magbulos was leaving, Wong threw something at
Magbulos that missed, and Wong asked Magbulos what he was doing
there.  Magbulos knew Wong, but they were not particularly close. 
5Photographs taken at the scene after Wong's stabbing showed
what appears to be a two-by-four piece of wood on the floor.
9FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Magbulos told Wong that he wanted to buy drugs from Cablay, but
Cablay was not there.  Wong told Magbulos to give him money and
he would buy the drugs.  Magbulos gave Wong $30 to buy "ice"
(methamphetamine), and Wong told Magbulos to wait by Wong's
dwelling.   
Magbulos waited a long time before Wong returned.  Wong
appeared very restless to Magbulos.  Wong asked Magbulos to help
him carry a cabinet from down the street back to Wong's place. 
Magbulos helped Wong, but the cabinet was heavy and they left it
on the road.  Magbulos asked Wong if he had purchased the drugs,
and Wong told Magbulos to come inside Wong's dwelling.  When
Magbulos entered the dwelling, he saw Lund, who had a head light
on his forehead, which was the only lighting inside.  Wong told
Magbulos to sit on the cooler, and Wong, who appeared tired, lay
down on his bed.  Magbulos got a cigarette from Lund.  When he
finished smoking the cigarette, Magbulos again asked Wong if Wong
had gotten the drugs. 
According to Magbulos, Wong got up and went to get
something underneath the bed.  Wong then approached Magbulos, who
was still siting on the cooler, and hit Magbulos with something,
which Magbulos believed was a piece of wood, about two and a half
feet long.  Magbulos raised his left arm, and the blow hit
Magbulos on the upper arm and nicked his head.  Wong and Magbulos
pushed each other, Magbulos grabbed Wong's hand, and Wong dropped
the wood.  Wong pushed Magbulos to the ground, and Wong put his
hand on Magbulos' neck.  They grappled with each other on the
ground.   
At some point, Wong stood up and went to get the wood. 
It was then that Magbulos saw a knife and grabbed it.  After
grabbing the knife, Magbulos remembered that he had brought a
small knife with him, because he knew "there are many
troublemakers in that place."  Magbulos showed Wong the two
knives to scare him.  Wong raised the wood to attack Magbulos. 
To defend himself, Magbulos stabbed Wong in a "one and two
10FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
combination."  Magbulos stabbed Wong in the front with the
smaller knife that was in Magbulos' left hand, then reached
around and stabbed Wong in the back with the larger knife that
was in Magbulos' right hand.  Wong stopped attacking Magbulos and
began screaming.  Magbulos ran to the door, which had previously
been blocked by Wong.  
Magbulos testified that he was not fighting or angry
with Wong prior to Wong attempting to hit him with the wood.  In
particular, Magbulos claimed that it did not bother him that Wong
took his money and did not give him anything in return.  Magbulos
was shown photographs taken of him after his arrest.  He
testified that an abrasion and bruising to his left arm were
caused by Wong hitting him with the wood.  He also identified
scratches on his back as having been sustained when Wong pushed
him to the ground. 
C.
Edward Fisher, Ph.D (Dr. Fisher), an expert in
pharmacology and toxicology, examined Wong's autopsy report.  Dr.
Fisher testified that methamphetamine increases aggressiveness
and that the very high level of methamphetamine found in Wong's
blood had "been correlated with individuals who show aggressive
and irrational behaviors."  However, Dr. Fisher acknowledged that
there was insufficient information to claim a causal link between
chronic methamphetamine use and violent behavior.  Dr. Fisher
opined that Wong's history of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
also increased the risk of irrational psychotic behaviors.  Dr.
Fisher stated that although methamphetamine use and a history of
bipolar disorder increase the risk of aggressive and psychotic
behavior, he could not say what behavior they would cause on any
particular occasion. 
IV.
The jury deliberated for about an hour and ten minutes
(excluding its recess for lunch) before informing the Circuit
Court that it had reached a verdict.  The jury found Magbulos
11FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
guilty as charged of second-degree murder.  The Circuit Court
sentenced Magbulos to life imprisonment with the possibility of
parole, and it entered its Judgment on November 15, 2014.  This
appeal followed.
DISCUSSION
I.
Magbulos contends that the prosecutor committed
misconduct during opening statement by emphasizing that despite
Wong's homelessness and drug use, Wong's life mattered.  Magbulos
asserts that the prosecutor's remarks were improper because they
constituted argument during opening statement and "induced the
jury to decide the case on their emotions instead of the facts
and the law."  We conclude that the remarks challenged by
Magbulos do not warrant vacating his conviction.
A.
The prosecutor's remarks challenged by Magbulos were
made at the beginning and the end of his opening statement. 
Magbulos objected three times on the basis that the prosecutor's
remarks constituted argument or were argumentative, and the
Circuit Court sustained the objections.  Magbulos did not move to
strike the prosecutor's remarks or seek a curative instruction. 
The remarks challenged by Magbulos on appeal have been
highlighted in the quoted material.  The prosecutor began his
opening statement as follows:
Fuck him.  Let him die.  That's what the defendant
said seconds after stabbing Darryle Wong.  Fuck him.  Let
him die.  Seconds after he plunged a ten-inch kitchen knife
into his back.  Fuck him.  Let him die.  As he lay there on
the ground, bleeding to death, his aorta sliced open.  Left
there to die, like he didn't matter.
And yes, Darryle Wong was homeless.  And he matters. 
And yes, Darryle Wong was a drug user.  And he matters.  And
yes, Darryle Wong is now dead.  And still, he matters.  He
matters because, whether homeless or not, whether a drug
user or not, he was a person.  He was a person who did not
deserve to die, a person who did not deserve to be brutally
murdered.
[Defense Counsel]:  Objection, Your Honor.  This is
argument.
THE COURT: Sustained.
12FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
After the Circuit Court sustained Magbulos' objection,
the prosecutor proceeded to recount in great detail what he
expected the evidence would show through the testimony of the
State's witnesses.  The trial transcripts reveal that the
prosecutor's opening statement went on for about ten pages
without drawing any objection from Magbulos.  The prosecutor then
ended his opening statement as follows:
Now, on May 5th, 2013, the City and County of
Honolulu, State of Hawai #i, Herwin Magbulos plunged the
knife into Darryle's back, severing his aorta and causing
his death.  And then he left him there to die, like he
didn't matter .
[Defense Counsel]: Objection, argumentative.
THE COURT: Sustained.
[Prosecutor]: The State is going to ask that, after
you consider the evidence, you show him that it does matter .
[Defense Counsel]: Objection, argumentative.
THE COURT: Sustained.
[Prosecutor]:  You show him that he's guilty, and find
that he is guilty.  Convict him as charged, murder in the
second degree.
B.
Although the challenged remarks appear to be argument,
and thus more appropriate in closing argument than opening
statement, the Circuit Court sustained Magbulos' objections.  The
crux of Magbulos' prosecutorial misconduct claim is that the
theme of the prosecutor's opening statement -- that Wong's life
mattered -- was improper because it "inflame[d] the passions or
prejudices of the jury" and "us[ed] an argument . . . that was
calculated to appeal to the jurors' emotions."  We disagree with
Magbulos' contention.  The rather obvious and self-evident
statement that the life of a person who had been killed matters
does not serve to improperly inflame the passions or prejudices
of the jury or cause a case to be decided on an improper basis.   
By their nature, trials are emotional, especially
trials involving a victim whose life has been lost.  It is not
13FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
improper for a prosecutor to present evidence or make arguments
that causes the jury to feel emotion; it is only improper to make
gratuitous appeals to the jury's passion, prejudice, or emotion
that have no legitimate bearing on issues relevant to the case. 
See State v. Bruce, SCWC-15-0000439, 2017 WL 4480038, at *9-12
(Hawai#i Oct. 9, 2007); State v. Kiakona, 110 Hawai #i 450, 457-59,
134 P.3d 616, 623-25 (App. 2006).
In Bruce, the defendants were charged "with offenses
arising from their alleged involvement in and benefit from the
activities of a prostitute, the complaining witness (CW)."  Id.
at *1.  The CW testified that defendants were her pimps who used
physical violence and other means to intimidate and control her 
to ensure that she would continue working for them as a
prostitute.  Id.  at *2-4.  In closing argument, the defendants
attacked the CW's credibility.  In response, the prosecutor in
his rebuttal closing argued:
So this whole thing about [CW] lying and can't be believed,
well, the only people who can't be believed was [defense
witness] Keshawn Stewart and [defendant] Mr. Bruce.  The
fact of the matter is that they treated her like she was
property.
. . . .
. . . They didn't see her as any thing more than a piece of
property to pass around, to mistreat, to humiliate,
intimidate, beat, and force.  That is how they viewed her,
that is how they treated her.  But she's not a piece of
property.  I mean, she's somebody's daughter, she's
somebody's friend, she's a mother, she's a woman, she is a
person, and she deserves to be treated properly [.]
Id. at *5 (emphasis and some brackets in original).
The Hawaii Supreme Court held that the prosecutor's
comments did not constitute an improper plea to the jury's
passions and prejudices and did not constitute misconduct.  The
supreme court distinguished its prior decision in State v. Rogan,
91 Hawai# i 405, 984 P.2d 1231 (1999), concluding that unlike in
Rogan, the prosecutor's remarks in Bruce: (1) "did not constitute
an improper appeal to the jury's emotions that bore no
objectively legitimate purpose," but were relevant to the State's#
14FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"overarching theme and theory of the case"; and (2) did not
constitute an improper invitation to the jury to put themselves
in the CW's place, but rather were a summation of facts that, in
the State's view, supported the charges against the defendants. 
Bruce, 2017 WL 4480038 at *10-11.
Here, the prosecutor's theory of the case was that
Magbulos, without provocation, stabbed Wong to death over a $30
drug transaction.  Magbulos defense was that he acted in self-
defense and that the State's witnesses, many of whom, like Wong,
were homeless and drug users, were not believable.  The
prosecutor's statements that Wong's life mattered,
notwithstanding his homelessness and drug use, was relevant to
the overarching theory and theme of the prosecution -- that
Magbulos held so little regard for Wong's life that without
justification or provocation, Magbulos felt it was permissible to
stab Wong to death.  The prosecutor's statements were also
relevant to counteract any possible prejudice the jury may have
felt against Wong or the State's witnesses due to their
homelessness and drug use, by reminding the jury that the lives
of all people matter and have value, regardless of whether they
are homeless or use drugs.  Thus, unlike in Rogan, the
prosecutor's statements were not gratuitous attempts to appeal to
the prejudices of the jury on matters having no legitimate
bearing on the case, but were directly tied to the State's
overarching theory of the case and were relevant to issues in
dispute.  See Bruce , 2017 WL 4480038, at *11 (concluding that
viewed in context, it was not improper for the prosecutor to
argue "that as a human being, CW did not deserve to be treated
like a piece of property").  Although the prosecutor's statements
would have been more appropriate in closing argument, we conclude
that they do not warrant vacating Magbulos' conviction.
C.
In this regard, we observe that our adversarial system
of justice is founded on the principle that strong advocacy by
15FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
each side is the best way to uncover the truth.  The appellate
courts should not attempt to micro-manage the trial process, the
trial judge, or advocacy by the trial participants.  For our
adversarial system to work, both parties and their counsel must
be given leeway to strongly advocate their positions to the jury. 
Imposing undue restrictions on what a prosecutor can say, or
making every occasion in which an appellate court believes the
prosecutor made an objectionable statement the basis for
overturing a conviction, will skew the appropriate adversarial
balance.  This will be detrimental to the proper functioning of
the adversarial system and the principal purpose of criminal
trials -- to search for and find the truth.
Even if improper in opening statement, the prosecutors'
challenged remarks were relatively innocuous.  It is self-evident
that every person's life matters, regardless of whether the
person is homeless or a drug user, and that no one deserves to be
murdered.  The same remarks by the prosecutor would have been
permissible in closing argument.  
No trial is perfect, and during a typical trial, both
prosecutors and defense counsel, in advocating their side of the
case, make numerous remarks or ask questions that are found
objectionable by the trial court.  Jurors understand that the
prosecutor and defense counsel are not disinterested actors, but
that their role is to strongly advocate for their side.  The
appellate court should not exaggerate the impact that brief
remarks by the prosecutor, found objectionable by a trial court
as part of the routine give and take of trial, had on the outcome
of a case.  The trial court's sustaining of a defense counsel's
objection to a prosecutor's remark indicates to the jury that the
remark should be disregarded.  We conclude that in this case, 
the prosecutor's challenged remarks, which merely expressed self-
evident propositions, did not prejudice the defendant's right to
a fair trial and do not justify overturning Magbulos' conviction. 
See State v. Mara , 98 Hawai #i 1, 16, 41 P.3d 157, 172 (2002)
16FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
("Prosecutorial misconduct warrants a new trial or the setting
aside of a guilty verdict only where the actions of the
prosecutor have caused prejudice to the defendant's right to a
fair trial." (internal quotation marks and citations omitted)). 
II.
Magbulos contends that the prosecutor committed
misconduct in closing argument by improperly vouching for the
credibility of the State's witnesses and inviting jurors to
consider Magbulos' interest in the case in evaluating his
credibility.  We conclude that the prosecutor did not improperly
vouch for the credibility of the State's witnesses and that any
impropriety in inviting the jurors to consider Magbulos' interest
in the case in evaluating his credibility was harmless.
A.
The prosecutor's comments in closing argument that are
challenged by Magbulos arose in the following context.
The prosecutor began his closing argument in a manner
similar to his opening statement, arguing that Magbulos, without
provocation or remorse, stabbed Wong to death:
Fuck him.  Let him die.  It comes down to that again. 
Because that's what the defendant did.  He stabbed him two
times.  Once in the abdomen, 3.5 inches deep, top to bottom,
front to back, and left to right.  Then again he stabbed the
defendant in the back, with a ten-inch kitchen knife, going
7 and a half inches deep, through his rib cages, or his rib
cage, through his diaphragm, through his spleen, eventually
slicing his aorta.  Again, up to down.  Left to right.  And
this time, back to front.
 
Then after this, as [Wong] is on the ground bleeding
to death, his aorta having been cut, this is no remorse. 
There is no How can we help?  There is no regret.  There is
Fuck him.  Let him die.
Now, that alone, you can see this was not a fight. 
Okay.  This was not self defense.  This was the defendant
coming in, sitting feet away from [Wong] for 15 minutes,
calmly, coolly smoking a cigarette, before stabbing him
twice.
This was a cold and deliberate murder.
The prosecutor then recited the elements the State had
to establish to prove the charged second-degree murder, and he
17FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
discussed the facts that were not in dispute, including that
Magbulos caused the death of Wong by stabbing him.  Although the
prosecutor argued that Magbulos' actions and the evidence showed
that Magbulos' intent to cause death was clear and that there was
no self-defense, he noted the defense may disagree.  With respect
to self-defense, the prosecutor argued that if the jury believed
the State's witnesses, Lund, Vesper, and Cablay, there was no
issue of self-defense.  In particular, the prosecutor noted that
Lund, who was present when the stabbing occurred, testified that
there was no fight, Wong did not know he was about to be stabbed,
and that Magbulos inflicted the fatal blow to Wong's back while
Wong was in "the fetal position." 
The prosecutor argued that in evaluating Magbulos'
self-defense claim, the jury would have to evaluate the
credibility of the witnesses who testified.  Citing the jury
instructions, the prosecutor stated that included in the things
the jury should consider in evaluating a witness's credibility
were "the extent to which the witness is supported or
contradicted by other evidence; the probability or improbability
of the witness's testimony; and the witness's interest, if any,
in the result of the case."  The prosecutor then proceeded to
argue these credibility factors to the jury.  The prosecutor
argued that Magbulos' version of events was contradicted by the
State's witnesses, but noted that the mere fact that one
witness's testimony is contradicted by another witness does not
tell you which witness to believe.  Thus, the prosecutor argued
that what was more important was that the physical evidence
corroborated the State's witnesses and contradicted Magbulos'
testimony.  
In particular, the prosecutor argued that the angle of
Wong's stab wounds to the abdomen and back were consistent with
Lund's testimony, but inconsistent with Magbulos' testimony and
Magbulos' in-court demonstration of how he claimed he stabbed
Wong in self-defense with a one-two combination.  The prosecutor
18FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
attacked Magbulos' claim that Magbulos' post-arrest photos
corroborated his testimony that Wong struck him with a piece of
wood, arguing that the photographs depicted well-developed scabs
and bruising that were too old to have come from injuries
suffered earlier that day.  The prosecutor also attacked
Magbulos' version by arguing that the location of the blood
stains at the scene did not jibe with Magbulos' testimony about
the location of the stabbing, and that Magbulos' testimony does
not account for the defensive wounds on Wong's left arm.
The prosecutor then discussed the "improbabilities in
the defendant's story."  The prosecutor argued that this included
Magbulos' testimony that he did not know Wong very well, but
decided to give Wong $30 to buy drugs; that he was not bothered
or upset by Wong's failure to come back with any drugs; and that
Wong was so tired that he could not finish moving the cabinet,
but then minutes later Wong, who was much older than the 25-year-
old Magbulos, became restless and could summon the power to hold
Magbulos down.  The prosecutor asserted that in contrast, the
testimony of Lund, Vesper, and Cablay, who had not been in
contact with each other,6 were consistent with each other
regarding the significant details.  He further argued that the
testimony of these witnesses was consistent with Magbulos'
testimony, except that Magbulos' testimony differed on matters
that would show he was guilty and did not act in self-defense. 
The prosecutor also argued that Magbulos' actions showed
consciousness of guilt, including Magbulos' hiding of the knives
and his statement, "Fuck him, let him die."  
At this point in his closing argument, the prosecutor
made the following comments, with the comments challenged by
Magbulos on appeal highlighted in the quoted material:
Just quickly, I'll go into in the interests or bias. 
6The prosecutor argued that Vesper testified he did not know
Lund and that Lund testified that he had not spoken to Cablay
since the day in question.
19FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
You know, when we talked in voir dire, almost to a person,
everyone who we talked about when we -- both Defense Counsel
and the State asked what's the reason people lie, everyone's
number one reason, so you don't get in trouble.  Not going
to spend too much time on that.  That one's obvious.  He has
an interest in the case.  Self protection .
Now, on the flip side of that, again, not going to
insult you by saying that State's witnesses were perfect. 
Okay.  You heard them go up there.  They occasionally left
things out that they didn't think were important.  And they
didn't say the same story exactly the same way.
. . .  There's difference in perspective.  There's
differences in when you tell the same story, of course, tell
the same story over and over, a good attorney, like
[Magbulos' counsel], is going to be able to find something
that you didn't tell exactly the same way.  And in this case
he did just that.  He found something that wasn't exactly
the same.
Now, I'd ask you when you're considering these, call
them inconsistencies, I guess, to be fair, okay, to think
about some of the instructions that you will also get about
how to consider those.  But first I'd -- I guess I would
suggest to you that they're credible for more than just
because they came across as the more credible witnesses, and
because the State's saying that they're the more credible
witnesses .
Look at what the underlying facts are.  Okay.  Their
story are not just consistent with each other.  They're
consistent with the defendant.  Okay.  Again, the only parts
where they become inconsistent is where the defendant has to
change the story to make him not guilty .
Now, also remember that we talked about those broad
strokes, okay, that everybody's going to get it wrong if you
had to say it over and over.  But clearly, in each and every
one of their statements and in their testimony, the broad
strokes are identical.  They saw the defendant walking out,
with a huge knife.  And in [Lund's] case, that he saw him
not self defense, not fight, but stab [Wong] in the back.
Now, also, the State's witnesses, I would argue and
submit to you, do not have that interest or bias, that
incentive to lie that the defendant has .
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, I'm going to object at
this point.  State v. Bashom [sic].
THE COURT: Overruled.
[Prosecutor]: Okay.  So, again, [Cablay] was a friend
to the defendant.  Okay.  He has no reason to try and put
the knife in his hands.  He let him stay in his house.  He
was living with him.  Okay. [Wong is] a neighbor, true.  But
[Cablay] has no incentive to favor anyone.  Okay.  He just
called it like he saw it.
Same, [for Lund] and [Vesper].  They indicated they
didn't even know who the defendant was.  What incentive do
20FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
they have to pin it on someone they didn't even know? 
Because it's not like we're talking about a balance, like
maybe [Wong is] going to get in trouble.  Okay.  It's the
cold reality is [Wong is] dead.  He's not going to be
getting in trouble for anything that happened that day. 
There is no reason to lie about what his role was.  Okay. 
It's not going to help him.
The prosecutor then discussed the instruction that in
weighing the effect of inconsistencies or discrepancies, the jury
can consider whether they concern matters of importance or
unimportant detail and whether they result from innocent error or
deliberate falsehood; argued that any inconsistencies in the
testimony of the State's witnesses did not indicate that they
were lying; discussed the self-defense instruction and argued
that Magbulos was not justified in using deadly force; and
discussed lesser included offenses.  The prosecutor concluded the
opening portion of his closing argument by stating:
So at this point, I'll leave it at that.  It's clear
from the credible evidence that the defendant's testimony is
in fact just a fabrication to try and get him out of
trouble.  Okay.  All the physical evidence, as well of
course all the State's witnesses, unequivocally suggest --
not suggest, require I would argue, that the jury find him
guilty of murder, as charged.
B.
With respect to Magbulos' claim that the prosecutor
improperly personally vouched for the credibility of the State's
witnesses, we conclude that this claim is without merit. 
Magbulos did not object to the prosecutor's alleged "personal
vouching" comment, and thus, he has the burden of showing plain
error.  
Viewed in context, the message conveyed by the
prosecutor's comment was that the jury should not find that the
State's witnesses were more credible than Magbulos simply because
the State was making this argument, but because the factors
relevant to the jury's assessment of credibility supported that
conclusion.  Prior to making the alleged "personal vouching"
comment, the prosecutor had engaged in a prolonged argument
explaining that the State's witnesses were more credible than
21FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Magbulos because their testimony was consistent with, and
Magbulos' testimony was inconsistent with, the physical evidence
presented at trial, and because Magbulos' version of the events
was improbable.  The prosecutor's statement that Lund, Vesper,
and Cablay were credible "for more than just because they came
across as the more credible witnesses, and because the State's
saying that they're the more credible witnesses," was a prelude
to the prosecutor's additional arguments, based on the evidence
presented at trial, that the testimony of the State's witnesses
were consistent with each other in significant detail and that
these witnesses did not have a bias or an interest to testify
falsely.  Based on this context, and viewing the prosecutor's
closing argument as a whole, we conclude that the stray comment
challenged by Magbulos did not constitute improper personal
vouching for the credibility of the State's witnesses.
C.
Citing State v. Basham , 132 Hawai# i 97, 319 P.3d 1105
(2014), Magbulos contends that the prosecutor engaged in
misconduct by arguing that Magbulos had an interest in the case
and an incentive to lie that the State's witnesses did not have. 
Magbulos argues that under Basham, a generic argument that a
defendant was not credible because he or she had an interest in
the outcome of the case and thus a motive to lie was
impermissible, and that the prosecutor's argument in this case
was improper under Basham.  To properly evaluate Magbulos' claim,
a history of the development of the law on this issue is
instructive.
1.
Prior to Basham, the long established rule in Hawai #i
was that it was permissible for the prosecutor to argue that a
defendant's interest in the outcome of the case gave him or her a
motive to lie.  In State v. Apilando , 79 Hawai #i 128, 142, 900
P.2d 135, 149 (1995), the defendant Apilando argued that it was
improper for the prosecutor to attack Apilando's credibility in
22FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
closing argument by stating that because Apilando "had the
highest stake in the outcome of the case, he had the greatest
motive to lie."  The Hawai #i Supreme Court rejected Apilando's
argument, reasoning as follows:
This court has held that, when a defendant takes the stand
to testify, his or her credibility can be tested in the same
manner as any other witness.  State v. Pokini, 57 Haw. 17,
22, 548 P.2d 1397, 1400 (1976); see also HRE 609.1(a) (1985)
(Generally, "the credibility of a witness may be attacked by
evidence of bias, interest, or motive.")  Apilando testified
on his own behalf, and, by so doing, subjected himself to
attacks on his credibility.  We believe the prosecution's
comments regarding Apilando's interest in the case were not
improper
. See, e.g., People v. Dall, 207 Ill. App.3d 508,
527, 152 Ill. Dec. 442, 453, 565 N.E.2d 1360, 1371
(prosecutor's statement that defendant had better motive
than victim to lie was not error), appeal denied , 139 Ill.2d
599, 159 Ill. Dec. 111, 575 N.E.2d 918 (1991); People v.
Bunyard
, 45 Cal.3d 1189, 249 Cal. Rptr 71, 92–94, 756 P.2d
795, 816–18 (1988) (prosecutor's argument that defendant was
an "interested party" and had motive to lie in order to
avoid conviction deemed appropriate); Walls v. State, 560
A.2d 1038, 1049 (Del.) (proper for prosecutor to argue that
defendants were biased because they had a big stake in the
outcome of the case), cert. denied, 493 U.S. 967, 110 S.Ct.
412, 107 L.Ed.2d 377 (1989).
Apilando, 79 Hawai# i at 142, 900 P.2d at 149 (emphases added.)
However, twenty years later, in Basham, the supreme
court majority sua sponte  addressed this issue, which had not
been raised by the parties.  At trial, the prosecution began
closing argument by stating that two of the State's witnesses
were "completely credible" and then stating that Aliikea Basham
(Aliikea), one of the co-defendants who testified, had "no reason
to tell the truth."  Basham, 132 Hawai# i at 115, 319 P.3d at
1123.7  The supreme court noted that at that point in the closing
7As quoted in Basham, the prosecutor's closing argument was
as follows:  
On behalf of the prosecution, I adamantly state to you,
that Mr. and Mrs. Bloom [(the alleged victim and his
wife)] have been completely credible witnesses, that
they are worthy of your belief.  They have no axe to
grind, no revenge to be had.  They did not know the
Defendants Basham before this incident.  They have
absolutely no reason to fabricate or otherwise make up
the accounts that they have recited to you in explicit
(continued...)
23FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
argument, the prosecutor had not discussed any of the testimony
presented at trial or offered any reason, based on the evidence,
other than Aliikea's status as a defendant, for why Aliikea would
have no reason to tell the truth.  Id. at 116, 319 P.3d at 1124. 
The supreme court held that "the implication of the prosecutor's
argument" was that Aliikea "had no reason to tell the truth
because he was a defendant in the case."  Id.  at 115-16, 319 P.3d
at 1123-24.8  The supreme court concluded that such general
comments about a defendant's credibility based solely upon his or
her status as the defendant were improper.  The supreme court
held that
it is improper for a prosecutor in summation to make generic
arguments regarding credibility based solely upon the status
of a defendant.  Walsh, 125 Hawaii at 285, 260 P.3d at 364
("Because fundamental rights are infringed when generic
tailoring arguments are made, generic tailoring arguments
are subject to plain error review.").  Accordingly, a
prosecutor may not argue during closing argument that
defendants, because they are defendants, have no reason to
tell the truth or have the "greatest motive to lie." 
Apilando , 79 Hawai #i at 142, 900 P.2d at 149.
 
Id. at 118, 319 P.3d at 1126.   
7(...continued)
detail.
Defendant Aliikea Basham, on the other hand, has
decided to testify, which is his right.  When a
defendant testifies, his credibility is to be weighed
as any other witness.  But you need to keep something
in mind.  Defendant Aliikea Basham has absolutely no
reason to tell you the truth.  So the selection or the
choice before you in weighing the credibility of the
witness is this.  Your willingness to believe two
people who have no reason to lie to you versus one
person who has no reason to tell you the truth.
Basham, 132 Hawai #i at 104, 319 P.3d at 1112 (emphasis omitted).
8The petitioner before the supreme court was Michael Basham,
Aliikea's father, who did not testify at trial.  The supreme
court concluded that "while the prosecutor's argument was
specifically directed at Aliikea, the statement implicated
[Michael] Basham as well.  Basham, 132 Hawai# i at 116, 319 P.3d
at 1124. 
24FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Although the supreme court majority cited Apilando as
the source of the "greatest motive to lie" quote, it did not
expressly overrule Apilando in its decision.  It also did not
discuss the Apilando  decision, other than a "but see" citation to
its statement that prosecutors are bound to refrain from
expressing their personal views as to the credibility of the
witnesses.9  However, we conclude that Basham overrules Apilando,
at least with respect to Apilando's holding that it was not
improper for the prosecutor to argue that because Apilando "had
the highest stake in the outcome of the case, he had the greatest
motive to lie."10
9The "but see" citation to Apilando appears in the Basham
majority opinion in the following context:
It is well-established "under Hawai #i case law
that prosecutors are bound to refrain from expressing
their personal views as to a defendant's guilt or the
credibility of witnesses." Clark, 83 Hawai #i at 304,
926 P.2d at 209 (citations omitted).  See State v.
Marsh, 68 Haw. 659, 660, 728 P.2d 1301, 1302 (1986);
State v. Cordeiro , 99 Hawai #i 390, 424–25, 56 P.3d 692,
726–27 (2002); Tuua, 125 Hawai #i at 14, 250 P.3d at
277.  But see State v. Apilando , 79 Hawai #i 128, 142,
900 P.2d 135, 149 (1995) (prosecutor's comment that
defendant "had the greatest motive to lie" because he
had the "highest stake in the outcome of the case" was
permissible attack on defendant's credibility).
Basham, 132 Hawaii at 115, 319 P.3d at 1123. #
10We note that the Basham majority began its discussion of
the issue by stating that the prosecutor's argument in closing
that Aliikea had no reason to tell the truth came before the
prosecutor had discussed any trial testimony or offered any
reason based on the evidence for why Aliikea would have no reason
to tell the truth.  Thus, it could be argued that the prohibition
against a prosecutor's arguing that a defendant has a motive to
lie because of his or her interest in the outcome of the case is
only triggered when a prosecutor makes this argument without
first discussing trial evidence or attacking the defendant's
credibility based on evidence presented at trial.  However, we
believe that such an argument would be difficult to reconcile
with the Basham majority's subsequent, more unconstrained
(continued...)
25FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2.
The Basham majority's failure to expressly overrule
Apilando, and, in particular, to specify exactly what aspects of
Apilando's analysis it was overruling, creates questions
concerning how to apply Basham to this case.  Did the Basham
majority intend only to prevent the prosecutor from arguing  that
a defendant has a motive to lie due to his or her interest in the
outcome of the case, or did the Basham  majority intend a broader
holding that it is improper for the jury to consider  the
defendant's interest in the outcome of the case in assessing the
defendant's credibility?  Each interpretation is problematic.
A person's self-interest is widely recognized as a
relevant factor to consider in evaluating the person's
credibility.  The precept that people are inclined to act in ways
that further their own interests is reflected in Hawaii Rules of
Evidence (HRE) Rule 609.1 (2016), which establishes the general
rule that "[t]he credibility of a witness may be attacked by
evidence of bias, interest, or motive.  It is also reflected in
judicial precedent which holds that "[b]ias, interest, or motive
is always relevant[.]"  State v. Estrada , 69 Haw. 204, 220, 738
P.2d 812, 823 (1987).  Precluding the jury from considering a
defendant's interest in the outcome or result of the case in
evaluating the defendant's credibility will require the jury to
ignore a factor that is "always relevant" in evaluating
credibility.  It would therefore impair and impede the truth-
seeking purpose of the criminal justice system.
On the other hand, if the jury can consider the
defendant's interest in the outcome of the case as a relevant
factor in evaluating the defendant's credibility, it is unclear
why a prosecutor should be precluded from arguing this factor.
In choosing between these alternative interpretations
of Basham, we note that the Basham  majority focused on the role
10(...continued)
analysis.
26FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of the prosecutor in its analysis, prefacing its holding with the
phrase, "Given the prosecutor's important role in our justice
system . . . ."  Basham, 132 Hawai# i at 118, 319 P.3d at 1126.
Indeed, the specific holding of Basham is that "it is improper
for a prosecutor in summation to make generic arguments regarding
credibility based solely upon the status of the defendant" and
that "a prosecutor may not argue during closing argument  that
defendants, because they are defendants, have no reason to tell
the truth or have the greatest motive to lie."  Id.  (emphasis
added; internal quotation marks and citation omitted).  
Furthermore, Basham did not address whether it was permissible
for the jury to consider the defendant's interest in the outcome
of the case in assessing the defendant's credibility.  Basham
also did not specifically overrule the Apilando court's
conclusion that "when a defendant takes the stand to testify, his
or her credibility can be tested in the same manner as any other
witness."  Apilando , 79 Hawai #i at 142, 900 P.2d at 149.11   
For these reasons, we conclude that Basham should be
read narrowly to only preclude the prosecutor from making the
generic argument regarding the defendant's interest in the
outcome of the case, and not to prevent the jury from considering
the defendant's interest in the outcome of the case in evaluating
his or her credibility.  Interpreting Basham  in this manner, we
11We note that the standard Hawai #i Criminal Jury
Instructions (HCJI) provide that "[w]hen a defendant testifies,
his/her credibility is to be tested in the same manner as any
other witness."  HCJI § 3.15 (1991).  The HCJI further provide
that "[i]n evaluating the weight and credibility of a witness's
testimony," the jury may consider a number of factors, including
"the witness's interest, if any, in the result of the case[.]" 
HCJI § 3.09 (2000).  If Basham were read to preclude a jury from
considering a defendant's interest in the result of the case in
evaluating his or her credibility, HCJI § 3.15, which has been in
effect since 1991, may have to be amended to read something like:
"When a defendant testifies, his/her credibility is to be tested
in the same manner as any other witness , except that, unlike
other witnesses, the defendant's interest in the result of the
case shall not be considered."
27FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
conclude that the prosecutor's Basham error was harmless and did
not prejudice Magbulos' right to a fair trial.  
Because the jury could legitimately consider Magbulos'
interest in the case, the error is limited to the prosecutor's
arguing that Magbulos had an interest and incentive to lie.  We
conclude that the effect of this error on the jury was not
substantial.  The prosecutor's argument on this point was brief. 
The prosecutor spent the vast majority of his closing argument
focusing on other factors, which were based on evidence presented
at trial, to support his assertion that Magbulos' testimony was
not credible.  This included the prosecutor's arguments that
Magbulos' testimony was inconsistent with the physical evidence
presented at trial; that Magbulos' testimony conflicted with the
testimony of the State's witnesses, including Lund, who was
present and witnessed the stabbing; and that Magbulos' version of
events was improbable.  The Circuit Court also instructed the
jurors that they were "the sole and exclusive judges of the
effect and value of the evidence, and of the credibility of the
witnesses" and that it was their "exclusive right to determine
whether and to what extent a witness should be believed, and to
give weight to his or her testimony accordingly."  Finally, the
evidence supporting Magbulos' conviction was strong.  Magbulos
admitted that he stabbed Wong in the stomach and back.  Magbulos
did not dispute that the stab to Wong's back, which penetrated to
a depth of 7.5 inches, caused Wong's death.  Lund, an eyewitness
to the stabbing, testified that Magbulos stabbed Wong without
provocation and not in self-defense.  Wong had cuts to his left
arm that were consistent with defensive wounds; Magbulos' version
of events did not specifically account for these defensive
wounds; and Magbulos did not suffer any significant injury.  
For these reasons, we conclude that the prosecutor's
Basham error was harmless.  We also conclude, based on our
preceding analysis, that the cumulative effect of the alleged
misconduct of the prosecutor in opening statement and closing
28FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
argument did not affect Magbulos' substantial rights and do not
justify overturning his conviction.
III.
The Circuit Court instructed the jury on the lesser
included offenses of reckless manslaughter and first-degree
assault, but denied Magbulos' request to instruct the jury on the
lesser included offenses of second-degree assault, third-degree
assault, and third-degree assault by mutual affray.  Magbulos
argues that the Circuit Court erred in failing to instruct on the
lower-level assault offenses.  We conclude that any error in
failing to instruct on the lower-level assault offenses was
harmless.
A. 
The development of the law on this issue includes the
following. 
In State v. Haanio , 94 Hawai #i 405, 16 P.3d 246 (2001),
the supreme court held that the trial court is required to 
"instruct juries as to any included offenses having a rational
basis in the evidence" regardless of what the parties desire. 
Haanio, 94 Hawai #i at 407, 16 P.3d at 248.  The supreme court
reasoned:
A trial court's failure to inform the jury of its option to
find the defendant guilty of the lesser offense would impair
the jury's truth-ascertainment function.  Consequently,
neither the prosecution nor the defense should be allowed,
based on their trial strategy, to preclude the jury from
considering guilt of a lesser offense included in the crime
charged.  To permit this would force the jury to make an
"all or nothing" choice between conviction of the crime
charged or complete acquittal, thereby denying the jury the
opportunity to decide whether the defendant is guilty of a
lesser included offense established by the evidence.
Id. at 415, 16 P.3d at 256 (block quote format altered; citation
omitted).  The supreme court, however, further held that the
trial court's error in failing to instruct the jury on a lesser
included offense "is harmless when the jury convicts the
defendant of the charged offense or of an included offense
greater than the included offense erroneously omitted from the
29FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
instructions."   Id. 
In State v. Flores, 131 Hawai# i 43, 44, 314 P.3d 120,
121 (2013), the supreme court overturned this latter holding in
Haanio, and it ruled that the trial court's failure to instruct
on a lesser included offense is not automatically harmless error
when the jury returns a guilty verdict on a greater offense.  In
reaching this result, the supreme court concluded that rendering
the failure to instruct on a lesser included offense always
harmless whenever the jury finds the defendant guilty of a
greater offense would leave "the jury with the same 'all or
nothing' choice that had been condemned in Haanio."  Flores, 131
Hawai#i at 56, 314 P.3d at 133.  
In State v. Kaeo, 132 Hawai# i 451, 323 P.3d 95 (2014),
the supreme court applied its new rule in Flores to overturn
Kaeo's manslaughter conviction.  Kaeo had been charged with
second-degree murder, but was convicted of the lesser included
offense of reckless manslaughter.  Kaeo, 132 Hawai #i at 460, 323
P.3d at 104.  The supreme court vacated the manslaughter
conviction on the ground that the trial court had erred in
failing to instruct on the lesser included offense of first-
degree assault.  The supreme court concluded that there was a
rational basis in the evidence to acquit Kaeo of second-degree
murder and to convict him of first-degree assault based on the
evidence presented at trial, which included Kaeo's testimony that
he was trying to hurt, but did not intend to kill, the victim who
ultimately died.  Id.  at 465-67; 323 P.3d at 109-11.
B.
Here, the jury, after being instructed on the lesser
included offenses of reckless manslaughter and first-degree
assault, convicted Magbulos of the charged offense of second-
degree murder.  Thus, unlike in Flores and Kaeo, the failure of
the Circuit Court to instruct on the lower-level assault offenses
did not present Magbulos' jury with an "all or nothing" choice
between the guilty verdict it rendered and a "complete
30FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
acquittal."  Instead, the jury had the option of finding Magbulos
guilty of manslaughter or finding him guilty of first-degree
assault, but chose to find him guilty as charged of second-degree
murder.
Under these circumstances, we need not consider whether
there was a rational basis in the evidence to acquit Magbulos of
second-degree murder and convict him of the lower-level assault
offenses because we conclude that any error in failing to
instruct on the lower-level assault offenses was harmless beyond
a reasonable doubt.  While the failure to instruct on a lesser
included offense just below the offense for which the jury
returned a guilty verdict is not automatically harmless error, we
conclude that absent unusual circumstances, the failure to
instruct on a lesser included offense two levels below the
offense for which the defendant is found guilty will ordinarily
be harmless.  In this case, Magbulos is contending that the
failure to instruct on lesser included offenses that are at least
three levels below the second-degree murder for which the jury
found him guilty entitles him to a new trial.  It strains
credulity to believe that the jury who found Magbulos guilty as
charged of second-degree murder, despite being instructed on the
lesser included offenses of manslaughter and first-degree
assault, might reasonably have found him guilty of the lower-
level assault offenses if instructed on these offenses.  We
therefore conclude that there is no reasonable possibility that
the Circuit Court's failure to instruct on the lower-level
assault offenses affected the outcome of this case.
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit
Court's Judgment. 
On the briefs:
Jon N. Ikenaga
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant
31FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Brian R. Vincent
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee
32