NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0001923
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
RICHARD GARVIS, Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
GINA T. DEVINE, Defendant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 11-1-0488)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Richard A. Garvis (Garvis) appeals
 
from the June 17, 2013 "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence"
 
(Judgment) entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit1
 
(circuit court). Garvis was found guilty of disorderly conduct
 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 711-1101(1)(c)
 
and (3) (1993 and Supp. 2013).2
 
1	 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 
2
 HRS § 711-1101 provides, in relevant part:
 
§711-1101 Disorderly conduct. (1) A person commits the
offense of disorderly conduct if, with intent to cause physical
inconvenience or alarm by a member or members of the public, or
recklessly creating a risk thereof, the person:
 
. . . .
 
(c)	 Subjects another person to offensively coarse behavior
or abusive language which is likely to provoke a
violent response;
 
. . . .

 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Garvis contends that the indictment was substantively
 
defective and thus the circuit court lacked subject matter
 
jurisdiction over the case, and that his conviction was not
 supported by substantial evidence.
I. BACKGROUND
 
Garvis was charged with disorderly conduct as follows:3
 
On or about the 23rd day of March, 2011, in the City
and County of Honolulu, State of Hawai' i, [Garvis],
persisting in disorderly conduct after reasonable warning or
request to desist, and with intent to cause physicalinconvenience or alarm by a member or members of the public,or recklessly creating a risk thereof, did subject anotherperson to offensively coarse behavior or abusive languagewhich is likely to provoke a violent response, therebycommitting the offense of Disorderly Conduct, a pettymisdemeanor, in violation of Section 711-1101(1)(a) [sic]
4 
and (3) of the [HRS]. 
(Footnote added.)
 
Garvis, Honolulu Police Department officers Darren
 
Cachola (Officer Cachola) and Timothy Tenney (Officer Tenney),
 
Club Electro (Electro) employee Scott Long (Long), and Garvis'
 
girlfriend and Electro employee Gina Devine (Devine) testified at
 
trial.
 
On March 23, 2011, Officer Cachola went to Electro in
 
response to Devine's complaint that Electro employee Ma 'ilani 
Muna (Muna) was violating a protective order. Upon arrival,
 
Officer Cachola spoke with Devine outside Electro. Officer
 
Cachola testified that he looked for Muna inside Electro but
 could not find her. Devine testified that Officer Cachola did
 
2(...continued)
(3) Disorderly conduct is a petty misdemeanor if it is the
defendant's intention to cause substantial harm or serious
 
inconvenience, or if the defendant persists in disorderly conduct
after reasonable warning or request to desist. Otherwise
 disorderly conduct is a violation.
 
3
 Garvis was charged with and acquitted of assault against a law
enforcement officer in the first degree in violation of HRS § 707-712.5(1)(a)
(Supp. 2013).
 
4
 The charging language of Garvis' indictment suggests that
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) intended to charge Garvis under
HRS § 711-1101(1)(c), not (1)(a). A person commits the offense of disorderlyconduct under HRS § 711-1101(1)(a) if he, "with intent to cause physicalinconvenience or alarm by a member or members of the public, or recklesslycreating a risk thereof, . . . [e]ngages in fighting or threatening, or inviolent or tumultuous behavior[.]" 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not go inside Electro. Officer Cachola testified that he
 
intended "to initiate a protective order violation[,]" but did
 not because after exiting Electro he "was distracted by [Garvis]
 making a commotion" in the Electro parking lot. 
Officer Cachola testified that Garvis was "visibly and
 
vocally upset" because he thought Officer Cachola was not going
 to initiate a report. Officer Cachola testified that he told
 Garvis he planned to initiate a report, but that Garvis remained
 upset and was "saying obscenities." Soon thereafter, Kiana, a
 co-owner of Electro, came out of the club.
 
Devine testified that Kiana came out of Electro "kind
 
of yelling at me" and that she and Kiana argued. Garvis
 testified that when Kiana came out of Electro, she talked to
 Devine and then walked over to Garvis and yelled at him from
 three feet away and that they argued "back and forth couple
 times" until Officer Cachola asked Kiana if Garvis was not
 allowed on her property. Garvis admitted to using "'F' bombs"
 while arguing with Officer Cachola. Officer Cachola testified
 that Kiana was upset with Garvis for "being loud and saying
 obscenities" and told him that he was not allowed on her property
 and to leave the property. Officer Cachola also testified that
 Officer Tenney arrived on the scene at the time Officer Cachola
 told Garvis to leave the property. Garvis left the parking lot
 and stood on the sidewalk.
 
Officer Cachola testified that from the sidewalk,
 
Garvis continued "yelling and screaming obscenities, he's getting
 more upset, . . . he's getting more and more people to pay
 attention of his actions." When asked what types of obscenities,
 Officer Cachola testified "[i]t was mostly fuck . . . directed
 toward Kiana. But a lot of the yelling was towards me . . . ."
 Officer Cachola testified that he told Garvis "calm down at least
 three times" and twice told Garvis that he would "be arrested for
 disorderly conduct" "if he keeps it up." Officer Cachola
 testified that he then told Garvis that he was under arrest for
 disorderly conduct and tried to cuff Garvis, but that Garvis
 resisted, they fell to the ground, Garvis punched him in the
 face, and others, including Devine and Garvis' son, also started
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hitting him. Officer Cachola testified that Long and Officer
 
Tenney helped stop the fight and that he went to Pali Momi
 hospital's emergency room for treatment of minor injuries.
 
Devine testified that while Garvis was on the sidewalk,
 
Kiana and Devine continued to argue and the arguing provoked
 Garvis to yell at Kiana from the sidewalk. Devine also testified
 that Officer Cachola did not like Garvis yelling at Kiana, and
 that Officer Cachola walked over to Garvis and pushed his left
 forearm up against Garvis' throat. Devine testified that she ran
 over and yelled "stop" and that Officer Cachola grabbed her hair
 and pulled her to the ground, but was shocked when he realized
 she was the person that he pulled to the ground. Devine
 testified that soon after that someone pulled them apart and she
 was cuffed and put in the police car. Devine also testified that
 she "never touch Cachola" and that nobody hit her.
 
Garvis testified that once on the sidewalk, he "wasn't
 
saying anything" "for about five minutes" because Kiana had left,
 but that once she returned, she was yelling at and harassing
 Devine, so Garvis yelled at Kiana from the sidewalk and "might
 have said leave her the 'F' alone" because he "was very upset at
 that point." Garvis testified that Officer Cachola "was at his
 car closer to the front door" and did not tell Garvis to stop
 yelling, but that Officer Tenney told Garvis to calm down. 
Garvis testified that he spoke with Officer Tenney for
 
"15 seconds or 10 or less" before Officer Cachola quickly walked
 up to Garvis and said "I thought I told you to leave the
 property?" Garvis testified that he responded that he "did leave
 the property" because he was on the sidewalk, and that Officer
 Cachola then "[s]pontaneously" used his left forearm to violently
 strike Garvis in the throat and then put Garvis in a "full
 chokehold." Garvis testified that he could not breathe and fell
 down, landed with his face on the concrete, and that Officer
 Cachola got on top of him and had him "in a death grip." Garvis
 testified that he "was losing consciousness" and "struggling for
 air." Garvis further testified that he was suddenly freed and
 "was seeing stars" and then saw Officer Tenney "pointing a Taser"
 at him and four or five people on the ground. Garvis testified
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that he then got down on the ground on his belly and Officer
 
Tenney cuffed him, and that at no time did he "take a swing" or
 "throw a punch" at Officer Cachola.
 
Long testified that he observed Garvis yelling and
 
swearing at Kiana from the sidewalk, but was paying more
 attention to Kiana and Devine's argument about Kiana's decision
 to fire Devine for calling the police. Long said he stepped back
 into Electro when Officer Cachola said he was going to talk to
 Garvis. Long further testified that when he stepped back
 outside, Officer Cachola was trying to grab Garvis, Garvis was
 resisting, and they "went down to the ground" and were "like
 wrestling." Long testified that Garvis' son jumped on Officer
 Cachola's back to try to pull him off of Garvis, Long jumped on
 Garvis' son "to try to get him off of Officer Cachola[,]" another
 one of Garvis' sons jumped on Long's back, and then Garvis got
 free, stood up, and punched Officer Cachola, who was on his hands
 and knees, in the face, and tried to punch him in the body, and
 then was cuffed by Officer Tenney. Long testified that he did
 not observe Officer Cachola strike anyone. Long also testified
 that he knew Officer Cachola as an officer that responded to 911
 calls when "things get out of hand" at Electro, and also as a
 customer because he came to the bar "a couple times" when he was
 off duty to drink and hang out with his wife. Long further
 testified that he did not mention Garvis punching Officer Cachola
 in his "HPD 252" statement even though he knew that the purpose
 of the statement was to support a charge of assault on Officer
 Cachola.
 
Officer Tenney testified that he did not see the
 
patrons who were leaving the bar react to Garvis' yelling and
 swearing. Officer Tenney also testified that he saw Garvis take
 a swing at Officer Cachola when Officer Cachola told Garvis that
 he was going to be arrested for disorderly conduct, but that
 Officer Cachola got "out of the way of that one" and that the two
 men fell to the ground and wrestled. Officer Tenney further
 testified that once the two men were separated, both were
 standing and Garvis took another swing at Officer Cachola and
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
this time hit him in the face, and then Officer Tenney threatened
 
Garvis with the Taser and Garvis complied and was arrested.
 
While giving his closing argument, the prosecutor
 
stated:
 
Garvis is also charged with disorderly conduct. There
 
are three elements to this charge.
 
. . . .
 
The second element is that he acted with intent to
 
cause physical inconvenience or alarm by a member or members

of the public or recklessly creating a risk thereof. Well,
the fact that what [Garvis] is yelling, the obscenities,
that they can be heard from 30 or 40 feet away, that they're

directed to Kiana satisfies this element of creating alarm. 
And it's [Garvis] -- he told you that he wanted Kiana to
hear him. He wasn't just saying this out loud. He wanted
 Kiana to hear him, hear that he was upset. He wanted her to
 know that he was not happy with what was going on.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
The jury found Garvis guilty of disorderly conduct on
 
June 17, 2013.
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
A. Sufficiency of Complaint
 
Whether or not an indictment or complaint sets forth
 
all the essential elements of a charged offense and thus provides

 
sufficient notice to a defendant is a question of law and
 
therefore is reviewed under the de novo, or right/wrong,
 standard. State v. Codiamat, 131 Hawai
'i 220, 223, 317 P.3d 664, 
667 (2013) (citing State v. Merino, 81 Hawai 'i 198, 212, 915 P.2d 
672, 686 (1996)). See also State v. Walker, 126 Hawai 'i 475, 485, 
273 P.3d 1161, 1171 (2012); State v. Young, 107 Hawai 'i 36, 39, 
109 P.3d 677, 680 (2005).
B. Sufficiency of Evidence
 
The appellate court reviews the sufficiency of evidence
 
on appeal as follows:
 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or jury. The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai 'i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998) 
(quoting State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai 'i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576 
(1997)). 
"'Substantial evidence' as to every material element of 
the offense charged is credible evidence which is of sufficient 
quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Richie, 88 Hawai
'i at 33, 960 
P.2d at 1241 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
III. DISCUSSION
 
A.	 Garvis had sufficient notice of the offense charged.
 
Garvis argues that the circuit court did not have
 
subject matter jurisdiction over this case because Garvis was
 charged with disorderly conduct in the disjunctive rather than
 the conjunctive and therefore did not have proper notice of the
 alleged offense. Garvis argues that State v. Jendrusch, 58 Haw.
 279, 282 n.4, 567 P.2d 1242, 1245 n.4 (1977) requires this court
 to vacate the circuit court's Judgment and dismiss the case "for
 the State's failure to sufficiently allege an offense and lack of
 [jurisdiction] . . . ."
 
The State argues that Garvis had proper notice of the 
offense charged because under Codiamat, 131 Hawai
'i at 227, 317 
P.3d at 671, a charge worded in the disjunctive does not violate the Jendrusch rule when it charges the defendant with violating only one subsection of a statute. The State is correct. 
HRS § 711-1101 provides, in pertinent part:
 
§711-1101 Disorderly conduct. (1) A person
commits the offense of disorderly conduct if, with
intent to cause physical inconvenience or alarm by a
member or members of the public, or recklessly
creating a risk thereof, the person:
 
(a) Engages in fighting or threatening, or in
violent or tumultuous behavior; or
 
(b)	 Makes unreasonable noise; or
 
(c)	 Subjects another person to offensively
coarse behavior or abusive language which
is likely to provoke a violent response;
or
 
(d)	 Creates a hazardous or physically
offensive condition by any act which is
not performed under any authorized license
or permit; or
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(e)	 Impedes or obstructs, for the purpose of
begging or soliciting alms, any person in
any public place or in any place open to
the public.
 
. . . .
 
(3) Disorderly conduct is a petty misdemeanor
if it is the defendant's intention to cause
 
substantial harm or serious inconvenience, or if the
defendant persists in disorderly conduct after
reasonable warning or request to desist. Otherwise
 disorderly conduct is a violation.
 
In Jendrusch, the State used the following language to
 
charge Jendrusch with disorderly conduct:
 
You (Jendrusch) are hereby charged that in the Cityand County of Honolulu, State of Hawai' i, on or about
the 14th day of September, 1974, with intent to causepublic inconvenience, annoyance or alarm by members ofthe public or recklessly creating a risk thereof, youdid make unreasonable noise or offensively coarseutterance, gesture or display or address abusivelanguage to any person present, thereby committing theoffense of Disorderly Conduct in violation of Section1101(1)(b) of the Hawai' i Penal Code. 
58 Haw. at 280, 567 P.2d at 1243-44 (emphases added).
 
First, the Jendrusch court noted that "[t]he complaint
 
here purports to charge an offense under HRS § 711-1101(1)(b)
 
(making unreasonable noise). However, the operative factual
 allegations charge the defendant with having engaged in
 activities violative of subsections (1)(b) and (1)(c) of the
 statute." Id. at 281, 567 P.2d at 1244.
 
The Jendrusch court then held that the charge against
 
Jendrusch was "fatally defective" for three reasons: (1) the
 State charged Jendrusch with "public inconvenience, annoyance or
 alarm" rather than "physical" inconvenience or alarm (id. at 281­82, 567 P.2d at 1244); (2) with regard to subsection (1)(c), the
 State failed to charge Jendrusch with behavior or language that
 is "likely to provoke a violent response" (id. at 282, 567 P.2d
 at 1245); and (3) the State charged Jendrusch with violating the
 statute in one count that was worded in the disjunctive and
 included two ways to violate the statute that were not factually
 synonymous. Id. at 282 n.4, 567 P.2d at 1245 n.4 ("Where a
 
statute specifies several ways in which its violation may occur,
 the charge may be laid in the conjunctive but not in the
 disjunctive.").
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Jendrusch is inapposite to the instant case because, in
 
this case, the State used charging language that is nearly
 
identical to the statute and charged Garvis under only one
 
5
subsection of the statute, HRS § 711-1101 (1)(c),  and"offensively coarse behavior" and "abusive language" are analogous forms of conduct. See Codiamat, 131 Hawai
'i at 227, 317 
P.3d at 671 (holding that "acts may be charged disjunctively when the words used charge similar or analogous forms of conduct that are codified in a single subsection of a statute"). Garvis' argument that the charge is defective for being worded in the disjunctive is without merit.
B. Garvis' conviction was not supported by substantial
evidence.
 
Garvis argues that the circuit court's Judgment must be 
reversed because Garvis' conviction was not supported by 
substantial evidence. Garvis contends the State failed to prove that he "acted with the intent to cause physical inconvenience to, or alarm by, a member or members of the public, or . . . with reckless disregard that his conduct might produce such a result" because Garvis' frustrations were not likely to physically inconvenience or alarm any member of the public under State v. Faulkner, 64 Haw. 101, 104-05, 637 P.2d 770, 773-74 (1981); and Officer Cachola and Kiana are not members of the public under State v. Leung, 79 Hawai
'i 538, 544, 904 P.2d 552, 558 (1995). 
The State argues there was sufficient credible evidence
 
to support Garvis' conviction because "the evidence revealing the
 duration, location, time and other circumstances of [Garvis']
 persistent obscenity-laced tirade [] ended with Officer Cachola,
 as well as [Long], being attacked by a member or members of the
 public."
 
Members of the public are not "physically
 
inconvenienced or alarmed within the meaning of [HRS § 711­1101(1)]" merely because they pay attention to a situation
 involving a defendant and a police officer. Faulkner, 64 Haw. at
 
5
 As noted supra at 2 n.4, Garvis' indictment included a typo in
 
that Garvis was charged with conduct described by HRS § 711-1101(c), but the
April 12, 2011 Indictment charged Garvis with violating HRS § 711-1101(a).
Garvis' arguments on appeal do not discuss this typo.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
105, 637 P.2d at 774. Neither a police officer nor a person with 
whom a defendant engages in an argument with is a "member of the public" within the meaning of HRS § 711-1101(1). Leung, 79 
Hawai
'i at 545, 904 P.2d at 559 (holding that the State did not 
have "an adequate basis for a charge under HRS § 711-1101" because the evidence "indicated that all of Defendant's statements pertained to Defendant's belief that he was being unjustly detained and that the alleged profanity was aimed only at the officers and the manager, not at the public or any member of the public generally"). 
The State did not produce substantial evidence that 
Garvis' conduct had the effect of or was likely to have the effect of causing any member of the public to experience physical inconvenience or alarm. Officer Cachola and Kiana do not constitute members of the public, and the evidence does not indicate that any of the people in the Electro parking lot were physically inconvenienced or alarmed by Garvis' yelling and swearing at Kiana and Officer Cachola or that Garvis had the intent to cause such a result or that such a result was likely to occur. See Leung, 79 Hawai
'i at 543-45, 904 P.2d at 557-59 
(holding that a defendant did not commit disorderly conduct when theater patrons paid attention to him yelling obscenities at the theater manager and police officers over what he believed to be an unjustified detention in the theater lobby); Faulkner, 64 Haw. at 104-05, 637 P.2d at 773-74 (holding that a defendant did not commit disorderly conduct when pedestrians and motorists in the vicinity paid attention to the defendant arguing with a police officer in the zoo parking lot over what he believed to be an improper investigation of his complaint).
6 
6
 Both Faulkner and Leung suggest that Garvis' conduct directed 
towards Kiana and Officer Cachola could support charges of harassment under
HRS § 711-1106 (Supp. 2013). See Faulkner, 64 Haw. at 105, 637 P.2d at 774
("Belligerency, when combined with persistently outrageous and abusiveconduct, which unreasonably interferes with an officer's performance of hisofficial duties, may supply the basis for a charge of harassment under HRS §711-1106."); Leung, 79 Hawai' i at 544, 904 P.2d at 558 (holding that Leung's
conduct directed towards the theater manager and the police could "constitutea possible charge under HRS § 711-1106"); see also HRS § 711-1106(1) ("Aperson commits the offense of harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy, oralarm any other person[.[ . . . ." (emphasis added)). 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The June 17, 2013 "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" 
entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is reversed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, January 13, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Klemen Urbanc 
(Urbanc Willard Park & Kim)for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge 
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity And County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
11
 