  
 
 
    
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 _______________________ 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: McCullen, Presiding Judge, Circuit Judge Castagnetti and 
Circuit Judge Wong, in place of Ginoza, Chief Judge, and 
Leonard, Hiraoka, Wadsworth, Nakasone, 
and Guidry, JJ., recused.) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-17-0000867 08-NOV-2023 08:46 AM Dkt. 318 MO 
NO. CAAP-17-0000867 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
HENRY CHANG WO, JR., Appellant-Appellee, v. 
BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES, 
THE DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES, 
DAWN N.S. CHANG, IN HER OFFICIAL CAPACITY AS CHAIRPERSON OF 
THE BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES,
1  
HASEKO (EWA), INC., CITY AND COUNTY OF HONOLULU 
DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND PERMITTING, 
DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN HOME LANDS, and 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAIʻ I, Appellees-Appellees. 
KUAʻĀINA ULU ʻ AUAMO, 
Party in Interest-Appellant. 
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 14-1-1373) 
1 Pursuant to Hawaiʻ i Rules of Evidence Rule 201 and Hawaiʻ i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 43(c)(1), we take judicial notice that 
Dawn N.S. Chang is the current Chairperson of the Board of Land and Natural 
Resources and she is automatically substituted as an Appellee- Appellee in 
place of Suzanne Case.   
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Party in Interest-Appellant Kua‘ āi na Ulu ‘ Auamo (KUA) 
appeals from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's 
(1) October 3, 2017 order granting Appellee-Appellee University 
of Hawaii's (UH) motion to dismiss deceased Appellant-Appellee Henry Chang Wo, Jr.'s (Wo) appeal to the circuit court and 
(2) November 7, 2017 Final Judgment.  
2
 The controversy in the case underlying this appeal 
concerns whether a seaside berm that is naturally six to eight 
feet above mean sea level should be lowered to four feet. The 
purpose of lowering the berm is to prevent flooding of nearby 
urban development by allowing more runoff into our ocean. 
Wo requested a contested case on the matter at a Board 
of Land and Natural Resources (Board or BLNR) meeting in March 2012.
3 While litigating that matter before the Board, Wo passed 
away and the Board allowed KUA to substitute in Wo's place. That substitution was the basis for the circuit court's 
dismissal of the appeal in this case, and is at the center of 
this secondary appeal. We vacate and remand. 
2 The Honorable Keith K. Hiraoka presided. 
3 Michael Kumukauoha Lee also requested a contested case, and was a 
party to the proceedings, but later withdrew from the case. 
2   
 
 
  
   
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. BACKGROUND 
A. BLNR - Application for a Use Permit 
For a brief background, "Kalo‘ i Gulch is a natural 
drainage for about 7488 acres, beginning in lower slopes of the 
[Wai‘anae] Mountains mauka of the H-1 Freeway ending at the 
Kalo‘i Gulch discharge site at the eastern [sic] of One‘ ula Beach 
Park." "Urban development has caused, and will continue to 
cause, stormwater runoff greatly exceeding that which occurred 
when the [‘ Ewa] Plain was planted in sugar cane."  This 
development "includes [ʻ Ewa] Villages, UH West [O‘ ahu] Campus, 
Ocean Pointe, East Kapolei, Gentry [ʻ Ewa], and other 
developments." 
In August 2011, SSFM International, Inc., as agent for 
Haseko, Inc. (
Haseko); the City and County of Honolulu, 
Department of Planning and Permitting (Honolulu Planning 
Department); the Department of Hawaiian Homelands; and UH 
(collectively, Applicants) applied for a Conservation District 
Use Permit (Use Permit) "to construct an ocean outlet for storm water discharge on State-owned land in the Conservation District 
as part of the 
Kalo‘i Gulch Drainage Improvements . . . ."4 
4 BLNR denied the same proposed construction in 2008 because "Haseko 
was the sole applicant and could not answer for the other land owners as to 
how or to what extent their developments would be constrained without the 
ocean outlet." 
3   
 
 
  
 
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Applicants requested the sand berm be lowered two to four feet, 
across the 500 foot width of the channel. 
Applicants' 2011 application was supported by an 
environmental impact statement dated December 2005. 
At a March 2012 BLNR meeting, Wo orally requested a 
contested case on the application for the Use Permit, which was 
granted. 
In his written petition for a contested case, Wo 
stated he and "his ancestors have traditionally and customarily gathered limu and other marine life from the area" and his 
"interests stem from his (a) traditional and customary 
practices; (b) recreational interests; (c) cultural interests; 
and (d) environmental interests." Wo asserted that Applicants 
failed to meet the criteria for obtaining a Use Permit under the 
"public trust doctrine, Native Hawaiian rights, Hawai‘ i State 
Constitution Articles XI § 1 and § 9, and XII § 4 and § 7, section 5(f) of the Admissions Act; and [Hawai
‘i Revised Statutes 
(HRS)] Chapters 7 and 205A . . . ."5 
5 Article XI, section 1 of the Hawaiʻi Constitution addresses 
conservation of resources, and provides as follows: 
For the benefit of present and future generations, 
the State and its political subdivisions shall conserve and 
protect Hawaii's natural beauty and all natural resources, 
including land, water, air, minerals and energy sources, and shall promote the development and utilization of these 
(continued . . .) 
4   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(. . . continued) 
resources in a manner consistent with their conservation 
and in furtherance of the self- sufficiency of the State. 
All public natural resources are held in trust by the 
State for the benefit of the people. 
Article XI, section 9  of the Hawaiʻi Constitution addresses  environmental 
rights,  and provides  as follows:  
 
Each  person has the right to a clean and healthful 
environment, as defined by laws relating to environmental quality, including control of pollution and conservation, 
protection and enhancement of natural resources. Any 
person may enforce this right against any party, public or 
private, through appropriate legal proceedings, subject to 
reasonable limitations and regulation as provided by law.  
Article XII, section 4  of the Hawaiʻi Constitution is titled "Public Trust," 
and provides  as follows:  
 
The lands granted to the State of [ Hawaiʻi]  by 
Section  5(b) of the Admission Act and pursuant to 
Article  XVI, Section 7, of the State Constitution, 
excluding therefrom lands defined as "available lands" by 
Section 203 of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as 
amended, shall be held by the State as a public trust for native Hawaiians and the general public.  
 
Article XII, section 7  of the Hawaiʻi Constitution addresses  traditional and 
customary rights, and provides  as follows:  
 
 The State reaffirms and shall protect all rights, 
customarily and traditionally exercised for subsistence, cultural and religious purposes and possessed by ahupuaʻ a  
tenants who are descendants of native Hawaiians who 
inhabited the Hawaiian Islands prior to 1778, subject to 
the right of the State to regulate such rights.  
Section 5(f)  of the 
Admissions Act  provides  in pertinent part:  
 
 The lands granted to the State of [ Hawaiʻi] by 
subsection (b) of this section and public lands retained by the United States under subsections (c) and (d) and later conveyed to the State under subsection (e), together with 
the proceeds from the sale or other disposition of any such 
lands and the income therefrom, shall be held by said State 
as a public trust for the support of the public schools and 
other public educational institutions, for the betterment of the conditions of native Hawaiians, as defined in the 
Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended, for the 
development of farm and home ownership on as widespread a 
basis as possible for the making of public improvements, 
and for the provision of lands for public use.  
5   
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
     
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In May 2013, before the evidentiary hearing began, the 
Hearing Officer found Wo "ha[d] standing based on Ka [Pa‘ akai]."
In June 2014, the Board issued its decision and order approving 
Applicants' Use Permit for the Kalo‘ i Gulch Drainage 
Improvements. 6  
B. Circuit Court - Appeal 
Wo appealed to the circuit court. With the Honorable 
Rhonda A. Nishimura presiding, Wo raised the issue of whether a 
supplemental environmental impact statement (Supplemental EIS) 
was warranted. 
Judge Nishimura determined Wo properly raised the 
Supplemental EIS issue below, but the Hearing Officer did not 
address it. She then ordered the case be remanded to address 
the Supplemental EIS issue and set the parameters for remand: 
[Judge Nishimura:] Now, in looking under [Hawai‘ i 
Administrative Rules (
HAR) §] 11-200-27, to the extent that 
they have properly raised it, in looking at the [Findings 
of Fact (FOF), Conclusions of Law (COL)] and order, the 
[Supplemental EIS] has not been addressed by the hearings 
officer. So to that extent the Court will remand it with
instructions to address the issue of 
[a Supplemental EIS]. 
6 In Ka Paʻakai O Ka ‘ Āina v. Land Use Comm 'n, State of Hawaiʻi, 94 
Hawaiʻi 31, 7 P.3d 1068 (2000), the Hawaiʻi Supreme Court addressed whether 
the circuit court lacked jurisdiction to consider the appeals of Ka Paʻ akai 
and Plan to Protect. The supreme court held that the parties were "persons 
aggrieved within the meaning of HRS § 91- 14[.]" Id. at 44, 7 P.3d at 
1081 
(cleaned up). The court explained "[w]ith regard to native Hawaiian 
standing, this court has stressed that the rights of native Hawaiians are a 
matter of great public concern in Hawaiʻ i." Id. at 42, 7 P.3d at 1079 
(citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). And, "where the 
interests at stake are in the realm of environmental concerns, we have not 
been inclined to foreclose challenges to administrative determinations 
through restrictive applications of standing requirements." Id. (cleaned 
up). 
6   
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
So it's up to the agency to address as to whether or not 
supplemental statement is warranted. 
The Court will not reopen it to take in new evidence, 
because I believe the evidence --
 substantial evidence has 
been presented both for and against the [Use Permit]  with 
respect to, for example, the monk seal, the berm, the pollution, the limu. All of that have been raised during 
the context of the contested case proceeding. So for the 
Board to determine, based upon the evidence that have been 
presented, whether or not [ a Supplemental EIS]  is 
warranted. So therefore, to remand it back to the Board to 
make the determination as to  whether or not  [a Supplemental 
EIS]  is warranted, based upon the evidence presented 
through the contested case proceeding.  
So the Court is not going to reopen it for to taking 
in new evidence, but for the Board to determine whether or 
not one is warranted. Once that determination is made, 
then you may be able --  you may be probably coming back 
here to appeal that decision one way or the other. Because either the Board is going to say it's warranted, or it's 
not warranted, based on the evidence that was presented.  
So the Court envisions to remand it just for that 
specific purpose. Not to reopen. And to allow the Board 
to perhaps file a supplemental to what has been issued, to address the [ Supplemental EIS].  
(Formatting altered and emphases added.) Wo's counsel, David 
Kimo Frankel (Mr. Frankel), then asked Judge Nishimura to 
clarify the stay and whether the circuit court had jurisdiction: 
[Mr. Frankel:]   So  I would like to ask that the 
permit be stayed until we come back to you. You know, for 
example, if they say --  if they say [a Supplemental EIS]  
needs to be done, then to me the permit actually needs to 
be vacated and we have to go. But if they say the 
opposite, that no [ Supplemental EIS]  needs to be done, we 
want to come before you to argue. But we don't want them to start construction before we have a chance to argue 
before you. So just procedurally we need to know, do you
still have jurisdiction?  
[Judge Nishimura:] I would think so. 
[Mr. Frankel:] Okay. So the stay --
[Judge Nishimura:] Because I'm remanding it. I'm 
not affirming, vacating or reversing. I'm remanding it. 
[Mr. Frankel:] Okay. So the stay will continue 
until you have an opportunity to make another decision. 
7   
 
 
  
[Judge Nishimura:]   Right. Because it depends upon 
what they -- what's determined regarding the [ Supplemental
EIS].  You know, they may take a look and -- look at the 
evidence from a different perspective, based upon the -- 
under the HAR provision.  
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
(Formatting altered and emphases added.) 
In her December 30, 2014 written order, Judge 
Nishimura explained that the Supplemental EIS issue "was timely 
raised during the course of the contested case hearing" and the Board "did not address this issue in its decision." The written 
order remanded the case to the Board, ordered the Board to 
determine whether a Supplemental EIS was necessary based on the 
existing evidence, and clarified that the circuit court retained 
jurisdiction over the case: 
1. This Court remands this case to the [Board] to 
determine whether a [Supplemental EIS] should be 
prepared for the Kaloʻi Gulch drainage project. 
2. On remand, the contested case hearing shall not be re
-
opened and no new evidence shall be submitted. Rather, 
based on the evidence that has already been submitted, 
the [Board] shall determine, after hearing from the 
parties, whether a [Supplemental EIS] is necessary and 
shall provide its reasoning in the form of supplemental written findings, conclusions, decision and order. 
3. The permit granted by the [Board] is stayed until this 
Court has an opportunity to review the [Board's] 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order Dated June 13, 2014 after the Board renders a 
decision on the [ Supplemental EIS] issue. Appellees 
may not engage in any land alteration or construction activity pursuant to conservation district use permit 
OA-3604 for the Kaloʻ i Gulch drainage project until 
this stay is lifted by this Court. 
8   
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4. This court retains jurisdiction over this case, orders 
the parties to inform this Court of the [Board's] 
decision on remand, and awaits the filing of any 
appropriate motions. 
(Emphases added.) 
C. BLNR - Remand 
On remand, the Board held oral arguments in March 
2015. With several new board members, the Board requested to 
visit the site, and the parties agreed they should request 
permission from Judge Nishimura. Judge Nishimura granted 
permission, and BLNR visited the site. Pending BLNR's decision, 
the following occurred: 
1. BLNR - Motion to Substitute 
On September 17, 2015, Wo moved the Board to expedite 
its decision on whether a Supplemental EIS was required and to promptly order substitution of KUA in his place. In Wo's 
affidavit attached to his motion, Wo explained he was "diagnosed 
with mesothelioma, which is incurable." He stated he wished to 
"assign/transfer/bequeath my interest in this proceeding to" 
KUA, should something happen to him before the Board rendered a decision. He also explained he was working closely with KUA, to 
pass on his knowledge and skills to a new generation, and with 
KUA's executive director, Kevin Chang (Chang), to perpetuate the 
tradition of gathering limu. 
Also attached to the motion was a declaration by 
Chang, explaining that "KUA is an innovative, community-based 
9   
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
initiative for protecting, restoring and caring for Hawai‘ i ." 
Chang also explained Wo was "a founding kupuna of KUA" and 
helped organize a limu hui. Chang stated "KUA empowers 
communities to improve their quality of life through caring for their biocultural (natural and cultural) heritage" and its 
"vision is ‘ ā
ina momona - abundant and healthy ecological systems 
in 
Hawai‘i that contribute to community well-being." 
Chang noted "KUA, through staff and volunteers, 
attended all of the contested case hearing" and he "was in 
attendance for almost the entire proceeding." Chang stated Wo 
asked KUA to "grab the 
‘auamo for him; that we step into his 
tabis," and "[w]e are willing to substitute" in Wo's place. 
Wo passed away two days after the motion to expedite 
and substitute was filed. 
2. Circuit Court - Suggestion of Death 
On 
September 25, 2015, six days after Wo's death, UH 
filed a "Suggestion of Death Upon the Record Under" Hawai‘i Rules 
of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 25(a)(1).7 
7 HRCP Rule 25(a)(1) provides: 
If a party dies and the claim is not thereby 
extinguished, the court may order substitution of the 
proper parties. The motion for substitution may be made by
any party or by the successors or representatives of the 
deceased party and, together with the notice hearing, shall be served on the parties as provided in Rule 5 and upon 
persons not parties in the manner provided in Rule 4 for 
(continued . . .) 
10   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Three days later, Judge Nishimura notified the parties 
that a status conference would be held on October 2, 2015. 
According to the October 2, 2015 circuit court 
minutes, the status conference with Judge Nishimura was "IN 
CHAMBERS -- OFF RECORD." The minutes also note that present 
were "David Frankel/For Appellant Wo[,] Linda Chow/For BLNR[,] 
Don Kitaoka/For City and County[,] Lisa Munger/For UH[,] Yvonne 
Izu/For Haseko[, and] Craig Iha/for DLNR." (Formatting 
altered.) The minutes do not provide information on what transpired during the conference, and do not indicate Judge 
Nishimura entered an order. 
3. BLNR - Motion to Substitute Back before the Board, on October 23, 2015, Applicants 
filed a "Joint Memorandum in Opposition to Motion to Expedite and Substitute." Applicants argued that the Board lacked 
jurisdiction to substitute KUA because the substitution was "not within the scope of the Remand Order." Applicants also argued 
(. . . continued) 
the service of a summons, and may be served in any judicial 
district. Unless the motion for substitution is made not 
later than 120 days after the death is suggested upon the 
record by service of a statement of the fact of the death 
as provided herein or the service of the motion, the action 
shall be dismissed as to the deceased party. 
(Emphases added.) See HRCP Rule 81(e) (providing that the HRCP "shall apply 
to any proceedings in a circuit court pursuant to appeal to the circuit court 
from a governmental official or body (other than a court), except as 
otherwise provided in Rule 72"). 
11   
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that KUA was not the proper party to substitute because HRCP 
Rule 25 controls and not HAR § 13-1-19 (Amended 2009) and, thus, 
"substitution of parties is allowed when the rights that resided 
in the original party have been transferred to the substituted 
party." 
Four days later, Wo and KUA filed a reply. Wo and KUA 
asserted that Applicants "failed to inform the BLNR that at that 
[October 2, 2015] conference, Judge Nishimura agreed to await 
the BLNR's decision on this pending motion and that her inclination was to allow substitution to take place." Wo and 
KUA further asserted that "it [was] perfectly appropriate for 
the BLNR to rule on the September 17, 2015 motion. And in fact, 
Judge Nishimura expects nothing less, as she made clear in 
chambers." 
On November 4, 2015, Applicants filed a joint 
surreply. In their surreply, Applicants stated they "take strong exception to [Native Hawaiian Legal Corporation's] 
characterization of what transpired during the conference before 
Judge Nishimura" and "[a]t no time during the conference did 
Judge Nishimura express an 'inclination . . . to allow 
substitution to take place.'" Applicants further stated that 
Judge Nishimura indicated 
12   
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"an inclination to have the Board, rather than 
herself, render a decision on the motion to substitute. She later clarified, however, that the question of whether the Board had 
jurisdiction to entertain the motion was not 
closed, and that the parties were free to argue that issue to the Board." 
(Emphases added.) 
Applicants attached declarations from Yvonne Izu 
(Ms. Izu) and Lisa Bail (Ms. Bail), attorneys for Haseko and UH, 
respectively. Ms. Izu declared that "[a]t no time during the 
Status Conference did Judge Nishimura indicate or even suggest an inclination on how she would rule if the Motion to Substitute 
were before her." Ms. Izu also declared that, while discussing 
jurisdiction of the Board and the circuit court, "Judge 
Nishimura at one point did indicate an inclination to have the 
Board, rather than herself, render a decision on the motion to 
substitute" and "[s]he later clarified, however, that the 
question of whether the Board had jurisdiction to entertain the 
motion was not closed, and that the parties were free to argue 
that issue to the Board." (Emphases added.) Ms. Bail's declaration did not mention what transpired at the status 
conference. 
Mr. Frankel then filed a declaration responding to 
Applicants' surreply stating, "[i]n our conversation, Judge 
Nishimura said, 'I would grant it.' Although the word 'it' 
13   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
could be construed as ambiguous, the context of the conversation 
was substitution." Mr. Frankel also stated counsel for BLNR, 
Deputy Attorney General Linda Chow (DAG Chow), "attended that 
meeting and can offer her own interpretation of what Judge 
Nishimura said." 
On December 16, 2015, the Board granted Wo's request 
to substitute KUA pursuant to HAR § 13-1-19, but denied Wo's 
request to expedite its decision indicating it would complete 
its review "in due course." 
4. Circuit Court - Response to Suggestion of Death 
On January 6, 2016, 103 days after UH filed the 
suggestion of death in circuit court, Wo and KUA filed a "Response to [UH's] Suggestion of Death Upon the Record Under" 
HRCP Rule 25(a)(1). Wo and KUA stated, "The sole purpose of 
this notice is to advise this Court that on December 16, 2015, 
the BLNR granted the motion to substitute KUA in place of [Wo] pursuant to HAR § 13-1-19. . . . The case remains before the 
BLNR on remand to render its determination as to whether [a 
Supplemental EIS] is necessary." 
January 25, 2016 marked 120 days since UH filed its 
suggestion of death informing Judge Nishimura that Wo died, 
14   
 
 
  
 
 
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
which would trigger the dismissal of a case as to a decedent if 
no motion to substitute was filed under HRCP Rule 25(a)(1).8 
5. BLNR - Decision On February 27, 2017, the Board issued its "Findings 
of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order Re Request for Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement" denying Wo's 
request for a Supplemental EIS. In FOF 4, the Board found that 
"[t]he Remand Order remanded the case to the Board for the 
limited purpose of determining whether [a Supplemental EIS] 
should be prepared for the Kalo‘ i Gulch drainage project. Except 
for the limited remand, the First Circuit Court retained 
jurisdiction over this case." In FOF 12, the Board further 
found, "After the death of . . . Wo, the First Circuit Court 
permitted the substitution of [KUA] in place of . . . Wo." 
D. Circuit Court - Return from Remand 
1. Judge Nishimura 
On March 16, 2017, a notice of BLNR's "Findings of 
Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Decision and Order Re Request for Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement" was filed in the 
circuit court. 
8 Actually, January 23, 2016 marked 120 calendar days since UH filed 
its suggestion of death. However, pursuant to HRCP Rule 6(a), if the last 
day of a time period falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, "the period 
runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a 
holiday." January 23, 2016 was a Saturday, thus the 120- day period would 
have been extended to Monday, January 25, 2016. 
15   
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On April 24, 2017, 455 days after triggering an HRCP 
Rule 25(a)(1) dismissal based on UH's suggestion of death, the 
court minutes note "STATUS CONFERENCE HELD IN CHAMBERS. PTYS TO 
STIPULATE TO A BRIEFING SCHEDULE." Present were "Camille 
Kalama/For Appellant[,] Don Kitaoka/For City and County[,] Lisa 
Munger & Christine Terada/For UH[,] Yvonne Izu/For Haseko[,] 
Craig Iha/For DLNR[, and] William Wynhoff/For BLNR & DLNR[.]" 
(Formatting altered.) These minutes do not mention the 
substitution. 
On June 20, 2017, a stipulation to supplement the 
certified record on appeal was filed. 
2. Judge Hiraoka 
On July 11, 2017, 533 days after triggering an HRCP 
Rule 25(a)(1) dismissal based on UH's suggestion of death, the case was reassigned from Judge Nishimura to the Honorable 
Keith K. Hiraoka. 
On July 20, 2017, nine days after the reassignment 
from Judge Nishimura to Judge Hiraoka, UH moved to dismiss Wo's notice of appeal based on the failure to file a motion to 
substitute in the circuit court. UH reiterated Judge 
Nishimura's instructions to the Board on remand and asserted 
that "[i]n direct contravention of these express instructions, 
the Board granted a motion for substitution filed on behalf of 
KUA. The Board had no authority to grant the motion for 
16   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
substitution, and its order affords no substitute for compliance 
with the requirements of HRCP Rule 25(a)(1)." (Footnote 
omitted.) UH further argued KUA was not a proper party for 
substitution because "Wo's standing was based on personal 
interests and rights." (Formatting altered.) UH asserted that 
the Board "incorrectly concluded, 'After the death of . . . Wo, 
the First Circuit Court permitted the substitution of [KUA] in 
place of . . . Wo.'" 
The Honolulu Planning Department joined UH's motion to 
dismiss; the other applicants did not. KUA opposed UH's motion to dismiss. 
On September 20, 2017, Judge Hiraoka held a hearing on 
the motion. The hearing began with Judge Hiraoka asking the 
Board's counsel, DAG Chow, about the Board seeking Judge 
Nishimura's permission to visit the site but not seeking 
permission to substitute parties: 
[Judge Hiraoka:] The counsel for the Land Board, why 
did the Board feel it was necessary to move the Circuit 
Court for leave to conduct a site visit? 
[DAG Chow:] Because at that time, there had been a 
previous site visit, I believe, and I may be confusing the 
first case with the second case, but there had been previous site visits that had been conducted, but the Land 
Board members who were, a lot of them were new, had not had 
an opportunity to see the site or were not familiar with 
the site, and they had wanted to be able to see that even 
if in connection with the limited purpose of the remand, and so because that would be taking in evidence that was 
not part of the prior contested case, we felt that it would 
be better to get leave of the court for that limited 
purpose. 
17   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Judge Hiraoka:] Based on the terms of the remand 
order? 
[DAG Chow:] Yes. 
[Judge Hiraoka:]   Why did the Land Board  not seek 
Circuit Court approval to substitute the parties upon 
[Wo's] impending death?  
[DAG Chow:]   Because they thought that that was not 
taking in new evidence per se pertaining to the subject matter of the contested case but that it was more in terms 
of just a, not really a ministerial duty because, of 
course, there is a discretion that is exercised  with that, 
but that it was ancillary to the subject matter of the contested case and that it was properly within the 
jurisdiction to do it.  
[Judge Hiraoka:] And the Board 
did consider 
evidence, didn't it? 
[DAG Chow:]   The evidence it considered was based on 
the standing for the substitution but solely for that 
purpose.  
[Judge Hiraoka:] Yes, but the Board 
considered new 
evidence in the form of declarations from [Wo] and [Chang]? 
[DAG Chow:] Correct. 
(Formatting altered.) 
New counsel for Wo and KUA, Camille Kalama 
(Ms. Kalama), argued that there was "no dispute among the 
parties that [Judge Nishimura] was aware and had indicated that 
she would allow the Board to make a decision on" the motion to 
substitute. Ms. Kalama also requested that if the circuit court 
determined Wo should have followed HRCP Rule 25(a)(1), the time  
18   
 
 
  
     
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"be enlarged for excusable neglect."9 Ms. Kalama requested the 
circuit court "allow time for us to satisfy that rule and not to 
impose such a draconian penalty . . . ." 
Following a discussion with the parties on HRCP 
Rule 25, enlarging the time to file a motion based on excusable 
neglect, and transfer of rights, Judge Hiraoka ruled in UH's 
favor. Judge Hiraoka (1) explained Wo's standing was based on 
his personal Native Hawaiian rights and Wo's counsel made a 
strategic decision to file a motion to substitute before the Board rather than file an HRCP Rule 25(a)(1) motion in circuit 
court, (2) denied the motion to enlarge the time to file an HRCP 
Rule 25(a)(1) motion to substitute with the circuit court, and 
(3) dismissed the appeal: 
The issue of organizational standing, the Court 
doesn't consider to be dispositive because even if [KUA] 
would have had standing to bring its own proceeding before 
the Board,  . . .  the case before the Court was one brought 
by [Wo] based on his personal Native Hawaiian rights. When 
[Wo] passed away or shortly before, his then counsel made a 
strategic decision. Rather than filing [an  HRCP] Rule 25 
motion in the Circuit Court which had jurisdiction over the 
9 HRCP Rule 6(b) provides in relevant part: 
Enlargement.   When by these rules or by a notice given 
thereunder or by order of court an act is required or allowed to be done at or within a specified time, the court
for cause shown may at any time in its discretion . . .  
upon motion made after the expiration of the specified 
period permit the act to be done where the failure to act  
was the result of excusable neglect; but it may not extend the time for taking any action under Rules 50(b)[,] 52( b), 
59(b), (d)[,]  and (e) and 60(b) of these rules and 
Rule  4(a) of the Hawai‘ i Rules of Appellate Procedure, 
except to the extend and under the conditions stated in  
them. 
(Emphasis added.) 
19   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entire case, he decided, he made the tactical decision to 
file a motion before the Land Board in a proceeding in which the final order had not been reopened and was 
specifically not reopened by the Circuit Court's temporary 
remand. 
And so because it was a strategic or tactical 
decision, the Court does not believe excusable neglect can 
be shown, so that's why the Court is going to deny the 
request for a continuance under  [HRCP Rule]  6(b) or any 
other authority to file 
[an HRCP]  Rule 25 motion.  
And the Court has struggled with the equities of this 
case because it does present very compelling equities, but the Court is constrained because the rule of law must be 
applied equally to all parties, and the issue of 
jurisdiction, subject matter jurisdiction, can be raised at any time, even on appeal for the first time, because it's 
not waivable.  
The Court rules that the Land Board  did not have 
jurisdiction to substitute [KUA] for [Wo] because the 
Circuit Court retained jurisdiction over the entire case. 
Since [an HRCP] Rule 25 motion was not filed in Circuit 
Court within 120 days of the filing of the suggestion of death, the appeal was abated, and therefore, the Motion to 
Dismiss is granted.  
Ms. Munger, since you represent the prevailing party, 
could you please prepare the order, and the order need not 
recite Findings or Conclusions. It is not the Court's 
intent to make them. The Court just wanted to explain for everyone present the thought process that the Court went 
through in reaching this very difficult decision.  
KUA timely appealed to this court. 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
"In [a] secondary appeal, this court applies the 
standards of HRS § 91-14(g) to determine whether the circuit 
court's decision was right or wrong." 
Mauna Kea Anaina Hou v.
Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 136 Hawaiʻi 376, 388, 363 P.3d 224, 236
(2015). HRS § 91-14(g) (Supp. 2016) provides:  
Upon review of the record, the court may affirm the 
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions 
for further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the 
decision and order if the substantial rights of the 
20   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the 
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory 
provisions; 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of the agency; 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; 
(4) Affected by other error of law; 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the whole 
record; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted 
exercise of discretion. 
(Formatting altered.) 
The denial of an HRCP Rule 6(b) extension is reviewed 
for an abuse of discretion. 
Kapahu v. Sam's Club West, Inc., 
139 Hawai‘i 36, 383 P.3d 139, No. CAAP-13-0006152, 2016 WL 
4555856 at *4 (App. Aug. 31, 2016) (mem. op.). Abuse of 
discretion occurs if the court has "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice 
to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Amfac, Inc.
v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 
26 (1992). 
III. 
DISCUSSION 
In challenging the dismissal of Wo's case, KUA argues, 
inter alia, that (1) the Board could not have complied with the 
remand order without substituting Wo, and (2) if HRCP 
21   
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
    
    
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rule 25(a)(1) applied, the circuit court "abused its discretion 
by refusing KUA's request to enlarge time to substitute pursuant 
to HRCP [Rule] 6(b)."10 (Formatting altered.) Applicants, on 
the other hand, contend that the circuit court's dismissal was proper because the Board lacked jurisdiction to substitute KUA 
in Wo's place and HRCP Rule 25(a)(1) applied.
11 
A. The Board's consideration of the motion to substitute did 
not require dismissal of the appeal. 
KUA explains that Judge Nishimura "indicated that the 
[Board] should decide that issue 'in the first instance.'" 
KUA argues that "[h]aving full knowledge then of the Motion to 
Expedite and Substitute still pending before the [Board], she 
could have objected, but did not object, to the [Board] acting on the motion and easily notified the parties then of any 
contrary reading of her limited remand order." Applicants argue 
10 We note that KUA mainly argues the circuit court failed to recognize 
BLNR's "primary jurisdiction." KUA also argues Applicants failed to serve 
nonparties with the suggestion of death. Because we vacate and remand for 
reasons discussed below, we need not address these arguments. 
11 Applicants also correctly point out that KUA's opening brief fails 
to comply with HRAP Rule 28(b). 
In its points of error, KUA challenges specific findings of fact and 
conclusions of law, but does not address these findings and conclusions in the argument section of its opening brief. See HRAP Rules 28(b)(4) and (7). 
Instead, KUA appears to address these findings and conclusions in the context 
of its broader arguments .  We address KUA's challenged findings and 
conclusions in the same manner. 
In addition, though KUA' s arguments are not presented as points of 
error, the appellate courts have "consistently adhered to the policy of affording litigants the opportunity 'to have their cases heard on the merits 
where possible.'" Morgan v. Plan. Dep't, Cnty. of Kauaʻ i, 104 Hawaiʻ i 173, 
180-81, 86 P.3d 982, 989- 90 (2004) (citation omitted). 
22   
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that "the Board lacked jurisdiction to substitute KUA for [Wo] 
during remand." (Formatting altered.) 
Under HRS § 91-14, the circuit court may affirm, 
reverse, or modify the Board's decision, or "remand the case 
with instructions for further proceedings[.]" HRS § 91-14(g). 
"Where a court remands a matter to an agency for the purpose of 
conducting a contested case hearing, the court may reserve 
jurisdiction . . . ." HRS § 91-14(i) (Supp. 2016). 
As HRS §§ 91-14(g) and (i) permit, Judge Nishimura 
remanded the case, instructing the Board to determine whether a Supplemental EIS was warranted based on the existing record 
without taking new evidence, while retaining jurisdiction over 
the appeal. 
At this point, it is essential to recognize that this 
appeal is not about jurisdiction per se because Judge Nishimura 
explicitly retained jurisdiction over the case. Instead, this appeal concerns the authority Judge Nishimura bestowed upon the 
Board on remand. To determine whether the Board acted within 
its authority as permitted by Judge Nishimura, we consider all 
relevant circumstances. 
Judge Nishimura remanded the case for the limited 
purpose of determining whether a Supplemental EIS was warranted, 
and ordered no new evidence be taken in making that 
determination. Even when taking this into consideration, the 
23   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record before this court demonstrates that Judge Nishimura 
nonetheless permitted the Board to decide the motion to 
substitute. 
Following an in-chambers conference with Judge 
Nishimura held seven days after UH filed its HRCP Rule 25(a)(1) 
suggestion of death, the parties actively litigated the 
substitution issue before the Board. Applicants filed an 
opposition to Wo's motion to substitute arguing lack of 
jurisdiction, Wo filed a reply, Applicants filed a surreply, and Mr. Frankel filed a declaration in response to the surreply. 
Based on the litigation before the Board surrounding the 
substitution issue, it may be reasonably inferred that the 
parties understood that the Board would hear the substitution 
issue and Applicants were free to argue the Board's authority in 
opposing the motion. 
Ms. Izu's declaration supports this inference, as she 
stated, "Judge Nishimura at one point did indicate an inclination to have the Board, rather than herself, render a 
decision on the motion to substitute" and "[s]he later 
clarified, however, that the question of whether the Board had 
jurisdiction to entertain the motion was not closed, and that 
the parties were free to argue that issue to the Board." 
(Emphasis added.) 
24   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In addition, Applicants filed no HRCP Rule 25(a)(1) 
motion to dismiss during the 533 days between January 25, 2016 
(120 days since the suggestion of death) and July 11, 2017 
(reassignment order) while Judge Nishimura presided over the 
appeal. During those 533 days, the Board issued its decision 
that a Supplemental EIS was not warranted, the Board filed a 
notice of its decision with Judge Nishimura, Judge Nishimura 
held a status conference with all parties attending, and the 
parties stipulated to supplement the certified record. And, Applicants made no motion to dismiss based on HRCP 
Rule 25(a)(1). 
Although Applicants took no action within those 533 
days to request Judge Nishimura dismiss the appeal, it only took 
nine days for UH to request an HRCP Rule 25(a)(1) dismissal 
after the case was reassigned to Judge Hiraoka. 
When considering Judge Nishimura set the parameters of 
the Board's review on remand and (1) the parties actively litigated the substitution issue before the Board, 
(2) Applicants did not request Judge Nishimura dismiss the 
appeal pursuant to HRCP Rule 25(a)(1) during those 533 days she 
presided over the appeal, and (3) deciding the Supplemental EIS 
issue innately required determining whether the issue was moot 
after Wo's death, it is reasonable to infer that the Board acted 
within the authority granted by Judge Nishimura. 
25   
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Thus, as governed by the standard of review in HRS 
§ 91-14(g), we hold that the Board deciding the motion to 
substitute did not require an HRCP Rule 25(a)(1) dismissal of 
the appeal. B. The Board's substitution of parties was supported by good 
cause. 
KUA argues good cause existed to substitute it in Wo's 
place, while Applicants argue the good cause standard did not 
apply because the Board had no jurisdiction. 
As discussed above, it is reasonable to infer the 
Board acted within the authority granted by Judge Nishimura. 
Turning to good cause, HAR § 13-1-19 guides the 
Board's substitution of parties, providing that "[u]pon motion and for good cause shown, the board may order substitution of 
parties; provided that in case of death of a party, substitution 
may be ordered without filing of a motion." "It is not possible 
to provide one definition of 'good cause,' as standards 
governing whether 'good cause' exists depend not only upon the 
circumstances of the individual case, but also upon the specific 
court rule at issue." Chen v. Mah
, 146 Hawai‘i 157, 178, 457 
P.3d 796, 817 (2020). "Good cause depends upon the 
circumstances of the individual case, and a finding of its 
existence lies largely in the discretion of the officer or court 
to which the decision is committed." Id.
 (cleaned up). 
26   
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, while the decision on the Supplemental EIS was 
pending before the Board, Wo moved to substitute KUA in his 
place due to his mesothelioma diagnosis. KUA indicated it was 
willing and able to take Wo's place in the suit. Two days 
later, Wo passed away. 
The substitution was fully litigated before the Board 
with Applicants arguing, inter alia, that the Board lacked 
jurisdiction to entertain the motion. The Board granted Wo's 
motion to substitute finding "good cause appearing therefrom[.]" 
Considering Wo's death, KUA's willingness to 
substitute, and the environmental concerns raised regarding the impact of runoff into our oceans should Applicant's use permit 
be granted, good cause existed for the substitution. See Ka
Pa
ʻakai O Ka ‘ Āina v. Land Use Comm'n, State of Hawaiʻi
, 94 
Hawaiʻi 31, 42, 7 P.3d 1068, 1079 (2000) (explaining "where the 
interests at stake are in the realm of environmental concerns, 'we have not been inclined to foreclose challenges to 
administrative determinations through restrictive applications 
of standing requirements'" (citation and brackets omitted)). 
And by allowing the parties to fully litigate the 
motion to substitute, including whether the Board had the 
authority to entertain the motion, we cannot say the Board clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregard rules or 
principles of law or practice. Amfac
, 74 Haw. at 114, 839 P.2d 
27   
 
 
    
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at 26. Based on HAR § 13-1-19, the Board did not abuse its 
discretion in substituting KUA in place of Wo. See id.
Thus, as governed by the standard of review in HRS 
§ 91-14(g), we hold that the Board's substituting KUA in Wo's 
place did not require dismissal of the appeal under HRCP 
Rule 25(a)(1). C. The circuit court abused its discretion by denying KUA's 
request to enlarge time. 
Even if HRCP Rule 25(a)(1) applied in this case, we 
hold that the circuit court abused its discretion by denying 
Wo's request to enlarge the time for filing a motion to 
substitute with the circuit court based on excusable neglect. 
"The 120-day time period provided for in HRCP 
Rule 25(a)(1) is subject to extension under HRCP Rule 6(b), at the discretion of the circuit court." Kapahu, 2016 WL 4555856 
at *4 (citation and brackets omitted). HRCP Rule 6(b)(2) allows for enlargement of time to file a motion where the failure to 
timely file was the result of excusable neglect: 
When by these rules or by a notice given thereunder 
or by order of court an act is required or allowed to be 
done at or within a specified time, the court for cause 
shown may at any time in its discretion . . . upon motion 
made after the expiration of the specified period permit 
the act to be done where the failure to act was the result 
of excusable neglect . . . . 
(Emphasis added.) 
"Courts generally have given Rule 6(b) a liberal 
interpretation . . . in order to work substantial justice 
28   
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . ." Bagalay v. Lahaina Restoration Found., 60 Haw. 125, 
141, 588 P.2d 416, 426 (1978) (applying HRCP Rule 6(b) to the 
HRCP Rule 25 time period, utilizing the framework for the 
substantially identical Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 
Rules 6(b) and 25(a)). "Ordinarily, the discretion of the court 
should be exercised to permit an extension of time, in the 
absence of a showing of bad faith on the part of the movant for 
substitution or undue prejudice to the other parties to the 
action." Id. (emphases added); see JK v. DK, 153 Hawai‘ i 268, 
275, 278, 533 P.3d 1215, 1222, 1225 (2023) (explaining that 
excusable neglect in the context of default judgment is determined by considering "all relevant circumstances," and when 
considering undue prejudice, the court looks at "prospective 
prejudice"). "The burden is on the movant to demonstrate good 
faith and to show some reasonable basis for noncompliance with 
the rules." Bagalay, 60 Haw. at 141, 588 P.2d at 426. 
When Wo's condition became apparent, the parties were 
litigating before the Board whether a Supplemental EIS was 
warranted. So, it was reasonable for Wo to request substitution 
from the Board. See generally, 60 Haw. at 141, 588 P.2d at 426. 
Doing so did not rise to the level of bad faith. See generally, 
29   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
id. And Applicants did not claim prospective undue prejudice 
before the Board.12 
As discussed above, Judge Nishimura set the parameters 
of what the Board could review on remand. Through the 
suggestion of death and the in-chambers conference, Judge 
Nishimura was aware of the pending motion to substitute before 
the Board. Judge Nishimura was also aware of the Board's 
substitution based on the notice of substitution and the Board's 
decision denying a Supplemental EIS. And Applicants did not move for an HRCP Rule 25(a)(1) dismissal in the 533 days between 
January 25, 2016 (120 days since the suggestion of death) and 
July 11, 2017 (reassignment order) that Judge Nishimura presided 
over the appeal. 
Based on these circumstances, there was no evidence 
showing Wo's counsel engaged in bad faith. Rather, it appears 
Wo's counsel litigated the motion to substitute before the Board on a good faith belief that Judge Nishimura intended the matter 
be litigated before the Board. 
The determination that the motion to substitute before 
the Board was strategic was insufficient to show bad faith or 
undue prejudice. Denying the request for an HRCP Rule 6(b) 
12 Applicants claim on appeal to this court that they "would have been 
prejudiced if the circuit court granted an extension to KUA pursuant to 
[HRCP] Rule 6(b)," but do not provide a valid basis to support this claim. 
(Formatting altered.) 
30   
 
 
   
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
enlargement of time to file a substitution motion without bad 
faith or undue prejudice was an abuse of discretion as it 
disregarded rules or principles of law to KUA's substantial 
detriment. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the circuit court's 
October 3, 2017 order granting UH's motion to dismiss Wo's appeal and the November 7, 2017 Final Judgment, and remand this 
case to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this memorandum opinion. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, November 8, 2023. 
 
 
 
 On the briefs: Summer L.H. Sylva, 
Alan T. Murakami, 
for Party in Interest-
Appellant Kua‘ āina Ulu ʻ Auamo.
Carrie K.S. Okinaga, 
University General Counsel, Bruce Y. Matsui, 
Office of the General 
Counsel, 
University of Hawaiʻ i 
and 
Lisa Woods Munger, 
Lisa A. Bail, Christine A. Terada, (Goodsill Anderson Quinn & 
Stifel), 
for Appellee-Appellee 
University of Hawaiʻ i.  
  /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Presiding Judge 
/s/ Jeannette H. Castagnetti 
Circuit Court Judge 
/s/ Paul B.K. Wong 
Circuit Court Judge 
 
31   
 
  
  
 Angela Fong, 
Yvonne Y. Izu, 
(Morihara Lau & Fong, LLP), 
for Appellee-Appellee Haseko (Ewa), Inc. 
Donna Y.L. Leong, 
Corporation Counsel, Brad T. Saito, 
Deputy Corporation Counsel, 
for Appellee-Appellee City and County of Honolulu, Department of Planning and 
Permitting. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI
ʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
32 