NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000030
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ROGELIO LAHIP GANOTISI, also known as
ROGER GANOTISI, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 14-1-0331)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Rogelio Lahip Ganotisi, also known
as Roger Ganotisi (Ganotisi) appeals from the December 31, 2015
Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (Circuit Court)1 Judgment of
Conviction and Sentence.  After a jury trial, the Circuit Court
convicted Ganotisi of three counts of Failure to Comply with
Covered Sex Offender Registration in violation of HRS §§ 846E-2
(2014), 846E-9(a)(6) (2014), and 846E-9(c) (2014) (Counts 1 and
3), and HRS §§ 846E-2, 846E-9(a)(1), and 846E-9(c) (Count 2). 
Ganotisi was sentenced to five years incarceration for each count
to be served concurrently.
On appeal, Ganotisi appears to contend2 the Circuit 
1The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
2Ganotisi's point of error does not comply with Hawai #i Rules of
Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4) insofar as it fails to provide, at a
minimum,
(i) the alleged error committed by the court or agency; (ii)
where in the record the alleged error occurred; and (iii)
where in the record the alleged error was objected to or the
manner in which the alleged error was brought to the
attention of the court or agency.
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Court erred in failing to grant his motion for judgment of
acquittal because the evidence was insufficient to establish: 
(1) incarceration release dates triggering the three-business-day
requirement to register as a covered offender in Counts 1 and 3;
and (2) his receipt of a letter from the Attorney General's
office informing him of his duty to register as a covered
offender in Count 2.
After reviewing the issue raised and arguments made by
the parties, the record on appeal, and the applicable legal
authorities, we resolve Ganotisi's point on appeal as follows and
affirm.
As an initial matter, we note that Ganotisi failed to
properly preserve his issue before the Circuit Court.  Pursuant
to Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 29(a),3 Ganotisi
moved for judgment of acquittal at the close of the State's case. 
The Circuit Court denied the motion.4  Thereafter, Ganotisi
presented himself and Dr. Diane Gerard as witnesses in his
2(...continued)
For this reason alone, this court could refuse to review the
point.  Sprague v. California Pac. Bankers & Ins. Ltd., 102 Hawai #i 189, 196,
74 P.3d 12, 19 (2003).  However in light of this court's policy of addressing
the issues on the merits, where possible, the following discussion is
presented.
3HRPP Rule 29(a) provides:
(a) Motion Before Submission to Jury.   Motions for
directed verdict are abolished and motions for judgment of
acquittal shall be used in their place.  The court on motion
of a defendant or of its own motion shall order the entry of
judgment of acquittal of one or more offenses alleged in the
charge after the evidence on either side is closed if the
evidence is insufficient to sustain a conviction of such
offense or offenses.  If a defendant's motion for judgment
of acquittal at the close of the evidence offered by the
prosecution is not granted, the defendant may offer evidence
without having reserved the right.
4HRPP Rule 29(b) provides:
(b) Reservation of Decision on Motion.  If a motion
for judgment of acquittal is made at the close of the
evidence offered by the prosecution, the court shall not
reserve decision thereon.  If such motion is made after all
parties have rested, the court may reserve decision on the
motion, submit the case to the jury and decide the motion
either before the jury returns a verdict or after it returns
a verdict of guilty or is discharged without having returned
a verdict.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
defense.  Ganotisi did not renew the motion after he rested or
after all evidence had been presented.
In light of his failure to preserve a challenge to the
Circuit Court's denial at the end of the State's case, we must
review Ganotisi's point for plain error under HRPP Rule 52(b),5
and in light of all evidence adduced at trial.  See State v.
Rodrigues, 6 Haw. App. 580, 580, 733 P.2d 1222, 1223 (1987)
(defendant lost his right to contest HRPP Rule 29(a) ruling when
he introduced evidence after his motion was denied).
1.  Ganotisi argues that the lack of proof of a
specific date he was released from incarceration failed to
sufficiently fix the date by which he must have registered.  
However, as to Count 1, the State produced Kaua# i Community
Correctional Center (KCCC) Corrections Supervisor Jon Miyajima 
to testify that Ganotisi was released either February 13, 2013,
or from mid to late February, 2013 and Sex Offender Registry
Office Assistant Trudy Malott (Malott) to testify Ganotisi had
been released from KCCC on February 22, 2013.
As to Count 3, Kauai Police Department (KPD) Detective
Scott Williamson (Det. Williamson) testified that on October 30,
2014, he arrested Ganotisi at his home, and had him transported
to and booked at the KPD cell block.  KPD Public Safety Officer
Collette Saiki (Saiki) testified she was working at the KPD cell
block on October 30, 2014.  Saiki recalled preparing State's
Exhibit P-14, a certified copy of the bail bond receipt for
Ganotisi, which she identified by her handwriting.6  The receipt
identified the date, the charge, Ganotisi's name, his Apapane
address, the date and place of court appearance, and Saiki as the
preparing clerk.  She declared that Ganotisi signed the document
in front of her.  The State also produced State's Exhibit P-15, a#
5HRPP Rule 52(b) Plain Error, provides, "[p]lain errors or defects
affecting substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought to
the attention of the court."
6Ganotisi correctly states that Saiki was not asked and did not
identify him in court.  However, a person of reasonable caution could take
Detective Williamson's testimony identifying Ganotisi as the person arrested,
Saiki's authentication of the document, and the facts contained in the
OBTS/CCH to support the conclusion that Ganotisi was in fact the person
arrested and released on October 30, 2014. 
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
certified copy of an OBTS/CCH form dated October 31, 2014,
memorializing Ganotisi's arrest and release.  The form identified
Det. Williamson as arresting and charging Ganotisi, KPD Officer
Kalama Lingaton as receiving him, and Saiki as booking and
releasing him on October 30, 2014.
Thus, there was ample evidence of the dates of
Ganotisi's release from incarceration.
2.  In Count 2, Ganotisi was charged with failure to
register as a covered offender "on or about August 15, 2014".
Ganotisi maintains that "there was no evidence that [he] failed
to register by August 15, 2014, or anytime around that period at
all," arguing that State's Exhibit P-4, a copy of a letter giving
notice of a failure to register (Notice) was insufficient to
establish that he actually received this letter.  However,
Malott, an assistant with the State sex offender registry
division of the Department of the Attorney General, was assigned
to investigate Ganotisi, and testified that Ganotisi had not
registered.  Malott sent the Notice to Ganotisi at his Apapane
Street address via Registered and Certified mail with the
Restricted Delivery option.  The Notice, dated August 13, 2014,
and the return receipt signed by "Roger L. Ganotisi" on
August 15, 2014, were admitted as State's Exhibit P-4.  The
Notice required Ganotisi to register with the State Attorney
General by reporting in person to the KPD Records Division,
"immediately."   This evidence and the reasonable inferences
drawn therefrom, was sufficient to infer Ganotisi received the
Notice.
Moreover, KPD Senior Records Clerk Clyde Latreta
(Latreta) testified that he processed all KPD covered offender
registrations, and that Ganotisi had never registered with the
KPD.  As Malott and Latreta's testimony established that Ganotisi
never registered, it was a fair inference from the evidence that
he failed to register "on or about August 15, 2014" as charged. 
Based on the evidence presented at trial, we conclude
that the Circuit Court did not plainly err by denying Ganotisi's
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
motion for judgment of acquittal at the end of the State's case
in chief.
Therefore, the December 31, 2015 Judgment of Conviction
and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit is
affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawaii, November 30, 2017. #
On the briefs:
Rosa Flores,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Tracy Murakami,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Kauai,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
5