SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001130
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
ALTON DAYLE KAONO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. FC-CR NO. 14-1-094K)

 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Fujise, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Alton Dayle Kaono (Alton) with abuse of a
 
family or household member, in violation of Hawaii Revised
 
1
Statutes (HRS) ยง 709-906(1) (Supp. 2013)  (Count 1), and fourth-
degree criminal property damage, in violation of HRS ยง 708-823(1)
 
2
(2014) (Count 2).  The complaining witness for both counts was
 
Alton's brother, Elliot Kaono (Elliot). After a jury-waived
 
1HRS ยง 709-906(1) provides, in relevant part: "It shall be
unlawful for any person, singly or in concert, to physically
abuse a family or household member[.]" A "family or household
member" includes persons related by consanguinity. Id. 
2HRS ยง 708-823(1) provides: "A person commits the offense of
criminal property damage in the fourth degree if by means other
than fire, the person intentionally or knowingly damages the
property of another without the other's consent."
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
bench trial, the Family Court of the Third Circuit (Family
 
3
Court) found Alton guilty as charged of Counts 1 and 2.  The
 
Family Court sentenced Alton to concurrent terms of two years of

 
probation on Count 1 and six months of probation on Count 2,
 
subject to the special condition of 48 hours of imprisonment. 
The Family Court entered its Judgment on September 15, 2014.
 
On appeal, Alton argues that the Family Court erred in
 
finding him guilty because there was insufficient evidence to

 
prove that he committed the charged offenses. We disagree and
 affirm.
 
I.
 
When viewed in the light most favorable to the State,
 
there was sufficient evidence to support the Family Court's
 guilty verdicts. Elliot testified that on the day in question,
 Alton punched the back of Elliot's truck, came up and punched
 Elliot on the left side of the head, punched Elliot again in the
 cheek, and then "punched out" the driver's side window of
 Elliot's truck. Elliot stated that "it hurt" both times that
 Alton hit him. Elliot also stated that Alton's first punch
 "kinda dazed" him and caused him to "stumble back." Elliot drove
 to the police station to report the incident. 
At the police station, Elliot met with Officer Daniel
 
Tam (Officer Tam). Officer Tam testified that he observed
 "slight red swelling to the left side of [Elliot's] face" and
 "[a]brasions of the left shoulder." Officer Tam also observed
 that the driver's side window of Elliot's vehicle was broken. 
In explaining its guilty verdicts, the Family Court
 
stated that it "based its decision" on Elliot's testimony and
 noted that Elliot's testimony had been corroborated by other
 evidence presented by the State. Alton's claim that there was
 insufficient evidence to support the Family Court's guilty
 verdicts is based on his contention that the Family Court should
 have accepted Alton's version of the incident, which was that
 
3The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Alton did not punch Elliot and that Alton accidently broke the 
window of Elliot's truck when Alton slammed the door. However, as the trier of fact, it was the Family Court's prerogative to determine the credibility of the witnesses. See State v. Smith, 
106 Hawai
'i 365, 372, 105 P.3d 242, 249 (App. 2004) ("It is the 
province of the [trier of fact], not the appellate courts, to determine the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence."); State v. Lioen, 106 Hawai
'i 123, 130, 102 P.3d 367, 
374 (App. 2004) ("We . . . give full play to the province of the trier of fact to determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw rational inferences from the facts."). We conclude that Alton's claim that there was insufficient evidence to support the Family Court's guilty verdicts is without merit. 
II.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Family Court's
 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 27, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
William H. Jamieson, Jr.
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Jason R. Kwiat Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3
 