 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-17-0000806 19-DEC-2023 08:02 AM Dkt. 93 OP 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI
#I 
---o0o— 
PETER J. WINN, WESTMINSTER REALTY, INC.,
Plaintiffs-Appellants
v. 
WADE BRADY and KATHERINE T. BRADY, individually and
as trustees of the WADE K. BRADY FAMILY TRUST,
CONTEMPORARY KAMA# AINA, LLC, WESTMINSTER REALTY, INC.
as trustee of the 2806 KOLEPA PLACE TRUST DATED 
DECEMBER 14, 2010, ERIC L. KEILLOR, ERIC S. HART,
Defendants-Appellees,
and 
JAMES E. SPENCE, BEVERLY C. SPENCE, STEPHEN R. SPENCE,
and VALORIE A. SPENCE, Intervenors-Appellees,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; and DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants 
NO. CAAP-17-0000806 
A
PPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0087(1)) 
December 19, 2023 
GINOZA, CHIEF JUDGE, WADSWORTH and NAKASONE, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, CHIEF JUDGE 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Peter J. Winn (Winn) and 
Westminster Realty, Inc. (collectively 
the Winn Parties) appeal FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
from the post-judgment "Order Granting Intervenors James E. 
Spence, Beverly C. Spence, Stephen R. Spence, and Valorie A. Spence's Motion for Reconsideration of Order Granting Judgment Creditors Peter J. Winn and Westminster Realty, Inc.'s Ex Parte Motion for First Alias Writ of Execution" (Order Granting Spence 
Motion for Reconsideration), filed October 11, 2017, by the 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).
1 
This appeal arises because the Winn Parties claim that 
as known lienholders for the subject Haleakalâ Highway Property, they were entitled to personal or actual notice of an execution 
sale
2 initiated by Intervenors-Appellees James E. Spence (James) 
and Beverly C. Spence (Beverly) (collectively, the Spences), 
regardless of their junior position to the Spences. The Spences 
had a judgment against Defendant-Appellee Wade Brady (Brady), and 
separately, the Winn Parties also had a judgment against Brady. 
Brady, in turn, held a joint tenant interest in the Haleakalâ Highway Property.
3 The Spences executed their judgment on the 
Haleakalâ Highway Property without personal or actual notice to the Winn Parties.
4 
The Circuit Court held that the Winn Parties were not 
entitled to actual notice of the execution sale from the Spences, and that the Winn Parties' junior lien on the 
Haleakalâ  Highway 
Property was extinguished. 
1 The Honorable Rhonda I.L. Loo presided. 
2 An "execution sale" is "[a] forced sale of a debtor's property by a
government official carrying out a writ of execution." Black's Law Dictionary
1604 (11th ed. 2019). See generally Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) Chapter
651, Part II (Execution) (providing statutory authority for executions upon
judgments or decrees of a court). 
3 Brady and Wesley Nohara were joint tenant owners of the Haleakal â 
Highway Property. 
4 As explained in more detail infra, the high bidder at the execution
sale was a company for which the Spences served as managers. Subsequently, a50% interest in the Haleakal â Highway Property was transferred to the Spences.
The other 50% interest in the property was acquired by Intervenors-AppelleesStephen R. Spence and Valorie A. Spence, who were not involved in theexecution sale of the property. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, the Winn Parties contend the Circuit Court 
erred by: (1) concluding that the Winn Parties were not entitled 
to personal or actual notice of the execution sale of the 
Haleakalâ  Highway Property, which violated their constitutional 
right to due process; (2) concluding that the Winn Parties' junior lien on the Haleakalâ Highway Property was extinguished by the execution sale, for which the Winn Parties did not receive personal or actual notice; and (3) failing to consider that the Spences benefitted from the failure to provide the Winn Parties with proper notice of the execution sale.
5 The Winn Parties' 
first two points of error are dispositive. 
We hold that the Winn Parties' recorded judgment lien, 
pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 636-3 (Supp. 2012),6 
created a property interest in the Haleakalâ  Highway Property. 
The Winn Parties were thus entitled to notice consistent with due process when the Spences conducted the execution sale of the Haleakalâ Highway Property under HRS Chapter 651. The notice provided to the Winn Parties did not meet due process standards. We thus vacate the Order Granting Spence Motion for Reconsideration entered by the Circuit Court and remand this case for further proceedings. 
5 The Winn Parties also assert the Circuit Court erred in not rejecting
the Spences' argument that the Winn Parties were estopped from raising their
due process claims. In the Circuit Court, the Spences argued estoppel ongrounds that the Winn Parties failed to provide actual notice to them for anexecution sale on another property. We need not reach this issue because the Circuit Court did not rule on estoppel grounds and the Spences do not argueestoppel in this appeal. 
6 HRS § 636-3 (Supp. 2012) provides, in relevant part: 
Judgment, orders, decrees; lien when . Any money judgment,
order, or decree of a state court or the United StatesDistrict Court for the District of Hawaii shall be a lien upon real property when a copy thereof, certified as correctby a clerk of the court where it is entered, is recorded inthe bureau of conveyances. 
(Emphasis added.) 
3  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. Background
A. The Winn Action - This Case 
On January 25, 2012, the Winn Parties commenced this 
case by filing a Complaint against Defendants-Appellees Wade 
Brady and Katherine T. Brady (collectively, 
the Bradys), 
Individually and as Trustees of the Wade K. Brady Family Trust, and Contemporary 
Kama#aina, LLC (Contemporary Kama# aina), amongst 
others, in Civil No. 12-1-0087(1) (Winn Action). The Winn 
Parties alleged, inter alia, breach of a joint venture agreement 
to develop a property in Lahaina, Maui. On January 17, 2013, the Circuit Court entered an Amended Judgment in favor of the Winn Parties and against the Bradys and Contemporary Kama# aina, 
awarding approximately $955,000 for the breach of the joint venture agreement, and attorney's fees and costs (Winn Judgment). 
The Winn Judgment was recorded in the State of Hawai# i Bureau of 
Conveyances (Bureau of Conveyances) on February 6, 2013.
B. The Spence Action 
In a separate action, the Spences obtained a judgment 
in Civil No. 08-1-0584(1) (
Spence Action) against the Bradys and 
other parties, jointly and severally, on October 28, 2010, for 
approximately $152,000 (Spence Judgment). The Spence Judgment 
was recorded in the Bureau of Conveyances on March 9, 2011. 
On October 17, 2014, the Circuit Court granted the 
Spences an ex parte motion for writ of execution on the Haleakalâ 
Highway Property. On December 19, 2014, pursuant to HRS § 651-38 
(2016),7 the Spences obtained a First Alias Writ of Execution 
7 HRS § 651-38 provides: 
Alias Writs . Any circuit court, out of which an execution
has been issued, if such execution has been returned
unsatisfied wholly or in part, may issue an alias executionto the same circuit, or an execution leviable in some othercircuit, for the satisfaction of the unpaid remainder of thejudgment and additional costs, expenses, and commissions,which alias or testatum writ of execution shall be served in like manner as the original. 
In other words, alias writs of execution may be issued when the original
writ of execution is not satisfied. 
4  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against Wade Brady's joint-tenant interest in the Haleakalâ 
Highway Property (Spence First Alias Writ of Execution). 
Attached to the Spence First Alias Writ of Execution as an 
exhibit was a Status Report for the Haleakalâ Highway Property, which listed the Winn Judgment and the Spence Judgment as exceptions to title. 
After recording the Spence First Alias Writ of 
Execution on Wade Brady's interest in the Haleakalâ Highway Property, the Spences posted written notices of the execution sale in accordance with HRS § 651-43 (2016)
8 on January 4, 2015.9 
No actual or personal notice was provided to the Winn Parties. On June 3, 2015, the Circuit Court granted the Spences' motion to confirm the sale of the Haleakalâ Highway Property in the amount 
of $25,001, and directing that the property be conveyed to Haleakala Estate Properties, LLC (
HEP LLC) as the highest bidder. 
Subsequently, by way of a quitclaim deed recorded on 
October 13, 2016, HEP LLC and Wesley Nohara, as grantors, conveyed an undivided 50% interest in the 
Haleakalâ  Highway 
Property to the Spences, and conveyed the other undivided 50% interest in the property to Stephen Spence (Stephen) and Valorie 
Spence (Valorie). The quitclaim deed was executed for HEP LLC by 
the Spences as its managers. 
8 HRS § 651-43 provides: 
The officer shall, after levy, advertise for sale the property
levied upon, whether real or personal, for thirty days, or forsuch time as the court shall order, by posting a written orprinted notice in three conspicuous places within the districtwhere the property is situated, and if on the island of Oahu, byadvertisement thereof at least three times in one or more newspapers published in Honolulu. 
9 The Spences posted written notice at four locations: (1) the front
door of the Haleakal â Highway Property; (2) the public bulletin board outside
of the Makawao Public Library; (3) a "public posting board" at the WailukuCourthouse; and (4) the Makawao post office. 
5  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C. The Winn Parties Contest the Sale of the 
Haleakalâ Highway Property 
In this case, on May 23, 2017, the Winn Parties filed 
an ex parte motion for first alias writ of execution on the 
Haleakalâ Highway Property (Winn Motion for First Alias Writ of 
Execution),10 arguing that HEP LLC's purchase of the Haleakalâ 
Highway Property is subject to the Winn Judgment because the Winn 
Parties were not provided notice of the execution sale. 
The Circuit Court granted the Winn Motion for First 
Alias Writ of Execution on May 23, 2017 (Order Granting Winn
First Alias Writ of Execution
). On June 7, 2017, the Spences, 
Stephen, and Valorie filed a motion to intervene in this case 
with respect to the Order Granting Winn First Alias Writ of Execution. On July 18, 2017, the Circuit Court granted the request to intervene. On July 20, 2017, the Winn Parties filed a Motion to Amend First Alias Writ of Execution or, in the Alternative to Issue Second Alias Writ of Execution (Winn Motion 
to Amend First Alias Writ of Execution) based on new information 
that HEP LLC had transferred title to the 
Haleakalâ  Highway 
Property to the Spences, Stephen, and Valorie. On July 26, 2017, 
the Spences, Stephen, and Valorie filed a motion for reconsideration of the Order Granting Winn First Alias Writ of Execution (Spence Motion for Reconsideration) requesting that the 
Circuit Court reverse the order. They argued that the Order 
Granting Winn First Alias Writ of Execution was moot in that HEP LLC no longer owned the Haleakalâ Highway Property, the Winn 
Parties had no right to the Haleakalâ Highway Property because their lien was extinguished by the execution sale, and the Winn Parties' argument regarding the lack of notice of the execution sale was without merit. 
At a hearing on August 22, 2017, the Circuit Court 
denied the Winn Motion to Amend First Alias Writ of Execution, stating: 
10 The Circuit Court had previously granted the Winn Parties a writ of
execution pursuant to HRS § 651-36 (2016) on June 25, 2013. 
6  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Court having had an opportunity to review
the motion, the opposition, the reply, having heard
the oral arguments in court this morning, the Court'sgoing to deny [the] motion for -- to amend the firstalias writ of execution or, in the alternative, toissue a second alias writ of execution. 
The Court does find clearly that Mr. Winn sat on
his rights for many years. The Court also finds that Mr. Winn's junior lien was extinguished back in 2015,and that, lastly, though you folks have made goodarguments, the Court believes as well that Mr. Winnwas not entitled to actual notice. 
On October 11, 2017, the Circuit Court entered the 
Order Granting Spence Motion for Reconsideration. The effect of 
this order is to preclude the Winn Parties from executing the Winn Judgment on the Haleakalâ Highway Property. 
The Winn Parties timely appealed.
II. Standards of Review 
A. Constitutional Questions 
"The appellate court reviews questions of 
constitutional law de novo, under the right/wrong standard." Hussey v. Say, 139 Hawai# i 181, 185, 384 P.3d 1282, 1286 (2016) 
(citation, underlining, and internal quotation marks omitted).
B. Statutory Interpretation 
"The interpretation of a statute is a question of law 
reviewable de novo." Ka Pa#akai O Ka# Aina v. Land Use Comm'n, 94 
Hawai
#i 31, 41, 7 P.3d 1068, 1078 (2000) (quoting Amantiad v. 
Odum, 90 Hawai# i 152, 160, 977 P.2d 160, 168 (1999)). 
III. Discussion 
A. The Winn Parties Were Entitled to Notice Reasonably
Calculated to Apprise Them of the Execution
Sale and Provide an Opportunity to Object 
On appeal, the Winn Parties contend their 
constitutional right to due process was violated because they were entitled to, and did not receive, personal or actual notice of the execution sale of the Haleakalâ Highway Property as known 
judgment creditors of the Bradys. 
In particular, the Winn 
Parties argue due process requires that they be afforded notice reasonably calculated under the circumstances to inform them of the execution sale, and that compliance with the posting of 
7  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
notice under HRS § 651-43 did not constitute notice reasonably 
calculated under the circumstances given evidence of the Spences' communications with Winn and knowledge of the Winn Parties' interest in the Haleakalâ  Highway Property. The Spences do not 
dispute that they had knowledge of the Winn Parties' recorded judgment against the Bradys, and they also do not dispute Winn's declaration stating that they knew how to contact him. 
The Spences contend that pursuant to HRS § 651-43, the 
Winn Parties were not entitled to notice beyond posting. Further, the Spences contend that as junior judgment creditors of the Bradys, the Winn Parties did not have constitutionally protected property rights in the Haleakalâ Highway Property.
1. The Winn Parties had a property interest in the
Haleakalâ Highway Property 
The threshold inquiry is whether a recorded judgment 
serves as a lien on a property, entitling the lienholder to 
notice according to due process. The Winn Parties assert, pursuant to HRS § 636-3, that the Winn Judgment was a recorded lien and they had a property interest in the Haleakalâ  Highway 
Property. 
The Spences contend, to the contrary, that a judgment 
does not create a property right, only a right to levy on the property. The Spences cite to Lindsey v. Kainana
, 4 Haw. 165 
(Haw. Kingdom 1879), for the proposition that because "[ Hawai#i 
has] no statute making a judgment of Court of Record a lien upon real estate in the nature of a subsisting incumbrance[,]" a "judgment constitutes no property or right in the land. It only confers a right to levy on the same." 
Id.
 at 168-69. The 
Spences also cite In re Lopez' Estate, 19 Haw. 620 (Haw. Terr. 1909), for a similar proposition that "a judgment of itself gives no lien and a creditor gains nothing by obtaining it." Id. at 
623. 
The Winn Parties respond that Kainana and In re Lopez' 
Estate are inapposite because those cases relied on the lack of any statutory authority at the time the cases were decided making a recorded judgment a lien on property. The Winn Parties argue 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
both cases were decided prior to 1913, when the Legislature first 
enacted a statute allowing a recorded judgment to become a lien on real property. Pursuant to HRS § 636-3, the statute in effect when the execution sale in this case occurred, the Winn Parties contend the recorded Winn Judgment created a lien on the Haleakalâ Highway Property and a property interest. 
The Winn Parties' analysis is persuasive. The 
predecessor to HRS § 636-3 was adopted in 1913, after the Kainana and In re Lopez' Estate decisions were issued. 1913 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 32, § 1 at 36. Although there is no case law explicitly interpreting HRS § 636-3 as creating a property interest in real property that entitles a lienholder to due process, the Hawai# i 
Supreme Court has stated that "HRS § 636-3 grants a judgment creditor an automatic lien on any real property of the judgment debtor." Bank of Hawaii v. Shinn, 120 Hawai# i 1, 4 n.8, 200 P.3d 
370, 373 n.8 (2008) (emphasis added). 
Here, under HRS § 636-3, 
the Winn Parties were judgment lienholders on the Haleakalâ Highway Property because they obtained a judgment against the Bradys and recorded the judgment in the Bureau of Conveyances on February 6, 2013. Further, as recognized by the Supreme Court of New Jersey, "a judgment lien is a property interest subject to due-process protections." New Brunswick Sav. Bank v. Markouski, 
587 A.2d 1265, 1270, 1275 (N.J. 1991) (concerning a statute providing that a docketed judgment is a lien on all real property held by the judgment debtor in the state, and holding that the judgment creditor was entitled to actual notice of execution sale in accordance with due process); 
see also In re Upset Sale, Tax 
Claim Bureau of Berks County, 479 A.2d 940, 944 (Pa. 1984) (holding that a judgment lien was a protectable property interest). We thus conclude that the Winn Parties have a property interest that entitled them to notice consistent with due process. 
Moreover, the Winn Parties were listed in the Status 
Report regarding title for the Haleakalâ Highway Property as creditors of the Bradys based on the recorded Winn Judgment. The Status Report was attached to the Spence First Alias Writ of 
9  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Execution. Thus, the Spences knew or reasonably should have known 
that the Winn Parties had a judgment lien on the property.
2. Posting of written notice was insufficient to
satisfy the Winn Parties' due process right asknown lienholders 
Here, the Spences gave notice of the execution sale by 
posting written notice pursuant to HRS § 651-43. As to whether 
such notice satisfies due process for a known lienholder, the United States Supreme Court has established the general rule that "[a]n elementary and fundamental requirement of due process in any proceeding which is to be accorded finality is notice reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances, to apprise interested parties of the pendency of the action and afford them an opportunity to present their objections." Mullane v. Cent. 
Hanover Bank & Tr. Co., 339 U.S. 306, 314 (1950) (citations omitted) (concluding that a state statute permitting notice by publication alone to trust beneficiaries whose names and addresses were known did not satisfy constitutional due process). 
The reasonableness and hence the constitutional validity of
any chosen method may be defended on the ground that it isin itself reasonably certain to inform those affected, or,where conditions do not reasonably permit such notice, thatthe form chosen is not substantially less likely to bringhome notice than other of the feasible and customarysubstitutes. 
Id. at 315 (citations omitted); see also Cate v. Archon Oil Co., 
Inc., 695 P.2d 1352, 1355 (Okla. 1985) ("Notice by publication and by posting are designed primarily to attract prospective purchasers, and are unlikely to reach those who have an interest in the property."). 
The Mullane
 due process principle has also been applied 
in Hawai#i. In 
Freitas v. Gomes
, 52 Haw. 145, 472 P.2d 494 
(1970), the Hawai#i Supreme Court cited 
Mullane in stating 
"[p]rocedural due process requires that, under all the circumstances, notice must be reasonably calculated to apprise interested [parties] of the pendency of any proceeding which is to be accorded finality." Id.
 at 152, 472 P.2d at 498. The 
Hawai#i Supreme Court concluded that a statute only requiring 
notice by publication for a proceeding to administer an estate 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and distribute property was "constitutionally insufficient by 
itself because it was not supplemented by notice by mail or personal service." Id. at 151-52, 472 P.2d at 498-99. The court 
held that: 
notice of the pendency of a proceeding in the administration
of an estate which affords finality to a decree ofdistribution must, in addition to being published asrequired by the statute be mailed, where the names andaddresses of interested persons are known, or by reasonablediligence can be ascertained by executors or administrators,unless notice is otherwise personally served. 
Id. at 152, 472 P.2d at 499 (emphasis added). 
Although no Hawai# i case has explicitly applied this 
due process principle to a real property execution sale by a 
judgment creditor,11 the Hawai# i Supreme Court, in Freitas, noted 
that: 
In addition to Mullane the United States Supreme Court has
held that a standard of reasonable diligence is required inseeking out interested parties in the following cases. Bankof Marin v. England, 385 U.S. 99 (1966) (bankruptcy); Walkerv. City of Hutchinson, 352 U.S. 112 (1956) (residentproperty owners in eminent domain proceedings); Covey v.Town of Somers, 351 U.S. 141, 146 (1956) (tax foreclosureagainst property of an incompetent who had no guardian);City of New York v. New York, N.H.& H.R.R., 344 U.S. 293,296 (1953) (creditors in bankruptcy proceeding) ("Notice bypublication is a poor and sometimes a hopeless substitutefor actual service of notice. Its justification isdifficult at best."); Standard Oil v. New Jersey, 341 U.S.428 (1951) (escheat). 
This court alluded to a requirement of personal notification
whenever possible in In re Complaint of Vockrodt, 50 Haw.201, 206 n.7, 436 P.2d 752, 755 n.7 (1968) citing Mullane,
supra [339 U.S.] at 313. 
Id. at 152 n.4, 472 P.2d at 498 n.4 (format altered). 
Furthermore, the Oklahoma Supreme Court has explained 
that: 
Theoretically, publication may be available for all the
world to see, but it is presumptuous to suppose that anyonecould read all that is published to see if something may bereported which affects his/her property interest. Exclusive reliance on an inefficacious means of notification cannot be permitted under the Mullane doctrine — neither necessity norefficiency can abrogate the rule that, within the limits ofpracticability, notice must be reasonably calculated toreach the interested parties. If the names of those 
affected by a proceeding are available, the reasons 
11 In Klinger v. Kepano , 64 Haw. 4, 13-16, 635 P.2d 938, 944-46 (1981),
the Hawai #i Supreme Court applied 
Mullane narrowly to a tax lien foreclosure
case. 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
disappear for resorting to means less likely than the mails
to apprise them of the pending sale. Mail service can be utilized as an inexpensive and efficient mechanism toenhance the reliability of the otherwise unreliableprocedure of notice by publication. 
Cate, 695 P.2d at 1356 (emphasis added) (citing Greene v. 
Lindsey, 456 U.S. 444, 455 (1982); Schroeder v. City of New York, 371 U.S. 208, 213 (1962); Mullane, 339 U.S. at 318-20) (holding that the execution sale of an oil and gas lease by a judgment creditor violated due process because notice was by publication under state statute, but debtor as well as any other persons with a reasonably known security interest in the lease was entitled to proper notice reasonably calculated to reach them). 
In light of the relevant authority from the U.S. 
Supreme Court, the Hawai#i Supreme Court, and other persuasive 
authorities considering due process in the context of affecting a property interest, we adopt the rule established in Mullane and its progeny with respect to execution sales by judgment creditors.
 See e.g., Mennonite Bd. of Missions v. Adams, 462 
U.S. 791, 797-98 (1983) (extending due process principle in Mullane to a mortgagee for purposes of a tax sale); Walker, 352 U.S. at 115-17 (applying Mullane to condemnation proceeding where city knew name of land owner but only provided publication notice). 
In other words, for purposes of execution sales by 
judgment creditors, we hold that due process requires notice reasonably calculated to reach lienholders of the subject property, to inform them of the execution sale and allow them an opportunity to object, notwithstanding the limited notice required under HRS § 651-43. See Mullane, 339 U.S. at 314, 317-18; see also In re Vockrodt, 50 Haw. at 205 n.5, 436 P.2d at 755 n.5 (resorting to publication notice is permissible where it is not reasonably possible or practicable to give more adequate notice, such as when a person is missing or unknown (citing Mullane, 339 U.S. at 317)). 12
12 The Spences argue that affording the Winn Parties actual or personal
notice conflicts with HRS § 651-43. However, the Hawai #i Supreme Court has
recognized that "historical procedures must yield to changing concepts of
fairness which the due process clause requires." Freitas, 52 Haw. at 152, 472
P.2d at 498-99. 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Extending Mullane to this case, an interested party, 
i.e., a party with a protected property interest at stake, must 
be identified. See 339 U.S. at 313. Next, Mullane recognizes personal service is not required in all circumstances. Id. at 314. However, where interested parties are identifiable, "notice must be of such nature as reasonably to convey the required information, and it must afford a reasonable time for those interested to make their appearance[.]" Id. (citations omitted). Specifically, "[w]here the names and post office addresses of those affected by a proceeding are at hand, the reasons disappear for resort to means less likely than the mails to apprise them of its pendency." Id. at 318; cf. Schroeder, 371 U.S. at 212-13 ("The general rule that emerges from the Mullane case is that notice by publication is not enough with respect to a person whose name and address are known or very easily ascertainable and whose legally protected interests are directly affected by the proceedings in question."). 
Here, due process principles required the Spences to 
provide the Winn Parties with personal notice of the execution sale. The Winn Parties had a protected property interest in the Haleakalâ Highway Property because the Winn Judgment against the Bradys was recorded and thus the Winn Parties had a judgment lien on the property. Further, the Spences were aware, or should have been aware, of the Winn Parties' recorded judgment lien based on the Status Report regarding title for the Haleakalâ Highway Property. Winn also submitted a declaration attesting that Beverly had called him multiple times prior to the execution sale, and that the Spences knew about the Winn Judgment, knew that it had been recorded, and knew that it was a lien on the Haleakalâ Highway Property. Winn further attested the Spences knew his telephone number and other information by which they easily could have contacted him.
13 The Spences do not dispute 
these assertions in Winn's declaration. Thus, the Winn Parties 
13 The record also establishes that Winn was president of Westminster
Realty, Inc. 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were entitled to personal notice of the execution sale because 
Winn's identity was known and his personal contact information was known and/or ascertainable through reasonable diligence by the Spences.
3. The notice requirements in HRS § 651-43 exist
separate and apart from procedural due processnotice requirements 
Pursuant to this court's Order Regarding Rule 44 of the 
Hawai#i Rules of Appellate Procedure, filed on September 5, 2023, 
the Attorney General of the State of Hawai# i (Attorney General) 
submitted an amicus curiae brief (Amicus Brief) in response to 
this court's suggestion that "the Appellants' arguments appear to 
call into question the constitutionality of HRS § 651-43 (2016)[] for not meeting due process requirements with respect to the execution sale that is the subject of this appeal." 
In its Amicus Brief, the Attorney General asserts that 
the constitutionality of HRS § 651-43 is not at issue because (1) Winn does not challenge the constitutionality of the statute, (2) HRS § 651-43 remains valid regardless of whether a judgment lien creates a property right for purposes of due process, and (3) the form of notice required is dependent on the specific circumstances of each case. 
We agree that Winn does not expressly challenge the 
constitutionality of HRS § 651-43 and that the posting and advertisement requirements in HRS § 651-43 serve purposes separate and apart from notifying individual parties that may have property interests in the property to be sold, such as advertising the sale to the general public. 
HRS § 651-43 does 
not preclude other and additional forms of notice that may, in certain circumstances, be necessitated by procedural due process. Therefore, we conclude the posting and advertisement requirements in HRS § 651-43 and the specific notice required by due process are separate considerations, and we need not address the constitutionality of HRS § 651-43. 
14  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B. The Winn Parties' Junior Position Did Not
 Affect Their Entitlement to Notice 
Besides challenging the Winn Parties' entitlement to 
personal or actual notice as lienholders for the Haleakalâ 
Highway Property, the Spences assert the Winn Parties were not entitled to notice given their junior lienholder status.  The 
Spences point out that their judgment against Brady was recorded 
almost two years before the Winn Parties recorded their judgment against Brady. Further, the Spences note that HRS § 651-41 (2016)
14 provides priority in levying to writs of execution 
"according to the order of time in which they are received[,]" such that their writ of execution had priority. The Spences ultimately contend that once they executed on their senior lien on the Haleakalâ Highway Property, the junior lien held by the Winn Parties was extinguished. 
With respect to notice, however, a junior lien does not 
make a creditor any less worthy of constitutional due process prior to an execution sale. 
Under the principles set out by the 
U.S. Supreme Court in Mullane, due process requires notice to "interested parties." 339 U.S. at 314. In Freitas, addressing notice to beneficiaries of an estate, the 
Hawai#i Supreme Court 
applied Mullane and stated that "[a] requirement that there be a reasonable probability that all interested parties are noticed of the pendency of a proceeding accorded finality does not breach the 'limits of practicality' cautioned by Mullane . . . by increasing delay and cost." 52 Haw. at 152, 472 at 499 (emphasis added) (citation omitted). In Cate, the Supreme Court of Oklahoma dealt with a sheriff's sale and expressed that the "debtor, as well as any other persons who have a security 
14 HRS § 651-41 provides: 
Priority in levying.  Every officer receiving a writ of
execution issued in due form by any court or judge, shall
note thereon the day and hour of its receipt, and theofficer shall give priority in levying upon property of thedefendant in execution, to the writs received by the officeraccording to the order of time in which they are received. 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interest in the property must be notified properly of even a 
possible sale." 695 P.2d at 1355 (emphasis added). 
The decision by the Supreme Court of New Jersey in 
Markouski is particularly instructive. There, the court discussed the rights of a nonlevying judgment creditor, similar to the Winn Parties in this case. 587 A.2d at 1275-77. The court recognized that "a judgment lien is a property interest subject to due-process protections[,]" where under New Jersey law "a judgment creditor's interest in the property is created on the docketing of a lien." Id. at 1275. The court also noted that: 
when a nonlevying judgment creditor is notified of an
execution sale, it can protect itself by bidding at thesale. Notice additionally benefits both the levyingcreditor and the judgment debtor by potentially making thebidding more competitive. 
Id. The court also noted that, under New Jersey law, "the 
levying creditor is still rewarded for its diligence by gaining 
priority over the nonlevying creditor in the distribution of the proceeds of the sale." Id. at 1276. Given these circumstances, 
the court held that "a levying creditor must provide actual notice of an execution sale to judgment creditors whose names and addresses are reasonably ascertainable." Id. at 1277 (emphasis 
added). 
Contrary to the Spences arguments in this case, 
Markouski expressly recognized that a nonlevying judgment creditor is entitled to notice consistent with due process, even though the levying judgment creditor had a senior position. This is consistent with the principle in Mullane and its progeny that "interested parties" are entitled to proper notice. 
The Spences rely on two cases that are distinguishable. 
First, they cite Belden v. Donohue, 325 S.W.3d 515, 519 (Mo. Ct. App. 2010), where the court held "no statute or rule requires that notice of a Sheriff's sale be provided to other lienholders, especially those whose interests are junior to the interest which is the catalyst for the Sheriff's sale." Second, they cite Camp Finance, LLC v. Brazington, 135 P.3d 946, 950 (Wash. Ct. App. 2006), where the court determined that a statute requiring a 
16 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
judgment creditor to provide notice of an execution sale only to 
a judgment debtor excluded notice to junior lienholders. Both Belden and Camp Finance are unhelpful, however, because neither address notice required under due process principles. In this case, to the contrary, the Winn Parties expressly challenged the lack of notice based on due process grounds in the Circuit Court and in this appeal. 
We thus conclude that the Winn Parties' junior 
lienholder status did not affect their entitlement to notice consistent with due process.
IV. Conclusion 
Based on the above, we vacate the "Order Granting 
Intervenors James E. Spence, Beverly C. Spence, Stephen R. Spence, and Valorie A. Spence's Motion for Reconsideration of Order Granting Judgment Creditors Peter J. Winn and Westminster Realty, Inc.'s Ex Parte Motion for First Alias Writ of Execution," filed on October 11, 2017. We remand this case to the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
On the briefs: 
Lance D. Collins,
Law Office of Lance D. Collins,for Plaintiffs-Appellants 
Stephen R. Spence and
Valorie A. Spence,Self-representedIntervenors-Appellees /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge 
Joseph A. Stewart,Aaron R. Mun,Kobayashi Sugita & Goda, LLP,for Intervenors-AppelleesJames E. Spence andBeverly C. Spence 
17 