BACKGROUND NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000711 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN THE INTEREST OF AA 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(FC-S NO. 16-00249)  
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
This appeal arises from a proceeding under the Hawai# i 
Child Protective Act, Hawaii Revised Statutes (
HRS) Chapter 587A.
Appellant AM appeals from the "Decision and Order Regarding the 
Contested Hearing on [AM]'s Motion to Set Aside Default Filed 
June 5, 2019[,]" (Decision & Order) entered by the Family Court 
of the First Circuit  on September 20, 2019. We affirm the 
Decision & Order. 1 
Child was born in a Honolulu hospital on November 30, 
2016. On December 2, 2016, Child's mother (
Mother) told hospital 
staff she did not feel safe going home because of domestic 
violence by her boyfriend; she wanted Child placed into foster 
care. Mother was then interviewed by a social worker. Mother 
said she lived with her boyfriend "John" and other of her family 
1 The Honorable Bode A. Uale presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
members. She reported domestic violence by the boyfriend, and 
stated that the boyfriend was not Child's father and did not know 
Mother was pregnant. Mother refused to go to a domestic violence 
shelter and wanted Child to go into foster care. Child was taken 
into protective custody and placed with Resource Caregivers 
licensed by the Hawai# i Department of Human Services (DHS). 
On December 7, 2016, DHS filed a petition to take 
temporary foster custody of Child under HRS §§ 571-11(9)2 and 
587A-5,3 initiating the Child Protective Act proceeding below. 
The petition named Mother; the name of Child's natural father was 
stated as "Unknown." 
On December 9, 2016, Mother attended the family court 
hearing on the petition with court-appointed counsel. Mother 
stipulated to Child being placed in foster custody. A per diem 
district family court judge awarded foster custody to DHS, 
ordered a service plan for Child, and set a further hearing for 
March 2, 2017. 
2 On December 7, 2016, HRS § 571-11 provided, in relevant part: 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the [family]
court shall have exclusive original jurisdiction inproceedings: 
. . . . 
(9) For the protection of any child under chapter587A[.] 
3 On December 7, 2016, HRS § 587A-5 provided, in relevant part: 
Pursuant to section 571-11(9), the [family] court shall have
exclusive original jurisdiction: 
(1) In a child protective proceeding concerning anychild who is or was found within the State at the time specified facts and circumstancesoccurred, are discovered, or are reported to thedepartment [of human services]. These facts andcircumstances constitute the basis for the court's finding that the child's physical orpsychological health or welfare is subject toimminent harm, has been harmed, or is subject tothreatened harm by the acts or omissions of thechild's family[.] 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mother failed to appear at the March 2, 2017 hearing, 
and was defaulted. Circuit family court judge Bode A. Uale 
(Judge Uale) granted DHS's oral motion for leave to serve Child's 
natural father by publication. A written order granting the 
motion was entered on March 2, 2017. Summons for Child's natural 
father was published in the Honolulu Star-Advertiser on April 10, 
17, 24, and May 1, 2017, with a return date of June 21, 2017. No 
one appeared for the return; Judge Uale entered the default of 
Child's natural father on June 21, 2017. 
Mother appeared by telephone at a further hearing 
conducted on September 11, 2017. Judge Uale set aside Mother's 
default, prospectively, without setting aside any previous 
orders. 
On February 21, 2018, DHS filed a motion to terminate 
parental rights. The motion was heard on February 27, 2018. 
Mother did not appear at the hearing. Judge Uale again entered 
Mother's default and granted DHS's motion, terminating the 
parental rights of Mother and the then-unknown natural father. 
Letters of permanent custody were issued to DHS. Child was 15 
months old at the time. 
Judge Uale conducted a review hearing on August 14, 
2018. Child was 21 months old. Judge Uale approved adoption as 
the proper permanency plan. However, on October 23, 2018 (one 
month before Child's second birthday), DHS filed a motion for 
immediate review of Child's case. DHS had received an email from 
AM on October 9, 2018. AM believed he was Child's natural 
father, and "inquired about how he could begin the process of 
legally bringing [Child] home." The motion was given a hearing 
date of December 6, 2018. 
Meanwhile, on November 5, 2018, AM filed a petition for 
paternity with the family court, naming Mother and DHS as 
respondents (Paternity Action). 
At the December 6, 2018 hearing on DHS's motion for 
immediate review, Judge Uale ordered that AM "do a genetic test 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
-- as arranged & paid for by DHS if it is not done by [the Hawai# i 
Child Support Enforcement Agency] as part of their process[.]" 
The hearing on DHS's motion was continued to January 29, 2019. 
On January 28, 2019, AM filed a motion to intervene in 
the Child Protective Act case. The motion, signed by AM's 
attorney, stated that it was based on "the agreements reached 
with the parties in [AM]'s related petition in [the Paternity 
Action]" and AM's "understanding and belief that this motion is 
unopposed." AM re-filed the motion on February 11, 2019, 
including a notice of hearing for March 25, 2019. 
On February 22, 2019, AM was adjudicated to be Child's 
natural father. 
Judge Uale conducted the hearing on March 25, 2019. 
Child was 2 years, 4 months old. Counsel for DHS reported that 
Child had been with Resource Caregivers for over two years, and 
was doing well in their home. Judge Uale stated: 
Now, as to your motion, [counsel for AM], I'm going to
set it for trial. As I explained to you in the prehearing
conference, this is a -- this is a very -- it's going to bea difficult case for your client because of the fact of thepassage of time and where the child has been placed almost
three years and then your client appears. So it's not only
about your client. It's also about the safety, welfare, and
well-being of the child.  So I cannot give you an automatic
intervention in this case, but I am going to set it for
trial. I'm going to set it for trial April 22nd -- excuseme, May 7th at 8:30. Pretrial conference will be April 22ndat 9:30. . . . 
. . . . 
[AM'S COUNSEL]: 
Just for the -- so I'm clear, on the
trial, is the court granting our motion to intervene so --
THE COURT: No. 
[AM'S COUNSEL]: -- we're having a trial on -- on the 
THE COURT: The trial is on whether I'm going to allow
[AM] to intervene in this case. 
[AM'S COUNSEL]: All right. 
THE COURT: So your motion to intervene is the subject
of the trial. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[AM'S COUNSEL]: And I take it the issues are going to
be the -- the objections raised in the short report from the
[Court Appointed Special Advocates Program] and whateverthat's in the permanency plan? 
THE COURT: Well, the standard is always best interest
of the child  so --
[AM'S COUNSEL]: Yes. 
THE COURT: -- you might want to go on that. Based on 
all of the things that have happened, it's almost three
years this child has been in -- in care. 
As far as why your
client took so long, bring it up at trial. I'm not going tohear anything today. 
(Emphasis added.) Judge Uale entered a written order setting 
AM's motion to intervene for trial on May 7, 2019, with a 
pretrial conference set for April 22, 2019. 
The April 22, 2019 pretrial conference was conducted by 
a per diem district family court judge. DHS and Child's guardian 
ad litem informed the family court that they had no objection to 
AM's motion to intervene. The per diem judge stated: 
Well, here's the thing, right. The May 7th date, if no
one's going to put up a fight, then I don't see the need tokeep a contested hearing on the calendar when it's going tojust eat up a court slot. So I guess if everyone's inagreement, [AM]'s got his own counsel privately, then bystipulation, with no objection of the parties, [AM]'s motionto -- [AM]'s motion to intervene in the proceedings will begranted. He'll be made a party to the case. He shall be noticed through counsel on all matters and papers regardingthis case. 
And vacate the May 7th hearing date --
. . . . 
[COUNSEL FOR COURT APPOINTED SPECIAL ADVOCATES
PROGRAM]: I -- I'm sorry. Your Honor, I think we just --we just wanted clarification, if the motion to intervene, ifit starts now or from the very beginning of the case(indiscernible). 
THE COURT: Well -- okay, it's granted and you're made
a party to the case prospectively. So from here on out,you're noticed on all matters. 
The per diem judge entered an order granting AM's motion to 
intervene. The order also stated: "All prior consistent orders 
shall remain in full force and effect until further order of the 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court[.]" All parties were ordered to appear at a further 
hearing on June 18, 2019. 
On May 14, 2019, Resource Caregivers filed their own 
motion to intervene in the Child Protective Act case. AM opposed 
the motion. Judge Uale heard the motion on May 22, 2019. Judge 
Uale informed the parties: 
THE COURT: Okay, and I guess [AM] has been made a
party by stipulation. So I'm going to make you a party
because I don't believe that stipulation was appropriatebecause I -- you folks sent the stipulation to me, and Ireturned it because I told you folks I wouldn't sign it, andthen when I was gone, I understand the per diem judge thatwas sitting signed off on the stipulation. The problem isis you have -- you have a termination of parental rights soyou have to set that aside first in order for your client tointervene. So as far as I'm concerned, that stipulation is
void, because in order for you to come into the case, since
you're saying that your client is the biological father, I
think legally you have to set aside the prior court order oftermination of parental rights . So I don't know how you
want to deal with this. I'm certainly happy to give you a
trial. But I don't think that stipulation was appropriatejust . . . legally. 
. . . . 
So I'm ready to tell you first I'm setting aside the
stipulation to allow [AM] to intervene because I don't thinkthat was appropriate. It's not the per diem judge's fault.I wasn't here. I was on some kind of leave. And I do think 
that you have a right, but I think you need to file an
appropriate motion to set aside default citing the
appropriate law in order to have that . So I'm going to
allow you to do that, but I'm also going to give you a
pretrial and a trial date in order to have that come across. 
. . . . 
And so, [AM's counsel], you need to file a written
motion to -- to set aside default, citing the appropriatelaw. And then I'm going to set it for these dates. 
(Emphasis added.) A written order granting Resource Caregivers'
motion to intervene and setting aside the order granting AM's 
intervention was entered on May 29, 2019. Trial was set for 
July 29, 2019, with a pretrial conference on June 26, 2019.  
AM filed a "Motion to Set Aside Default" on June 5, 
2019. 
Resource Caregivers filed a memorandum in opposition. AM 
filed a supplemental memorandum in support of his motion. Judge 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
   Uale conducted an evidentiary hearing on AM's motion on July 29, 
2019. The hearing could not be completed by the end of the day, 
and was continued to August 27, 2019. The parties thereafter 
submitted written closing arguments. 
The Decision & Order denying AM's motion was entered on 
September 20, 2019. AM filed a timely notice of appeal. The 
family court entered findings of fact and conclusions of law 
pursuant to Rule 52(a) of the Hawai# i Family Court Rules (HFCR) 
on November 19, 2019. Child's third birthday occurred less than 
two weeks thereafter. 
DISCUSSION 
AM challenges several of the family court's findings of 
fact and conclusions of law. 
AM contends: (
1) the family court 
erred in concluding that AM was duly served by publication; 
(2) the family court erred in not setting aside the entry of AM's 
default and the termination of AM's parental rights by default; 
and (3)  the denial of AM's motion to intervene deprived AM of his 
constitutional right to due process. 
1. Service by publication was proper. 
The Hawai# i Child Protective Act "creates within the 
jurisdiction of the family court a child protective act to make 
paramount the safety and health of children who have been harmed 
or are in life circumstances that threaten harm." 
HRS § 587A-2 
(Supp. 2016). The statutory provisions are to be "liberally construed to serve the best interests of the children affected 
and the purpose and policies set forth herein." Id. 
Service of summons in Child Protective Act cases is 
governed by HRS § 587A-13 (Supp. 2016). The statute provides, in 
relevant part: 
(a) After a petition has been filed, the court shall issue
a summons requiring the presence of the parents[.] 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
(c) The sheriff or other authorized person shall
serve the summons by personally delivering a certified copy
to the person or legal entity being summoned. . . .[P]rovided that: 
. . . . 
(2) If the court finds that it is impracticable[4]
to personally serve the summons, the court mayorder service by . . . publication . . . . When publication is used, the summons shall bepublished once a week for four consecutive weeksin a newspaper of general circulation in thecounty in which the party was last known to haveresided. In the order for publication of thesummons, the court shall designate thepublishing newspaper and shall set the date ofthe last publication at no less than twenty-onedays before the return date. Such publicationshall have the same force and effect as personalservice of the summons. 
DHS orally moved for leave to serve Child's then-
unknown father by publication during a hearing on March 2, 2017. 
The family court granted the motion. AM contends that DHS did 
not establish, nor did the family court find, that it was 
"impracticable" to personally serve the then-unknown father. AM 
challenges the following findings of fact: 
16. Mother informed DHS that the child's father was 
in Chuuk but did not provide the name of the biological
father to DHS or any contact information for the biologicalfather. 
. . . . 
19. Throughout the duration of the case prior to
termination of parental rights, Mother did not maintaincontact with the DHS; she did not provide DHS with anyfurther information about the identity or location of thechild's father; she did not provide DHS with any furtherinformation about the identity or location of the boyfriendthat she claimed was abusing her; she did not attend anysupervised visits; and she did not show any interest inreunifying with [Child] or engaging in any services offeredby the DHS to address the safety concerns of her home. 
4 "Impracticable" means "incapable of being performed or accom-
plished by the means employed or at command." Impracticable, Merriam-Webster,
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/impracticable  (last updated
Aug. 29, 2020). 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mother was represented by appointed counsel throughout the
case. 
20. In April and May of 2017, based upon Mother's
failure/refusal to provide any information regarding theidentity of [Child]'s father, the DHS published notice tothe Unknown Natural Father of [Child]. 
21. On June 21, 2017, the Unknown Natural Father of
[Child] was defaulted by the Court in consequence of hisfailure to appear on the date provided in the publication. 
22. At that time, the DHS remained unaware of any
additional information regarding [Child]'s father. 
23. Due to the continuing lack of knowledge
regarding the identity or whereabouts of [Child]'s naturalfather and Mother's failure to engage in services, maintaincontact with the DHS and parents' inability to provide[Child] with a safe family home, on February 21, 2018, theDHS filed a Motion to Terminate Parental Rights. 
. . . . 
112. During the period between November of 2016 and
April of 2018, [AM] knew or should have known that legalproceedings were going forward regarding [Child]. 
AM does not challenge the following findings of fact, which are
binding upon him and this court: 
14. After [Child] was born and was still in the
hospital, Mother claimed to DHS that she did not feel safe
to return home because of domestic abuse by her currentboyfriend, whom she identified as "John." 
. . . . 
18. On March 2, 2017, Mother was defaulted as a
consequence of her failure to appear for a scheduledhearing. 
The family court's findings of fact are reviewed under 
the "clearly erroneous" standard. Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai# i 
41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006). 
A finding of fact is clearly 
erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to support 
the finding, or despite substantial evidence in support of the 
finding, we are nonetheless left with a definite and firm 
conviction that a mistake has been made. Id. "Substantial 
evidence" is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and 
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to 
support a conclusion. Id. In this case, the challenged findings 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of fact are all supported by substantial evidence in the record, 
and we are not left with a definite or firm conviction that a 
mistake has been made. 
AM challenges the following conclusions of law: 
6. This Court has jurisdiction over this family and
[Child] pursuant to the provisions of The Child Protective
Act. 
7. Based upon Mother's failure to provide any
information regarding the identity or other means to locate[Child]'s father, the DHS published notice to an UnknownNatural Father pursuant to Rule 17(d)(2), Hawaii FamilyCourt Rules, which states: 
[T]he person intended shall thereupon be considered aparty defendant to the action, as having notice of theinstitution of the action against that person, and assufficiently described for all purposes, includingservice of process, and the action shall proceedagainst that person. 
8. [AM] was duly noticed and served by this
publication and the entry of default and subsequent
termination of his parental rights upon his failure toappear based upon this notice was appropriate. 
The family court's conclusions of law are ordinarily 
reviewed de novo, under the right/wrong standard, "and are freely 
reviewable for their correctness." Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 
137 P.3d at 360 (citation omitted). 
However, when a conclusion 
of law presents mixed questions of fact and law, we review it 
under the "clearly erroneous" standard because the court's 
conclusions are dependent on the facts and circumstances of each 
individual case. Estate of Klink ex rel. Klink v. State, 113 
Hawai# i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 523 (2007). A conclusion of law 
that is supported by the trial court's findings of fact and 
reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be 
overturned. Id. 
In this case, when DHS served Child's then-unknown 
father by publication, the only information DHS had about Child's 
father had been provided by Mother, who "stated that baby's 
father is in Chuuk and that he wants child to go into foster 
care." Mother appeared at the December 9, 2016 hearing on DHS's 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
petition with counsel, who stated, "[s]he does not know who the 
father is." Mother did not appear at the March 2, 2017 hearing, 
when DHS orally moved for leave to serve by publication. 
AM incorrectly contends that DHS knew, before March 2, 
2017, that Child's father's name was "John." The record shows 
that Mother identified her boyfriend, whom she stated was not 
Child's father, as "John." It was not until Mother signed a 
declaration on June 5, 2019, (more than two years later) that she 
identified "someone named John" as the person with whom she had a 
sexual encounter in Chuuk, who she originally thought was Child's 
father. 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has held: 
[R]esort to constructive service by publication is predi-
cated upon necessity, and, if personal service could beeffected by the exercise of reasonable diligence, sub-stituted service is unauthorized. . . . The test, however,is not whether it was in fact possible to effect personalservice in a given case, but whether the complainantreasonably employed knowledge at [their] command, madediligent inquiry, and exerted an honest and conscientiouseffort appropriate to the circumstances, to acquire theinformation necessary to enable [them] to effect personalservice on the defendant. 
Murphy v. Murphy, 55 Haw. 34, 35, 514 P.2d 865, 867 (1973) 
(cleaned up) (citation omitted). We hold that the challenged 
conclusions of law were supported by the family court's findings 
of fact, and reflect an application of the correct rule of law. 
AM argues that publication was defective. We disagree. 
The record shows that summons for Child's natural father was 
published in the Honolulu Star-Advertiser on April 10, 17, 24, 
and May 1, 2017, with a return date of June 21, 2017. The 
publication — 4 consecutive weeks, with a return date more than 
21 days after the last publication date — complied with HRS 
§ 587A-13. AM's contention that "he does not regularly read 
newspapers" is irrelevant because the Star-Advertiser is "a 
newspaper of general circulation" in Honolulu, where AM lives. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
AM argues that publication should have been made in 
Chuuk, where Mother said Child's father lived. We disagree. AM, 
who was later determined to be Child's natural father, did not 
live in Chuuk. AM lived in Honolulu. We hold that summons was 
properly served upon AM by publication in the Honolulu Star-
Advertiser. 
2. The family court did not err by declining to
set aside the entry of AM's default and thetermination of AM's parental rights by default. 
The family court's Decision & Order was entered on 
September 20, 2019. At that time, a party seeking to set aside 
an entry of default was required to satisfy the three-prong test 
set forth in BDM, Inc. v. Sageco, Inc., 57 Haw. 73, 549 P.2d 1147 
(1976), abrogated by Chen v. Mah, 146 Hawai# i 157, 457 P.3d 796 
(2020). See Chen, 146 Hawai# i at 177, 457 P.3d at 816 (noting 
that before January 30, 2020, party seeking to set aside entry of 
default pursuant to HRCP Rule 55(c) must satisfy three-prong BDM 
test for Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 60(b) 
motions). 
That standard also applied to the identical language 
of the HFCR. Id. at 177 n.21, 457 P.3d at 816 n.21. 
HFCR Rule 55 states, in relevant part: 
(c) Setting aside default . For good cause shown the
court may set aside an entry of default and, if a judgment
by default has been entered, may likewise set it aside inaccordance with Rule 60(b) of these rules. 
HFCR Rule 60 states, in relevant part: 
(b) Mistakes; inadvertence; excusable neglect; newly
discovered evidence; fraud . On motion and upon such terms
as are just, the court may relieve a party or a party'slegal representative from any or all of the provisions of afinal judgment, order, or proceeding for the followingreasons: 
(1) mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable 
neglect; 
(2) newly discovered evidence which by due diligence
could not have been discovered in time to move for a new 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial under Rule 59(b) of these rules or to reconsider,
alter, or amend under Rule 59(e); 
(3) fraud (whether heretofore denominated intrinsic
or extrinsic), misrepresentation, or other misconduct of anadverse party; 
(4) the judgment is void; 
(5) the judgment has been satisfied, released, or
discharged, or a prior judgment upon which it is based hasbeen reversed or otherwise vacated, or it is no longerequitable that the judgment should have prospectiveapplication; or 
(6) any other reason justifying relief from the
operation of the judgment. 
The motion shall be made within a reasonable time, and for
reasons (1), (2), and (3) not more than one year after thejudgment, order, or proceedings was entered or taken. 
AM's default was entered pursuant to HFCR Rule 55. 
AM's parental rights were terminated while he was in default, 
making the termination of parental rights a default judgment. 
See In re Doe, 77 Hawai# i 109, 114, 883 P.2d 30, 35 (1994) 
(holding that "an infringement upon parental custody rights is an appealable decision even though the requisite finality normally 
required for appeals is lacking."). 
Accordingly, AM was required 
to obtain relief under both HFCR Rule 55 and HFCR Rule 60(b). AM had the burden of establishing that: (1) Child will not be 
prejudiced by the reopening; (2) AM has a meritorious defense; 
and (3) AM's default was not the result of inexcusable neglect or 
a wilful act. Chen, 146 Hawai# i at 173-74, 457 P.3d at 812-13. 
The family court made the following findings of fact: 
12. On December 2, 2016, the DHS assumed placement
responsibility of [Child] via police protective custody
because of Threat of Abuse and Threat of Neglect. 
13. [Child]'s Date of Entry into Foster Care was
December 9, 2016. 
14. After [Child] was born and was still in the
hospital, Mother claimed to DHS that she did not feel safeto return home because of domestic abuse by her currentboyfriend, whom she identified as "John." 
15. Mother refused to enter a domestic violence 
shelter and requested that [Child] be placed in foster care. 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
16. Mother informed DHS that the child's father was 
in Chuuk but did not provide the name of the biological
father to DHS or any contact information for the biologicalfather. 
17. On December 9, 2016, an initial temporary foster
custody return hearing took place and at that hearing Motherappeared with counsel and voluntarily stipulated to fostercustody, adjudication of the Petition, the jurisdiction ofthe Court and the Family Service Plan, dated December 6,2016. 
18. On March 2, 2017, Mother was defaulted as a
consequence of her failure to appear for a scheduledhearing. 
19. Throughout the duration of the case prior to
termination of parental rights, Mother did not maintaincontact with the DHS; she did not provide DHS with anyfurther information about the identity or location of thechild's father; she did not provide DHS with any furtherinformation about the identity or location of the boyfriendthat she claimed was abusing her; she did not attend anysupervised visits; and she did not show any interest inreunifying with [Child] or engaging in any services offeredby the DHS to address the safety concerns of her home.Mother was represented by appointed counsel throughout thecase. 
20. In April and May of 2017, based upon Mother's
failure/refusal to provide any information regarding theidentity of [Child]'s father, the DHS published notice tothe Unknown Natural Father of [Child]. 
21. On June 21, 2017, the Unknown Natural Father of
[Child] was defaulted by the Court in consequence of hisfailure to appear on the date provided in the publication. 
22. At that time, the DHS remained unaware of any
additional information regarding [Child]'s father. 
. . . . 
24. On February 27, 2018, the parental rights of
[Child]'s parents were terminated. 
. . . . 
35. [AM]'s Motion to Set Aside Default was filed on
June 5, 2019, more than one year after the entry of theEntry of Default on June 21, 2017, and more than one yearafter [AM]'s parental rights had been terminated onFebruary 27, 2018. 
. . . . 
42. [Child] was placed with [Resource Caregivers] on
December 2, 2016[,] and has been continuously in their caresince that time. 
. . . . 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
49. [Resource Caregivers] wish to adopt [Child] and
have filed their own Petition for Adoption in FC-A No.
19-1-6097. 
. . . . 
50. During the hearing [on AM's motion to set aside
default] the Court received testimony from [AM], Mother, andDHS social worker, Lena Kakehi. 
51. All parties stipulated that DHS social worker
Lena Kakehi was an expert with regard to child protectiveservices and child welfare services and she was so qualifiedby the Court. 
. . . . 
59. Mother claimed to Ms. Kakehi that she did not 
know the identity of [Child]'s father. 
. . . . 
64. Ms. Kakehi testified that in her opinion the
fact that Mother lied about events pertinent to this caseand [Child]'s safety constituted a safety concern regardingher ability to be protective and provide a safe home for[Child]. 
65. Ms. Kakehi testified that in her opinion the
fact that Mother did not participate in any servicesconstituted a safety concern regarding her ability toprovide a safe home for [Child] and showed a lack ofcommitment to the child. 
66. Ms. Kakehi testified that in her opinion the
fact that Mother's parental rights had been terminatedwithout any appeal on Mother's part constituted a safetyconcern regarding her ability to provide a safe home for[Child]. 
67. Mother's relationship with [AM] has continued to
the present day and it is their plan that Mother would bethe primary caretaker for [Child] should Father's default beset aside. 
68. Ms. Kakehi testified that in her opinion Mother
and [AM] would not presently be able to provide a safefamily home for [Child]. 
69. The testimony of Ms. Kakehi was credible. 
70. Mother and [AM] are presently not able or
willing to provide a safe family home for [Child], even withthe assistance of services and would not be able to do so within the reasonably foreseeable future. 
. . . . 
73. Mother testified that after she left Hawaii and 
went to Chuuk on March 25, 2016, she met a man at a store,and two days later had sexual relations with him. 
She said 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the sex was consensual. She also testified that she 
met the man in Hawaii and knew him for three days while hewas in Hawaii. She testified that she did not know the man's last name and knew him only as "John." Mother testified at one time that she thought "John" was the onlypossible father for [Child] and at other times she testifiedthat she was not sure whether the father was "John" or [AM]. 
. . . . 
76. Mother admitted that after she was discharged
from [the hospital] after the birth of [Child], she wastransferred to the psychiatric ward at Castle Hospital,where she stayed for four days. 
. . . . 
78. After she was discharged from the Castle
psychiatric ward Mother lived in her car for a period oftime because she did not want to return to [AM]. 
. . . . 
80. In December of 2016, after Mother returned to
[AM], he found the medical records of her discharge from[the hospital] and was aware that she had given birth duringthe time that she was in [the hospital]. 
. . . . 
83. Based upon the Court's observation of Mother's
demeanor and the contradictory testimony that she gaveduring the trial, Mother's testimony was not credible. 
84. Mother's stated reasons for not telling [AM] of
her pregnancy are not credible. 
85. Mother's stated reasons for allegedly hiding her
pregnancy from [AM] are not credible. 
86. Mother's stated reasons for hiding [Child]'s
birth from [AM] are not credible. 
87. Mother's claim that there was no domestic 
violence in her relationship with [AM] is not credible. 
. . . . 
96. Mother went to Chuuk shortly after she became
pregnant with [Child] and did not return to Hawaii untilapproximately one month before [Child] was born. 
97. [AM] and Mother lived together after she
returned to Hawaii from Chuuk. 
98. [AM] testified that he was not aware that Mother
was pregnant during the month preceding [Child]'s birthclaiming she did not look that big and also claiming that hedid not see her without her clothes on during that period. 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
99. [AM] claims that he does not remember if he and
Mother had sex during that period but said that if they did,
they did not utilize the "missionary" position so he wouldnot have noticed her pregnancy. 
100. [AM]'s testimony that he did not know of
Mother's pregnancy before she gave birth was not credible. 
101. [AM]'s testimony that he did not have intimate
relations with Mother after she returned to Hawaii is not credible. 
102. [AM]'s claim that he does not remember if he saw
Mother without her clothes on during that period is notcredible. 
103. [AM] testified that he first became aware that
Mother had given birth to [Child] during the month ofDecember 2016 when he found records from [the hospital] inher car. 
104. [AM] claims that he did not at that time perform
any calculation to determine if he was possibly the fatherof [Child]. 
. . . . 
106. [AM]'s claim that he did not perform any
calculation to determine if he was possibly the father of[Child] is not credible. 
107. As of December 2016, when [AM] became aware of
[Child]'s birth and the date of [Child's] birth[,] [AM] knewor reasonably should have known that he was a possiblefather of [Child]. 
108. [AM] claimed that Mother did not tell him
anything about any court proceedings. 
109. [AM] claimed that he did not know anything about
adoption proceedings and said that as far as he knew thechild had been adopted by that time. 
. . . . 
111. [AM]'s testimony that he did [not] know anything
about adoption proceedings is not credible. . . . 
112. During the period between November of 2016 and
April of 2018, [AM] knew or should have known that legalproceedings were going forward regarding [Child]. 
. . . . 
117. [AM] claimed that the only person that Mother
had dealt with regarding [Child] was DHS social worker LindaKakehi when in fact Mother also had court-appointed counselwho represented her throughout the [Child Protective Act]proceeding. 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
118. No explanation was offered for their failure to
contact Mother's court-appointed counsel. 
119. [AM] claimed that he and Mother went to the DHS
office where Ms. Kakehi worked every three weeks from the
end of May 2018 to early October of 2018 without ever makingcontact with Ms. Kakehi. 
120. No explanation was offered for their failure
during this period to call Ms. Kakehi on her direct line orto send her an email since they also had her email address. 
121. No explanation was offered for their failure to
find out the name of Ms. Kakehi's supervisor or contactsomeone else at the DHS regarding the status of [Child]'scase. 
122. Given the information available to [AM] and
Mother, the delay in contacting the DHS and making known hisclaim that he was the father of [Child] was not reasonable. 
. . . . 
127. Based upon his claimed education and business
experience, [AM]'s delay in consulting with or retaining theservices of an attorney was not reasonable. 
128. No explanation was offered for [AM'S] failure to
file a motion seeking to set aside the default beforeJune 5, 2019. 
129. The delay in filing a motion to set aside the
default was not reasonable. 
130. [AM] did not appeal the termination of his
parental rights. 
131. [AM] knew or should have known that [Child] was
his child since December of 2016, and it was a consequenceof his own inexcusable inaction that the Motion to Set Aside Default was not filed until June 5, 2019. 
132. Based upon the Court's observation of [AM]'s
demeanor and the contradictory testimony that he gave duringthe trial, [AM]'s testimony was not credible. 
133. [Child] has been in foster care with [Resource
Caregivers] for almost 3 full years. 
134. [Child] has no significant relationship with
[AM] at this point. 
135. [Child] has no significant relationship with
Mother at this point. 
136. [Child] has been thriving in the care of
[Resource Caregivers] and is bonded to them as they arebonded to him. 
137. [Child] deserves permanency at this point. 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
141. It would be extremely prejudicial and harmful to
[Child] to remain any longer in the foster care system
without providing [Child] with closure and permanency. 
142. It is not in [Child]'s best interests for
permanency to be delayed in light of all the delays thathave occurred during this case so far. 
These findings of fact were supported by substantial evidence in 
the record. In addition, "[i]t is well-settled that an appellate 
court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of 
witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the province of the 
trier of fact." Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360 
(citation omitted). 
The family court entered the following conclusions of 
law, some of which are actually mixed questions of fact and law: 
6. This Court has jurisdiction over this family and
[Child] pursuant to the provisions of The Child Protective
Act. 
7. Based upon Mother's failure to provide any
information regarding the identity or other means to locate[Child]'s father, the DHS published notice to an UnknownNatural Father pursuant to Rule 17(d)(2), Hawaii FamilyCourt Rules[.] . . . 
8. [AM] was duly noticed and served by this
publication and the entry of default and subsequenttermination of his parental rights upon his failure toappear based upon this notice was appropriate. 
. . . . 
11. The Court is without jurisdiction to consider a
motion based upon Rule 60(b)(1), (2), or (3), Hawaii FamilyCourt Rules, if the motion is made more than one year afterthe entry of the order being challenged. Child Support
Enforcement Agency v. Doe
, 98 Haw. 499, 51 P.3d 366[](2002). 
12. Since the Motion to Set Aside Default filed by
[AM] herein was filed more than one year after the entry ofdefault against [AM] and more than one year after the entryof the order terminating his parental rights, this Courtdoes not have jurisdiction to entertain a motion relating toeither of those orders based upon Rule 60(b)(1), (2), or(3), Hawaii Family Court Rules. 
13. Rules 60(b)(4) and (5), Hawaii Family Court
Rules, are not applicable to the facts of this case. 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
14. Relief pursuant to Rule 60(b)(6) is
extraordinary and the movant must show: (1) that the motion
is based on some reason other than those specifically statedin subdivisions (1) through (5); (2) the reason is such tojustify the relief; and (3) that the motion is made within areasonable time. Hayashi v. Hayashi, 4 Haw. App. 286, 666
P.2d 171 (1983); In re: RBG, 123 Haw. 1, 229 P.3d 1066(2010). 
15. Any of [AM]'s claims that are based upon reasons
that fall within Rules 60(b)(1), (2), or (3) may not beasserted as a reason to justify relief under Rule 60(b)(6). 
16. [AM] claimed that the fact that he is [Child]'s
birth father was a sufficient reason for the Court to grantrelief under Rule 60(b)(6). 
17. The fact that [AM] is [Child]'s birth father, in
and of itself, is not a reason to justify relief under Rule60[(]b)(6), Hawaii Family Court Rules. Quilloin v. Walcott,
434 U.S. 246 (1978); Caban v. Mohammed, 441 U.S. 380 (1979);and with Lehr v. Robertson, 463 U.S. 248 (1983)[.] 
18. [AM] has no meaningful or substantial
relationship with [Child]. 
19. In the absence of any evidence of a meaningful
or substantial relationship between [AM] and [Child], thefact that he is [Child]'s birth father is not a reason tojustify relief under Rule 60(b)(6), Hawaii Family CourtRules. In re: I.S., 2007 Haw. App. Lexis 675 (App. 2007). 
20. [AM] claimed that the fact that [Resource Care-
givers] are Caucasian and [Child] is not is a sufficientreason for the Court to grant relief under Rule 60(b)(6). 
21. The fact that [Resource Caregivers] are
Caucasian and [Child] is not is not a reason to justifyrelief under Rule 60(b)(6), Hawaii Family Court Rules. In 
the Matter of J.N., 158 Misc.2d 97, 601 N.Y.S.2d 215 (FamilyCourt of New York, New York County 1993). 
22. [AM] has not presented any other reason that
would justify relief under Rule 60(b)(6), Hawaii FamilyCourt Rules. 
23. It is not in [Child]'s best interests to grant a
motion to set aside default at this point in the case. 
24. [AM]'s Motion to Set Aside Default has not been
brought within a reasonable time after the Default wasentered. 
25. [AM]'s Motion to Set Aside Default has not been
brought within a reasonable time after termination of [AM's]parental rights. 
26. [AM] has not presented reasons that would
justify a claim for relief under Rule 60(b), Hawaii FamilyCourt Rules. 
20 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
27. With regard to Rule 55(c), Hawaii Family Court
Rules, a motion to set aside a default must show (1) that
the non-defaulting party will not be prejudiced by thereopening; (2) that the defaulting party has a meritoriousdefense; and (3) that the default was not the result ofinexcusable neglect or a willful act on the part of themoving party. BDM, Inc., v. Sageco, Inc., 57 Haw. 73, 549
P.2d 1147 (1976). 
28. [Child] is a party to this proceeding. HRS
§[ ]587A-4. 
29. [Child] would be prejudiced by reopening the
case because (1) he has been in foster care forapproximately 3 years and he is entitled to permanency andclosure[ ](In the Interest of T Children, 113 Haw. 492, 499,155 P.3d 675, 682 (App. 2007)); (2) Mother and [AM] are notpresently able to provide a safe family home for [Child],even with the assistance of services; (3) there is noindication when, or if, [AM] would be able to provide a safefamily home for [Child] if the default were to be set aside;(4) [Child] is strongly bonded to [Resource Caregivers] justas they are to him; (5) [Child] is not bonded to Mother or[AM]; (6) [Child] is thriving in his current placement' and(7) there are no compelling reasons documented in the recordthat would justify preventing [Child] from permanency andclosure. 
30. [AM] does not have a meritorious defense to the
default. 
31. [AM] has not shown good cause to set aside the
default or the termination of his parental rights asrequired by Rule 55(c), Hawaii Family Court Rules. 
32. [AM] has not satisfied the requirements of Rule
60(b) or Rule 55, Hawaii Family Court Rules. 
33. The default and the subsequent termination of
parental rights was the result of inexcusable neglect on thepart of [AM]. 
We hold that the family court's conclusions of law were correct, 
Fisher, 111 Hawai# i at 46, 137 P.3d at 360; to the extent they 
presented mixed questions of fact and law, they were not "clearly erroneous," were supported by the trial court's findings of fact, 
and reflected an application of the correct rule of law. 
Klink, 
113 Hawai# i at 351, 152 P.3d at 523. 
3. AM Was Not Denied Due Process. 
AM argues that the family court's denial of his motion 
to intervene violated his "due process rights." AM had been 
21 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defaulted before he moved to intervene, and a default judgment 
was entered. AM had to have both his default and the default 
judgment set aside before he could have standing to intervene. 
The family court conducted a 2-day evidentiary hearing on AM's 
motion to set aside the entry of his default and the default 
judgment. As was discussed above, the family court did not err 
in declining to set aside the entry of default or the default 
judgment. We hold that AM was not deprived of due process. 
AM argues that Judge Uale violated the "law of the 
case" when he set aside the per diem judge's approval of the 
parties' stipulation to allow AM to intervene. It is true that 
in cases upon which more than one judge has presided, "the usual 
practice of courts to refuse to disturb all prior rulings in a 
particular case" is referred to as the "law of the case[.]" Chun 
v. Bd. of Trs. of Emps.' Ret. Sys., 92 Hawai# i 432, 441, 992 P.2d 
127, 136 (2000) (citation omitted). 
"Unless cogent reasons 
support the second court's action, any modification of a prior ruling of another court of equal and concurrent jurisdiction will 
be deemed an abuse of discretion." Wong v. City & Cty. of 
Honolulu, 66 Haw. 389, 396, 665 P.2d 157, 162 (1983) (citations and emphasis omitted). 
The law of the case doctrine 
does not, however, have the inexorable effect of res
judicata and does not preclude the court from reconsideringan earlier ruling if the court feels that the ruling wasprobably erroneous and more harm would be done by adheringto the earlier rule than from the delay incident to areconsideration and the possible change in the rule of lawto be applied. In fact, it has been noted that, so long asa trial court retains jurisdiction, it always has the powerto reexamine, modify, vacate, correct and reverse its priorrulings and orders. 
Chun, 92 Hawai# i at 441, 992 P.2d at 136 (cleaned up) (citations 
omitted). 
In this case, Judge Uale had "cogent reasons" to set 
aside the per diem judge's ruling because AM failed to set aside 
his default, or the judgment terminating his parental rights, 
before moving to intervene. Judge Uale did not abuse his 
22 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
discretion by vacating the per diem judge's order allowing AM to 
intervene while AM was still in default. 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the "Decision and Order 
Regarding the Contested Hearing on [AM]'s Motion to Set Aside 
Default Filed June 5, 2019[,]" is affirmed. 
Dated: Honolulu, Hawai# i, September 29, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate JudgeGeorgia K. McMillen, for Appellant AM. 
Clare E. Connors, Nara E. Sitachitta,Julio C. Herrera, for Petitioner-Appellee Department of Human Services. 
Francis T. O'Brien,
for Appellees-Intervenors Resource Caregivers. 
Shelby N. Ferrer,
for Appellee Court AppointedSpecial Advocates Program. 
23 