NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000132
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
IKAIKA PUA AHINA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-0702(4))

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ikaika Pua Ahina (Ahina) appeals
 
from the February 18, 2011 Judgment in which Ahina was convicted
 
of one count of Driving While License Suspended or Revoked
 
(DWLSR) in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 286-132
 
1
(2007) and one count of Promoting a Detrimental Drug in the
1
 HRS § 286-132 provides:
 
Driving while license suspended or revoked.  Except as
provided in section 291E-62, no resident or nonresident
whose driver's license, right, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle in this State has been canceled, suspended, or
revoked may drive any motor vehicle upon the highways of
this State while the license, right, or privilege remains
canceled, suspended, or revoked.
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2
Third Degree (PDD) in violation of HRS § 712-1249 (1993)  entered
by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court).3
 
On appeal, Ahina challenges these convictions on the
 
basis that certain evidence was improperly admitted at trial and
 
as a result, there was insufficient admissible evidence in
 
support of each conviction.4
 
After careful consideration of the issues raised and
 
arguments made by the parties, the record and applicable legal
 
authority, we resolve Ahina's points on appeal as follows:
 
1. Relevant to his DWLSR conviction, Ahina challenges,
 
on plain error review, the admission of (a) the testimony by
 
Debbie Silva (Silva), a service representative with the Maui
 
County Department of Motor Vehicles (MDMV) and custodian of
 
records, and (b) State's Exhibit 6, a letter written by Silva
 
containing "a summary of [Ahina]'s driver's license
 
information[,]" arguing that both were admitted in violation of
 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rules 801, 802, 803(b)(6),
 
803(b)(8), 1001(1) and 1002.
 
We agree that it was plain error to admit Silva's
 
testimony regarding the results of her search of MDMV records. 
Silva's testimony that, on the date of the offense, Ahina's
 
"driver's license reflected a revocation, a revoked status[,]"
 
was testimony regarding a public record, used to prove the truth
 
2 HRS § 712-1249(1), Promoting a detrimental drug in the third
degree, provides that: "A person commits the offense of promoting a
detrimental drug in the third degree if the person knowingly possesses any
marijuana or any Schedule V substance in any amount." Ahina was charged with
possession of marijuana only.
 
3
 The Honorable Richard T. Bissen, Jr. presided.
 
4
 Ahina argues that: (1) there was insufficient evidence supporting
his conviction for PDD; (2) the Circuit Court erred in admitting test results
showing the presence of THC in the residue of a pipe found in his possession;
(3) the Circuit Court erred in admitting evidence seized incident to a
warrantless search; (4) the Circuit Court erred in admitting inadmissible
hearsay evidence; and (5) the Circuit Court erred in allowing the use of the
hearsay testimony and a letter to prove the contents of documents and records
that were not themselves offered into evidence.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of the matter asserted. HRE Rules 801, 802, and 803(b)(8).5
 
However, to prove the contents of a public record, which is,
 
inter alia, a writing, including a data compilation held in the
 
custody of any department or agency of the government, the
 
"original," or in the case of computer records, a printout of the
 
contents, is required. HRE Rules 1001 (3), (5) and 1002, provide
 
that, if otherwise admissible, the public record may be proved by
 
copy, certified as correct in accordance with rule 902 or
 
testified to be correct by a witness who has compared it with the
 
public record.
 
Here, no writing, printout or other copy was offered. 
Silva did not testify that she had personal knowledge that
 
Ahina's license was revoked on the pertinent date. She learned
 
that information from perusal of the public records. See A.
 
Bowman, Hawaii Rules of Evidence Manual § 1002-1[3], at 10-5
 (2012-2013 ed.) ("If the witness'[s] knowledge of the matter
 
derives solely from having perused a document, then the testimony
 
would be offered to prove the contents of the writing, however it
 
may be phrased."). Similarly, State's Exhibit 6, was a letter
 
prepared by Silva at the request of the prosecutors, without a
 
printout of the MDMV records themselves.
 
Moreover, this letter stated,
 
On December 03, 2009, The defendant did not have a
active/valid Hawaii driver's license and/or instructional
permit. On the violation date the defendant's status
 relected [sic] an expired revocation that ended 02/19/2004
and requires clearance from the Administrative Revocation
Office. Defendant has a outstanding violation flag that
need [sic] to be cleared.
 
5
 HRE Rule 803(b)(8), Hearsay exceptions; availability of declarant
immaterial, provides, in pertinent part:
 
The following are not excluded by the hearsay rule, even
though the declarant is available as a witness: . . . (b)
Other Exceptions. . . . (8) Public records and reports.
Records, reports, statements, or data compilations, in any
form, of public offices or agencies, setting forth (A) the
activities of the office or agency[.]
 
(Format altered.)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(Emphasis added.) To the extent that the letter represented that
 
Ahina's revocation had expired on February 19, 2004, well before
 
the date in question, it contradicted Silva's testimony, and in
 
any event did not establish revocation of Ahina's driver's
 
license on the relevant date. Neither testimony nor exhibit was
 
competent evidence to prove the status of Ahina's driver's
 
license. Thus, the evidence presented by the State did not
 
establish that, on the date of the offense, Ahina's driver's
 
license was revoked as was required under HRS § 286-132. 
It is well established, as a precept of constitutional
as well as statutory law, that an accused in a criminal case
can only be convicted upon proof by the prosecution of every
element of the crime charged beyond a reasonable doubt. . .
 . A conviction based on insufficient evidence of any
element of the offense charged is a violation of due process
and thus constitutes plain error.
 
State v. Puaoi, 78 Hawai 'i 185, 191, 891 P.2d 272, 278 (1995) 
(internal citations and quotation marks omitted). 
2. Ahina also challenges the sufficiency of the
 
evidence in support of his PDD conviction as there was no
 
evidence that he possessed any part of the cannabis plant. The
 
State agrees and we concur. As charged here, the offense
 
requires proof that the offender possess marijuana in any amount. 
6
Marijuana is defined by statute  as the plant and plant parts,
but does not include tetrahydrocannabinol, also known as THC. 

State v. Choy
, 4 Haw. App. 79, 82 n.5, 661 P.2d 1206, 1209 n.5
 
(1983). As the State concedes and our review of the record
 
confirms, there was no evidence that Ahina possessed any part of
 
6
 The statutory definition of marijuana for the purpose of PDD is
 
any part of the plant (genus) cannabis, whether growing or
not, including the seeds and the resin, and every alkaloid,
salt, derivative, preparation, compound, or mixture of the
plant, its seeds or resin, except that, as used herein,
"marijuana" does not include hashish, tetrahydrocannabinol,
and any alkaloid, salt, derivative, preparation, compound,
or mixture, whether natural or synthesized, of
tetrahydrocannabinol.
 
HRS § 712-1240 (1993).
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the marijuana plant, only that the substance found in the pipe he 
possessed tested positive for THC.7 
Therefore, the February 18, 2011 Judgment of the 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit is reversed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 30, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Benjamin E. Lowenthal,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge

 
Associate Judge
 Artemio C. Baxa,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,

County of Maui,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
7
 The determination that there was insufficient evidence that Ahina
 
possessed marijuana makes it unnecessary for us to address the propriety of
the admission of the fruits of the search of his pockets incident to his
arrest or evidence of the arresting officer's field test for THC.
 
5
 