 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI  RE PORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000443 30-APR-2025 07:53 AM Dkt. 76 SO 
NOS. CAAP-22-0000443 and CAAP-22-0000759 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
HAWAII STATE FEDERAL CREDIT UNION, a federal credit union, 
Plaintiff-Appellee, v. 
VIP TOWING LLC, a Hawaii limited liability company, 
Defendant-Appellant. 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DRC-21-0006128)  
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: 
Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.) 
In CAAP-22-0000443, Defendant-Appellant VIP Towing 
appeals from the District Court of the First Circuit's August 4, 
2022 "Amended Order Denying Defendant's Motion to Set Aside 
Default Judgment Filed on April 18, 2022" (
Denial Order).1 In 
CAAP-22-0000759, VIP Towing appeals from the district court's December 5, 2022 Post-Judgment Order Granting Attorneys' Fees 
1 The Honorable Karin L. Holma presided.    
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and Costs (Fees and Costs Order).2 Because these appeals involve 
the same parties and stem from the same underlying case, this 
court consolidated these appeals. 
In 2020, Ryan D. Donlon financed the purchase of a 
used truck through Hawaii State Federal Credit Union. On 
March 4, 2021, VIP Towing towed Donlon's truck from a Honolulu 
Walmart store to VIP Towing's lot. On April 22, 2021, the City 
and County of Honolulu issued a Certificate of Title noting Donlon was the truck's registered owner and Hawaii State was the 
lienholder. 
About two months later, in June 2021, VIP Towing sent 
Hawaii State a notice of the tow and the thirty-day period to 
claim the truck, citing Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 290-11 
(2020):
3 
2 The Honorable Summer M.M. Kupau- Odo presided. 
3 HRS § 290- 11 provided in pertinent part: 
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
chapter, any vehicle left unattended on private or public 
property without authorization of the owner or occupant of the property, may be towed away at the expense of the 
vehicle owner, by order of the owner, occupant, or person 
in charge of the property; provided that there is posted a 
notice prohibiting vehicles to park on the property without 
authorization. 
 . . . . 
(b) Towing companies engaged by the owner, 
occupant, or person in charge of the property shall: 
 . . . . 
(continued . . .) 
2    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  . . . . NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(. . . continued) 
(3)  Determine the name of the legal owner and the 
last registered owner of the vehicle from the 
department of transportation or the county  
department of finance.   The legal owner and the 
last registered owner shall be notified in 
writing  at the address on record with the 
department of transportation or with the county 
department of finance by registered or certified 
mail of the location of the vehicle, together 
with a description of the vehicle, within a 
reasonable period not to exceed fifteen days 
following the tow
.   The notice shall state:  
(A) The maximum towing charges and fees allowed by law; 
(B) The telephone number of the consumer information service of the department of 
commerce and consumer affairs; and 
(C) That if the vehicle is not recovered within 
thirty days after the mailing of the notice, 
the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and 
will be sold or disposed of as junk. 
Where the legal owner and the last registered 
owner have not been notified pursuant to this paragraph, the vehicle may be recovered by the 
vehicle owner from the towing company without 
paying tow or storage fees. The notice need 
not be sent to a legal owner or last registered owner or any person with an unrecorded interest 
in the vehicle whose name or address cannot be 
determined. Absent evidence to the contrary, a notice shall be deemed received by the legal 
owner or last registered owner five days after 
the mailing; 
(g) Any person who violates any provision of this 
section shall be deemed to have: 
(1) Engaged in an unfair or deceptive act or practice in the conduct of any trade or commerce 
within the meaning of section 480- 2 and subject 
to penalties and remedies under chapter 480; and 
(2) Furnished services without a license within the 
meaning of section 487
-13 and subject to 
penalties and remedies under chapter 487. 
(Emphases added.) 
3    
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
This is to inform you that the Department of Finance, 
Division of licensing, has informed us that you are the 
legal and/or registered owner of the above described 
vehicle, which was towed to our lot. If this vehicle is 
not claimed within Thirty Days (30) after the date of this 
notice, the company will conclude your authorization of 
said vehicle to be sold, or disposed of as provided in 
section 290- 11, [HRS]. 
On July 9, 2021, Hawaii State filed a complaint in 
district court asserting violation of HRS § 290-11 (Count 1) and 
conversion (Count 2). The complaint also sought restitution, 
damages, and reimbursement of costs and expenses including 
attorneys' fees. 
According to the complaint, Hawaii State contacted VIP 
Towing and was told the truck "had been 'disposed of.'" VIP Towing later informed Hawaii State the June 2021 notice was sent 
in error, VIP Towing was not in possession of the truck, and the 
truck was "released to an unidentified individual." 
The filed Return of Service indicates that, after four 
unsuccessful attempts to serve the complaint and summons on VIP 
Towing, the process server served VIP Towing's agent, Myhanh 
Huynh, with the documents on August 23, 2021. In the 
acknowledgment of service section, "Refused to sign" was stamped 
in lieu of a signature. 
The summons informed VIP Towing it was required to 
file a written answer or appear at 1111 Alakea Street, tenth floor "at 1:30 p.m. on the second Monday following date of 
service, and should that Monday be a legal holiday then on the 
4    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
next business day."4 The summons also provided a Zoom meeting ID 
number and phone number. In bold capital letters, the summons 
warned that failure to attend the hearing or file a written 
answer would result in a default judgment. 
VIP Towing did not file an answer by September 7, 2021 
or appear at the September 7, 2021 hearing. 
Hawaii State moved for a default judgment. On 
October 21, 2021, the district court entered a Default Judgment in favor of Hawaii State, awarding it $38,440.14 (including 
attorneys' fees and costs). 
Two months later, Hawaii State filed an "Ex Parte 
Motion for Examination of Person Having Knowledge of Judgment 
Debtor(s)[,]" asking the district court to enter an order 
directing Huynh, as VIP Towing's agent, to appear in district 
court and be examined under oath. The district court granted 
the motion. The process server attempted to serve the motion 
three times, but Huynh evaded service and refused to sign. Huynh did not appear at the hearing on the motion and the 
district court continued the hearing to April 18, 2022. Huynh 
did not appear at the April 18, 2022 hearing. The district 
4 As the second Monday following August 23, 2021 (the date of service) 
was September 6, 2021, Labor Day, the date for VIP Towing to file a written 
answer or appear was Tuesday, September 7, 2021. See HRS § 8- 1 (2009) 
(noting first Monday in September is Labor Day and a state holiday); D istrict 
Court Rules of C ivil Procedure (DCRCP) Rule 6(a) (indicating where a deadline 
falls on a legal holiday, "the period runs until the end of the next day 
which is not a" legal holiday). 
5    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court then issued a bench warrant for Huynh's arrest, with bail 
set at $50.00. 
That same day, which was almost six months after 
Default Judgment was entered, VIP Towing moved to set aside the 
default, citing District Court Rules of Civil Procedure (
DCRCP) 
Rules 7 and 55.  The motion was supported by the declaration of 
Frances Freitas, who stated she was VIP Towing's "Corporate 
Secretary" and that the motion should be granted because VIP Towing was not served and had strong defenses. The entirety of 
her declaration stated: 5
VIP Towing LLC was never served with the Complaint and 
Notice(s) of Court Date, and accordingly was not able to 
appear in Court. Moreover, VIP Towing LLC never had an 
opportunity to defend itself in the above- referenced 
matter. VIP Towing LLC has strong defenses and is prepared 
to present its case on the merits. 
(Emphases added.) There were no attachments to the motion. 
5 DCRCP Rule 7(b) provides in relevant part: 
An application to the court for an order shall be by motion 
which, unless made during a hearing or trial, shall be made 
in writing, shall state with particularity the grounds 
therefor, and shall set forth the relief or order sought. The requirement of writing is fulfilled if the motion is 
stated in a written notice of the hearing of the motion. 
DCRCP Rule 7(b)(1). And, DCRC P Rule 55(c) provides: 
Setting aside default. For good cause shown the court may 
set aside an entry of default and, if a judgment by default 
has been entered, may likewise set it aside in accordance 
with Rule 60(b). 
When a motion to set aside either an entry of  default 
or a judgment by default is denied, the court  in denying 
the motion may award to the  non-defaulting party those 
reasonable attorney's fees  incurred to defend the motion.  
6    
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawaii State opposed the motion to set aside the 
default and attached a webpage printout entitled "DCCA State of 
Hawaii" showing Huynh was VIP Towing's agent. Also attached was 
a declaration from the process server that stated, "Huynh met me 
at the entrance of the garage, and I confirmed her name[,]" "I 
attempted to hand her the documents but she refused to hold 
them[,]" "I placed the documents at Huynh's feet, and informed 
her of completed service[,]" and "Huynh kicked the documents, and acted very upset." 
During the hearing on VIP Towing's motion to set aside 
the default, VIP Towing's counsel asserted various purported 
facts but presented no evidence to the district court. 
The 
district court denied VIP Towing's motion. The district court later awarded Hawaii State $1,753.40 in attorneys' fees and 
$355.29 in costs related to the motion to set aside the default. 
On appeal, VIP Towing challenges the Denial Order and 
the Fees and Costs Order. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve this 
appeal as discussed below. 
7    
 
 
  
 
 
    
  
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) VIP Towing contends the district court abused its 
discretion in denying the motion to set aside the default as 
there was no identifiable prejudice to Hawaii State, VIP Towing 
had meritorious defenses, and VIP Towing was not served with the 
complaint, summons, or notice of the hearing.6 
DCRCP Rule 4(d)(3) requires the complaint and summons 
be served together upon a corporation, partnership, or "other 
unincorporated association which is subject to suit under a common name, by delivering a copy of the summons and of the 
complaint to an officer, a managing or general agent, or to any 
other agent authorized by appointment or by law to receive 
service of process[.]" 
DCRCP Rule 12(a) requires all defendants to "appear or 
answer at the time appointed in the summons, on the second 
Monday following the date of service, except where the district 
judge sets some other secular day; and should such Monday be a 
legal holiday then upon the next secular day." And, following DCRCP Rule 55(a), "[w]hen a party against whom a judgment for 
affirmative relief is sought has failed to plead or otherwise 
defend as provided by these rules, and the fact is made to 
6 We note that, in the points of error section of its CAAP- 22-0000443 
opening brief, VIP Towing does not challenge the district court's oral 
findings.  Hawai‘i Rules of A ppellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4); see 
Okada 
Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply
, 97 Hawai‘i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 
(2002) ("Findings of fact . . . not challenged on appeal are binding on the 
appellate court."). 
8    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appear by affidavit or otherwise, the clerk shall enter that 
party's default." 
A district court may enter default judgment after 
damages are determined. See DCRCP Rule 55(b)(2).7 "For good 
cause shown the court may set aside an entry of default and, if a judgment by default has been entered, may likewise set it 
aside in accordance with Rule 60(b)." DCRCP Rule 55(c) 
(emphasis added). 
DCRCP Rule 60(b) explains a district court may provide 
relief from a final judgment for: 
(1) mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable neglect; 
(2) newly discovered evidence which by due diligence could 
not have been discovered in time to move for a new trial 
under Rule 59(b); 
(3) fraud . . . , misrepresentation, or other misconduct of 
an adverse party; 
(4) the judgment is void; (5) the judgment has been satisfied, released, or 
discharged, or a prior judgment upon which it is based has 
been reversed or otherwise vacated, or it is no longer 
equitable that the judgment should have prospective 
application; or 
(6) any other reason justifying relief from the operation 
of the judgment. 
7 DCRCP Rule 55(b)(2) provides: 
In all other cases the party entitled to a judgment by 
default shall apply to the court therefor. If, in order to 
enable the court to enter judgment or to carry it into 
effect, it is necessary to take an account or to determine the amount of damages or to establish the truth of any 
averment by evidence or to make an investigation of any 
other matter, the court may conduct such hearings as it 
deems necessary and proper. 
9    
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Formatting altered.) To prevail on a Rule 60(b) motion, the 
movant must show "(1) that the nondefaulting party will not be 
prejudiced by the reopening, (2) that the defaulting party has a 
meritorious defense, and (3) that the default was not the result 
of inexcusable neglect or a wil[l]ful act." Chen v. Mah
, 146 
Hawai‘i 157, 172, 177, 457 P.3d 796, 811, 816 (2020) (emphasis 
added and citation omitted). 
Because the district court entered a default judgment 
in this case, VIP Towing could have moved for relief from the 
judgment under DCRCP Rule 60(b). 
However, VIP Towing moved to 
set aside the default pursuant to DCRCP Rules 7 and 55, not DCRCP Rule 60(b). And at the hearing on the motion to set aside default, VIP Towing relied on DCRCP Rule 55(c) and asserted 
there was "good cause" to grant its motion. Thus, VIP Towing's 
motion to set aside the default failed to raise and address 
DCRCP Rule 60(b). 
To the extent we may construe VIP Towing's claim that 
it was not served with the complaint and summons as a mistake or 
excusable neglect under DCRCP Rule 60(b)(1), the record does not 
support such a claim. See Bank of Hawaii v. Shaw
, 83 Hawai‘i 50, 
56, 924 P.2d 544, 550 (App. 1996) (holding that orders denying 
motions for relief for excusable neglect under DCRCP 
Rule 60(b)(1) are reviewed for abuse of discretion). 
10    
 
 
  
 
    
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, the district court made the following findings 
during the hearing on VIP Towing's motion to set aside the 
default: "the complaint was personally served on" Huynh; "Huynh 
is the agent of record for VIP Towing"; Huynh "threw the papers 
on the ground"; Huynh "refused to sign the service"; "VIP, 
through its agent, which is the very purpose of having an agent 
designated for service, had notice of the date"; and VIP 
Towing/Huynh did not appear on the answer date. The district court made further findings regarding Huynh's continued failure 
to appear stating, "We haven't heard anything from . . . Huynh 
through this whole thing."
8 
Documents in the record, including the "DCCA State of 
Hawaii" printout, the process server's declaration, the Return 
of Service, and the summons, support these findings. The only 
evidence VIP Towing presented the district court to support its 
motion to set aside the default was Freitas' declaration, which 
noted VIP Towing "was never served" but did not address service on Huynh. Thus, we cannot say that VIP Towing showed "the 
default was not the result of inexcusable neglect or wil[l]ful 
act." See Chen, 146 Hawai‘ i at 172, 457 P.3d at 811.  And VIP 
8 Huynh first participated in these proceedings via a declaration 
attached to VIP Towing's September 9, 2022 motion to stay, which was over 
three months after the May 23, 2022 hearing on VIP Towing's motion to set 
aside the default. 
11    
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Towing did not present any other evidence to the district court 
to support its claim of "strong defenses."  
Based on the foregoing, the district court did not 
abuse its discretion in denying VIP Towing's motion to set aside 
default. 
(2)  VIP Towing next contends "the trial court's fee 
award under HRS § 607-14.7 [(2016)] is an abuse of discretion, 
because the award exceeds the statutory cap for post-judgment fees to collect the judgment at issue."
  9
HRS § 607-14.7 provides: 
In addition to any other attorney's fees, costs, and 
expenses, which may or are required to be awarded, and notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the court in any 
civil action may award to a judgment creditor, from a 
judgment debtor, reasonable attorney's fees, costs, and 
expenses incurred by the judgment creditor in obtaining or 
attempting to obtain satisfaction of a money judgment, whether by execution, examination of judgment debtor, 
garnishment, or otherwise. The court may award attorney's 
fees that it determines are reasonable, but shall not award 
fees in excess of the following schedule: 
(1) Twenty-five per cent on the first $1,000 or 
fraction thereof; 
(2) Twenty per cent on the second $1,000 or fraction 
thereof; 
(3) Fifteen per cent on the third $1,000 or fraction thereof; 
(4) Ten per cent on the fourth $1,000 or fraction thereof; 
(5) Five per cent on the fifth $1,000 or fraction 
thereof; and 
9 VIP Towing also contends that "[b]ecause the underlying default 
judgment must be reversed, the subsequent post- judgment attorney fee award 
under HRS § 607- 14.7" must be "reversed." Because the district court did not 
abuse its discretion in denying the motion to set aside default, we need not address this contention. 
12    
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
   
   
   
   
   
     
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(6)  2.5 per cent on any amount in excess of $5,000.  
The fees shall be assessed on the amount of judgment, 
exclusive of costs and all other attorney's fees.  
(Some formatting altered and emphases added.) 
Here, the district court awarded Hawaii State 
$31,168.17 (principal amount of $30,122.63 and $1,045.54 in 
interest) in the Default Judgment. Based on the schedule 
outlined in HRS § 607-14.7, the district court was allowed to 
award Hawaii State up to $1,404.20 in attorneys' fees.  10 
Because the award of $1,753.40 in attorneys' fees 
exceeded the limit allowed under HRS § 607-14.7, the district 
court abused its discretion. 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the district court's 
Fees and Costs Order to the extent the award of attorneys' fees exceeded the amount allowed under HRS § 607-14.7; we otherwise 
affirm the Denial Order and Fees and Costs Order. We remand 
10 Under HRS § 607- 14.7, the maximum amount of attorneys' fees are 
calculated as follows: 
25% * $1,000 = $250  
20% * $1,000 = $200  
15% * $1,000 = $150  
10% * $1,000 = $100  
 5% * $1,000 = $50  
2.5% *  ($31,168.17
-$5,000) = $654.20  
The total is $1,404.20 ($250 + $200 + $150 + $100 + $50 + $654.20 = 
$1,404.20). 
13    
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
this case to the district court for further proceedings 
consistent with this summary disposition order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai‘i, April 30, 2025. 
On the briefs: /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
 Presiding Judge 
Sheri J. Tanaka,  
for Defendant-Appellant. /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
 Associate Judge 
Jonathan W.Y. Lai,  
Thomas H. Yee, /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
(Watanabe Ing), Associate Judge 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
14 