NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000024
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
SEONG HO MICHAEL JI, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 14-1-0769)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Seong Ho Michael Ji (Ji) was found
guilty by a jury of Assault in the Second Degree, a violation of
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-711(1)(a) (2014) and/or 707-
711(1)(b) (2014).1  Ji appeals from the Circuit Court of the
First Circuit's (Circuit Court)2 December 15, 2015 Judgment of
Conviction and Probation Sentence.
Ji contends that (1) his trial counsel (Counsel) was
ineffective when he failed to inform Ji of a plea agreement
proffered by the State; (2) there was prosecutorial misconduct
when the deputy prosecuting attorney (DPA) argued during closing
argument that Ji's testimony was not credible, and other
1HRS § 707-711(1)(b) provides:
Assault in the second degree.   (1) A person commits the
offense of assault in the second degree if:
(a) The person intentionally or knowingly causes
substantial bodily injury to another; [or]
(b) The person recklessly causes serious or
substantial bodily injury to another[.]
2The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
witnesses' testimonies were, and by arguing that Ji had tailored
his testimony to align with other witnesses' testimonies; and (3)
there was no substantial evidence that he caused the victim's
facial fracture injury, and/or that he was not acting in self-
defense.
1. Ji argues that there was ineffective assistance of
counsel when Counsel failed to inform him of a plea agreement
proffered by the State.3  A lawyer must promptly inform his or
her client of an offer of a plea bargain which the lawyer
receives.  Hawai #i Rules of Professional Conduct Rule 1.4(a)(6).
[W]here the record on appeal is insufficient to demonstrate
ineffective assistance of counsel, but where:  (1) the
defendant alleges facts that if proven would entitle him or
her to relief, and (2) the claim is not patently frivolous
and without trace of support in the record, the appellate
court may affirm defendant's conviction without prejudice to
a subsequent Rule 40 petition on the ineffective assistance
of counsel claim.
State v. Silva, 75 Haw. 419, 439, 864 P.2d 583, 592–93 (1993).
Ji fails to demonstrate, by reference to the record,
that the State proffered a plea agreement to Counsel, which
Counsel failed to relay to Ji.  Thus, the record on appeal is
insufficient to demonstrate ineffective assistance of counsel. 
However, because the exchange relied upon by Ji was ambiguous and
could be read to indicate plea discussions were had between
Counsel and the DPA, we reject his argument based on the state of
the record before us without prejudice.
2. Ji contends that the DPA engaged in misconduct
when she argued during closing argument that he "dovetailed" his
3Ji offers the following excerpt from a tentative change of plea
hearing as the evidence of his claim:
MR. LANDSBERG: Good morning, Your Honor. Marcus
Landsberg. Mr. Ji is present next to me at this time. 
THE COURT: Okay, have we -- what are we doing? 
MR. LANDSBERG: I don't think we've been able to reach
an agreement in this case at this time.
THE COURT: Let's go to trial. We'll see you Tuesday,
8:30 in the morning.
MS. LOWENBERG: Thank you. 
MR. LANDSBERG: Thank you very much, Your Honor.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
testimony to fit the testimony of other testifying witnesses and
offered her personal opinion that Ji was not credible, while the
State's witnesses Hasegawa and Calinao were credible.
Prosecutorial misconduct is reviewed under the harmless
beyond a reasonable doubt standard, which requires a
determination of whether there was a reasonable possibility that
the error complained of may have contributed to the conviction.  
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai# i 504, 513, 78 P.3d 317, 326 (2003). 
Factors to be considered in determining whether a conviction
should be overturned due to prosecutorial misconduct are:  (1)
whether there was improper conduct, (2) the promptness of
curative instruction, and (3) the strength or weakness of the
evidence against the defendant.  Wakisaka , 102 Hawai #i at 513, 78
P.3d at 326 (2003) (citation omitted).
a.  Argument regarding "tailoring."  It is improper
"under article I, section 14 of the Hawai #i Constitution for a
prosecutor to make generic accusations during closing argument
that a defendant has tailored his or her testimony based solely
on the defendant's exercise of his or her constitutional right to
be present at trial."  State v. Mattson, 122 Hawai #i 312, 314,
226 P.3d 482, 484 (2010).4  Misconduct has been found when the
prosecutor draws attention to the defendant's presence at trial,
remarks or implies that the defendant tailored his testimony
4In Mattson, the prosecutor "commented on the fact that Mattson had
the opportunity to sit through all of the evidence presented at trial" and
went on to say, "He had to make his story gibe [sic] with what you've heard. 
What is in evidence. . . .  He sat through the evidence."  Mattson, 122
Hawai#i at 320, 226 P.2d at 490 (emphasis omitted).  The Mattson court adopted
the reasoning of the dissenting opinion in Portuondo v. Agard, 529 U.S. 61,
63-64 (2000), that banning generic tailoring arguments was necessary to
protect the defendant's constitutional right to be present at trial.  In doing
so, the Mattson court noted that the Portuondo prosecutor 
commented on the defendant's presence at trial during
closing argument, stating in relevant part that, 
unlike all the other witnesses in this case[,] the
defendant has a benefit and the benefit that he has,
unlike all the other witnesses, is he gets to sit here
and listen to the testimony of all the other witnesses
before he testifies . . . .  That gives you a big
advantage, doesn't it.  You get to sit here and think
what am I going to say and how am I going to say it? 
How am I going to fit into the evidence?
Mattson, 122 Hawai #i at 322, 226 P.2d at 492, quoting Portuondo, 529 U.S at
63-64.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
based on his presence at trial, and does not refer to particular
evidence provided at trial indicating that there was tailoring. 
See State v. Walsh, 125 Hawai# i 271, 285, 260 P.3d 350, 364
(2011).
Based on our review of the DPA's arguments, to the
extent a generic tailoring argument was made, it was implied and
not explicit.  The DPA did not include any reference to Ji's
presence at trial.  While the DPA did point out that Ji's
testimony "dovetailed" with that of other witnesses in some
respects, it was not argued that this was so because he had been
present to hear the testimony.
The Circuit Court gave a specific cautionary
instruction, upon the objection of Counsel, informing the jury
that Ji had "a constitutional right to be present throughout the
trial and while other witnesses testify.  You must not draw any
unfavorable inference regarding the credibility of the
defendant's testimony on the basis that he was present during
trial."  The Circuit Court also struck the DPA's last argument
before the objection.5  No further dovetailing arguments were
made thereafter. 
Finally, as discussed in more detail below, the State's 
evidence in this case was strong as it was supported by the
testimony of two uninterested third parties, one of whom was a
percipient witness.
b.  Argument regarding credibility.  It is improper
conduct when the prosecutor offers personal views on the
credibility of witnesses.  State v. Clark , 83 Hawai #i 289, 304,
926 P.2d 194, 209 (1996).  However, during closing arguments, the
prosecutor is allowed to draw reasonable inferences from the
evidence presented at trial.  State v. Rogan , 91 Hawai #i 405,
412-13, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238-39 (1999).
Although DPA argued many times that Ji was not credible
and certain State's witnesses were credible, these arguments were
prefaced by acknowledging to the jury that it was the exclusive
5The jury was also instructed that all matters stricken by the
court must be disregarded and was reminded that it could not draw "any
unfavorable inference regarding the credibility of the Defendant's testimony
on the basis that he was present during the trial."
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
judge of the witnesses' credibility and recited to the jury the
instruction they would receive regarding assessing credibility.  
The DPA did not state her personal opinion regarding credibility
and in most instances, she supported her comments with evidence
presented at trial and reasonable inferences that could be drawn
from such evidence.  
No cautionary instruction on this subject was given
during the closing argument, although the jury was ultimately
instructed that the attorneys' arguments were not evidence and
that it was "the sole and exclusive judge of 
the effect and value of the evidence and of the credibility of
the witnesses[,]" how to evaluate witnesses' credibility
generally, and how to evaluate Ji's credibility in particular.
As discussed in more detail below, the prosecution's
case was strong.
Based on consideration of all the Wakisaka factors, we
conclude that any prosecutorial misconduct was harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt.
3.  There was substantial evidence supporting Ji's
conviction.  Ji challenges the evidence of complainant's facial
fractures, and/or that any force used by Ji against complainant
was not in self-defense.
Evidence is sufficient to support a conviction if,
taken in the light most favorable to the prosecution, and
recognizing the province of the jury as the trier of fact, there
is substantial evidence to support every material element of the
offense charged.  See State v. Grace, 107 Hawai# i 133, 139, 111
P.3d 28, 34 (App. 2005) (quoting State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawai# i 409,
422, 23 P.3d 744, 757 (App. 2001)).  Substantial evidence is
credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative
value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion.  State v. Richie, 88 Hawai# i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227,
1241 (1998) (quoting State v. Eastman , 81 Hawai #i 131, 135, 913
P.2d 57, 61 (1996)).
Looking to the testimony given at trial, there was
substantial evidence to support the jury's finding that Ji caused
complainant's facial fracture.  Ji was charged and convicted of
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Assault in the Second Degree under HRS § 707-711(1)(b) (2014),
which provides:
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the second
degree if:
(b) The person recklessly causes serious or
substantial bodily injury to another[.]
Substantial bodily injury includes a bone fracture.  HRS 707-700
(2014).
Ji admitted at trial that he punched complainant at
least once.  Brandi Hasegawa (Hasegawa), complainant's ex-
girlfriend, also testified that Ji admitted to her that he hit
complainant.  Ronald Calinao (Calinao), an employee of the bar
where this incident occurred, testified that he saw Ji shove
complainant and kick complainant at least once when he was on the
ground.  He also saw Ji make a repeated kicking motion when
complainant was "sleeping" on the ground.  Dr. Bryan Gushiken
diagnosed complainant with a fracture of the eye socket caused by
"blunt trauma" consistent with a blow with a fist.
There was substantial evidence disproving self defense. 
"[T]he use of force upon or toward another person is justifiable
when the actor believes that such force is immediately necessary
for the purpose of protecting himself against the use of unlawful
force by the other person on the present occasion."  HRS § 703-
304(1) (2014).
Ji relies on his testimony that he hit complainant only
after the latter lunged at him more than once, and only after
complainant had made a fist, and Hasegawa's testimony that Ji
told her complainant threatened to "fuck up" Ji and had rushed Ji
and thrown a punch at Ji.  However, testimony by three witnesses,
including Ji, established that Ji was larger than complainant,
outweighing complainant by as much as thirty-five pounds and
being taller by as much as seven inches.  Calinao testified that
he did not see complainant hit Ji, or hear complainant say
anything during the alleged assault, but saw Ji shove complainant
twice, pushing him to the ground the second time.   Calinao also
saw Ji kick complainant once while he was on the floor, and saw
Ji make repeated swinging motions with his leg as complainant
appeared to "sleep" on the floor.  Calinao also heard Ji swearing
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
at complainant throughout this altercation.  Furthermore,
although Ji testified that his friend told Hasegawa, "[t]ell your
boyfriend when he's down to stay down" after the alleged assault,
Hasegawa testified that it was Ji who made that statement to her.
Thus, there is substantial evidence that Ji did not
reasonably believe that force was immediately necessary to
protect himself against complainant.  Alternatively, there was
substantial evidence that Ji consciously disregarded a
substantial and unjustifiable risk that his belief that his use
of force against complainant was immediately necessary to protect
himself was wrong.
Thus, taken in the light most favorable to the
prosecution, and recognizing the province of the jury as the
trier of fact, there was credible evidence of sufficient quality
and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
support the conclusion that Ji caused substantial injury to
complainant.
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court of
the First Circuit's December 15, 2015 Judgment of Conviction and
Probation Sentence without prejudice to Ji raising his claim of
ineffective assistance of counsel for failure to communicate a
plea offer.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 30, 2017.
On the briefs:
Randall K. Hironaka
(Miyoshi & Hironaka),
for Defendant-Appellant.
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
7