       FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
---o0o---
EDMOND KRAFCHOW and KATHLEEN KRAFCHOW, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v. 
DONGBU INSURANCE CO., LTD., nka DB INSURANCE CO., LTD.,
JOHN MULLEN & CO., INC., Defendants-Appellants,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, and DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants 
NO. CAAP-21-0000513 
A
PPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 2CC191000266) 
EDMOND KRAFCHOW and KATHLEEN KRAFCHOW, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v. 
DONGBU INSURANCE CO., LTD., nka DB INSURANCE CO., LTD.,
JOHN MULLEN & CO., INC., Defendants-Appellants,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, and DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants 
NO. CAAP-21-0000517 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 2CC191000266) 
FEBRUARY 17, 2023 
GINOZA, CHIEF JUDGE, HIRAOKA AND WADSWORTH, JJ. FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY HIRAOKA, J. 
These consolidated appeals arise from first-party 
insurance claims1 made by Plaintiffs-Appellees Edmund Krafchow 
and Kathleen Krafchow (collectively, the Krafchows) under 
insurance policies issued by Defendant-Appellant Dongbu Insurance 
Co., Ltd. (now known as DB Insurance Co., Ltd.).  We must decide 
whether the appraisers and umpire who were to appraise "the amount of loss" had the power to decide what amount was owed by Dongbu to the Krafchows under the insurance policies.  We hold they did not.  They were to decide the amount of the Krafchows' loss irrespective of insurance coverage, not the amount of covered loss.  Accordingly, we vacate (1) the "Order Granting 
Plaintiffs' Motion to Confirm Appraisal Summary and Awards" 
entered on July 26, 2021; (2) the "Amended Order Denying 
Defendants' Motion to Vacate and/or Modify Three Appraisal Awards 
or, in the Alternate, to Stay, and Reconfirming the Appraisal Awards" entered on June 13, 2022; and (3) the "Amended Order 
Denying Defendants' Motion to Vacate and/or Modify Three 
Appraisal Awards and Reconfirming Appraisal Awards" entered on June 14, 2022.
2 
BACKGROUND AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
The Krafchows owned real property on the island of 
Maui.  There were three structures on the property: the Villa; 
the Cottage; and the Garage.  The structures were insured under 
separate insurance policies issued by Dongbu to the Krafchows.  A 
homeowners policy covered the Villa.  The Cottage and the Garage were covered by dwelling fire policies. 
The structures and their contents were damaged because 
of a wildfire.  The Krafchows made insurance claims for their 
1 A "first-party claim" is made under one's own insurance policy
"for losses suffered by the insured."  Best Place, Inc. v. Penn Am. Ins. Co., 
82 Hawai #i 120, 124 n.4, 920 P.2d 334, 338 n.4 (1996). 
2 The Honorable Kelsey T. Kawano presided. 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
loss.  Dongbu tendered over $300,000 to the Krafchows (under 
reservations of rights)  pending preparation of "final settlement
figures[.]"  Dongbu also raised issues about coverage and limits of liability, and asked the Krafchows for additional information about their claims. 3 
The parties disagreed on the amount of the Krafchows' 
loss (among other things).  The homeowners and dwelling fire policies contained substantially identical appraisal provisions: 
Appraisal 
If you and we fail to agree on the amount of loss , either 
may demand an appraisal of the loss .  In this event, each
party will choose a competent and impartial appraiser within
20 days after receiving a written request from the other. The two appraisers will choose an umpire.  If they cannotagree upon an umpire within 15 days, you or we may requestthat the choice be made by a judge of a court of record inthe state where the ["residence premises"/DescribedLocation] is located.  The appraisers will separately set the amount of loss .  If the appraisers submit a written
report of an agreement to us, the amount agreed upon will bethe amount of loss .  If they fail to agree, they will submit
their differences to the umpire.  A decision agreed to by any two will set the amount of loss . 
Each party will: 
1. Pay its own appraiser; and 
2. Bear the other expenses of the appraisal and umpire
equally. 
(Bold italics added.) 
The Krafchows invoked the appraisal provisions of the 
insurance policies, but Dongbu did not name an appraiser.  The 
Krafchows then sued Dongbu and its claims adjuster, Defendant-Appellant John Mullen & Co., Inc. (collectively, DB).  The 
3 A reservation of rights "is a notice by the insurer to the insured
that the insurer . . . is not waiving any defenses it may have under the
[insurance] policy."  First Ins. Co. of Haw. v. State, 66 Haw. 413, 422, 665P.2d 648, 654 (1983) (original ellipsis omitted) (first quoting Crawford v.Ranger Ins. Co., 653 F.2d 1248, 1252 (9th Cir. 1981); and then citing 7C J.Appleman, Insurance Law & Practice § 4694 (Berdal 1979)). 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complaint alleged that Dongbu breached the insurance policies by 
failing to participate in the appraisal process.  4
Dongbu's answer asserted these affirmative defenses: 
38. This action is barred by the terms and
conditions in the subject policies. 
. . . . 
40. Coverage under the subject policies is barred in
whole or in part by the terms, exclusions, conditions, and
limitations contained or incorporated in such policy,including any and all endorsements. 
. . . . 
42. [The Krafchows]' claims for additional damages
are barred to the extent [their] claims are for losses ordamage that were not covered or excluded under the Policy. 
. . . . 
57. To the extent that [the Krafchows] breached or
failed to comply with the terms and conditions of thesubject policies, [they] are barred from recovery. 
. . . . 
58. To the extent that [the Krafchows], or someone
acting on [their] behalf, has [sic] concealed,misrepresented or negligently failed to disclose materialfacts in their applications and/or claims for the purpose ofinducing [Dongbu] to pay benefits, any claims for coverageunder such policy are barred. 
The Krafchows filed a motion to compel appraisals.  DB 
opposed the motion.  DB argued it was premature to appraise the 
amount of loss because coverage issues had not been resolved. The Krafchows' reply memorandum stated: 
To the extent that [DB], who have already paid out over
$300,000 in covered losses to the KRAFCHOWS, believes thereis information which would preclude coverage, that is aquestion which is separate from appraising the value of theloss.  The appraisal of the claim only establishes the value 
4 The complaint also alleged that DB: breached the implied covenant
of good faith and fair dealing; breached a fiduciary duty to the Krafchows;intentionally or negligently inflicted emotional distress upon the Krafchows;committed unfair and deceptive acts and practices in violation of HawaiiRevised Statutes ( HRS) § 480-2; negligently failed to adjust the Krafchows'
claims; and committed consumer fraud elder abuse in violation of HRS § 480-13.5.  The circuit court stayed proceedings on those claims pending thedisposition of these appeals. 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the loss and does not go to coverage.  Insurance coverage 
is outside of the scope of an appraisal .  Wailua Associates 
v. Aetna Cas. and Sur. Co., 904 F.Supp. 1142 (D. Haw., 1995)(stating the appraisal panel should not consider issuespertaining to coverage and liability under the insurancepolicy as these issues are beyond the scope of theparties['] agreement to arbitrate). 
(Emphasis added.) 
The circuit court granted the motion to compel 
appraisal, without referring to insurance coverage.  The 
Krafchows and Dongbu each appointed an appraiser: the Krafchows appointed Chris Arnold; Dongbu appointed Jim Reinhardt.  The 
circuit court appointed a retired judge to serve as the umpire.
5 
Arnold and Reinhardt each issued appraisals; they did 
not agree on the amount of loss.  Under the appraisal provisions 
of the insurance policies, if the appraisers did not agree on the amount of loss, the amount of loss would be the one with which the umpire agrees.  The umpire agreed with Arnold's appraisals. Each of Arnold's appraisals stated: 
This is to certify that we, the undersigned, pursuant to our
appointment as appraisers and umpire, have carefullyexamined the documents and/or the damaged property and/orevidence thereof and have determined the following valuesand loss: 
(Bold omitted.) 
Each appraisal established replacement cost value, 
depreciation, and actual cost value for various categories of 
loss,6 reduced the appraised amount by a deductible amount, and 
stated: "This award shall be payable within 20 calendar days. . . .  All prior payments shall be deducted [from] this award." 
5 The orders granting the motion to compel and appointing the umpire
were entered by the Honorable Peter T. Cahill. 
6 The categories were building; other structures; landscaping;
contents; and additional living expense/loss of use. 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Each appraisal contained the following notation: 
The undersigned Umpire, pursuant to the footnote on page 2
of the foregoing Appraisal and Award,[7] hereby makes the
following notation at the request of appraiser Jim Reinhart[sic].  Mr. Reinhart [sic] has not executed the Award forthe reason that, in view of Dongbu Insurance Co. Ltd., theAward includes amounts that are not covered by theapplicable policy.  More specifically, that the work forwhich awards are made is prohibited by Maui CountyOrdinance.  The undersigned has forwarded this notation toboth appraisers. 
The Krafchows moved to confirm the appraisals.  DB 
moved to vacate them.  At the hearing, Dongbu argued: 
The function of appraisers is to determine the amount
of damage resulting to various items submitted for theirconsideration.  It is certainly not their function toresolve questions of coverage and interpret provisions ofthe policy. 
The Krafchows argued: 
[I]n this particular case, I think Judge Cahill had orderedthe appraisal.  It was clear there were no restrictions on it. 
The circuit court stated: 
[T]he Court determines and rejects the argument that theumpires [sic] exceeded their scope of authority indetermining the appraisal amounts.  And this is pursuant to
the Court's order directing such appraisal . 
The Court determines that pursuant to HRS Section
658-23, there are no grounds for vacation of the award ongrounds that the arbitrator exceeded the arbitrator'spowers. . . . 
. . . . 
So clearly, the arbitrator's and umpire's decision did
have to take into consideration arguments pertaining toscope of coverage and exclusions. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The circuit court entered orders granting the motion to 
confirm and denying the motion to vacate, expressly recognizing 
7 The footnote stated: "Further detailed documents may be attached
to this summary of the award." 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that the appraiser's and umpire's values included "consideration 
[of] . . . scope of [insurance] coverage and exclusions."  In CAAP-21-0000513, DB appeals from the order granting the Krafchows' motion to confirm the appraisals.  In CAAP-21-0000517, DB originally appealed from the orders
8 denying its motion to 
vacate the appraisals; on temporary remand the circuit court entered amended orders that denied the motion to vacate and also reconfirmed the appraisals.
9  We consolidated the appeals. 
POINTS OF ERROR 
DB contends that the circuit court erred by granting 
the motion to confirm and denying the motion to vacate the appraisal awards, because the appraiser and the umpire exceeded their authority when they considered insurance coverage issues and decided whether the insurance policies provided coverage for certain claimed loss. 
STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
"[T]he scope of an agreement to arbitrate is an issue 
that a court must decide."  Nat'l Union Fire Ins. Co. v. Reynolds, 77 Hawai# i 490, 494, 889 P.2d 67, 71 (App. 1995) 
(cleaned up).  The construction of, and legal effect given to, an arbitration agreement is a question of law reviewed de novo. 
8 The circuit court entered two orders denying DB's single motion to
vacate the three appraisals. 
9 We temporarily remanded the case "to allow for the issuance of an
amended order denying the motion to vacate the appraisal awards and
reconfirming the appraisal awards under HRS § 658A-23.  See Bennett v. Chung, 143 Hawai #i 266, 268, 428 P.3d 778, 780 (2018) (holding that although order
denying motion to vacate arbitration award was not appealable under HawaiiRevised Statutes § 658A-28, subsequently-issued, amended order denying motionto vacate was appealable where order also reconfirmed award). 
In the future, if a circuit court grants a motion to confirm an
arbitration award and denies a motion to vacate the award, we suggest bothmotions be disposed of in a single order.  See HRS § 658A-23(d) (2016); Bennett, 143 Hawai #i at 280, 428 P.3d at 792 ("[I]n the interest of judicial
economy, absent the filing of a motion to vacate, a circuit court should waitto file an order confirming an arbitration award until the ninety-day periodin which to file a motion to vacate has elapsed."). 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Yamamoto v. Chee, 146 Hawai# i 527, 533, 463 P.3d 1184, 1190 
(2020) (quoting Brown v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 82 Hawai# i 226, 
239, 921 P.2d 146, 159 (1996)).  The determination whether an 
arbitration agreement is ambiguous is also a question of law reviewed de novo.  Id.
DISCUSSION 
The appraisal provisions in the insurance policies are 
arbitration agreements, subject to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
Chapter 658A.
10  See Wailua Assocs. v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., 904 
F. Supp. 1142, 1148 (D. Haw. 1995) (Wailua I) (relying upon 
former HRS Chapter 658 and relevant Hawai# i case law to determine 
what constitutes an "agreement to arbitrate" under the Federal 
Arbitration Act) (first citing Hung Wo Ching v. Hawaiian Rests., 50 Haw. 563, 566, 445 P.2d 370, 372 (1968); then citing Leeward Bus Co. v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 58 Haw. 64, 69-70, 564 P.2d 445, 448-49 (1977); and then citing Loyalty Dev. Co. v. Wholesale Motors, Inc., 61 Haw. 483, 487-88, 605 P.2d 925, 928 (1980)). 
HRS Chapter 658A contains these relevant provisions: 
Confirmation of award .  After a party to an
arbitration proceeding receives notice of an award, the
party may make a motion to the court for an order confirmingthe award at which time the court shall issue a confirmingorder unless the award is modified or corrected pursuant tosection 658A-20 ["Change of award by arbitrator"] or 658A-24["Modification or correction of award"] or is vacatedpursuant to section 658A-23. 
Vacating award .  (a) Upon motion to the court by a
party to an arbitration proceeding, the court shall vacatean award made in the arbitration proceeding if: 
. . . . 
(4) An arbitrator exceeded the arbitrator's powers[.] 
. . . . 
(d) If the court denies a motion to vacate an award, 
10 HRS Chapter 658A applies to "an agreement to arbitrate made on or
after July 1, 2002."  HRS § 658A-3 (2016).  The insurance policies were issued in January and February 2018. 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
it shall confirm the award . . . . 
Judgment on award; attorney's fees and litigation
expenses .  (a) Upon granting an order confirming . . . an
award, the court shall enter a judgment in conformity
therewith.  The judgment may be recorded, docketed, andenforced as any other judgment in a civil action. 
HRS §§ 658A-22, -23, -25 (2016). 
I. The Appraiser and the Umpire Had No Power toDecide What Amounts Dongbu Owed to the Krafchows 
What issues, if any, are beyond the scope of a contractualagreement to arbitrate depends on the wording of thecontractual agreement to arbitrate.  An arbitration agreement is interpreted like a contract, and as with anycontract, the parties['] intentions control.  Further, wehave long expressed our disapproval of interpreting acontract such that any provision be rendered meaningless. 
County of Hawaii v. UNIDEV, LLC, 129 Hawai# i 378, 394-95, 301 
P.3d 588, 604-05 (2013) (cleaned up) (emphasis omitted). 
The appraisal provisions in the homeowners and dwelling 
fire policies state that the appraisers and the umpire, if 
necessary, are to determine the "amount of loss."  None of the policies defined the word "loss."  Thus, the word "should be interpreted according to [its] plain, ordinary, and accepted sense in common speech unless it appears from the [insurance] policy that a different meaning is intended."  Dairy Rd. Partners v. Island Ins. Co., 92 Hawai# i 398, 411, 992 P.2d 93, 106 (2000) 
(cleaned up). 
A common meaning of the word "loss" is "decrease in 
amount, magnitude, value, or degree[.]"  Loss, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/loss (last updated Jan. 30, 2023).  The word appears 258 times in the homeowners policy and 149 times in each of the dwelling fire policies — with and without qualifiers.
11  For example, the homeowners policy 
11 According to Merriam-Webster, an alternate definition of "loss" is
"the amount of an insured's financial detriment by death or damage that the
insurer is liable for[.]"  Loss, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/loss (last updated Jan. 30, 2023).  That definition is 
(continued...) 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
11 provides:12 
SECTION I — PERILS INSURED AGAINST 
We insure against risk of direct loss  to property described 
in Coverages A, B and C, only if that loss  is a physical 
loss  to property. 
We do not insure, however, for loss : 
1. Under Coverages A, B and C: a. Excluded under Section I — EXCLUSIONS[.] 
. . . . 
B. Coverage C — Personal Property We insure for 
direct physical loss  to the property 
described in Coverage C caused by any of the following 
perils unless the loss  is excluded in Section I — 
Exclusions. 
. . . . 
SECTION I — EXCLUSIONS A. We do not insure
 for loss  caused directly or
indirectly by any of the following.  Such loss  is 
excluded regardless of any other cause or event
contributing concurrently or in any sequence to theloss .  These exclusions apply whether or not the loss 
event results in widespread damage or affects asubstantial area. 
. . . . 
SECTION I - CONDITIONS 
A. Insurable Interest And Limit Of Liability Even if more than one person has an insurable interest
in the property covered, 
we will not be liable in any
one loss : 
(...continued)
inconsistent with the language of the insurance policies, which specificallyrefer to "loss" that is "excluded" or not "covered" or for which Dongbu "willnot be liable." 
12 The homeowners policy is 55 pages long.  The dwelling fire policy 
is 46 pages long.  Each contains, in addition to the declarations, a number ofnotices, schedules, forms, and endorsements, some of which replace or modifythe terms or conditions of other portions of the policy.  However, "mere complexity" does not create ambiguity.  Sturla, Inc. v. Fireman's Fund Ins.Co., 67 Haw. 203, 209, 684 P.2d 960, 964 (1984).  Ambiguity exists "only whenthe contract taken as a whole, is reasonably subject to differinginterpretation."  Id. at 209–10, 684 P.2d at 964.  The policy provisionsmaterial to the disposition of this appeal are not ambiguous. 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1. To an "insured" for more than the amount of such 
"insured's" interest at the time of loss ; or 
2. For more than the applicable limit of liability. 
B. Duties After Loss 
In case of a loss  to covered property, we have no duty
to provide coverage under this policy if the failureto comply with the following duties is prejudicial tous.  These duties must be performed either by you, an"insured" seeking coverage, or a representative ofeither: 
. . . . 
C. Loss  Settlement 
In this Condition C., the terms "cost to repair or
replace" and "replacement cost" 
do not include the
increased costs incurred to comply with theenforcement of any ordinance or law, except to theextent that coverage for these increased costs isprovided in E.11 . Ordinance Or Law under Section I — 
Property Coverages.  Covered property losses  are 
settled as follows: 
. . . . 
F. Other Insurance And Service Agreement 
If a loss  covered by this policy
 is also covered by: 
1. Other insurance, we will pay only the proportion
of the loss  that the limit of liability that
applies under this policy bears to the totalamount of insurance covering the loss [.] 
. . . . 
PERSONAL PROPERTY REPLACEMENT COST 
LOSS  SETTLEMENT 
A. Eligible Property 
1. Covered losses  to the following property are
settled at replacement cost at the time of the
loss : 
a. Coverage C; and 
b. If covered
 in this policy: 
(1) Awnings, outdoor antennas andoutdoor equipment; and 
(2) Carpeting and household appliances; 
whether or not attached to buildings. 
2. This method of loss  settlement will also apply
to the following articles or classes of property 
11 . . . . FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
if they are separately described and
specifically insured in this policy and notsubject to agreed value loss  settlement: 
. . . . 
Personal Property Replacement Cost loss  settlement 
will not apply to other classes of property separatelydescribed and specifically insured. 
(Bold italics and underscoring added.) 
Similarly, each dwelling fire policy provides:13 
PERILS INSURED AGAINST 
A. Coverage A - Dwelling And Coverage B - Other
Structures 
1. We insure against risk of direct physical loss 
to property described in Coverages A and B. 
2. We do not insure, however, for loss : 
a. Excluded under General Exclusions[.] 
. . . . 
B. Coverage C - Personal Property We insure for 
direct physical loss  to the property 
described in Coverage C caused by a peril listed below 
unless the loss  is excluded in the General Exclusions. 
. . . . 
GENERAL EXCLUSIONS A. We do not insure
 for loss  caused directly or
indirectly by any of the following.  Such loss  is 
excluded regardless of any other cause or event
contributing concurrently or in any sequence to theloss .  These exclusions apply whether or not the loss 
event results in widespread damage or affects asubstantial area. 
. . . . 
B. We do not insure
 for loss  to property described in 
Coverages A and B caused by any of the following. 
However, any ensuing loss  to property described in 
Coverages A and B not precluded by any other provision
in this policy is covered. 
13 See supra note 12. 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
CONDITIONS 
A. Policy Period This policy applies only to loss  which occurs during 
the policy period. 
B. Insurable Interest And Limit Of Liability Even if more than one person has an insurable interest
in the property covered, we will not be liable in anyone loss : 
1. For an amount greater than the interest of aperson insured under this policy at the time ofloss ; or 
2. For more than the applicable limit of liability. 
C. Concealment Or Fraud 
We provide coverage to no persons insured under this
policy if, whether before or after a loss , one or more 
persons insured under this policy have: 
1. Intentionally concealed or misrepresented any
material fact or circumstance; 
2. Engaged in fraudulent conduct; or 
3. Made false statements; 
relating to this insurance. 
D. Duties After Loss 
In case of a loss  to covered property, we have no duty
to provide coverage under this policy if the failureto comply with the following duties is prejudicial tous.  These duties must be performed either by you oryour representative: 
. . . . 
E. Loss  Settlement 
In this Condition E., the terms "cost to repair or
replace" and "replacement cost" do not include
 the
increased costs incurred to comply with theenforcement of any ordinance or law except to theextent that coverage for these increased costs isprovided in Other Coverage F.12.  Ordinance Or Law. 
Covered property losses  are settled as follows . . . . 
(Bold italics and underscoring added.) 
Dongbu and the Krafchows disagreed on the amount of the 
Krafchows' loss because of the wildfire.  The insurance policies 
require that the amount of loss be determined by the appraisers 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and, if necessary, the umpire.  But not all of the Krafchows' 
loss is necessarily insured or covered under their insurance policies; Dongbu's liability to pay for a "loss" is limited by the coverage provisions, exclusions, and other terms and conditions of the policies.  The appraisal provision does not limit itself to 
covered loss; it does not preclude appraisal of 
non-covered or excluded loss, or loss for which Dongbu is otherwise not liable; and it does not empower the appraisers to consider policy or coverage defenses. 
Nothing in the appraisal provision empowers the 
appraisers and umpire to determine whether any part of the "loss" being appraised is or is not covered under the insurance policies.  See, e.g., Wailua I, 904 F. Supp. at 1149 ("Clearly, the appraisal panel should not consider issues pertaining to coverage and liability under the insurance policy as these issues are beyond the scope of the parties['] agreement to arbitrate."); St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co. v. Wright, 629 P.2d 1202, 1203 (Nev. 1981) ("The function of the appraisers is to determine the amount of damage resulting to various items submitted for their consideration.  It is certainly not their function to resolve questions of coverage and interpret provisions of the [insurance] policy.") (quoting Jefferson Ins. Co. of N.Y. v. Superior Ct. of Alameda Cnty., 475 P.2d 880, 883 (Cal. 1970)). 
The Krafchows argue that Dongbu waived the issue of 
whether the appraisers and umpire had the power to decide insurance coverage issues because Dongbu failed to appeal from the order granting the Krafchows' motion to compel appraisals. The argument is without merit.  First, the order granting the motion to compel appraisals was not an appealable order.  See HRS § 658A-28(a) (2016).  Second, the Krafchows' reply memorandum in support of their motion to compel appraisals cited Wailua I and acknowledged that "[t]he appraisal of the claim only establishes the value of the loss and does not go to coverage.  Insurance coverage is outside of the scope of an appraisal."  Accordingly, the order granting the Krafchows' motion to compel appraisals 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
cannot be interpreted to empower the appraisers and umpire to 
decide insurance coverage issues.  Indeed, the order itself makes no reference to insurance coverage issues.
14 
The insurance policy provisions are not ambiguous 
because, read as a whole, they are not reasonably subject to differing interpretation with respect to the word "loss."  See Sturla, Inc. v. Fireman's Fund Ins. Co., 67 Haw. 203, 209-10, 684 P.2d 960, 964 (1984).  Under the circumstances of this case, the unqualified word "loss" in the appraisal provision refers to the Krafchows' loss because of the wildfire, not what Dongbu is obligated to pay under any of the Krafchows' insurance policies. Simply put, the appraisers and umpire had the power to appraise what the Krafchows lost because of the wildfire.  The appraisers and the umpire had no power to decide what amounts Dongbu owed to the Krafchows under the insurance policies, because what Dongbu actually owes to the Krafchows depends upon coverage issues that must be decided by the circuit court. 
II. The Appraiser and the Umpire Exceeded Their Powers
by Deciding How Much Dongbu Must Pay to theKrafchows, and When the Payment Must Be Made 
Citing Tatibouet v. Ellsworth, 99 Hawai# i 226, 233, 54 
P.3d 397, 404 (2002), the Krafchows argue that their appraiser 
(Arnold) and the umpire did not exceed their powers, but made only "mistakes in the application of law and in their findings of fact" that are not a basis to vacate the awards. 
It is well-established that "parties who arbitrate a 
dispute assume 'all the hazards of the arbitration process including the risk that the arbitrators may make mistakes in the application of law and in their findings of fact.'"  Tatibouet, 99 Hawai# i at 233, 54 P.3d at 404 (quoting Wayland Lum Constr., 
14 Dongbu argues that the Krafchows are judicially estopped from
taking a legal position contrary to Wailua I, which they cited in support of
their successful motion to compel appraisals.  We need not address the judicial estoppel argument. 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Inc. v. Kaneshige, 90 Hawai# i 417, 422, 978 P.2d 855, 860 
(1999)).  The Tatibouet
 court also noted, however: 
[T]his court has, thus far, reserved the phrase "exceeded
their powers" as reference to arbitrators' improperconsideration of matters outside the scope of thearbitration agreement: 
[P]recisely because "the scope of an arbitrator'sauthority is determined by agreement of the parties,"it follows that "[a]n arbitrator must act within thescope of the authority conferred upon him by theparties and cannot exceed his power by decidingmatters not submitted."  Clawson v. Habilitat, Inc.,71 Haw. 76, 78, 783 P.2d 1230, 1231 (1989) (citationsomitted).  Accordingly, . . . where an arbitrator hasexceeded his or her powers by deciding matters notsubmitted, this court has held, pursuant to HRS§ 658–9(4), that the resulting arbitration award mustbe vacated.  Brennan v. Stewarts' Pharmacies, Ltd., 59Haw. 207, 223, 579 P.2d 673, 681–82 (1978). 
Mathewson[ v. Aloha Airlines, Inc.], 82 Hawai #i [57], 75,
919 P.2d [969], 987 [(1996)] (some alterations in originaland bracket omitted). 
Id. at 235, 54 P.3d at 406. 
The appraisals themselves do not reveal whether Arnold 
or the umpire made mistakes in finding facts or applying the law. 
Arnold and the umpire may or may not have made factual or legal mistakes when they valued what the Krafchows lost, but that is not at issue in these appeals.  At issue is Arnold's and the umpire's decision about how much Dongbu owed the Krafchows under the insurance policies, and when Dongbu's payment must be made. The appraisals specifically state how much Dongbu was to pay the Krafchows (after subtraction of deductibles and prior payments), and when payment was to be made.  Those awards could not have been made without considering the scope of insurance coverage. They show that Arnold and the umpire purported to appraise what they believed to be covered loss, because under the insurance 
policies Dongbu is not obligated to pay uncovered or excluded 
loss, or loss for which Dongbu is otherwise not liable.  Indeed, in granting the Krafchows' motion to confirm and denying DB's motion to vacate the appraisals, the circuit court stated that the appraiser and umpire included "consideration . . . of [insurance] coverage and exclusions." 
16 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Rather than issue awards directing Dongbu to pay, 
Arnold and the umpire should have appraised the value of what the 
Krafchows lost because of the wildfire, irrespective of insurance coverage.  
See Koolau Radiology, Inc. v. Queen's Med. Ctr., 73 
Haw. 433, 834 P.2d 1294 (1992) (arbitration agreement limited scope of arbitration to determining lease values and did not give arbitrator power to decide legal issues such as statute of frauds or parol evidence rule related to alleged oral agreement); Wailua Assocs. v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., 27 F. Supp. 2d 1208, 1211 (D. Haw. 1997) (Wailua II) ("The Court recognizes that the Award 
includes a number of 'appraised values' and that there are 
additional issues to be adjudicated which may or may not affect the final amount to be awarded under the policy."); cf. Nat'l Union Fire Ins. Co. v. Reynolds, 77 Hawai# i 490, 494, 889 P.2d 
67, 71 (App. 1995) (holding, under arbitration clause of underinsured motorist policy, that arbitration on question of whether insured was "legally entitled to recover damages" is limited to determining tortfeasor's fault and amount of insured's damages, and did not include whether underinsured motorist coverage applied under any particular circumstance). 
The Krafchows also argue that Dongbu waived its right 
to challenge the appraisals because Dongbu's statement of the points of error on appeal did not include the circuit court's denial of Dongbu's request to stay enforcement of the appraisal awards.  The argument lacks merit.  Dongbu challenges the entirety of the appraisals, which include provisions that "[t]his award shall be payable within 20 calendar days."  Under HRS § 658A-25 the Krafchows could have, but did not, request entry of a judgment on each of the appraisals.  The resultant judgments could have been recorded and executed against Dongbu.  When Dongbu filed its notice of appeal before the Krafchows moved for entry of a judgment on the order confirming the appraisals, Dongbu's stay request became moot because there were no potential enforcement procedures to stay. 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we hold that the Krafchows' 
appraiser and the umpire exceeded their powers by deciding what 
amounts Dongbu owed to the Krafchows, rather than appraising the value of the Krafchows' loss because of the wildfire.  Because the appraiser and umpire exceeded their powers, the circuit court erred by granting the Krafchows' motion to confirm the appraisals, and by denying DB's motion to vacate the appraisals. The following orders are vacated: 
(1) "Order Granting Plaintiffs' 
Motion to Confirm Appraisal Summary and Awards" entered on July 26, 2021; (2) "Amended Order Denying Defendants' Motion to 
Vacate and/or Modify Three Appraisal Awards or, in the Alternate, 
to Stay, and Reconfirming the Appraisal Awards" entered on June 13, 2022; and (3) "Amended Order Denying Defendants' Motion 
to Vacate and/or Modify Three Appraisal Awards and Reconfirming 
Appraisal Awards" entered on June 14, 2022.  This case is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
Chief Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Associate Judge 
18 Wesley H. H. Ching, Nadine Y. Ando,Jennifer Cook Clark, for Defendants-Appellants Dongbu Insurance Co., Ltd., nka DB Insurance Co., Ltd. and John Mullen & Co., Inc. 
Peter N. Martin,Thomas C. Zizzi,for Plaintiffs-AppelleesEdmond Krafchow and Kathleen Krafchow. 