 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-17-0000898 13-APR-2020 09:36 AM 
NO. CAAP-17-0000898 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I  
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
SAMSON K. KEANAAINA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(
3CPC-17-0000154)  
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Defendant-Appellant Samson K. Keanaaina (Keanaaina) 
appeals from the November 17, 2017 Judgment of Conviction and 
Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit 
(Circuit Court).1 After a jury trial, the Circuit Court 
convicted Keanaaina of Prohibited Acts Related to Drug Paraphernalia, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 329-43.5(a) 
(Supp. 2019); Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, HRS 
§ 712-1243(1) (2014); Promoting a Detrimental Drug in the Third 
Degree, HRS § 712-1249(1) (2014); and Attempted Promoting a 
Controlled Substance in, on or near Schools, School Vehicles, 
Public Parks, or Public Housing Projects or Complexes, HRS 
§§ 705-500(1)(b) (2014) and 712-1249.6(1) (2014). 
On appeal, Keanaaina contends that (a) his Motion to 
Suppress was wrongfully denied because (1) the police officers 
1 The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failed to knock and announce and (2) the warrant did not permit 
search of Keanaaina's backpack; (b) Juror #7 should have been 
excused immediately upon the Circuit Court's learning that she 
was a neighbor to a police officer witness (Police Officer 
Witness); (c) Keanaaina's trial counsel was ineffective for 
failing to object to the prosecutor's line of questioning of 
Keanaaina; and (d) there would have been insufficient evidence to 
convict Keanaaina if the Motion to Suppress had been granted. 
II. BACKGROUND 
On March 8, 2017, police executed a search warrant for 
a homeless woman and the campsite she lived in at the Old Kona 
Airport Park. The several police officers yelled at least five 
times from as close as fifteen feet away from the tent announcing 
their office, that they had a warrant, and asking all individuals 
present to exit their tents. The police did not knock on the 
woman's tent; there was nothing to knock on but a tarp. However, 
Officer Michael Hardie, who was "up against the tent" yelled into 
the tent "five to six times", announcing police presence and 
asking the occupant to come outside. In response, many 
individuals exited their tents, including the woman who was the 
target of the warrant. The woman told an officer that her 
sleeping boyfriend, Keanaaina, was hearing impaired and likely 
could not hear the officers' command to exit; therefore, one 
officer moved a futon out of the way, entered the tent, and 
tapped on the man's shoulder to wake him up. Drugs and drug 
paraphernalia were discovered inside two backpacks and two 
Hydroflasks located on the bed on which the woman and the man had 
been sleeping. 
III. POINTS ON APPEAL 
Keanaaina alleges the following points of error on 
appeal:2 
2 The Opening Brief fails to comply with Hawai #i Rules of Appellate
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4)(ii) and (iii) in that Keanaaina fails to show
where in the record the alleged error occurred and where in the record the
(continued...)
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2A. The Circuit Court erred in denying Keanaaina's
Motion to Suppress upon the circumstancessurrounding the execution of the search warrant. 
B. The Circuit Court abused its discretion by failingto immediately excuse Juror #7, who had a personalconnection to a police officer witness. 
C. The defense counsel was ineffective for failing toobject to questions on cross-examination that wereoutside the scope of direct and were evidence ofprior bad acts. 
D. The wrongful introduction of evidence obtainedthrough the search warrant was not harmless error. 
IV. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Motion to Suppress 
We review a circuit court's findings of fact in a
pretrial ruling according to the following standard:  
Appellate review of factual determinations made by the
trial court deciding pretrial motions in a criminalcase is governed by the clearly erroneous standard. A finding of fact is clearly erroneous when (1) therecord lacks substantial evidence to support thefinding, or (2) despite substantial evidence insupport of the finding, the appellate court isnonetheless left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. 
State v. Okumura, 78 Hawai #i 383, 392, 894 P.2d 80, 89
(1995) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted)."The circuit court's conclusions of law are reviewed under the right/wrong standard." State v. Pattioay, 78 Hawai #i 
455, 459, 896 P.2d 911, 915 (1995) (citation omitted).Furthermore, 
the proponent of a motion to suppress has the burdenof establishing not only that the evidence sought tobe excluded was unlawfully secured, but also, that hisor her own Fourth Amendment rights were violated bythe search and seizure sought to be challenged. 
State v. Abordo, 61 Haw. 117, 120-21, 596 P.2d 773, 775(1979) (citation and footnote omitted). . . . The proponentof the motion to suppress must satisfy this "burden of proofby a preponderance of the evidence." Pattioay, 78 Hawai #i 
at 466, 896 P.2d at 922 . . . (citation omitted). 
(...continued)
alleged error was objected to or the manner in which the alleged error wasbrought to the attention of the court or agency. Counsel is warned that future violations of the rules of court may result in sanctions. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Anderson, 84 Hawai# i 462, 466-67, 935 P.2d 1007, 1011-12 
(1997) (brackets and emphases omitted). 
B. Jury Challenges for Cause 
Hawai
#i appellate courts review a trial court's 
decision to pass a juror for cause under the abuse of discretion 
standard. State v. Kauhi, 86 Hawai# i 195, 197, 948 P.2d 1036, 
1038 (1997). 
"The trial court abuses its discretion when it 
clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or 
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a 
party litigant." Id. (citation and internal quotation marks 
omitted). 
C. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel 
When reviewing a claim of ineffective assistance of
counsel, [the appellate court] looks at whether defense
counsel's assistance was within the range of competencedemanded of attorneys in criminal cases. The defendant has the burden of establishing ineffective assistance of counseland must meet the following two-part test: 1) that therewere specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lackof skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors oromissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense. To satisfythis second prong, the defendant needs to show a possibleimpairment, rather than a probable impairment, of apotentially meritorious defense. A defendant need not proveactual prejudice. 
State v. Wakisaka, 102 Hawai# i 504, 513-14, 78 P.3d 317, 326-27
(2003) (citations, internal quotation marks, and footnote 
omitted).  
V. DISCUSSION 
A. The Circuit Court Properly Denied the Motion to Suppress. 
Keanaaina contends that the denial of the Motion to 
Suppress was wrong because the evidence had been illegally 
obtained when (1) the police failed to "yell out 'KNOCK KNOCK', 
and demand entry" prior to breaking into the tent; and (2) the 
police searched a backpack they should have realized belonged to 
Keanaaina, who was a visitor.3 
3 Keanaaina also purports to challenge the specificity of the
warrant, but does not identify in what way the warrant's specificity was
lacking. Therefore, we do not analyze this argument further. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1. The Search Was Legal Because, Although Knock and
Announce Did Not Apply, the Police NeverthelessComplied with Its Requirements. 
When executing a search warrant, a police officer may
enter the  
house, store, or other building . . . designated as the
place to be searched . . . without demanding permission ifthe officer finds it open. If the doors are shut, theofficer shall declare the officer's office and the officer's business and demand entrance. If the doors, gates, or otherbars to the entrance are not immediately opened, the officermay break them[.] 
HRS § 803-37 (2014). The Hawai# i Supreme Court has repeatedly 
stated that, when interpreting a statute, an appellate court's 
foremost obligation is to ascertain and give effect to theintention of the legislature, which is to be obtainedprimarily from the language contained in the statute itself.And where the language of the statute is plain andunambiguous, [a court's] only duty is to give effect to [thestatute's] plain and obvious meaning. 
State v. Wells, 78 Hawai# i 373, 376, 894 P.2d 70, 73 (1995) 
(citations, original quotation marks, and brackets omitted; 
brackets added). Assuming HRS § 803-37 was applicable to the 
tent involved in this case,  the tent did not have a clearly 
defined door. 
Therefore, whether a door was "open" or "closed" -
the latter state triggering the requirements of the statute - was 
also not clear. 4
Assuming the existence and closed status of the "door",
HRS § 803-37 requires police officers to "declare the officer's 
office and the officer's business; and demand entrance" prior to 
executing a search warrant. State v. Dixon, 83 Hawai# i 13, 17 
n.4, 924 P.2d 181, 185 n.4 (1996). The purposes of this so-called knock and announce rule are to "(1) reduce the potential 
of violence to both occupants and police resulting from an 
unannounced entry; (2) prevent unnecessary property damage; and  
4 The terms "house" and "building" are not defined in the statute.
A shelter made from poles and overlapping tarpaulins and other materials,
referred to in this case as a tent, is arguably not a "house, store, or otherbuilding" within common understanding. See House and Building, Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary (11th ed. 2003). 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(3) protect the occupant's right of privacy[.]" Id. at 14, 924 
P.2d at 182. The knock and announce rule is a mechanism that 
"safeguard[s] individuals from the arbitrary, oppressive, or 
harassing conduct of government officials" as guaranteed by 
article I, section 7 of the Hawai# i Constitution. State v. Diaz, 
100 Hawai# i 210, 217-18, 58 P.3d 1257, 1264-65 (2002). Where the 
purposes of the knock and announce rules are not frustrated, 
evidence obtained need not be suppressed. Dixon, 83 Hawai# i at 
14, 924 P.2d at 182. 
In this case, all three of the knock and 
announce rule purposes were fulfilled. 
First, the ten-plus officers clearly and loudly 
announced that they were police officers, that they had a search 
warrant, and demanded that the individuals exit their tents, 
thereby announcing their presence and reducing the potential of 
violence to both occupants and police. HRS § 803-37; 
Dixon, 83 
Hawai# i at 14, 924 P.2d at 182. By the plain language of the 
statute, the officers were not required to actually knock on the 
tent structure,5 but rather to ensure that the occupants heard 
their announcement. Requiring police to knock on the tent structure or, as suggested by Keanaaina, to yell "knock, knock" 
would not be any more effective than the other orders the police 
used here, thereby not increasing the chance that the occupants 
heard the police's announcements. Furthermore, as the Circuit 
Court concluded, upon the woman's exit from the tent, she 
voluntarily opened her "door," whereby knock and announce was no 
longer required. Dixon, 83 Hawai# i at 23, 924 P.2d at 191 
("there is no unwarranted intrusion on the occupant's privacy [where] the occupant has voluntarily surrendered his or her 
privacy by opening the door."). 
Moreover, there was testimony that police yelled both 
demands for entry and for the occupants to leave their 
5 The Circuit Court's finding that the structure was soft sided and
knocking would have made no noise is unchallenged on appeal and therefore
binding on this court. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
enclosures. Thus, the police complied with the requirements of 
HRS § 803-37, as well as its first purpose. 
Second, the officers were able to see the interior of 
the tent through gaps and could therefore pick the entranceway 
that would cause as little property damage as possible while 
providing the greatest safety to themselves and the remaining 
occupant, Keanaaina. As the Circuit Court concluded, there was 
no "breaking" of a door. Instead, after the woman-resident 
voluntarily exited the tent, the officers entered the tent by 
lifting a flap and moved a couch, which was unlikely to cause 
permanent property damage. 
Furthermore, the police are entitled to "break" any 
barrier denying the officers access to the structure if the "bars 
to the entrance are not immediately opened." HRS § 803-37. 
State v. Eleneki, 92 Hawai# i 562, 566, 993 P.2d 1191, 1195 
(2000). "What would constitute a reasonable period of time to respond to a knock and announcement must be determined by the 
circumstances of each case." State v. Monay
, 85 Hawai# i 282, 
284, 943 P.2d 908, 910 (1997) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Garcia, 77 Hawai# i 461, 468, 
887 P.2d 671, 678 (App. 1995)). Here, several minutes passed between the officers first requesting that the occupants exit and 
the officers entering the tent, and the officers only entered 
after learning that verbal commands were unlikely to be heard by 
the remaining occupant of the tent. 
This delay was reasonable 
and entitled the police officers to lift the flap and move the couch. See Diaz, 100 Hawai# i at 219, 58 P.3d at 1266 (holding 
that a fifteen seconds lapse before forcibly entering the interior office of a business during business hours was 
reasonable). 
Third, the officers protected Keanaaina's privacy as 
much as possible under the circumstances by providing Keanaaina 
several minutes to respond. Upon learning from his girlfriend 
that Keanaaina was likely unable to hear the officers because he 
is hearing impaired, and yelling yielded no response from 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Keanaaina, the police officers reasonably entered the structure 
to physically tap on his shoulder to wake him up. 
Based on this record, the police officers complied with 
the requirements and purposes of HRS § 803-37 and the Circuit 
Court did not err when it denied Keanaaina's Motion to Suppress. 
2. The Police Properly Seized and Searched the Gray
Backpack Pursuant to the Search Warrant. 
Keanaaina asserts that, because there were two 
backpacks on the bed on which one man and one woman slept, "[i]t 
defies logic to conclude other than that the 'Hello Kitty' model 
belonged to [the woman] and the SWISSGEAR model belonged to" 
Keanaaina, and the police therefore illegally searched the gray 
SWISSGEAR backpack. Keanaaina's argument is without merit. 
"[A] lawfully issued warrant to search premises extends 
to the officers executing it the 'authority to search, in a 
reasonable manner, whatever spots within the described premises 
their professional experience indicates may be used as a cache' 
for the items named in the warrant." State v. Nabarro, 55 Haw. 
583, 583, 525 P.2d 573, 574 (1974) (quoting State v. Davenport, 55 Haw. 90, 100, 516 P.2d 65, 72 (1973)). 
[T]he police cannot realistically be expected to avoid
searching the property of a mere visitor to the premisesunless they are aware of its ownership. Absent a requirement of such awareness, the effective execution of awarrant to search a place would be impossible since thepolice could never be sure that a plausible repository foritems named in the warrant belongs to a resident, and henceis searchable, or to a non-resident, and hence is notsearchable. Because of this, without notice of some sort ofthe ownership of a belonging, the police are entitled toassume that all objects within premises lawfully subject tosearch under a warrant are part of those premises for thepurpose of executing the warrant. 
Nabarro, 55 Haw. at 587-88, 525 P.2d at 576-77 (emphases added). 
Because the warrant authorized a search of every backpack found 
within the woman's (Keanaaina's girlfriend) campsite, absent 
clearly identifying markings on the gray backpack, the warrant 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
authorized the search of Keanaaina's backpack.6 Nabarro, 55 Haw. 
at 593-94, 525 P.2d at 580. There is no evidence in the record 
that the police knew that the gray backpack belonged to Keanaaina 
prior to searching it. No photographs in evidence depicted, and 
no witness identified, any exterior markings, writings, or other 
symbols that identified the gray bag as belonging to a male, let 
alone Keanaaina.7 Thus, Keanaaina failed to show the police 
should have known the gray backpack belonged to him prior to its seizure. 
When the officers -- pursuant to the valid search 
warrant of the tent structure -- opened the gray backpack, they 
immediately observed controlled substances. The officers did not 
search the backpack further at that time, but, rather, brought 
the bag to the police station to complete the search in a 
controlled environment. Only upon the subsequent search did the 
police uncover Keanaaina's identification cards inside the 
backpack, for the first time showing who the likely owner of the 
backpack was. Under the plain view doctrine, the items the 
officers observed after warrant-authorized opening of the 
backpack are admissible, and the subsequent discovery of the 
backpack's true owner does not negate the admissibility of the 
evidence. See State v. Meyer, 78 Hawai# i 308, 312-13, 893 P.2d 
159, 163-64 (1995). Thus, the Circuit Court's Conclusion of Law number 15, that "[t]he backpack which contained the 
identification cards of the defendant was not clearly the 
6 Citing State v. Joyner, 66 Haw. 543, 545-46, 669 P.2d 152, 153-54
(1983), Keanaaina contends that he retained a reasonable expectation of
privacy in the backpack because of its proximity to him. However, unlike thecase at hand, in which the search warrant authorized search of allrepositories that could contain methamphetamine, the search warrant in Joynerauthorized a search for gambling devices in a bath house. Id. Thus, the
defendant was found to have a reasonable expectation of privacy in his small,zippered bag, which was located within his closed athletic bag, presumablybecause the gambling devices were unlikely to fit inside the searched bags.Id. 
7 Keanaaina contends that the backpack "had all the indicia of the
backpack of a male," yet, beyond the color of the backpack, he does notspecify what indicia would make the backpack that of a male versus that of afemale. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
property of one or the other of the occupants of the structure, 
and the defendant had ties to the residence, so the search of the 
backpack was not improper" was not wrong. 
B. Any Error in Failing to Immediately Excuse a Juror Who Knew
a Witness Was Harmless. 
Keanaaina contends that Juror #7 should have been 
immediately dismissed for cause when she disclosed to the Circuit 
Court that one of the police officers who had just testified 
(Police Officer Witness) was her neighbor, and that Juror #7 knew 
some of Keanaaina's family members.8 
Juror #7 apparently did not recognize the Police 
Officer Witness's name when it was read and only after she had 
watched the Police Officer Witness testify in person did Juror #7 
recognize him and bring the matter to the Circuit Court's 
attention. The Circuit Court instructed Juror #7 not to discuss 
the matter with the other jurors and did not immediately dismiss 
her. Later in the trial, after the Circuit Court conducted a 
second colloquy with Juror #7, she was excused for cause before 
jury deliberation, and the Circuit Court again admonished her not 
to discuss the matter with other jurors. 
Jurors are presumed to have followed the Circuit 
Court's instructions. See, e.g., State v. Holbron, 80 Hawai# i 
27, 46, 904 P.2d 912, 931 (1995) (holding that there is a "sound presumption of appellate practice that jurors are reasonable and 
generally follow the instructions they are given.") (citation, 
internal quotation marks and brackets omitted); State v. Austin, 
8 Keanaaina contends that he is awaiting approval to view the Third
Circuit Court's bench book, in which he apparently expects there to be
language similar to the New Jersey's Judiciary Bench Manual on Jury Selectionthat he attached to his Opening Brief. First, New Jersey's manual provides"procedural and operational guidance," and does not require even New Jerseyjudges to follow the policies to the letter. New Jersey Judiciary Bench
Manual on Jury Selection i (Dec. 4, 2014),https://www.njcourts.gov/pressrel/2014/Bench%20Manual%20on%20Jury%20Selection%20-%20promulgated%20Dec%204%202014.pdf (last visited March 30, 2020) (emphasisadded). Second, even New Jersey's policies do not prohibit the CircuitCourt's actions in this case; instead, judges "are given substantialdeference" as to whether to excuse or rehabilitate jurors, even thoughrehabilitation is not "preferred." Id. at 35. Finally, Keanaaina presents no
authority making New Jersey's bench book binding on the courts of this state. 
10  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
70 Haw. 300, 308, 769 P.2d 1098, 1102 (1989) ("A jury is presumed 
to follow a trial court's directive, so any prejudice was 
eliminated."). Therefore, it is presumed that Juror #7 did not 
talk to other jurors about the reasons she was eventually excused 
for cause. 
Because Juror #7 was excused before deliberations and 
we may presume no disclosure of the reasons she was excused was 
made to the remaining jurors, any error in not excusing Juror #7 
midtrial was fully alleviated. The Circuit Court did not abuse 
its discretion by not immediately excusing Juror #7. 
C. Defense Counsel Was Not Ineffective for Failing to Object to
Questions During Cross-Examination. 
Keanaaina contends that he received ineffective 
assistance of counsel when his trial counsel, despite Keanaaina's 
Motion to Exclude Crimes, Wrongs, or Acts (Order to Exclude) 
having been granted, failed to object to the prosecution asking 
Keanaaina to identify drugs and drug paraphernalia from 
photographs. 
The Order to Exclude, consistent with the Hawaii Rules 
of Evidence (HRE) Rules 6099 and 611,10 prevented the State from 
introducing evidence of Keanaaina's criminal history absent Keanaaina opening the door to the issue. The Order to Exclude 
restricted the use of other crimes, wrongs, or acts for any 
purpose, however, thereby preventing the prosecution's use of 
9 HRE Rule 609(a) provides, in part, 
[I]n a criminal case where the defendant takes the stand,
the defendant shall not be questioned or evidence introducedas to whether the defendant has been convicted of a crime,for the sole purpose of attacking credibility, unless thedefendant has oneself introduced testimony for the purposeof establishing the defendant's credibility as a witness, inwhich case the defendant shall be treated as any otherwitness as provided in this rule. 
10 HRE Rule 611(b) provides, that "[c]ross-examination should be
limited to the subject matter of the direct examination and matters affectingthe credibility of the witness. The court may, in the exercise of discretion,permit inquiry into additional matters as if on direct examination." 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
such evidence under HRE Rule 404(b),11 which permits presentation 
of evidence to prove motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, 
plan, knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake 
or accident. 
During direct examination, Keanaaina testified that he 
was aware that his girlfriend was a drug user, but he denied 
knowing that she was a drug dealer until after he reviewed the 
police report. On cross-examination, the State asked whether 
Keanaaina's knowledge of his girlfriend's drug use allowed him to 
recognize what certain drugs and drug paraphernalia -- including 
methamphetamine pipes, straw scoopers, digital scales, plastic 
bags for holding methamphetamine -- looked like, and whether the 
amount of methamphetamine seized was "a lot." This line of 
questioning did not explore Keanaaina's criminal history but, 
rather, tested his credibility as a witness because the depth of 
his knowledge suggested that Keanaaina likely knew that his 
girlfriend was dealing drugs even before he read the police 
report, thereby impeaching Keanaaina by questioning the veracity 
of his testimony.12 As such, the line of questioning was proper, 
and the failure to object was not evidence of ineffective assistance of counsel. 
Furthermore, trial counsel could have made a tactical 
decision to not object. If counsel had objected to a question 
regarding Keanaaina's knowledge of his girlfriend's criminal 
activities, it could have suggested to the jury that evidence 
existed of Keanaaina's criminal activities. "Specific actions or 
11 HRE Rule 404(b) provides, in part: 
Other crimes, wrongs, or acts. Evidence of other crimes,
wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of
a person in order to show action in conformity therewith.It may, however, be admissible where such evidence isprobative of another fact that is of consequence to thedetermination of the action, such as proof of motive,opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity,modus operandi, or absence of mistake or accident[.] 
12 HRE Rule 607 provides, "[t]he credibility of a witness may be
attacked by any party, including the party calling the witness." 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
omissions alleged to be error but which had an obvious tactical 
basis for benefitting the defendant's case will not be subject to 
further scrutiny." Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 462-63, 848 
P.2d 966, 976 (1993) (emphasis in original) (citing State v. Tyrrell, 60 Haw. 17, 29, 586 P.2d 1028, 1036 (1978)). Given that 
this line of questioning was not inconsistent with Keanaaina's 
theory of the defense, which was that the police, in removing 
articles from the two backpacks placed the drugs from the woman's 
backpack into his own, objecting to this line of questioning may 
have undercut that theory. Objecting to questions eliciting that 
Keanaaina knew what certain drugs and paraphernalia looked like 
could have left the impression the defense sought to hide 
knowledge that did not incriminate him in this situation. 
Trial counsel was not ineffective for failing to object 
to the line of questioning on cross-examination. 
D. The Introduction of Evidence Obtained Through Execution of
the Search Warrant Was Not Error. 
Keanaaina contends that it was not harmless error to 
introduce the evidence seized from the search because his 
conviction was for crimes that all required possession of a 
controlled substance. However, because the evidence was properly 
admitted, there was no error, and Keanaaina's argument is without 
merit. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the November 17, 2017 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court 
of the Third Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 13, 2020. 
On the briefs: /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
Victor M. Cox,for Defendant-Appellant.
 /s/ Alexa D.M. FujiseAssociate Judge
Stephen L. Frye,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Hawai# i,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Clyde J. WadsworthAssociate Judge
13 