  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000092
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
RAY N. PUGA, Defendant-Appellant and
HAZEL K.R. DAVIS and RAMON A. ALCANTARA, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-0149)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Ray N. Puga (Puga) appeals from a
 
January 12, 2012 Judgment Guilty Conviction and Sentence
 
(Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
(Circuit Court).1
 
On February 2, 2010, Plaintiff-Appellee State of 
Hawai'i (State) charged Puga and co-defendants, Hazel K.R. Davis 
(Davis) and Ramon A. Alcantara (Alcantara), with attempted murder 
in the second degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes 
(HRS) §§ 705-500 (1993), 707-701.5 (1993), and 706-656 (1993 & 
Supp. 2012). On October 25, 2011, following a jury trial, Puga 
was found guilty of the lesser included offense of reckless 
endangering in the second degree in violation of HRS § 707-714 
(Supp. 2012). 
1
 The Honorable Colette Y. Garibaldi presided.
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Puga raises a single point of error, 
contending that the Circuit Court was not authorized to impose 
restitution against him because his criminal misconduct did not 
cause the victim's losses, as required under the Hawai' i victim 
restitution statute. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Puga's point of error as follows:
 
Puga argues that the jury's verdict as to reckless
 
endangering in the second degree fails to provide a causal link,
 
or a nexus, between Puga's conduct and the complaining witness's
 
injuries and, therefore, Puga cannot be ordered to pay
 
restitution pursuant to HRS § 706-646 (Supp. 2012), which
 
provides, in relevant part:
 
§706-646 Victim restitution. (1) As used in this
section, "victim" includes any of the following:
(a) 	The direct victim of a crime including a business
entity, trust, or governmental entity;
 
.  .  .
 
(c) 	
A governmental entity that has reimbursed the
victim for losses arising as a result of the
crime or paid for medical care provided to the
victim as a result of the crime.
 
(2) The court shall order the defendant to make
 
restitution for reasonable and verified losses suffered by
the victim or victims as a result of the defendant's offense
 when requested by the victim. The court shall order
 restitution to be paid to the crime victim compensation
commission in the event that the victim has been given an
award for compensation under chapter 351. . . .
(3) . . . Restitution shall be a dollar amount that
 
is sufficient to reimburse any victim fully for losses,
including but not limited to:
 
.  .  .
 (b) 	Medical expenses; and
(c) 	Funeral and burial expenses incurred as a result
of the crime. 
"[U]nder HRS § 706-646, a defendant cannot be ordered 
to pay restitution unless he caused a victim's losses." State v. 
Domingo, 121 Hawai' i 191, 194, 216 P.3d 117, 120 (App. 2009). 
Absent evidence that Puga's conduct was a cause of, or 
aggravated, the complaining witness's injuries, no causal 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
relationship between Puga's criminal act and a victim's losses is
 
shown and restitution may not be imposed pursuant to HRS § 706­
646. See id. at 195, 216 P.3d at 121. To establish causation,
 
there must be a nexus between Puga's conduct and the complaining
 witness's injuries. See id. ("[R]estitution cannot be imposed
 
pursuant to HRS § 706-646" because" [n]o nexus between Domingo's
 conduct and [the victim's] injuries [] has been demonstrated.").
 
The jury found Puga guilty of reckless endangering in
 
the second degree in violation of HRS § 707-714 (Supp. 2012),
 
which provides, in relevant part:
 
§707-714 Reckless endangering in the second degree.
(1) A person commits the offense of reckless endangering in
the second degree if the person:
(a) 	Engages in conduct that recklessly places another
person in danger of death or serious bodily
injury[.]
 
The Circuit Court found that there was a sufficient
 
nexus between Puga's conduct and the complaining witness's
 
injuries to order restitution. We agree. Even though Puga was
 
not convicted of attempted murder, the complaining witness's
 
injuries were, in part, a result of Puga's offense. Puga
 
participated in planning the attack. He picked up and
 
transported the complaining witness to the location of the
 
attack, and otherwise engaged in conduct that recklessly placed
 
the complaining witness in danger of death or serious bodily
 
injury. Although Puga was not convicted of inflicting bodily
 
injury upon the complaining witness, the complaining witness
 
suffered bodily injury and incurred medical expenses as a result
 
of Puga's actions.
 
Puga's reliance on Domingo is misplaced. In Domingo, 
which involved a fatal car accident, the State asserted that the 
decedent, not the defendant, caused the accident. Domingo, 121 
Hawai'i at 195, 216 P.3d at 121. Domingo's criminal misconduct 
was that he failed to remain at the scene of the accident, 
provide information, and render assistance. Id. None of these 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
actions had a nexus with the decedent's death, which was
 
immediate upon impact. Id. That situation is plainly
 
distinguishable from the incident in this case, where Puga's
 conduct placed the complaining witness in danger of death or
 
serious bodily injury, and the complaining witness did in fact
 
suffer bodily injury at least in part as a result of Puga's
 
reckless endangerment.
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's January 12, 2012
 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 20, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Walter J. Rodby
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Sonja P. McCullenDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4 