NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000087
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JAMES E. ABEL, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 1P1120008541)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant James E. Abel appeals from a
 
December 17, 2012 Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order
 
entered in the District Court of the First Circuit (district
 court) for using a live animal for the solicitation of business
 on public property in violation of Revised Ordinances of Honolulu
 (ROH) ยง 29-13.2(b) (2012).
 
On appeal Abel contends the district court wrongly 
denied his motion for judgment of acquittal and wrongly adjudged him guilty as charged because the Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i failed to provide sufficient evidence regarding the 
element of solicitation. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Abel's
 appeal is without merit.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
ROH ยง 29-13.2(b) provides that
 
In the Waikiki special district, no person shall use
any live animal in furtherance of any solicitation on any
public property, except in compliance with all of the
following conditions of this section or, if applicable,
Section 29-13.2A:
 
. . . .
 (b) The person conducting the solicitation shall not place
the animal on or otherwise transfer the animal to any
other person
.
 
"'Solicitation' means to request or demand money or gifts." ROH
 
ยง 29-13.1.
 
The testimony from Honolulu Police Department Sergeant
 
Christensen indicates that she observed Abel standing on the
 sidewalk fronting 2335 Kalakaua Avenue while holding four birds. 
She then observed Abel "placing [the] birds on different
 individuals[,] taking pictures with the individuals['] cameras[,]
 and [she] would [then] see money transfer between the individual
 and [Abel]." She further described Abel's conduct of
 transferring the birds from himself to another person, as
 follows: "So he would have the birds in his hands. He would
 place them on the individuals, take the individuals' camera or
 phone[,] . . . take a photo, . . . [Abel would take] the birds
 back, and they would give him money." According to Sergeant
 Christensen, Abel "reached out to . . . other people . . . with
 the birds[.]" Sergeant Christensen's testimony constituted
 sufficient evidence proving that Abel intentionally, knowingly,
 or recklessly used his birds in furtherance of solicitation by
 reaching out to people with his birds, placing his birds onto
 other people, taking a photograph of the person with his birds in
 Waikiki, taking his birds back, and accepting money from that
 person. There is substantial evidence that Abel intentionally,
 knowingly, or recklessly used his birds in furtherance of a
 request for money.
 
The standard of review for sufficiency of the evidence
is well established; namely, whether, upon the evidence
viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution and in
full recognition of the province of the trier of fact, the
evidence is sufficient to support a prima facie case so that
a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. Sufficient evidence to support a prima
facie case requires substantial evidence as to every
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
material element of the offense charged. Substantial
 
evidence as to every material element of the offense charged
is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to
support a conclusion. Under such a review, we give full play
to the right of the fact finder to determine credibility,
weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable inferences of fact. 
State v. Grace, 107 Hawai 'i 133, 139, 111 P.3d 28, 34 (App. 2005) 
(block quote format changed) (quoting State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawai 'i 
409, 422, 23 P.3d 744, 757 (App. 2001)).
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the December 17, 2012 Notice
 
of Entry of Judgment and/or Order entered in the District Court
 of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 8, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
James S. Tabe,
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Brandon H. Ito,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 
3
 