  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000549
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
NOAH PERKINS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 11-1-1151)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Noah Perkins ("Perkins") appeals
 
from the "Order of Resentencing; Revocation of Probation," filed
 
1
on May 7, 2012  in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
("Circuit Court").2
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On February 14, 2012, pursuant to an earlier guilty
 
plea, Perkins was sentenced for two counts of Burglary in the
 
First Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS")
 § 708-810(1)(c); one count of Unauthorized Entry in a Dwelling in
 the First Degree, in violation of HRS § 708-812.55; and one count
 of Terroristic Threatening in the First Degree, in violation of
 HRS § 707-716(1)(f)(i).
3 The Circuit Court sentenced Perkins in
 
1/
 Perkins's notice of appeal purports to appeal "from the Judgment
of Conviction and Sentence filed on May 7, 2012[,]" however, attaches to it
the Order of Resentencing; Revocation of Probation entered on May 7, 2012.
Since the substance of Perkins's arguments on appeal challenge the latter
document, we proceed as if this was the document from which Perkins has
appealed.
 
2/
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee ("Judge Lee") presided.
 
3/
 As part of the plea bargain, the Circuit Court granted the State's
motion to nolle prosequi one count of Violation of an Order of Protection, see
 HRS § 586-11, and two additional counts of Burglary in the First Degree. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
accordance with the plea agreement. Thereby, he was sentenced to
 
five-year concurrent terms of probation for each count, along
 with agreed-upon special conditions. Also in accordance with the
 plea agreement, the Circuit Court ordered that Perkins be
 referred to Hawaii's Opportunity Probation with Enforcement
 ("HOPE") program. The special conditions included an eight-month
 concurrent term of imprisonment, with credit for time served, and
 specified that Perkins "[w]rite letters of apology to Mr. Frank
 Perkins, Mr. Jonah Perkins, Ms. Messaouda Dawley, and Mr. Dylan
 Dawley by July 1, 2012."
4
 
On April 11, 2012, almost two months before the
 
deadline by which the apology letters needed to be written, the
 State, through Probation Officer James M. May ("Officer May"),
 moved to revoke Perkins's probation. The motion for revocation
 was based solely on the ground that Perkins had violated the
 condition of his probation requiring him to write a letter of
 apology to Messaouda Dawley. The State alleged that Perkins
 "failed to submit a letter of apology to Messaouda Dawley,
 despite being ordered to do so by the Court." 
Officer May's motion was prompted by two handwritten
 
letters that he received from Perkins on April 10, 2012. One was
 a cover letter addressed to Officer May and the other was a
 letter addressed to Ms. Dawley ("Dawley Letter"). The cover
 letter read as follows:
 
Dear James May,
 
I'm writing this letter for you just to give you a
letter so you can give it to the people who sent me hear
[sic]. Even though it is a bad letter, it is the truth.
Well I will check in with on [sic] April 13, and I will do
what I need to do to get off probation, because I want to go
back to my country. [ 5
]  I will give you all my info when I
get it from my dad. Thank you for the good news, and see
you on the 13th.
 
-Noah Perkins [signature] 
4/
 Arrest warrant affidavits indicate that Perkins had been living
temporarily at Ms. Dawley's house and, while she was away, he took her
television and a gaming console. He also visited his father's house, where
his father and brother resided, threatened each of them, and removed a gaming
console. Perkins's father had a restraining order against Perkins at the
time.
 
5/
 Prior to his plea hearing, Perkins had advised the court by letter
that he desired to serve his time and return to Russia. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Dawley Letter read as follows:
 
Dear Messaouda Dawley,
 
Let me start this letter by saying that I'm not sorry
for what I did to your family. . . . But I have write [sic]
this letter to you because I was told by the judge, and when
you called Kats [sic] phone and threatened me saying that
you have friends with the FBI, and you have friends or
investigators. 
Let me tell you that I knew that your fool
[sic] of shit, and that I'm not feeling sorry for you at
all. I hate the USA, and the Feds, but I have to play by
the rules for now, and when I get off probation, I will make
the American people pay, mark my words, you can take this
letter and shove it up your ass, thank for giving your TV,
and your son [sic] PS3, and ill [sic] see you around.
 
Fuck you,
Andrey Borsovich Ledniev [signature] 
On May 7, 2012, the Circuit Court held a probation
 
revocation hearing on Officer May's motion and affidavit alleging
 
that Perkins "failed to submit a letter of apology to [Ms.
 Dawley] despite being ordered to do so and, instead, had
 submitted a letter which is attached [as an exhibit]." Perkins
 denied the allegation.
 
The State called Officer May to testify. Officer May
 
explained that upon receiving the Dawley Letter, he moved to
 revoke probation because he "perceived the letter as
 threatening[.]" He testified that a couple of days later he
 received a phone call from Perkins, who was inquiring as to why
 he was not being released from custody as expected. Officer May
 explained to Perkins that it was because he had moved to revoke
 probation. Officer May related that Perkins' response was that
 "what he had said [in his letter] was true and that he was trying
 to make a statement." Officer May testified that he thereafter
 received another pair of letters from Perkins. Officer May
 described one of the letters as "addressed to Ms. Dawley which
 was apologetic in nature in which he was apologizing . . . and
 taking responsibility . . . ."
6 On cross-examination, Officer
 
May affirmed that it was not yet July 2012, and that Perkins had
 since sent an apologetic letter, in addition to the one that he
 
6/
 The other letter was addressed to Judge Lee, in which Perkins
"relized [sic] that [he] made a big mistake on the apology letter . . . to the
Dawaleys [sic]," expressed regret for having sent the Dawley Letter, and
explained that he sent it out of anger, that he realized he had to make better
choices, and that he hoped he had not thrown away his freedom.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
deemed threatening in nature.
 
Perkins testified on his own behalf. He explained that
 
he had written the letter out of anger stemming from how he was
 
treated by "ACOs" while he was incarcerated. He also explained
 the contents of the letter, and stated that he had no plans to
 harm anyone. He acknowledged that the letter was threatening and
 unacceptable, explained that he did not send the letter directly
 to Ms. Dawley because she had a restraining order against him,
 and stated that he did not think the probation officer would
 forward it to Ms. Dawley. Regarding the second, apologetic
 letter he sent to Ms. Dawley, he affirmed that it was "from the
 heart," and explained that "[he] wanted to pay them back, for
 reimbursement, and just to leave them alone." 
On cross-examination, Perkins responded that it was
 
"not really" his intent that Ms. Dawley receive the first letter. 
On re-cross, Perkins testified that it was his desire to finish
 probation and return to Russia to find his birth mother. He also
 testified that the conditions and treatment while incarcerated
 reminded him of his time in an orphanage in Russia, and that the
 association was one of the reasons he became angry. Judge Lee
 asked of Perkins if he had consulted with a lawyer prior to
 writing the second letter; Perkins responded that he had not. 
The State argued that the Dawley Letter was plainly
 
unapologetic, Perkins knew he had to write an apology letter, his
 second letter was only written after he learned that Officer May
 had moved to revoke his probation, and there "need[s] to be
 consequences and that the State has proven there was a
 violation." In her counter-argument, Perkins's counsel explained
 that the terms and conditions of probation afforded Perkins until
 July 12, 2012, to write his apology letters, that he was
 therefore not out of compliance, and that "it's unusual for a
 defendant to even start meeting [probation] conditions until he's
 gotten out and talked to [his probation officer.]" She further
 argued that:
 
[the Dawley Letter] in and of itself is not a violation. It
 
may be cause for concern. It may be a reason that we should
be extra careful in observing whether he meets his
conditions, and we should be concerned probably about his
mental health in terms of his ability to feel that
frustration that he felt [while incarcerated], but it's not
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
a probation violation.
 
After argument, the court addressed the parties. Judge
 
Lee recognized that Perkins had at one point sought to undo his
 
plea agreement in order to do his time and return to Russia,
 correlating this with a portion of the May Letter. He stated
 "[i]t's quite obvious that Mr. Perkins had sent this letter to
 [Officer] May indicating that he wanted [Officer] May to give
 this letter to Ms. Dawley because she had put him in jail." 
Judge Lee continued: 
What the court finds troubling is that you cannot undo
a letter. The letter was sent for the purposes of the
defendant complying with the terms and conditions of his
agreement with the State, and the court had followed the
agreement. In other words, he got the deal that he wanted.
The deal he wanted was probation provided he does these
terms. So he got the deal. The court sentenced him
 accordingly. 
So the issue now is did he violate the terms and
 
conditions of probation by sending this letter? The
 defendant says that he was angry and irritated by his
situation in prison. The court further finds that Mr.
 Perkins was further irritated because he was held in prison
beyond what he believed he was going to be released, and
that's why he called Mr. May, to find out why he wasn't
being released. And that's why Mr. May had indicated that
he wasn't being released, because of the letter that he -­the first letter that he sent, that he had some concerns,
and he filed a motion to revoke probation because that
wasn't the type -- that wasn't an apology letter.
 
. . . .
 
The second letter that you wrote was an apology, I
agree. But you only wrote it so that you could get out of
prison because you knew Mr. May had concerns about your
first letter which you, in your own words, expressed this is
the way you truly feel which means you have no remorse.
 
. . . .
 
Therefore, the court finds that Mr. Perkins did
violate the terms and conditions of probation and,
therefore, grants the motion to revoke probation.
 
The court proceeded immediately to resentencing. After
 
hearing Perkins' father speak, argument from Perkins' counsel and
 
the State, and hearing brief comments from Perkins himself, Judge
 Lee resentenced Perkins to concurrent terms of imprisonment on
 each count of conviction. The Order of Resentencing; Revocation
 of Probation was issued accordingly, and this timely appeal
 followed. 
5
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Perkins alleges that the Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion in (1) "granting the State's motion for
 
revocation of probation and revoking Mr. Perkins's probation[,]"
 and (2) "resentencing Mr. Perkins to indeterminate terms of
 imprisonment."
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
Revocation of Probation
 
Probation revocation decisions are reviewed for abuse
 
of discretion:
 
Whether probation should be granted, revoked, or
modified lies solely within the discretion of the sentencing
court. . . . While the power of the court to revoke or to
modify the conditions of probation is well established, the
exercise of this authority must rest upon the sound and
enlightened judgement of the trial court. And where the
record reflects justifiable cause for the revocation or the
modification of probation terms, the trial court's
determination will be sustained.
 
State v. Yamamoto, 79 Hawai' i 511, 514, 904 P.2d 525, 528 (1995) 
(citing State v. Huggett, 55 Haw. 632, 635-36, 525 P.2d 1119, 
1122 (1974)). 
A court's discretion is further guided by HRS § 706­
625(3), which specifies that "[t]he court shall revoke probation if the defendant has inexcusably failed to comply with a substantial requirement imposed as a condition of the order[.]" State v. Lazar, 82 Hawai' i 441, 443, 922 P.2d, 1054, 1056 (1996) 
(quoting H
AW. REV. STAT. § 706-625(3) (Supp. 1994)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
Perkins advances two grounds for concluding that the
 
Circuit Court abused its discretion in revoking his probation. 
First, he argues that he was in compliance with the conditions of
 probation, having sent his second, apologetic letter to Officer
 May for forwarding to Ms. Dawley prior to July 12, 2012. Second,
 he argues that the Circuit Court failed to consider that it had
 sentenced Perkins to the HOPE version, rather than the "regular"
 version, of probation. In doing so, he presents a description
 from HOPE's website, which describes itself as typically
 punishing violators swiftly, but moderately, with "short jail
 term[s]." 
6
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HRS § 706-625 provides:
 
Revocation, modification of probation conditions.
(1) The court, on application of a probation officer, the
prosecuting attorney, the defendant, or on its own motion,
after a hearing, may revoke probation except as provided in
subsection (7), reduce or enlarge the conditions of a
sentence of probation, pursuant to the provisions applicable
to the initial setting of the conditions and the provisions
of section 706-627.
 
(2) The prosecuting attorney, the defendant's
probation officer, and the defendant shall be notified by
the movant in writing of the time, place, and date of any
such hearing, and of the grounds upon which action under
this section is proposed. The prosecuting attorney, the
defendant's probation officer, and the defendant may appear
in the hearing to oppose or support the application, and may
submit evidence for the court's consideration. The
 defendant shall have the right to be represented by counsel.
For purposes of this section the court shall not be bound by
the Hawaii rules of evidence, except for the rules
pertaining to privileges. 
(3) The court shall revoke probation if the defendant
 
has inexcusably failed to comply with a substantial
 requirement imposed as a condition of the order or has been
 convicted of a felony. The court may revoke the suspension
of sentence or probation if the defendant has been convicted
of another crime other than a felony. 
HAW. REV. STAT. § 706-625 (Supp. 2012) (emphasis added).
 
An inexcusable failure to comply with a substantial
 
requirement imposed as a condition of a probation order requires
 
revocation of probation. Lazar, 82 Hawai' i at 443, 922 P.2d at 
1056 (concluding that defendant's failure to comply with a
 requirement that he remain in a rehabilitation program until
 clinically discharged was inexcusable). Nevertheless, although
 many things may be said about Perkins's submission of the Dawley
 Letter – it was foolish, vulgar, abrasive, unnerving (if not
 frightening), contemptuous, and contemptible - it did not
 establish the asserted violation of his probation. Cf. State v.
 
Reyes, 93 Hawai' i 321, 2 P.3d 725 (App. 2000) (holding that, 
where a condition of probation was that defendant submit to
 polygraph examinations, defendant's continued refusal to admit
 having committed offenses and his failure to pass those tests did
 not constitute an inexcusable failure to comply with a condition
 of probation).
 
Perkins was accused of not complying with a specific
 
condition of probation -- his obligation to "[w]rite [a] letter[]
 of apology to . . . Ms. Messaouda Dawley . . . by July 1, 2012." 
7
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
See HAW. REV. STAT. § 706-625(2) (requiring the defendant to be
 
notified of the grounds upon which the motion for revocation is
 
based). Perkins, however, did submit a second letter to Ms.
 Dawley, via Officer May, that both Officer May and Judge Lee
 found to be apologetic in nature and apparently satisfactory (but
 for Perkins's earlier letter). Furthermore, the second letter
 was timely; he submitted it with more than two months to spare.
 By the plain terms of that probationary condition, with respect
 to Ms. Dawley, Perkins complied. Therefore, we conclude that
 Perkins did not fail to comply with the condition of his
 probation on which the State's motion for revocation was based.
7
 
Consequently, we vacate the Circuit Court's revocation of
 probation.
 
In light of our ruling on the probation revocation
 
issue, we decline to rule on Perkins's contention that the
 Circuit Court abused its discretion in resentencing him to an
 indeterminate term of ten years imprisonment.
 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
We vacate the Circuit Court's May 7, 2012 Order of
 
Resentencing; Revocation of Probation, and remand for proceedings
 
consistent with this memorandum opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 9, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 James S. Tabe,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City & County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
7/
 Although the State may have perceived the Dawley Letter as
threatening, it did not seek revocation on the ground that Perkins had engaged
in criminal conduct in submitting the letter.
 
8
 