  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000137
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MARTIN J. MONAHAN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR NO. 10-1-1526)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
1
Defendant-Appellant Martin J. Monahan  ("Monahan")
appeals from the October 27, 2010 Amended Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence; Notice of Entry ("Amended Judgment") entered by the
 Family Court of the First Circuit ("Family Court").
2 A jury
 
convicted Monahan of one count of abuse of family or household
 members in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") § 709­906.
3 The Family Court sentenced Monahan to, among other things,
 
two years of probation and five days in jail with credit for time
 served. 
1
 The spelling of Monahan's name is not consistent in the record.
While the spelling on the opening and closing briefs and the complaint appear
as "Monahan," the spelling on the notice of appeal and various other documents
appear as "Monohan." Based on its overall prevalence in the record, however,
it appears that the correct spelling is "Monahan." 
2
 The Honorable Jeannette H. Castagnetti presided.
 
3
 HRS § 709-906(1) states, in pertinent part, that "[i]t shall be
unlawful for any person, singly or in concert, to physically abuse a family or
household member . . . ." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 709-906 (Supp. 2011).
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Monahan contends that the Family Court (1)
 
violated his constitutional right to a trial before a fair and
 
impartial tribunal by telling the prosecutor how to lay
 sufficient foundation in order to read the complainant's
 ("Complainant") statement to the police ("Statement") into
 evidence under the past-recollection-recorded exception to the
 hearsay rule and (2) otherwise erred in admitting the Statement
 because the State failed to lay sufficient foundation. Monahan
 also argues that (3) the Family Court's instructions to the jury
 regarding self-defense were erroneous because the Family Court
 failed to state that a person employing protective force "may
 estimate the necessity for the use of such force under the
 circumstances as he reasonably believes them to be when the force
 is used, without retreating or doing any other act that he has no
 legal duty to do or abstaining from any lawful action." 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Monahan's points of error as follows:
 
(1) Monahan argues that the Family Court violated his
 
constitutional right to a trial before a fair and impartial
 tribunal by giving instructions to the prosecutor on how to lay
 the foundation to admit the Complainant's Statement under the
 past-recollection-recorded exception to the hearsay doctrine.
4
 
We disagree.
 
The Family Court's alleged misconduct occurred after
 
the prosecutor had attempted to lay the foundation necessary to
 allow the Statement to be read to the jury by asking the
 Complainant about various provisions found in the Statement
 
4
 Under the Hawai' i Rules of Evidence ("HRE"), past recollection
recorded is 
[a] memorandum or record concerning a matter about which the
witness once had knowledge but now has insufficient
recollection to enable the witness to testify fully and
accurately, shown to have been made or adopted by the
witness when the matter was fresh in the witness' memory and
to reflect that knowledge correctly.
 
Haw. R. Evid. 802.1(4). A statement that constitutes a past recollection
recorded is not excluded by the hearsay rule. Id. 802.1.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
itself—for instance, asking the Complainant, "just above your
 
signature, isn't it true that it says that you have read this
 statement . . . which consists of typed or handwritten pages and
 continuation pages?" Monahan's attorney then asked for a bench
 conference. Monahan's attorney objected to the fact that the
 prosecutor was "basically reading what's on the report" without
 laying a foundation to utilize the past-recollection-recorded
 exception to the hearsay doctrine. The prosecutor responded that
 she was simply reading "the typewritten portion that she signed
 to authenticate the document . . . ." The Family Court stated:
 
I understand the purpose of why you're asking that.
 
But the fact that you're reading it in, that she
attested that it was true at the time and now she's changing
her story is raising some issues. So the foundation for
 this type of evidence is that she has to –– it's information
about what the witness once had knowledge but now has
insufficient recollection, I think that's been laid.
 
To enable the witness to testify fully and accurately,
shown to have been made or adopted by the witness when the
matter was fresh in the witness' memory, and to reflect that
knowledge correctly. All right.
 
So the test –– the foundation as to when she wrote it
 
was right then and there.
 
. . . .
 
And then it was fresh in her memory. All right. So there's
 
a little more foundation that needs to be laid here.
 
So I'm going to sustain your objection about reading
in that testimony and then –– but you need to lay more
foundation. All right.
 
Monahan contends that this statement constitutes the alleged
 
misconduct.
 
Due process requires that courts be impartial and that 
courts should not act as an advocate for any party. State v. 
Medeiros, 80 Hawai' i 251, 259, 909 P.2d 579, 587 (App. 1995). 
"However, reversal on the grounds of judicial bias or misconduct is warranted only upon a showing that the trial was unfair." State v. Hauge, 103 Hawai' i 38, 48, 79 P.3d 131, 141 (2003). 
"Unfairness, in turn, requires a clear and precise demonstration of prejudice." Id. 
Here, Monahan fails to show that his trial was unfair,
 
and it appears that the Family Court acted well within
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
constitutional bounds. While Monahan's counsel, when making a
 
prior speaking objection, clearly intended not to reveal what
 foundation was lacking — stating, "I'm not going to give away
 what is missing from foundation, but it has not been laid" — the
 Family Court was not required to play along. The Family Court
 merely recited the foundational elements of past recollection
 recorded, which are directly discernible from the text of HRE
 Rule 802.1, when clarifying its ruling on Monahan's objection
 that foundation was lacking. Monahan's attempt to twist the
 Family Court's words into something nefarious fails; the Family
 Court was merely articulating the legal basis for her ruling.
 
Therefore, the Family Court did not violate Monahan's
 
constitutional right to a trial before a fair and impartial
 tribunal.
 
(2) Under HRE 802.1(4), a memorandum or record is 
admissible if the proponent demonstrates that (a) "the witness once had personal knowledge of the matter," (b) "the record or memorandum was prepared or adopted by him when it was fresh in his memory," (c) "it accurately reflected his knowledge," and (d) "the witness currently has insufficient recollection to enable him to testify fully and accurately." State v. Keohokapu, 127 
Hawai'i 91, 106, 276 P.3d 660, 675 (2012) (quoting 30C Michael 
Graham, Federal Practice and Procedure: Evidence § 7046 (interim ed. 2006)). Monahan argues that the State failed to show (b) and (c). We hold that Monahan has not demonstrated error. 
The Family Court did not err in concluding that the 
Statement was prepared or adopted by Complainant when the incident was fresh in her memory. Complainant testified that she remembered writing the Statement on the same day as the incident, that no changes had been made to the Statement since she last saw it, and that the handwriting and signature on the document was her own. This was sufficient.
5 Keohokapu, 127 Hawai' i at 106, 
5
 Monahan argues that testimony, presented after the Statement had
already been read to the jury, shows that Officer Kam helped Complainant write
the Statement and that Complainant does not understand English very well.
However, the admissibility of evidence must be judged upon the record that
exists at the time the evidence is offered. Cf. Myers v. Cohen, 67 Haw. 389,
394, 688 P.2d 1145, 1150 (1984) ("admissibility is frequently a matter within
the discretion of the trial judge, dependent upon what has been shown at the
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
276 P.3d at 675.
 
Furthermore, Monahan fails to show that the State did
 
not establish that the Statement reflected Complainant's
 
knowledge correctly. At the time that the Family Court allowed
 the Statement to be read to the jury as past recollection
 recorded, Complainant testified that she remembered being at home
 with Monahan in the evening on May 17, 2010. While unable to
 remember specifically what happened that evening between her and
 Monahan, Complainant acknowledged that, on May 17, 2010, she and
 Monahan were involved in an "incident." She recalled the police
 coming to her house that same night, and she remembered speaking
 with them. Complainant testified that she remembered writing the
 Statement on the same day as the incident. She recognized the
 handwriting and signature on the Statement as her own, and stated
 that no changes had been made to the Statement since she last saw
 it. Right above her signature, the document states: "I attest
 that this statement is true and correct to the best of my
 knowledge, and that I gave this statement freely and voluntarily
 without coercion or promise of reward."
6 These facts were
 
sufficient to show that the Statement reflected Complainant's
 knowledge correctly. See id. Therefore, Monahan has not shown
 
error.
 
(3) Monahan argues that the Family Court's jury
 
instructions on the affirmative defense of self-defense were
 erroneous because they failed to state that "a person employing
 protective force may estimate the necessity thereof under the
 circumstances as he believes them to be when the force is used
 without retreating, surrendering possession, doing any other act
 which he has no legal duty to do, or abstaining from any lawful
 
trial at the time the evidence in question is offered." (emphasis added)).
Evidence subsequently presented that calls the reliability of the previously
admitted evidence into question raises an issue for the factfinder; it does
not render previously admissible evidence inadmissible.
 
6
 Furthermore, evidence tending to impeach the quality of
Complainant's knowledge — for example, that Complainant drank beer that night
or that she had been angry at Monahan and belligerent — had not been
introduced when the Family Court made its foundational ruling.
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
action."7 This statement of law comes from HRS § 703-304(3),
 
which provides "the generally applicable rule that the actor need
 
not retreat or take any other evasive action before estimating
 the necessity for the use of force in self-protection." H
AW. REV.
 
STAT. § 703-304 cmt. (1993).
 
Monahan argues that the failure to give such an
 
instruction was prejudicial and was, therefore, plainly erroneous
 because evidence was presented that (1) Complainant had been
 drinking and was throwing objects at him; (2) Monahan attempted
 to retreat from the room several times only to have Complainant
 block the exit, preventing him from retreating; and (3) Monahan
 pushed her only to escape. He argues that he "did not have a
 duty to retreat and he was justified in using force to exit the
 room and avoid further assault by [Complainant]." 
It is undisputed that trial counsel did not submit a
 
proposed instruction to address the issue, nor did he object to
 the self-defense instruction that the Family Court gave to the
 jury. That instruction, however, did not provide the same
 information that would have been covered by a jury instruction
 incorporating the text of HRS § 703-304(3) and specifically
 addressing the defendant's entitlement to exit his bedroom and to
 move about his house.
 
Given the manner in which Monahan's defense was 
presented at trial, the substantial evidence in the case, and the fact that Monahan's defense clearly called into question his entitlement to remove himself from the bedroom under the circumstances, we conclude that the Family Court had a duty under State v. Stenger, 122 Hawai' i 271, 226 P.3d 441 (2010), to sua 
sponte instruct the jury that Monahan could estimate the necessity of employing protective force without retreating, surrendering possession, doing any other act which he has no 
7
 As to the issue of self-defense and the justifiable use of force,
the Family Court instructed the jury, in part, as follows:
 
The reasonableness of the Defendant's belief that the
 
use of such protective force was immediately necessary shall
be determined from the viewpoint of a reasonable person in
the Defendant's position under the circumstances of which
the Defendant was aware or as the Defendant reasonably
believed them to be.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
legal duty to do, or abstaining from any lawful action.
 
In Stenger, the Hawai' i Supreme Court considered 
whether and when a trial court is obligated to give a jury 
instruction on a potential defense when the defendant has not requested the instruction. A majority of the court ruled that the trial court was obligated, sua sponte, to give the jury instruction at issue in that case. 122 Hawai' i at 273, 226 P.3d 
at 443 (Acoba, J.); id. at 296, 226 P.3d at 466 (Kim, J. concurring); id. at 297, 226 P.3d at 467 (Moon, C.J., dissenting); id. at 300, 226 P.3d at 470 (Nakayama, J. dissenting). It is at least clear that four of the five members of the Stenger court agreed that a trial court has a duty to sua sponte instruct the jury on a particular defense if: "(1) it appears that the defendant is relying on such a defense, or (2) if there is substantial evidence supportive of such a defense and the defense is not inconsistent with the defendant's theory of the case." 122 Hawai' i at 299, 226 P.3d at 469 (Moon, C.J., 
dissenting); id. at 281, 226 P.3d at 451 (Acoba, J.); id. at 296–97, 226 P.3d at 466–67 (Kim, J., concurring). 
In this case, the theory that Monahan employed
 
protective force while in the act of trying to leave the room in
 which the Complainant had allegedly barricaded him was central to
 the defense presentation at trial. Since the jury was not
 presented with the specific instruction, the jury might have
 believed that Monahan was obliged to remain in his room and to
 avoid initiating a confrontation with the Complainant. 
We cannot say that the failure to instruct the jury on 
the defendant's entitlement to estimate the need for protective force without retreating or first abstaining from any lawful action was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, as "there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the defendant's conviction[.]" See Stenger, 122 Hawai' i at 281, 226 
P.3d at 451 (quoting State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai' i 327, 337, 141 
P.3d 974, 984 (2006)). Therefore, even though not requested by counsel, the Family Court had a duty to sua sponte instruct the jury on the defendant's entitlement to leave his bedroom and move about his house even in the face of Complainant establishing a 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
barricade at the doorway.
 
Therefore, we vacate the Amended Judgment entered on
 
October 27, 2010 and remand for a new trial.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, July 3, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Iokona A. Baker,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Anne K. Clarkin,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8
 