 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000355
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
DEBBIE S. QUEL, Petitioner-Appellant/Appellant, v.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES, EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM OF HAWAI' I,
Respondent-Appellee/Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-1308)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Debbie S. Quel (Quel) appeals from
 
the "Decision and Order Affirming the Final Decision of Appellee
 
Board of Trustees of the Employees' Retirement System of the
 State of Hawaii [(Board)] and Dismissing Appellant Debbie S.
 Quel's Appeal" (Decision and Order) and the "Final Judgment"
 entered on April 13, 2016 in the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit
1 (Circuit Court).
 
On appeal, Quel argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
when it affirmed the Board's denial of Quel's application for
 service-connected disability retirement benefits because (1) the
 Board erroneously relied upon an incorrect definition of
 "occupational hazard" when interpreting Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS) § 88-79(a) (Supp. 2017)
2 and (2) the Board should have
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. 
2
 HRS § 88-79(a) provides:
 
§88-79 Service-connected disability retirement.
(a) Under rules the board of trustees may adopt, upon
application of a member, or the person appointed by the
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
instead relied upon precedent set in Komatsu v. Bd. of Trs.,
 
Emps.' Ret. Sys., 67 Haw. 485, 693 P.2d 405 (1984) to grant
 Quel's application.
 
After a careful review of the record on appeal and the
 
relevant legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the
 issues raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we
 resolve Quel's points on appeal as follows, and affirm the
 Decision and Order and the Final Judgment.
 
The Board determined that Quel was not incapacitated
 
due to an "occupational hazard" under HRS § 88-79. As a basis
 for its determination, the Board relied on the definition of
 "occupational hazard" contained in Hawai' i Administrative Rules 
(HAR) § 6-22-2.
 
The Board may adopt rules that are to be used in the
 
application of the statute. HRS § 88-79(a); see also HRS § 88-28
 (2012) ("the board, from time to time, shall establish rules for
 
2(...continued)
family court as guardian of an incapacitated member, any
member who has been permanently incapacitated for duty as
the natural and proximate result of an accident occurring
while in the actual performance of duty at some definite
time and place, or 
as the cumulative result of some
occupational hazard, through no wilful negligence on the
member's part, may be retired by the system for
service-connected disability; provided that:
 
(1) 	 In the case of an accident occurring after
July 1, 1963, the employer shall file with the
system a copy of the employer's report of the
accident submitted to the director of labor and
 industrial relations;
 
(2) 	 An application for retirement is filed with the
system within two years of the date of the
accident, or the date upon which workers'
compensation benefits cease, whichever is later;
 
(3) 	 Certification is made by the head of the agency
in which the member is employed, stating the
time, place, and conditions of the service
performed by the member resulting in the
member's disability and that the disability was
not the result of wilful negligence on the part
of the member; and
 
(4) 	 The medical board or other entity designated by
the board of trustees certifies that the member
 
is incapacitated for the further performance of
duty at the time of application and that the
member's incapacity is likely to be permanent.
 
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the administration of the funds of the system and for the
 
transaction of its business.") The Board promulgated HAR § 6-22­1, which states that "[t]his chapter shall govern the procedures
 for the certifications and findings of the medical board relating
 to applications for: . . . (2) Service-connected disability
 retirement under [HRS §] 88-79[.]" The Medical Board found that
 Quel did not have an incapacity that was "the cumulative result
 of some occupational hazard." HAR § 6-22-2 defines "occupational
 hazard" as "a danger or risk which is inherent in, and
 concomitant to, a particular occupation or particular job, if not
 a risk common to employment in general." Given the unambiguous
 text found in HRS § 88-79 and HAR § 6-22-2, the Board, and by
 extension the Circuit Court, did not err in relying upon the
 definition of "occupational hazard" contained in HAR § 6-22-2
 when reviewing Quel's application for service-connected
 disability retirement benefits.
 
Komatsu
, upon which Quel relies, is not to the
 
contrary.3 The Komatsu court, citing Lopez v. Bd. of Trs.,
 
3 At the time Komatsu was decided in 1984, HRS § 88-79(a) provided:
 
Service-connected occupational disability retirement.
(a) Upon application of a member, or of the head of his
department, any member who has been permanently
incapacitated for duty as the natural and proximate result
of an accident occurring while in the actual performance of
duty at some definite time and place, or 
as the cumulative
result of some occupational hazard, through no willful
negligence on his part, may be retired by the board of
trustees for service-connected occupational disability
provided that:
 
(1) In the case of accident occurring after July 1,
1963, the employer shall file with the board a copy of the
employer's report of the accident submitted to the bureau of
workers' compensation;
 
(2) An application for retirement is filed with the
board within two years of the date of the accident, or the
date upon which workers' compensation benefits cease,
whichever is later;
 
(3) Certification is made by the head of the agency in
which the member is employed, stating the time, place and
conditions of the service performed by the member resulting
in his disability and that the disability was not the result
of willful negligence on the part of the member; and
 
(4) The medical board certifies that the member is
incapacitated for the further performance of duty, that his
incapacity is likely to be permanent.
 
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Emps.' Ret. Sys. , used the following definition of "occupational
hazard":
  
[To be an occupational hazard] the [disability's] causative
factors must be those which are not ordinarily incident to
employment in general and must be different in character
from those found in the general run of occupations.
 
67 Haw. at 494, 693 P.2d at 411 (citing Lopez, 66 Haw. 127, 129,
 
657 P.2d 1040, 1042 (1983)). As this definition is not
 substantially different from that contained in HAR § 6-22-2,
 Komatsu does not dictate a different result.
 
Quel's application for service-connected disability
 
retirement benefits relied on the following injuries: (1) pain in
 left shoulder and arm; (2) arm and hand swollen; and (3) pain
 also in right shoulder, arm, and hand. Quel claimed that this
 was the result of the repetitive use of her hands, arms, and
 shoulders as a cafeteria helper at an elementary school. Her
 duties included lifting heavy trap doors, putting things into the
 oven for breakfast, scooping rice with her left hand, pinching
 dough, peeling potatoes, cutting vegetables, opening cans with
 old-fashioned can openers, serving meals to students, cooking
 rice in oven, emptying vegetables and other foods out of pots
 used to make stew, and performing custodial-type work.
 
After a contested case hearing, the Hearing Officer
 
determined that Quel was permanently incapacitated "due to the
 cumulative effects of work related activities[,]" but
 nevertheless concluded that the repetitive work activities did
 not equate to an "occupational hazard." Citing Lopez, the
 Hearing Officer held that "[Quel] failed to introduce evidence
 that the lifting requirements were 'different in character' from
 those in the general run of occupations..." The Hearing Officer
 also held that "[Quel] had the burden to introduce evidence that
 her work related problems were limited to a relatively few number
 
3(...continued)
Komatsu
, 67 Haw. at 487 n.1, 693 P.2d at 407 n.1 (emphasis added.) Thus,
although some of the technical language in HRS § 88-79(a) has changed since
Komatsu was decided, the requirement that the petitioner may show he or she
had been "permanently incapacitated for duty . . . as the cumulative result of
some occupational hazard" remains unchanged.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of occupations, but she failed to do so."4 The Board adopted the
 
Hearing Officer's Recommended Decision.
 
We agree. Quel failed to prove that her conditions
 
were "not ordinarily incident to employment in general" and were
 
"different in character from those found in the general run of
 occupations." See Lopez, 66 Haw. at 129, 657 P.2d at 1042. 
Thus, the Board, and by extension the Circuit Court, did not err
 in denying Quel's application for service-connected disability
 retirement benefits. 
Based on the foregoing, the "Decision and Order
 
Affirming the Final Decision of Appellee Board of Trustees of the
 Employees' Retirement System of the State of Hawaii and
 Dismissing Appellant Debbie S. Quel's Appeal" and the "Final
 Judgment" both entered on April 13, 2016, by the Circuit Court of
 the First Circuit, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, May 18, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Dan S. Ikehara,
for Petitioner-Appellant/Appellant. 
Patricia Ohara,
Brian P. Aburano, andElmira K.L. Tsang,Deputy Attorneys General,for Respondent-Appellee/Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
4
 
§ 6-23-31 Burden of proof.  Except as otherwise
provided by law, the party initiating the proceeding shall
have the burden of proof, including the burden of producing
evidence and the burden of persuasion. The party having the
burden of proof shall proceed first in the presentation of
opening statements, evidence, witnesses, and arguments,
followed by the other party. The degree or quantum of proof
shall be a preponderance of the evidence. 
5
 