NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000466 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
THE TRUSTEES OF THE ESTATE OF BERNICE PAUAHI BISHOP,
ALSO KNOWN AS KAMEHAMEHA SCHOOLS,
Plaintiffs-Counterclaim Defendants/Appellees,
v.
RONALD G.S. AU,
Defendant-Counterclaimant/Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0420-02)
AMENDED SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendant-Counterclaimant/Appellant Ronald G.S. Au (Au)
appeals from the Final Judgment (Judgment) entered by the Circuit
Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)1/ in favor of 
Plaintiffs-Counterclaim Defendants/Appellees Trustees of the
Estate of Bernice Pauahi Bishop, Also Known as Kamehameha Schools
(KS).  The Judgment was based on the Circuit Court's grant of
summary judgment in favor KS on KS's complaint and its grant of
summary judgment in favor of KS on Au's counterclaim.  Au also
appeals from the Circuit Court's order granting in part KS's
motion for attorney's fees (Attorney's Fees Order).  
On appeal, Au contends that the Circuit Court erred in
(1) granting KS's motion for summary judgment on KS's complaint;
(2) granting KS's motion for summary judgment on Au's
1/ The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
counterclaim; (3) denying Au's motions to vacate or for
reconsideration of the Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment
on KS's complaint and Au's counterclaim; and (4) granting in part
KS's motion for attorney's fees.  As explained below, we affirm
the Circuit Court's Judgment and its Attorney's Fees Order.
I.
KS was the landlord and Au was the tenant under a lease
for property in an agricultural subdivision (Lease).  In 2010, KS
and Au filed lawsuits against each other, with KS alleging that
Au had failed to make payments due under the Lease and Au
alleging that the development of a residential subdivision on
adjacent property (approved by KS) prevented him from utilizing
his property.  The parties resolved their claims through a
settlement agreement executed on April 24, 2012 (Settlement
Agreement).  Under the Settlement Agreement, Au released his
claims against KS and agreed to pay KS $62,000.00 for amounts due
under the Lease by December 31, 2012, the parties executed an
amendment to the Lease, and the 2010 litigation was dismissed
with prejudice.  
On February 23, 2013, KS filed a complaint in the
instant case, seeking to terminate the Lease, evict Au, and
recover damages based on Au's alleged failure to make payments
due under the Settlement Agreement and the Lease.  Au answered
the complaint and filed a counterclaim.  On June 6, 2013, KS
filed a motion for summary judgment on its complaint.  On
September 18, 2013, the Circuit Court entered an order granting
KS's motion, terminating the Lease, and awarding KS monetary
damages in the principal amount of $130,735.40.  On March 12,
2015, KS filed a motion for summary judgment on Au's
counterclaim.  On May 19, 2015, the Circuit Court entered an
order granting this motion.   
Beginning in April 2015, Au filed several motions to
vacate or for reconsideration of the Circuit Court's orders
granting summary judgment in favor of KS on its complaint and
Au's counterclaim.  In support of these motions, Au alleged for
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the first time that the $62,000 owed under the Settlement
Agreement had been incorrectly calculated or procured by fraud
because KS did not take into account tax refunds Au had obtained
through tax appeals he filed regarding the leasehold property.  
The Circuit Court denied Au's various motions to vacate or for
reconsideration, and it entered its Judgment on June 12, 2015. 
KS filed a motion for attorney's fees.  On August 14, 2015, the
Circuit Court filed its Attorney's Fees Order which granted in
part KS's motion for attorney's fees.
II.
At the outset, we note that Au mixes the evidence and
arguments he presented in opposition to KS's motion for summary
judgment on its complaint, in opposition to KS's motion for
summary judgment on Au's counterclaim, and in support of his
motions to vacate or for reconsideration of the orders granting
summary judgment.  However, the law is clear than when reviewing
the grant or denial of a motion for summary judgment, we are
limited "to an examination of the materials before the court at
the time the rulings were made."  Koga Eng'g & Constr., Inc. v.
State, 122 Hawai# i 60, 80, 222 P.3d 979, 999 (2010); see Ass'n of
Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai #i
97, 108, 58 P.3d 608, 619 (2002) ("When reviewing a summary
judgment, an appellate court's consideration of the record is
limited to those materials that were considered by the trial
court in ruling on the motion.").  Thus, in reviewing the Circuit
Court's orders granting summary judgment, we limit our
consideration to the evidence and arguments before the Circuit
Court when it entered its orders. 
III.
Au contends that the Circuit Court erred in granting
KS's motion for summary judgment on KS's complaint.  We disagree.
Au argues that he was not in default of his payment
obligation under the Settlement Agreement because the December 
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
31, 2012, deadline was not a firm deadline and because he was led
to believe that he would have a one-year grace period if he
failed to meet the December 31, 2012, deadline.  However, the
Settlement Agreement explicitly provided that Au owed "KS an
amount totaling $62,000.00" and that this amount was to be paid
"in its entirety, on or before, and no later than December 31,
2012."  
Au's reliance on an email from KS's counsel prior to
the Settlement Agreement to support his claim that he had a grace
period to pay the $62,000 is without merit.  The Settlement
Agreement contained an integration clause which provided that
"[t]he Parties represent and warrant that none of them is relying
upon any understanding(s), promise(s) or agreement(s) between
them other than as expressly set forth herein."2/  Thus, Au's
reliance on prior discussions regarding a potential grace period
to contradict the unambiguous terms of the Settlement Agreement
was barred by the parol evidence rule.  See Amfac, Inc. v.
Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 124–25, 839 P.2d 10, 31
(1992).  Moreover, the email cited by Au does not support his
claim.  In the email, KS's counsel notes that the Settlement
Agreement does not include a grace period, and KS's counsel
states that while Au could request additional time to pay, "we
cannot give any assurances as to whether such a request will be
approved or disapproved."
We reject Au's claim that the Declaration of Kawika
Burgess (Burgess), KS's land asset manager, was hearsay and
inadmissible to show the amounts owed by Au under the Settlement
Agreement and Lease.  Burgess' Declaration statements were not
hearsay as Burgess stated that his Declaration was "based on
personal knowledge[.]"  In any event, Au did not raise a hearsay 
2/ The Settlement Agreement further provided that it contained "the
entire agreement of the Parties and supercedes all prior agreements,
understandings, and representations between all parties, whether written or
oral, relating to the Actions and the Arbitration."
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
objection to Burgess' Declaration in Au's opposition to KS's
motion for summary judgment.  Au therefore waived this objection
to the Circuit Court's consideration of Burgess' Declaration in
ruling on KS's motion.  See Price v. AIG Hawai #i Ins. Co., 107
Hawai#i 106, 111-12, 111 P.3d 1, 6-7 (2005) (holding that failure
to object to papers supporting a summary judgment motion in the
trial court constituted a waiver of such an objection on appeal).
IV.
Au contends that the Circuit Court erred in granting
KS's motion for summary judgment on his counterclaim.  We
disagree.
The Lease required Au to obtain the written consent of
KS before he could assign the Lease.  Au's counterclaim asserted
that KS breached the Lease or acted fraudulently by unreasonably
withholding its consent to Au's proposed assignment of the Lease. 
In opposing KS's motion for summary judgment on his counterclaim,
Au contended that there was a factual question as to whether KS
unreasonably withheld its consent to Au's assignment of the Lease
by requiring financial information regarding the potential
assignee.  We conclude that the Circuit Court properly rejected
Au's contention.
In support of its motion for summary judgment, KS
produced evidence that Au did not make a valid request to KS to
consent to a proposed assignment because Au did not identify the
proposed assignee.  "[A] landlord cannot reasonably be expected
to consent to an assignment of a lease without knowing 
the identity of, and having pertinent information about, a
proposed assignee[.]"  Rowley v. City of Mobile , 676 So.2d 316,
319 (Ala. Civ. App. 1995).  Au failed to respond to KS's
production of evidence by setting forth specific facts showing
that he had advised KS of the name of his proposed assignee.  In
light of KS's showing that Au failed to identify his proposed
assignee, the Circuit Court properly granted summary judgment on
Au's claim that KS improperly withheld consent to his proposed
assignment.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
We also conclude that Au's contention that KS's request
for financial information regarding the proposed assignee was
unreasonable is without merit.  The Hawai #i Supreme Court has
concluded that ensuring the financial viability of an assignee is
not only "reasonable[,]" but also "should be regarded as good
business practice on the part of any lessor."  Kahili, Inc. v.
Yamamoto
, 54 Haw. 267, 273, 506 P.2d 9, 12 (1973).  As such, we
conclude that KS was within its rights to request financial
information about Au's potential assignee.  This provides a
separate ground to support the Circuit Court's grant of summary
judgment on Au's claim that KS improperly withheld consent to his
proposed assignment.
V.
We reject Au's contention that the Circuit Court erred
in denying his motions to vacate or for reconsideration of the
summary judgment orders.  Au's primary basis for these motions
was his alleged discovery that the $62,000 owed under the
Settlement Agreement had been incorrectly calculated or procured
by fraud because KS did not take into account tax refunds Au had
obtained.  However, motions for reconsideration or for relief
from judgment under Hawai #i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 60(b)
(2006) are not "device[s] to relitigate old matters or to raise
arguments or evidence that could and should have been brought
during the earlier proceeding."  Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson
Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai #i 92, 104, 176 P.3d 91, 103 (2008); Cho
v. State, 115 Hawai# i 373, 385-86, 168 P.3d 17, 29-30 (2007);
Sevenson Envtl. Services, Inc. v. Shaw Envtl. , 246 F.R.D. 151,
153 (W.D.N.Y. 2007) (stating that a motion under Federal Rules of
Civil Procedure Rule 60(b) "is granted only upon a showing of
exceptional circumstances, and cannot be used to relitigate the
merits").  In this regard, newly discovered evidence will only
serve as a basis for relief from judgment when it is "previously
undiscovered even though due diligence was exercised."  Kawamata 
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Farms, Inc. v. United Agric. Prods., 86 Hawai #i 214, 259, 948
P.2d 1055, 1100 (1997).  
Here, the record shows that the evidence regarding tax
refunds on which Au relied to claim that the $62,000 Settlement
Agreement amount was improperly calculated was available and
could have been discovered through due diligence before KS filed
its motions for summary judgment.  Indeed, Au acknowledged that
he discovered his alleged entitlement to credits for the tax
refunds by examining "public tax records," which were available
online.  Moreover, Au submitted an August 15, 2008, letter from
himself to KS officers, in which he stated that he was successful
in his tax appeals and that "[t]he assessment earlier made has
been reduced."  Au also submitted a January 19, 2010, letter from
himself to KS's attorney in which the subject of Au's obtaining
tax refunds was discussed.  We conclude that because the evidence
and arguments raised by Au could have and should have been raised
in opposition to KS's summary judgment motions, the Circuit Court
did not abuse its discretion in denying Au's motions to vacate or
for reconsideration of the summary judgment orders. 
VI.
Au's opposition to the Circuit Court's award of
attorney's fees is without merit.  The Circuit Court properly
awarded KS attorney's fees pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes 
§ 607-14 (2016) based on twenty-five percent of the $130,735.40
in damages awarded on KS's complaint.  With respect to the
attorney's fees awarded on Au's counterclaim, the Circuit Court
awarded roughly half of the attorney's fees requested by KS.  We
conclude that this was a fair apportionment of the attorney's
fees incurred by KS in defending against the assumpsit versus the
non-assumpsit claims in Au's counterclaim.3/
3/ We have considered Au's other arguments on appeal and conclude that
they are without merit.
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
VII.
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's
Judgment and its Attorney's Fees Order.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, December 22, 2017.
On the briefs:
Ronald G.S. Au
Defendant-Counterclaimant/
Appellant pro se.Chief Judge
Dennis W. Chong Kee
Christopher T. Goodin
(Cades Schutte)
for Plaintiffs-Counterclaim
Defendants/Appellees.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
8