NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-19-0000713 11-JAN-2024 07:50 AM Dkt. 78 SO 
NO. CAAP-19-0000713 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I 
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
CALVIN LEE HARRIS, JR., Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-17-0000631) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Guidry, JJ.) 
Calvin Lee Harris, Jr. appeals from the Judgment  of 
Conviction and Probation Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of 
the First Circuit on October 16, 2019.
1 We vacate and remand for 
a new trial. 
Harris was charged by complaint with felony Abuse of 
Family or Household Members. A jury found him guilty of misdemeanor Abuse of Family or Household Members. He filed this appeal. He contends the circuit court plainly erred when instructing the jury on self-defense. 
Trial courts have a duty to properly instruct the jury. 
State v. Kato
, 147 Hawai#i 478, 499, 465 P.3d 925, 946 (2020). 
If a jury instruction is flawed we will vacate, even without a timely objection, if there is a reasonable possibility that the 
1 The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
error contributed to conviction — that is, if the erroneous 
instruction was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Id.  
The relevant law on self-defense is: 
§ 703-304 Use of force in self-protection . (1)
Subject to the provisions of this section . . . the use of
force upon or toward another person is justifiable when theactor believes that such force is immediately necessary forthe purpose of protecting himself against the use ofunlawful force by the other person on the present occasion. 
. . . . 
(3) . . . [A] person employing protective force may
estimate the necessity thereof under the circumstances as he
believes them to be when the force is used without retreating, surrendering possession, doing any other actwhich he has no legal duty to do, or abstaining from anylawful action. 
Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 703-304 (2014). The self-
protection defense is limited to certain circumstances: 
When the actor believes that the use of force upon or towardthe person of another is necessary for any of the purposesfor which such belief would establish a justification under[HRS § 703-304] but the actor is reckless  . . . in having
such belief or in acquiring or failing to acquire anyknowledge or belief which is material to the justifiabilityof the actor's use of force, the justification  afforded by
those sections is unavailable in a prosecution for an
offense for which recklessness . . . suffices to establish 
culpability . 
HRS § 703-310(1) (2014) (emphasis added). 
The jury found Harris guilty of misdemeanor Abuse of 
Family or Household Members: 
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person . . . to
physically abuse a family or household member . . . . 
. . . . 
(5) Abuse of a family or household member . . . [is
a]
 misdemeanor[.] 
HRS § 709-906(1), (5)(a) (2014 and Supp. 2016). The statute 
doesn't specify the state of mind required for misdemeanor Abuse of Family or Household Members. Thus, the jury could have found Harris guilty if it found that he "intentionally, knowingly, or 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
recklessly" physically abused the complaining witness ( CW). See 
HRS §§ 702-204, -206 (1)-(3) (2014). The jury was instructed 
that if it did not find Harris guilty of felony Abuse of Household or Family Members it must consider the included offense of misdemeanor Abuse of Family or Household Members: 
A person commits the offense of Abuse of Family or
Household Members if he intentionally, knowingly, or
recklessly physically abuses a family or household member. 
There are three material elements of the offense of 
Abuse of Family or Household Members, each of which theprosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt. 
These three elements are: 
1. That, on or about April 30, 2017, in the City
and County of Honolulu, the Defendant physically abused
[CW]; and 
2. That, at that time, the Defendant and [CW] were
family or household members; and 
3. That the Defendant acted intentionally,
knowingly, or recklessly  as to each of the foregoing
elements. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The jury was also instructed on the defense of self-
protection. The jury was correctly instructed that the State had 
to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the force used by Harris was not justified. The instruction also included this limitation: 
Self-defense is not available if the prosecution
proves that: 
(1) the defendant was reckless in believing that he
was justified in using deadly force or force against theother person; or 
(2) the defendant was reckless in acquiring or
failing to acquire any knowledge or belief which wasmaterial to the justifiability of his use of deadly force orforce. 
The jury was instructed that if the State proved beyond 
a reasonable doubt that Harris intentionally, knowingly, or 
recklessly physically abused CW, and that Harris was reckless in 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
believing that he was justified in using force against CW or was 
reckless in acquiring or failing to acquire any knowledge or belief which was material to the justifiability of his use of force, the self-protection defense was not available to him for the offense of misdemeanor Abuse of Family or Household Members. But under the law, the self-protection defense was only unavailable to Harris for reckless  misdemeanor physical abuse of 
CW. HRS § 703-310(1) (2014). 
In State v. Culkin, 97 Hawai#i 206, 35 P.3d 233 (2001), 
Culkin was charged with murder in the second degree in violation of HRS § 707-701.5 (1993). He contended he acted in self-defense. The jury was instructed on the included offenses of assault in the second degree and assault in the third degree, among others. Assault in the second degree could be committed intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly. HRS § 707-711(1)(a), (b) (1993). Assault in the third degree could also be committed intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly. HRS § 707-712(1)(a) (1993). The supreme court approved this instruction: 
If and only if you find that the defendant was reckless in
having a belief that he was justified in using self-protective force against another person, or that thedefendant was reckless in acquiring or failing to acquireany knowledge or belief which was material to thejustifiability of his use of force against the other person,then the use of such self-protective force is unavailable asa defense to the offenses of Manslaughter, Assault in theSecond Degree based on reckless conduct , and Assault in the
Third Degree based on reckless conduct . 
Id. at 216 n.8, 35 P.3d at 243 n.8 (emphasis added). 
And in State v. Nupeiset , 90 Hawai#i 175, 977 P.2d 183, 
(App. 1999), Nupeiset was convicted of murder in the second 
degree, HRS § 707–701.5 (1993). It appears that the jury was also instructed on the included offenses of manslaughter and assault in the second degree. Manslaughter could be committed intentionally or recklessly. HRS § 707-702(1)(a), (b) (1993). Assault in the second degree could be committed intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly. HRS § 707-711(1)(a), (b) (1993). The supreme court approved this instruction: 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
If and only if you find that [Defendant] was reckless in
having a belief  that he was justified in using deadly force
against [Fuller], or that [Defendant] was reckless in
acquiring or failing to acquire any knowledge or belief
which was material to the justifiability of his use ofdeadly force against [Fuller], then the use of such deadlyforce is unavailable as a defense to the offenses of Manslaughter based on reckless conduct  and/or Assault in the
Second Degree based on recklessly  causing serious bodily
injury to another person. 
Id. at 186, 977 P.2d at 194 (bolding added). 
The jury in this case should have been instructed that 
the self-protection defense was unavailable to Harris for 
reckless  physical abuse — it would have been available to Harris 
for intentional or knowing physical abuse. The State argues that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt because no reasonable person in Harris's position could have believed it was necessary to use force against CW. But that was a question for the jury. The record does not show whether the jury found Harris guilty of intentional, knowing, or reckless physical abuse of CW. On this record, we cannot say that the instructional error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The Judgment is vacated and this case is remanded for a new trial. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai #i
, January 11, 2024. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Phyllis J. Hironaka, Presiding Judge
Deputy Public Defender,
State of Hawai #i, /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
for Defendant-Appellant. Associate Judge 
Donn Fudo, /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, 
Associate Judge
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
5 