NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000544
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
KRISTEN NICOLE AKEMI HIGA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-16-03508)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Ginoza, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Kristen Nicole Akemi Higa (Higa)
 
appeals from two Notices of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
 
Plea/Judgment (Judgment) entered on May 15, 2017 and June 14,
 
2017, respectfully, in the District Court of the First Circuit,
 
Honolulu Division (District Court).1 After a bench trial, the
 
District Court found Higa guilty of operating a vehicle under the
 influence of an intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 291E-61(a)(1) and (b)(1) (Supp. 2017).
2
 
1
 The Honorable James H. Ashford presided over Higa's trial. The
 
Honorable Melanie M. May presided over Higa's sentencing.
 
2
 HRS §§ 291E-61(a)(1) provides:
 
§291E-61 Operating a vehicle under the influence of an
intoxicant. (a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the person
operates or assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
(1) 	While under the influence of alcohol in an amount 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Higa contends that: (1) the District Court
 
erred in denying Higa's "Motion to Suppress Statements" (motion
 
to suppress) filed on November 18, 2016 because she was not
 
advised of her Miranda rights and did not waive her Miranda
 
rights before being subjected to custodial interrogation; (2) the
 District Court erred in denying Higa's motion to suppress because
 Officer Darryl Jones' (Officer Jones) initial order for her to
 
get out of her vehicle was illegal as there were no specific and
 
articulable facts to believe a crime had been committed; and (3)
 without the improperly admitted evidence of Officer Jones'
 testimony regarding Higa's verbal responses and physical
 performance on the standardized field sobriety test (SFST), there
 
was insufficient evidence to convict Higa. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant legal authorities, we resolve Higa's points
 of error as follows, and we affirm.
 
At trial, Officer Jones testified to the following:
 On September 25, 2016, at about 3:20 a.m., Officer 
Jones effected a traffic stop of a car being driven by Higa. Officer Jones first saw Higa's vehicle directly in front of his patrol car on Bethel Street in the far left lane. Both Officer Jones and Higa were stopped at the red light to make a left-hand turn onto South Beretania Street. When the light changed, Higa's vehicle turned left onto Beretania Street, a six-lane, one-way westbound street, and proceeded towards Nu' uanu Avenue in the 
third from the left lane.
3 The two far right lanes turn right 
2(...continued)
sufficient to impair the person's normal mental
faculties or ability to care for the person and
guard against casualty[.] 
3
 Although Officer Jones describes Higa's car was in the "third from
the left lane," for the purposes of clarity, we will refer to the position as
the fourth lane from the left. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
onto Nu'uanu Avenue and the other four lanes go straight on 
Beretania Street. 
When Higa approached the intersection of Beretania 
Street and Nu' uanu Avenue, her lane had the red light. As Higa 
approached the red light, Officer Jones could see that Higa did 
not apply the brakes because no brake lights were illuminated. Officer Jones observed Higa's car accelerating towards the intersection. Higa's car was across the stop line but was not in the intersection completely when a car driving on Nu' uanu Avenue 
crossed the intersection in front of Higa. Higa stopped abruptly to prevent a collision with the other car. The car driving on Nu'uanu Avenue had the right of way.  
Although Officer Jones could not testify as to how
 
closely the two vehicles had come to colliding, Officer Jones had
 expected a collision and had braced for an impact. After the
 other car passed the intersection but before the traffic light
 changed, Higa "let off the brakes to [her car] and proceeded like
 she had the green light." Before Higa's car could completely
 enter the intersection, Officer Jones turned on his patrol car's
 lights and Higa's car came to an immediate stop. At this point,
 Higa's car was stopped in the middle of the road, just entering
 the intersection and blocking the fourth lane from the left on
 Beretania Street.
 
Officer Jones approached Higa's car and asked for her
 
driver's license which she provided. Officer Jones took note of
 the four passengers in the car and could smell a "very strong
 odor of alcohol coming from the vehicle" while talking to Higa. 
Officer Jones observed Higa had watery eyes and her speech was
 slurred. Officer Jones then asked Higa to step out of the car to
 ascertain whether the smell of alcohol was coming from Higa or
 the passengers. 
Higa and Officer Jones went to the concrete traffic 
island on Nu' uanu Avenue and Beretania Street. While Officer 
Jones spoke with Higa, he could smell a very strong odor of alcohol coming from her. Officer Jones then asked Higa to participate in a SFST and Higa agreed to do so. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Prior to administering the SFST, Officer Jones asked
 
Higa the "standardized field questions" or "medical rule-out
 
questions." Officer Jones asked Higa whether she was "wearing
 contacts, if she has any speech impediments, under the care of a
 doctor, and so on." Higa only answered "yes" to the question as
 to whether she wore contacts. 
Higa swayed from side to side during the horizontal
 
gaze nystagmus test and the instructional phase. During the walk
 and turn test, Higa had her arms away from her body both before
 and after the turn portion of the test. Higa began walking heel
 to toe on the first few steps but missed all heel to toe on her
 final steps before the turn. Although Higa counted nine steps
 before the turn, she only took eight steps because she had
 started her count from count two instead of beginning from count
 one. Higa then did a spinning motion for the turn instead of a
 slow, deliberate turn and "she kinda lost her balance and stepped
 around." After the turn, Higa took ten steps instead of nine and
 stopped counting out loud in the middle of her return steps,
 missing most of the heel to toe steps.
 
Finally, during the one leg stand test, Higa's raised
 
foot fluctuated in height, she swayed from side to side, her arms
 were slightly away from her body, and her counting was soft and
 slurred. 
Higa testified at trial to the following:
 On September 25, 2016, prior to being stopped by
 
Officer Jones, Higa and her four friends were at "Manifest," a
 bar where Higa had consumed two alcoholic mixed drinks which
 contained whiskey and ginger around midnight. Thereafter, Higa
 and her four friends went to "Downbeat," a restaurant. Although
 it is unclear from the record what time Higa started driving,
 Higa and her friends left a paid parking lot in front of "Marks
 Garage." 
Higa was "[n]ot particularly" familiar with the area
 
and asked her friends for directions so that she could take them
 home. Her friends were "[r]eally loud, talking a lot, chatting"
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in the car and were not responding to Higa's questions for
 
directions. Higa was "[p]robably not completely" sober when she
 was driving. 
After turning left onto Beretania Street, Higa saw a 
green arrow on the traffic light on the traffic island to her right. Higa did not check for other traffic lights in front of her car. When Higa stopped abruptly to avoid colliding with the other car, Higa believed the other car had run a red light. After the abrupt stop, Higa believed she had the green light and began moving her car forward. When Higa was pulled over by Officer Jones, her car was not blocking any of the lanes for Nu'uanu Avenue. 
(1) Miranda Warning. Higa contends the District Court 
erred by denying her motion to suppress Officer Jones' observations of Higa during the SFST because she was not advised of her rights under Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966), and did not waive her Miranda rights. Higa relies on State v. Tsujimura, 140 Hawai' i 299, 400 P.3d 500 (2017) to assert that 
she had a pre-arrest right to remain silent and that she "was seized at the moment that Officer Jones detained her for the traffic stop" and therefore should have been advised of her right to remain silent. Higa also argues she was subjected to custodial interrogation by Officer Jones during the SFST, and therefore should have been advised of her Miranda rights. For the reasons set forth below, we disagree. 
First, a traffic stop does not automatically constitute 
a seizure requiring Miranda warnings. See State v. Kaleohano, 99 
Hawai'i 370, 376, 56 P.3d 138, 144 (2002) (holding a motorist is 
not in custody "for purposes of Miranda merely because she had been pulled over pursuant to a valid traffic stop"); Berkemer v. McCarty, 468 U.S. 420, 437-39 (1984) (holding that persons temporarily detained pursuant to ordinary traffic stops are not in custody for purposes of Miranda). Here, Higa was pulled over after a valid traffic stop after Officer Jones observed her vehicle pass the stop line at a red light and almost collide with 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
another vehicle. Under the totality of the circumstances of the
 
traffic stop in this case, Higa was not in custody for Miranda
 purposes and was not subjected to custodial interrogation. 
Second, Tsujimura is not dispositive in the instant 
case. The court in Tsujimura held that a person has the right to remain silent pre-arrest. Tsujimura, 140 Hawai' i at 310-11, 400 
P.3d at 511-12. The issue in Tsujimura was whether the defendant's pre-arrest silence could be used against him substantively as an implication of guilt, not whether Miranda warnings were required. Id. at 311-14, 400 P.3d at 512-15. 
Third, the SFST does not seek either communication or
 
testimony, and instead involves an exhibition of "physical
 characteristics of coordination." State v. Wyatt, 67 Haw. 293,
 
303, 687 P.2d 544, 551 (1984). Real or physical evidence
 obtained from a suspect is distinct from communicative or
 testimonial evidence and does not violate a person's right to
 remain silent. Id. at 302-03, 687 P.2d at 551 (citing Schmerber
 
v. California, 384 U.S. 757, 763-64 (1966)); see also State v. Kahana, No. CAAP-17-0000359, 2018 WL 2316511, at *2 (Hawai' i App. 
May 22, 2018). 
Based on the above, the District Court did not err in
 
denying Higa's motion to suppress.
(2) Specific and Articulable Facts.  Higa next
 
contends the District Court erred in denying her motion to
 suppress because Officer Jones ordered her to exit her vehicle
 when he had no reasonable basis of specific and articulable facts
 to believe a crime had been committed. We disagree.
 
To support her argument, Higa relies on State v. Kim, 
68 Haw. 286, 290, 711 P.2d 1291, 1294 (1985), which held that under article I, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution, "a police 
officer must have at least a reasonable basis of specific articulable facts to believe a crime has been committed to order a driver out of a car after a traffic stop." However, Kim is distinguishable from the instant case. Kim involved a defendant 
who made a right turn through a red light without first stopping 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
or signaling his intention to make a right turn. Id. at 288, 711
 
P.2d at 1293. In Kim, it was only after the defendant had exited
 
the vehicle that the police officer observed any indications that
 the defendant was intoxicated. Id. 
Here, Officer Jones asked Higa to step out of her
 
vehicle after observing her near-miss with another vehicle and
 smelling a very strong odor of alcohol coming from the vehicle. 
Officer Jones also observed that Higa had watery eyes and that
 her speech was slurred while she was still in her vehicle. See
 
Wyatt, 67 Haw. at 300-01, 687 P.2d at 550 (involving a traffic
 stop of a motorist driving without headlights, during which the
 police officer could smell alcohol coming from the vehicle and
 the defendant stated that she had been drinking); State v. Kuba,
 68 Haw. 184, 185, 706 P.2d 1305, 1307 (1985) (involving a police
 officer asking a motorist to step out of his vehicle after
 observing the motorist straddle two lanes of highway and driving
 at an abnormally slow rate); see also, Kim, 68 Haw. at 290, 711
 P.2d at 1294 (concluding there were specific articulable facts to
 justify ordering the drivers out of their vehicles in Wyatt and
 Kuba). Given the observations made by Officer Jones of Higa's
 traffic violation (proceeding through a red light), the near-miss
 with another vehicle, Higa's watery eyes and slurred speech, and
 the strong smell of alcohol emanating from her vehicle, Officer
 Jones had a reasonable basis to believe Higa was operating a
 vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant when he asked her to
 exit her vehicle. 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude there were specific
 
articulable facts to believe a crime had been committed to
 justify Officer Jones' request for Higa to step out of her
 vehicle. Consequently, the District Court did not err in denying
 Higa's motion to suppress. 
Given the above, we need not address Higa's third point
 
of error.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Therefore, we affirm the District Court of the First
 
Circuit, Honolulu Division's Notices of Entry of Judgment and/or
 
Order and Plea/Judgment, filed on May 15, 2017 and June 14, 2017.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 28, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
Alen M. Kaneshiro,
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Brian R. Vincent,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
8
 