NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000901
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
EDISON C. LEGASPI, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-1322)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Edison C. Legaspi (Legaspi) appeals
 
from the Judgment Guilty Conviction and Sentence entered on June

 
10, 2014 (Judgment), by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
1
(Circuit Court).  After a jury-waived trial, Legaspi was found
guilty of Kidnapping, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
2
(HRS) § 707-720(1)(e) (2014),  and Abuse of Family or Household
Members, in violation of HRS § 709-906(1) and (5) (Supp. 2013).
 
1
 The Honorable Colette Y. Garibaldi presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-720 provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 707-720 Kidnapping.  (1) A person commits the
offense of kidnapping if the person intentionally or
knowingly restrains another person with intent to:
. . . .
 (e)	 Terrorize that person or a third person[.]
(2)	 Except as provided in subsection (3), kidnapping
is a class A felony.
(3)	 In a prosecution for kidnapping, it is a defense
which reduces the offense to a class B felony
that the defendant voluntarily released the
victim, alive and not suffering from serious or
substantial bodily injury, in a safe place prior
to trial.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Legaspi raises a single point of error, 
contending that there was insufficient evidence that Legaspi 
possessed the requisite mens rea, i.e., that he intentionally or knowingly restrained the complaining witness (CW) with the intent 
to terrorize her. Accordingly, Legaspi argues that his 
conviction for Kidnapping must be reversed under the due process and fair trial clauses of the United States and Hawai
'i 
Constitutions. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Legaspi's point of error as follows:
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held: 
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellatecourt passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence tosupport a conviction; the same standard applies whether thecase was before a judge or a jury. The test on appeal isnot whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt,but whether there was substantial evidence to support theconclusion of the trier of fact. Indeed, even if it couldbe said in a bench trial that the conviction is against theweight of the evidence, as long as there is substantialevidence to support the requisite findings for conviction,the trial court will be affirmed. 
"Substantial evidence" as to every material
element of the offense charged is credible evidence
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to
enable a person of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion. And as trier of fact, the trial judge is
free to make all reasonable and rational inferences
 under the facts in evidence, including circumstantial
evidence.
 
State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai 'i 149, 157-58, 166 P.3d 322, 330-31 
(2007) (citation omitted); see also State v. Kiese, 126 Hawai 'i 
494, 502, 273 P.3d 1180, 1188 (2012). 
In order to convict Legaspi of Kidnapping, the State
 
was required to adduce, inter alia, substantial evidence that
 
Legaspi intentionally or knowingly restrained CW with the intent
 to terrorize her. Viewing the evidence in the light most
 favorable to the prosecution, we conclude that there was
 substantial evidence to support the Circuit Court's findings of
 fact, including evidence supporting the requisite mens rea.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The CW testified, inter alia, that after entering their
 
3
bedroom and locking the door,  Legaspi initiated a conversation
about their adult daughter and became upset. 
Legaspi grabbed CW,
 
put her on the floor, sat on her legs, pulled her hair, and
 
punched her in the face. CW started screaming and felt pain. 
Legaspi then pulled her up to the bed, by pulling her hair and
 dragging her, and flipped her over. Legaspi then put an ointment
 on her face, where it was injured, said he was sorry and told her
 that she "cannot go out anymore." Legaspi told CW she needed to
 stay in the room for a week or two so that nobody could see her
 bruised, swollen face. CW testified that she felt "numb, blank,
 pain, scared." Legaspi restrained CW by tying her hands behind
 her back with a white luggage belt, and then attempted to tie her
 leg or legs with a black luggage belt. CW testified that she was
 just screaming and Legaspi told her, "This is what you deserve"
 and "Now you suffer." He then put a cloth in her mouth. CW said
 she gagged and felt like vomiting. Legaspi pulled the rag out
 and she screamed some more.
 
At that point, CW saw a small folding knife that

 
Legaspi kept in his waistband and tried to grab the knife, while
 still screaming; CW was able to loosen her hands; they wrestled
 for the knife on the bed. Legaspi got the knife back and opened
 it and said, "That's it." At that point, the three men who lived
 downstairs in the same house then entered the room. CW told them
 Legaspi had a knife. They left and, according to CW, Legaspi
 again locked the door. A few minutes later, two firemen knocked
 at the door. CW got up and opened the door and Legaspi made no
 attempt to stop her.
 
Legaspi testified, inter alia, that he was so upset
 
about the conversation about the daughter, he punched his wife
 mistakenly, that he did not mean to punch her, and that it was a
 reflex. He further testified that, when he hit her, he was in a
 panic, and "couldn't think already." He said he did not know
 
3
 Legaspi and CW shared a rented room in a house belonging to a
third party. Legaspi testified that he locked the door to ensure that their
conversation was private.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
what he was thinking when he decided to grab the luggage strap to
 
tie up her hands. They talked about Halawa prison, that he might
 have to go back to prison if "they" saw her. Legaspi claimed
 that he was going to show CW "how the kidnapping is" and she
 willingly gave him her hand. He admitted tying her hands
 together behind her back, but stated that she agreed to it. He
 denied pulling her hair and wondered why she was calling for help
 on him. He said he did not have a plan, but the situation "just
 happened just like that." After CW struggled for his knife, the
 button on the knife got pushed and the knife opened; CW panicked
 and yelled again. Legaspi testified that, at that point, when
 "the guys went broke the door, I gave them the knife right away."
 
In its written Decision, the Circuit Court stated that
 
it considered Legaspi's testimony, but found CW was more credible
 than Legaspi with respect to her testimony and her demeanor as a
 witness. Based on the trial evidence, the court found that the
 State met its burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt with
 respect to the three essential elements of the offense of
 Kidnapping, including that Legaspi restrained CW, that he did so
 knowingly and intentionally, and that he did so with the intent
 to terrorize her.
 
The HRS do not provide a statutory definition of the
 
term "terrorize." As Legaspi notes, this court has stated:
 
Where there is no statutory definition, HRS § 701-104 (1993
4
Repl.) applies, which provides the principles of
construction for interpreting provisions of the Hawai
'i 
Penal Code (Code). See State v. Cavness
, 80 Hawai' i 460,
466, 911 P.2d 95, 101 (App. 1996) (HRS § 701-104 applies
where criminal statute did not define a phrase). Pursuant to HRS § 701-104, provisions of the Code "shall be given agenuine construction, according to the fair import of thewords, taken in their usual sense[.]" HRS § 701-104. 
4
 HRS § 701-104 provides:
 
§ 701-104 Principles of construction.  The provisions
of this Code [Hawaii Penal Code] cannot be extended by
analogy so as to create crimes not provided for herein;
however, in order to promote justice and effect the objects
of the law, all of its provisions shall be given a genuine
construction, according to the fair import of the words,
taken in their usual sense, in connection with the context,
and with reference to the purpose of the provision.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Applying the foregoing principles, we note that the
ordinary and usual meaning of "terrorize" is "1: to fill
with terror or anxiety: SCARE 2: to coerce by threat or
violence[.]" Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary 1213
(10th ed. 2000).
 
State v. Rodriguez, CAAP-12-0000212, 3-4 (Hawai 'i App. June 25, 
2013) (footnote omitted), cert. denied, State v. Rodriguez, SCWC­
12-0000212 (Hawai 'i September 17, 2013). 
Here, substantial evidence supports the Circuit Court's
 
finding that Legaspi restrained CW with the intent to terrorize
 CW, consistent with the ordinary and usual meaning of terrorize,
 including Legaspi's above-referenced words and conduct.
5
 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court's June 10, 2014 Judgment
 
is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, September 25, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Taryn R. Tomasa
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Loren J. Thomas Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
5
 Legaspi also asserts that the Circuit Court erred in finding that
the CW began to vomit, as opposed to felt like vomiting. This distinction is
 
inconsequential under the circumstances of this case.
 
5
 