FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--­
MICHAEL DOYLE RUGGLES, REV. NANCY WAITE HARRIS,
KENNETH V. MIYAMOTO-SLAUGHTER, WENDY TATUM,
DAVID TATUM, and ROBERT S. MURRAY,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
and 
GEORGE HERMAN KLARE, BARBARA JEAN LANG,
Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v. 
DOMINIC YAGONG, DONALD IKEDA, J. YOSHIMOTO, DENNIS ONISHI,
FRED BLAS, BRITTANY SMART, BRENDA FORD, ANGEL PILAGO, and
PETE HOFFMAN, current Hawai 'i County Council members;
JAY KIMURA, Hawai 'i County Prosecutor;
MITCHELL ROTH and CHARLENE IBOSHI, Deputy Prosecuting Attorneys;
BILLY KENOI, Hawai 'i County Mayor, respondeat superior,
HARRY KUBOJIRI, Hawai 'i County Chief of Police,
KELLY GREENWELL, GUY ENRIQUES, and EMILY NA 'OLE,
previous Hawai 'i County Council members,
Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10, Defendants
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000117
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-117)
 
February 7, 2014
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FOLEY, J.
 
Pro se Plaintiffs-Appellants Michael Doyle Ruggles,
 
Rev. Nancy Waite Harris, Kenneth V. Miyamoto-Slaughter, Wendy
  
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Tatum, David Tatum, and Robert S. Murray (collectively,
 
Plaintiffs) appeal from the January 28, 2013 Final Judgment
1
entered in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit  (circuitcourt), in favor of the following County of Hawai
'i public
officials, Defendants-Appellees Dominic Yagong, Donald Ikeda, J. Yoshimoto, Dennis Onishi, Fred Blas, Brittany Smart, Brenda Ford, 
Angel Pilago, Pete Hoffman, Jay Kimura, Mitchell Roth, Charlene 
Iboshi, Billy Kenoi, Harry Kubojiri, Kelly Greenwell, and Emily 
Na
'ole (collectively, Defendants). Plaintiffs' complaint, filed 
March 24, 2011, alleged that Defendants failed to implement and enforce a citizen-sponsored initiative, the Lowest Law 
Enforcement Priority of Cannabis Ordinance (LLEP), Hawai
'i County
Ordinance No. 08-181, which the County of Hawai 'i (County) voters
supported by ballot in November 2008.
I. BACKGROUND
 
In 2008, the County voters approved a citizen-sponsored 
initiative that made the enforcement of marijuana laws the lowest enforcement priority in the county. The Certificate of Results 
reported 35,689 votes for the LLEP proposal and 25,940 votes 
against it. 
The County Clerk certified the measure, the "Lowest 
Law Enforcement Priority of Cannabis Ordinance," Bill No. 335, Ordinance No. 08-181, codified as Article 16, Hawai
'i County Code
(HCC) § 14-96 et seq. (2008).
Section 14-96.  Purpose .
 
The purpose of this article is to:
 
(1) Provide law enforcement more time and resources to
focus on serious crimes;
 
(2) Allow our court systems to run more efficiently;
 (3) Create space in our prisons to hold serious
criminals;
 
(4) Save taxpayers money and provide more funding for
necessities such as education and health care; and 
(5) Reduce the fear of prosecution and the stigma of
criminality from non-violent citizens who harmlessly
cultivate and/or use cannabis for personal, medicinal,
religious, and recreational purposes.
 
1
 The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided. 
2
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Most of the LLEP provisions address "adult personal
 
use" of cannabis. An "adult" as defined in LLEP is any
 
individual of twenty-one years of age or older. HCC § 14-98. 
"Adult personal use" is defined as: 
the use of cannabis on private property by adults. It does
 
not include:
 
(1) Distribution or sale of cannabis;
 (2) Distribution, sale, cultivation, or use of cannabis on
public property;
 
(3) Driving under the influence; or
 (4) The commercial trafficking of cannabis, or the
possession of amounts of cannabis in excess of the amounts
defined as being appropriate for adult personal use.
Id.
 
The LLEP defined "Lowest Law Enforcement Priority" to
 
mean:
 
a priority such that all law enforcement activities related
to all offenses other than the possession or cultivation of
cannabis for adult personal use shall be a higher priority
than all law enforcement activities related to the adult
 personal use of cannabis. The Lowest Law Enforcement
 Priority regarding possession or cultivation of cannabis
shall apply to any single case involving twenty four or
fewer cannabis plants at any stage of maturity or the
equivalent in dried cannabis, where the cannabis was
intended for adult personal use
.
 
Section 14-99(b)-(d) of the LLEP, entitled "Lowest law
 
enforcement priority policy relating to the adult personal use of
 
cannabis[,]" provides, in part: 
(b) The council, the police commissioner, the chief of
police and all associated law enforcement staff, deputies,
officers and any attorney prosecuting on behalf of the
county shall make law enforcement activity relating to
cannabis offenses, where the cannabis was intended for adult
personal use, their Lowest Law Enforcement Priority. Law
 enforcement activities relating to cannabis offenses include
but are not limited to the prosecution of cannabis offenses
involving only the adult personal use of cannabis.
 
(c) Neither the chief of police, the police commissioner,
nor any attorney prosecuting on behalf of the county, nor
any associated law enforcement staff, deputies, nor officers
shall seek, accept or renew any formal or informal
deputization or commissioning by a federal law enforcement
agency for the purpose of investigating, citing, or
arresting adults, nor for searching or seizing property from
adults for cannabis offenses subject to the Lowest Law
Enforcement Priority of cannabis where such activities would
be in violation of that policy, nor shall such authorities
exercise such powers that may be ancillary to deputization
or commissioning for another purpose.
 
3
  
 
 
 
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(d) The council shall not authorize the acceptance or the issuing
of any funding that is intended [to] be used to investigate, cite,
arrest, prosecute, search or seize property from adults for
cannabis offenses in a manner inconsistent with the county's
Lowest Law Enforcement Priority policy.
 
The circuit court found: 
1. Under Section 14-99 of the [HCC], law enforcement
activities including prosecution involving criminal
offenses which fall within the definition of Lowest Law
 Enforcement Priority are to have the lowest priority.
 
2. Under Article 16 of Chapter 14 of the [HCC]. [The County]
law enforcement personnel are:
 a) Prohibited from deputizing or commissioning federal
enforcement personnel from participating in the
investigation or prosecution of offenses which fall
within the definition of the Lowest Law Enforcement
 Priority. Section 14-99(c), [HCC]. 
b) Prohibited from obtaining funds for the investigation
or prosecution of offenses which fall within the
definition of the Lowest Law Enforcement Priority.
Section 14-99(d), [HCC]
 c) Prohibited from spending or authorizing the spending
of funds for the investigation of offenses which fall
within the definition of the Lowest Law Enforcement
 Priority. Section 14-101(a), [HCC].
 
3) Article 16, if enforced, would prevent the investigation
and prosecution of offenses which fall within the
definition of Lowest Law Enforcement Priority under
Section 14-99 of the [HCC]. 
4) Article 16, if enforced, would prevent the investigation
and prosecution in the [County] of the followingcriminal offenses defined under the Hawai' i Penal Code:
 Section 712-1247(1)(e) Promoting a Detrimental Drug in the
First Degree; Section 712-1248(1)(c) Promoting a DetrimentalDrug in the Second Degree; and Section 712-1249(1) Promoting aDetrimental Drug in the Third Degree. 
The circuit court concluded: "[t]he Penal Code of the
 
State of Hawai 'i is a comprehensive code of penal laws that 
applies throughout the State of Hawai 'i and is uniformly applied 
throughout the State[]" citing Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 
§ 701-106 (1993) ("Territorial applicability"); "[t]he provisions
 
of Article 16 of Chapter 14 [HCC] are preempted by the provisions
 
of Title 37 of the [HRS;]" and "[t]he provisions of Article 16 of
 
Chapter 14, [HCC], are thus unenforceable."
II. DISCUSSION
 
The County derives its powers to enact and enforce
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5ordinances from the general laws of the State of Hawai #i.  Haw.
Const. art. VIII, § 1.  The County's authority to enact and
enforce ordinances, however, is limited by the legislature's
power to enact laws of "statewide concern."  Haw. Const. art.
VIII, § 6;  see also HRS § 50-15 (2012 Repl.).  Article VIII
section 6 of the Hawai# i Constitution is implemented by HRS § 50-
15, which provides: 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, there is
expressly reserved to the state legislature the power to
enact all laws of general application throughout the State
on matters of concern and interest and laws relating to the
fiscal powers of the counties, and neither a charter nor
ordinances adopted under a charter shall be in conflict
therewith. 
"Ordinances in violation of these provisions [HRS § 50-
15 and Haw. Const. art. VIII, § 6] thus are invalid."  Stallard
v. Consol. Maui, Inc., 103 Hawai #i 468, 473, 83 P.3d 731, 736
(2004).  HRS § 46–1.5(13) (2012 Repl.), titled, "General powers
and limitation of the counties," provides:
(13) Each county shall have the power to enact ordinances
deemed necessary to protect health, life, and property, and
to preserve the order and security of the county and its
inhabitants on any subject or matter not inconsistent with,
or tending to defeat, the intent of any state statute where
the statute does not disclose an express or implied intent
that the statute shall be exclusive or uniform throughout the
State[.]
(Emphasis added.)
Hawai#i courts have derived a "comprehensive statutory
scheme" test from these constitutional and statutory parameters
to approach the issue of state statutory preemption of county
ordinances.  The Hawai #i Supreme Court has held: "a municipal
ordinance may be preempted pursuant to HRS § 46–1.5(13) if (1) it
covers the same subject matter embraced within a comprehensive
state statutory scheme disclosing an express or implied intent to
be exclusive and uniform throughout the state or (2) it conflicts
with state law."  Richardson v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu , 76
Hawai#i 46, 62, 868 P.2d 1193, 1209 (1994).
The LLEP governs the investigation of cannabis related
offenses by attorneys "prosecuting on behalf of the [C]ounty[.]"  
The supreme court has further held that:  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The Hawai[]i Penal Code, being of general application
throughout the state, is a law of statewide concern within
the meaning of article VIII, section 6, of the Hawai[' ]i
State Constitution. See HRS § 701–106 (1985). When the
 
Prosecutor conducts prosecutions for offenses against the
laws of the state pursuant to Honolulu Charter § 8–104(a),
it does so on behalf of all the people of the State of
Hawai[']i. See Territory of Hawaii v. Lucas, 19 Haw. 162 
(1908). Accordingly, how violations of state penal laws are
investigated by authorized state and county officials is
inherently also a matter of statewide concern
constitutionally reserved for the legislature. 
'
Marsland v. First Hawaiian Bank, 70 Haw. 126, 133, 764 P.2d 1228,
 
1232 (1988) (emphasis added). 
HRS § 28-2.5(a) (2009 Repl.) provides: 
The attorney general shall investigate alleged violations of
the law when directed to do so by the governor, or when the
attorney general determines that an investigation would be
in the public interest.
 
HRS § 28-2 (2009 Repl.) provides, "[t]he attorney
 
general shall be vigilant and active in detecting offenders
 
against the laws of the State, and shall prosecute the same with
 
diligence."
 
Under Hawai 'i's statutory scheme: 
the attorney general, as the chief legal officer for the
State, shall have the ultimate responsibility for enforcing
penal laws of statewide application. The public prosecutor,
however, has been delegated the primary authority and
responsibility for initiating and conducting criminal
prosecutions within his county jurisdiction. What is thus
 reserved to the attorney general is the residual authority
to act. 
Amemiya v. Sapienza, 63 Haw. 424, 427, 629 P.2d 1126, 1129
 
(1981).
 
Amemiya held that the attorney general has the
 
authority to intercede in the county prosecutors' criminal
 
prosecutions in "certain compelling circumstances[:]"
 
So that, for example, where the public prosecutor has
refused to act and such refusal amounts to a serious
 dereliction of duty on his part, or where, in the unusual
case, it would be highly improper for the public prosecutor
and his deputies to act, the attorney general may supersede
the public prosecutor. In every such case, however, it must
be clearly apparent that compelling public interests require
the attorney general's intervention in the particular
matter.
 
Amemiya, 63 Haw. at 427, 629 P.2d at 1129.
 
State statutes providing for the criminalization and
 
regulation of adult personal use of cannabis provide further
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence of legislative intent to preempt the LLEP. The circuit
 
court found the LLEP would prevent the investigation and
 
prosecution of the following criminal offenses: (1) promoting a
 
detrimental drug in the first degree, which includes the knowing
 
possession of a preparation containing marijuana that weighs one
 
pound or more (HRS § 712-1247(1)(e) (1993)); (2) promoting a
 
detrimental drug in the second degree, which includes the knowing
 
possession of a preparation containing marijuana that weighs one
 
ounce or more (HRS § 712-1248(1)(c) (1993)); and (3) promoting a
 
detrimental drug in the third degree, which includes the knowing
 
possession of marijuana in any amount (HRS § 712-1249(1) (1993)). 
Id.
 
The legislature also disclosed its intent to regulate 
the adult personal use of cannabis through HRS Chapter 329, 
Hawai'i's Uniform Controlled Substances Act. Chapter 329 
prohibits the possession of paraphernalia used to produce, deliver, or ingest marijuana by adults. HRS § 329-43.5(a),(b) 
(2010 Repl.). HRS § 329-122 (Supp. 2013) regulates the adult 
personal use of marijuana for medicinal purposes across the 
state. Cannabis is a "Schedule I" controlled substance (HRS 
§ 329-14(g)(1) (Supp. 2013)) and is thus subject to statutes 
providing for: (1) the registration of practitioners, where the 
cannabis is used for research (HRS § 329-33(c) (2010 Repl.)); (2) 
the assistance of the Hawai
'i advisory commission on drug abuse 
and controlled substances (HRS § 329-4 (Supp. 2013)); (3) the filing requirements for the manufacture, distribution, 
dispensing, transportation, warehousing, or other handling of 
cannabis (HRS § 329-37 (2010 Repl.)); and (4) the penalties for 
Chapter 329 violations (HRS §§ 329-41 (2010 Repl.) through -42 
(Supp. 2013)). 
We conclude that the LLEP conflicts with, and is thus 
preempted by state laws governing the investigation and 
prosecution of alleged violations of the Hawai
'i Penal Code 
concerning the adult personal use of cannabis. We further conclude that the LLEP covers the adult personal use of cannabis, 
which is the same subject matter that the legislature intended to 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
govern under HRS Chapter 329 provisions for the regulation of
 
controlled substances. The LLEP is therefore preempted by the
 
Hawai'i Penal Code and HRS Chapter 329, Hawai 'i's Uniform 
Controlled Substances Act. 
III. CONCLUSION
 
The January 28, 2013 Final Judgment entered in the 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit is affirmed.
 
On the briefs:
 
Michael Doyle Ruggles,
Rev. Nancy Waite Harris,
Kenneth V. Miyamoto-Slaughter,
Wendy Tatum,
David Tatum,
Robert S. Murray,
Plaintiffs-Appellants pro se.
 
Michael J. Udovic
 
Deputy Corporation Counsel,
County of Hawai
'i
 
for Defendants-Appellees.
 
8
 