NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0000070
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
TODD ATHERTON PERKINS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
TAMMY ASH PERKINS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 11-1-0086)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Tammy Ash Perkins (Wife) appeals
 
from an "Order On Defendant's Motion And Affidavit For Post-
Decree Relief Filed October 25, 2012" (Order on Post-Decree
 Motion), entered by the Family Court of the Second Circuit
 
1
(family court)  on January 7, 2013.  On March 14, 2013, the
 
family court also entered its "Findings of Fact and Conclusions

 
of Law and Order for November 27, 2012 Hearing" related to this
 appeal. 
Wife contends that the family court erred when it (1)

 
failed to consider Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 580-47 (2006
 and Supp. 2014) in deciding Wife's motion for post-decree relief;
 (2) misinterpreted the divorce decree by accepting the amount
 left by Plaintiff-Appellee Todd Atherton Perkins (Husband) in an
 account as the amount owing to Wife from rental proceeds; and (3)
 found Husband was not in civil contempt regarding two orders to
 
1
 The Honorable Mimi Desjardins presided, except as otherwise noted.
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
deposit all rent monies in the account and use it to pay the
 
mortgage.2
 
For the reasons set forth below, we vacate the family
 
court's rulings related to the amount owed to Wife for rental
 proceeds from the Marital Residence during the pendency of the
 divorce proceedings. We remand for further proceedings.
I. Background
 
Husband and Wife jointly owned two parcels of real
 
property, one located in Kula, Maui (Marital Residence) and the
 other located in Kahului, Maui (Commercial Property). Pending a
 final divorce decree, several motions for pre-decree relief were
 filed by both Husband and Wife. On March 28, 2011, the family
 court filed an "Order on [Husband's] Motion for Pre-Decree
 
3
Relief"  which provided in pertinent part:
7. 172 Holomakani Place, Kula, Maui, Hawaii.
[Husband] and not [Wife] shall be entitled to rent and
collect the rental proceeds from the marital residence and
cottage located at 172 Holomakani Place, Kula, Maui, Hawaii.
[Wife] shall turn over to [Husband] all rental agreements,
all security deposits and the balance of any past collected
rents. [Wife] shall also provide [Husband] with all of the
rental proceeds and security deposits collected from the
tenants who are moving on to the property beginning the
month of April.
[Husband] shall deposit said rental funds in an
account under his name and shall have sole control of said
 account and shall use the monies collected to pay the
mortgage on said residence.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
Subsequently, on September 7, 2011, the family court
 
entered an "Order of the Evidentiary Hearing Held August 8,
 
4
2011" that inter alia further specified Husband's rights and
 
obligations in managing both the Marital Residence and Commercial
 
2
 Wife's Opening Brief does not comply with Hawai' i Rules of Appellate
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28 in several ways, which alone raises the potential fordismissal of the appeal and/or waiver of issues sought to be raised.Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558 (1995).
However, because we seek to address cases on the merits where possible, weaddress Wife's arguments to the extent they are discernable. Id.
3
 The Honorable Keith E. Tanaka presided.
 
4
 The Honorable Michelle L. Drewyer presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3Property:
8.  Real Property.  [Husband] shall be allowed to
manage both the Kula property located at 172 Holomakani
Place, Kula, Maui, Hawaii and the commercial property
located 381 Ala Makani Street, Kahului, Maui, Hawaii.
[Husband] shall have the right to rent and
collect the rents from any tenants and use those funds
towards payment of the mortgages on those properties.
The parties are ordered to cooperate and
communicate in any manner as may be necessary relating to
the tenants, the collection of funds relating to the real
properties and payments of the mortgages related thereto.
(Emphasis added.)    
On September 26, 2012, the family court entered the
Divorce Decree, which included in paragraph 15(b) an award to
Wife as follows:
b.  Rental Proceeds. [Wife] shall be awarded the
parties' joint account containing any and all rental
proceeds from the rental of the Marital Residence during the
pendency of the divorce proceedings as her sole and separate
property. [Husband] shall waive any right, title, claim, and
interest in and to said account. [Husband] shall pay [Wife]
these proceeds and provide proof of the total amount of the
account within two (2) weeks of the entry of the Decree.
(Emphasis added.)  
On October 25, 2012, Wife filed a Motion and Affidavit
For Post-Decree Relief (Post-Decree Motion).  The Post-Decree
Motion alleged in pertinent part that Husband failed to pay Wife
all of the rental proceeds from the rental of the Marital
Residence during the pendency of the divorce proceedings, which
she asserts should equal to $46,800.  The Post-Decree Motion
asked the court to enter judgment against Husband for amounts in
arrears, for an order sequestering, garnishing, etc., specific
property of Husband, and for an order finding Husband in civil
contempt.  
On January 7, 2013, the family court filed the Order on
Post-Decree Motion, making the following findings:
3. [Wife] questioned the language of paragraph 15b of
the Divorce Decree as to the rental proceeds.  The Court in
its interpretation of that paragraph notes that previous
orders of the Court allowed [Husband] to collect the rental
proceeds from the parties' two marital properties, deposit
them into a joint account and apply them to the mortgages.
4.  Reviewing the language of paragraph 15b, the Court
finds that [Wife] was awarded the joint account of theNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
parties, but not the total proceeds received by [Husband].
5. The Court further finds that this make [sic] sense
in the light of the fact that [Husband] was suppose to use
the funds in this account to pay the mortgages.
6. If there is a dispute as to how the rental
proceeds should have been used or what the balance of the
account should have been that should have been resolved
 before the final Divorce Decree herein in September of 2012.
7. The Court also finds that the monies that were in
 
the rental account at the time of the Divorce Decree were
 the amounts that were made available to [Wife] or
$10,639.36.
 
The family court denied Wife's request for amounts allegedly owed
 
and sequestration of property, and found that Husband was not in
 civil contempt. 
On February 7, 2013, Wife timely filed her notice of
 
appeal. Following Wife's notice of appeal, the family court
 filed a "Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law and Order for
 November 27, 2012 Hearing" on March 14, 2013, which provides in
 pertinent part:
 
Rental Proceeds.
 
23. The issue relating to the rental proceeds arose
initially as a result of an Order by this Court on August 8,
2011 which was filed September 7, 2011.
24. That Order allowed [Husband] to collect rents
from the parties' marital residence located at 172
Holomakani Place, Kula, Maui, Hawaii and the parties'
commercial property located at 381 Ala Makani Street,
Kahului, Maui, Hawaii and to use those monies to pay the
mortgages.
25. The case file also shows that there was an
 
evidentiary hearing on this matter on April 17, 2012, and
Order filed May 2, 2012, which addressed the issue of
payments to be made for support by [Husband] and the allowed
rental collections.
 
26. [Husband] had the authority to collect and
disburse monies from the rental account as provided in those
Orders.
 
27. The Court takes judicial notice of these
documents in the record and other documents in the file as
 further provided herein.
28. [Husband's] Asset and Debt Statement filed on
August 1, 2012 and provided to [Wife's] counsel reflects a
balance in the Bank of Hawaii rental account of $15,766.64.
29. This document was mailed to [Wife's] counsel as
reflected in a Certificate of Service located in the file
 and filed August 6, 2012.
30. There was no evidence offered by [Wife] to show
the account contained a different amount.
 
31. [Husband] had the obligation to collect certain
rents from the Holomakani property and the commercial
property, he also had the right to use these rents to make
payments towards the mortgages.
32. [Wife] knew or should have known that the amount
in the account as of August 1, 2012, was $15,766.64.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
33. There is nothing in the Divorce Decree
specifically naming the amount to be awarded to [Wife] from
the rental account as of any date.
34. In reviewing the language of paragraph 15.b of
the Divorce Decree, the Court finds that [Wife] was awarded
the contents of the joint account, but not any specific
amount since none is mentioned in the Divorce Decree.
 
35. The Court concludes that [Wife] was not awarded
the total of all rental proceeds by [Husband] from the date
he began collecting funds until the divorce.
36. This make [sic] sense in light of the fact that
[Husband] was suppose to use the funds in this account to
pay the mortgages and certain expenses relating to the
properties.
37. If there was a dispute as to how the rental
proceeds should have been used or what the balance of the
rental account should have been, that issue should have been
addressed before the Divorce Decree herein in September of
2012.
 
38. The evidence showed that the monies in the rental
 
account at the time the Divorce Decree was signed were the
amounts ultimately made available to [Wife] or $10,639.36.
39. [Wife] provided no testimony or evidence that
contradicted that amount.
 
II. HRS § 580-47
 
In her first point of error, Wife contends that the
 
family court erred in failing to consider HRS § 580-47.  We 
 
conclude that Wife waived this argument.
 
HRS § 580-47 requires the court to divide property in a
divorce decree in a manner that is just and equitable. See
 
Gordon v. Gordon, 135 Hawai 'i 340, 348-49, 350 P.3d 1008, 1016-17 
(2015) ("Under HRS § 580-47 (2006), the family court has wide
 
discretion to divide marital partnership property according to
 what is 'just and equitable' based on the facts and circumstances
 of each case." (footnote omitted)). Under Hawai
'i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 4(a)(1), Wife had thirty days to
 appeal the terms of the Divorce Decree and challenge whether the
 property division was equitable, but did not so appeal. 

 
In any event, the core of Wife's appeal is not a
 
challenge to the Divorce Decree itself, but instead the manner in
 which the family court interpreted paragraph 15(b). Wife's Post-
Decree Motion did not assert that the property division in the
 Divorce Decree was inequitable. Rather, the motion sought to
 enforce paragraph 15(b) of the Divorce Decree, as Wife understood
 that provision. Therefore, we turn to the interpretation of the
 
5

   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Divorce Decree.
 
III. Interpretation of Paragraph 15(b) of the Divorce Decree
 
Wife contends that the family court misconstrued
 
paragraph 15(b) of the Divorce Decree, because Wife asserts that
 
she is entitled to all the rental proceeds from the Marital
 Property during the pendency of the divorce proceedings. We are
 not bound by the lower court's interpretation of the Divorce
 Decree. Jendrusch v. Jendrusch, 1 Haw. App. 605, 609, 623 P.2d
 
893, 897 (1981). "The lower court's interpretation is not
 protected by the clearly erroneous rule and is freely
 reviewable." Id.
 
The determinative factor in construing a Divorce Decree
 
"is the intent of the court as gathered from the decree and other
 evidence." Anderson v. Anderson, 59 Haw. 575, 584, 585 P.2d 938,
 
944 (1978). In addition, "[a] judgment or decree like any other
 
written instrument is to be construed reasonably and as a whole,
 
and effect must be given not only to that which is expressed, but
 also that which is unavoidably and necessarily implied in the
 judgment or decree." Id. at 584-85, 585 P.2d at 944 (citation
 
omitted).
 
Paragraph 15(b) of the Divorce Decree provides that
 
Wife shall be awarded "the parties' joint account containing any
 and all rental proceeds from the rental of the Marital Residence
 during the pendency of the divorce proceedings as her sole and
 separate property." (Emphasis added.) However, the prior orders
 of the family court gave Husband the right to collect the rents
 for the Marital Residence, deposit them into an account, and to
 use those funds to pay the mortgage. We thus agree with the
 family court's ruling to the extent that it determined that
 paragraph 15(b) needed to be read in light of the family court's
 prior orders allowing Husband to use rental funds from the
 Marital Residence to pay the mortgage on that property.
 
We cannot, however, agree with the family court's
 
ruling that Wife was simply entitled to the amount actually left
 in the account at the time of the Divorce Decree, without any
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
further inquiry or assessment as to the appropriate amount that
 
should have been in the account. In this regard, the family
 court reasoned that, in an asset and debt statement filed on
 August 1, 2002, Husband had notified Wife's counsel that there
 was $15,766.54 in the rental account, Wife knew or should have
 known this was the amount in the account, the Divorce Decree does
 not state the specific amount owing to Wife, and any dispute as
 to the balance of the account should have been addressed before
 the Divorce Decree was entered in September 2012. Neither the
 family court nor Husband point to anything in the record to
 establish that the amount in Husband's asset and debt statement
 was supposed to represent all of the rental amounts owing to
 Wife. Moreover, as the family court notes, the amount actually
 left in the account at the time of the Divorce Decree and paid to
 Wife was $10,639.36. There is no explanation by the family court
 as to why this lesser amount was appropriate, other than that was
 the amount left in the account at that time.
 
Given the language of paragraph 15(b) in the Divorce

 
Decree, and the prior orders of the family court regarding the
 rental proceeds, we conclude that Wife is entitled to all rental
 proceeds from the rental of the Marital Residence during the
 pendency of the divorce proceedings, minus the amounts Husband
 used from these rental proceeds to pay the mortgage on the
 Marital Residence. In this regard, the family court should have
 made a factual determination of the proper balance in the
 account, rather than just rely on the amount that happened to
 remain in the account at the time of the Divorce Decree.
 
IV. Civil Contempt
 
Finally, Wife contends that the family court erred when
 
it did not find Husband in civil contempt. Based on the record
 before us, we cannot say there was enough evidence for the family
 court to determine that Husband was in civil contempt at the time
 the court ruled on this issue. See Murray v. Murray, 60 Haw.
 
160, 164, 587 P.2d 1220, 1224 (1978) (requiring for civil
 contempt not only that the party failed to comply with a court
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
order, but also a finding by the court that the party has the
 
ability to comply); Chan v. Chan, 7 Haw. App. 122, 128, 748 P.2d
 807, 811 (1987). We thus conclude that the family court did not
 err in ruling that Husband was not in civil contempt.
V. Conclusion
 
To the extent that they address the amount owing to
 
Wife for the rental proceeds from the Marital Residence during
 the pendency of the divorce proceedings, the "Order on
 Defendant's Motion and Affidavit for Post-Decree Relief Filed
 October 25, 2012" filed on January 7, 2013, and the "Findings of
 Fact and Conclusions of Law and Order for November 27, 2012
 Hearing" filed on March 14, 2013, both entered by the Family
 Court of the Second Circuit, are vacated. The case is remanded
 to the family court for further proceedings consistent with this
 opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 15, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Tammy Ash Perkins,
Defendant-Appellant, pro se. Chief Judge 
Guy A. Haywood,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
8
 