NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000074
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF ST 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 12-00021)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Mother-Appellant/Cross-Appellee (Mother) appeals and
 
Father-Appellee/Cross-Appellant (Father) cross-appeals from the
 
Family Court of the First Circuit's (Family Court) January 30,
 2015 "Order Terminating Parental Rights."
1 The Family Court
 
awarded the Department of Human Services (DHS) permanent custody
 of Mother and Father's minor child, ST.
 
On appeal, Mother argues that the Family Court abused
 
its discretion in terminating her parental rights after wrongly
 concluding that Mother was unwilling and unable to provide a safe
 home for ST within a reasonable amount of time. Mother contests
 
2 3 4	 and 53-56,5
findings of fact (FOF) 38,  48, 49d,  in the Family
1
 The Honorable Steven M. Nakashima presided.
 
2
 FOF 38 provides:
 
38.	 The Court rendered its oral decision on January 30,
2015.
 
a.	 The Court found that DHS had shown by clear and
convincing evidence that neither Mother nor
Father were presently willing and able to
provide a safe family home for [ST].
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court's April 20, 2015 "Supplemental Record on Appeal, Findings
 
of Fact and Conclusions of Law" (FOF/COL). It is clear from her
 points of error that she also contests conclusions of law (COL)
 L1 and L2.
6
 
2(...continued)
b.	 The Court further found that it was not
 
reasonably foreseeable that either Mother or
Father would become able to provide [ST] with a
safe family home within a reasonable period of
time, even with a service plan.
 
3	 FOF 48 provides:
 
48.	 The Court specifically found that for each Parent,
this was a case of too little, too late as far [sic]
their ability to demonstrate that they were willing
and able to provide a safe family home for [ST]
. 
4 FOF 49d provides in relevant part, "[T]he hoped for progress did
not occur." 
5	 FOF 53-56 provide:
 
53.	 Under the circumstances presented by the instant
cases, DHS has exerted reasonable and active efforts
to avoid foster placement of [ST].
 
54.	 Under the circumstances presented by the instant
cases, DHS has exerted reasonable and active efforts
to reunify [ST] with Mother and Father, by identifying
necessary, appropriate and reasonable services to
address Mother and Father's identified safety issues
(problems), and making appropriate and timely
referrals for these services.
 
55.	 Each of the service plans offered by DHS and ordered
by the court, were fair, appropriate, and
comprehensive.
 
56.	 Under the circumstances presented in these cases, DHS
treated Mother and Father fairly and serviced the
entire family intensely since the start of the instant
DHS and family court intervention with this family.
 
6	 COLS L1 and L2 provide:
 
1.	 [ST's] legal mother and [ST's] legal father,
adjudicated, presumed, or concerned natural father, as
defined under [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] Chapter
578, are not presently willing and able to provide
[ST] with a safe family home, even with the assistance
of a service plan.
 
2.	 It is not reasonably foreseeable that [ST's] legal
mother, legal father, adjudicated, presumed, or
concerned natural father, as defined under HRS Chapter
578, will become willing and able to provide [ST] with
a safe family home, even with the assistance of a
service plan, within a reasonable period of time.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On cross-appeal, Father argues that the Family Court
 
abused its discretion in terminating his parental rights based on
 
a clearly erroneous conclusion that he was not willing and able
 to provide ST with a safe home even with the assistance of a
 service plan, and would not become willing and able to do so
 within the reasonably foreseeable future; and violated his due
 process and procedural rights by granting Guardian Ad Litem Sheri
 Ritter's (GAL Ritter) August 28, 2014 Motion for Immediate
 Review, seeking the Family Court's permission to allow ST's
 resource caregivers (Resource Caregivers) to relocate out-of­state with ST, without first conducting an Interstate Compact on
 Placement of Children (ICPC) home-study or holding a trial. 
7	 8
Father contests FOF 50t  and COL L1, L2, M1, and M2.
7	 FOF 50t provides: 
[50]t.	 Based on the credible evidence, Father was given
reasonable opportunities to effect positive
changes to demonstrate that he could provide a
safe family home for [ST]. However, it is clear
to the Court that Father never reached the point
where he could start unsupervised visits with
[ST] and it is clear to the Court that Father is
not currently willing and able to provide a safe
family home for [ST]. Further, it is not
reasonably foreseeable that Father will become
willing and able to provide [ST] with a safe
family home, even with the assistance of a
service plan.
 
8	 The contested COL provide:
 
L.	 Parental Unfitness
 1.	 [ST's] legal mother and [ST's] legal father,
adjudicated, presumed, or concerned natural
father, as defined under HRS Chapter 578, are
not presently willing and able to provide [ST]
with a safe family home, even with the
assistance of a service plan.
 
2.	 It is not reasonably foreseeable that [ST's]
legal mother, legal father, adjudicated,
presumed, or concerned natural father, as
defined under HRS Chapter 578, will become
willing and able to provide [ST] with a safe
family home, even with the assistance of a
service plan, within a reasonable period of
time.
 
M.	 Permanent Plan
 
1. Having made [COL] pertaining to "parental
unfitness" pursuant to HRS § 587A-22(a)(1) and
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
The Family Court did not err in terminating Mother's 
parental rights. See HRS § 587A-33 (Supp. 2014). Mother does 
not challenge the FOF that support the "ultimate determinations" 
set forth in the contested FOF and COL and, therefore, the uncontested findings are binding on this court and this court considers the ultimate determinations valid. See Kawamata Farms, 
Inc. v. United Agri Prods., 86 Hawai
'i 214, 252, 948 P.2d 1055, 
1093 (1997). Regardless, FOF 38 and 48 are not clearly erroneous because they accurately reflect the Family Court's findings at the hearing on the Motion to Terminate Parental Rights, and FOF 49d and 53-56 and COL L1 and L2 are not clearly erroneous because they are supported by substantial evidence. 
At trial, social worker Leimomi Brigoli (SW Brigoli)
 
testified that Mother was unwilling and unable to provide ST with
 a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan,
 and she would not become able or willing to do so within the
 reasonably foreseeable future. Mother's participation in
 services was inconsistent and she did not demonstrate healthy
 coping skills or that she would avoid entering into abusive
 relationships and make ST a priority. Although SW Brigoli
 testified that Mother made progress in her therapy and GAL Ritter
 testified that Mother made tremendous progress in parenting, they
 both stated that Mother did not progress enough to support
 reunification.
 
It is clear from the record on appeal that DHS's
 
decision to move for termination of parental rights was primarily
 based on Mother's failure to progress sufficiently in her
 services in the years prior to GAL Ritter's filing of the Motion
 for Immediate Review, on August 28, 2014, and not Mother's
 interactions with ST via Skype. Regardless, SW Brigoli testified
 
8(...continued)
 
(2), the Court makes the following [COL]
regarding the permanent plan (dated
September 24, 2015) pursuant to HRS § 587A­33(a)(3).
 
2.	 The Court hereby concludes that the Permanent
Plan, dated September 24, 2014, is in the best
interests of [ST].
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Mother failed to individualize Skype visits by making them
 
at a time when she could focus exclusively on ST rather than
 whenever it was most convenient for her.
 
DHS gave Mother a reasonable opportunity to reunify
 
with ST. Unless certain exceptions applied (which do not apply
 in this case) DHS was required, under HRS § 587A-31(g) (Supp.
 2014), to move for termination of parental rights once ST had
 been in foster care for twelve consecutive months or an aggregate
 of fifteen out of the most recent twenty-two months from the date
 he entered foster care. DHS gave Mother more than two
 consecutive years from ST's entry into foster care to demonstrate
 that she could provide a safe family home.
II.
 
Father does not challenge the FOF which support the 
"ultimate determinations" set forth in the contested FOF and COL and, therefore, the uncontested findings are binding on this court, and this court considers the ultimate determinations valid. See Kawamata Farms, Inc., 86 Hawai
'i at 252, 948 P.2d at 
1093. Regardless, the Family Court did not err in terminating Father's parental rights, see HRS § 587A-33, and FOF 50t and COL L and M are not clearly erroneous. 
At trial, SW Brigoli's testimony showed that DHS moved
 
for permanency based on its assessments of Father, particularly
 his lack of progress in anger management and sex offender
 treatment, in the prior two years. SW Brigoli testified that
 Father was not offered more visits with ST due to Father's time
 constraints and scheduling conflicts. He was not offered
 unsupervised visits because he failed to progress in his anger
 management and sex abuse treatment. And he was not given the
 opportunity to participate in Mother's supervised visits because
 his aggressiveness made Resources Caregivers uncomfortable and he
 had intimidated ST's foster mother. Father's ability to interact
 with ST via Skype was not a significant factor in DHS's
 assessment.
 
Father's sex abuse treatment group therapist Raul Sabat
 
(Sabat) testified that, throughout sex offender treatment, Father
 appeared angry and sometimes defensive or agitated. SW Brigoli
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
testified that Father did not take responsibility for DHS's
 
involvement. Sabat also reported that Father resisted meaningful
 conversation and did not develop "insight" into himself or the
 ability to understand a situation from a variety of perspectives. 
Sabat testified that Father denied that he was at risk
 
of committing another sex offense, despite that a sex offender
 was always at risk of re-offending; he was unable to effectively
 cope with every day problems, such as financial struggles, which
 could trigger another sex offense; that although ST was younger
 than KV, and male, there was a risk that Father could sexually
 harm him as well, because in many cases an offender will
 victimize whoever is most accessible. SW Brigoli testified that
 Father could sexually harm ST because Father had not successfully
 completed his sex offender treatment and was unable to recognize
 what triggered his abuse of KV.
 
SW Brigoli testified that Father was unwilling and
 
unable to provide ST with a safe family home, even with the
 assistance of a service plan, and he would not become able or
 willing to do so within the reasonably foreseeable future. 
Brenda Wong, Ph.D., an assistant director at the Kapiolani Child
 Protection Center, testified that the Multidisciplinary Team
 assigned to the case ultimately concluded that risk factors were
 still present and Father's lack of progress was not sufficient
 for reunification to occur. SW Brigoli testified that Father's
 mental health, domestic violence, and parenting issues were still
 a concern, and he refused to report to her as required.
 
DHS gave Father more than two consecutive years from
 
ST's entry into foster care to demonstrate that he could provide
 a safe family home. See HRS § 587A-31(g).
 
Father has provided no authority to support his
 
argument that the Family Court was required to hold a trial on
 GAL Ritter's August 28 2014 Motion for Immediate Review, and we
 find none. Further, Father does not argue that he was prejudiced
 by the Family Court's failure to hold a trial, except to say that
 his "constitutional and procedural right for a contested hearing"
 was violated, and he does not appear to have been prejudiced. 
Therefore, any error on the part of the Family Court in failing
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to hold a trial on the Motion for Immediate Review was harmless. 
See In re Doe, 99 Hawai 'i 522, 534 n.18, 57 P.3d 447, 459 n.18 
(2002); Hawai 'i Family Court Rules (HFCR) Rule 61. 
Father has not demonstrated that he was prejudiced by 
DHS's alleged violation of the ICPC and, thus, any such error was harmless. See In re Doe, 99 Hawai
'i at 534 n.18, 57 P.3d at 459 
n.18; HFCR Rule 61. 
III.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights," issued by the Family Court of the
 First Circuit, on January 30, 2015, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 27, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Herbert Y. Hamada,
for Mother-Appellant/Cross-Appellee. Presiding Judge 
Tae Chin Kim for Father-Appellee/Cross-Appellant. 
Associate Judge 
Patrick A. Pascual,Mary Anne Magnier, andJay K. Goss,Deputy Attorneys General,for Department of HumanServices-Appellee. Associate Judge 
7
 