NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000549 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
JAMES KREITMAN, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
JAMES MILTON DAY, JR. and JENNIFER ELLEN DEMOSS DAY,
Defendants-Appellants,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-100; JANE DOES 1-100; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-100;
and DOE CORPORATIONS 1-100, Defendants 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3CC15100253K) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: 
Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Defendants-Appellants James Milton Day, Jr. and 
Jennifer Ellen DeMoss Day (collectively, the Days
) appeal from 
the Judgment in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee James Kreitman 
entered on June 16, 2017.  For the reasons explained below, we
vacate the Judgment in part and remand for further proceedings.1 
 
This case is about the Days' alleged failure to 
disclose a leaking water line on real property on Hawai# i island 
(the Property
) they sold to Kreitman.   The Days listed the 
Property for sale in September 2012. The listing price was 2
1 The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided. 
2 The facts in this section come from the unchallenged findings of
fact made by the circuit court after a jury-waived trial. See Okada Trucking
Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai #i 450, 459, 40 P.3d 73, 82 (2002) (noting
that unchallenged findings of fact are binding on the appellate court). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
$3.7 million. They signed a "Seller's Real Property Disclosure 
Statement" on January 30, 2013. The Disclosure Statement did not 
mention water leaks or excessive water usage. 
During February 2013, a home inspection was conducted 
for potential buyers of the Property. The inspector's written 
report (the Woodbury Inspection Report) stated: 
Plumbing: 
1) The water shut off valve is located near the garage in a
recessed box. The valve and pressure regulator here arepartially buried in the soil, and the valve handle is quitecorroded. Remove some of the soil and replace the valvehandle. 
2) There [sic] disclosure of apparent leakage in the
plumbing system, as bills are apparently high. The caretaker present during my inspection related a leakdetection specialist was engaged to solve this problem, butdid not. Have a licensed plumber test for any leakage inthe water supply system. 
The potential buyers did not purchase the Property. 
The Property was on the market for over a year. On 
December 30, 2013, Kreitman offered to buy the Property, subject 
to various contingencies. The next day, the Days' realtor asked them if she should provide Kreitman with the Woodbury Inspection Report. The Days responded by email: "Hold on to the Woodbury Inspection Report. Do not forward it to the buyer. The buyer may request an inspection and we can address items on his inspection report when we see what the inspector comes up with." The Days then accepted Kreitman's offer. The Purchase Contract 
was signed on December 31, 2013. The purchase price was 
$2.7 million. 
On January 3, 2014, Jennifer Day signed an Amendment to 
the Disclosure Statement. The Amendment stated: 
19. Water Line: In preparing the property for sale, the
sellers observed that the water bills showed abnormally high
consumption and contracted with Kona Labs to perform a leakdetection on the irrigation and main water supply lines intothe house. The initial test performed was an air test andit disclosed line leakage. The irrigation lines wereisolated from the main water lines and retested with air and leakage was found around several valves. The valves were repaired and retesting showed the repairs to be tight. The main water lines were tested with helium and were determined to be leaking in several places. Three large water leaks 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were discovered and repaired where the water line crossed
the gas line and there is one leak that is in the process ofbeing repaired. 
26. Pool: In getting the property ready for sale, the
sellers contracted with Big Island Leak Detection to test
the pool for leakage. A small 30-gallon per day leak wasdetected. Pacific Blue H20 has been contracted to make the repairs in early January 2014 using a high-pressure epoxyinjection to permanently seal the hairline cracks. 
Additional: The filter in the koi pond is currently
malfunctioning, and is in the process of being repaired orreplaced. Work to be completed prior to closing. 
Kreitman had the Property inspected on January 6, 2014. 
On January 11, 2014, the Days and Kreitman signed Addendum #1 to 
the Purchase Contract. Kreitman received a $10,000 plaster 
credit for the pool, and the Days were required to complete repair work to the pool and koi pond before closing. The transaction closed and title to the Property was conveyed to Kreitman on February 7, 2014. 
About three months later, Kreitman received a water 
bill showing the Property using over 5,000 gallons of water per day. At that time, the Property was unoccupied but was being maintained by a landscaper (Lindsey Swan-Lindsey) who had 
previously worked for the Days. At Swan-Lindsey's suggestion, 
Kreitman contacted Stephen Edmonds, an irrigation and landscaping 
contractor. Edmonds found and repaired a leak in the water line 
under the front lawn. He determined that there were no other leaks in the water line going away from the house. 
Kreitman then contacted Ron Miller, the contractor who 
had installed the original plumbing on the Property. Miller took Gary Taylor, a plumber, to the Property. Taylor determined there 
were leaks somewhere outside the house. He recommended replacing 
the water line. Kreitman had the line replaced. But water leaks persisted. 
Adam Broderson, a landscaper, went to the Property. He 
shut off the backflow preventer on the water line coming into the house. He determined there was a leak somewhere between the backflow preventer and the Hawai# i county water meter. Broderson 
replaced and re-routed that portion of the water line. 
After the 
3  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
work was completed the water bill for the Property — then 
occupied — averaged 700 gallons per day. 
Kreitman filed the action below on June 29, 2015. The 
complaint alleged breach of contract, breach of implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing, violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 508D (Mandatory Seller Disclosures in Real 
Estate Transactions), and intentional and negligent 
misrepresentation. 
The Days moved to dismiss the complaint. The circuit 
court denied the motion. A jury-waived trial was held on January 17 and 18, 2017. The parties submitted amended stipulated findings of fact on January 27, 2017. The court entered findings of fact, conclusions of law, and an order on April 3, 2017 (Findings, Conclusions, and Order). The court 
found in favor of Kreitman and against the Days, awarded damages 
in the lump sum of $37,337.40, and awarded Kreitman attorneys' fees in an amount to be determined. The Judgment, entered on June 16, 2017, awarded Kreitman an additional $39,334.35 in attorneys' fees and $4,868.37 in costs.
3 
This appeal followed. The Days raise six points of 
error, which we've consolidated for discussion purposes:(1) findings of fact (FOF) nos. 68, 70, and 76 were clearly 
erroneous; (2) conclusions of law (COL) nos. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 
10, and 11 were wrong;
4 (3) the circuit court erred in its award 
and calculation of damages; and (4) the circuit court erred in 
its award and calculation of Kreitman's attorneys' fees. 
1. FOF nos. 68, 70, and 76 were not clearly
erroneous. 
We review findings of fact under the "clearly 
erroneous" standard. Est. of Klink ex rel. Klink v. State, 113 
Hawai#i 332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 523 (2007). A finding of fact is 
clearly erroneous when the record lacks substantial evidence to 
3 The Days have not appealed the cost award. 
4 The opening brief fails to comply with Hawai #i Rules of Appellate
Procedure 28(b)(4)(C) but it appears that the Days are challenging these COLs. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
support the finding or when, despite substantial evidence to 
support the finding, we are left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed. Id."Substantial 
evidence" is "credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Id. (citations omitted). 
The circuit court found: 
68. Steve Edmonds told Lindsey Swan-Lindsey that
from his inspection of the subject property and judging from
the rate at which the water meter was spinning, that therewere additional, substantial leaks that needed to be fixed.He further stated that concrete in portions of the subjectproperty would probably need to be removed and the majorityof the water lines would need to be replaced in order toremedy the leaks. Lindsey Swan-Lindsey reiterated this tothe [Days] via a telephone call to Mr. James Day. Ex. TT,at 28. See also Ex. RR; First Am. Stip. FOF, at ¶¶ 30-31;
Trial Test. of Lindsey Swan-Lindsey. 
Exhibit TT is the transcript of Edmonds' deposition, 
portions of which were admitted into evidence by stipulation. 
Edmonds testified: 
Q Do you recall telling Mrs. Lindsey that judging
from the rate at which the meter was spinning, there were
additional and substantial leaks that needed to be fixed? 
A Yes. 
Q Do you also recall telling her that concrete
portions of the subject property would probably need to be
removed, and the majority of the waterlines would need to bereplaced in order to remedy the leaks? 
A 
I believe we had that conversation, yes. The 
installer of the original waterline placed it far under asidewalk, so it was impossible to get to. 
Edmonds did not say when that conversation took place. 
The stipulated findings of fact state: 
30. Mrs. Lindsey claims that Mr. Day told her that
they had spent enough money trying to fix the water leaksand they were not going to spend any more. 
31. The Days deny receiving such a telephone call
from Mrs. Lindsey. 
During trial Swan-Lindsey testified that she worked for 
the Days when they owned the Property. They asked her to 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
investigate the water bill because it was "high." Swan-Lindsey 
asked "our irrigation guy" Edmonds to look for leaks on the two-acre Property. There was nothing obvious, so she hired a leak inspector named Frank. Frank found and fixed "several smaller things in the irrigation lines" but that did not completely solve the problem. Swan-Lindsey then hired Kona Labs, which found two or three more leaks. Edmonds fixed those leaks and "the water meter was better for sure but, again, it was still [spinning.]" 
Swan-Lindsey then talked with Jennifer Day and either 
James Day or his brother, Joe Day. She testified: 
I let them know that we had repaired several leaks and
that the meter was still going, and then it was [Edmond]'s
suggestion that we lay a whole new water line. 
Q Did you say anything to them about removal of
concrete? 
A Yeah. Basically the water line, the existing
main water line looked like it was underneath the sidewalk of the house. So not really an easy place to get to andrepair. So it was advised that we put a whole new waterline outside of the concrete in the plants there so we couldget to it and fix it. 
On cross-examination Swan-Lindsey testified: 
Q And after seeing that the water meter was still
spinning but slowed down, you called Mr. Day on yourtelephone? 
. . . . 
A 
Yes. 
The Days argue that "[i]t was clearly erroneous for the 
Circuit Court to find that on or around January 13, 2014, [Swan-
Lindsey] called Mr. Day." They point out that Exhibit RR (Verizon Wireless telephone bills for "Lindsay [sic] Swan") "reveal[s] she did not call Mr. Day on or around January 13, 2014." The Days' reply brief argues that FOF no. 68 "clearly falls in the timeline of facts during the January 13, 2014 period." Although FOF no. 68 does not specify when Swan-Lindsey called James Day, the parties stipulated that Edmonds "performed repairs on the water line . . . on January 13, 2014." The parties also stipulated that "Mr. Edmonds prepared and sent an 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
invoice dated January 13, 2014 to the Days for the last of his 
water line repairs along with pictures and a video of the leaking pipe." The circuit court found, in FOF no. 75, that "[t]he Days' testimony that they were not aware of the unresolved water issues as of the time of closing was unconvincing." "It is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Fisher v. Fisher, 111 
Hawai#i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) (citation omitted). FOF 
no. 68 is supported by substantial evidence and is not clearly erroneous. 
The circuit court found: 
70. [The Days] did not amend their disclosure
statement or make any reference to [Kreitman] about the
leaks identified and left unrepaired by Steve Edmonds onJanuary 13, 2014, or the potential for future leaks asreferenced by Steve Edmonds. See Trial Test. of James 
Kreitman. 
The Days argue they did not know there were 
"additional, substantial leaks that needed to be fixed" or the 
"potential for future leaks." We conclude there is substantial evidence to support FOF no. 70, including the evidence supporting FOF no. 68, described above. FOF no. 70 is not clearly erroneous. 
The circuit court found: 
76. Approximately three (3) months after the close
of escrow, [Kreitman] became aware of a water problem when
he received his first full water bill. See Trial Test. of 
James Kreitman; Trial Test. of Terri Kreitman. 
The Days argue that Kreitman admitted reading the 
Amendment to the disclosure statement, and therefore knew about 
the water problem. The Amendment told Kreitman about leakage in the irrigation lines, which "were repaired and retesting showed the repairs to be tight[,]" and from the main water lines, three of which were repaired and one "that is in the process of being repaired." The Amendment did not mention the possibility of additional leaks, or that the county water meter was still 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
spinning. Instead, the Amendment appears to indicate that all 
leaks had been identified and were repaired, or would be repaired, before closing. FOF no. 76 is not clearly erroneous. 
2. COL nos. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11
were not clearly erroneous or wrong. 
A trial court's label of a finding of fact or a 
conclusion of law does not determine the standard of review. In 
re JK, 149 Hawai# i 400, 406, 491 P.3d 1179, 1185 (App. 2021) 
(citing Crosby v. State Dep't Of Budget & Fin., 76 Hawai# i 332, 
340, 876 P.2d 1300, 1308 (1994)). 
Whether a determination is a 
finding of fact or a conclusion of law is a question of law; 
thus, the label's accuracy "is freely reviewable by reviewing courts." Kilauea Neighborhood Ass'n v. Land Use Comm'n, 7 Haw. 
App. 227, 229, 751 P.2d 1031, 1034 (1988). 
We review conclusions of law under the "right/wrong" 
standard. Klink, 113 Hawai# i at 351, 152 P.3d at 523. A 
conclusion of law supported by the trial court's findings of fact and reflecting an application of the correct rule of law will not be overturned. Id.When a conclusion of law presents mixed 
questions of fact and law, we review it under the "clearly erroneous" standard because the court's conclusions are dependent on the facts and circumstances of each individual case. Id.
The circuit court concluded: 
4. [The Days] have breached their obligations under
Paragraphs I-1 and I-2 of the Purchase Contract by failing
to disclose material evidence of the true extent of water leaks at the subject property in the Amendment to RealProperty Disclosure Statement dated 1/30/13 for [theProperty], which was executed by Jennifer Day on January 3,2014, or to amend the disclosure statement after January 13,2014, when advised of additional leaks of an unknown amountand location that directly, substantially and adverselyaffected the value of the subject property. 
COL no. 4 is a combined finding and conclusion. The 
Purchase Contract provided: 
I-1 Seller's Obligation to Disclose . Pursuant to Hawaii 
Revised Statutes Chapter 508D (for the sale ofresidential real property), Seller is obligated tofully and accurately disclose in writing to Buyer anyfact, defect, or condition, past or present, that 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
would be expected to measurably affect the value of
the Property to a reasonable person (a "materialfact"). No later than Five (5) days [ten (10) days ifleft blank] from the Acceptance Date, Seller shallprovide Buyer with a written Disclosure Statementsigned and dated by Seller within six (6) monthsbefore or ten (10) days after the Acceptance Date.Such Disclosure Statement shall be prepared in goodfaith and with due care and shall disclose all material facts relating to the Property that: (i) arewithin the knowledge or control of Seller; (ii) can beobserved from visible, accessible areas; or, (iii) arerequired to be disclosed under Section 508D-4.5 andSection 508D-15 of the Hawaii Revised Statutes. Seller acknowledges and agrees that the disclosurerequirements under Chapter 508D are in addition to allother disclosure obligations of Seller required by lawrelating to the sale of residential real property.Furthermore, Seller's obligations under Hawaii RevisedStatutes Chapter 508D, as amended, regarding mandatorydisclosure of all documents pertaining to the Propertyare set forth in Section M-1 below. 
I-2 Seller's Obligation Upon Later Discovered Information . 
Under Chapter 508D, if after Seller delivers aDisclosure Statement to Buyer and prior to closing,Seller becomes aware of information that was not previously disclosed or that makes any statement inthe Disclosure Statement inaccurate, and saidinformation directly, substantially, and adverselyaffects the value of the Property (called "LaterDiscovered Information" in this paragraph), thenSeller shall provide an Amended Disclosure Statement(a written statement prepared by Seller or at Seller'sdirection) to Buyer within Three (3) days [or ten (10)days if left blank] after the Seller's discovery ofthe inaccuracy, and in any event, no later than twelvenoon of the last business day prior to the recordedsale of the Property. Buyer's rights upon discoveryof Later Discovered Information and/or receipt of theAmended Disclosure Statement are found in ParagraphI-4. The information described in this paragraphLater Discovered Information may arise from manysources, including but not limited to, titlereport(s), inspection report(s), survey report,termite inspection report, condominium, cooperative,subdivision, PUD, homeowner's/planned communitydocuments, and rental property matters. 
COL no. 4 is supported by the circuit court's findings of fact 
and the parties' stipulated facts, and reflects an application of the correct rule of law. 
The circuit court concluded: 
5. Negligent misrepresentation requires that:
(1) false information be supplied as a result of the failure
to exercise reasonable care or competence in communicatingthe information; (2) the person for whose benefit theinformation is supplied suffered the loss; and (3) therecipient relies upon the misrepresentation. Blair v. Ing,
95 Haw. [sic] 247, 269, 21 P.3d 452, 474 (2001). 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
6. The [Days]' failure to disclose material
evidence of the extent of water leaks at the subject
property before execution of the Amendment to Real PropertyDisclosure Statement dated 1/30/13 for [the Property] or toamend the disclosure statement after January 13, 2014, whenadvised of additional leaks of an unknown amount and location, constitutes negligent misrepresentation. The disclosures and non-disclosure by [the Days] were reliedupon by Plaintiffs [sic] to their detriment. 
COL no. 5 is right. COL no. 6 is a combined finding and 
conclusion. It is supported by the circuit court's findings of fact and the parties' stipulated facts, and reflects an application of the correct rule of law. 
The circuit court concluded: 
7. Under Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS"), Section
508D-1 and 508D-5, a seller or his agent has a duty to
disclose to the buyer all material facts, i.e., "any fact,defect, or condition, past or present, that would beexpected to measurably affect the value to a reasonableperson of the residential property being offered for sale,"so long as they are within the knowledge or control of theseller or can be observed from visible, accessible areas. 
8. HRS 508D-13 provides that if the sellers become
aware of new information regarding the subject property andthe information directly, substantially, and adverselyaffects the value of the residential real property, theseller shall provide an amended disclosure statement to thebuyer disclosing the material fact within ten (10) calendardays after the seller's discovery of such information if theseller discovers such information prior to the recorded saleof the residential real property, and in any event, no laterthan twelve noon of the last business day prior to therecorded sale of the real property. 
9. [The Days]' failure to disclose information in
the original disclosure form and failure to disclosesubsequently obtained information that directly,substantially, and adversely affected the value of thesubject real property as set forth herein, constitutes aviolation of Hawaii Revised Statutes, Chapter 508D. 
COL nos. 7 and 8 are right. COL no. 9 is a combined 
finding and conclusion. It is supported by the circuit court's 
findings of fact and reflects an application of the correct rule of law. 
The circuit court concluded: 
10. Every contract contains an implied covenant of
good faith and fair dealing that neither party will do
anything that will deprive the other of the benefits of theagreement. Best Place, Inc. v. Penn Am. Ins. Co., 82 Haw.
[sic] 120, 123, 920 P.2d 334, 337 (1996), as amended 
10  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(June 21, 1996). 
11. The [Days] breached the implied covenants of
good faith and fair dealing inherent in the Purchase
Contract by failing to cooperate with [Kreitman] in theperformance of the contract and failing to do everythingthat the contract presupposes that each party will do toaccomplish its purpose. 
COL no. 10 is right. COL no. 11 is a combined finding 
and conclusion. It is not clearly erroneous, but it does not 
form an additional basis for recovery of breach-of-contract damages. Nor does it form the basis for recovery of tort damages, because "there is no tort of bad faith outside the context of insurance claims." Laeroc Waikiki Parkside, LLC v. 
K.S.K. (Oahu) Ltd. P'ship, 115 Hawai# i 201, 229, 166 P.3d 961, 
989 (2007) (citation omitted).
5 
3. The circuit court must either recalculate the 
damage award or conduct a new trial on theissue of damages. 
The circuit court found, and the Days do not contest, 
that: 
85. Mr. Edmonds' charges for the [front lawn] water
line repairs amounted to $1,900.72 , which was paid in full
by the Kreitmans. First Am. Stip. FOF, at ¶41. 
. . . . 
94. The Kreitmans were billed $
34,134.54  by Clean
Sewer Lines [to replace the existing water line with Type Kcopper line,] which was paid in full by the Kreitmans.First Am. Stip. FOF, at ¶5l. 
95. The amount billed by Clean Sewer Lines included
approximately $4,000 to $5,000  worth of gas line work
unrelated to the replacement of the water line. See Dep.
Tr. of Gary Taylor, at 29:15-23, 32:19-23, 33:7-12, 36:8-25. 
. . . . 
102. Mrs. Kreitman accepted Mr. Broderson's proposal
[to replace and re-route the water line between the backflowpreventer and the water meter,] and the work commenced on orabout February 6 or 7, 2015[,] and was completed inapproximately six or seven weeks. 
The Kreitmans paid the 
5 Kreitman argues that the Days made this argument for the first
time on appeal, but the Days' motion to dismiss Kreitman's complaint argued —correctly — that the tort of bad faith did not apply outside the context of aninsurance policy. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
estimated cost of $6,302.14  in full. First Am. Stip. FOF,
at ¶57. 
(Emphasis added). Kreitman paid a total of $42,337.40 for 
various work and material. The Judgment awarded "compensatory damages" of $37,337.40. The difference of $5,000 appears to be the amount that the circuit court approximated Kreitman paid for gas line work unrelated to the water line replacement. Although the circuit court found in favor of Kreitman and against the Days on all four counts of the complaint, neither the Findings, Conclusions, and Order nor the Judgment specified under which count(s) the damages were awarded. 
The Days argue that the circuit court erroneously 
awarded damages for work and material over and above what was necessary to repair any water leaks that existed when the sale closed. Their argument has merit. Tort damages must have been caused by the defendant's breach of duty. See, e.g., Exotics 
Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co., 116 Hawaii 277, 292, 172 P.3d 1021, 1036 (2007). Contract damages generally attempt to give the injured party the benefit of the bargain by awarding a sum of money that will, to the extent possible, put them in as good a position as they would have been in had the contract been performed. Kawakami v. Kahala Hotel Invs., LLC, 
142 Hawai# i 507, 514, 421 P.3d 1277, 1284 (2018). 
At least some of the damages awarded by the circuit 
court were attributable not to the cost of repairing leaks that should have been repaired by the Days, but to improvements to the Property made by Kreitman. For example, the original waterline was made of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) but Kreitman replaced it 
with Type K copper line.
6 Taylor (the plumber) testified that 
"[s]ome things were done that weren't just to fix the water line. 
It was an upgrade of the system they had." Taylor also testified that "the only reason [a backflow preventer] was moved is for 
6 The testimony indicates that copper pipe is of better quality —
and presumably more expensive — than PVC pipe, but the record on appeal does
not contain evidence of the price difference between PVC and copper pipe whenKreitman had the work done. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
esthetics."7 The Days should not have been held liable for these 
upgrade costs, under either a tort or contract theory of 
recovery. 
Awarding a lump sum of damages for different claims is 
not reversible error. Rodrigues v. State, 52 Haw. 156, 175, 472 
P.2d 509, 521 (1970). In this case, however, the circuit court's failure to state the amount awarded for each claim makes it impossible for us to amend the lump sum award when we have determined that the court erred about the amount of the award or the evidence necessary to sustain it. Id.The judge who 
presided over the jury-waived trial of this case has retired and is unavailable to classify or recalculate the damage award. Accordingly, we remand to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this memorandum opinion including, if necessary, an evidentiary hearing or new trial on the issue of damages only. See In re Elaine Emma Short Revocable Living Tr. 
Agreement, 147 Hawai# i 456, 471 n.30, 465 P.3d 903, 918 n.30 
(2020); cf. Hana Ranch, Inc. v. Kanakaole, 66 Haw. 643, 649, 672 P.2d 550, 554 (1983) (noting that under HRCP Rule 63, "a successor trial judge cannot enter findings of fact and conclusions of law in a case which was tried before his predecessor."). 
4. The circuit court must recalculate and 
explain, if necessary, its award ofattorneys' fees. 
A "trial court's grant or denial of attorneys' fees and 
costs is reviewed under the abuse of discretion standard." 
Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117 Hawai# i 92, 105, 
176 P.3d 91, 104 (2008) (brackets omitted) (quoting Kahala Royal Corp. v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 113 Hawai# i 251, 266, 
151 P.3d 732, 747 (2007)). 
The same standard applies to a review 
of the amount of an attorney's fee award. Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of 
the Emps. Ret. Sys. of Haw., 106 Hawai# i 416, 431, 106 P.3d 339, 
7 The circuit court did not apportion the amount Kreitman paid to
Taylor for relocating the backflow preventer vs. replacing the water line. 
13               NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
354 (2005). An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has 
clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or has disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant. Id.
The circuit court awarded Kreitman $9,334.35 in 
attorneys' fees under Counts 1 (breach of contract) and 2 (breach of implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing), and $30,000 under Counts 3 (violation of HRS Chapter 508D) and 4 (misrepresentation). Attorneys' fees were recoverable for Counts 1 and 2 under HRS § 607-14 (subject to a twenty-five percent limit), and for Count 3 under HRS § 508D-16(d). Attorneys' fees were not recoverable for Count 4. The circuit court did not explain how the allocation of attorneys' fees was made. See Blair v. Ing, 96 Hawai# i 327, 332, 31 P.3d 184, 189 
(2001). 
The amount of attorneys' fees recoverable under Counts 1 
and 2 may also change depending on the circuit court's recalculation of damages on remand. Thus, we vacate the award of attorneys' fees and remand to the circuit court for proceedings consistent with this memorandum opinion. 
Based upon the foregoing, we vacate in part the "Final 
Judgment in Favor of Plaintiff James Kreitman and Against Defendants James Milton Day, Jr. and Jennifer Ellen Demoss Day" entered on June 16, 2017, and this case is remanded for proceedings consistent with this memorandum opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 19, 2023. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge
14 Paul Alston, Kristin L. Holland,for Defendants-Appellants James Milton Day, Jr. and Jennifer Ellen Demoss Day. 
Lisa Strandtman, for Plaintiff-AppelleeJames Kreitman. 