NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1The Honorable Edward H. Kubo, Jr. presided.
2HRS § 712-1243 provides:
§ 712-1243 Promoting a dangerous drug in the third
degree. (1) A person commits the offense of promoting a
dangerous drug in the third degree if the person knowingly
possesses any dangerous drug in any amount.
(2) Promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree is a class
C felony.NO. CAAP-16-0000100
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KEKOA IONA, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 14-1-0648)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Kekoa Iona (Iona ) appeals from the
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence ( Judgment) filed on January
25, 2016, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit ( Circuit
Court).1  Following a bench trial, Iona was convicted of
Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, in violation of
Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 712-1243 (2014)2 (Count I) andNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3HRS § 329-43.5(a) provides: 
§ 329-43.5 Prohibited acts related to drug
paraphernalia. (a) It is unlawful for any person to use, or
to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of this chapter. Any person who
violates this section is guilty of a class C felony and upon
conviction may be imprisoned pursuant to section 706-660
and, if appropriate as provided in section 706-641, fined
pursuant to section 706-640.
2Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia, in violation of HRS § 329-
43.5(a) (2010)3 (Count II).  Iona was sentenced to concurrent
five year terms of imprisonment and fined $1,000.
On appeal, Iona raises two points of error, contending
that the Circuit Court erred in denying his motion to suppress
evidence, including a glass pipe and a plastic bag containing a
white crystalline substance, because:  (1) the police
unnecessarily prolonged the length of time needed to issue a
citation; and (2) the assertion by the police that the
investigation was not complete when Iona was arrested for an
outstanding warrant was a pretext to allow more time for a
warrant check.  On these grounds, Iona argues that the evidence
seized pursuant to a pat-down upon his arrest for the outstanding
warrant was tainted fruit of a warrantless search and seizure, in
violation of article I, section 7, of the Hawai# i Constitution.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Iona's points of error as follows: NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3As Iona acknowledges, the police may temporarily detain
a person without a warrant in an investigative stop so long as
the stop is justified by reasonable suspicion.  Under Hawai #i
law,  "the police officer must be able to point to specific and
articulable facts" which, "measured by an objective standard,
[would warrant] a man of reasonable caution  . . . in believing
that criminal activity was afoot."  State v. Powell , 61 Haw. 316,
321–22, 603 P.2d 143, 148 (1979) (citation omitted).  Here, Iona
was properly stopped for an observed traffic violation.
Nevertheless, police may not "prolong the detention of
individuals subjected to brief, temporary investigative stops 
. . . solely for the purpose of performing a check for
outstanding warrants."  State v. Barros , 98 Hawai #i 337, 342, 48
P.3d 584, 589 (2002)(citation omitted).  More specifically, 
a temporary investigative detention must . . . be truly
temporary and last no longer than is necessary to effectuate
the purpose of the detention—i.e., transpire for no longer
than necessary to confirm or dispel the officer's reasonable
suspicion that criminal activity is afoot.  In other words,
a temporary investigative detention must be reasonably
related in scope to the circumstances which justified the
detention in the first place, and, thus, must be no greater
in intensity than absolutely necessary under the
circumstances.
State v. Kaleohano
, 99 Hawai# i 370, 379, 56 P.3d 138, 147 (2002)
(citations omitted).
Here, approximately fourteen minutes passed between the
initial stop and Iona's arrest.  As the Circuit Court found, Iona
was stopped for an untaxed bicycle investigation when Honolulu
Police Department ( HPD) Lieutenant Brent Kagawa ( Lt. Kagawa )
observed him riding a bicycle that did not have the required
yellow tax decal.  Upon Lt. Kagawa's inquiry, Iona first claimedNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4the bicycle was his and then, as the officer was writing down the
information, Iona said the bicycle belonged to "Nalu" from Ala
Moana Beach Park.  As Lt. Kagawa was conducting the bicycle
investigation, he ran a warrant check on Iona and his two
companions (who were also riding bicycles without tax decals) and
two other officers arrived on the scene.  The other officers
checked for serial numbers on the three bicycles.  Only Iona's
serial number was legible.  It was relayed to dispatch, who
reported back that the bicycle was registered to an individual in
Waianae, Kuni K., not someone named Nalu.  While this
investigation was ongoing, which included an attempt to contact
the registered owner, fourteen minutes from the time of the
initial stop, dispatch confirmed that Iona had an outstanding 
warrant and Iona was arrested on the warrant.  The police
conducted the pat-down search in conjunction with his arrest.
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
finding that "[a]n unreasonable amount of time did not pass
before Defendant was arrested on the outstanding warrant."  Based
on the police testimony regarding the steps regularly taken in
conjunction with an untaxed bicycle investigation, and in light
of Iona's shifting statements regarding the bicycle's ownership,
which were inconsistent with the bicycle's registration, it was
not unreasonable for the investigation to have been ongoing when
the outstanding warrant information became available fourteen
minutes after the initial stop.  
We also reject Iona's pretext argument.  There is no
evidence that follow up inquiries regarding the bicycle'sNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5ownership were pretextual or that the officers delayed the
attempts to reach the registered owner of the bicycle in order to
prolong the warrant check.  Cf. State v. Estabillio , 121 Hawai #i
261, 218 P.3d 749 (2009).  On the contrary, the testimony of the
officers supported the Circuit Court's findings that the bicycle
investigation was still underway, and an unreasonable amount of
time had not passed, when Iona was arrested for his outstanding
warrant.
Accordingly, we conclude that the evidence recovered in
the search incident to Iona's arrest was not "fruit of the
poisonous tree."  The Circuit Court's January 25, 2016 Judgment
is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 29, 2017.
On the briefs:
William H. Jameson, Jr.
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.Presiding Judge
Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge