FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
---o0o--–

 
NICHOLAS K. NICHOLS, Petitioner-Appellant,
vs.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
CAAP-12-0000043
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(SPP NO. 11-1-0053 (CR NOS. 08-1-1354 & 08-1-1762))

 
DECEMBER 24, 2014
 
NAKAMURA, CHIEF JUDGE, AND FOLEY AND FUJISE, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKAMURA, C.J.
 
Petitioner-Appellant Nicholas K. Nichols (Nichols) 
filed a "Petition for Post-Conviction Relief" (Petition) pursuant 
to Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 (2006). 
Nichols was convicted of numerous offenses in two separate criminal cases -- one case charging felony offenses arising out of a home invasion and shooting and the second case charging felony offenses arising out of a serious assault. The trial court sentenced Nichols to a combination of concurrent and consecutive prison terms for a total maximum term of thirty years of imprisonment. The Hawai
'i Paroling Authority (HPA) set 
Nichols' minimum terms of imprisonment the same as his maximum terms, so that he was subject to a total minimum term of thirty FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
years of imprisonment, the same as the total maximum term imposed
 
by the trial court. In the HPA's corrected order fixing the
 minimum terms of imprisonment, the HPA placed Nichols in the
 Level III level of punishment under its "Guidelines for
 Establishing Minimum Terms of Incarceration" (Guidelines). The
 only explanation provided by the HPA for placing Nichols in
 punishment Level III and imposing minimum terms of incarceration
 that were the same as the maximum terms was its identification of
 "(1) Nature of Offense; [and] (2) Degree of Injury to Person" as
 "significant factors . . . in determining the level of
 punishment[.]"
 
In his Petition, Nichols contended that the HPA
 
improperly set his minimum terms and that his counsel had
 provided ineffective assistance during that process. Nichols
 asserted four grounds for relief:
 
Ground One: The HPA acted as a mere rubberstamp of the
recommendations given by the prosecutor, with no review of

the facts. Sentencing outside the guidelines set by the HPA
was inconsistent, arbitrary and capricious. 
Ground Two: 
The HPA failed to sufficiently specify its
rationale for determining the Level of Punishment and
describe the significant criteria it considered in
Petitioner's history or offense upon which the HPA's
determination was based.
 
Ground Three: 
The HPA Used the Wrong Level of Punishment
Assessment as the Starting Point for Its Minimum fixingDetermination, Chose the Wrong Level of Punishment UponWhich the HPA fixed the Minimum Terms Using the Criteria:Nature of Offense at a Level of Punishment Inconsistent with the Language of the Numerous Underlying Statutory Offensesin violation of HPA Guidelines, [Hawaii Revised Statutes(HRS)] § 706-699 and [Hawai' i Administrative Rules (HAR)]
Ch[ap]ter 700, While Ill[e]gally Comparing Petitioner'sOffenses Against Non-Identical Statutory Offenses. 
Ground Four: 
Petitioner's Counsel failed to assert the
 
correct level of punishment, failed to discern that the
Notice (Order) was constitutionally deficient, made no
attempt to protect Petitioner's rights through any appellate
or post-conviction actions, and such failures of Counsel are
such that a reasonably informed, skilled or diligent
attorney would not have made, where such actions or
omissions denied Petitioner a meritorious defense that was
 available to Petitioner, amounting to ineffective assistance
of counsel.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On December 22, 2011, the Circuit Court of the First
 
1
Circuit (Circuit Court)  filed its Order dismissing and denying
the Petition (Order Denying Petition). The Circuit Court
 
concluded that the Petition was "patently frivolous and without
 trace of support in the record" and that "[Nichols'] argument and
 allegations have no merit on this record and under the law." 
Nichols appeals from the Order Denying Petition. 
On
 
appeal, Nichols contends that the Circuit Court erred by failing
 to include findings of fact or conclusions of law addressing each
 of his grounds for relief in its Order Denying Petition. The
 essence of his argument is that the Circuit Court erred in
 denying his Petition because the HPA acted improperly in setting
 his minimum terms.
 
The decisions of the HPA establishing minimum terms of 
incarceration are subject to judicial review, and judicial intervention is appropriate where the HPA has "'acted arbitrarily and capriciously so as to give rise to a due process violation[.]'" Coulter v. State, 116 Hawai
'i 181, 184, 172 P.3d 
493, 496 (2007) (citation omitted). Where the HPA has taken the extraordinary action of setting the minimum term of imprisonment at the maximum term, thereby effectively eliminating the opportunity for parole, the HPA's explanation of the reasons for its action, beyond simply listing the significant factors under the Guidelines, would assist the court in reviewing whether the HPA's action was arbitrary and capricious. We may require a more detailed explanation in such cases, especially for class B felonies or higher, where the absence of a more detailed explanation would prevent our meaningful review of, or leave us in doubt about, whether the HPA acted arbitrarily or capriciously in applying its Guidelines. In this case, however, we conclude that a more detailed explanation was not necessary for proper judicial review of the HPA's decision. This is because the record in this case provides clear support for the HPA's exercise 
1The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
of its discretion in fixing Nichols' minimum terms under the
 
Guidelines. Accordingly, we affirm the Circuit Court's Order
 Denying Petition.
 
BACKGROUND
 
In his underlying criminal cases, Nichols pleaded
 
guilty to seventeen felony counts charged in two separate
 criminal cases. Nichols was charged in Criminal No. 08-1-1762
 with fifteen felony offenses arising out of a home invasion and
 shooting. He was charged in Criminal No. 08-1-1354 with two 
felony offenses arising out of an assault.
 
A.
 
The assault case involved an attack on two men at
 
Kal
akaua District Park. According to information in the record,
 
on July 30, 2008, at approximately 10 p.m., Nichols and a group
 of males assaulted Ashleigh Kamaile (Kamaile) and Rudy Tabios
 (Tabios) in the park. Nichols' group confronted Kamaile and
 asked him, "You think you tough?" Nichols punched Kamaile,
 causing Kamaile to fall to the ground. Tabios saw Kamaile being
 attacked by the group of males while Kamaile was on the ground. 
Tabios grabbed a bat and went to help Kamaile. Nichols, carrying
 a broken forty ounce bottle, threw the broken bottle at Tabios'
 face, severely cutting Tabios' face and causing him to drop the
 bat. Nichols then grabbed the bat and began beating Tabios with
 it. Nichols hit Tabios on the back of the head with the bat,
 causing him to fall to his knees. Nichols used the bat to strike
 Tabios three more times on the head as well as on the shoulder
 and back. While Nichols was assaulting Tabios with the bat,
 other males with Nichols were kicking Tabios. The injuries
 suffered by Tabios included permanent disfigurement from a five-
inch long, extreme facial laceration as well as laceration to his
 scalp.
 
Nichols was charged in the assault case with the felony
 
offenses of first-degree assault for causing serious bodily
 
4
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
injury to Tabios and second-degree assault for causing bodily
 
injury to Tabios with a dangerous instrument.2
 
B.
 
On August 11, 2008, two weeks after the assault on
 
Tabios at Kal akaua District Park, Nichols committed a home
 
invasion kidnapping and robbery, during which he shot Timothy
 Lapitan (Lapitan), resulting in Lapitan becoming paralyzed. 
According to information in the record, Nichols and several other
 men, all wearing black masks and carrying guns, entered Lapitan's
 home with the intent to rob Lapitan. During the home invasion,
 Nichols and his accomplices held Lapitan, his mother, and his
 sister at gunpoint. Two minor children of Lapitan's sister were
 also present. When Lapitan attempted to push some of the robbers
 out of the house, Nichols shot him in the abdomen. Lapitan was
 taken to Queen's Medical Center and was placed in the Intensive
 Care Unit in critical condition. The shooting almost killed
 Lapitan and left him paralyzed and unable to walk. 
Nichols and four co-defendants were indicted for
 
offenses arising out of the home invasion and shooting. Nichols
 was charged in fifteen felony counts, including attempted second-
degree murder, kidnapping, first-degree robbery, first-degree
 burglary, and carrying or use of a firearm in the commission of a
 separate felony. The indictment also notified Nichols that he
 was potentially subject to extended term sentencing, pursuant to
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 706-661 and 706-662(4)(a) as a
 multiple offender, and mandatory minimum terms of imprisonment,
 pursuant to HRS § 706-660.1 for the possession or use of a
 firearm during the commission of a felony.
 
2Nichols was also charged with misdemeanor third-degree assault for
causing bodily injury to Kamaile during the Kala kaua District Park incident on
 
July 30, 2008, and with misdemeanor third-degree assault for causing bodily
injury to Tabios in a separate assault on May 1, 2008.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C. 
Pursuant to a plea agreement, Nichols pleaded guilty to
 
two felony counts in the assault case3
 and fifteen felony counts
in the home invasion/shooting case. As part of the plea
 
agreement, the attempted second-degree murder charge in the home
 invasion/shooting case was reduced to first-degree assault. The
 parties agreed that for each count, the maximum indeterminate
 terms of imprisonment would be imposed. The plea agreement 
provided that the multiple sentences imposed within each case
 would run concurrently with each other, but it left each party
 free to argue whether the sentences imposed in the separate cases
 would run consecutively or concurrently. In addition, the
 prosecution agreed not to seek extended terms of imprisonment. 
The plea agreement required the Circuit Court to bind itself to
 the terms of the plea agreement pursuant to HRPP Rule 11(e)(3)
 (2007). 
On October 26, 2009, the Circuit Court imposed sentence
 
on Nichols in both cases. 
In the assault case, Criminal No. 08­
1-1354, the Circuit Court imposed the maximum term of
 imprisonment on each count, to run concurrently with each other,
 for a total imprisonment term of ten years. In the home
 invasion/shooting case, Criminal No. 08-1-1762, the Circuit Court
 imposed the maximum term of imprisonment on each count and a
 five-year mandatory minimum term on seven of the counts, with all
 terms to run concurrently to each other, for a total imprisonment
 term of twenty years. The Circuit Court ordered that the
 concurrent sentences imposed in the assault case be served
 consecutively to the concurrent sentences imposed in the home
 invasion/shooting case. Accordingly, Nichols received a total
 maximum sentence of thirty years of imprisonment for both cases,
 with a five-year mandatory minimum term.
 
3Nichols also pleaded guilty to the two misdemeanor third-degree assault
offenses with which he had been charged in the assault case. See note 2,
 
supra
.
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D.
 
On November 30, 2009, the HPA issued a "Notice of
 
Hearing and Rights Request for Legal Counsel" (Notice of Hearing)
 
to Nichols, informing him of his upcoming minimum term hearing. 
Nichols acknowledged his receipt of the Notice of Hearing and
 requested the assistance of his court appointed counsel. Nichols
 also submitted a handwritten letter to the HPA acknowledging his
 errors and describing the ways in which he was working to turn
 his life around.
 
On February 16, 2010, Nichols appeared at the HPA
 
hearing with his court appointed counsel, Walter Rodby. On that
 same day, the HPA issued its "Notice and Order Fixing Minimum
 Term(s) of Imprisonment" (Minimum Term Order). The Minimum Term
 Order set the minimum terms for Nichols' seventeen felony
 convictions the same as the maximum terms to which Nichols had
 been sentenced. Accordingly, Nichols' total minimum term of
 imprisonment was set at thirty years, the same as his overall
 maximum sentence. The HPA stated that its Minimum Term Order was
 based on a Level III "Level of Punishment" and listed the
 "significant factors identified in determining the level of
 punishment" as "(1) Nature of Offense; (2) Degree of Injury to
 Person." No other explanation was provided in the Minimum Term
 Order for the HPA's fixing of the minimum terms.
 
On March 29, 2010, the HPA issued a "Corrected Copy" of
 
its Minimum Term Order (Corrected Minimum Term Order). The
 Corrected Minimum Term Order again set the minimum terms at the
 maximum terms for Nichols' seventeen felony offenses, based on
 the same level of punishment and significant factors as the
 Minimum Term Order, and it used identical language as the Minimum
 Term Order to describe the level of punishment and significant
 factors identified in determining the level of punishment. The
 only difference between the Minimum Term Order and the Corrected
 Minimum Term Order was the correction of the dates on which the
 minimum terms would expire, which had been improperly calculated
 and set too far in the future in the Minimum Term Order.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
E.
 
On September 23, 2011, Nichols filed his Petition 
challenging the minimum terms of imprisonment set by the HPA in
 
its Corrected Minimum Term Order. The Circuit Court denied the
 Petition without a hearing and filed its Order Denying Petition
 on December 22, 2011. The Order Denying Petition states that the
 Circuit Court "dismisses and denies [Nichols' Petition] because
 it is patently frivolous and without trace of support in the
 record, and because [Nichols'] arguments and allegations have no
 merit on this record and under the law." This appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
In his points of error on appeal, Nichols contends that
 
the Circuit Court erred by failing to include findings of fact or
 conclusions of law addressing each of his grounds for relief in
 its Order Denying Petition. Underlying these points of error is
 his claim that the Circuit Court erred in denying his Petition
 because the HPA acted improperly in setting his minimum terms. 
We address Nichols' points of error as well as his underlying
 claim.
 
I.
 
A petition filed pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 is an 
appropriate means for a prisoner to challenge a minimum term of imprisonment set by the HPA. Coulter v. State, 116 Hawai
'i 181, 
184, 172 P.3d 493, 496 (2007). With respect to an HPA decision establishing a minimum term of imprisonment, "judicial intervention is appropriate where the HPA has failed to exercise any discretion at all, acted arbitrarily and capriciously so as to give rise to a due process violation, or otherwise violated the prisoner's constitutional rights." Williamson v. Hawai
'i 
Paroling Auth., 97 Hawai 'i 183, 195, 35 P.3d 210, 222 (2001). 
In support of its standard for reviewing HPA minimum 
term decisions, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court in Williamson cited the 
limited scope of review applied by other jurisdictions in reviewing decisions denying parole. Id. at 194-95, 35 P.3d at 
221-22. The supreme court referred to decisions from other 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
jurisdictions, which concluded that a court "cannot substitute 
its judgment on questions of parole for that of the parole board"; that judicial review is limited to situations where "the decision of a state administrative agency is an arbitrary one . . . made without fair, solid, and substantial cause or reason; but it is not necessarily so because mistaken or even wrong"; and that "review would be exercised to determine whether the parole board has followed the appropriate criteria, rational and consistent with the applicable statutes and that its decision is not arbitrary and capricious nor based on impermissible considerations." Id. at 194, 35 P.3d at 221 (formatting altered; 
internal quotation marks, citations, emphasis, and brackets omitted) (quoting Turner v. Hawaii Paroling Auth., 93 Hawai
'i 
298, 307–08, 1 P.3d 768, 777–78 (2000)). 
We review a trial court's denial of an HRPP Rule 40 
petition without a hearing for failure to present a colorable claim de novo. Dan v. State, 76 Hawai
'i 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 
532 (1994). 
To establish a colorable claim, the allegations of the
petition must show that if taken as true the facts alleged
would change the [outcome of the challenged proceeding],
however, a petitioner's conclusions need not be regarded as
true. Where examination of the record . . . indicates that
 the petitioner's allegations show no colorable claim, it is
not error to deny the petition without a hearing.
 
Id. (block quote format altered; citation ommitted). 
II.
 
With respect to Nichols' claim that the Circuit Court
 
erred in failing to include findings of fact and conclusions of
 
law in its Order Denying Petition, the Circuit Court ruled that
 Nichols' Petition was "patently frivolous and without trace of
 support in the record" in denying the Petition without a hearing. 
HRPP Rule 40(f) sets forth the standard for a court to grant a
 hearing on a petition and provides in relevant part:
 
If a petition alleges facts that if proven would entitle the
petitioner to relief, the court shall grant a hearing which
may extend only to the issues raised in the petition or
answer. However, the court may deny a hearing if the
petitioner's claim is patently frivolous and is without
 
9
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
trace of support either in the record or from other evidence
submitted by the petitioner.
 
It is well settled that the Circuit Court is not 
required to issue findings of fact or conclusions of law when 
denying a petition pursuant to HRPP Rule 40(f). Stanley v. 
State, 76 Hawai 'i 446, 449, 879 P.2d 551, 554 (1994). Therefore, 
if the Circuit Court correctly denied the Petition pursuant to HRPP Rule 40(f), the Circuit Court did not err in failing to include findings of fact or conclusions of law in its Order Denying Petition. 
III.
 
The question therefore becomes whether the Circuit
 
Court correctly denied the Petition without a hearing. In other
 words, whether Nichols' Petition raised a colorable claim that
 the HPA acted arbitrarily and capriciously so as to give rise to
 a due process violation in fixing Nichols' total minimum term of
 imprisonment at thirty years, the same as the total maximum term
 imposed by the trial court. The only explanation provided by the
 HPA for its action was the following statement in the Corrected
 Minimum Term Order:
 
Level of Punishment: Level III. 
Significant factors identified in determining the level of
punishment: (1) Nature of Offense; (2) Degree of Injury to
Person.
 
Under the HPA Guidelines, a Level III level of
 
punishment has: (1) a minimum term range of ten to twenty years
 
where the court imposes a twenty-year maximum term (the maximum
 term for a class A felony); and (2) a minimum term range of five
 to ten years where the court imposes a ten-year maximum term (the
 maximum term for a class B felony). Nichols was convicted of
 twelve class A felonies in the home/invasion shooting case and
 one class B felony in the assault case. These were the offenses
 carrying the highest maximum term of imprisonment in each case. 
Nichols' twelve convictions for class A felonies in the home 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
invasion/shooting case each carried a maximum indeterminate term
 
of imprisonment of twenty years, HRS § 706-659 (Supp. 2008), and
 his conviction for a class B felony in the assault case carried a
 maximum indeterminate term of imprisonment of ten years. HRS 
§ 706-660 (1993). In sentencing Nichols, the Circuit Court
 ordered that the concurrent maximum terms of imprisonment it
 imposed in the assault case be served consecutively to the
 concurrent maximum terms of imprisonment it imposed in the home
 invasion/shooting case.
 
A. 
In discussing an appellate court's review of a trial
 
court's sentencing decision, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court, in State 
v. Hussein, 122 Hawai 'i 495, 503-04, 229 P.3d 313, 321-22 (2010), 
made the following observation:
 
[The Hawai' i Supreme Court] has indicated that "[a]lthough
there is no requirement for the sentencing court to state 
its reasons for imposing sentence, we have urged and 
strongly recommended that the sentencing court do so[.]"[State v.] Lau, 73 Haw. [259,] 263, 831 P.2d [523,] 525(emphasis added); see also [State v.] Gaylord, 78 Hawai' i 
[127,] 144, 890 P.2d [1167,] 1184 ("In order to facilitateappellate review for abuse of a trial court's sentencingdiscretion, and whenever a defendant is qualified forsentencing alternatives and the sentence imposed isunsatisfactory to the defendant, we strongly encourage andrecommend that the sentencing court state its reasons forimposing the particular sentence.") (Quotation marks,brackets, ellipses, and citation omitted.); State v.Sinagoga, 81 Hawai' i 421, 429, 918 P.2d 228, 236 (App. 1996)
(stating that the "preferable practice is for the sentencingcourt to . . . acknowledge on the record that it hasconsidered the factors enumerated in HRS § 706–606 whenimposing concurrent or consecutive sentences under HRS§ 706–668.5"), overruled on other grounds by State v.Veikoso, 102 Hawai' i 219, 226, 74 P.3d 575, 582 (2003); cf.
State v. Valera, 74 Haw. 424, 435–36, 848 P.2d 376, 381(1993) (holding that "the sentence . . . imposed should betailored to the particular circumstances of a defendant'scase[,]" that "a sentencing judge is required to considerspecific statutory factors in determining the sentence to beimposed" under HRS § 706–606 and "that a sentencing judge'sdiscretion is [not] without limits" as "[a] sentencing judgeis still required to impose a fair, proper, and justsentence, based upon the crime of which the defendant wasconvicted") (internal quotation marks and citationsomitted). 
(Ellipsis points and some brackets in original.)
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In Hussein, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court established a new 
requirement in cases where the trial court imposes a consecutive 
sentence. The supreme court held: 
In this case, a concurrent sentence would have
resulted in ten years of imprisonment, as opposed to the
twenty years that [Hussein] received as a consequence of
running the terms consecutively. Although to this point we
have recognized the benefits of a statement of reasons but
not mandated it, we now conclude, based on the reasons and
circumstances set forth supra, that a court must state its
reasons as to why a consecutive sentence rather than a
concurrent one was required.
 
Such a requirement serves dual purposes. First,
reasons identify the facts or circumstances within the range
of statutory factors that a court considers important in
determining that a consecutive sentence is appropriate. An
 express statement, which evinces not merely consideration of
the factors, but recites the specific circumstances that led
the court to impose sentences consecutively in a particular
case, provides a meaningful rationale to the defendant, the
victim, and the public.
 
Second, reasons provide the conclusions drawn by the
court from consideration of all the facts that pertain to
the statutory factors. It is vital, for example, for the
defendant to be specifically informed that the court has
concluded that he or she is dangerous to the safety of the
public, or poses an unacceptable risk of re-offending, or
that rehabilitation appears unlikely due to his or her lack
of motivation and a failure to demonstrate any interest in
treatment, or that the multiplicity of offenses and victims
and the impact upon the victims' lives warrant imposition of
a consecutive term. Hence, reasons confirm for the
defendant, the victim, the public, and the appellate court,
that the decision to impose consecutive sentences was
deliberate, rational, and fair.
 
Consequently, after the filing date of the judgment
herein, circuit courts must state on the record at the time
of sentencing the reasons for imposing a consecutive
sentence.
 
Id. at 509-10, 229 P.3d at 327-28 (emphasis added).
 
B.
 
The HPA's establishment of a defendant's minimum term
 
of imprisonment directly affects when the defendant will actually
 
be released from prison. From the standpoint of a criminal
 defendant, the HPA's decision in setting the minimum term of
 imprisonment may be more important and significant than a trial
 court's decision to impose the maximum indeterminate term or to
 impose a consecutive sentence. This is especially true when the
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
HPA sets the minimum term of imprisonment at the maximum term for
 
the offense. However, the trial court's sentencing decisions and
 the HPA's parole decisions (including the HPA's minimum term
 determination) are subject to different statutory schemes.
 
In Williamson, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court addressed the 
question of whether the HPA had the authority to set a prisoner's minimum term of imprisonment at a period equal to his or her maximum sentence under the statutory scheme enacted by our Legislature. The supreme court held that neither the plain language of the statutory scheme, nor the relevant policy considerations, justified restricting the HPA's authority by prohibiting it from setting prisoners' minimum terms at their maximum sentences. Williamson, 97 Hawai
'i at 193-94, 35 P.3d at 
220-21. 
The supreme court noted that "[t]he legislature has
 
stated that the 'dual and inseparable purposes of parole' are
 'the protection of society on the one hand and the rehabilitation
 of the offender on the other.'" Id. at 194, 35 P.3d at 221
 
(citation omitted). It further noted that the Legislature has
 vested the HPA "with the 'exclusive authority to determine the
 minimum time which must be served before the prisoner will be
 eligible for parole.'" Id. (citation omitted). The court held
 
that as a policy matter, it was unnecessary to restrict the HPA's
 authority to set the minimum term at the maximum sentence. In
 support of this holding, the court cited the procedural
 protections provided to prisoners under the statutory scheme as
 well as the ability of a prisoner to seek judicial review of the
 HPA's minimum term determination through an HRPP Rule 40
 petition. Id. at 194-95, 35 P.3d at 221-22. While the scope of
 
judicial review is limited, the supreme court held that "judicial
 intervention is appropriate where the HPA has failed to exercise
 any discretion at all, acted arbitrarily and capriciously so as
 to give rise to a due process violation, or otherwise violated
 the prisoner's constitutional rights." Id. at 195, 35 P.3d at
 
222.
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The court concluded that:
 
"'parole is a matter of legislative grace, and the denial of
it to certain offenders is within legislative discretion.'"
State v. Kumukau, 71 Haw. 218, 227, 787 P.2d 682, 687 (1990)
(quoting State v. Freitas, 61 Haw. 262, 270, 602 P.2d 914,
921 (1979)). As such, it was with[in] the legislature's
discretion to allow the HPA to deny parole to certain
prisoners by setting their minimum terms at periods equal to
their maximum sentences. Therefore, we assume that, if the
legislature had intended to limit the HPA's discretion by
prohibiting it from doing so, it would have enacted an
express restriction. We will not read this limitation into
 the statutes. If the HPA's authority to establish minimum
terms is to be limited in this manner, it is incumbent upon
the legislature, not the appellate courts, to do so.
 
Id. 
C.
 
It is clear from Williamson that the HPA had the
 
statutory authority to set Nichols' minimum terms of imprisonment
 
at his maximum terms and thereby set his total minimum term at
 the thirty-year maximum term for his offenses. It also seems
 clear that the HPA's setting of Nichols' total minimum term at
 the total maximum term should constitute an exceptional
 situation. One of the dual purposes of parole is the
 rehabilitation of the offender, and permitting a prisoner to be
 released on parole would appear to be an integral part of the
 normal rehabilitation process. In Williamson, the total minimum
 term was set at five years, which was the total maximum term for
 the concurrent sentences imposed on Williamson's two class C
 felonies. See id. at 186-87, 35 P.3d at 213-14. Here, Nichols'
 
total minimum term was set at thirty years, the total maximum
 term for Nichols' sentences which required him to serve his
 prison term on a class B felony consecutively to his concurrent
 prison terms on class A felonies.
 
Williamson relied in part on the availability of
 
judicial review in concluding that it was not necessary to
 restrict the HPA's authority to set the minimum term of
 imprisonment at the maximum sentence. Id. at 194-95, 35 P.3d at
 
221-22. Among other circumstances, "judicial intervention is
 appropriate where the HPA has . . . acted arbitrarily and
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
capriciously so as to give rise to a due process violation" in
 
applying the Guidelines. See id. at 195, 35 P.3d at 222.
 
Where the HPA has taken the extraordinary action of
 
setting the minimum term of imprisonment at the maximum term, a
 more detailed explanation by the HPA for its decision beyond
 merely listing the significant Guideline factors would assist the
 court in reviewing whether the HPA's action was arbitrary and
 capricious. Where the absence of a more detailed explanation
 would prevent our meaningful review of, or leave us in doubt
 about, whether the HPA acted arbitrarily or capriciously in
 applying its Guidelines, we may require a more detailed
 explanation.
4 We conclude, however, that in this case, a more
 
detailed explanation by HPA was not necessary for proper judicial
 review of the HPA's decision. As explained below, in this case,
 the record provides clear support for the HPA's exercise of its
 discretion in fixing Nichols' minimum terms under the Guidelines.
 
IV.
 
A.
 
Nichols' contentions that the HPA set his minimum terms
 
outside the Guidelines and acted as a "mere rubber stamp" for the
 prosecution are without merit. Nichols' minimum terms were set
 within the range under the HPA Guidelines for the Level III level
 of punishment found by the HPA.
5 The HPA set Nichols' minimum
 
terms after a hearing at which he was represented by counsel, and
 he provides no basis for his "mere rubber stamp" contention.
 
B.
 
Based on the record in this case, we reject Nichols'
 
claims that the HPA failed to sufficiently specify its rationale
 for determining his level of punishment and describe the
 
4The concerns in this regard and the impact on a prisoner are heightened
when the HPA sets a prisoner's minimum term at the maximum term for class B
felonies or higher.
 
5As noted  supra,  under the HPA Guidelines, the minimum term range of
imprisonment for a Level III level of punishment includes the maximum term
imposed by the Circuit Court for Nichols' class A and class B felonies.
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
significant criteria it considered. We also reject his claim
 
that the HPA misapplied the Guidelines by using the wrong level
 of punishment.
 
In setting Nichols' minimum terms of incarceration, the
 
HPA placed him in the Level III level of punishment. Under its
 Guidelines, the HPA focuses on three primary criteria to
 determine the appropriate level of punishment and the minimum
 term: (1) Nature of the Offense; (2) Degree of Injury/Loss to
 Person or Property; and (3) Offender's Criminal History. In its
 Corrected Minimum Term Order, the HPA cited "(1) Nature of
 Offense; [and] (2) Degree of Injury to Person" as the significant
 factors it relied upon in determining Nichols' Level III level of
 punishment.
 
Under the Nature of the Offense criteria, the standard
 
for a Level III level of punishment is met if "[t]he offense was
 against a person(s) and the offender displayed a callous and/or
 cruel disregard for the safety and welfare of others[.]" Under
 the Degree of Injury/Loss to Person or Property criteria, the
 standard for a Level III level of punishment is met if "[t]he
 injury or loss suffered by the victim(s) was more than those
 experienced by similarly situated victims."
 
Here, the record provides ample support for the HPA's
 
reliance on the "Nature of Offense" and "Degree of Injury to
 Person" in placing Nichols in the Level III level of punishment. 
The record shows in both the home invasion/shooting and assault
 cases, Nichols committed offenses against persons and that he
 "displayed a callous and/or cruel disregard for the safety and
 welfare of others[.]" In the home invasion/shooting case,
 Nichols terrorized an entire family, including minor children,
 holding the victims at gunpoint. He also shot Lapitan, when
 Lapitan tried to push some of the robbers from his home. In the
 assault case, Nichols threw a broken bottle at Tabios' face,
 resulting in a severe laceration, then proceeded to beat Tabios
 with a bat while others were kicking Tabios. There was strong
 justification in the record for a finding by the HPA that Nichols
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
displayed a callous and/or cruel disregard for the safety and
 
welfare of others in committing the offenses in both cases.
 
The record also supports a determination by the HPA
 
that "[t]he injury or loss suffered by the victim(s) was more
 than those experienced by similarly situated victims." In the
 home invasion/shooting case, Nichols was convicted of class A
 felonies for kidnapping, first-degree robbery, and carrying or
 use of a firearm in the commission of a separate felony. 
Nichols' shooting of Lapitan resulted in Lapitan being paralyzed,
 a greater loss than typically experienced by victims of these
 three offenses. In the assault case, Nichols was convicted of
 the class B felony of first-degree assault for causing Tabios to
 suffer permanent disfigurement from a five-inch long, extreme
 facial laceration. The permanent disfigurement to Tabios' face
 provided a basis for the HPA to determine that the loss Tabios
 suffered was more than experienced by similarly situated victims. 
The record in this case provides clear support for the
 
factors cited by the HPA in setting Nichols' minimum terms of
 imprisonment. In light of the record, we conclude that in
 exercising its discretion to establish Nichols' minimum terms,
 the HPA did not act arbitrarily or capriciously in applying the
 Guidelines. 
C.
 
Nichols' claim that his counsel provided ineffective
 
assistance by failing to assert the correct level of punishment
 or discern that the Corrected Minimum Term Order was
 constitutionally deficient is without merit. As previously
 discussed, the record supports the HPA's determination of Level
 III as the applicable level of punishment. In addition, Nichols
 does not provide any valid basis to support a claim that the
 Corrected Minimum Term Order was constitutionally deficient. 
Accordingly, Nichols has not shown that his counsel provided
 ineffective assistance.
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit
 
Court's Order Denying Petition.
 
On the briefs:
 Nicholas K. Nichols
 
Petitioner-Appellant Pro Se
 
Richard W. Stacey
Diane K. Taira
 Deputy Attorneys General
for Respondent-Appellee
 
18
 