NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000403
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
BRANDON VACCHELLI, Defendant-Appellant, and
JOSHUA VACCHELLI, Defendant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 13-1-0745)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Brandon Vacchelli (Brandon) appeals
 
from the "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence" entered on April
 
1
27, 2015 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit
 
court).
 
On appeal, Brandon contends the circuit court erred in:
 
(1) allowing in prejudicial evidence; (2) denying Brandon's
 
motion for acquittal; (3) giving a jury instruction on accomplice
 liability; (4) failing to instruct the jury on self-defense and
 defense of others; (5) answering incorrectly a jury question
 regarding accomplice liability; and (6) sentencing Brandon to
 five years incarceration.
 
I. BACKGROUND

 
On May 12, 2013, Jessica Layco (Layco) and her
 
boyfriend Tai Tang "Randy" Thai (Thai) were driving to their home
 
in Makakilo with their two daughters after dinner. Going up
 
1 The Honorable Dean E. Ochiai presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Makakilo Drive, Layco noticed two cars tailgating their car. One
 
of the cars sped up and cut in front of Layco and Thai's car. On
 the side of the residential street where Layco and Thai live, the
 two cars that had been tailgating them, had parked. Layco and
 Thai pulled over in front of them near the driveway of their
 home.
 
Layco and Thai exited the car telling their daughters
 
to stay in the car. Layco and Thai approached the two cars,
 whose drivers had also exited their cars. The two drivers were
 brothers, Joshua Vacchelli (Joshua) and Brandon. Layco
 
confronted the brothers, asking, "What is your guys' problem
 
revving [your engines and] going up tailgating behind us so close
 like that?" Thai and Joshua began "exchanging words" and were
 "about to fight."
 
As Joshua and Thai began to physically fight, Brandon
 
was behind Layco, who put his hands on her to hold her down.
 Layco told Thai, "Enough already. Get off him already. Enough. 
We're done already. It's done with." Following her comments,
 Brandon let Layco go and Joshua "backhanded" Layco on the side of
 her face.
 
After checking on her daughters' safety, Layco felt
 
someone grab her hand and say, "Sister, calm down. I'm a police
 officer." The person who approached Layco was an off-duty
 reserve police officer named Michael Cho (Cho). Cho saw the
 
fight happening and pulled over to intervene. Layco saw Cho walk
 
over to the three men fighting, and then saw Joshua hit Cho
 across the head. Cho fell to his hands and knees, and Joshua
 began hitting Cho on his back and Brandon began kicking Cho on
 the right side of Cho's face.
 
Cho was taken to the hospital, where a doctor diagnosed
 
him with hemorrhagic contusion, in other words, a bruise and
 bleeding in the brain.
 
On May 23, 2013, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i 
(State) charged Joshua with assault in the second degree for 
actions against Cho, assault in the third degree for actions 
against Thai, and assault in the third degree for actions against 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Layco. The State charged Brandon with assault in the second
 
degree for his actions against Cho.
 
On July 22, 2014, Joshua pled no contest to the charges
 
against him. Joshua was sentenced to five years probation for
 the assault in the second degree charge, and one year for each
 assault in the third degree charge.
 
Brandon's trial began on January 21, 2015. The jury
 
returned a guilty verdict on January 23, 2015.
 
At the sentencing hearing, the circuit court announced
 
its intention to sentence Brandon to a term of imprisonment of
 five years. The circuit court entered the Judgment of Conviction
 and Sentence on April 27, 2015.
 
Brandon filed his notice of appeal on May 12, 2015.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
A. Evidentiary Rulings and Identification Testimony
 
"We apply two different standards of review in
addressing evidentiary issues." State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 
19, 36, 960 P.2d 1227, 1244 (1998). 
"Evidentiary rulings
are reviewed for abuse of discretion, unless application of
the rule admits of only one correct result, in which case
review is under the right/wrong standard." State v. Loa, 83
 
Hawai'i 335, 349, 926 P.2d 1258, 1271 [(1996).] 
State v. Ortiz, 91 Hawai 'i 181, 189, 981 P.2d 1127, 1135 (1999). 
When the defendant challenges admissibility of
eyewitness identification on the grounds of impermissibly
suggestive pre-trial identification procedure, he or she has
the burden of proof, and the court, trial or appellate, is
faced with two questions: (1) whether the procedure was
impermissibly or unnecessarily suggestive; and (2) if so,
whether, upon viewing the totality of the circumstances,
such as opportunity to view at the time of the crime, the
degree of attention, and the elapsed time, the witness's
identification is deemed sufficiently reliable so that it is
worthy of presentation to and consideration by the jury.
 
State v. Walton, 133 Hawai 'i 66, 83, 324 P.3d 876, 893 (2014) 
(quoting State v. Araki, 82 Hawai 'i 474, 484, 923 P.2d 891, 901 
(1996)).
B. Motion for Judgment of Acquittal
 
The standard to be applied by the trial court in
ruling upon a motion for a judgment of acquittal is whether,
upon the evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the
prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the
trier of fact, a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Keawe, 107 Hawai' i 1,
4, 108 P.3d 304, 307 (2005). 
This court employs the same
 
3
 Walton, 133 Hawai 'i at 83, 324 P.3d at 893. "The circuit court's 
response to a jury communication is the functional equivalent of
 
an instruction." State v. Haili, 103 Hawai 'i 89, 101, 79 P.3d 
1263, 1275 (2003) (brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Uyesugi,
 100 Hawai
'i 442, 458, 60 P.3d 843, 859 (2002)).NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
standard of review in reviewing a motion for a judgment of
acquittal. Id.
 
Walton, 133 Hawai 'i at 83, 324 P.3d at 893 (brackets omitted).
C. Jury Instructions and Response to Jury Communications
 
It is the circuit court's duty and ultimate
responsibility to ensure that the jury was properly
instructed on issues of criminal liability. State v.
 
Kikuta 
, 125 Hawai' i 78, 90, 253 P.3d 639, 651 (2011). "When 
jury instructions, or the omission thereof, are at issue on
appeal, the standard of review is whether, when read and
considered as a whole, the instructions given are
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or
misleading. Erroneous instructions are presumptively
harmful and are a ground for reversal unless it
affirmatively appears from the record as a whole that the
error was not prejudicial." Kobashigawa v. Silva, 129
 
Hawai'i 313, 320, 300 P.3d 579, 586 (2013). 
D. Sentencing

 
[A] sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in
imposing a sentence. The applicable standard of review for
sentencing or resentencing matters is whether the court
committed plain and manifest abuse of discretion in its
decision. Factors which indicate a plain and manifest abuse
of discretion are arbitrary or capricious action by the
judge and a rigid refusal to consider the defendant's
contentions. And, generally, to constitute an abuse it must
appear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason
or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
substantial detriment to the litigant.
 
State v. Henley, 136 Hawai 'i 471, 478, 363 P.3d 319, 326 (2015) 
(quoting State v. Kong, 131 Hawai 'i 94, 101, 315 P.3d 720, 727 
(2013)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Admission of Evidence
 
Brandon contends the circuit court erred in admitting
 
"the mug shot in a photographic line up of [Brandon]," and a
 
police form "which contained prejudicial written statements from
 Layco[.]" Brandon sought to exclude these items in a motion in
 limine filed before trial. At trial, the circuit court admitted
 the State's Exhibit 13, which was a document with six black and
 white photographs in two rows of three, with handwritten
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
indication marks on the photograph numbered "3." The circuit
 
court also admitted the State's Exhibit 12, which was a statement
 signed by Layco indicating that she selected "photograph number
 3," and that the person she selected "punche[d] the police
 officer and caused the police officer to fall to the ground & he
 also punched my boyfriend & backhanded me on the right side of my
 face."
 
Brandon argues that because he was not charged with
 
assault of Layco or Thai, the admission of Layco's statement was
 an admission of "other acts of misconduct or crimes" prohibited
 
2
by Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b) (Supp. 2015).  We
 
reject Brandon's argument because the photographic lineup was not
 introduced "to prove the character" of Brandon or "to show action
 in conformity therewith." Instead, the photographic lineup was
 introduced to show that Layco identified Brandon as a perpetrator
 to the police two days after the altercation.
 
Brandon additionally argues that the photographic

 
lineup should have included Joshua because there were misdemeanor
 assault charges against Joshua for assaulting Layco and Thai.
 Brandon concludes that "[t]his could prejudicially have mislead
 the jury into believing [Layco] properly identified [Brandon] as
 the assailant for all three assaults." Brandon also argues that
 "[t]hese Exhibits were extremely prejudicial as they cast
 [Brandon] in the light of a suspect and should not have been
 allowed as they were unduly suggestive."
 
This court has used a three-part test to determine
 
whether the admission of police photographs at trial was proper:
 
1. The Government must have a demonstrable need to
 
introduce the photographs; and
 
2. The photographs themselves, if shown to the jury, must
not imply that the defendant has a prior criminal record;
and 
2 HRE Rule 404(b) provides in relevant part: 
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible
to prove the character of a person in order to show action
in conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible
where such evidence is probative of another fact that is of
consequence to the determination of the action, such
as . . . identity[.]
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
3. The manner and introduction at trial must be such that
 
it does not draw particular attention to the source or
implications of the photographs.
 
State v. Kurtzen, 1 Haw. App. 406, 412-13, 620 P.2d 258, 262-63 
(1980) (citing U.S. v. Fosher, 568 F.2d 207, 214 (1st Cir. 1978)); see also State v. Yamada, 116 Hawai
'i 422, 439-41, 173 
P.3d 569, 586-88 (App. 2007). 
First, the State argues that the lineup was necessary
 
to connect Brandon to Cho's injuries because Brandon denied that
 he caused Cho's injuries. Brandon does not dispute this point. 
Layco, who was a witness to the event, identified Brandon two
 days after the altercation as the person who "punche[d] the
 police officer and caused the police officer to fall to the
 ground . . . ." The State had a demonstrable need to introduce
 Layco's identification of Brandon through the photographs in
 order to establish that Brandon's actions were the cause of Cho's
 injuries. See State v. Reiger, 64 Haw. 510, 512, 644 P.2d 959,
 
962 (1982) ("The photographs were the photographic lineup or
 array shown to the victim in the hospital after the attack. In
 this case, the defense was alibi. The question of identification
 was, therefore, crucial to the proof of the prosecution's case
 and obviously, proof that the victim had picked the appellant out
 of a photographic display at an early point was relevant and
 necessary to the government's case.").
 
Second, the photograph was a black and white copy of 
six pictures in two rows of three, numbered one through six, and titled "Photo Lineup Sheet." There is no indication on the document that any of the persons in the photographs on the lineup had criminal records. See Yamada, 116 Hawai
'i at 441, 173 P.3d 
at 588 (holding that a photographic array in black and white of photographs in two rows of three titled "HONOLULU POLICE" did not violate the second prong of the Kutzen test where there were no internal police markings or mug shot identification numbers). Layco's statement indicated that the person she identified as Brandon had also hit her and her boyfriend Thai, but did not suggest that Brandon had a prior criminal record. 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Third, the manner in which Exhibits 12 and 13 were
 
introduced at trial did not draw any particular attention to the
 
source of the photos as "mug shots." The exhibits were
 introduced as part of the State's direct examination of Layco. 
After describing the incident, the State asked Layco if she
 helped the Honolulu Police Department to identify the individuals
 involved in the altercation. Layco testified in response that
 the police came to her house two days after the altercation and
 showed her a lineup. The jury was not presented any evidence or
 testimony as to the source of the photographs.
 
Exhibits 12 and 13 meet the three prongs of the Kutzen
 
test, and we hold that the admission of these exhibits was not
 erroneous. Brandon's additional argument that the exhibits were
 prejudicial because Layco identified Brandon as the perpetrator
 of the assault against Layco and Thai even though Brandon's
 brother was charged with those assault crimes is without merit.
 Brandon's misidentification goes to Layco's credibility rather
 than the admissibility of those exhibits.
B. Motion for Judgment of Acquittal
i. Causation
 
Brandon next argues that the circuit court should have
 
granted his motion for judgment of acquittal because "[t]here was
 
insufficient evidence that [Brandon] was the one who struck [Cho]
 causing the contusion concussion."
 
At trial, Layco testified for the prosecution that she
 
heard Cho tell Joshua, Brandon, and Thai, "I'm a police officer."
 Layco testified that after Cho announced himself, "Joshua hit
 [Cho] across the head. When that happened, [Cho] went down on
 his knees on all fours, and Joshua was hitting the cop behind his
 back and [Brandon] was kicking him on the right side of the
 face." Layco testified that she witnessed the event from a
 "couple of feet" away.
 
Thai's testimony supported the testimony given by
 
Layco. Thai testified that during the altercation, he saw
 Brandon punching Cho in the face while the "guy in the red Civic
 was kicking him," referring to Joshua.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Finally, Cho testified for the prosecution that he
 
could not remember who had caused his injuries. Cho testified,
 
"I was false cracked and, um, I was blind sided. And it was such
 an intense hit that it was like a flash of light and intense
 pain. And the next thing I know is I'm kinda on all fours on the
 ground." Cho did not see the person who hit him. The punch that
 sent Cho to the ground was to the right side of his face on his
 cheekbone. Cho remembers one more strike before he blacked out.
 
For the defense, Justin Sakahara (Sakahara), a witness
 
present at the scene and co-worker of Joshua, testified that he
 only witnessed Brandon trying to get Joshua off the person Joshua
 was fighting with.
 
Joshua testified that he did not recall "a tall Asian
 
man who said he was a police officer[,]" but that it was possible
 that Joshua could have injured the police officer. Joshua
 testified that he pled no contest to charges involving injuries
 to Layco, Thai, and Cho. Joshua's testimony suggested that it
 was his actions, and not Brandon's, that caused injury to Cho.
 
Brandon testified for his own defense that during the
 
altercation, he saw Cho laying on the ground but did not cause
 Cho to lay on the ground, and did not know how Cho came to be on
 the ground. Brandon said he did not get physically involved in
 the fight, but stepped between Layco and Joshua to "put distance
 between the two of them." Brandon testified that he did not
 assault Cho, did not kick him in the head, and did not punch him
 in the head.
 
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the 
prosecution, there is sufficient evidence to support the conclusion that Brandon hit Cho in the side of his face, causing injury to Cho. The circuit court did not err in denying Brandon's motion for judgment of acquittal because "a reasonable mind might fairly conclude" that Brandon was the cause of Cho's injuries and therefore guilty under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 707-711(1)(b) (2014 Repl.). See Walton, 133 Hawai
'i at 83, 324 
P.3d at 893 (citing Keawe, 107 Hawai 'i at 4, 108 P.3d at 307). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ii. Substantial Injury
 
Brandon also argues that he was entitled to a judgment
 
of acquittal because "[t]here was no opinion testimony by [Daniel
 
Donovan, M.D. (Dr. Donovan)] that to a reasonable medical
 
probability, [Cho] suffered a substantial injury."
 
Brandon seems to be referring to the rule applied in 
civil cases that "medical opinions must be based on reasonable 
medical probability." State v. DeLeon, 131 Hawai 'i 463, 482, 319 
P.3d 382, 401 (2014). Brandon has cited no authority applying this rule to medical testimony in criminal cases. Brandon does not seem to challenge the admissibility of the expert testimony of Dr. Donovan. Therefore, we address only whether "a reasonable mind might fairly conclude guilt beyond a reasonable doubt" based on the testimony provided at trial. Walton, 133 Hawai
'i at 83, 
324 P.3d at 893 (quoting Keawe, 107 Hawai 'i at 4, 108 P.3d at 
307). 
Brandon was convicted of assault in the second degree
 
under HRS § 707-711(1)(b), which makes it a crime to "recklessly
 [cause] serious or substantial bodily injury to another[.]"
 "Substantial bodily injury" under HRS chapter 707 includes "[a]
 serious concussion." HRS § 707-700 (2014 Repl.).
 
Dr. Donovan testified at trial that following the
 
altercation he examined Cho in the Neuroscience Intensive Care
 Unit at the Queen's Medical Center. Upon examination, Dr.
 Donovan found that Cho had a hemorrhagic contusion, or in other
 words, "a bruise and bleeding in the brain itself in the left
 frontal lobe." Dr. Donovan described the hemorrhagic contusion
 as "a severe traumatic brain injury."
 
Dr. Donovan testified that Cho also had a concussion,
 
which he defined as "a temporary alteration or change in mental
 function due to a traumatic injury." Dr. Donovan testified that
 the medical community avoids classifying concussions by level of
 severity because "all [concussions] need to be taken seriously,"
 but will classify varying levels of severity for traumatic brain
 injury. Dr. Donovan added that experts in the field tend to
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prefer the term "traumatic brain injury" over "concussion"
 
because it is more specific.
 
Based on Dr. Donovan's testimony, a reasonable mind
 
could conclude that Cho suffered "a serious concussion" within
 the meaning of HRS § 707-700 such that liability would ensue
 under HRS § 707-711(1)(b). The circuit court did not err in
 denying Brandon's motion for judgment of acquittal on this basis.
C.	 Jury Instruction on Accomplice Liability
 
Brandon argues that the circuit court erred in
 
instructing the jury on accomplice liability. Brandon seems to
 
argue that the facts of this case do not support an accomplice
 instruction.
 
Accomplice liability is provided for in HRS § 702-221

 
(2014 Repl.), and states in relevant part:
 
§702-221 Liability for conduct of another. (1) A
person is guilty of an offense if it is committed by his own
conduct or by the conduct of another person for which he is
legally accountable, or both.
 
(2)
	 A person is legally accountable for the conduct
of another person when:
 
. . . .
 
(c)	 He is an accomplice of such other person in the
commission of the offense.
 
HRS § 702-222 (2014 Repl.) defines an accomplice:
 
§702-222 Liability for conduct of another; complicity.
A person is an accomplice of another person in the
commission of an offense if:
 
(1) With the intention of promoting or facilitatingthe commission of the offense, the person: 
(a) Solicits the other person to commit it; 
(b) Aids or agrees or attempts to aid the otherperson in planning or committing it[.]
 At the close of evidence, the circuit court instructed
 
the jury:
 
A person charged with committing an offense may be
guilty because he is an accomplice of another person in the
commission of the offense. The prosecution must prove
accomplice liability beyond a reasonable doubt. A person is
an accomplice of another in the commission of an offense if:
 
1. With the intent to promote or facilitate the
commission of the offense, he, A, solicits the other person
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to commit it; or, B, aids or agrees or attempts to aid the
other person in the planning or commission of the offense.
 
Mere presence at the scene of an offense or knowledge
that an offense is being committed without more does not
make a person an accomplice to the offense. However, if a
person plans or participates in the commission of an offense
with the intent to promote or facilitate the offense, he is
an accomplice to the commission of the offense. 
On appeal, Brandon does not challenge the accuracy of the circuit
 
court's instruction to the jury on accomplice liability. Rather,
 Brandon argues that the jury should not have been instructed on
 accomplice liability at all.
 
Brandon argues that State v. Apao, 59 Haw. 625, 586 
P.2d 250 (1978) should not control because "[t]here is no such evidence in the instant case that [Brandon] and his brother planned to assault [Cho]." In Apao, the defendant argued that an instruction on accomplice liability was reversible error because the indictment did not specify whether he was going to be charged as a principal or accomplice. Id. at 644, 586 P.2d at 262. The 
Hawai
'i Supreme Court disagreed, noting that where a defendant is 
charged as a principal, it is not error for the court to instruct the jury on accomplice liability. Id. at 646, 586 P.2d at 263. 
Brandon's attempt to distinguish Apao is without merit. Like the defendant in Apao, Brandon could be convicted as an accomplice even though the felony information charged him as a principal. 
Brandon cites State v. Soares, 72 Haw. 278, 815 P.2d
 
428 (1991) to argue that an accomplice liability instruction is
 error where one defendant is charged separately from another
 defendant. Brandon misstates the rule from Soares. The supreme
 court held in Soares that where "each defendant is charged
 separately and each charge involves different facts with
 different victims, an accomplice instruction should not have been
 given." Id. at 281, 815 P.2d at 430. Unlike the crimes involved
 
in Soares, the charges against Joshua and the charges against
 Brandon involved the same set of facts and the same victims. 
Brandon's argument that the jury instruction on accomplice
 liability was erroneous under Soares is without merit.
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Brandon argues that even if the circuit court's
 
instruction on accomplice liability was proper, the circuit court
 
erred in responding to the jury's question about accomplice
 liability. The jury submitted "Communication No. 2 From the
 Jury," which read:
 
Question regarding acts that constitute an "accomplice."
 
Is someone an accomplice by not stopping a fight?
 Is someone an accomplice by encouraging the fleeing of a
scene after an incident?
 
The circuit court answered the jury by stating, "You have
 
received all admitted evidence."
 
Brandon cites State v. Estrada, 69 Haw. 204, 738 P.2d 
812 (1987) and State v. Miyashiro, 90 Hawai 'i 489, 979 P.2d 85 
(1999) as examples of improperly answered jury questions. Estrada involved the decision by the trial court to read only one witness's testimony where the jury requested the rereading of two witnesses' testimony. Estrada, 69 Haw. at 228-29, 738 P.2d at 
828-29. Miyashiro  involved a trial court's answer to the jury 
that 
may have implied to the jurors that if they failed to reach
[a unanimous] agreement as to the affirmative defense ofentrapment, they were required to return a guilty verdict,even if they had not unanimously determined whether theprosecution had established all the elements of the charged
offenses beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
Miyashiro, 90 Hawai 'i at 500, 979 P.2d at 96. Neither of these 
cases helps us to evaluate whether the circuit court's answer to 
the jury's communication was erroneous. 
In a jury trial, the trial court is prohibited from
 
commenting upon the evidence. HRE Rule 1102 (1993) ("The court
 shall instruct the jury regarding the law applicable to the facts
 of the case, but shall not comment upon the evidence. It shall
 also instruct the jury that they are the exclusive judges of all
 questions of fact and the credibility of witnesses."). The
 jury's question asked the trial court to apply the law on
 accomplice liability to the facts of the case, which was the role
 of the jury. The circuit court's decision to decline answering
 the jury's question was not improper or erroneous. See Walton,
 
12
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
133 Hawai 'i at 83, 324 P.3d at 893. Brandon's argument that the 
circuit court improperly answered the jury's questions on 
accomplice liability is without merit.
D. Self-Defense and Defense of Others Jury Instruction
 
Brandon next argues that the jury should have been 
instructed on self-defense and defense of others. Counsel for 
Brandon admitted at trial that there was not enough evidence to support a self-defense or defense of others instruction. Despite this position, Brandon encourages this court to notice plain error on appeal because the omission of the jury instructions on self-defense and defense of others affects Brandon's substantial rights. See Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 52(b) ("Plain 
errors or defects affecting substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the court."). 
Brandon relies primarily on the testimony of witness
 
Sakahara to argue that "there was a scintilla of evidence for
 which . . . a self defense instruction and defense of others
 instruction should have been given." Sakahara was asked on
 cross-examination, "[W]as [Cho] able to break up the
 altercation?" Sakahara responded, "He ended up having Brandon in
 a chokehold." Brandon confirmed on cross-examination that
 someone had put him in a chokehold. Brandon posits that this
 testimony was sufficient to indicate that he was acting in self-
defense to warrant a self-defense instruction.
 
HRS § 703-304(1) (2014 Repl.) provides, "the use of
 
force upon or toward another person is justifiable when the actor
 believes that such force is immediately necessary for the purpose
 of protecting himself against the use of unlawful force by the
 other person on the present occasion."
 
The test for self-defense contains both a subjective and an
objective prong. Under the subjective prong the jury is
required to evaluate the use of force from the defendant's
perspective. The focus is on the circumstances known to the
 defendant, thus directing the jury to consider the actions
of a reasonable person in the defendant's position under the
circumstances as he believed them to be. Under the
 objective prong, emphasis is placed on the reasonable person
standard so the defendant's use of force must be determined
 from the point of view of a reasonable person.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Williams, 137 Hawai 'i 230, 242, 368 P.3d 972, 984 (App. 
2016) (internal citations and quotation marks omitted). 
The testimony Brandon cites showing that at one point
 
during the altercation, Cho placed Brandon in a chokehold, does
 
not support a conclusion that Brandon was acting in self-defense. 
There was no testimony that Brandon subjectively believed that he
 was acting to protect himself or his brother. There was no
 testimony that would support a finding that a reasonable person
 in Brandon's position would have been acting to protect himself
 or his brother.
 
Reading the record as a whole, the omission of the 
self-defense and defense of others was not prejudicial, and it was not plain error. See Walton, 133 Hawai
'i at 83, 324 P.3d at 
893.
 
E.	 Sentencing
 
Brandon's final argument on appeal is that the circuit
 
court abused its discretion in sentencing him to the maximum five
 
years incarceration for his first criminal offense.
 
First, Brandon contends the circuit court failed to
 
take into account that Joshua received probation for the same
 offense, which was an "unwarranted sentence disparit[y]" under
 HRS § 706-606 (2014 Repl.).
3 Brandon takes out of context the
 
3 HRS § 706-606 provides:
 
§706-606 Factors to be considered in imposing a
sentence. The court, in determining the particular sentence
to be imposed, shall consider:
 
(1)	 The nature and circumstances of the offense and
 
the history and characteristics of the
defendant;
 
(2)	 The need for the sentence imposed:
 
(a)	 To reflect the seriousness of the offense,
to promote respect for law, and to provide
the punishment for the offense;
 
(b) 	To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;
 
(c) 	To protect the public from further crimes
of the defendant; and 
(continued...)
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court's statement, "Your client did not plead. He went
 
to trial." Brandon suggests that this statement demonstrates
 that the circuit court was punishing Brandon for exercising his
 right to a jury trial instead of pleading guilty. In context,
 however, the circuit court was expressing its fuller
 understanding of the circumstances warranting a longer sentence
 for Brandon than the sentence his brother Joshua received. At
 the hearing, this interchange took place:
 
[Counsel for Brandon]:  Your Honor, if I may? Is this
 
court willing to consider the disparity sentence between his

brother [Joshua] that was imposed?
 
THE COURT:  I have considered it. 
[Joshua] pled and
got four years probation with one year of incarceration.
Your client did not plead. He went to trial. I heard the
 entire trial, and I understand the full impact of this case
upon everyone involved.
 
Furthermore, "there is no constitutional requirement that the
 
court impose uniform sentences on multiple defendants involved in
 the same criminal activity, and a disparity among sentences does
 not establish that any particular defendant's sentence is
 excessive." State v. Teves, 4 Haw. App. 566, 572, 670 P.2d 834,
 
838 (1983) (citing State v. Seifart, 597 P.2d 44, 47 (Idaho
 1979)). Brandon's argument that his sentence should have been
 reduced because of the disparity between Brandon's sentence and
 his brother Joshua's sentence is without merit.
 
Second, Brandon appears to suggest that the circuit
 
court gave him the maximum sentence because he used brass
 knuckles to commit the offense. Brandon takes issue with the
 circuit court's statement, as Brandon recounts, that "hitting a
 person [with] brass knuckles [while] he was down is an act of
 
3(...continued)
 
(d) 	To provide the defendant with needed
educational or vocational training,
medical care, or other correctional
treatment in the most effective manner;
 
(3) 	The kinds of sentences available; and 
(4) 	The need to avoid unwarranted sentence
 disparities among defendants with similar
records who have been found guilty of similar
conduct.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
cowardice." We cannot find in the transcript of the sentencing
 
hearing where the circuit court made this statement. The only
 mention of brass knuckles was the circuit court's statement,
 
And coupled with that cowardice were extreme acts of
brutality by both you and your brother, one with the brass
knuckles which, in itself, is illegal; and, two, hitting a
man when he's down shows no sense of mercy or any effort to
break off the attack because, clearly, [Cho] was
incapacitated from the very first blow, and he didn't have a
fair chance to defend himself that night. So while we're
 here and you may be remorseful now, your remorse and mercy
was nonexistent on the day in which [Cho] happened upon you
and your brother.
 
At the sentencing hearing, Cho told the circuit court that he had
 
been punched in the head by Joshua, who was wearing brass
 knuckles. The circuit court's statement recognizes that Joshua
 hit Cho with brass knuckles, not Brandon. Brandon's argument on
 this point is mistaken and without merit.
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Therefore, the "Judgment of Conviction and Sentence"
 
entered on April 27, 2015 in the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 23, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Daphne E. Barbee
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Brandon H. Ito Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 
16

 