NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000609
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
JOHN OLIVAS, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-0573)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellee John Olivas (Olivas) with three counts of 
second-degree robbery. The charges stemmed from a bank robbery committed at the Wahiaw
a Branch of American Savings Bank and two 
bank robberies committed at the Mililani Town Center Branch of American Savings Bank. 
During trial, Olivas moved to suppress witness
 
identifications made during a post-arrest physical lineup and at
 trial, arguing that his arrest was made without probable cause
 and that the post-arrest witness identifications were the tainted
 fruit of his unlawful arrest. The Circuit Court of the First
 
1
Circuit (Circuit Court)  granted Olivas's motion.
1 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The State appeals from the "Order Granting Defendant's
 
Motion to Suppress Identifications" (Order Suppressing
 
Identifications). On appeal, the State argues that: (1) the
 Circuit Court erred in concluding that the police lacked probable
 cause to arrest Olivas; and (2) even assuming that the police
 lacked probable cause to arrest Olivas, the Circuit Court erred
 by suppressing the witnesses' in-court identifications. We
 affirm.
 
I.
 
We resolve the issues raised by the State on appeal as
 
follows:
 
1. The Circuit Court did not err in concluding that
 
the police lacked probable cause to arrest Olivas. The police
 did not have a warrant to arrest Olivas, and once Olivas
 challenged the lawfulness of his arrest, the State bore the
 burden of proving that there was probable cause for Olivas's
 arrest. See State v. Crowder, 1 Haw. App. 60, 66, 613 P.2d 909,
 
914 (1980); United States v. Porter, 701 F.2d 1158, 1165 (6th
 Cir. 1983).
 
The police included Olivas's picture in a pre-arrest
 
2
photospread because M.E.  thought the bank robber resembled
someone who had attended her middle school, whom she had not seen
 for over ten years. However, when M.E. was shown a photospread
 that contained Olivas's picture, she was unable to identify
 anyone as the bank robber. M.E.'s failure to identify Olivas as
 the bank robber in the photospread undermined the police's basis
 for believing that he was a suspect and for including him in the
 photospread. Under these circumstances, we conclude that N.V.'s
 identification of Olivas in the photospread was insufficient to
 establish probable cause to arrest Olivas and that the State
 failed to satisfy its burden of proving that there was probable
 cause for Olivas's arrest. 
2The initials "M.E." are based on the person's maiden name.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2. The Circuit Court did not err in suppressing the 
in-court identifications of witnesses U.R., G.S., M.E., and M.D. 
as the fruit of Olivas's unlawful arrest. The State has the burden of proving that subsequently obtained evidence has been purged of the taint of an illegal arrest. See Brown v. Illinois, 
422 U.S. 590, 604 (1975); State v. Tominiko, 126 Hawai
'i 68, 81, 
266 P.3d 1122, 1135 (2011); State v. Fukusaku, 85 Hawai 'i 462, 
475, 946 P.2d 32, 45 (1997). 
There were four witnesses who identified Olivas at
 
trial. However, the opportunity of these witnesses to observe
 the bank robber at the time of the robbery was limited. During
 each bank robbery, the robber wore a hat that obscured his eyes. 
U.R. was the only victim teller to identify Olivas in court; the
 other three in-court identifiers, G.S., M.E., and M.D., were not
 the person who was robbed and did not have any significant
 interaction with the robber during the robbery. U.R., however,
 did not select Olivas's picture from a pre-arrest photospread
 containing Olivas's picture. The same is true of M.E. G.S.
 testified that she was busy counting her receipts and closing her
 till and only briefly looked twice at the person she was later
 informed had committed the robbery. In addition, two months
 passed between the time of the robbery and G.S.'s identification
 of Olivas at the post-arrest physical lineup. M.D.'s observation
 of the person she later learned had robbed the bank was also
 brief, and although M.D. claimed to have identified Olivas at the
 post-arrest physical lineup, she informed the police at that time
 that she was unable to select anyone as the suspect.
3
 
The Circuit Court determined that the witnesses' post­
3We note that the record is silent on whether M.D. had been
 
shown a pre-arrest photospread, and thus, the Circuit Court erred
in finding that M.D. was not able to identify the male who
committed the robbery in a photospread. Whether or not M.D. was
 able to identify the male who committed the robbery in a pre­arrest photospread is not material to our analysis. Accordingly,
the Circuit Court's erroneous finding on this point was harmless
error.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
arrest lineup identifications unduly influenced their in-court 
identifications and that the State had failed to prove that the in-court identifications were based on a source independent of Olivas's illegal arrest and post-arrest lineup identifications. See United States v. Crews, 445 U.S. 463, 472-73 (1980). We conclude that the State failed to meet its burden of proving that the witnesses' in-court identifications were not the tainted fruit of Olivas's illegal arrest -- that is, the State failed to show that the in-court identifications were obtained by other means sufficiently distinguishable to be purged of the taint of the illegal arrest. See Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471, 
487-88 (1963); Fukusaku, 85 Hawai
'i at 475, 946 P.2d at 45. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in suppressing the four witnesses' in-court identifications. 
II. 
We affirm the Order Suppressing Identifications. DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, September 30, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Brandon H. Ito 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge 
Cynthia A. Kagiwadafor Defendant-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4
 