NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-10-0000148
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIf I 
HIWALANI P S HOLDINGS, LLC and ROBERT N. FABRIQUE,
Plaintiffs-Appellants, v.
WELLS FARGO BANK, N.A., AS TRUSTEE FOR OPTION
ONE MORTGAGE LOAN TRUST 2007-6 ASSET-BACKED 
CERTIFICATES SERIES 2007-6, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-1847)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiffs-Appellants Hiwalani PS Holdings, LLC
 
(Holdings) and Robert N. Fabrique (Fabrique) (collectively,
 
Plaintiffs) appeal from the (1) Final Judgment filed on October
 
1
18, 2010 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit
court) and (2) "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part
 
Defendant Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. (Bank), as Trustee for Option
 
One Mortgage Loan Trust 2007-6 Asset-Backed Certificates, Series
 
2007'6 [sic] Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs," (Order re:
 
Attorneys' Fees and Costs) filed on December 27, 2010 in the
 
circuit court. The circuit court entered Final Judgment pursuant
 
to its "Order (1) Denying Plaintiffs' Motion for Summary
 
Judgment, filed September 3, 2010; and (2) Granting [Bank's]
 
Motion for Summary Judgment, filed September 7, 2010" (Order). 
1
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Final Judgment resolved all claims in favor of Bank and
 
against Plaintiffs.
 
On appeal, Plaintiffs contend the circuit court erred
 
when it granted Bank's Motion for Summary Judgment. Plaintiffs
 
also contend the circuit court erred when it granted Bank's
 
Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
By Assignment of Mortgage recorded on March 20, 2009, 
Bank became holder of Borrower's Mortgage recorded in the State 
of Hawaif i Bureau of Conveyances on April 25, 2007 for property 
at 116 Hiwalani Loop, Pukalani, Hawaif i, identified by Tax Map 
Key No. 2-3-054-065 (Property). In 2009, Borrower was in default 
on her Mortgage, having failed to make her monthly payments. 
American Home Mortgage Servicing, Inc. (AHMSI), the Mortgage 
servicer, communicated with Borrower regarding loan modification 
and, according to Bank, it appears Borrower was given two 
opportunities to reinstate the Mortgage before the foreclosure 
sale. Bank acknowledged in its interrogatories that "it does not 
appear the default was cured by the day of the Sale," but further 
stated "it is unclear whether the Mortgage was in default on the 
day of the Sale." 
Bank published a notice in a newspaper of general 
circulation in the State of Hawaif i informing the public of 
Bank's intent to foreclose on the Property at a public auction on 
2
June 5, 2009, pursuant to its power of sale  under the Mortgage
2
 The mortgage provided in pertinent part:
 
21. Acceleration; Remedies. If any installment under the
Note or notes secured hereby is not paid when due, or if Borrower
should be in default under any provision of this Security
Instrument, or if Borrower is in default under any other mortgage
or other instrument secured by the Property, all sums secured by
this Security Instrument and accrued interest thereon shall at
once become due and payable at the option of Lender without prior
notice, except as otherwise required by applicable law, and
regardless of any prior forbearance. In such event, Lender, at
its option, and subject to applicable law, may then or thereafter
invoke the power of sale and/or any other remedies or take my
other actions permitted by applicable law. Lender will collect
 all expenses incurred in pursuing the remedies described in this
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 667-5 through ยง 667-10
 
(2009). On May 16, 2009, Borrower wrote a letter to AHMSI
 
explaining why she had become delinquent on her Mortgage payments
 
and requesting a loan modification. On May 19, 2009, AHMSI
 
replied to Borrower, noting it had received a workout package
 
regarding her Mortgage loan and informing Borrower it would take
 
up to fourteen days from May 19, 2009 "to complete the initial
 
review and analysis," after which a negotiator would contact
 
Borrower to discuss available options. AHMSI advised Borrower
 
that its review did not relieve Borrower of her obligation to
 
maintain payments on her Mortgage nor did the review "suspend or
 
forestall the foreclosure process in any way during the review
 
and consideration period." Id. On June 3, 2009, Borrower faxed
 
documentation to AHMSI verifying her ex-husband's new employment
 and salary. At 4:51 p.m. on June 4, 2009, AHMSI placed
 
Borrower's "file on hold" awaiting approval of a "Loss Mitigation
 
Workout." At 5:49 p.m., AHMSI "[received] additional income
 
stopped [foreclosure]." At 7:21 p.m., LPS Default Solutions
 
postponed the sale, giving the reason for postponement as "Loss
 
Mitigation." At 7:22 p.m., LPS Default Solutions approved the
 
hold for a "Loss Mitigation Workout."
 
Despite the approval to postpone the foreclosure, the
 
foreclosure auction was held the next day, June 5, 2009. On June
 
23, 2009, apparently unaware of the auction and sale, AHMSI
 
"extended [foreclosure] hold to 08/30/09." On June 30, 2009,
 
AHMSI noted that Borrower "now has sufficient income to get back
 
on track just needs help on deli[n]quency and bringing loan
 
current[.]" Id.
 
At the June 5, 2009 auction, Fabrique placed the
 
winning bid and wrote two checks for a total of $30,000,
 
representing "at least 10% of the highest successful bid price"
 
of $232,000. Fabrique was given a receipt documenting this
 
Paragraph 21, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys'
fees and costs of title evidence.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
transaction. Thereafter, Fabrique assigned his rights to
 
purchase the Property to Holdings. Soon after, Bank informed
 
Fabrique of its intent to cancel the sale and returned Fabrique's
 
checks, which were accepted "under protest." Bank explained in
 
its interrogatories that it did not close the sale with
 
Plaintiffs because 
its agents were in the process of negotiating a loan
modification with Borrower immediately prior to the Sale.
[Bank] notified Routh Crabtree Olsen to postpone the auction
prior to the Sale. Due to a miscommunication, Routh
Crabtree Olsen did not receive the message and the Sale went
forward on June 5, 2009. Plaintiff Fabrique was
subsequently advised that the Sale was being cancelled and
his deposit was promptly returned with interest.
 
Bank refused to go through with the sale of the Property.
 
On August 10, 2009, Plaintiffs filed their Complaint in
 
circuit court, seeking specific performance, or in the
 
alternative, breach of contract damages. The parties
 
subsequently stipulated and agreed to dismiss the specific
 
performance claim on October 4, 2010.
 
On September 3, 2010, Plaintiffs moved for summary
 
judgment on their damages claim, arguing that when Bank failed to
 
close the sale, it breached the valid contract that was formed at
 
the public auction. On September 7, 2010, Bank filed its Motion
 
for Summary Judgment, arguing the sale was invalid because
 
Borrower had cured the default prior to the auction and
 
therefore, any alleged contract was void. 
On October 18, 2010, the circuit court entered its
 
Order and Final Judgment in favor of Bank. On November 1, 2010,
 
Bank filed a Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs. On November
 
8, 2010, Plaintiffs filed a notice of appeal from the Final
 
Judgment. On December 27, 2010, the circuit court entered its
 
"Order re: Attorneys' Fees and Costs" in favor of Bank. On
 
January 3, 2011, Plaintiffs filed a notice of appeal from the
 
Order re: Attorneys' Fees and Costs. On January 19, 2011,
 
Plaintiffs filed an amended notice of appeal to reflect their
 
intent to appeal from both the Final Judgment and the Order re:
 
Attorneys' Fees and Costs.
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
On appeal, the grant or denial of summary judgment is
reviewed de novo. See State ex rel. Anzai v. City and 
County of Honolulu, 99 Hawaif i 508, [515], 57 P.3d 433,
[440] (2002); Bitney v. Honolulu Police Dep't, 96 Hawaif i 
243, 250, 30 P.3d 257, 264 (2001). 
[S]ummary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and
admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if
any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. A fact is material if
 proof of that fact would have the effect of
establishing or refuting one of the essential elements
of a cause of action or defense asserted by the
parties. The evidence must be viewed in the light
most favorable to the non-moving party. In other
 words, we must view all of the evidence and inferences
drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the
party opposing the motion.
 
Kahale v. City and County of Honolulu, 104 Hawaif i 341, 344,
90 P.3d 233, 236 (2004) (citation omitted). 
Nuuanu Valley Ass'n v. City & Cnty. of Honolulu, 119 Hawaif i 90, 
96, 194 P.3d 531, 537 (2008). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
The appellate court reviews "the circuit court's grant 
or denial of summary judgment de novo. Under the de novo 
standard, [the appellate court examines] the facts and answer[s] 
the question without being required to give any weight to the 
circuit court's answer to it." Hawaii Ventures, LLC, v. Otaka, 
Inc., 114 Hawaif i 438, 457, 164 P.3d 696, 715 (2007) (internal 
quotation marks, citations, and brackets omitted). 
Here, Plaintiffs contend the circuit court erred when
 
it granted summary judgment to Bank. Plaintiffs argue that the
 
public auction was a legitimate auction, Fabrique was the
 
successful high bidder, and when Bank accepted Fabrique's down
 
payment of $30,000, Bank and Fabrique had entered into a legally
 
binding contract.
 
On the other hand, Bank asserts it was entitled to
 
summary judgment because AHMSI and Borrower entered into a pre-
auction agreement to modify the loan, effectively curing the
 
underlying default and making any auction a "legal nullity" and
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
any contract deriving from the auction "void and unenforceable"
 
because the foreclosure sale was invalid pursuant to HRS ยง 667-5. 
HRS 667-5 provides for the foreclosure process where a 
"power of sale is contained in a mortgage." The statute 
"specifically requires breach of a condition of the mortgage as a 
condition precedent to foreclosure." Lee v. HSBC Bank USA, 121 
Hawaifi 287, 290, 218 P.3d 775, 778 (2009). Borrower's Mortgage 
provided that "[i]f any installment . . . is not paid when due, 
. . . all sums . . . shall at once become due and payable at the 
option of the Lender[.]" Furthermore, the "[l]ender, at its 
option, and subject to applicable law, may then or thereafter 
invoke the power of sale and/or any other remedies[.]" 
Borrower's Mortgage empowered the Bank to invoke the power of 
sale in the event of a breach of the contract, such as failing to 
make the Mortgage payments. 
Pursuant to the Borrower's Mortgage, when Bank invoked
 
its power of sale and published the "Notice of [Banks'] Intention
 
to Foreclose Under Power of Sale" (Notice of Sale) on Borrower's
 
Property, Bank was required to "sell the Property at the time and
 
place and under the terms specified in the notice of sale." The
 
terms of the sale provided in the Notice of Sale included "[a]t
 
the close of the auction, Purchaser shall pay at least 10% of the
 
highest successful bid price ("Bid") in cash, or by cashier's or
 
certified check[.]" Another term was "[t]he property shall be
 
conveyed by Mortgagee by mortgagee's quitclaim conveyance,
 
provided by Mortgagee, within 30 days after the auction," as long
 
as the Purchaser met his obligations as outlined in the Notice of
 
Sale. Id. The Mortgagee reserved the right to retain the 10%
 
down payment as liquidation damages should there be "any delay in
 performance by Purchaser which prevents the closing from
 
occurring within 30 days after the auction." Id. Finally, "[b]y
 
submitting the Bid, Purchaser acknowledges reading the terms of
 conditions set forth in this notice and agrees to be bound
 
thereby[.]" Id. 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
It is undisputed that Borrower had defaulted on her
 
loan. Bank argues that "the pre-Auction agreement to modify the
 
loan and postpone the sale of the Property, while not a per se
 
'cure', obviated the Borrower's underlying default[,]"
 
effectively curing the default and voiding the sale. Bank points
 
to a series of entries made in AHMSI's communication tracking
 
system on the eve of the sale to argue that where AHMSI's notes
 
indicated a hold on the foreclosure had been approved, a pre-
auction agreement had been reached.
 
Bank relies on Lee to support its argument that the 
auction was erroneously conducted and the sale rightfully voided. 
Lee is inapposite to the instant case. In Lee, the defaulting 
borrowers paid the delinquent amount on their loan before the 
sale, thereby curing their default. Lee, 121 Hawaif i at 290, 218 
P.3d at 778. The foreclosure counsel was advised to halt the 
foreclosure sale, but the sale went forward anyway. Id. Because 
the borrowers in Lee were no longer in default, they were no 
longer in breach of the mortgage, and defendant no longer had the 
power of sale pursuant to the mortgage and HRS ยง 667-5. Lee, 121 
Hawaifi at 291, 218 P.3d at 779. Therefore, the foreclosure sale 
was invalid. Id. 
That is not the case before us. Here, Bank
 
acknowledged in its interrogatories that "it does not appear the
 
default was cured by the day of the sale." Bank also states that
 
"it is unclear whether the Mortgage was in default on the day of
 
the Sale," but points to nothing other than the alleged pre-
auction agreement to support the perceived lack of clarity. Id.
 
Bank fails to document any pre-auction agreement that
 
clearly demonstrates Borrower's default had been cured prior to
 
the auction. There are what appear to be internal records by LPS
 
Default Solutions documenting the intent to place the foreclosure
 
on hold and work out a loss mitigation, but there is no
 
indication that a pre-auction agreement was made with Borrower or
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI fI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that she was even aware her case was on hold. Furthermore, there
 
is no documentation that Borrower was not in default on the day
 
of the auction and, in fact, documentation exists that on June
 
30, 2009, Borrower was still in default because AHMSI notes
 
Borrower "just needs help on deli[n]quency and bringing loan
 
current[.]"
 
Whether there was a pre-auction agreement that cured
 
Borrower's default and caused the subsequent auction to be
 
invalid is a genuine issue of material fact that "would have the
 
effect of establishing or refuting" whether the requirement was
 
met that a borrower be in default before a foreclosure sale takes
 
place. Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the
 
non-moving party on this issue, we conclude summary judgment
 
should not have been granted. 
IV. CONCLUSION
 
The (1) Final Judgment filed on October 18, 2010 and
 
(2) "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendant Wells
 
Fargo Bank, N.S. (Bank), as Trustee for Option One Mortgage Loan
 
Trust 2007-6 Asset-Backed Certificates, Series 2007'6 [sic]
 
Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs" filed on December 27, 2010
 
in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit are vacated and
 
remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaif i, February 23, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Steven K.S. Chung
Chanelle M.C. Fujimotofor Plaintiffs-Appellants Presiding Judge 
Paul Alston J.Blaine Rogers(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)for Defendant-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
8
 