NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000342
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
JAMAL D. MANK, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 15-1-0686)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Jamal D. Mank (Mank) by felony information
 
with unauthorized possession of confidential personal information
 (UPCPI), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708­839.55 (2014).
1 The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
 
1HRS § 708-839.55 provides, in relevant part:
 
(1)
 A person commits the offense of unauthorized possession
of confidential personal information if that person intentionally
or knowingly possesses, without authorization, any confidential
personal information of another in any form, including but not
limited to mail, physical documents, identification cards, or
information stored in digital form.
 
HRS § 708-800 defines the term "confidential personal information" as follows:
 
"Confidential personal information" means information in
which an individual has a significant privacy interest, including
but not limited to a driver's license number, a social security
number, an identifying number of a depository account, a bank
account number, a password or other information that is used for
accessing information, or any other name, number, or code that is
used, alone or in conjunction with other information, to confirm
the identity of a person.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2
Court) dismissed the felony information with prejudice on the
grounds that HRS § 708-839.55 and the HRS § 708-800 definition of
 
"confidential personal information" incorporated into HRS § 708­839.55 (collectively, the UPCPI statutes) are unconstitutionally
 vague and overbroad. The Circuit Court memorialized its decision
 in its "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting
 Defendant's Second Motion to Dismiss Felony Information" (Order
 Dismissing Felony Information) filed on March 22, 2016.
 
On appeal, the State argues that the Circuit Court 
erred in concluding that the UPCPI statutes are unconstitutionally vague and unconstitutionally overbroad. 
Based 
on the Hawai 'i Supreme Court's recent decision in State v. 
Pacquing, ___ Hawai 'i ___, ___ P.3d ___, SCAP-14-0001205, 2016 WL 
7176766 (Hawai 'i Dec. 9, 2016), we vacate the Order Dismissing 
Felony Information and remand for further proceedings. 
I.
 
The record contains the following information. After
 
shopping at Costco on April 30, 2015, the complaining witness
 (CW) could not find her purse, which she had placed in her
 shopping cart while at Costco. The purse contained two credit
 cards belonging to the CW: a Nordstrom Visa credit card and a
 Navy Federal Credit Union Visa credit card. Shortly after losing
 her purse, the CW was contacted by Nordstrom's credit card fraud
 department about suspicious charges on her credit card. On May
 1, 2015, the CW filed a theft report with the police regarding
 the theft of her purse and its contents, including the two credit
 cards. 
On May 2, 2015, Mank was arrested after fleeing the
 
scene of a traffic accident. The CW's missing credit cards were
 found in Mank's possession, in his back right pants pocket. The
 police contacted the CW, who verified her ownership of the credit
 cards in Mank's possession by her name and the credit card
 numbers. A detective showed the CW a picture of Mank. The CW
 
2The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stated that she did not know Mank and that she did not give Mank
 
permission to be in possession of her credit cards. 
On May 5, 2015, the State filed a felony information
 
charging Mank with unauthorized possession of the CW's
 confidential personal information. Mank initially pleaded guilty
 to this charge, stating as a factual basis that he "knowingly
 possessed [the CW's] credit cards without authorization."
 However, the Circuit Court permitted Mank to withdraw his guilty
 plea and to file a second motion to dismiss the charge on the
 grounds that the UPCPI statutes were unconstitutionally vague and
 overbroad. The Circuit Court granted Mank's second motion to
 dismiss and dismissed the felony information with prejudice.
 
II.
 
The State's challenge to the Circuit Court's rulings 
that the UPCPI statutes are unconstitutionally vague and
 overbroad is controlled by the supreme court's decision in
 Pacquing. 
A.
 
In Pacquing the supreme court held that "the UPCPI
 
statues are not facially and unconstitutionally overbroad." 
Pacquing, 2016 WL 7176766, at *10. We therefore reject the
 Circuit Court's conclusion that the UPCPI statutes are
 unconstitutionally overbroad.
 
B.
 
The supreme court concluded that the UPCPI statutes
 
were unconstitutionally vague as applied to certain aspects of
 Pacquing's conduct, but were not unconstitutionally vague as
 applied to other aspects of Pacquing's conduct. Id. at *14. The
 
supreme court held that the UPCPI statutes were not
 unconstitutionally vague as applied to Pacquing's conduct of
 possessing the last four digits of the complainant's social
 security number and the complainant's driver's license number. 
Id. The supreme court reasoned that these items of information
 
were among the specific examples contained in the definition of
 confidential personal information, and therefore, the UPCPI
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
statutes were not vague as applied to the possession of these
 
items. Id. 
The supreme court further concluded that the portions
 
of the UPCPI statues that were unconstitutionally vague could be
 excised in a manner that would render the remaining portions
 constitutional. Id. at *15-17. To eliminate the
 
unconstitutional aspects of the UPCPI statute, the supreme court
 excised the HRS § 708-800 definition of "confidential personal
 information" as follows:
 
"Confidential personal information" means
information in which an individual has a
 significant privacy interest, including but not
limited to a driver's license number, a social
security number, an identifying number of a
depository account, [or] a bank account number, a
password or other information that is used for
accessing information, or any other name, number,
or code that is used, alone or in conjunction with
other information, to confirm the identity of a
person.
 
Id. at *16.
 
The supreme court concluded that "[a]fter the deletion
 
of the unconstitutional portions of HRS § 708-800's definition of
 
'confidential personal information,' its meaning would be
 circumscribed to the enumerated classes of information preceded
 by 'including' and information similar to those already
 enumerated." Id. The supreme court explained that "[t]his means
 
that a non-enumerated item of 'information in which an individual
 has a significant privacy interest' would qualify as
 'confidential personal information' only if that non-enumerated
 item is similar in nature and character to those already
 enumerated in HRS § 708-800." Id. The supreme court held that
 
after the unconstitutional portions of the definition of
 "confidential personal information" were excised, the remaining
 portions of the UPCPI statutes were constitutional. Id. at *16­
17.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The supreme court concluded that the remaining portions
 
of the UPCPI statutes "[i]mportantly . . . still carr[y] out the
 
intent of the legislature." Id. at *17. The supreme court
 
explained that the legislature's clear intent in enacting the
 UPCPI statutes was "to address and deter identity theft by
 targeting and criminalizing conduct that precedes identity theft
 -- the possession of confidential personal information." Id. 
The supreme court concluded that the remaining UPCPI statutes, as
 excised, "still effectuate[]" this legislative intent "because
 intentional or knowing possession, without authorization, of a
 driver's license number, a social security number, an identifying
 number of a depository account, a bank account number, or other
 information similar in nature and character to those statutorily
 enumerated would still be a criminal offense." Id. The supreme
 
court reasoned that the Legislature would have preferred the
 UPCPI statutes, as excised, to no statute at all because it
 enacted the UPCPI statutes out of "concern that law enforcement
 did not possess adequate legal tools to 'curb the rise in
 identity theft-related crimes.'" Id. (quoting Conf. Comm. Rep.
 
No. 111, in 2006 Senate Journal, at 957). The supreme court
 noted that the UPCPI statutes, as excised, provided law
 enforcement with a legal tool it "could use to deter identity
 theft and precursors to identity theft[.]" Id. 
C.
 
HRS § 708-839.55 prohibits the intentional or knowing
 
possession, "without authorization," of "the confidential
 personal information of another[.]" As noted by the supreme
 court in Pacquing, the Legislature enacted the UPCPI statutes to
 deter identity theft by targeting and criminalizing the
 intentional or knowing possession, without authorization, of
 certain forms of confidential personal information that precedes
 and is a precursor to the commission of identity theft-related
 crimes. Id. at 17; see S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2508, in 2006
 
Senate Journal, at 1248-49. Prior to the enactment of the UPCPI
 statutes, law enforcement "found it difficult to curb the rise in
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
identity theft related crimes" because under existing law,
 
"identity thieves in possession of personal information who have
 not yet caused a monetary loss to the victim [could not] be
 prosecuted for crimes other than petty misdemeanor thefts." S.
 Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 2508, in 2006 Senate Journal, at 1249. The
 Legislature's intent in enacting the UPCPI statutes was to close
 this enforcement loophole. Id. 
For purposes of the UPCPI statutes, we conclude that
 
the unauthorized possession of another individual's credit card
 number constitutes the unauthorized possession of information
 that is similar in nature and character to a bank account number
 or the identifying number of a depository account. Like a bank
 account number or the identifying number of a depository account,
 a credit card number provides access to an individual's financial
 resources and personal transactions. Each of these numbers
 typically is unique, is linked to a particular individual, is
 used for identification purposes, is necessary to obtain funds
 relating to the underlying account, and is used to distinguish
 and separate the transactions of the individual who owns the
 account from transactions engaged in by others. 
The definition of "confidential personal information,"
 
as excised in Pacquing, identifies a bank account number and an
 identifying number of a depository account as among the items of
 information in which an individual has a significant privacy
 interest. We conclude that just as an individual has a
 significant privacy interest in protecting against the
 unauthorized possession of his or her bank account or depository
 account number, an individual also has a significant privacy
 interest in protecting against the unauthorized possession of his
 or her credit card number. In other words, the nature and
 character of an individual's privacy interest that is associated
 with these three items of information is very similar. 
As noted, each of the numbers provides access to an
 
individual's financial resources and personal transactions. 
While individuals may disclose these numbers where necessary to
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
engage in transactions that the underlying accounts were intended
 
to facilitate, they typically guard against the unnecessary or
 unauthorized disclosure of the numbers. This is because the
 unauthorized possession of these numbers by third-parties would
 expose the individuals to identity theft-related crimes and
 financial loss. For example, a credit card holder may disclose
 his or her credit card number to third-parties where necessary to
 purchase goods or services. The same is also true of a bank
 account or depository account number, which appears on checks
 written on the account, which a bank or depository account holder
 may disclose to third-parties to facilitate authorized purchases
 or deposits. However, individuals do not generally disclose
 their credit card numbers, bank account numbers, or depository
 account numbers to strangers, or allow the numbers to be
 possessed or used without permission or authorization. The
 limited disclosure of these numbers in situations authorized by
 the account owners does not diminish the significant privacy
 interest that individuals have in these numbers.
 
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that a credit card
 
number is an item of information that is similar in nature and
 character to a bank account number and an identifying number of a
 depository account, and that a credit card number falls within
 the definition of "confidential personal information," as excised
 in Pacquing. Our conclusion is consistent with the purpose of
 the UPCPI statues to deter identity theft by targeting and
 criminalizing the unauthorized possession of confidential
 personal information that is a precursor to the commission of
 identity theft-related crimes. Clearly, the unauthorized use of
 someone else's credit card is a common form of identity theft,
 and Mank's conduct of possessing the CW's credit cards without
 authorization is at the core of the types of conduct the UPCPI
 statues were intended to prohibit. See S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No.
 
2508, in 2006 Senate Journal, at 1248-49; Hawaii Anti–Phishing
 Task Force, Report on Electronic Commerce–Based Crimes, at 3-5
 (2006) (stating that "[c]redit card fraud was the most prevalent
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
underlying identity theft crime" reported by Hawai 'i residents to 
the Federal Trade Commission in 2004). Accordingly, we hold that 
the UPCPI statutes, as excised in Pacquing, are not unconstitutionally vague as applied to Mank's conduct of intentionally or knowingly, without authorization, possessing the CW's credit cards, and that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing the felony information on the ground of the unconstitutional vagueness of the UPCPI statutes. 
III.
 
We vacate the Order Dismissing Felony Information and
 
remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this
 Summary Disposition Order.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 31, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Brian R. Vincent 
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge 
James S. Tabe Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8
 