 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0003941
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
TOBY J. STANGEL, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-0803)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Toby J. Stangel (Stangel) appeals
 
from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's (Circuit Court)
 
August 14, 2013 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence.1
 
On June 3, 2011, beginning at about 12:30 a.m., Stangel
 
fired several shots at motorists stopped at the intersection of
 Kapiolani Boulevard and Waialae Avenue. Stangel shot at Michael
 Pagdilao three times. Stangel shot and killed Tammy Nguyen in
 front of her teenaged daughter, Cindy Nguyen, discharging nine
 shots. Stangel drove onto the H-1 Freeway in a westbound
 direction and, near the Likelike offramp, shot at Amie Lou
 Ascuncion three times, hitting her once in the back. Stangel
 shot Samson Naupoto, who attempted to help Amie Lou Ascuncion,
 once in the leg. Proceeding further west on the Moanalua Freeway
 by the H-1 off-ramp, Stangel fired four or five shots at HPD
 Officers Robertson and Ogasawara, who were supporting a traffic
 stop. Stangel was eventually apprehended near the Kaamilo Street
 overpass on the H-1 Freeway.
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
On June 8, 2011, the State charged Stangel via
 
indictment as follows:
 
•	 Cts 1-2: Attempted Murder in the First Degree, in
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 705-500,
707-701(1)(b), and 706-656;
 
•	 Ct 3: Attempted Murder in the First Degree in
violation of HRS §§ 705-500, 707-701(1)(a), and 706­656;
 
•	 Ct 4: Murder in the Second Degree, in violation of HRS
§§ 707-701.5 and 706-656;
 
•	 Cts 5-8: Attempted Murder in the Second Degree, in
violation of HRS §§ 705-500, 707-701.5, and 706-656;
 
•	 Cts 9-13: Carrying or Use of Firearm in the Commission
of a Separate Felony, in violation of HRS § 134-21;
 
•	 Ct 14: Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver, in violation
of HRS § 134-25;
 
•	 Ct 15: Possession of Prohibited Detachable Ammunition
 Magazine, in violation of HRS § 134-8(c) and (d);
 
•	 Ct 16: Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Second
Degree, in violation of HRS § 712-1242(1)(b)(i);
 
•	 Ct 17: Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphenalia, in violation
of HRS § 329-43.5(a);
 
•	 Ct 18: Promoting a Harmful Drug in the Fourth Degree,
in violation of HRS § 712-1246.5;
 
•	 Ct 19: Place to Keep Ammunition, in violation of HRS
§ 134-27; and
 
•	 Ct 20: Promoting a Detrimental Drug in the Third
Degree, in violation of HRS § 712-1249.
 
Expert Testimony Regarding Capacity.
 
On January 20, 2012, forensic psychiatrist
 
Dr. Marvin W. Acklin (Dr. Acklin) submitted a written report to
 
the defense based upon his independent mental examination of
 Stangel. Dr. Acklin reported in relevant part
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
At the time of the criminal offenses it is my opinion that
Mr. Stangel's cognitive and volitional capacities were
substantially impaired as a result of substance-induced
psychotic disorder with delusions and polysubstance
intoxication. The substance intoxication diagnoses are
validated by positive drug screens obtained in the aftermath
of the shootings. There is strong support from collaterals
that Mr. Stangel was experiencing a substance-induced
psychotic disorder with paranoid delusions for many months
and perhaps years before the shooting incidents, associated
with active severe polysubstance abuse and dependence.
 
Dr. Acklin's report concluded that "[Stangel's] loss of self-
control during the shooting appears to be the combined result of
 psychosis and drug intoxication."
 
On January 25, 2012, counsel for Stangel moved for an
 
HRS § 704-404 Examination, which was granted by the Circuit
 Court. All three examiners reported that they believed Stangel
 was fit to proceed to trial and his cognitive or volitional
 capacities were not substantially impaired at the time of the
 alleged offenses. On April 9, 2012, the Circuit Court at the
 hearing found that Stangel was fit to proceed.
 
On April 12, 2013, the State filed a Motion in Limine
 
seeking an order precluding Stangel from calling Dr. Acklin "as a
 witness on the issue of Insanity [sic] until [Stangel] can
 establish that his testimony is relevant." At the hearing on the
 motion, with regard to the issue of penal responsibility, the
 Circuit Court ruled that "Dr. Acklin's testimony is completely
 irrelevant, in total, on the issue of a 704 defense[.]" With
 regard to the issue of pathological intoxication, the Circuit
 Court explained that 
In order for Dr. Acklin to be qualified to even opine on
this issue, it seems, to me, he would have to know, number
one, exactly how much -- the amount of the various drugs Mr.
Stangel took on that night because the amount of the
intoxicant is an element. And then given the amount of the
intoxicant, Dr. Acklin would have to be able to testify
. . . as to what the, for lack of a better word, "normal" or
"usual effect" of that much cocaine, marijuana -- whatever
it is -- has on a so-called normal, usual person, and then
would also have to opine that it was gross -- that Mr.
Stangel's reaction to the self -- to the drugs he
voluntarily took was somehow grossly excessive to the amount
that he took. And it doesn't end there. It's gotta be the
result of a physical abnormality of the defendant.
 
Dr. Acklin, in his report, gives almost a full page of his
qualifications. I don't see medical doctor there anywhere.
He's a clinical psychologist. There is no way on God's
green earth Dr. Acklin is qualified to opine on pathological
intoxication, period. So I think he would be precluded from
rendering an opinion on that, also.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court granted the State's Motion in Limine and
 
excluded all of Dr. Acklin's expert testimony.
 
On May 3, 2013, the Circuit Court apparently agreed to
 
hold a hearing to reconsider its decision granting the State's
 Motion in Limine to preclude Dr. Acklin from testifying. 
Regarding Dr. Acklin's expert testimony on the issue of penal
 responsibility, the Circuit Court questioned Dr. Acklin at length
 in order to make sure that "the record's real clear on this[.]"
 
Q: Doctor, is it your opinion, which is another way of
saying can you opine, that the defendant was suffering from
a mental disease, disorder or defect prior to any voluntary
substance abuse on his part, at any time in his life?
 
A: It would be my opinion that he did not.
 
Q: Okay. All right. So it follows from your opinion then
that any mental disease, disorder or defect that the
defendant has suffered in his life was due to substance
 abuse.
 
A: Yes, sir. That would be my opinion. I believe there's
 
good facts to support that.
 Q: And the early substance abuse, for example, on page 12
of your report, you detail some of the things the father
told you, things like when he was about 13, he started doing
drugs across the street. He never lied about it. He wanted
 me to eat hallucinogenic mushrooms with him. This is
 Waialua High, in the ninth grade. He's hanging around with
the wrong crowd. He was hanging around with, quote, all the
wrong kids. Drugs, rebellions, mushrooms, LSD, and ice.
They are aware he was also doing IV heroin. This is when
 he's 13 and 14 years old, according to the father, right?
 
A: Yes, sir. That's my understanding too.
 
Q: And on those occasions it was voluntary substance abuse,
was it not? He didn't have this settled insanity at the
time?
 
A: That's correct. I think that it would be fair to say
that at the very beginning of his career, his very initial
acts were voluntary. In other words, they were a choice -­
Q: Right.
 
A: -- that he made when he was 12 or 13 years of age.
 
. . . . 
Q: . . . Voluntary substance abuse, in some manner, shape
or form, either from when he's 13, 14, 15, or on the night
in question, or both, was at least a substantial factor in
his penal irresponsibility, correct?
 
A: Yes, sir.
 
. . . .
 Q: I understand. And you do -- and I understand totally
that you distinguish and differentiate between the
intoxication which induced the irresponsibility on the night
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in question, from the settled insanity, for lack of a better
way of putting it, that he may have been suffering years
prior to the incident in question, right?
 
A: Yes, sir.
 
The Circuit Court concluded that "any testimony [Dr. Acklin]
 
would have would be, given the law of this jurisdiction, simply
 irrelevant. And certainly would be totally confusing and
 misleading to the jury."
 
Regarding Dr. Acklin's expert testimony on the issue of
 
pathological intoxication, Dr. Acklin proffered testimony that
 Stangel suffered from "sensitization," a physical abnormality. 
According to Dr. Acklin, "sensitization" means "an individual
 whose brain has been sensitized to crystal methamphetamine can,
 months or years after abstinence, take a dose . . . an ordinary
 person would take and not become psychotic, and actually have
 . . . a full-blown resurgence of psychotic symptoms." As with
 the issue of penal responsibility, the Circuit Court questioned
 Dr. Acklin at length in order to clarify his testimony on
 pathological intoxication.
 
Q: . . . Now, let me ask you some other questions, just so
we clear up this pathological intoxication issue, because
that was one of the early offers of proof on Mr. Schum's
part. And I know you may very well disagree with the
statutory definitions, et cetera. But if you could just
answer these questions.
 
A: Yes, sir.
 
Q: Do you know exactly what substances the defendant
ingested prior to the incidents in question?
 A: I have the report that he provided to me, supported by
some drug testing that was done at the time of his arrest.
So I believe I have a reasonably good understanding. Yes,
sir.
 
Q: Do you know in exactly what amounts, for each drug, he
ingested that night?
 A: No, sir. No, sir.
 
Q: Do you know what are the usual effects, on an otherwise
normal person, of each substance, in the specific amount he
ingested?
 
A: Yes, sir. I mean, I have had years of experience of
working with individuals in all forms of drug intoxication
and dependency states.
 
. . . .
 Q: . . . Let's assume that there were some grossly
excessive effects. Okay. What is the physical or bodily
abnormality suffered by the defendant which caused them?
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
A: It's called sensitization.
 
Q: [The abnormality] was caused by the already maybe years
long use of substances, or abuse of substances, correct?
 
A: That's correct. The usage, the continuous or chronic
usage, actually has the opposite effect of the opiates. It
 
is called sensitization. And sensitization is a situation
 where actually smaller and smaller amounts of drug
ingestion, or amount ingested, will have similar effects.
For example, an individual whose brain has been sensitized
to crystal methamphetamine can, months or years after
abstinence, take a dose that would -- an ordinary person
would take and not become psychotic, and actually have a
resurgence of -- a full-blown resurgence of psychotic
symptoms.
 
Q: And, again, do you know exactly what amounts of what
drugs, of exactly what drugs, he took that night?
 A: No, sir.
 
The Circuit Court concluded that
 
at very least, the doctor would have to know exactly what
amounts, of specifically what drugs, Mr. Stangel had taken
that night. That's a predicate to whether the reaction
would be grossly excessive in degree, et cetera. And
 Dr. Acklin, quite frankly and candidly, said he doesn't
know. And so the -- some of the essential predicates for
an opinion on pathological intoxication are missing.
 
The Circuit Court denied Stangel's Motion for
 
Reconsideration.
 
Motion to Suppress Stangel's Pre-Miranda Statement.

 
On February 27, 2013, Stangel filed a Motion to
 
Suppress Statements in order to suppress and exclude from use at
 
trial "any and all statements obtained from a warrantless seizure
 and custodial interrogation of [Stangel.]" The motion
 specifically sought to suppress a statement he made on June 4,
 2011 while in custody at the Hawai
'i Police Department main 
station. Stangel argued that the statement (1) was not made
 pursuant to a valid Miranda waiver because it was not knowingly,
 intelligently, and voluntarily made; (2) was the product of
 duress or coercion; and (3) stemmed from an illegal pre-interview
 that took place before he was Mirandized. On April 3, 2013, the
 Circuit Court granted Stangel's Motion to Suppress Statements.
Jury Instructions

 
On May 14, 2013, the Circuit Court instructed the jury. 
Regarding Count 4, Murder in the Second Degree, the Circuit Court
 instructed the jury, in relevant part, that
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
If you find that the prosecution has proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that the defendant committed the offense of
 
Murder in the Second Degree or the included offense of
Reckless Manslaughter in Count 4, then you must also answer
the following question on a special interrogatory form which
will be provided to you.
 
"Did the defendant have in his possession or threaten
its use or use a semi-automatic firearm whether loaded or
 not and whether operable or not while engaged in the
commission of Murder in the Second Degree or Reckless
Manslaughter in Count 4?" Your answer must be unanimous. If
 you are unable to come to a unanimous answer, then you must
not check off either "Yes" or "No" on the interrogatory
form.
 
Identical language appeared on the actual forms provided to the
 
jury. The Circuit Court gave identical instructions for Counts 5­8.
 
Regarding Count 9, Carrying or Use of Firearm in the
 
Commission of a Separate Felony, the Circuit Court instructed the
 jury, in relevant part, that
 
A person commits the offense of Carrying or Use of a Firearm
While Engaged in the Commission of a Separate Felony if he
knowingly carries on his person, knowingly has within his
immediate control, intentionally uses, or intentionally
threatens to use a firearm while engaged in the commission
of a separate felony whether the firearm was loaded or not
and whether it was operable or not.
 
There are two material elements of the offense of
 
Carrying or Use of a Firearm While Engaged in the Commission
of a Separate Felony, each of which the prosecution must
prove beyond a reasonable doubt. These two elements are:
 
1. That on or about the 3rd day of June, 2011, in the
City and County of Honolulu, state of Hawaii, the defendant
knowingly carried on his person, knowingly had within his
immediate control, intentionally used, or intentionally
threatened to use a firearm whether the firearm was loaded
 or not and whether operable or not; and,
 
2. That the defendant did so while engaged in the
commission of Murder in the Second Degree.
 
The Circuit Court gave substantially similar instructions for
 
Counts 10-13.
 
On May 16, 2013, the jury returned verdicts finding, in
 
relevant part, Stangel guilty of Counts 4, 5, and 7, and answered
 the special interrogatories regarding possession, threat to use,
 or use of a firearm in the commission of each of those Counts in
 the affirmative. Further, the jury returned verdicts finding
 Stangel guilty of Counts 9, 10, and 12, but not guilty of Counts
 11 and 13.
 
7

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Sentencing
 
On August 14, 2013, the Circuit Court sentenced
 
Stangel, in relevant part, as follows: (1) for Counts 4, 5, and
 
7, life imprisonment with the possibility of parole with a
 mandatory minimum term of imprisonment of twenty years in each
 count; and (2) for Counts 9, 10, and 12, twenty years each. 
Further, the Circuit Court ordered that the terms of imprisonment
 in Counts 4, 5, and 7 were to run consecutively. Count 9 would
 run concurrently with Count 4, Count 10 would run concurrently
 with Count 5, and Count 12 would run concurrently with Count 7.
 
In deciding to sentence Stangel to consecutive terms of
 
imprisonment, the Circuit Court stated
 
Regarding the State's motion for consecutive term
sentencing, the applicable statutes provide that the Court
must look at the factors enumerated in the general
sentencing statute, I'm referring to HRS [§] 706-606, to
decide whether in any particular given case consecutive term
sentencing is appropriate. Now, pursuant to that statute,
I've got to first consider the nature and circumstances of
the offense and the history and characteristics of the
defendant.
 
First of all, regarding the history and
characteristics of this defendant, we have here a 30-year
old man who, according to all the available information, has
been seriously abusing a variety of illegal drugs, including
narcotics and ice, for more than half his life. I repeat,
for more than half his life. And I see nothing in the
record to indicate that he has ever made any kind of serious
and sustained effort to address the problem.
 
Additionally, based on the fact that he plead no
contest to a gun charge nine years ago and the fact of his
use of a semiautomatic firearm in this case, I think it's
safe to infer that he's been illegally carrying around a
handgun for years. You add those two things together, years
of severe substance abuse and carrying a gun around, and
what you've essentially got is a lethal time bomb just
waiting to go off. And unfortunately for Tammy Nguyen, the
Nguyen family, and the other victims in this case, the bomb
did eventually go off with both lethal and near lethal
consequences.
 
In short, the defendant is an extremely dangerous
person, a person who for absolutely no good reason beyond
his own twisted thinking, essentially went on a killing
rampage against some completely innocent and defenseless
people, people who were simply trying to live their lives.
 
Now, this brings us to the nature and circumstances of
the offenses in this case.
 
. . . . [Description of the crimes]

 
So how do you adequately describe the nature and
circumstances of this behavior? Words fail me, they really
do, when I look at the utter senselessness and depravity of
the defendant's actions in this case.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Now, the law also says that the Court must consider
the need for the sentence imposed to reflect the seriousness
of the offense, to promote respect for law, to provide just
punishment for the offense, to afford adequate deterrence to
criminal conduct, and to protect the public from further
crimes of the defendant.
 
What this defendant did is he took the public streets
and highways of this beautiful city of ours and he turned
them into literal killing zones. And when I consider all of
 the foregoing factors, I can only conclude that they
absolutely require and demand a severe sentence in this
case. And I'm going to impose that sentence.
 
On October 11, 2013, Stangel filed a timely Notice of
 
Appeal.
 
On appeal, Stangel argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
because it (1) precluded the expert testimony of his forensic
 
psychologist who would have testified regarding Stangel's defense
 of penal irresponsibility and pathological intoxication; (2)
 failed to instruct the jury on merger on firearms charges and
 mandatory minimum sentences; (3) failed to include, in the
 special interrogatories given to the jury, the requisite state of
 mind for possession, threat to use, or use of a firearm as an
 element of an aggravated offense; (4) considered Stangel's
 suppressed statement at sentencing; and (5) considered uncharged
 alleged misconduct unsubstantiated by the record when sentencing
 Stangel to consecutive terms of imprisonment.
 
II.

 
The Circuit Court did not err when it excluded the
 
testimony of defense witness Dr. Acklin.
 
Stangel argues the Circuit Court erred in excluding
 
Dr. Acklin's testimony because it was relevant to a determination
 
of Stangel's penal responsibility and to the issue of
 pathological intoxication. While it is undisputed that Stangel
 was entitled to present evidence relevant to his insanity
 
2
defense, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 704-400 (2014),  the
2
 The so-called insanity defense is defined as follows:
 
Physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect excluding
penal responsibility.  (1) A person is not responsible,
under this Code, for conduct if at the time of the conduct
as a result of physical or mental disease, disorder, or
defect the person lacks substantial capacity either to
appreciate the wrongfulness of the person's conduct or to
conform the person's conduct to the requirements of law.
(continued...)
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Circuit Court ruled that Dr. Acklin's testimony was not relevant 
to that defense, a decision we review de novo. State v. 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai 'i 504, 514, 78 P.3d 317, 327 (2003) ("A trial 
court's determination of relevance pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of 
Evidence (HRE) Rule 401[ 3
] can produce only one correct result,
and is therefore reviewable under the right/wrong standard"). 

4
Dr. Acklin told the Circuit Court  that, in his
opinion, Stangel had been suffering, for a substantial period
 before the events underlying the charges in this case, from "a
 stimulant induced psychosis . . . that [] had become independent
 of his actual drug use[,]" and any mental disease, disorder or
 defect that Stangel suffered was due to voluntary substance
 abuse. As to the issue of pathological intoxication, Dr. Acklin
 testified that he had a "reasonably good understanding" of the
 kinds of drugs Stangel ingested prior to the incidents in
 question but did not know exactly what amounts of each drug
 Stangel ingested on the evening in question. Dr. Acklin avoided
 the question asking for his opinion whether the effects of these
 drugs on Stangel were grossly excessive in degree because,
 generally, over time, opiates require greater amounts for
 effects. However, even assuming Stangel suffered grossly
 excessive effects of the drugs he took on the night in question,
 Dr. Acklin testified that the physical abnormality causing this
 effect was called "sensitization," which in turn was caused by
 Stangel's "long use of substances."
 
2(...continued)
HRS § 704-400(1).
 
3
 HRE Rule 401 provides,
 
Definition of "relevant evidence".  "Relevant evidence"
 
means evidence having any tendency to make the existence of
any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the
action more probable or less probable than it would be
without the evidence.
 
4
 Stangel moved the Circuit Court to reconsider its original ruling
to exclude Dr. Acklin's testimony. It was at the hearing on Stangel's motion
to reconsider that Dr. Acklin was called to testify regarding his opinions.
 
10
 --------------NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
5
Intoxication  "does not, in itself, constitute a
physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect within the

 
meaning of [HRS] section 704-400[,]" HRS § 702-230(3) (2014), and
 
6
self-induced  intoxication is not a defense to any offense,
unless specifically provided for in HRS § 702-230. 
HRS § 702­
230(1) (2014). A drug-induced or exacerbated mental illness does 
not constitute a defense. State v. Young
, 93 Hawai 'i 224, 232, 
999 P.2d 230, 238 (2000). Therefore, the Circuit Court's decision to exclude Dr. Acklin's testimony that Stangel was suffering from a psychosis caused by Stangel's long-standing drug abuse was not error. 
Nor was Dr. Acklin's testimony regarding Stangel's
 
pathological intoxication relevant. "Pathological intoxication"
 is defined as
 
intoxication grossly excessive in the degree, given the
amount of the intoxicant, to which the defendant does not
know the defendant is susceptible and which results from a
physical abnormality of the defendant. 
HRS § 702-230(5). The Commentary on § 702-230 further informs us
 
that pathological intoxication is
 
employed "to provide a defense in a few, extremely rare,
cases in which an intoxicating substance is knowingly taken
into the body and, because of a bodily abnormality
intoxication of an extreme and unusual [and unforseen]
degree results."
8
 
8 M.P.C. Tentative Draft No. 9, comments at 11-12 (1959).
 
Given that Dr. Acklin did not know the amounts of the
 
multiple drugs Stangel ingested on the night in question, was
 
reluctant to opine on whether Stangel's reaction to the ingested
 drugs was excessive in degree, and posited that the physical
 abnormality causing any excessive reaction was one caused by
 
5
 "Intoxication" is defined as "a disturbance of mental or physical
capacities resulting from the introduction of substances into the body." HRS
 
§ 702-230(5).
 
6
 
"Self-induced intoxication" means intoxication caused by
substances which the defendant knowingly introduces into the
defendant's body, the tendency of which to cause
intoxication the defendant knows or ought to know, unless
the defendant introduces them pursuant to medical advice or
under such circumstances as would afford a defense to a
 charge of a penal offense.
 
HRS § 702-230(5).
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Stangel's own long-standing drug abuse, we agree with the Circuit
 
Court that the testimony of Dr. Acklin was not relevant to
 establishing any defense based on a theory of pathological
 intoxication.
 
Even assuming this testimony had some probative value, 
the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion, Wakisaka, 102 Hawai
'i at 514, 78 P.3d at 327 (the determination of the 
admissibility of relevant evidence under rule excluding relevant evidence on grounds of prejudice, confusion, or waste of time "is eminently suited to the trial court's exercise of its discretion because it requires a 'cost-benefit calculus' and a 'delicate balance between probative value and prejudicial effect'") (citation and internal quotation marks omitted), when it excluded Dr. Acklin's testimony because this probative value would be substantially outweighed by the confusion of the issues it would cause. State v. Fukagawa, 100 Hawai
'i 498, 506, 60 P.3d 899, 907 
(2002) ("[I]t is well-settled that [a]n appellate court may affirm a judgment of the lower court on any ground in the record that supports affirmance.") (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). As the Circuit Court noted, if it admitted Dr. Acklin's testimony, it would also have to instruct the jury that the law did not recognize the effects of Stangel's voluntary intoxication as constituting a defense. As Stangel does not argue this testimony was relevant to any other subject, it was not an abuse of discretion to exclude testimony that the jury would be told was not relevant to any defense. 
The Circuit Court Did Not Plainly Err When It Did
Not Issue Instructions or Interrogatories
Regarding Merger to the Jury.
 
Relying on HRS § 701-109(1)(e) (2014), Stangel next
 
argues that the Circuit Court plainly erred in failing to present
 
special interrogatories regarding merger to the jury. He
 maintains that, as his convictions for Counts 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 12,
 and 14 all involve possession of the same firearm, "[t]he
 question of whether Stangel's conduct relat[ing] to the firearm
 constituted separate and distinct culpable acts or was an
 uninterrupted continuous course of conduct should have been
 submitted to the jury for determination." In addition, Stangel
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argues that "whether [he] committed the firearms offenses, and
 
the conduct creating the mandatory minimum sentences under HRS
 § 706-660.1, with separate and distinct intents, rather than
 acting with one general impulse and one plan to commit all of the
 offenses should also have been submitted to the jury." He asks
 that the case be remanded for the prosecution to either elect one
 of these seven convictions or to retry the case with a merger
 instruction.
 
HRS § 701-109(1)(e) provides, 

(1) When the same conduct of a defendant may establish an
element of more than one offense, the defendant may be
prosecuted for each offense of which such conduct is an
element. The defendant may not, however, be convicted of
more than one offense if:
 
. . . .
 
(e)	 The offense is defined as a continuing course of
conduct and the defendant's course of conduct
 was uninterrupted, unless the law provides that
specific periods of conduct constitute separate
offenses.
 
In Count 4, Stangel was convicted of Murder in the
 
Second Degree for intentionally or knowingly causing the death of
 
Tammy Nguyen and in Counts 5 and 7 for intentionally taking a
 substantial step intended or known to cause the death of Michael
 Pagdilao and Amie Lou Asuncion, respectively, thereby committing
 the offense of Attempted Murder in the Second Degree with regard
 to each. HRS §§ 707-701.5 (2014) and 705-500 (2014).
7 The
 
7 HRS § 707-701.5(1) provides: "Except as provided in section
707-701, a person commits the offense of murder in the second degree if the
person intentionally or knowingly causes the death of another person." HRS
 § 707-701 (2014) defines Murder in the First Degree, and provides:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of murder in the first
degree if the person intentionally or knowingly causes the
death of:
 
(a) 	More than one person in the same or separate incident;
 
(b) 	A law enforcement officer, judge, or prosecutor
arising out of the performance of official duties;
 
(c) 	A person known by the defendant to be a witness in a
criminal prosecution and the killing is related to the
person's status as a witness;
 
(d) 	A person by a hired killer, in which event both the
person hired and the person responsible for hiring the
killer shall be punished under this section;
 
(e) 	
A person while the defendant was imprisoned; 

(continued...)
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
crimes of Murder in the Second Degree and Attempted Murder in the
 
Second Degree are not defined as a continuing course of conduct. 
See State v. Matias, 102 Hawai
'i 300, 305, 75 P.3d 1191, 1196 
(2003) (quoting State v. Hoopii, 68 Haw. 246, 251, 710 P.2d 1193,
 1197 (1985)) ("HRS § 701-109(1)(e) . . . does not apply where a
 defendant's actions constitute separate offenses under the law.") 
Each commission is complete upon either performing the act that
 causes the death or which is a substantial step towards causing
 "the death of another person."
8 Therefore, these three offenses
 
7(...continued)
(f) 	A person from whom the defendant has been restrained,
by order of any court, including an ex parte order,
from contacting, threatening, or physically abusing
pursuant to chapter 586;
 
(g) 	A person who is being protected by a police officer
ordering the defendant to leave the premises of that
protected person pursuant to section 709-906(4),
during the effective period of that order; or
 
(h) 	A person known by the defendant to be a witness in a
family court proceeding and the killing is related to
the person's status as a witness.
 
HRS § 705-500, defining criminal attempts, provides:
 
(1) A person is guilty of an attempt to commit a crime if
the person:
 
(a)	 Intentionally engages in conduct which would
constitute the crime if the attendant
 circumstances were as the person believes them
to be; or
 
(b)	 Intentionally engages in conduct which, under
the circumstances as the person believes them to
be, constitutes a substantial step in a course
of conduct intended to culminate in the person's
commission of the crime.
 
(2) When causing a particular result is an element
of the crime, a person is guilty of an attempt to commit the
crime if, acting with the state of mind required to
establish liability with respect to the attendant
circumstances specified in the definition of the crime, the
person intentionally engages in conduct which is a
substantial step in a course of conduct intended or known to
cause such a result.
 
(3) Conduct shall not be considered a substantial
 
step under this section unless it is strongly corroborative
of the defendant's criminal intent. 
8
 Moreover, we note that Stangel was charged, in Count 3, with
Attempted Murder in the First Degree under HRS § 707-701(1)(a), which alleged
that Stangel "did intentionally engage in conduct which is a substantial step
in a course of conduct intended or known to cause the deaths of more than one
 person in the same or separate incident[.]" This charge is defined as a
(continued...)
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
would not merge as a matter of law, and no jury instruction or
 
separate verdict question was necessary.
 
Similarly, the offense of Carrying or Use of a Firearm
 
9
in the Commission of a Separate Felony (Use of Firearm),  as its
name implies, is complete upon the commission of the underlying
 felony. The Use of Firearm statute specifically provides that
 conviction for Use of Firearm is in addition to the conviction
 and sentence for the underlying felony. HRS § 134-21(b) (2011);
 
8(...continued)
continuing course of conduct. State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai' i 1, 18, 928 P.2d 843,
860 (1996). The charges of Attempted Murder in the First Degree versus Murder
in the Second Degree and multiple counts of Attempted Murder in the SecondDegree differ in that the states of mind required for each are mutuallyexclusive. See Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 457, 848 P.2d 966, 974 (1993).
As the jury rejected the charge of Attempted Murder in the First Degree butconvicted Stangel of one count of Murder in the Second Degree and two countsof Attempted Murder in the Second Degree involving three separate persons, indifferent locations, the jury must have found that Stangel did not act withthe intent or plan to kill multiple persons, i.e., as a serial killer, butrather that he intended to kill each separately. Briones, 74 Haw. at 454-57, 
848 P.2d at 973-75. 
9
 
Carrying or use of firearm in the commission of a separate
felony; penalty.  (a) It shall be unlawful for a person to
knowingly carry on the person or have within the person's
immediate control or intentionally use or threaten to use a
firearm while engaged in the commission of a separate
felony, whether the firearm was loaded or not, and whether
operable or not; provided that a person shall not be
prosecuted under this subsection when the separate felony
is:
 
(1) 	A felony offense otherwise defined by this
chapter;
 
(2) 	The felony offense of reckless endangering in
the first degree under section 707-713;
 
(3) 	The felony offense of terroristic threatening in
the first degree under section 707-716(1)(a),
707-716(1)(b), or [707-716(1)(e)]; or
 
(4) 	The felony offenses of criminal property damage
in the first degree under section 708-820 or
criminal property damage in the second degree
under section 708-821 and the firearm is the
 instrument or means by which the property damage
is caused.
 
(b) A conviction and sentence under this section
 
shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any conviction
and sentence for the separate felony; provided that the
sentence imposed under this section may run concurrently or
consecutively with the sentence for the separate felony.
 
(c) Any person violating this section shall be
guilty of a class A felony.
 
HRS § 134-21. 
15
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
see State v. Brantley, 99 Hawai 'i 463, 465-66, 56 P.3d 1252, 
1254-55 (2002) and State v. Feliciano, 107 Hawai 'i 469, 481, 115 
P.3d 648, 660 (2005) ("We [] hold that the double jeopardy clause 
does not constrain the legislature from intentionally imposing multiple punishments upon a defendant for separate offenses arising out of the same conduct."). Therefore, the Use of Firearms convictions in Counts 9, 10, and 12 would not merge with the underlying Murder In the Second Degree and Attempted Murder in the Second Degree charges as a matter of law and no instruction on merger was necessary. 
We next turn to Stangel's conviction for Place to Keep
 
Pistol or Revolver (Place to Keep)
10 in Count 14. This offense
 
is not defined as a continuing course of conduct; it is a
 prohibition against transporting firearms. Once the person takes
 the firearm out of a place of business, residence, or sojourn-­but for certain exceptions--the offense is complete. The fact
 that the offense may continue beyond this point does not change
 the character of the offense. 
Instructive is the long-standing case of State v.
 
Hoopii, 68 Haw. 246, 710 P.2d 1193 (1985). There, the court
 reviewed Hoopii's conviction for Kidnapping, Rape in the First
 Degree, and Sodomy in the First Degree, and reasoned,
 
HRS § 701-109(1)(e) prohibits multiple convictions
where the defendant's actions constitute an uninterrupted,
continuing course of conduct. This prohibition, however,
does not apply where these actions constitute separate
offenses under the law. Furthermore,
 
where a defendant in the context of one criminal
 scheme or transaction commits several acts
 independently violative of one or more statutes, he
may be punished for all of them if charges are
properly consolidated by the State in one trial.
 
State v. Pilago, 65 Haw. 22, 24, 649 P.2d 363, 365 (1982);
State v. Pia, 55 Haw. 14, 19, 514 P.2d 580, 585 (1973).
 
10
 The offense of Place to Keep is defined in HRS § 134-25 (2011) and
provides, in pertinent part:
 
[§ 134-25] Place to keep pistol or revolver; penalty.
(a) . . . all firearms shall be confined to the possessor's
place of business, residence, or sojourn[.]
 
. . . . 
(b) Any person violating this section by carrying or
possessing a loaded or unloaded pistol or revolver shall be
guilty of a class B felony.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In this case, Appellant committed and completed the
act of kidnapping at the moment he restrained the victim by
abducting her, putting her in his van and driving away. Any
restraint which continued throughout the subsequent rape and
sodomy was not necessary to the perpetration of the
kidnapping. See State v. DeCenso, 5 Haw. App. 127, 135, 681
P.2d 573, 580 (1984). Appellant would still be subject to
prosecution for kidnapping had he not continued to restrain
the victim throughout the rape and sodomy. Moreover, these
later acts themselves constituted separate and independent
offenses.
 
Hoopii, 68 Haw. at 251-52, 710 P.2d at 1197 (footnote omitted). 
See also State v. Momoki, 98 Hawai 'i 188, 195, 46 P.3d 1, 8 (App. 
2002) (impaired driving offense complete upon driving or assuming control of vehicle; that impaired driving continued through commission of separate offense of inattention to driving not violative of HRS § 701-109(1)(e)). 
Similarly, Stangel committed the offense of Place to
 
Keep when he left his home with the loaded firearm. That he
 continued to have the firearm during the entire episode of
 June 3, 2011 and committed other offenses with that same firearm
 was not necessary to the commission of the Place to Keep offense. 
As Place to Keep is not defined by statute as a continuing course
 of conduct offense,
11 HRS § 701-109(1)(e), the Circuit Court was
 
not required to instruct the jury to decide whether Stangel
 engaged in an uninterrupted course of conduct as a matter of
 fact.
 
Nor was the Circuit Court required to instruct the jury
 
to decide whether Stangel committed all "the firearms offenses,
 and the conduct creating the mandatory minimum sentences under
 HRS § 706-660.1, with separate and distinct intents, rather than
 acting with one general impulse and one plan to commit all of the
 
12
offenses[.]" First, HRS § 706-660.1 (2014),  by its terms, 
11
 Stangel's citation to State v. Matias, 102 Hawai' i 300, 306, 76
P.3d 1191, 1197 (2003) and State v. Padilla, 114 Hawai' i 507, 517, 164 P.3d
765, 774 (App. 2007) following Matias, are not persuasive. Both cases 
concerned the possible merger of Place to Keep and Ownership or PossessionProhibited (Felon in Possession) under HRS § 134-7(b) and (h) (2011)convictions. Here, Stangel completed commission of the offense of Place toKeep as soon as he left his residence with the firearm and without a permit.His subsequent actions in committing each of the underlying felonies in eachof the Use of Firearm offenses were therefore separate from the Place to Keepoffense. 
12
 
§ 706-660.1. Sentence of imprisonment for use of a
firearm, semiautomatic firearm, or automatic firearm in a
(continued...)
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
12(...continued)
felony.  (1) A person convicted of a felony, where the

person had a firearm in the person's possession or
threatened its use or used the firearm while engaged in the
commission of the felony, whether the firearm was loaded or
not, and whether operable or not, may in addition to the
indeterminate term of imprisonment provided for the grade of
offense be sentenced to a mandatory minimum term of
imprisonment without possibility of parole or probation the
length of which shall be as follows:
 
(a) For murder in the second degree and attemptedmurder in the second degree--up to fifteenyears; 
(b) For a class A felony--up to ten years; 
(c) For a class B felony--up to five years; and 
(d) For a class C felony--up to three years. 
The sentence of imprisonment for a felony involving the use
of a firearm as provided in this subsection shall not be
subject to the procedure for determining minimum term of
imprisonment prescribed under section 706-669; provided
further that a person who is imprisoned in a correctional
institution as provided in this subsection shall become
subject to the parole procedure as prescribed in section
706-670 only upon the expiration of the term of mandatory
imprisonment fixed under paragraph (a), (b), (c), or (d).
 
(2) A person convicted of a second firearm felony
offense as provided in subsection (1) where the person had a
firearm in the person's possession or threatened its use or
used the firearm while engaged in the commission of the
felony, whether the firearm was loaded or not, and whether
operable or not, shall in addition to the indeterminate term
of imprisonment provided for the grade of offense be
sentenced to a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment
without possibility of parole or probation the length of
which shall be as follows:
 
(a) 	For murder in the second degree and attempted
murder in the second degree--twenty years;
 
(b) 	For a class A felony--thirteen years, four
months;
 
(c) 	For a class B felony--six years, eight months;
and
 
(d) 	For a class C felony--three years, four months.
 
The sentence of imprisonment for a second felony offense
involving the use of a firearm as provided in this
subsection shall not be subject to the procedure for
determining a minimum term of imprisonment prescribed under
section 706-669; provided further that a person who is
imprisoned in a correctional institution as provided in this
subsection shall become subject to the parole procedure as
prescribed in section 706-670 only upon expiration of the
term of mandatory imprisonment fixed under paragraph (a),
(b), (c), or (d).
 
(continued...)
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is a sentencing provision and not a separate offense. Secondly,
 
to the extent that HRS § 706-660.1 was included in the charge,13
 
it was not an element of that charged offense, HRS § 702-205
 
14
(2014) either by operation of law, or by terms of the charge
12(...continued)
(3) A person convicted of a felony, where the person
had a semiautomatic firearm or automatic firearm in the
 
person's possession or used or threatened its use while
engaged in the commission of the felony, whether the
semiautomatic firearm or automatic firearm was loaded or
 not, and whether operable or not, shall in addition to the
indeterminate term of imprisonment provided for the grade of
offense be sentenced to a mandatory minimum term of
imprisonment without possibility of parole or probation the
length of which shall be as follows:
 
(a) For murder in the second degree and attemptedmurder in the second degree--twenty years; 
(b) For a class A felony--fifteen years; 
(c) For a class B felony--ten years; and 
(d) For a class C felony--five years. 
The sentence of imprisonment for a felony involving the use
of a semiautomatic firearm or automatic firearm as provided
in this subsection shall not be subject to the procedure for
determining a minimum term of imprisonment prescribed under
section 706-669; provided further that a person who is
imprisoned in a correctional institution as provided in this
subsection shall become subject to the parole procedure as
prescribed in section 706-670 only upon expiration of the
term of mandatory imprisonment fixed under paragraph (a),
(b), (c), or (d).
 
(4) In this section:
 
"Automatic firearm" has the same meaning defined in
section 134-1.
 
"Firearm" has the same meaning defined in section
134-1 except that it does not include "semiautomatic
firearm" or "automatic firearm".
 
"Semiautomatic firearm" means any firearm that uses
the energy of the explosive in a fixed cartridge to
extract a fired cartridge and chamber a fresh
cartridge with each single pull of the trigger. 
13
 HRS § 706-660.1 was included in Counts 4, 5, and 7, but not 9, 10,
12, or 14.
 
14
 
§702-205 Elements of an offense. The elements of an
 
offense are such (1) conduct, (2) attendant circumstances,
and (3) results of conduct, as:
 
(continued...)
 
19
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
itself.15 Moreover, Stangel presents no authority for the
 
proposition that the jury must make a finding regarding his
 
intent with respect to a sentencing provision, and we find none.
 
Therefore, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 
plainly err in omitting merger instructions to the jury.
 
The Circuit Court Did Not Plainly Err in Omitting
a Mens Rea Requirement Relating to Qualifying
Facts for Mandatory Minimum Sentences From the
Special Interrogatories.
 
Stangel argues that the Circuit Court plainly erred
 
when it failed to include a mens rea requirement in the special
 
interrogatories for Counts 4, 5, and 7, asking the jury to
 determine whether facts qualifying Stangel for mandatory minimum
 sentencing under HRS § 706-660.1 were present. Stangel argues
 that, because the mens rea for the charged offense applies to all
 elements of the offense and the qualifying facts for imposition
 of a mandatory minimum sentence for that offense are considered
 elements of the offense, the jury must be instructed that it must
 find Stangel acted with the requisite state of mind with regard
 to these qualifying facts as well. The special interrogatories
 did not contain a mens rea element.
16 Stangel did not object to
 
14(...continued)
(a)	 Are specified by the definition of the offense, and
 
(b)	 Negative a defense (other than a defense based on the
statute of limitations, lack of venue, or lack of
jurisdiction.
 
15 Counts 4, 5, and 7 each contained a separate paragraph, which
read, in pertinent part, 
If convicted of this offense or any included felony
offense, TOBY J. STANGEL may be subject to sentencing in
accordance with Section 706-660.1 . . . .
 
16
 The special interrogatory accompanying Count 4 stated 
"Did the defendant have in his possession or threaten its
use or use a semi-automatic firearm whether loaded or not
 and whether operable or not while engaged in the commission
of Murder in the Second Degree or Reckless Manslaughter in
Count 4?" Your answer must be unanimous. If you are unable
to come to a unanimous answer, then you must not check off
either "Yes" or "No" on the interrogatory form.
 
(continued...)
 
20
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the instructions at trial. Consequently, these un-objected to 
jury instructions are reviewed for plain/harmless error. See 
State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai 'i 327, 334-35, 141 P.3d 974, 981-92 
(2006). 
We need not decide whether the special interrogatories 
were erroneous under the circumstances of this case, as we conclude that the error, if any, was harmless. "In analyzing alleged errors in special verdict forms, the instructions and the interrogatories on the verdict form are considered as a whole." Montalvo v. Lapez, 77 Hawai
'i 282, 292, 884 P.2d 345, 355 (1994). 
The jury found Stangel guilty of predicate felonies under Counts 4, 5, and 7, and also found Stangel guilty of respective Counts 9, 10, and 12 for Use of Firearm. Counts 9, 10, and 12 required, and the jury so found, that Stangel "knowingly carrie[d] on his person, knowingly ha[d] within his immediate control, intentionally use[d], or intentionally threaten[ed] to use a firearm while engaged in the commission of a separate felony." Thus the jury unanimously decided that Stangel intentionally or knowingly possessed a firearm in the commission of each predicate felony. 
Stangel does not suggest any scenario in which the same
 
jury that found that he knowingly possessed a firearm in each of
 the charged felony offenses could have found that Stangel did not
 knowingly possess a firearm for the same predicate felonies for
 the purposes of HRS § 706-660.1.
 
Stangel's third asserted point of error is without
 
merit.
 
The Record Does Not Support the Allegation That
the Circuit Court Considered Stangel's Suppressed
Statement in Sentencing.
 
Stangel argues that the Circuit Court violated his 
right to due process under the Hawai
'i and Federal Constitutions 
because it considered his suppressed statements at the sentencing 
16(...continued)
Substantially similar special interrogatories accompanied Counts 5
and 7. 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hearing. As Stangel acknowledges, he did not object to inclusion 
of, nor move to strike, the material from the Presentence Diagnosis and Report (PSI) but argues that this plain error affected his substantial rights. State v. Fagaragan, 115 Hawai
'i 
364, 368, 167 P.3d 739, 743 (App. 2007) ("[W]here plain errors were committed and substantial rights were affected thereby, the errors may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the trial court.") (citation, internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). 
We find no plain error here. Generally, the sentencing 
court is not only entitled to consider, but must give "due consideration to" the PSI before imposing sentence. HRS § 706­601 (2014); State v. Hussein, 122 Hawai
'i 495, 527, 229 P.3d 313, 
345 (2010). This mandate is not without limit, as in the example of statements that have been suppressed. State v. Valera, 74 
Haw. 424, 848 P.2d 376 (1993). However, "[i]t is well established that a judge is presumed not to be influenced by incompetent evidence and the normal rule is that if there is sufficient competent evidence to support the judgment or finding below, there is a presumption that any incompetent evidence was disregarded and the issue determined from a consideration of competent evidence only." State v. Barros, 105 Hawai
'i 160, 171, 
95 P.3d 14, 25 (App. 2004) (internal citations, quotations and brackets omitted). 
Here, the Circuit Court ordered the suppression of
 
Stangel's statement and was thus well aware that the statement
 had been suppressed. Stangel does not identify what portions of
 his suppressed statement were used by the Circuit Court in
 imposing sentence. On the other hand, there was a wealth of
 eligible information at the Circuit Court's disposal in rendering
 its sentencing decision: the records and files in the case,
 including the evidence admitted at trial, the statements from
 counsel at sentencing, and letters from the families of the
 victims and Stangel. In addition to the unusually violent and
 seemingly random acts involved in this case, there was Stangel's
 history of abusing a variety of illegal drugs for more than half
 
22
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of his life without any kind of serious or sustained effort to
 
address the problem, and Stangel's previous arrest for illegal
 gun possession. The Circuit Court's conclusion that "[Stangel]
 is an extremely dangerous person, a person who for absolutely no
 good reason beyond his own twisted thinking, essentially went on
 a killing rampage against some completely innocent and
 defenseless people[,]" and that there was a "need for the
 sentence imposed to . . . protect the public from further crimes
 of the defendant[,]" appears supported by the record independent
 of the information included in the synopsis of Stangel's
 suppressed statement and therefore Stangel fails to rebut the
 presumption that the Circuit Court was unaffected by the
 inclusion of suppressed evidence in the PSI.
17
 
The Consideration of Uncharged and Unsubstantiated
Illegal Conduct to Support Imposition of
Consecutive Sentences Was Plain Error.
 
Stangel argues that the Circuit Court
 
unconstitutionally punished him for "illegally carrying around a
 
handgun for years" without substantiation in the record. Again,
 Stangel asks this court to review the Circuit Court's action for
 plain error.
 
"The authority of a trial court to select and determine 
the severity of a penalty is normally undisturbed on review in the absence of an apparent abuse of discretion or unless applicable statutory or constitutional commands have not been observed." State v. Reis, 115 Hawai
'i 79, 83, 165 P.3d 980, 984 
(2007) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). However, 
While a court has broad discretion in imposing a
sentence, and can consider the candor, conduct, remorse and
background of the defendant as well as the circumstances of
the crime and many other factors, a judge cannot punish a
defendant for an uncharged crime in the belief that it too
deserves punishment.
 
17
 Stangel also argues that "other information" included in the PSI
provide additional bases to vacate his sentence. As Stangel did not object to
this information being included in the PSI at sentencing, did not dispute the
information before the sentencing court and does not identify the information
or explain why he believes it was improperly included, he has waived this
argument and failed to show plain error justifying our notice.
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Vellina, 106 Hawai 'i 441, 450, 106 P.3d 364, 373 (2005) 
(quoting State v. Nunes, 72 Haw. 521, 526, 824 P.2d 837, 840 
(1992)). 
Vellina and Nunes are cases in which the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court found plain error in the trial court's reliance upon uncharged and unsubstantiated criminal conduct in imposing sentence. In Nunes, the trial court increased a two-day jail term to thirty days based on the court's belief that the victim "lied for the defendant." Nunes, 72 Haw. at 525, 824 P.2d at 
840. In Vellina, the trial court imposed consecutive terms based 
on the government's argument that the defendant had sold the semiautomatic weapon he had stolen in that case to a "drug dealer." 106 Hawai
'i at 449, 106 P.3d at 372. 
Here, evidence was presented at the sentencing phase of
 
the jury trial that, in 2004, Stangel received a deferred
 acceptance of a no contest plea to a charge of Place to Keep and
 that he had been found guilty in the instant case of two or more
 felonies, including firearms offenses. The State does not point
 to any evidence in the record of Stangel's possession of firearms
 in the interim.
18 The Circuit Court explicitly considered the
 
19
factors contained in HRS § 706-606 (2014)  before imposing
18 We note that, in Dr. Acklin's January 20, 2012 report, he includes
a synopsis of his interview of Stangel's girlfriend, who had lived with
Stangel for six to seven months at the time of the incident. In that
 interview, Leslie Guerra told Dr. Acklin that Stangel "kept a gun at the
house[.]" Dr. Acklin's report was included as an attachment to the PSI.
 
19	 HRS § 706-606 provides:
 
Factors to be considered in imposing a sentence.  The court,
in determining the particular sentence to be imposed, shall
consider:
 
(1) 	The nature and circumstances of the offense and
 the history and characteristics of the
defendant;
 
(2) 	The need for the sentence imposed:
 
(a) 	To reflect the seriousness of the offense,
to promote respect for law, and to provide
just punishment for the offense;
 
(b) 	To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;

 
(continued...)
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sentence, and communicated its ruling first at the hearing on the
 
State's motion for consecutive sentencing:
 
Additionally, based on the fact that [Stangel pled] no
contest to a gun charge nine years ago and the fact of his
use of a semiautomatic firearm in this case, I think it's
safe to infer that he's been illegally carrying around a
handgun for years. You add those two things together, years
of severe substance abuse and carrying a gun around, and
what you've essentially got is a lethal time bomb just
waiting to go off. And unfortunately for Tammy Nguyen, the
Nguyen family, and the other victims in this case, the bomb
did eventually go off with both lethal and near lethal
consequences.
 
(Emphasis added). In its September 3, 2013 Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting State's Motion for
 Consecutive [Terms of] Imprisonment (Order Granting Consecutive
 Terms) the Circuit Court later memorialized the reasons why it
 concluded that, under the factors contained in HRS § 706-606,
 consecutive sentences were warranted:
 
This court bases this conclusion on the facts adduced during
trial, the PSI, State's Motion, and Defendant's Sentencing
Statement. Defendant's combination of severe substance
 abuse and propensity for illegally carrying loaded
semiautomatic firearms created a lethal time bomb. This
 time bomb went off on June 3, 2011, when Defendant took the
public streets and highways of Honolulu and turned them into
literal killing zones. Thus, in considering [] all of the
foregoing factors, the court can only conclude that they
require and demand a severe sentence.
 
We agree with Stangel that basing the decision to
 
impose consecutive terms on the speculation that Stangel
 
illegally carried a firearm "for years" before the instant
 offense, was improper. Vellina, 106 Hawai
'i at 450, 106 P.3d at 
375. As this notion was a prominent part of the Circuit Court's
 
19(...continued)
 
(c) 	To protect the public from further crimes
of the defendant; and
 
(d) 	To provide the defendant with needed
educational or vocational training,
medical care, or other correctional
treatment in the most effective manner;
 
(3) 	The kinds of sentences available; and
 
(4) 	The need to avoid unwarranted sentence
 disparities among defendants with similar
records who have been found guilty of similar
conduct.
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasons supporting its decision, we cannot conclude that the
 
consideration of this speculation was harmless and must vacate
 this part of Stangel's sentence.
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the part of the
 
sentence that imposed consecutive terms of incarceration for
 Counts 4, 5 and 7, and remand for resentencing before another
 judge. The August 14, 2013 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
 is affirmed in all other respects.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 26, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Craig W. Jerome,

Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Donn Fudo,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
26
 