NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000450
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
PAUL K. CULLEN aka PAUL KAUKA NAKI, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
LAVINIA CURRIER and PUU O HOKU RANCH, LTD., Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
MOLOKA 'I DIVISION
 
(DC-CIVIL NO. 11-1-3105)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellant Paul K. Cullen aka Paul Kauka Naki
 
(Cullen) appeals from the "Judgment Against Plaintiff Paul K.
 
Cullen aka Paul Kauka Naki" (Judgment) entered in favor of
 Defendants-Appellees Lavinia Currier (Currier) and Puu O Hoku
 Ranch, Limited (the Ranch) (collectively Appellees) on April 24,
 2012, by the District Court of the Second Circuit, Moloka
'i 
1
Division  (district court).
On appeal, Cullen appears to generally challenge the

 
Judgment and various orders by the district court.2 To the
 
1
 The Honorable Richard A. Priest, Jr. entered the Judgment appealed
from in this matter and presided at the February 14, 2012 hearing. Various
 
other judges presided at hearings in this matter and are identified infra.
2
 Cullen's Amended Opening Brief fails to comply with the requirements
of Hawai' i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28 in almost every
respect. Failure to comply with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4) is alone sufficient to
affirm the judgment of the district court. O'Connor v. Diocese of Honolulu, 
77 Hawai' i 383, 385-86, 885 P.2d 361, 363-364 (1994). However, it is the
policy of appellate courts "to permit litigants to appeal and to have theircases heard on the merits, where possible." Id. at 386, 885 P.2d at 364.
Thus, we address Cullen's arguments to the extent that they are discernible.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
extent we can discern Cullen's arguments, he contends: (1) the
 
district court erred in dismissing Cullen's complaints; and
 (2) the district court abused its discretion by striking Cullen's
 post-dismissal filings, deeming him a vexatious litigant and
 prohibiting further filings without court approval, and ordering
 Cullen to pay Appellees' attorneys' fees and costs. In his
 arguments, Cullen appears to challenge several of the district
 court's findings of fact (FOFs) and conclusions of law (COLs). 
For the reasons set forth below, we affirm.
 
I. Background
 
Cullen's district court action is apparently a response 
to the Ranch's filing of a complaint in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (circuit court) (Civil No. 11-1-0124(3)) seeking to eject five individuals, whom the Ranch claimed to be squatters and trespassers, from property located in Halawa Valley, Moloka
'i 
(Property).3 Although Cullen was not named as a defendant, he 
filed an answer with the circuit court claiming that he was the rightful owner of the Property. Cullen then initiated the instant action in the district court, apparently alleging that he is the landlord of the Property entitled to summary possession and ejectment against Appellees, and also seeking monetary damages.
II. The District Court Properly Dismissed the Complaints
 
Cullen's original complaint, filed on October 31, 2011,
 
sought possession of the Property and judgment against Currier
 
for one trillion dollars. The district court orally dismissed
 Cullen's original complaint at a November 8, 2011 return hearing,
 but did not issue a written order until February 28, 2012.
4
 
Prior to the February 28, 2012 order, Cullen filed a First
 Amended Complaint on December 30, 2011, and a Second Amended
 
3
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided. On November 28, 2011, the
circuit court issued its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order in
Civil No. 11-1-0124(3), granting the Ranch's Motion for Summary Judgment
against the named defendants and declaring that title to the Property was
vested in the Ranch.
4
 The Honorable Barclay E. MacDonald presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Complaint on January 10, 2012 (collectively amended complaints),
 
adding the Ranch as a defendant. Cullen's amended complaints
 claim a right to summary possession based on a "Default Judgment"
 purportedly entered in the circuit court action, a document of
 Cullen's own creation. The district court orally dismissed the
 amended complaints at a February 14, 2012 hearing and issued a
 written order on March 8, 2012. 
In the summary possession context, the district court 
is divested of jurisdiction where a defendant raises a question of title to real property. See Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 604-5(d) (Supp. 2013) ("The district courts shall not have cognizance of real actions, nor actions in which the title to real estate comes in question[.]"). District Court Rules of Civil Procedure (DCRCP) Rule 12.1 requires that such a defense be asserted by a written answer or motion, accompanied by an affidavit or declaration setting forth "the source, nature and extent of the title claimed by defendant" and "further particulars" sufficient to "fully apprise the court of the nature of defendant's claim." See DCRCP Rule 12.1; Deutsche Bank Nat'l 
Trust Co. v. Peelua, 126 Hawai
'i 32, 35-36, 265 P.3d 1128, 1131­
32 (2011). 
In their answer to Cullen's amended complaints, 
Appellees properly raised a defense based on the district court's
 lack of jurisdiction by attaching a declaration of their counsel
 and the circuit court's judgment and Findings of Fact,
 Conclusions of Law, and Order in Civil No. 11-1-0124(3), which
 determined that the Ranch held title to the Property. As to
 possession of the Property, Appellees adequately raised the issue
 of title such that the district court was divested of
 jurisdiction and was required to dismiss Cullen's claims for
 possession. See DCRCP Rule 12(h)(3) ("Whenever it appears by
 
suggestion of the parties or otherwise that the court lacks
 jurisdiction of the subject matter, the court shall dismiss the
 action.").
 
Moreover, to the extent that Cullen sought damages, the
 
district court correctly determined that alleged damages for one
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
trillion dollars, as requested by Cullen, are beyond its
 
jurisdictional limits. See HRS § 604-5(a) (Supp. 2013).
 
In sum, the district court did not err in dismissing
 
this action based on lack of jurisdiction over the claims
 asserted by Cullen.
III. The District Court Properly Struck Cullen's Post-Dismissal
Filings
 
After the district court dismissed Cullen's complaints,
 
Cullen filed four documents with the district court which appear
 
to characterize Cullen as the prevailing party and unilaterally
 enter rulings and/or judgment against Appellees. Cullen's
 
"Default Judgment Declaration" (Default Declaration) and "Order
 
Granting Plaintiff Paul K. Cullen-Naki Default Judgment and Writ
 of Summary Possession, and Ejectment, and Sanctions against
 Lavinia Currier, and Puu O Hoku Ranch, Ltd., and Sanctions
 against their Attorneys Craig Nakamura and Robert Strand and
 Jacob Matson, et al." (March 5 Order) both appeared to assert
 that default was entered against Appellees for their failure to
 appear in court. Cullen's "Order Denying and Striking
 Defendants' Motion to Strike Plaintiff's Judgment" (March 13
 Order) purported to deny Appellees' Motion to Strike and to
 impose sanctions against Appellees. Cullen's "Judicial Notice to
 Clerks of Molokai District Court, et al.,: Hearing March 27 is
 cancelled due to resolution of Motion by Defendants to Strike was
 Denied and Stricken and Dismissed" (Judicial Notice) purported to
 advise the district court clerks that a hearing on Appellees'
 motions was cancelled because the motions had been denied. After
 
5
a March 27, 2012 hearing,  the district court granted Appellees'
motions to strike Cullen's four documents and deemed Cullen a
 vexatious litigant. On April 24, 2012, the district court issued
 its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order. 
Cullen's arguments implicitly challenge the district

 
court's FOF nos. 1 and 9, and COL nos. 1 through 5. "In this
 jurisdiction, a trial court's FOFs are subject to the clearly
 
5
 The Honorable Eric G. Romanchak presided.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
erroneous standard of review. An FOF is clearly erroneous when, 
despite evidence to support the finding, the appellate court is left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed." Chun v. Bd. of Trs. of the Empls' Ret. Sys. of 
the State of Hawai
'i, 106 Hawai 'i 416, 430, 106 P.3d 339, 353 
(2005) (citations, internal quotation marks, and ellipses omitted). "A COL is not binding upon an appellate court and is freely reviewable for its correctness." Id. (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted). 
[The appellate court] ordinarily reviews COLs under the
right/wrong standard. Thus, a COL that is supported by the
trial court's FOFs and that reflects an application of the
correct rule of law will not be overturned. However, a COL
that presents mixed questions of fact and law is reviewed
under the clearly erroneous standard because the court's
conclusions are dependent upon the facts and circumstances
of each individual case.
 
Id. (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
As an initial matter, under DCRCP Rule 55(b)(1) and
 
(2), default and default judgment may only be entered by the
 
clerk or the court. Parties are not allowed to unilaterally file
 an entry of default or default judgment. This basis alone was
 sufficient for the district court's rejection of Cullen's
 unauthorized documents.
 
Throughout his various filings, Cullen insists that
 
Appellees' purported failure to appear in court provides a basis
 for default judgment in his favor. This argument is baseless. 
The district court's FOFs and COLs, all of which we conclude are
 not clearly erroneous, set out why Appellees were not in default.
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
1. . . . While Ms. Currier's address was listed in
 
the Original Complaint as "c/o Puu O Hoku Ranch", the Ranch
was not named as a defendant in the Original Complaint.
 
. . . .
 
9. On February 23, 2012, Plaintiff [Cullen] filed a
Default Judgment Declaration of Plaintiff (the
"Declaration".) In the Declaration, Plaintiff [Cullen]
appears to assert that default should be entered against
Ms. Currier and the Ranch for their failure to appear at the
return hearing on November 8, 2011 on the Original
Complaint. As noted above, the Ranch was not named as a
defendant in the Original Complaint and had no obligation to
appear. The attorneys for Ms. Currier filed a written
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Answer to the Original Complaint and also appeared at the
return hearing.
 
. . . .
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
1. Rule 12(a) of the DCRCP provides that defendants
shall appear or answer at the time appointed in the summons.
The summonses attached to the Original Complaint and the
Amended Complaint provide that attendance at the Court
hearing can be in person or by the attorney for the party
named in the summons.
 
2. In the case of the Original Complaint, the only
named defendant was Ms. Currier. A written Answer to the
 Original Complaint was filed by Ms. Currier's attorneys on
November 4, 2011 and she was also represented by her
attorney at the return hearing held on November 8, 2011. 
3. In the case of the Amended Complaint, where
Plaintiff [Cullen] improperly added the Ranch as a defendant
in violation of Rule 15(a) of the DCRCP, a written Answer
was filed by the attorneys for Ms. Currier and the Ranch on
February 9, 2012 and both Ms. Currier and the Ranch were
represented by the attorney at the hearing held on February
14, 2012. 
4. The acts which an attorney is authorized to do
by virtue of his employment include the taking of "all steps
in the regular course of litigation . . . [sic]" Scott v.
 
Pilipo, 25 Hawaii 386, 389-390 (1920). The written Answers
 
and appearances filed by the attorneys for Ms. Currier and
the Ranch, respectively, constituted the required responses
from Ms. Currier and the Ranch. As a result, there is no
basis for Plaintiff [Cullen's] claim that either Ms. Currier
or the Ranch, respectively, failed to answer and appear as
required by the DCRCP and the summonses attached to the
Original Complaint and the Amended Complaint.
 
5. Rule 55(a) of the DCRCP provides that an entry
of default may only be entered where a party has failed to
plead or otherwise defend as required by the rules.
Ms. Currier and the Ranch timely answered the Original
Complaint and the Amended Complaint, respectively, and so
there is no basis under Rule 55(a) for the entry of default
against either of them.
 
(Footnote omitted.)
 
The district court also properly struck Cullen's post-
dismissal filings based on DCRCP Rule 12(f), which provides that
 
upon timely motion by a party, "the court may order stricken from
 any pleading any insufficient defense or any redundant,
 immaterial, impertinent, or scandalous matter." In its COL no.
 10, the district court determined that "[i]n the case of the
 Declaration, the March 5 Order, the March 13 Order and the
 Judicial Notice, these pleadings should be stricken in their
 

6

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
entirety because they seek to raise issues that have already been
 
decided by the Court through the dismissals of the Original
 Complaint and the Amended Complaint." 
We conclude that the district court did not abuse its
 
discretion in striking these post-dismissal filings because all
 were unauthorized, redundant, and immaterial.
 
IV.	 The District Court Properly Deemed Cullen a Vexatious
Litigant and Imposed Sanctions on Cullen
 
The district court also declared Cullen a vexatious 
litigant, prohibited him from filing further documents absent 
prior court approval, and imposed sanctions. We review a trial court's determination of whether a person is a vexatious litigant under the abuse of discretion standard. Ek v. Boggs, 102 Hawai
'i 
289, 294, 75 P.3d 1180, 1185 (2003). With regard to the sanctions imposed on Cullen, "[r]egardless of whether sanctions are imposed pursuant to statute, circuit court rule, or the trial court's inherent powers, such awards are reviewed for an abuse of discretion." Kaina v. Gellman, 119 Hawai
'i 324, 329, 197 P.3d 
776, 781 (App. 2008). 
The district court made the following COLs regarding
 
the issue of Cullen as a vexatious litigant:
 
16. Plaintiff [Cullen's] filing of the Declaration,
the March 5 Order, the March 13 Order and the Judicial
Notice are bad faith attempts by Plaintiff [Cullen] to
relitigate the final determinations by Judges MacDonald and
Priest in favor of Ms. Currier and the Ranch as evidenced by
the dismissals of Plaintiff [Cullen's] Complaint and Amended
Complaints, meeting the definition of a "vexatious litigant"
under Section 634J-1(2), Hawaii Revised Statutes [(1993)].
 
17. Furthermore, Plaintiff [Cullen's] filing of the
Declaration, the March 5 Order, the March 13 Order and the
Judicial Notice which seek to characterize Plaintiff
 [Cullen] as the prevailing party, when in fact Plaintiff
[Cullen] is the losing party, are unmeritorious pleadings
filed in bad faith meeting the definition of a vexatious
litigant under 634J-1(3), Hawaii Revised Statutes.
 
18. As a result, an order declaring Plaintiff
[Cullen] to be a vexatious litigant is appropriate.
 
We conclude that the district court did not abuse its discretion
 
in ruling that Cullen is a vexatious litigant, because the court
 made specific, substantive findings and properly relied on
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
evidence establishing that Cullen meets the definition of a
 
"vexatious litigant" in HRS § 634J–1 (1993).6
 
We also agree with the district court's decision to
 
prohibit Cullen from filing further documents pursuant to HRS
 § 634J-7(a) (1993), which provides that a court "may enter a
 prefiling order which prohibits a vexatious litigant from filing
 any new litigation in the courts of this State on the litigant's
 own behalf without first obtaining leave of the presiding judge
 of the court where the litigation is proposed to be filed." 
In EK v. Boggs , the Hawai 'i Supreme Court ruled that "a 
prefiling order does not violate due process rights because it
 does not deny the vexatious litigant access to the courts, but
 operates solely to preclude the initiation of meritless lawsuits
 and their attendant expenditures of time and costs." 102 Hawai
'i 
at 298, 75 P.3d at 1189 (citation and internal quotation marks
 omitted). Here, because Cullen had a hearing on the various
 post-dismissal filings, he had the opportunity to be heard and
 was therefore not deprived of his due process rights. In its COL
 
6 HRS § 634J–1 provides in relevant part:
 
[§634J-1] Definitions.  Unless otherwise clear from

 
the context, as used in this chapter:
. . . .
 
"Vexatious litigant" means a plaintiff who does any of the

following:
. . . .
 
(2)
	 After litigation has been finally resolved
against the plaintiff, relitigates or attempts
to relitigate in propria persona and in bad
faith, either:
(A)	 The validity of the determination against
the same defendant or defendants as to
 whom the litigation was finally
determined; or
(B)	 The cause of action, claim, controversy,
or any of the issues of fact or law,
determined or concluded by the final
determination against the same defendant
or defendants as to whom the litigation
was finally determined;
(3)	 In any litigation while acting in propria
persona, files, in bad faith, unmeritorious
motions, pleadings, or other papers, conducts
unnecessary discovery, or engages in other
tactics that are frivolous or solely intended to
cause unnecessary delay[.]
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
no. 20, the district court concluded that a prefiling order
 
against Cullen was warranted given his "complete disregard of the
 dismissals of his action[.]" Because Cullen filed multiple
 documents that clearly had no basis in law or fact, and
 considering his repeated refusal to comply with the court's
 rulings and procedural rules, a prefiling order was appropriate.
 
Moreover, the district court did not abuse its
 
discretion in sanctioning Cullen pursuant to DCRCP Rule 11, which
 provides in relevant part:
 
A party who is not represented by an attorney shall sign the
party's pleading, motion, or other paper and state the
party's address. . . . The signature of an attorney or party
constitutes a certificate by the signatory that the
signatory has read the pleading, motion, or other paper;
that to the best of the signatory's knowledge, information,
and belief formed after reasonable inquiry it is well
grounded in fact and is not interposed for any improper
purpose, such as to harass or to cause unnecessary delay or
needless increase in the cost of litigation. . . . If a
pleading, motion, or other paper is signed in violation of
this rule, the court, upon motion or upon its own
initiative, shall impose upon the person who signed it, a
represented party, or both, an appropriate sanction, which
may include an order to pay to the other party or parties
the amount of the reasonable expenses incurred because of
the filing of the pleading, motion, or other paper,
including a reasonable attorney's fee.
 
(Emphasis added). In its COL nos. 12-14, the district court
 
concluded that sanctions against Cullen were appropriate because
 his post-dismissal filings were made "in bad faith, without merit
 and as a frivolous tactic in an attempt to improperly undermine
 the rulings of the Court dismissing Plaintiff [Cullen's]
 action[,]" had "no basis in fact[,]" and were filed "to harass
 Ms. Currier and the Ranch resulting in a needless increase in the
 cost of this litigation." 
We agree with the district court's determination that
 
Cullen's post-dismissal filings were in bad faith, without merit,
 and frivolous, and we are especially concerned that these
 documents erroneously purported to represent rulings by the
 district court. Despite the circuit court's clear ruling as to
 the Ranch's ownership of the subject property and the district
 court's repeated dismissal of his complaints in this case, Cullen
 continued to pursue his claim, filing documents purporting to be
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
court orders that were, in fact, contrary to the district court's
 
prior rulings. See Kurkowski v. Volcker, 819 F.2d 201, 204 (8th
 
Cir. 1987) ("We recognize that pro se complaints are read
 liberally, but they still may be frivolous if filed in the face
 of previous dismissals involving the exact same parties under the
 same legal theories.").
 
There is no doubt that Cullen violated DCRCP Rule 11,
 
which mandates that the district court impose sanctions. The
 district court ordered Cullen to pay Appellees' attorneys' fees
 and costs in the amount of $8,049.75. Cullen does not challenge
 the amount of the sanction award and thus has waived any argument
 in that regard. HRAP Rule 28(b)(7).
V. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the April 24, 2012 "Judgment 
Against Plaintiff Paul K. Cullen aka Paul Kauka Naki" entered by 
the District Court of the Second District, Moloka
'i Division, is 
affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 20, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Paul K. Cullen aka
 
Paul Kauka Naki Plaintiff-Appellant pro se
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Craig G. Nakamura

Robert E. Strand 
Lindsay N. McAneeley
(Carlsmith Ball LLP)
for Defendants-Appellees
 
10
 