 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
O
F THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
---o0o---
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
SEAN WEBER, Defendant-Appellant 
NO. CAAP-18-0000478 
A
PPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3DTC-17-051847) 
JUNE 8, 2020 
GINOZA, CHIEF JUDGE, CHAN AND HIRAOKA, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY HIRAOKA, J. 
After a bench trial, Defendant-Appellant Sean Weber 
(Weber
) was convicted by the District Court of the Third Circuit, 
South Kohala Division, State of Hawai# i,1 of excessive speeding 
in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291C-105.2 The 
1 The Honorable Bruce A. Larson presided. 
2 HRS § 291C-105 (2007) provides, in relevant part: 
Excessive speeding . (a) No person shall drive a motor
vehicle at a speed exceeding: 
. . . . 
(continued...) 2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trial court entered a judgment of conviction on May 17, 2018. 
Weber appeals from the "Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment" (Judgment) filed on May 21, 2018. We hold that the trial court 
did not err when it: (1) overruled Weber's objections to 
preliminary questions that laid the foundation for admission of the radar measurement of the speed of Weber's vehicle, or (2) admitted the speed measurement into evidence. Thus, we affirm the Judgment. 
BACKGROUND 
On August 3, 2017, Hawai# i County Police Department 
(
HCPD) officer Kimo Keliipaakaua, using a Stalker DSR 2X radar 
device manufactured by Applied Concepts, Inc., determined that Weber was operating his vehicle on a public road at a speed of 86 miles per hour (MPH).  Officer Keliipaakaua cited Weber for 
excessive speeding. Weber contested the citation. A trial was 
conducted on May 17, 2018. Officer Keliipaakaua was the only witness called. The trial court found Weber guilty. This appeal followed. 
DISCUSSION 
Weber raises two points of error, contending that the 
trial court erred by: (1) allowing Officer Keliipaakaua to testify about the contents of radar training and device manuals over Weber's objections to hearsay
3 and best evidence,4 and 
(...continued)
(2) Eighty miles per hour or more irrespective of the
applicable state or county speed limit. 
3 Rule 802, Hawaii Rules of Evidence, Chapter 626, Hawaii Revised
Statutes (2016) ( HRE) provides: 
Hearsay is not admissible except as provided by these rules,or by other rules prescribed by the Hawaii supreme court, orby statute. 
4 HRE Rule 1002 (2016) provides, in relevant part: 
To prove the content of a writing, . . . the original
(continued...) 
2 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4 (2)
 allowing Officer Keliipaakaua to testify about the speed 
measurement displayed on his Stalker DSR 2X radar device. 
I. Evidentiary Objections 
The State asked Officer Keliipaakaua to describe 
certain contents of the manual that came with his Stalker DSR 2X 
radar. Weber objected based on hearsay and the best evidence rule. The court overruled the objections, and Officer Keliipaakaua responded. The State asked Officer Keliipaakaua to describe certain contents of the manual he received from Applied Concepts, Inc., the manufacturer of the Stalker DSR 2X, when he attended the manufacturer's training class in 2015. Weber objected based on hearsay and the best evidence rule. The court overruled the objections, and Officer Keliipaakaua responded. 
The purpose of the State's questions was to lay the 
foundation for admission of Officer Keliipaakaua's testimony about Weber's speed as indicated on the Stalker DSR 2X radar device. To lay a foundation for the introduction of a speed measurement by a radar device, the State must demonstrate that:(1) the police officer who used the device was trained as 
required by the device manufacturer; and (2) the device's 
accuracy was tested according to manufacturer-recommended 
procedures and was operating properly prior to use. See State v. 
Gonzalez
, 128 Hawai# i 314, 324-27, 288 P.3d 788, 798-801 (2012). 
As to the training prong, the State must show (a) what the 
manufacturer's training requirements were, and (b) what training 
was actually received by the police officer operating the device. 
See State v. Amiral
, 132 Hawai# i 170, 178, 319 P.3d 1178, 1186 
(2014) (citing 
Gonzalez
, 128 Hawai# i at 327, 288 P.3d at 801). 
The Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) do not apply to preliminary 
questions concerning the foundation for admissibility of a radar 
(...continued)
writing[] . . . is required, except as otherwise provided inthese rules or by statute. 
3 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
speed measurement. HRE Rule 104(a);  HRE Rule 1101(d)(1) . The 
trial court did not err in overruling Weber's objections. 6 5
II. Foundation for Radar Speed Measurement 
"The determination of whether proper foundation has 
been established lies within the discretion of the trial court, 
and its determination will not be overturned absent a showing ofclear abuse." 
Gonzalez, 128 Hawai# i at 325, 288 P.3d at 799 
(cleaned up) (quoting State v. Assaye, 121 
Hawai# i 204, 210, 216
P.3d 1227, 1233 (2009)).  
 
A. Weber waived any objection to training. 
In his closing argument Weber conceded that Officer 
Keliipaakaua was properly trained to operate his Stalker DSR 2X radar.  He waived any challenge to the training prong. 
See 
Gonzalez, 128 Hawai# i at 317, 288 P.3d at 791 (noting that 7
5 HRE Rule 104(a) (2016) provides, in relevant part: 
Questions of admissibility generally. Preliminary questions
concerning . . . the admissibility of evidence shall bedetermined by the court, subject to the provisions ofsubsection (b) [concerning relevancy conditioned on fact].In making its determination the court is not bound by therules of evidence except those with respect to privileges. 
6 HRE Rule 1101(d)(1) (2016) provides: 
(d) Rules inapplicable. The rules (other than with
respect to privileges) do not apply in the following: 
(1) Preliminary questions of fact. The determination of questions of fact preliminaryto admissibility of evidence when the issue isto be determined by the court under rule 104. 
7 In State v. Gleed, No. CAAP-16-0000373, 2017 WL 2839547 (Haw. App.
June 30, 2017) (SDO) the majority held that the State failed to lay asufficient foundation to establish that Officer Keliipaakaua was qualified tooperate the radar device at issue in that case. Id. at *1. In a concurring
opinion, Chief Judge Nakamura noted: "[W]hile proof that OfficerKeliipaakau[a] had successfully completed training provided or conducted by arepresentative of the manufacturer would, in my view, have been sufficient tosatisfy the qualified operator prong, the State did not present suchevidence." Id. at *2 n.1 (Nakamura, C.J., concurring). In this case, the
State presented evidence that Officer Keliipaakaua attended and passed thetraining conducted by the manufacturer's representatives. 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
failure to properly raise issue at trial level precludes party 
from raising that issue on appeal). 
B. The State laid a proper foundation
for accuracy of the radar device. 
Officer Keliipaakaua testified that on the day he 
ticketed Weber, he tested and operated his assigned Stalker DSR 
2X radar according to the contents of the manual that came with the device, the contents of the manual he received when he was trained by the manufacturer's representatives, and the actual training he received from the manufacturer. 
He testified that he tests his radar before and after 
each shift to determine that it is operating properly. 
He first 
powers the device on and allows it to run an internal self-check. If it is running properly it emits four rapid tones; if something was wrong, the screen would read "fail" and the device would be inoperable. 
The radar is operational once it passes the self-check. 
Officer Keliipaakaua then puts the device back into test mode using the remote control that comes with the device. This causes the device to run a second internal check. If the device is performing properly another four rapid tones would sound. He then performs an accuracy test using two tuning forks that come with the device. The forks are calibrated for 25 MPH and 40 MPH, and come with their own certificates of accuracy. He checks the target zones for the front and rear antennae. Each antenna has two target zones, for a total of four target zones: (1) vehicles traveling ahead of him in the same direction; (2) vehicles approaching him from the front; (3) vehicles approaching him from behind; and (4) vehicles behind him traveling away from him. He strikes a tuning fork on a non-metallic surface and it emits a frequency. He then holds the fork 2-6 inches away from an antenna. The device will display a speed. If the device is working properly, the displayed speed would be within 1 MPH of the speed to which the tuning fork was calibrated. He tests all 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
four of the device's target zones. Officer Keliipaakaua 
testified that his Stalker DSR 2X radar tested properly before and after his shift on the day he ticketed Weber. 
C. The "calibration" issue. 
Weber argues the State failed to establish that the 
radar used by Officer Keliipaakaua was properly "calibrated."
  
On voir dire, Weber asked Officer Keliipaakaua whether his radardevice was calibrated. Officer Keliipaakaua testified that the device came with its own dated calibration certificate, and had been calibrated in September 2012 (almost five years before Weber's alleged offense). He was then asked to read aloud from page 40 of the device's manual,  which the trial court allowed 
over the State's objection. He read: 
98
 
So the heading is "Why Testing is Important." 
"In order to ensure continued compliance with FCC
rules, meet legal requirements for admissibility of radar
speed measurements, and verify full operating performance,the following test procedures are recommended. If the unit fails any of the -- the tests, it should be removed fromservice until the cause of the problem is corrected." 
Uh, next heading is gonna be "Periodic Calibration." 
"We recommend that the following performance
characteristics should be verified on a regular basis. 
8 The supreme court mentioned the "calibration" issue in Amiral, but
that case was decided based on the State's failure to lay foundation for the
officer's training, and the calibration issue was not reached. Amiral
, 132
Hawai #i at 179, 319 P.3d at 1187. Amiral
 and Assaye both involved the use of
a Laser Technology Incorporated 20–20 UltraLyte laser gun by the HonoluluPolice Department, rather than the Applied Concepts, Inc. Stalker DSR 2X radarused by the HCPD; it is not at all clear from the cases whether a laser gun(which uses light waves) is "calibrated" in the same manner as a radar gun(which uses radio frequency waves). 
We did not reach the calibration issue in State v. Portillo
,
No. CAAP-18-0000949, 2020 WL 1879621 (Haw. App. Apr. 15, 2020) (SDO)(involving the 
Kaua #i Police Department's use of an unidentified radar gun)
because it had been waived. Id.
 at *2. 
9 The manual shown to Officer Keliipaakaua was the one he brought
with him to court. It came with the Stalker DSR 2X he was issued in October 2017, after he cited Weber. He explained that the manual "[s]tays with theunit[,]" but because his new radar was the same model as his old radar, themanuals had the same content. 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"No. 1. Transmitter frequency is within specification
of licensed operating frequency. 
"No. 2. Unit indicates correct speed, plus or minus
one mile per hour, when reading a target of known speed. 
"No. 3. Unit detects target of good reflectivity over
unobstructed flat terrain at distances of half a mile or 
more when set for highest sensitivity, sensitivity 4." 
Officer Keliipaakaua testified that he does not "calibrate" the
device, and that the device's manual does not provide user instructions for "calibrating" the device. He agreed that "calibration goes towards the internal circuitry of the StalkerDSR 2X, as well as setting the frequency levels[.]" He explained:  
 
Q. Officer, when is it appropriate to send that device
for calibration? 
A. So basically there's -- there's two things that,
uh, when I took the class, that was a big question that we
asked, uh, the instructors is, "When -- How often do we needto calibrate the device", 'cause, again, it was a big thing,talking about calibration versus accuracy tests, and theiranswer is there's a difference between recommendation and requirements. 
So in -- in this manual and in the passage you were
just read, there were recommendations, meaning, and comingfrom the instructors, they recommend that the -- the unitbe, um, calibrated every three years. 
When does it have to 
be, when is it required to be calibrated, is whenever youhave problems with it, as it said in the manual. Whenever it says "Fail" and you're unable to remedy the –- remedy theproblem, then you have to send it back in, that is therequirement, to have it recalibrated; but prior to that, if 
you do the accuracy test and it's within the plus or minusone using the tuning forks, 'cause, again, each tuning forkis calibrated and it comes with its certificate of accuracy,as long as it's reading true to that or within that varianceof plus or minus one, that the -- the device is workingproperly, then there will be no need for recalibration . And 
that's coming from the instructors. 
Q. Then the other question is, is the language on page
40 of the manual, that you read, list [sic] three differentitems. 
A.
 Yes. 
Q. One is the aspect of the quarter mile, um, testing;
the other one is the, uh, testing of the device within plusor minus one; and the other one is something to do with FCC,uh, frequency. 
A. Yes. 
7 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q. Is that part of calibration or part of accuracy
testing? 
A. So the first one is part of calibration, and that's 
talking about the transmitting frequency, that's the --
within regulation of the FCC . So that information is on the 
certificate of accuracy, or another [sic] words thatcalibration certificate, it says on there that it meets, um,the -- the FCC, uh, regulations as in -- as in accordancewith them. So all that information is contained on that accuracy of -- uh, certificate of accuracy, which is thesame thing as a calibration certificate. So they're theones that, um, do that calibration to the frequency. It's already been completed. Again, there's nowhere in themanual that teaches me how to do that, or the user how to dothat, as well as the cal -- calibration itself. 
The second part is talking about the tuning forks.
That is the only known speed because each tuning fork has
been calibrated to a specific, uh, frequency which gives offa certain miles per hour  and the variances between plus or
minus one of -- of that frequency. 
And then the last part is just when you use the
device, is it picking up vehicles or are you able to measurevehicles at a certain distance? 
That's the three -- three requirements that I just
said in there, and again, these are recommendations. 
(Emphasis added.) 
Weber cites State v. Manewa, 115 Hawai# i 343, 167 P.3d 
336 (2007), in support of his argument that the State failed to 
show that the radar was properly "calibrated." The defendant in Manewa was charged with promoting methamphetamine. The State was required to prove that the defendant possessed 1/8 ounce or more of methamphetamine. The State relied on the testimony of a Honolulu Police Department chemist (Mohammed). Mohammed 
testified that he used an "analytical balance" to determine the 
weight of the substance he determined to be methamphetamine. He had been using the device for 25 to 30 years, and was "trained on how to use it and to operate it." Id. at 346, 167 P.3d at 339 (emphasis omitted). However, when asked whether he knew if there were "any procedures or . . . any protocol to determine whether or not your balance is operating properly[]" he responded, "We have a manufacturer representative who checks out and services the balance two times a year[.]" Id. (emphasis omitted). Mohammed did not check the balance before each individual test he 
8 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
performed during the normal course of business. 
The defendant 
argued that the State failed to lay foundation for Mohammed's 
testimony about the weight of the substance. 
The Manewa court agreed, citing State v. Wallace
, 80 
Hawai# i 382, 910 P.2d 695 (1996). As explained by the 
Manewa 
court, Wallace held that the State failed to establish the accuracy of an electric balance used to weigh cocaine found in the defendant's car. In that case, a forensic chemist (Chinn) 
testified about the weight of the cocaine. Chinn "had personal 
knowledge that the electronic balance was calibrated annually, [but] he lacked personal knowledge that the balance had been correctly calibrated and merely assumed that the manufacturer's service representative had done so." Manewa
, 115 Hawai# i at 353, 
167 P.3d at 346 (cleaned up) (citing 
Wallace
, 80 Hawai# i at 412, 
910 P.2d at 725). In 
Manewa the supreme court noted that "the 
service representative [in Wallace] did not testify at trial regarding his calibration of the balance" and "the prosecution . . . did not offer any business record of the manufacturer reflecting proper calibration of the balance." Id. (cleaned up). 
The supreme court had concluded in Wallace that "because inadequate foundation was laid to show that the weight measured by the balance could be relied on as a substantive fact, [Chinn's] assumption that the balance was accurate was based on inadmissible hearsay." Id. (cleaned up). Applying Wallace to 
the facts of Manewa, the supreme court noted: "Like forensic chemist Chinn in Wallace, Mohammed 'had personal knowledge that the electronic balance was calibrated [semi-]annually.' However, as in Wallace, there was no evidence that Mohammed had personal knowledge that the balance had been correctly calibrated." Manewa
, 115 Hawai# i at 355, 167 P.3d at 348 (alteration in 
original) (citation omitted). 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Manewa
 and Wallace are both distinguishable on their 
facts. "Calibrate" means "to measure against a standard[.]" 
Calibrate, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/ dictionary/calibrate (last updated June 2, 2020). In Manewa and Wallace there was no evidence that Mohammed or Chinn measured the accuracy of their respective balances against a standard by, for example, weighing objects of a certified weight before or after weighing the evidence at issue in those cases. In State v. Tailo, 70 Haw. 580, 779 P.2d 11 (1989), the supreme court approved the use of tuning forks as calibration standards for radar guns: 
A special tuning fork can be used to check the calibration
of the radar gun . The tuning fork is specially tuned to
vibrate at a frequency equal to the Doppler frequency forsome set speed stamped into the handle of the fork. To test the accuracy of the radar gun with the fork, the officerstrikes the fork to get it vibrating and then holds the forkin front of the radar head. The radar unit will then read the fork's vibration and display the read Doppler frequencyvalue for comparison by the officer with the imprinted valueon the fork. . . . 
. . . . 
. . . [W]e hold that once the State puts in evidence that
the police conducted a tuning fork test indicating the[radar] gun was properly calibrated, this evidence creates aprima facie presumption that the tuning fork itself wasaccurately calibrated . 
Id. at 583, 779 P.2d at 13-14 (emphasis added). In this case 
Officer Keliipaakaua testified that he measured his radar device's accuracy against a standard — two calibrated, certified tuning forks that came with the device. Weber produced no evidence to rebut the prima facie presumption that the tuning forks were accurately calibrated. Although Officer Keliipaakaua did not use the words "calibrate" or "calibrated" to describe his Stalker DSR 2X radar, his testimony established that he in fact verified that his Stalker DSR 2X radar was "calibrated" to accurately measure the speed of Weber's vehicle. The State satisfied the foundational requirements for admitting Officer Keliipaakaua's radar measurement of the speed of Weber's vehicle 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
into evidence under 
Gonzales
, 128 Hawai# i at 324-27, 288 P.3d at 
798-801, and 
Tailo, 70 Haw. at 583, 779 P.2d at 13-14. 
CONCLUSION 
Based upon the foregoing, we hold that the trial court 
did not abuse its discretion by admitting Officer Keliipaakaua's 
radar measurement of the speed of Weber's vehicle into evidence. Accordingly, the "Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment" filedon May 21, 2018, is affirmed.  
On the briefs: 
E. Britt Bailey,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Daria K. Lagmay,
for Defendant-Appellant. /s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
11 