 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
  
            
 
 
NO. CAAP-22-0000267 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI ‘I 
  
 
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Hiraoka and Nakasone, JJ.,
with Leonard, Presiding Judge, concurring separately) 
 
  Defendant-Appellant Zeth Browder ( Browder) appeals from 
the March 29, 2022 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, entered by 
the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit ( Circuit Court ).
1   
Following a jury trial, Browder was found guilty of two counts of 
  
 
   
  Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000267 20-OCT-2023 08:03 AM Dkt. 94 MO 
STATE OF HAWAI ‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
ZETH BROWDER, Defendant-Appellant 
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 3CPC-19-0000486) 
1 The Honorable Robert D.S. Kim presided.  
 
   
 
   
 
 
  
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
first-degree sexual assault, two counts of third-degree sexual 
assault, first-degree burglary, kidnapping, and tampering with physical evidence.
2 Browder was sentenced to thirty years of 
imprisonment.3 He timely appealed. 
On appeal,4 Browder contends that the Circuit Court 
erred by: (1) transferring a motion to disqualify or recuse the assigned trial judge to another judge to decide (Browder also challenges the second judge's denial of the motion); (2) violating the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and 
Article I, Section 4 of the 
Hawai ‘i Constitution by limiting 
public access to the courtroom; (3) denying Browder's motion to dismiss based on violations of his rights under 
Hawai ‘i Rules of 
Penal Procedure Rule 48 and his speedy trial rights; (4) 
accepting Browder's evidentiary stipulations to admit certain 
exhibits when the stipulations were not "knowingly, intelligently and voluntarily executed"; (5) finding that there was sufficient evidence adduced at trial to convict Browder of a 
"supposed knife-point sexual assault"; and (6) giving Hawai ‘i 
Standard Jury Instructions Criminal ( HAWJIC) 3.09, the 
credibility of witnesses instruction. 
Browder also contends 
that (7) his trial counsel was ineffective; and (8) the 
prosecutor committed misconduct during closing argument based on 
2 The underlying charges in the Indictment arose out of a June 15,
2019 incident in which the Complaining Witness ( CW) alleged that Browder
broke into her camping tent and sexually assaulted her. 
3 The Circuit Court ran the 10-year terms of imprisonment for the
first-degree burglary and kidnapping offenses, consecutive to the 20-year
terms of imprisonment for the first-degree sexual assault offenses and theremaining offenses. 
4 Browder's points of error ( POEs) do not comply with Hawai ‘i Rules 
of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4), which requires the POEs be set forth in"separately numbered paragraphs." (Emphasis added.) We have numbered the POEs. 
2  
 
    
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Hirata , 152 Hawai ‘i 27, 520 P.3d, 225 (2022),5 by 
arguing that (a) CW's testimony was "consistent with someone 
who's been traumatized"; and (b) "As to Charge 1, we know that 
on June 15, 2019 the defendant vaginally penetrated [CW] with his penis."
6 
Browder's last point of error is dispositive. For the 
reasons explained herein, we hold that the second challenged remark constituted misconduct that was not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt. We also conclude that there was sufficient 
evidence adduced at trial to convict Browder of the sexual assault offenses, and vacate and remand for a new trial. 
I. BACKGROUND 
On July 9, 2019, Browder was charged via Indictment 
with two counts of first-degree sexual assault, two counts of third-degree sexual assault,
7 and one count each of first-degree 
burglary, kidnapping, and tampering with physical evidence. 
Trial Proceedings Jury trial was held on November 30 through December 1, 
2, 7, 8, 9, and 14, and 15, 2021, when the jury returned its verdict. 
Browder's defense presented in his opening statement 
was that the sexual assault never happened. Browder's trial counsel stated that the case involved "fictitious claims of 
5 Browder was permitted to file his January 12, 2023 Supplemental
Brief to raise prosecutorial misconduct based on State v. Hirata. The 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai ‘i (State) also filed a Supplemental Brief on
January 23, 2023. 
6 Browder specifically challenges the "we know" argument made in
reference to Count 1, first-degree sexual assault for vaginal penetration.
We also address a second similar "we know" argument that was made inreference to Count 2, first-degree sexual assault for fellatio, immediatelyfollowing the initial "we know" argument. 
7 Browder was initially charged with three counts of first-degree
sexual assault, but one count was struck by the State. 
3  
 
  
  
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
sexual assault" by CW, a "rush to judgment" by the police, and 
that the evidence would contradict CW's "alleged fictitious assault" claim. 
CW's testimony: CW, who was 80 years old at the time 
of trial, testified that in June 2019 when she was 78 years old, she visited the Big Island. CW camped for four nights in a tent at Spencer's Beach Camp, located on the Kona side of the Big Island ( Camp) from Wednesday, June 12, 2019 to Sunday, June 16, 
2019. Upon arrival, on June 12, 2019, a male "in his 20’s" that CW had just met, whom she later identified as Browder, assisted 
CW in bringing her items to her tent. That same day, CW also 
met another individual, "Matthew," who was with Browder. Throughout CW's time at the Camp, CW spoke with Browder multiple times, drove Matthew and Browder to the store to grab ice, and drove Browder to his grandmother's house. 
On Friday, June 14th, additional campers arrived at 
the Camp for the weekend. That Friday night, after falling 
asleep alone in her tent, CW was suddenly awakened early 
Saturday morning by "something on [her] back and a large bang . . . and that it felt like a bear." CW described being sexually assaulted and identified Browder as the suspect.
8 The male told 
8 CW identified Browder as the suspect as follows: 
A.  [(By CW)] Okay. And, um, as -- as that happened I
said -- then I realized that it wasn't a bear, but
I said, "What do you want?" 
 
 Q. [(By Prosecutor)] Now, did you know when you were
woken up what was on top of you? 
 
 A. Not at first, no. 
 
 Q. How was I guess whatever -- whatever [sic] was on
top of you, how was that positioned over you while you were
in your tent? 
  A. Totally covering my whole body. 
(continued. . .)
4  
 
  
 
 A. . . . And so the only thing that came to my mind
is that I opened my fingers a little bit, and I saw that
his hair was on the body, his body and I said I thought itwas dark. 
  And then I -- my neck was arched back as the penis
was going in and out, and I opened the fingers and I saw alittle bit of his face. I don't know if I saw the whole face or what, but it was the same face of [Browder] and it
was the voice. . . . 
 
. . . .  Q. And you were face down on your stomach? 
 
 A. I was face down on my stomach. Yes. 
  Q. At some point, um, did you -- were you able to
figure out what was holding you down? 
 
A. Yes. 
 
 Q. How did -- how were you able to make that
determination? 
 
 A. Because the person said -- he – the person pulled
my body up and arched my head back and was trying to put adark object, a dark hood over my head, but I don't knowwhat it was made of or anything. It was just dark, very
dark. 
 
 And that made me say or [sic] I couldn't able to
breathe. "I can't breathe. I can't breathe." 
 
 And the hands of that person came around my neck and
held it tight and said, "Put your hand over your eyes and
don't move. Don't move or I'm going to kill you. I'm goingto kill you." And then he said, "Keep it there." 
 
 Q. Now, [CW], did you recognize the voice that was
telling you to cover your eyes? 
 
A. Yes. 
 
 Q. Did you recognize the voice that told you that
they would kill you? 
 
A. Yes. 
 
 Q. Whose voice was that? 
 
 A. The defendant [(Browder)]. 
 
. . . . NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
8(. . .continued)
(continued. . .)
5  
 
   
  
 
 
 Q. When you walked to the bathroom was anybody else,
um, any other campers awake? 
 
A. No. 
 
 Q. Did you hear anyone as you were walking to the
bathroom? 
 
 A. I heard [Browder]'s name. I heard [Browder]'s --
not name, [Browder]'s voice and he said, "Are you leaving?" 
 
(Emphases added). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
CW to put her hands over her eyes and to not move, or else she 
would get killed. The male put his hands over CW's neck, flipped CW over, and demanded that CW put her legs around him. At this point, the male began "penetrating into [CW's] vaginal 
area" with his penis and CW was "shaking." The male pushed CW's 
head toward his body, began sucking on CW's breasts, told CW to put her hands on his penis, and put his penis into CW's mouth. CW began to feel "pain all over [her] body[,]" and "felt a sharp object coming into [her] back[,]" but did not see the object. CW's head was pushed into the bottom of the tent, which was on 
top of small rocks, and her "face felt like it was being 
smashed." CW could not remember if the male left after the incident, but remembered that she "had to go to the bathroom" due to "leakage" coming from her vaginal area. 
After the incident, CW walked to the bathroom and 
heard the male's voice asking if she was "'leaving.'" CW responded that she was going to the bathroom, continued on to 
the bathroom, and noticed that the leakage was "urine." After 
using the bathroom, CW was afraid that the male would kill her, and walked to her vehicle to call her friend in North Carolina. CW could not drive because the gates at the Camp were closed, and she did not call 911 because she was "too shaky." CW, on the advice of her friend, walked toward other campers in an 
8(. . .continued)
6  
 
   
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
attempt to get closer to other people. CW noticed that all the 
other campers were sleeping, and she sat on a bench near the other campers' tents. Browder approached CW at the bench and asked if she wanted "'to talk'" and if she was "'going back to 
[her] tent[,]'" to which she responded "'[n]o.'" Browder 
eventually left and CW was "too shaky and frozen," and sat at the bench until another camper woke up. CW told the camper that she was "'raped'" and could not move due to fear, and the camper called 911. 
Officers Ayau's and Kailiuli's testimony: On June 15, 
2019, Hawai ‘i Police Department ( HPD) officers Robert Ayau 
(Officer Ayau ) and Jonathan Kailiuli ( Officer Kailiuli ) 
testified that they were dispatched to the Camp for a sexual assault type case. Officer Ayau observed CW was "crying," "very emotional[,]" and that she had "scratches" on her cheeks and face. Officer Kailiuli interviewed CW and observed that CW was 
"under some stress[,]" "distraught," "afraid[,]" and "shooken 
[sic] up." Based on his interview with CW, Officer Kailiuli identified the suspect as Browder, who had a tent within the same area as CW. Officers Kailiuli and Ayau located Browder sleeping on the "top of [a] picnic table" under his pop-up tent, where they also located a "wooden object sharpened to a point." Officer Kailiuli arrested Browder, informed him of CW's report, 
and that he was under arrest for sexual assault. There were ten 
to twelve campers in the area. Browder's tent was "approximately 50 feet" from CW's tent. 
Witness Demotta's testimony: Witness Michael Demotta 
(
Witness Demotta ) testified that while at the Camp, she observed 
CW, Browder, and another older male interacting. On June 14, 
2019, Witness Demotta fell asleep at 10:00 p.m. and woke up at 
approximately 4:30 a.m. the next day, used the bathroom, and 
7  
 
   
  
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
observed CW sitting on the picnic table. Witness Demotta went 
to the bathroom a second time and after exiting the bathroom, CW "grabbed" her arm and told Witness Demotta about the incident. CW was "shooken [sic] up" and "[l]ooked like she was crying[.]" 
Witness Demotta called 911. 
Detectives Acob's and Delaries's testimony: HPD 
detectives Clarence Acob ( Detective Acob ) and Calvin Delaries 
(Detective Delaries ) were assigned to CW 's case. Detective Acob 
testified that on June 26, 2019, he interviewed CW at the Hilo 
police station and that she began to "cry." CW identified 
Browder from a photo lineup and "again she started to tear[.]" 
Detective Delaries met CW at Kona Hospital on the date 
of the incident, where he observed her crying and shaking. 
Detective Delaries directed another detective to obtain Browder's clothes while he was at the Kona police station. Detective Delaries was informed that Browder did not want to give his underwear. Detective Delaries checked the surveillance 
system, where he observed Browder wearing a "black band 
underneath the paper clothes" given to Browder to wear, after Browder's shirt and shorts had been removed. Detective Delaries saw Browder "pulling on something by his left hip[,]" holding "something black in his hand[,]" shoving the "black material" down the toilet, and flushing it. The surveillance footage was 
not admitted into evidence because "there was some type of 
technical issue" with retrieving it. 
Nurse Davis's testimony: Misty Davis ( Nurse Davis ), a 
registered nurse and a sexual assault nurse examiner who examined CW on June 15, 2019, testified as an expert in the "examination and treatment of patients of alleged sexual abuse." 
Nurse Davis described CW as "tearful" and "shaky" during the 
8  
 
  
  To assist in her testimony regarding CW's physical 
examination, Nurse Davis referred to the stipulated photographs 
taken of CW during the examination. During the physical 
examination, CW reported "generalized pain and tenderness" and "pain to the back of her head and neck." Nurse Davis observed "dried blood" above the lip. Abrasions
11 were observed on the 
"cheeks," "upper lip[,]" "bridge of her nose," "left eyebrow[,]" "right shoulder," "right arm[,]" and "right knee." Abrasions 
and blunt-force trauma were also observed on the "uvula[,]"
12  
"soft palate," and "hard palate[.]"13  Bruises14 were observed on 
 
   
  
 
   
 
   
    
  
     
  
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
examination. As part of the examination, Nurse Davis conducted 
a physical9 and genital10 examination of CW. 
9 The physical examination consisted of a "head to toe" examination
with the documentation of "areas of injury" and "pain or tenderness,"
including the "taking [of] photographs." 
10 The genital examination consisted of the observation of the
genital area and the taking of photographs, including the collection of swabsfrom the genital area. 
11 Nurse Davis defined an "abrasion" as the "breaking or scraping
away of the skin." 
12 While referring to State's Exhibit 112, a photograph of the
interior of CW's mouth, Nurse Davis described the "uvula" as the "littlepart" "hang[ing] down." 
13 Referring again to Exhibit 112, Nurse Davis referred to "hard
palate" and "soft palate" as areas "inside the mouth." The record does not reflect exactly how Nurse Davis used the photograph in Exhibit 112 to explainthese terms. We take judicial notice that "hard palate" is defined as "the
bony anterior part of the palate forming the roof of the mouth" Hard Palate,
Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/hard%20palate(last visited Aug. 30, 2023). "Soft palate" is defined as "the fold at theback of the hard palate that partially separates the mouth from the pharynx."Soft palate, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/
soft%20palate (last visited May 31, 2023). See HRE Rule 201(b) ("A
judicially noticed fact must be one not subject to reasonable dispute in thatit is either (1) generally known within the territorial jurisdiction of thetrial court, or (2) capable of accurate and ready determination by resort tosources whose accuracy cannot reasonably be questioned."). 
14 Nurse Davis defined "bruise" as "bleeding" "into the skin due to
an injury or blunt-force trauma[,]" which "can be in a variety of colors." 
9  
 
   
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
  
 
   
    
 
   
 
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the "lip," "left hip," "right thigh[,]" "right hand," and "right 
shin." Petechiae-like15 spots were also observed on the breasts, 
which could have been caused by "blunt-force trauma" or "suction." 
To assist in her testimony regarding CW's genital 
examination, Nurse Davis referred to the stipulated diagram of the female genitalia, Exhibit 156.
16 Nurse Davis observed 
"general redness" to the "labia majora."17 Redness, bruising, 
and petechiae were observed on the "labia minora,"18 
"introitus,"19 and "hymen."20 Petechiae was observed on the 
"cervix."21 "[T]here was bruising and a tear to the posterior 
15 Nurse Davis defined "petechiae" as "small red or purple spots
that are caused by bleeding into the skin." 
16 The diagram in Exhibit 156 depicts female genitalia, with no
labeling of individual genital parts. 
17 Nurse Davis defined "labia majora" as the "outer areas" of the
female genital, which are "speckled with . . . hair" on the diagram. 
18 Referring to the diagram in Exhibit 156, Nurse Davis explained
that the "labia minora" was the "[i]nternal" area of the "labia majora." 
19 Nurse Davis defined the "introitus" as the area "surrounding" the
"speckled pieces of hair" on the diagram in Exhibit 156. We take judicial
notice that "introitus" is defined as "the vaginal opening." Introitus,Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/medical/introitus; see HRERule 201(b). 
20 Referring to the diagram in Exhibit 156, Nurse Davis explained
that the "hymen" is the "surrounding" area of the hole that leads to the"vagina." 
21 Nurse Davis did not define or explain "cervix." "Cervix" is 
defined as "the narrow outer end of the uterus." Cervix, Merriam-Webster,
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/cervix (last visited May 31,2023); see HRE Rule 201(b). 
10  
 
   
  
 
   
  
 
   
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
fourchette22 and the fossa navicularis[.]"23 (Footnote added.) 
There was a tear on the fold between the labia majora and labia 
minora. Nurse Davis collected the following from CW: "buccal swabs";
24 "oral swabs"; swabs from "both of her breasts[,]" 
"external" and "internal" "vaginal area," "face," and "both of her hands underneath her fingernails." 
In conjunction with a search warrant, Nurse Davis 
collected the following from Browder: "buccal swabs[,]" "penile and scrotum swabs," swabs from his "upper arms" and "hands," a hair sample, and "scrapings from underneath the fingernails on 
both hands." 
DNA Expert Yuen's testimony: Sebastian Yuen ( Yuen), 
an expert in serology and forensic DNA testing, testified that a 
"serological test" was performed on the swabs obtained from CW's breasts, mouth, external and internal vaginal area, and face. The swabs obtained from CW's breasts did not contain a full DNA profile; however, based on the partial profile obtained, Yuen 
determined that the DNA profile contained a mixture of two 
individuals, with male DNA present, and that Browder could not be "excluded as a possible contributor" to the foreign DNA profile. The swabs obtained from CW's face contained a DNA profile of two individuals, with male DNA present, and Browder "[was] excluded" as a possible contributor. The swabs obtained 
from CW's mouth and external and internal vaginal area contained 
22 Referring to the diagram in Exhibit 156, Nurse Davis explained
that the "fossa navicularis" is the "area of skin" at the bottom of the hole 
leading to the vagina that "protrudes from the vagina to the outer
genitalia." 
23 Referring to the diagram in Exhibit 156, Nurse Davis explained
that the "posterior fourchette" is the "very thin . . . piece of skin" that
"protect[s]" the "introitus." 
24 Nurse Davis explained that "buccal swabs" are swabs that go
"inside the cheek." 
11  
 
   Browder did not present any evidence and did not 
testify. 
  
  During closing argument, the prosecutor made the following argument pertinent to this appeal, and the remarks at 
issue are underscored: 
 She's 80 years old. She was nervous, shaking on the
witness stand. She was emotional and crying. She was
scared. She told you she was scared that morning. She was
scared at the hospital. She was scared even a week and a
half later, and she was still scared in court. This is consistent with someone who's been traumatized. 
   . . . . 
 
 So again, ladies and gentlemen, when we look back at
the credibility factors that Judge Kim instructed you on as
well as the evidence presented in this case, when we turn
to that question, "Is [CW] believable?" State submits the
answer is, "Yes." And because [CW] is believable let's look
to the elements that the State needs to prove. 
 
 As to Charge 1 we know that on June 15, 2019
[Browder] vaginally penetrated [CW] with his penis. That hedid so with strong compulsion; the threats of bodily
injury, the force of holding her down. State 's proved the
second element. And [Browder] knew exactly what he was
doing when he did those things. 
 
As to count Charge 2, that's the fellatio count. We
know [Browder] shoved his penis again and again into [CW]'smouth. He also did so with the same strong compulsion; thethreats to kill her, the threats to her life, as well as
holding her down and also [Browder] he [sic] knew what he
was doing. 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
no male DNA or p30 protein, a protein found in semen. A 
serological test was also performed on the penile and scrotum swabs obtained from Browder. There was no presence of p30 protein present or human DNA on the swabs.  
 Defense 
case 
Closing arguments, verdict, sentencing 
(Emphases added).25 The prosecutor conceded that CW "couldn 't 
remember some things[,]" and that CW "admitted . . . that she 
25 The defense did not object to these arguments.
12  
 
  
 
  
  
  
  "The term 'prosecutorial misconduct' is a legal term 
of art that refers to any improper action committed by a 
prosecutor, however harmless or unintentional." State v.
Maluia, 107 Hawai ‘i 20, 25, 108 P.3d 974, 979 (2005). 
Prosecutorial misconduct may be subject to plain error review 
"[b]ecause prosecutorial misconduct impacts the fundamental 
right to a fair trial . . . ." 
Hirata, 152 Hawai ‘i at 31, 
520 P.3d at 229 (citing State v. Riveira, 149 Hawai ‘i 427, 
431 n.10, 494 P.3d 1160, 1164 n.10 (2021)). Thus, NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
didn't remember" certain things.  In conclusion, the prosecutor 
urged the jury to "[h]old the defendant responsible for what he did to [CW] and find him guilty as charged[,]" based on the "evidence of the terrifying events that [CW] lived through in 
her tent on June 15th, 2019." 
In the defense's closing argument, Browder's trial 
counsel circled back to repeat the defense theory presented in 
opening statement, stating: "I told you the evidence would show fictitious cries of sexual assault by [CW], a rush to judgment 
by the Hawai ‘i police investigating this case, and the wrongful 
arrest of an innocent teenager and the evidence showed all of 
this." The defense argued that the contradictory evidence proved that the case involved "fictitious cries of rape, of 
sexual assault by [CW]"; "[t]here was no investigation of the 
alleged crime scene"; there was no "corroboration" of CW's story from the evidence presented, such as the lack of DNA evidence; and there was nothing "putting [] [Browder] in [CW] 's tent." 
The jury found Browder guilty of all counts, and 
following sentencing, Browder timely appealed. 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
Prosecutorial Misconduct 
13  
 
   
 When reviewing sufficiency of evidence on appeal, 
"[e]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in the 
strongest light for the prosecution . . . ."  State v. Kalaola, 
124 Hawai ‘i 43, 49, 237 P.3d 1109, 1115 (2010) (quoting State v. 
Richie, 88 
Hawai ‘i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998)).     
  
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[o]nce the defense establishes misconduct — objection or no
objection — appellate review is the same: "After 
considering the nature of the prosecuting attorney's
conduct, promptness or lack of a curative instruction, andstrength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant,a reviewing court will vacate a conviction if there is areasonable possibility that the conduct might have affected
the trial's outcome." 
Id. (quoting Riveira, 149 Hawai ‘i at 431, 494 P.3d at 1164). 
Sufficiency of Evidence 
The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established
beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there wassubstantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trierof fact. "'Substantial evidence' as to every materialelement of the offense charged is credible evidence which
is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a
person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." 
Id. (quoting Richie, 88 Hawai ‘i at 33, 960 P.2d at 1241). 
III. DISCUSSION 
A. The prosecutorial misconduct in closing
argument was not harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt. 
Citing Hirata, Browder argues that the following 
remarks constituted misconduct: (1) that CW's testimony was 
"consistent with someone who's been traumatized"; and (2) "As to Charge 1, we know that on June 15, 2019 the defendant vaginally penetrated [CW] with his penis." (Emphasis added.) We also address the second "we know" argument immediately following the 
first one: "As to count Charge 2, that's the fellatio count. 
We know the defendant shoved his penis again and again into [CW]'s mouth." (Emphasis added.) The full context of the remarks is as follows: 
14  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: . . . Madam Prosecutor, you may commence
when you're ready. 
[PROSECUTOR]: Thank you, Your Honor. "Do what I say or I'm gonna kill you." "You have to
want me." "I'm bigger. I can kill you with this rock." This
is what [Browder] told [CW] in the early morning hours of
June 15th, 2019. 
Now, ladies and gentlemen, over the course of last
week you heard from a number of witnesses and you saw a
number of photographs, but ultimately this case comes to
one question. Is [CW] believable? 
Now, Judge Kim just read you a number of jury
instructions, and on page 9 you'll find a number of
credibility factors that you can use to determine the
credibility of witnesses. 
I'm not gonna [sic] reread everything again for you,
but when you look at some of them like her demeanor, her
candor, her lack of motive and is [sic] what she says makes
sense, then the State submits that, yes, the answer to thisquestion is that [CW] is believable. And because [CW] isbelievable as stated on page 11 of your jury instructions,the testimony of even a single witness if believed is
sufficient to prove a fact. 
So now let's look a little bit closer at the 
credibility factors and the evidence that you heard over
the last week. 
So looking at [CW]'s appearance, demeanor, manner of
testifying you saw her and you got to meet her over thecourse of two days of questioning. 
She's 80 years old. She was nervous, shaking on the
witness stand. She was emotional and crying. She wasscared. She told you she was scared that morning. She wasscared at the hospital. She was scared even a week and ahalf later, and she was still scared in court. This is 
consistent with someone who's been traumatized. 
To the next factor, the extent to which [CW] is
supported or contradicted by other witnesses. 
First we have the initial HPD officers, and they told
you when they met [CW] a few hours after the vicious attack
she was still emotional, crying, injured but was able togive a disclosure to them of how she had been violated andhurt in her tent. 
They found [Browder] in his tent, informed him of
[CW]'s report and then subsequently arrested him. 
15  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
You also heard from Michael Demotta, the first person
who saw [CW] after the attack, and she told you that [CW]
gripped onto her arms. She was shaking, crying and most
importantly she was now injured which was different fromhow she had looked the day before when [Demotta] saw her. 
[Demotta] helped her call 911, and [Demotta] also
helped her go to the bathroom because she was still shooken[sic] up. 
Then you heard from Detective Acob. A week and a half
-- about a week and a half after the incident he met with 
[CW], and he told you how she was still emotional and
crying when she had to describe the sex acts that [Browder]forced upon her. And when he showed her that photo lineupwith [Browder]'s picture in it she again became emotionaland looked away. 
Then you heard from Detective Delaries who met [CW] a
few hours after the incident at the Kona Hospital, andagain she was emotional. She was shaky, crying. 
But Detective Delaries also told us about what he saw 
with -- later that day when he went to try and get[Browder]'s underwear. He told you what he saw on thesurveillance. 
He told you that he had instructed another detective
to obtain [Browder]'s underwear but that didn't happen.Instead we have a hole in the [Browder]'s paper jump --paper pants, and we see [Browder] shoving his hand,according to Detective Delaries, down the toilet and
flushing multiple times. 
Then you heard from Nurse Davis who documented the
injuries to [CW]; the face injuries, the injuries on her
hand, her legs, her -- her breasts, the inside of her
mouth, and then her vaginal injuries, the bruising, the
petechiae and the tear. 
Then you also heard about that Nurse Davis said the -
-her injuries and what she documented in her examination
were consistent with [CW]'s patient history. 
She also told us about how [CW] in those hours in
between the attack and from the time she got to thehospital to get examined she had used the bathroom multipletimes. She had -- she had eaten cough drops, drank water. 
And then finally you heard from Sebastian Yuen, the
DNA analyst who testified that the DNA on [CW]'s breast wasa mixture of two people. One was [CW] and [Browder]couldn't be excluded, and over a million other people,
unrelated other people would have to be tested in order to
get that same result. 
16  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
He also told you that, yes, there was no male DNA on
the oral swabs or the vaginal swabs obtained from [CW], but
he told you how foreign DNA can be removed and he said --
he gave examples of showering, of swimming. That water hasan impact. 
[CW] testified that multiple times after the incident
not only was she urinating on herself in her tent but sheused the bathroom multiple times, wiped herself and that'swhy there's no male DNA. The witnesses support [CW]'stestimony. 
Now, turning to [CW]'s candor or frankness. Ladies
and gentlemen, she admitted to the things that she did. 
She admitted she helped [Browder]. She admitted she
complied with his demands in that tent to survive, and she
also admitted that she made some mistakes in her statements 
initially to the police. She told you that she had mistakenthe arm. That she couldn't remember some things. She alsoadmitted the things that she didn't do. She didn't scream.She didn't try to run away, and right after she couldn't
call 911 and she told you all why. Because she was fighting
to survive. She believed [Browder] was going to kill her. 
She also admitted to you the things that she didn't
remember. Under a long cross-examination by defense counsel
she admitted that, yes, she didn't remember certain things
she had told some of the initial officers or Detective Acob and that it was because she was in shock, and she couldn'tremember word by word exactly what she told multiple peopleabout this attack that she had just endured. 
But she did tell you exactly what [Browder] did to
her. She has been consistent that he entered her tent while she was sleeping, came on top of her, threatened to killher, told her to cover her eyes, vaginally and orally
penetrated her, sucked on her breasts, made her touch his
penis with her hand and then jammed a sharp object into herback as he smashed her face down to the bottom of the tent. [CW] has hid nothing from you. 
Now, let's now look to the probability or
improbability of [CW]'s testimony. 
[CW] was alone. She went camping by herself. On the
night of June 14th, 2019 she was sleeping. She told you shewent to bed about 7:30 that night. [CW] was an easy target,
and [Browder] had his opportunity. 
So after all the other campers went to sleep at about
2:30 on June 15, 2019 he entered her tent, and once he was
inside that tent he held her down, covered her eyes, told
her, "I'll kill you," then vaginally penetrated her. 
17  
 
  
 
 Then he sucked on her breast, told her to touch his
penis before he shoved it into her mouth again and again,and then before he was gonna [sic] leave put that sharp
object into her back, threatened to kill her again and told
her to lay her head down on the pillow. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 As to Charge 1 we know that on June 15, 2019 the
defendant vaginally penetrated [CW] with his penis. That hedid so with strong compulsion; the threats of bodily
injury, the force of holding her down. State’s proved the
second element. And [Browder] knew exactly what he wasdoing when he did those things. 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
And then when that didn't work and he wasn't 
satisfied enough told her that, "You have to want this. You
have to help me." 
What happened to [CW] and what she told you happened
to her on June 15th, 2019 makes sense. 
Now, let's look at [CW]'s interest if any in the
result of this case. 
She has nothing to gain. You saw her. She was
terrified and scared to even testify and be here today or
be in court with us last week. 
Her temper, feeling or bias towards [Browder]. 
Prior to June 12th, 2019 they were complete
strangers, but [CW] told you that she tried to help
[Browder] because she felt bad for him because he told herhe had no one. [CW] has no reason to lie. 
So again, ladies and gentlemen, when we look back at
the credibility factors that Judge Kim instructed you on aswell as the evidence presented in this case, when we turnto that question, "Is [CW] believable?" State submits theanswer is, "Yes." And because [CW] is believable let's look
to the elements that the State needs to prove. 
As to count Charge 2, that’s the fellatio count. We
know the defendant shoved his penis again and again into
[CW]’s mouth. He also did so with the same strongcompulsion; the threats to kill her, the threats to herlife, as well as holding her down and also the defendant heknew what he was doing. 
(Emphases added.) While the transcript reflects that no 
objections were made, plain error review applies to remarks that 
constitute misconduct. See Hirata, 152 Hawai ‘i at 30-31, 
520 P.3d at 228-29. 
18  
 
  
 Browder argues, pursuant to Hirata, that the 
prosecutor "improperly expressed her personal belief about the 
CW's credibility and injected new evidence by explaining to the jury that the CW's testimony was consistent with one who is traumatized." 
In response, the State argues that under the 
general definition of "trauma,"26 the prosecutor's remark was 
supported by the evidence of CW's own testimony regarding the effects of the alleged sexual assault when reporting the incident to others, and those witnesses' testimonies describing CW's emotional condition soon after the alleged incident.
27   
 Hirata involved the prosecution of the offense of 
"continuous sexual assault of a minor under the age of fourteen 
years." 152 Hawai ‘i at 28, 520 P.3d at 226. The minor 
complainant ( Minor), Minor's parents, a police officer, a 
detective who interviewed Minor, a doctor who examined Minor, an 
 
  
  
  
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1. Under the circumstances of this case, the
consistent-with-someone-who's-been-
traumatized remark did not constitute 
misconduct. 
26 The State cited general dictionary definitions of "traumatized"
or "trauma," which state: "'a startling experience which has a lasting
effect on mental life; a shock.'" See State's Supplemental Answering Brief
at 7 (quoting Trauma, The Random House Dictionary of the English Language,
1507 (The Unabridged Edition 1973)). 
27 In its Supplemental Answering Brief, the State pointed to Officer
Ayau's testimony that CW was sad, crying, and scared; Officer Kailiuli'stestimony that CW was "distraught[,]" under "stress[,]" "shooken [sic] up[,]"
and "a little afraid"; Detective Acob's testimony that CW turned away fromBrowder's photo and "started to tear"; Nurse Davis's testimony that CW was"very tearful and very shaky" during the examination; Detective Delaries'stestimony that CW would "cry[,]" "shake[,]" and her "lips would quiver"
during her report "less than 24 hours" after the incident. The State also 
noted how CW explained inconsistencies between her trial testimony and herstatements to the officers and Nurse Davis, that she was "in shock"; had been"fearing for [her] life" because she felt that she "was going to be killed";and that at that point, CW "did not have much strength to . . . say
everything exactly the right or the correct way . . . ." The State further 
related that CW testified that she understood her oath "[t]o tell the truth";that she was "trying to get the words out correctly"; and she still felt "alot scared [sic] and just very shaky."
19  
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
expert in the dynamics of child sexual abuse ( child sexual abuse 
expert), the defendant, the defendant's parents, and the 
defendant's girlfriend testified at trial. Id. at 29, 520 P.3d 
at 227. Minor's mother testified that the Minor was "hesitant 
and scared" when telling her parents about the alleged sexual 
assault. Id. at 37, 520 P.3d at 235 (Nakayama, J., dissenting). Minor testified that she was "scared" to tell the defendant that she did not like what the defendant was doing to her, and Minor was "scared" that the defendant would hurt her if she told someone. Id. at 38, 520 P.3d at 236 (Nakayama, J., dissenting). 
The child sexual abuse expert testified regarding "common memory 
problems observed in children who have experienced something 'traumatic[,]'" and how children often cannot recall surrounding details of shocking or traumatic events. Id. at 39, 520 P.3d at 237 (Nakayama, J., dissenting). The child sexual abuse expert's explanation of dynamics of child sexual abuse included "delayed disclosure" and "tunnel memory," but did not include "evidence 
about post-abuse 'trauma' or how traumatized children act or 
testify in court." Id. at 33 n.14, 520 P.3d at 231 n.14. In closing argument, the prosecutor in Hirata argued: 
So let's go through the factors of [Minor]'s
credibility. Her appearance, demeanor, her manner of
testifying. She came here last week. You saw her. She's 11years old. She was nervous and understandably so. And shetried to be brave up there on the stand. She answered allof my questions. She answered all of the defense attorney's
questions. Almost three hours up there. 
And then at the end of almost those three hours, she
couldn't be brave anymore, and you saw her when she got
emotional. She broke when the defense attorney continued tocall – to question her credibility and if she was making
this up, and her answer to you was this really happened.
It's consistent with a child who is traumatized. 
Id. at 29, 520 P.3d at 227 (emphasis added). 
In a 3-2 decision, the Hawaii ‘ Supreme Court vacated 
the defendant's conviction because, inter alia, it found the 
20  
 
  
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consistent-with-a-child-who-is-traumatized remark was serious 
prosecutorial misconduct: 
The DPA improperly expressed her personal belief about CW's
credibility and injected new evidence by explaining to thejury that CW's testimony is "consistent with a child who istraumatized." Her unsupported comment invited the jury toinfer that she had undisclosed information about CW's mental health, information that could corroborate a trauma-
inducing event like the charged crime. We hold that the
DPA's remarks constituted serious prosecutorial misconduct. 
Id. at 33, 35-36, 520 P.3d at 231, 233-34.28 
a. The "traumatized" remark referred to and 
was supported by the evidence, and was
not an improper expression of personal
belief. 
Browder's contention that the remark was without 
evidentiary support, as in Hirata, and thus constituted an 
improper expression of the prosecutor's personal belief, lacks merit under the circumstances of this case. 
"A statement about a witness's credibility that is 
made without reference to the evidence or facts supporting the assertion amounts to an expression of personal opinion." State
v. Salavea
, 147 Hawai ‘i 564, 582, 465 P.3d 1011, 1029 (2020). In 
Hirata, the prosecutor's argument that CW's testimony was consistent with a traumatized child was based on the prosecutor's own evaluation and opinion of CW's breakdown and reaction being cross-examined, which the majority said was "unsupported" by any evidence. 
Here, the prosecutor's argument that CW's testimony 
was consistent with a traumatized person was not based on the 
prosecutor's own evaluation and opinion of CW's reaction to 
28 At the time of closing arguments on December 14, 2021, in
Browder's jury trial, this court had issued a November 12, 2021 Summary
Disposition Order affirming Hirata's conviction. State v. Hirata, No.CAAP-20-0000689, 2021 WL 5273934, at *1 (App. Nov. 12, 2021) (SDO).
Certiorari review was granted on March 23, 2022, and the 
Hawai ‘i Supreme
Court's opinion was issued on October 31, 2022. 
21  
 
   
 
 
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
being cross-examined, as in Hirata, but was supported by 
"reference to the evidence or facts supporting the assertion[.]" 
See Salavea
, 147 Hawai ‘i at 582, 465 P.3d at 1029. Prior to the 
remark, the prosecutor referenced evidence relating to CW's 
"appearance," "demeanor," and "manner of testifying" -- all credibility factors under the HAWJIC 3.09 credibility of witness instruction. Leading up to the challenged remark, the prosecutor pointed out that CW was "nervous," "shaking[,]" 
"emotional and crying[,]" and "scared" while testifying; "scared 
that morning" of the alleged incident; "scared at the hospital"; and "was scared even a week and a half later[.]" These evidentiary references supported the prosecutor's immediately following assertion that CW's appearance, demeanor, and manner of testifying was consistent with someone who was "traumatized."
29 
"[I]t is well-established that prosecutors are 
afforded wide latitude in closing to discuss the evidence, and may 'state, discuss, and comment on the evidence as well as to draw all reasonable inferences from the evidence.'" State v.
Udo
, 145 Hawai ‘i 519, 536-37, 454 P.3d 460, 477-78 (2019) 
(citation omitted). Browder's defense presented in opening statement and in closing argument was that CW's claim of sexual assault was "fictitious." It was a reasonable inference that the fear CW manifested in her in-court testimony, as well as at 
29 "Traumatized" is defined as being "affected by physical or
emotional trauma" or as "severely shocked and upset in a way that causes
lasting emotional pain." Traumatized, Merriam-Webster,
https://www.merriamwebster.com/dictionary/traumatized (last visited Oct. 6,2023); Traumatized, Cambridge Dictionary, https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/traumatized (last visited Oct. 6, 2023). "Trauma" is defined as "a disordered psychic or behavioral state resulting from severe
mental or emotional stress or physical injury," or "an emotional upset."
Trauma, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/trauma(last visited Oct. 6, 2023). 
22  
 
  
 
 
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the time of the incident and immediately thereafter, tended to 
support the credibility of CW's claim that she had been sexually assaulted. See id. The prosecutor's remark was not an improper 
personal belief about CW's credibility untethered to evidence 
supporting the assertion; and it was within the wide latitude 
permitted in closing argument. See id.; Salavea, 147 Hawai ‘i at 
582, 465 P.3d at 1029. 
b. The "traumatized" remark did not inject
new evidence or create an inference that 
the prosecution had undisclosed
information about CW's mental health. 
Browder argues that, as in Hirata, there was no 
evidence adduced here that could "'legitimately support'" the 
prosecutor's claim that CW testified consistent with a 
traumatized person, because no witness testified about CW's 
mental health or psychological condition. Browder claims this remark "invited the jury to infer that the prosecution had undisclosed information about CW's mental health[.]" 
In Hirata, a child sexual abuse expert had testified 
regarding the specific dynamics unique to children subjected to 
sexual assault -- the effects of a sexual assault on a child's 
memory, their ability to recall, and the timing of a child's 
disclosure. See
 152 Hawai ‘i at 42, 520 P.3d at 240 (Nakayama, 
J., dissenting). Within this context, where the jury in Hirata 
had "heard no evidence  that could legitimately support the 
prosecutor's claim that the [Minor] testified consistent with a traumatized child"; where the child sexual abuse expert had supplied "no evidence about post-abuse 'trauma' or how traumatized children act or testify in court"; and where "[n]o witness testified about [Minor]’s mental health or psychological condition"; — — the prosecutor's remark "exceed[ed] fair 
commentary on the evidence ." 
Id.
 at 33, 33 n.14, 520 P.3d at 
231, 231 n.14. The Hirata majority explained that the
23  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prosecutor "effectively hinted she knew something the jury 
didn't know: [Minor] presently suffers trauma, and [Minor]'s demeanor and testimony match the way victims of child sexual abuse testify." Id. (emphasis added). Thus, the remark 
"injected new evidence" and inferred to the jury that the 
prosecutor "had undisclosed information about [Minor]'s mental health, information that could corroborate a trauma-inducing event like the charged crime." Id. at 33, 520 P.3d at 231. 
Here, in contrast to the lack of evidence that "could 
legitimately support the prosecutor's claim that the [Minor] 
testified consistent with a traumatized child" in Hirata, the 
jury in this case did hear evidence that could "legitimately support" the prosecutor's assertion that CW's demeanor was consistent with someone who had experienced a traumatic, shocking, startling, or emotionally upsetting event. Id.; see Traumatized, supra; Trauma, supra. The prosecutor's references to CW's manner of testifying and consistent pattern of fear at 
the time of the incident and immediately thereafter, were 
supported by the record in this case, by CW's own testimony, and corroborated by other witnesses.
30 Unlike Hirata, this case did 
not involve the unique "way victims of child sexual abuse testify" or involve a particular dynamic for which specialized expertise to explain a witness's compromised ability to recall, 
report, and relate, is required. Id.
We conclude that the prosecutor's remark did not 
inject new evidence or create an inference that the prosecutor 
30 Witness Demotta testified that CW appeared to be "crying" and
"shooken [sic] up." Officers Ayau and Kailiuli testified that when they
arrived at the Camp, CW appeared "scared" and "afraid." Detective Delaries testified that when he met CW at the hospital, CW would "cry," "shake," andher "lips would quiver." Nurse Davis testified that during the examination,
CW was "tearful and very shaky[.]" During an interview with Detective Acob
about a week and a half after the alleged incident, Detective Acob testifiedthat CW appeared to be "sad[,]" crying, and that she began to "tear" when sheidentified Browder's photo from a photograph lineup.
24  
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had undisclosed information about CW's mental health, and the 
remark did not constitute misconduct. See Hirata
, 152 Hawai ‘i at 
33, 520 P.3d at 233; 
Salavea
, 147 Hawai ‘i at 582, 465 P.3d at 
1029. 
2.
 Under the circumstances of this case, the
"we know" remarks constituted misconduct 
that was not harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt. 
Citing Hirata, Browder argues that the prosecutor 
"improperly expressed her personal belief about the strength of 
the State's case" when using the words "we know" in closing argument. We hold that the two "we know" remarks constituted 
improper expressions of the prosecutor's opinion on the strength 
of the evidence. 
A prosecuting attorney has a duty to seek justice, to
play fair and square. A prosecuting attorney's words have
an outsized influence on a jury. For this reason, this
court has often directed prosecutors to not expresspersonal beliefs about the evidence. See, e.g., State v.
Marsh, 68 Haw. 659, 660, 728 P.2d 1301, 1302 (1986)(stating that prosecutors must "refrain from expressing
their personal views as to a defendant's guilt or
credibility of witnesses"). 
Hirata, 152 Hawai ‘i at 33, 520 P.3d at 231. "[E]xpressions of 
personal opinion by the prosecutor are a form of unsworn, 
unchecked testimony and tend to exploit the influence of the 
prosecutor's office and undermine the objective detachment that should separate an attorney from the cause being argued." 
Id.
(quoting Salavea, 147 Hawai ‘i at 582, 465 P.3d at 1029). A 
prosecutor's use of the pronoun "we" during closing argument 
constitutes misconduct because of the "implication of unity, and 
the suggestion of an alliance between the State and the jury" against the defendant, which is improper. 
State v. Conroy
, 
25  
 
  
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
148 Hawai ‘i 194, 202-03, 468 P.3d 208, 216-17 ( 2020).31 The 
Conroy court explained that: 
The prosecutor's use of the inclusive pronoun, "we,"
implied that the jury and the State had similar interests
and were working together in convicting [the defendant] toprovide CW justice. This implication of unity, and the
suggestion of an alliance between the State and the jury
against [the defendant], was improper:  
  In light of the "prestige associated with the
prosecutor's office" and the "significant persuasive force"
the prosecutor's argument is likely to have on the jury,
this court has repeatedly recognized that the prosecutor
"has a duty to seek justice, to exercise the highest good
faith in the interest of the public and to avoid even the 
31 In Conroy, the supreme court held that "the prosecutor committed
misconduct at least eight times," one of which included the prosecutor's useof the pronoun, "we." The eight statements found improper were as follows: 
First, the prosecutor asserted that [the defendant] "wasgoing to make sure that CW didn't give that smile to anyother man, and she won't. She can't." 
 
Second, the prosecutor told the jury "we should teach her a
new lesson. I say we teach her that there is justice in the
world. I say we teach her that there can be justice inthis...." 
 
Third, the prosecutor told the jury they were to find [the
defendant] guilty to "put the smile back in her eyes." 
 
Fourth, the prosecutor asked the jury to consider that [the
defendant] "broke something inside of CW." 
 
Fifth, the prosecutor noted the jury's purpose was to healCW's spirit: "We all want CW's spirit to heal even if herface won't. But in order for that to happen, there has tobe justice done." 
 
Sixth, the prosecutor repeated his admonition to the jury —previously ruled improper by the trial court - that itspurpose was to provide justice to CW in order to heal her:"We all want CW's spirit to heal even if her face won't.But in order for that to happen, there has to be justice
done." 
 
Seventh, the prosecutor asserted that "You break my heart,
I break your face. That's what this case is about." 
 
And eighth, the prosecutor injected personal knowledge
about the pain caused by a kick to the groin. 
148 Hawai ‘i at 201-02, 468 P.3d at 215-16 (ellipses in original)
(emphases and brackets omitted) (emphases added).
26  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appearance of unfair advantage over the accused." State v.
Basham, 132 Hawai ‘i 97, 116, 319 P.3d 1105, 1124 (2014). 
Id. (emphases added). 
Here, the prosecutor improperly used the term "we" by 
arguing to the jury, "we know that . . . the defendant vaginally 
penetrated" CW in Count 1, and that "[w]e know the defendant shoved his penis again and again into [CW]'s mouth" in Count 2. These arguments conveyed an improper "implication of unity" 
between the State and the jury against Browder, and gave an 
"appearance of unfair advantage over the accused." Conroy, 
148 Hawai ‘i at 202-03, 468 P.3d at 216-17. 
We now consider whether the "we know" misconduct was 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. "After considering the 
nature of the prosecuting attorney's conduct, promptness or lack of a curative instruction, and strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant, a reviewing court will vacate a conviction if there is a reasonable possibility that the conduct 
might have affected the trial's outcome." Riveira, 149 Hawai ‘i 
at 431, 494 P.3d at 1164 (citation omitted). 
Regarding the first factor, the nature of the 
misconduct, the multiple uses of the pronoun "we" were improper 
expressions of the prosecutor's personal opinion that both the State and the jury "kn[e]w" that vaginal penetration in Count 1, 
and fellatio in Count 2, had been committed by Browder. The 
remarks improperly suggested an alliance between the State and the jury to convict Browder of the two most serious charges against him of first-degree sexual assault. This factor weighs in favor of Browder. 
Regarding the second factor, the "promptness or lack 
of a curative instruction," we need not consider it where no 
27  
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
objection was made or curative instruction given. See Hirata, 
152 Hawai ‘i at 34, 520 P.3d at 232. 
Regarding the third factor, the strength or weakness 
of the evidence against the defendant, "when a conviction is 
largely dependent on a jury's determination as to the credibility of a complainant's testimony, the evidence of the offense is not so overwhelming that it renders the prosecutor's improper statements harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." State
v. Williams, 149 Hawai ‘i 381, 396, 491 P.3d 592, 607 (2021) 
(internal brackets and citation omitted); accord Hirata, 
152 Hawai ‘i at 35, 520 P.3d at 233 ("In cases reliant on the 
jury's credibility findings, misconduct attacking a defendant's 
credibility or bolstering a complainant's (or critical witness's) credibility is seldom harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt." (citation omitted)). 
Here, the State's case turned on the jury's assessment 
of CW's credibility, as the only persons present during the 
incident were CW, and the perpetrator, whom CW identified as Browder. While there was evidence of physical injuries consistent with sexual assault, there were no eyewitnesses 
besides CW, and the DNA evidence was equivocal. No physical or 
forensic evidence indicated that Browder had been in CW's tent. There was not overwhelming evidence of identification, and the State's case establishing Browder as the perpetrator was entirely dependent on CW's testimony. Thus, the state of the evidence was not "so overwhelming" that it rendered the prosecutor's misconduct harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
See Williams, 149 Hawai ‘i at 396, 491 P.3d at 607. This factor 
weighs in favor of Browder. 
On this record, we conclude that there was a 
"reasonable possibility" that the misconduct might have 
28  
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contributed to Browder's convictions in this case and was not 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See Hirata, 152 Hawai ‘i at 
35, 520 P.3d at 233; see also Williams, 149 Hawai ‘i at 397, 
491 P.3d at 608 (holding in a sexual assault prosecution that 
prosecutorial misconduct during closing argument was not harmless because the CW was "the only witness other than the defendant who could describe the actual acts constituting the offenses[,]" and the "evidence against [the defendant] was not 
so overwhelming that it rendered the prosecutor's misconduct 
. . . harmless"); State v. Prescott, No. CAAP-20-0000574, 2022 WL 622335, at *10 (Mar. 3, 2022) (SDO) (holding in a sexual assault prosecution that prosecutorial misconduct during closing argument was not harmless, where CW "was the only witness who testified about the alleged act"). 
B. There was sufficient evidence adduced at trial 
to convict Browder of the sexual assault 
offenses. 
"It is well-settled that, even where this court finds 
trial error, challenges to the sufficiency of the evidence must 
always be decided on appeal." Kalaola, 124 Hawai ‘i at 59, 
237 P.3d at 1125 (cleaned up). "Trial error[s]" include 
prosecutorial misconduct. Id. at 52, 237 P.3d at 1118 (citing Burks v. United States, 437 U.S. 1, 14–15 & n.8 (1978)). We thus address Browder's challenge to the sufficiency of evidence to support the sexual assault offenses. Browder argues that 
there was insufficient evidence adduced at trial to convict 
Browder of sexual assault because there was no DNA profile recovered from the swabs obtained from CW or from the crime scene that matched Browder's DNA profile. Viewing the evidence "in the strongest light for the prosecution[,]" see id. at 49, 237 P.3d at 1115, Browder's contention is without merit. 
29  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, Browder was charged with two counts of Sexual 
Assault in the First Degree for "sexual penetration by strong 
compulsion" for "vaginal penetration with his penis" and "fellatio" in violation of HRS § 707-730(1)(a).
32 Browder was 
also charged with two counts of Sexual Assault in the Third Degree for engaging in sexual contact with CW by putting his "mouth on her breast" and "her hand on his penis" in violation of HRS § 707-732(1)(f).
33 At trial, CW testified that on 
June 15, 2019, she was asleep in her camping tent when she was awakened, held against her will, and sexually assaulted. CW 
identified the perpetrator as Browder, and that Browder 
penetrated her "vaginal area" with his penis, sucked on her breasts, told her to put her hands onto his penis, and stuck his penis into her mouth. "[T]he testimony of merely one percipient witness constitute[s] substantial evidence to support a 
conviction . . . ." State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai ‘i 131, 141, 
913 P.2d 57, 67 (1996) (citation omitted). Viewed in the 
strongest light for the prosecution, we conclude there was substantial evidence to support the jury's verdict convicting 
Browder of the sexual assault offenses. See Kalaola, 124 Hawai ‘i 
at 49, 237 P.3d at 1115. 
In light of our resolution, we do not address 
Browder's remaining contentions. 
32 Under HRS § 707-730(1)(a) (2014), a person commits the offense of
sexual assault in the first degree if the person "knowingly subjects another
person to an act of sexual penetration by strong compulsion[.]" 
33 Under HRS § 707-732(1)(f) (2014), a person commits the offense of
sexual assault in the third degree if the person "knowingly, by strongcompulsion, has sexual contact with another person[.]" 
30  
 
   
  
  
 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
 
/s/ Karen T. NakasoneAssociate Judge
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST' S HAWAI ‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
IV. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, the March 29, 2022 Judgment 
of Conviction and Sentence, entered by the Circuit Court of the 
Third Circuit, is vacated, and we remand for a new trial. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai ‘i, October 20, 2023. 
On the briefs: 
 
Walter J. Rodby, 
for Defendant-Appellant. 
 
Donn Fudo, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
 
31 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
CONCURRING OPINION BY LEONARD, J. 
I concur with the majority's conclusion that the 
conviction of Defendant-Appellant Zeth Browder (Browder) must be 
vacated based upon prosecutorial misconduct in conjunction with 
the prosecutor's closing argument. 
I agree with the majority's analysis and conclusion 
that the prosecutor's statements that "we know that on June 15, 
2019 [Browder] vaginally penetrated [CW] with his penis" and 
"[w]e know the defendant shoved his penis again and again into 
[CW's] mouth" constituted misconduct. (Emphasis added). I also 
agree with the analysis and conclusion that the prosecutor's misconduct was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
However, I further conclude that State v. Hirata, 152 
Hawai#i 27, 520 P.3d 225 (2022), is indistinguishable from this 
case with respect to the prosecutor's statement to the jury that 
the complaining witness's (CW's) appearance, demeanor, and manner 
of testifying was consistent with someone who's been traumatized. 
In both Hirata and this case, the defendant faced 
sexual assault charges. In both cases, the defendant's theory of 
the case was that there was no sexual assault. In Hirata, in closing argument, the prosecutor stated to the jury that their decision "'comes down to one question, is [CW] believable?'" Hirata, 152 Hawai# i at 29, 520 P.3d at 227. In the case now 
before us, the very same prosecutor stated to the jury "ultimately this case comes to one question. Is [CW] believable?" The prosecutor then made essentially the same NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
argument, except she noted the young age of the complaining 
witness in Hirata, and the advanced age of CW in this case: 
Hirata, 152 Hawai# i at 29, 520 This case (Browder)
P.3d at 227: (emphasis added): 
. . . . And it also comes down to one . . . . [U]ltimately this case comes
question, is [CW] believable? to one question. Is [CW] believable? 
Now, the Court gave you the jury Now, [the Circuit Court] just read
instructions that you all have in you a number of jury instructions,
front of you, and on page 8, there and on page 9 you'll find a number of
are a list of factors that you can credibility factors that you can use
consider when you deliberate to to determine the credibility of
determine if a witness is credible. witnesses. 
So you look at their demeanor, their
candor, lack of motive, and if whatthey say makes sense. 
So when you look at the factors – and I'm not gonna reread everything again
I'll go through them with you, ladies for you, but when you look at some of
and gentlemen – the answer is clear them like her demeanor, her candor,
to this question. Yes, [CW] is her lack of motive and is what she 
believable. And because [CW] is says makes sense, then the State
believable, it's – it is the submits that, yes, the answer to this
testimony that has a convincing force question is that [CW] is believable.
upon you that counts, and the And because [CW] is believable as
testimony of even a single witness, stated on page 11 of your jury
if believed, can be sufficient to instructions, the testimony of even a
prove a fact. single witness if believed is
sufficient to prove a fact. 
So let's go through the factors of So now let's look a little bit closer 
[CW]'s credibility. Her appearance, at the credibility factors and the
demeanor, her manner of testifying. evidence that you heard over the last
She came here last week. You saw week. 
her. She's 11 years old. She was nervous and understandably so. And So looking at [CW]'s appearance,
she tried to be brave up there on the demeanor, manner of testifying you
stand. She answered all of my saw her and you got to meet her over
questions. She answered all of the the course of two days of
defense attorney's questions. Almost questioning.
three hours up there. 
And then at the end of almost those She's 80 years old. She was nervous,
three hours, she couldn't be brave shaking on the witness stand. She 
anymore, and you saw her when she got was emotional and crying. She was 
emotional. She broke when the scared. She told you she was scared
defense attorney continued to call – that morning. She was scared at the 
to question her credibility and if hospital. She was scared even a week 
she was making this up, and her and a half later, and she was still
answer to you was this really scared in court. This is consistent 
happened. It's consistent with a with someone who's been traumatized. 
child who is traumatized. 
(Spacing between paragraphs altered). 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Hirata, the Hawai# i Supreme Court held that the 
prosecutor's remark that the complaining witness (also referred 
to as CW) testified "consistent with a child who is traumatized" was misconduct. Hirata, 152 Hawai# i at 33, 520 P.3d at 231. The 
supreme court explained its reasoning as follows: 
A prosecuting attorney has a duty to seek justice, to
play fair and square. A prosecuting attorney's words have
an outsized influence on a jury. For this reason, thiscourt has often directed prosecutors to not express personalbeliefs about the evidence. See, e.g., State v. Marsh, 68Haw. 659, 660, 728 P.2d 1301, 1302 (1986) (stating thatprosecutors must "refrain from expressing their personal
views as to a defendant's guilt or credibility of
witnesses"). 
Prosecutors are also forbidden from introducing new
information or evidence in closing argument. See Basham,132 Hawai #i at 113, 319 P.3d at 1121 ("Closing arguments are
not the place to introduce new evidence outside thesafeguards of the Hawai #i Rules of Evidence."). We have 
explained that "expressions of personal opinion by theprosecutor are a form of unsworn, unchecked testimony andtend to exploit the influence of the prosecutor's office andundermine the objective detachment that should separate anattorney from the cause being argued." Salavea, 147 Hawai #i 
at 582, 465 P.3d at 1029. 
Here, the jury heard the DPA opine that the CW
testified "consistent with a child who is traumatized." But 
it heard no evidence  that could legitimately support the
prosecutor's claim that the CW testified consistent with a
traumatized child.
13 No witness testified about CW's mental 
health or psychological condition.14 
13 Nor in most cases could they. See Riveira, 149Hawai #i at 431, 494 P.3d at 1164 (explaining
that testimony about "a crime's after-effectsare rarely allowed" because the information isboth irrelevant and highly prejudicial). 
14 The state's expert testified generally aboutdelayed disclosure, "tunnel memory," and otherdynamics of child sexual abuse. But the expertsupplied no evidence about post-abuse "trauma"or how traumatized children act or testify incourt. . . . 
The DPA improperly expressed her personal belief about
CW's credibility and injected new evidence by explaining to
the jury that CW's testimony is "consistent with a child whois traumatized." Her unsupported comment invited the juryto infer that she had undisclosed information about CW's mental health, information that could corroborate a 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
trauma-inducing event like the charged crime. We hold that 
the DPA's remarks constituted serious prosecutorialmisconduct.
 Hirata, 152 Hawai# i at 33, 520 P.3d at 231 (emphasis added). 
The rule of law applied to the prosecutor in Hirata is 
equally applicable to her in this case. The prosecutor was 
forbidden from introducing new information or evidence in closing argument. Expressions of personal opinion were also forbidden. In this case, the prosecutor gave the same opinion she did in Hirata, that the complaining witness testified consistent with a child/person who is traumatized. In Hirata, no witness testified about the complaining witness's mental health or psychological condition – in this case, no witness testified about the complaining witness's mental health or psychological condition.
1  
In Hirata, there was an expert witness, but he supplied no evidence about post-abuse trauma or how traumatized children act or testify in court – in this case, there was no expert witness, 
1 The majority submits that the prosecutor's remark was supported by
CW's testimony regarding the effects of the alleged sexual assault when
reporting the incident to others, and those witnesses' testimonies describingCW's emotional condition after the alleged incident, when CW told them she hadbeen sexually assaulted. This is not unlike Hirata, however, where thecomplaining witness testified that she got scared and was afraid after thealleged sexual assault, and her mother testified that when the complainingwitness disclosed the alleged abuse, she was hesitant and scared, and she
started crying as she spoke; the complaining witness in Hirata also became
emotional during her testimony. 152 Hawai #i at 37, 38, 520 P.3d at 235, 236
(Recktenwald, C.J., dissenting). In Hirata, there was delay in the disclosureof the alleged sexual abuse, and delayed disclosure by sexually abusedchildren was the subject of expert testimony. Id. at 37-38, 39, 520 P.3d at235-36, 237 (Recktenwald, C.J. dissenting). However, that deviation from thefact pattern in Hirata does not support a conclusion that the seriousprosecutorial misconduct in Hirata is distinguishable from the prosecutor's
conduct in this case. 
  
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and there was no evidence about post-abuse trauma or how 
traumatized persons act or testify in court. 
In Hirata, the supreme court concluded that the 
prosecutor expressed her personal belief about the complaining witness's credibility and injected new evidence by explaining that the complaining witness's testimony was consistent with a child who is traumatized – here, I conclude that the prosecutor expressed her personal belief about the complaining witness's credibility and injected new evidence by explaining that the complaining witness's testimony was consistent with a person who is traumatized. Like in Hirata, here, the prosecutor's unsupported comment invited the jury to infer that she had undisclosed information about CW's mental health, information that could corroborate a trauma-inducing event like the charged crime. As the supreme court held in Hirata, I would hold that the prosecutor's remarks here constituted serious prosecutorial misconduct. 
Finally, having determined that both of the challenged 
remarks constitute prosecutorial misconduct, I will briefly turn to the issue of whether there is a reasonable possibility that this misconduct might have affected the outcome in this case. See, e.g., Hirata, 152 
Hawai#i at 33, 520 P.3d at 231 (citing 
State v. Riveira, 149 Hawai# i 427, 431, 494 P.3d 1160, 1164 
(2021)). As explained in Hirata, the appellate courts have 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
considered three factors, two of which have greater weight here,2 
i.e., "the nature of the prosecuting attorney's misconduct" and 
"the strength or weakness of the evidence against the defendant." 
Id. at 34, 520 P.3d at 232. 
As to the "consistent-with-a-child-who-is-traumatized 
misconduct," the supreme court concluded that, standing alone, that misconduct was reasonably likely to have affected the outcome of Hirata's trial. Id.
 at 35, 520 P.3d at 233. The 
nature of that misconduct in Hirata is indistinguishable from the consistent-with-a-person-who-is-traumatized misconduct in this case. As to the remaining factor, the strength or weakness of the evidence against Browder, the outcome of this case rests almost exclusively on the jury's decision about CW's credibility. As the prosecutor argued to the jury, "ultimately this case comes to one question. Is [CW] believable?" The defense's theory of the case, as laid out in Browder's closing argument, was the opposite: CW's story of what happened changed significantly with each telling, there is no hair, DNA, or other evidence supporting that Browder was in CW's tent, you (the jury) should not believe CW. CW was the only witness who could describe the actual acts and her testimony constituted the most significant evidence against Browder. See e.g., State v Williams, 149 Hawai# i 381, 
397, 491 P.3d 592, 608 (2021). 
2 There was no "curative instruction" (the other factor) here. The 
supreme court's rationale in Hirata for diminishing the weight of that factor
applies here. See Hirata, 152 Hawai #i at 34, 520 P.3d at 232. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
There was no overwhelming evidence of Browder's guilt. 
"In cases reliant on the jury's credibility findings, misconduct 
attacking a defendant's credibility or bolstering a complainant's (or critical witness's) credibility is seldom harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." Hirata, 152 Hawai# i at 35, 520 P.3d at 233 
(citation omitted); see also Williams, 149 Hawai# i at 397, 491 
P.3d at 608. Here, the prosecutor enhanced CW's credibility, not only through her testimony-consistent-with-a-person-who-is-traumatized misconduct, but also through her we-know-Browder-did-it statements to the jury. I conclude that there is reasonable possibility that the misconduct contributed to the trial's result and that the prosecutorial misconduct in this case was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Accordingly, I would vacate Browder's conviction based 
on these multiple instances of misconduct and remand the case to the Circuit Court. 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Associate Judge 
7 