NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-13-0004948
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
MADORI RUMPUNGWORN, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 13-1-0397)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Chan, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) charged
Defendant-Appellant Madori Rumpungworn (Rumpungworn) by complaint
with Obstructing Government Operations, in violation of Hawaii
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 710-1010(1)(a) (2014).1  The charge
stemmed from Rumpungworn's actions during an operation by
employees of the City and County of Honolulu (City) to enforce
1HRS § 710-1010(1)(a) provides:
(1) A person commits the offense of obstructing
government operations if, by using or threatening to
use violence, force, or physical interference or
obstacle, the person intentionally obstructs, impairs,
or hinders:
(a) The performance of a governmental function by
a public servant acting under color of the
public servant's official authority[.]NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the City's Stored Property Ordinance, Revised Ordinances of
Honolulu (ROH) Chapter 29, Article 19.2  After a jury trial,
Rumpungworn was found guilty as charged.  The Circuit Court of
the First Circuit (Circuit Court)3 sentenced Rumpungworn to
thirty days of imprisonment.
On appeal, Rumpungworn contends that: (1) there was
insufficient evidence to support her conviction; (2) questions
posed by the deputy prosecuting attorney (DPA) to prospective
jurors during jury selection which portrayed homeless people as
dangerous and the DPA's use of a hypothetical which tracked the
facts of the case were improper and constituted prosecutorial
misconduct; (3) the Circuit Court erred in admitting evidence of
Rumpungworn's past encounters with the State's witnesses; (4) the
Circuit Court plainly erred by failing to sua sponte give a jury
2ROH § 29-19.3 (1990 & Supp. No. 20, 1-2012) provides:
(a) No person shall store personal property on public
property. All stored personal property may be
impounded by the city. In the event personal
property placed on public property interferes with
the safe or orderly management of the premises or
poses a threat to the health, safety, or welfare
of the public, it may be impounded at any time by
the city.
(b) Personal property placed on public property shall
be deemed to be stored personal property if it has
not been removed from public property within
twenty-four hours of service of the written notice
required by Section 29-19.4, which requires such
removal, and the city may cause the removal and
impoundment of such stored personal property;
provided that moving the personal property to
another location on public property shall not be
considered to be removing the personal property
from public property; and provided further that
this section shall not apply to personal property
that, pursuant to statute, ordinance, permit,
regulation, or other authorization by the city or
state, is placed on property that is owned or
controlled by the city.
3The Honorable Patrick W. Border presided.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
instruction on the choice-of-evil defense; and (5) the Circuit
Court plainly erred in failing to sua sponte  find HRS § 710-1010
unconstitutional as applied to her.
As explained in greater detail below, we conclude that
questions by the DPA in jury selection improperly injected
prejudicial stereotypes regarding and prejudice against the
homeless into the proceedings and require that we vacate
Rumpungworn's conviction.  We also conclude that there was
sufficient evidence to support Rumpungworn's conviction and thus
remand the case for a new trial.  Given our analysis on these
issues, we need not address the other arguments Rumpungworn
raises on appeal.
BACKGROUND
I.
The Stored Property Ordinance prohibits the storage of
personal property on public property, and it establishes
procedures for providing 24-hour notice that stored personal
property will be impounded if not removed, impoundment and
storage of property that is not removed, and repossession of
impounded property by its owner or disposal of such property. 
ROH Chapter 29, Article 19.  Typically, enforcement of the Stored
Property Ordinance at a particular site will occur over a two-day
period.  On the first day, City employees post removal notices on
personal property stored on public property.  Under the Stored
Property Ordinance, these notices are required to describe the
item to be removed and include statements that the item will be
impounded if not removed within twenty-four hours and that the
item will be sold or otherwise disposed of if it is not claimed
within thirty days after impoundment.  See  ROH § 29-19.4 (1990 &
Supp. No. 20, 1-2012).  On the second day, City employees return
to the site and impound or dispose of items that have not been
removed as required.  See  ROH §§ 29-19.3, 29-19.5 (1990 & Supp.
No. 20, 1-2012).  
Rumpungworn was affiliated with the De-Occupy Honolulu
movement.  On the day of her arrest, Rumpungworn was living in a
tent at Thomas Square Park.  Rumpungworn's arrest occurred during
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
a Stored Property Ordinance enforcement action at the park.  
City officials had taped-off the area surrounding tents,
including Rumpungworn's tent, at Thomas Square Park.  Police
arrested Rumpungworn after she failed to leave the taped-off area
after being asked multiple times to leave by a City official and 
the police.  She was subsequently charged with Obstructing
Government Operations, in violation of HRS § 710-1010(1)(a).
II.
During jury selection, the DPA asked three potential
jurors, prior to the exercise of peremptory challenges, whether
they would allow their children or grandchildren to play on a
jungle gym in a park if there were "tents right next to the
jungle gym and there are homeless people camped out there."  The
three jurors, Juror D, Juror O, and Juror M, responded that they
would allow their children or grandchildren to play on the jungle
gym: 
[DPA]: [Q.]  . . . .  So, uh, [Juror D], you have two
children; correct?
A.  Yes.
Q.  And you ever take them to the park?
A.  Yes.
Q.  Do you ever -- do they like to go on the jungle
gym?
A.  Yes.
Q.  Let's say you -- you took them to a park.  You see
a jungle gym.  There are tents right next to the jungle gym
and there are homeless people camped out there.  Would you
still let your kids on the jungle gym?
A.  Yeah.
Q.  Yes.  [Juror O] --
A.  Yeah.
Q.  -- you have five grandchildren?
A.  Yes.
Q.  If you had -- were in the same situation, would
you let your grandchildren on there?
A.  Yeah.  They're pretty big though.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Q.  They're pretty big.  Oh, yeah.  I'm sorry.  You look
very young to me that's why, so.
A.  They're (inaudible) years old.
Q.  Okay. [Juror M], what about you?
A.  Sure.  Yes.
(Emphasis added; formatting altered).
After receiving these responses from the three jurors
who would have permitted their children and grandchildren to play
on a jungle gym in a park with homeless people nearby, the State
proceeded to ask the panel whether there was anyone who would not
let their children play on a jungle gym with homeless people
nearby.  Two prospective jurors, Juror A and Juror W, responded
that they would not allow their children to play on a jungle gym
in the park immediately next to tents occupied by homeless
people:
[DPA]: [Q.]  . . . . Is there anyone who would not let
their children -- uh, would not prefer to have them go on a
jungle gym with homeless people, uh, or immediately around
it?
I'm sorry.  Um, [Juror A], why is that?
A.  Hmm, partly because he's really young and he might
just run off.  So (inaudible) not to be in an area
(inaudible).
Q.  Okay.  So is it a safety concern for your child ?
A.  Yes.
Q.  And if there were no tents around that jungle gym
with no homeless people around there, would you let your
children go on the jungle gym?
A.  Uh, partly, yeah.  (Inaudible) I know I got him on
the jungle gym (inaudible).
Q.  Okay.  Okay.  What if he was older, a little bit
older?  Jungle gym -- sorry.  I don't have any kids.  I have
no point of reference.
A.  (Inaudible) after looking at that situation
(inaudible).
Q.  Okay.  Would you go on the jungle gym, Ms.
(Inaudible)?
A.  Would I go on the jungle gym?
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Q   Yes.
A.  Maybe.
Q.  [Juror W], uh, so you wouldn't let your daughter
on the jungle gym if there were homeless people and tents
mapped out immediately nearby the jungle gym?
A.  That's correct.
Q.  Okay.  Why is that?
A.  Just personal safety.
Q.  Safety?
A. 
 Yes.
Q.  Okay.  Can you please elaborate on that a little
more
?
A.  Um, elaborate.  Um, yeah.  I mean she can wander
off, you know, and I'd have to run after her.  And -- yeah,
I just would rather not (inaudible)
.
Q.  Thank you for sharing.
A.  Sure.
(Emphases added.)
When a new prospective juror, Juror V, was called to
replace a juror excused after a peremptory challenge, the DPA
questioned her about the DPA's hypothetical regarding homeless
people living next to a park with a jungle gym, and the DPA
received the following responses:
[DPA]: Q.  So you have two kids.  I'm going to ask you
about the eleven-year-old.  Uh, and can you -- do you
remember my jungle gym question --
A.  Yes.
Q.  -- about the -- if there's a jungle gym?  Well, do
you take your child to the park?
A.  Yes.
Q.  And which park do you take your child to?
A.  Well, (inaudible) Aina Haina (inaudible).
Q.  Aina Haina, Waialae Iki.  And if, um -- we're back
to when -- would you take your child to the parks there? 
Would you take your child there if there were, um, several
tents and homeless people in the park?
A.  I think it would depend on where the tents are
(inaudible).
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Q.  Uh-huh.
A.  (Inaudible.)
Q.  Why is that ?
A.  Um, because a lot of times it's dirty and I'd
rather not (inaudible) the bathroom.
(Emphases added; format altered.)
Then, when another juror, Juror L, who was called to
replace a peremptorily excused juror, stated that she worked at
an elementary school, the DPA engaged her in the following
exchange:
[DPA:] Q.  And so, uh, as -- what exactly is your
position at the school?
A.  Uh, PCNC.
Q.  I'm sorry?
A.  PCNC. (Inaudible) Communication Network Center.
Q.  PCNC.  And if -- how would you feel if, uh,
homeless people came onto -- into the school during school
hours?  What would you do?
A.  Um, right away we -- we do a security watch.  We
contact all the safety team and then we would call the
police (inaudible).
Q.  Thank you for sharing.  
(Emphases added; format altered.)
The DPA did not ask the potential jurors whether their
opinions on the homeless would prevent them from being fair and
impartial in Rumpungworn's case.  Rumpungworn used her peremptory
challenges to excuse Juror A and Juror W.  Juror V and Juror L
were seated on the jury.  Rumpungworn did not object to any of
the DPA's questions concerning the homeless. 
III.
A.
City Housing Coordinator Trish Morikawa (Morikawa)
testified that on the day Rumpungworn was arrested, Morikawa was 
present at Thomas Square Park to assist City workers in the 
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
enforcement of the Stored Property Ordinance.  According to
Morikawa, the City had decided to tape-off the area surrounding
personal property that was subject to the Stored Property
Ordinance to permit City workers to perform their enforcement
activities under the ordinance without interference.  Morikawa
explained that based on past experience in enforcement actions at
Thomas Square Park, De-Occupy Honolulu members who were opposed
to the enforcement actions would yell and swear at the
enforcement crew, get in front of the crew, and would be very
difficult to deal with.  This made it very hard for the
enforcement crew to do their jobs.  So to protect the City
workers and to avoid delays, the City decided to place "yellow
construction tape" around the area in which the enforcement crew
was working and to have "the [De-]Ocuupy Honolulu people to stay
outside the tape so the workers could do their work."  
Honolulu Police Department Sergeant Lawrence Santos
(Sgt. Santos), who was present at Thomas Square Park "to keep the
peace" on the day in question, testified that a tape barrier had
been erected around the area where the City employees were
working so that the City workers could "work freely and . . .
safely"4 and not be intermixed with the protesters and others
occupying the park.  Sgt. Santos explained that the use of
construction tape to prevent access to the work area was done to
create a "safer work environment for police, city employees, as
well as the park users" and was part of the enforcement of the
Stored Property Ordinance. 
Morikawa testified that on the day in question, other
people who were not part of the City enforcement crew went
outside the taped-off area after the tape was erected, but that
Rumpungworn refused to leave and stayed inside the taped-off
4Sgt. Santos testified that "during these park clean ups the
people who live in the tents on the sidewalk tend to get upset,
sometimes violent, sometimes -- always very loud, very vocal. 
Um, and the city workers just didn't feel safe even with the
police presence there . . . with, um, people all about."
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
area.  Morikawa was informed that Rumpungworn was "bothering one
of the workers."  Morikawa went to investigate and saw
Rumpungworn questioning a worker named Louis Chun (Chun), "asking
him something to the effect of who are you?  What are you doing? 
Why are you doing this?  You know, what department do you work
for?  What -- you know, how do you feel about what you're doing?" 
Morikawa approached Rumpungworn and told Rumpungworn that she was
interfering with Chun's work and tried to get her "to stay away
so the workers [could] do their work."  Morikawa asked
Rumpungworn to "get behind the tape," but Rumpungworn refused. 
Morikawa told Rumpungworn "more than once" that if she did not
comply, she may be subject to arrest for obstructing governmental
operations.  
After refusing Morikawa's request to go outside the
tape, Rumpungworn yelled to others who were outside the tape,
trying to get them to come inside.  Both Morikawa and Sgt. Santos
asked Rumpungworn to leave the taped-off area.  Rumpungworn began
walking towards the tape perimeter, but did not leave the taped-
off area, and instead moved to question other City enforcement
personnel.  According to Morikawa, after Rumpungworn began
questioning the other workers, Sgt. Santos asked her repeatedly
to leave the taped-off area and to "comply with his
instructions."  Rumpungworn did not comply.
When asked whether Rumpungworn physically interfered
with the Stored Property Ordinance enforcement action, Morikawa
stated that "[Rumpungworn] was making it difficult for [Chun]"
because he "could not do his job while being confronted by
Rumpungworn."  Because Rumpungworn was "in front of" and "to the
side of" Chun, he had to try to go around her.  Furthermore,
because City workers tried to avoid confrontation, the crew that
usually worked with Chun did not come over with him, which
impeded the actions necessary to impound the property.  Morikawa
acknowledged that Rumpungworn "did not touch, hit, or strike
anyone," or use physical contact to prevent workers from "moving
their hands to write notices."  However, Morikawa stated that
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Rumpungworn's "physical presence was bothering" Chun and that
while Rumpungworn was not physically touching him, she was
"making it difficult for him to do his job." 
Sgt. Santos testified that he confronted Rumpungworn
after seeing that she was present in the taped-off area and was
speaking to the City workers, but that Rumpungworn continued to
talk to the workers.  According to Sgt. Santos, he warned
Rumpungworn that she had to leave the taped-off area at least a
dozen times, and other officers told her "[j]ust please leave." 
In addition to remaining in the taped-off area, Rumpungworn
indicated her unwillingness to leave by saying, "[N]o, I'm not
leaving" and by disregarding Sgt. Santos' instructions and visual
cues to leave the area. 
Prior to Rumpungworn's arrest, Sgt. Santos warned her
that she would be arrested if she failed to leave the taped-off
area, and he asked, "May I have your compliance?" multiple times. 
After Sgt. Santos advised Rumpungworn that he was giving her one
"last warning to leave," Rumpungworn failed to leave the taped-
off area.  Sgt. Santos then instructed officers to arrest her.  
B.
By stipulation, a video of the incident that was
created by a member of De-Occupy Honolulu was admitted into
evidence.   This video was played for the jury in its entirety,
and portions of the video were used by the prosecution and the
defense in examining witnesses who testified at trial.  The video
shows yellow tape being used to block off an area of Thomas
Square Park where several tents are located; Rumpungworn standing
inside the taped-off area; Rumpungworn following and talking to
Chun; Morikawa talking with Rumpungworn; Rumpungworn telling the
person taking the video that "they're planning to arrest me if I
don't get beyond the tape"; Sgt. Santos talking to Rumpungworn
and asking, "Can I have your compliance?"; and Rumpungworn being
arrested inside the taped-off area.  
C.
Rumpungworn testified in her own defense at trial. 
Rumpungworn stated that she was 24 years old.  According to
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Rumpungworn, at the time of the charged incident, she was a
college student majoring in education and teaching and was "part
of the Deoccupy Honolulu homeless encampment and protest."  On
the day in question, Rumpungworn was awakened by the sound of
trucks, saw the officials gathering, and went to ask what they
planned to do.  Rumpungworn was within the area as it was being
taped-off, and officials taped around her. 
Rumpungworn testified that after the area was taped-
off, she asked a police officer whether she could "hang
around[.]"  According to Rumpungworn, the officer nodded, which
Rumpungworn understood to mean that she was permitted to remain
within the taped-off area.  Rumpungworn went to various City
workers and asked whether they would be tagging property with
removal notices or seizing property; she also asked questions
about what they were writing on the notices.  Rumpungworn stated
that this was important because she had prior experience with
City workers enforcing the Stored Property Ordinance in which
property was not properly tagged and was then removed without
following the requirements of the ordinance. 
Rumpungworn acknowledged talking to Chun, but stated
that she did not intend to obstruct him from doing his job and
did not believe she was obstructing him.  Morikawa approached
Rumpungworn while she was talking to Chun, separated Rumpungworn
from Chun, and asked Rumpungworn about her concerns with the
ordinance and the removal notices.  Morikawa requested that
Rumpungworn maintain a distance of five feet from the workers
conducting the operation, and Rumpungworn complied and stepped
away from Chun. 
D.
The jury found Rumpungworn guilty as charged.  The
Circuit Court sentenced Rumpungworn to thirty days of
imprisonment.  The Circuit Court entered its Judgment on October
11, 2013, and this appeal followed.
DISCUSSION
I.
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Rumpungworn contends that there was insufficient
evidence to support her conviction because the State failed to
prove that she intentionally: (1) used physical interference or
obstacle;5 or (2) obstructed, impaired, or hindered the work of
the City employees.  We disagree.   
When viewed in the light most favorable to the State,
the evidence showed that City officials taped-off the area where
City workers were engaged in enforcement activities under the
Stored Property Ordinance to protect the City workers and avoid
delays by creating a safe area so the workers could perform their
duties without interference.  The decision to tape-off the area
was based on past experience in prior enforcement actions at
Thomas Square Park in which De-Occupy Honolulu members yelled and
swore at the enforcement crew, got in front of the crew members,
and made it very difficult for the enforcement crew to do their
jobs.  Rumpungworn was asked repeatedly by Morikawa and Sgt.
Santos to leave the taped-off area so the City workers could
perform their enforcement duties.  Rumpungworn refused, despite
being warned that she would be arrested if she failed to comply,
and she even encouraged others to enter the taped-off area. 
Rumpungworn followed and stood next to Chun, a member of the
City's enforcement crew, and questioned what he was doing. 
Morikawa indicated that Rumpungworn's physical presence was
interfering with Chun and making it difficult for him to perform
his work.  Rumpungworn's physical presence also kept Chun's crew
from accompanying him, which impeded Chun's ability to complete
his enforcement activities.  Even after Rumpungworn walked away
from Chun, she did not leave the taped-off area, but questioned
other members of the City's enforcement crew.  
We conclude that there was substantial evidence to
support the jury's finding that Rumpungworn intentionally used
physical interference or obstacle to obstruct, impair, or hinder
5The State conceded in closing argument that Rumpungworn did
not use or threaten to use violence or force.
12NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
City employees, acting under the color of their official
authority, in the performance of a governmental function.  
Relying on her own testimony, Rumpungworn argues that
her intent was not to obstruct, impair, or hinder the City
workers, but to ensure that the workers were complying with the
Stored Property Ordinance so that her property would be properly
tagged and identified and could be reclaimed if it was removed. 
She also claims that she had been given permission to stay in the
taped-off area by an unidentified police officer.  However, the
assessment of the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the
evidence is for the trier of fact.  State v. Lee, 90 Hawai# i 130,
134, 976 P.2d 444, 448 (1999) ("It is well-settled that an
appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the
credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is
the province of the trier of fact." (internal quotation marks,
citation, and brackets omitted)).  The jury was free to reject
Rumpungworn's testimony regarding her intent and base its
decision on the other evidence presented.
II.
Rumpungworn contends that the DPA's questions to
prospective jurors during jury selection regarding the homeless
in public parks, which she claims were "designed to inflame the
jurors passions and prejudices against the homeless rather than
to see whether the jurors could be fair and impartial,"
constituted prosecutorial misconduct.  We conclude that the DPA's
questions were improper and warrant vacating Rumpungworn's
conviction.
The purpose of questioning prospective jurors during
jury selection, also known as jury voir dire, is to enable the
parties to evaluate whether potential jurors are qualified and
competent to serve and whether they can be fair and impartial. 
See State v. Simmons , 254 P.3d 97, 101 (Kan. 2011); State v.
Bell, No. 03C019712CR00541, 1999 WL 436432, at *6 (Tenn. Crim.
App. June 29, 1999).  The proper scope of jury voir dire rests
largely in the discretion of the trial court, and the parties are
13NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
generally given latitude to engage in questioning that will serve
to uncover biases, prejudgments, or prejudices.  See Hawai#i
Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 24(a) (2011); State v. Altergott,
57 Haw. 492, 499, 559 P.2d 728, 734 (1977); State v. Hayes , 855
N.W.2d 668, 678 (S.D. 2014).   
However, the use of jury voir dire "to prejudice the
jury for or against a particular party" is improper.  Altergott ,
57 Haw. at 499, 559 P.2d at 734.  We acknowledge that it may be
difficult to distinguish between permissible questions that serve
to uncover biases and prejudices and impermissible questions that
serve to prejudice the jury for or against a party.  It may also
be difficult for counsel to frame questions that serve to uncover
biases and prejudices that also do not have some potential for
awakening existing prejudices that may be held by potential
jurors.  But here, based on our review of the record, we conclude
that the DPA's questions crossed the line.
Rumpungworn was homeless, and whether the prospective
jurors held a prejudice for or against the homeless was a
legitimate subject of inquiry in jury voir dire.  However, the
manner in which the DPA framed his questions on this subject
plainly fell on the side of impermissible questions that served
to prejudice the jury against the defendant.  This is because, as
framed, the questions unnecessarily emphasized negative
stereotypes associated with the homeless, namely, the perception
that homeless people are dangerous to children and thus
undesirable people.  It would have been permissible for the DPA
to frame his questions in a neutral fashion and to ask the
prospective jurors whether Rumpungworn's status as homeless would
affect their ability to be fair and impartial, or whether such
status would cause the jurors to be sympathetic towards or
prejudiced against Rumpungworn.  Instead, the DPA framed his
inquiry in terms of whether jurors would allow their children or
grandchildren to play on a jungle gym in a park where homeless
people were nearby, or what actions an elementary school would
take if a homeless person came onto the school.  
14NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The reference to children in the DPA's hypothetical
scenarios was gratuitous as there were no children associated
with the Stored Property Ordinance enforcement activities at
issue in this case.  The use of children in the DPA's
hypothetical scenarios also served to emphasize the negative
stereotypes and animus certain people have for the homeless --
that they pose a danger and a safety concern, especially to
children, and their presence prevents the use by others of public
parks.  Moreover, by identifying jurors who would not let their
children play in a park with homeless people nearby, and then
asking those jurors to explain why, the DPA set the stage for
remarks by jurors that painted the homeless in a negative light. 
Although the parties should be given latitude to uncover
prejudices held by prospective jurors, we conclude that it is
usually best to give the defendant the choice regarding whether
questions emphasizing negative stereotypes or prejudices against
a status held by the defendant should be used to determine
whether prospective jurors are prejudiced against the defendant.
See Rosales-Lopez v. United States , 451 U.S. 182, 191 (1981).6
The DPA's reason and motive for asking the questions
regarding the homeless challenged by Rumpungworn on appeal are
not entirely clear.  This is because Rumpungworn did not object
to the DPA's questions.  Therefore, the DPA did not have a chance
to explain his actions, and the Circuit Court was not asked to
rule on the propriety of the questions or take curative action. 
However, based on our review of the record, we conclude that the
DPA's questions were improper, as their effect was to 
gratuitously inject negative stereotypes of the homeless into the
proceedings, through the use of hypotheticals raising scenarios
irrelevant to the issues presented in the case, in a manner that
6We suggest that where a prosecutor intends to ask questions
designed to uncover whether potential jurors harbor a prejudice
against a status held by the defendant, it may be prudent for the
prosecutor to raise the issue with the trial court and defense
counsel before proceeding.
15NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
prejudiced Rumpungworn.  Indeed, the State acknowledges that the
DPA's voir dire questions regarding the homeless were "largely
irrelevant" because Rumpungworn's status as homeless or whether
homeless persons had prevented children from playing in Thomas
Square Park had no bearing on the issues in dispute.  
Closing arguments "that rely on racial, religious,
ethnic, political, economic, or other prejudices of the jurors"
are improper.  See State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai# i 405, 413, 984 P.2d 
1231, 1239 (1999) (quoting 1979 Commentary to ABA Prosecution
Function Standard 3–5.8(c) (1979)).  While the DPA's questions
during jury voir dire were not arguments to the jury, and
questions presented in jury selection generally have less impact
on the jury's deliberations than closing arguments, the principle
that prosecutors should not inject into the trial prejudices that
may cause jurors to improperly stigmatize the defendant applies
to jury selection.  See id.; State v. Monday, 257 P.3d 551, 557
(Wash. 2011) ("Theories and arguments based on racial, ethnic and
most other stereotypes are antithetical to and impermissible in a
fair and impartial trial." (internal quotation marks, citation,
and brackets omitted)).  
We conclude that the DPA's questions to prospective
jurors regarding the homeless were improper and constitutes plain
error.  While we have concluded that there was sufficient
evidence to support Rumpungworn's conviction, the trial evidence
was equivocal, and we cannot say that the DPA's improper
questions did not contribute to Rumpungworn's conviction.  We
therefore vacate Rumpungworn's conviction7 and remand the case
for a new trial.8
7Because we vacate Rumpungworn's conviction based on the
DPA's improper questions regarding the homeless, we need not
address Rumpungworn's claim that the DPA improperly used a no
parking hypothetical in jury voir dire to "condition the jurors
to vote for conviction." 
8We reject Rumpungworn's contention that the DPA's improper
questions in jury voir dire regarding the homeless constituted
16NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
III.
In light of our decision to vacate Rumpungworn's
conviction, we need not address her remaining points of error.9 
CONCLUSION
We vacate the Circuit Court's Judgment, and we remand
the case for a new trial.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 23, 2018.
On the briefs:
Jon N. Ikenaga
Deputy Public Defender
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge
Brian R. Vincent
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge
Associate Judge
misconduct that was so egregious that a new trial should be
barred.  As noted, Rumpungworn did not object to DPA's questions;
the DPA did not have a chance to explain his reason and motive
for asking the questions; and the DPA's questions occurred during
the preliminary stages of trial in jury selection and did not
involve questions or arguments during the evidentiary portion of
trial or in closing argument.  We conclude that the DPA's voir
dire questions regarding the homeless do not warrant barring a
retrial.  We further conclude that any impropriety in the DPA's
use of the no parking hypothetical in voir dire does not affect
this conclusion.  In this regard, we note that Rumpungworn
modified the DPA's no parking hypothetical and asked questions
about the modified no parking hypothetical that were similar to
the questions asked by the DPA.
9With respect to Rumpungworn's contention that the Circuit
Court plainly erred in failing to sua sponte  find HRS § 710-1010
unconstitutional as applied to her, we note that Rumpungworn can
raise a claim that HRS § 710-1010 is unconstitutional as applied
to her on remand.
17