
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
CAAP-12-0000518
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
 
BRANDON K. KAHAI, Defendant-Appellant.
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-0093(1))

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Brandon K. Kahai (Kahai) by indictment with first-degree sexual assault by strong compulsion (Count 1), third-degree sexual assault by strong compulsion (Counts 2 and 3), kidnapping with intent to inflict bodily injury or subject the alleged victim to a sexual offense (Count 4), and second-degree assault (Count 5). The complaining witness (CW) for all the charged offenses was Kahai's cousin. 
After Kahai was arrested, he waived his Miranda rights
 
and confessed to the police. In his confession, Kahai stated
 that he went drinking with the CW at the Ale House, and they were
 joined by the CW's friend. While with the CW, Kahai became
 sexually aroused. After going to the Watercress Lounge and
 closing it down, the CW's friend went home, and Kahai and the CW
 went to his house to drink some more. Kahai stated that at his
 house, the CW began "flipping out" and decided to walk home. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
After the CW left, Kahai got into his car and went to look for
 her. He saw her walking on the road, got out of his car, and
 decided to "capitalize," with his primary focus being to "just
 get it." Kahai walked up to the CW and struck her in the face,
 causing her to fall backward and hit the pavement. The CW was
 semi-conscious and moaning. Kahai dragged the CW into the brush
 area. Kahai admitted that he removed the CW's clothes and
 sexually assaulted her. During the sexual assault, the CW was
 non-responsive and her eyes were closed. Kahai left the CW naked
 at the scene and ran to his car. Kahai drove home and changed
 his clothes, leaving his shorts on the garage floor and his two
 shirts near the washing machine. Kahai stated that the incident
 was "eating at him inside," so he went back to the scene where he
 was stopped by the police and arrested.
 
Kahai moved to suppress his confession as the fruit of
 
an unlawful arrest (Motion to Suppress Confession). The Circuit
 
1
Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit Court)  denied the motion.
 
The Circuit Court also denied Kahai's motion to reconsider the

 
denial of the Motion to Suppress Confession (Motion for
 Reconsideration).
 
Pursuant to a plea agreement, Kahai entered a

 
conditional plea of no contest to all the charges, reserving the
 right to appeal the Circuit Court's denial of his Motion to
 Suppress Confession. The plea agreement included the parties'
 agreement to the imposition of concurrent sentences of twenty
 years as to Count 1, ten years as to Count 4, and five years as
 to Counts 2, 3, and 5. The Circuit Court agreed to follow the
 parties' sentencing agreement in accepting Kahai's no contest
 plea. In sentencing Kahai, the Circuit Court imposed the agreed-
upon sentences as to Counts 1, 2, 3, and 5. However, the Circuit
 Court sentenced Kahai to twenty years of imprisonment on Count 4,
 instead of the agreed-upon ten years. The Circuit Court entered
 its Judgment on April 27, 2012.
 
1The Honorable Joel E. August presided.
 
2
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 






 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Kahai raises two points of error. First,
 
Kahai argues that the Circuit Court erred in denying his Motion
 to Suppress Confession.
2 Kahai contends that the police lacked
 
probable cause to arrest him, that his arrest was therefore
 unlawful, and that his confession should have been suppressed as
 the fruit of an unlawful arrest. Kahai also challenges certain
 findings of fact and conclusions of law made by the Circuit Court
 in support of its order denying Kahai's Motion to Suppress
 Confession. Second, Kahai argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 sentencing him to twenty years of imprisonment on Count 4, in
 violation of its agreement to bind itself to the parties'
 sentencing agreement. 
As explained in greater detail below, we hold that the
 
police had probable cause to arrest Kahai. Accordingly, Kahai's
 confession was not the fruit of an unlawful arrest, and the
 Circuit Court properly denied Kahai's Motion to Suppress
 Confession. As to Kahai's sentencing claim, the State concedes
 that the Circuit Court erred in sentencing Kahai to twenty years
 of imprisonment on Count 4. We agree with the State's concession
 of error. Accordingly, we vacate Kahai's sentence on Count 4,
 and we remand the case with directions that the Circuit Court
 impose a ten-year term of imprisonment on Count 4, consistent
 with its agreement to bind itself to the parties' sentencing
 agreement. We affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment in all other
 respects.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The following evidence was adduced at the hearing on
 
the Kahai's Motion to Suppress Confession.
 
2Kahai also contends that the Circuit Court erred in denying his Motion
for Reconsideration. However, he raises the same arguments in contesting the
denial of his Motion for Reconsideration as he does in contesting the denial
of his Motion to Suppress Confession. We therefore will not separately
address the Circuit Court's denial of the Motion for Reconsideration. 
3
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 
 


 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On February 9, 2009, at approximately 2:35 a.m., Maui
 
Police Department officers were dispatched to a Wailuku residence
 to investigate a report of a hysterical female with blood on her
 hands. Three officers, Terrence Gomez (Officer Gomez), Denton
 Galarza (Officer Galarza), and Heather Gilroy (Officer Gilroy)
 were assigned to the investigation.
 
Upon arriving at the residence, the officers
 
encountered the CW, who had sustained a head wound and had a
 large amount of dried blood, as well as grass, dirt, and leaves,
 in her hair. The CW was only wearing a T-shirt, was not wearing
 any clothes or undergarments from the waist down, had a sheet
 wrapped around her waist, and was barefoot. The CW seemed shaken
 up and was crying off and on. She also appeared to be
 intoxicated and disoriented. She slurred her words and had a
 strong odor of liquor.
 
Officer Galarza interviewed the CW. The CW was unable
 
to provide Officer Galarza with much detail about what had
 happened. She just knew she had been attacked. Officer Galarza
 testified that the CW recalled hiding in some bushes at Waiehu
 Beach and being attacked and punched by an unknown person. When
 asked if she had been drinking, the CW initially denied having
 anything to drink, but later said she had been drinking by
 herself at her residence. Officer Galarza continued to question
 the CW because he did not believe these statements to be true. 
The CW eventually stated that she had been out earlier that
 evening with her friend, K.T., and her cousin, Kahai; that they
 had been drinking at the Ale House; that she later caught a ride
 home with K.T. and Kahai in K.T.'s car; and that after being
 dropped off, she went for a walk and ended up by the Waiehu
 Cemetery, where she was attacked. The CW later said she had not
 been dropped off at home. Officer Galarza noted that the CW was
 "really disoriented, kept giving us different -- kept adding on. 
She couldn't remember everything."
 
Officer Gomez testified that he conferred with Officer
 
Galarza after Officer Galarza interviewed the CW, and that
 
4
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Officer Galarza relayed the information Officer Galarza had
 received from the CW. Officer Gilroy took the CW into the
 bathroom to look at her injuries. Officer Gilroy observed a
 large laceration on the back of the CW's head, a large abrasion
 consistent with a "rug burn" or "road rash" near her tail bone,
 and abrasions to both elbows. The CW also complained of pain to
 her left jaw area and said she had been struck there. The CW
 denied being sexually assaulted. 
After interviewing the CW, Officer Galarza proceeded to
 
K.T.'s residence, which was nearby. K.T. stated that she met the
 CW and Kahai at the Ale House; that at about 9:30, the CW and
 Kahai left together in Kahai's vehicle; and that K.T. left in her
 vehicle and went home.
 
Officer Galarza obtained Kahai's residence address
 
though a license check. At approximately 4:00 a.m., Officer
 Galarza arrived at Kahai's residence, with the intention of
 questioning him as a possible witness to the CW's attack. 
Officer Gomez arrived several minutes later. The carport light
 was on and a vehicle registered to Kahai was parked in the
 carport, but the lights in the residence were off. On the floor
 of the carport, the officers noticed a pair of shorts. The
 shorts had dirt on them and appeared as if "they were stepped out
 of." The officers also noticed a white T-shirt and a tank top
 hanging over a utility sink about an arm's length distance from
 the shorts. The T-shirt had dark red stains on it that appeared
 to be blood. The officers knocked on the door to the house and
 on the walls around the house, but no one responded.
 
While at Kahai's residence, Officer Gomez called the
 
CW's father and was informed that the CW was now saying she
 possibly had been sexually assaulted. Officer Gomez and Officer
 Gilroy drove to the CW's father's residence. Officer Gilroy
 interviewed the CW.  The CW stated that after her father drove
 her home from where the police had earlier interviewed her, she
 took a shower. The CW stated that she believed she had been
 sexually assaulted because she was menstruating and after her
 
5
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
shower, she realized that her tampon "was shoved all the way up
 there." Although the CW still had difficulty remembering what
 had happened, she told Officer Gilroy that Kahai drove her to the
 Ale House where they met K.T. They subsequently went to the
 Watercress Lounge for more drinking. Kahai then drove the CW to
 Kahai's house. K.T. was no longer with them, and the CW stated
 she felt uncomfortable.
 
The CW told Officer Gilroy that the CW left Kahai's
 
house and walked down Kahekili Highway. While in the area of
 Waiehu Beach Road and Lower Waiehu Beach Road, the CW was
 attacked. All the CW could remember was being shoved down and
 someone on top of her. She was unsure of who the responsible
 person was and exactly where the attack occurred. She was also
 unsure if a sexual assault had taken place, but said that "it
 felt to her like it did." Although the CW indicated that she was
 not sure who was responsible for the attack, she stated several
 times, "It must have been Brandon."
 
Although Officer Gomez did not hear Officer Gilroy's
 
interview of the CW, Officer Gomez testified that he was working
 in concert with Officer Gilroy, and Officer Gilroy related to
 Officer Gomez what the CW had said. Officer Gilroy told Officer
 Gomez that Kahai was the suspect. Officer Gomez testified that
 at the CW's father's house, Officer Gilroy told him the CW said
 that she was unsure who the responsible person was and exactly
 where the assault happened; that the CW possibly had been
 sexually assaulted and that "she was menstruating and her tampon
 was shoved up there"; that the CW believes or suspects that Kahai
 was the perpetrator; and that the incident may have happened on
 Lower Waiehu Beach Road. Officer Gomez testified that the CW
 seemed more calm and coherent at her father's house than a couple
 of hours earlier when he first saw her.
 
Based on the information he had received, Officer Gomez
 
left the CW's father's house and drove towards Waiehu Beach Road
 to investigate. Near the Church of Christ on Waiehu Beach Road,
 Officer Gomez saw a women's high-heel shoe on the shoulder of the
 
6
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
road. Upon stopping to investigate, Officer Gomez found a
 matching shoe. About ten feet from the second shoe, Officer
 Gomez saw a puddle of blood that was still in liquid form. In
 the area of the puddle of blood, there was a trail down a hill,
 leading into some bushes and brush. Officer Gomez went down the
 trail and saw what appeared to be blood, still wet, on a
 flattened cardboard box and on a piece of carpet. On the carpet,
 he found a pair of jeans and female underwear connected to the
 jeans that were inside out, as if they had been "rolled off"
 someone. Officer Gomez described the area as having lots of
 debris, shredded wood, leaves, and dirt, similar to the debris he
 had seen stuck to the CW's bloody hair earlier that morning.
 
While waiting for an evidence technician to arrive at
 
the scene, Officer Gomez noticed a white four-door Ford pass by
 with a male driver. This car and driver stood out because the
 driver matched the description of Kahai, the car was going "too
 slow" for the morning traffic, and the driver kept staring and
 looking at the police without paying attention to the road. The
 car also matched the description of a car belonging to Kahai's
 mother. Officer Gomez attempted to have another officer stop the
 car, but it had already passed.
 
A short time later, Officer Gomez saw the same car come
 
back to the scene, approaching from the opposite direction. By
 this time, Officer Gomez had obtained the license plate number
 for Kahai's mother's vehicle. Officer Gomez effected an
 investigative stop of the car to identify the driver. As Officer
 Gomez approached the car, he noticed the driver was very nervous. 
The driver was shaking, clenching the steering wheel, and
 sweating profusely. Officer Gomez confirmed that the driver was
 Kahai, and then Officer Gomez placed Kahai under arrest, with
 sexual assault being the most serious crime for which Kahai was 
arrested.
 
7
  
 

 

 




 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
A.
 
At the close of the hearing, the Circuit Court orally
 
 
denied Kahai's Motion to Suppress Confession and made the
 
 
following pertinent findings:
 
 
By 7:50 in the morning when defendant was arrested the
police knew the following, or had reasonably trustworthy
information concerning the following. 
Number one, that [the CW] had been the victim of an 

assault at about 2:30 that morning. And when they 

interviewed her shortly thereafter, she had blood -- a 

significant amount of blood, grass and dirt on her hair. 

There was actually even blood, if you look at the police 

report, on the sheet that she was holding around her. 
 
 
She was basically naked from her waist down, but there 

was still blood flowing on to the sheet that was surrounding 

her. 
 
 
The police knew that the victim believed that the 

assault had occurred somewhere along the side of the road in 

Waiehu. The police knew that the last person who the victim 

had last been seen with that night was the defendant. And 
 
 
knew or believed, reasonably believed that he had driven the 

victim from a bar where they had been drinking to his home
 
in Waiehu. 

They knew, according to the victim, that she had 

apparently left the defendant's home when it's pitch black, 

sometime early in the morning because she was feeling 

uncomfortable at his house. In other words, something 

occurred there such that she left and went off into the 
 
 
night on her own. And they certainly didn't have any reason 

to believe that the defendant had driven her somewhere as he 
 
 
had driven her to his house. 

When the police arrive at the defendant's home at 

about 3:50 that morning, a time when most people are home in 

bed, they find the defendant's car in the driveway. They 

see lights on in the carport, but no lights on in the house. 

And nobody was observed to be at the house. 

And in the carport they find a pair of man's shorts 

with grass on them, as if somebody had just stepped right 

out of them. They were on the floor of the garage, the 

carport. They find a white T-shirt and tank top which had 

what appeared to be fresh blood stains on them. And the 
 
 
police seize the shorts and the blood sustained T-shirt as 

evidence of the crime committed against [the CW]. . . . 

At approximately 4:50 a.m., about an hour later, 

Officer Gilroy is interviewing the victim after she had 

showered, and apparently had come to the conclusion that she 

had not only been physically assaulted by being hit on the 

head, but in all likelihood was sexually assaulted because 

of the location of her tampon. 

8
 
 





 

 










 







 

 



 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
And while not sure who the attacker was, the victim
states several times that it must have been the defendant. 
Shortly after that, the police find the victim's
shoes, pants and underpants -­
. . . . 
. . . Well, they find along Waiehu Beach Road a pair
 
of levis or jeans with underwear on them and a pair of
 
shoes. And they certainly know that the victim did not have
 
any clothing on below her waist and was barefoot. And they 

find them near the church on Waiehu Beach Road which, at 

least formed to a reasonable person that that is likely the 

scene of the crime. 
 
 
Aside from that, they also find blood, fresh blood in
 
the area where the clothing is, which also is corroboration 

that that's the likely place where the victim was assaulted. 

In the Court's view, looking at the totality of the 

aforementioned facts and circumstances, it would lead a 

person of reasonable caution to believe that the defendant 

was involved with the assault which had been perpetrated 

against [the CW]. And would have provided probable cause
 
for his arrest at the time he was arrested.
 
 
B.
 
The Circuit Court memorialized its decision to deny
 
 
Kahai's Motion to Suppress Confession it its written "Findings of
 
 
Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Defendant's Motion to
 
 
Suppress Evidence," which provided in relevant part:
 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
1. On February 9, 2009, at approximately 2:35 a.m.,
Officers Denton Galarza and Terrence Gomez were assigned to
respond to a Wailuku residence where an adult female was
reported to have injuries on her person. Upon arrival, the
officers immediately observed that the above female had a
large laceration in the back of the head, with a large
amount of blood matted within her hair along with grass,
dirt and leaves. She also had visible injuries to her
elbows, and a large abrasion near her tail bone, and
complained of pain to her jaw area, and elbows.
 
2. The female, who was later identified as [the CW],
was visibly upset, crying and shaking. She also appeared
extremely disoriented with a strong odor of liquor coming
from her breath and was only wearing a dark stretched tank
top. Other than the tank top and a bed sheet draped around
her bottom, [the CW] was naked from the bottom down, and had
no other clothing or footwear. The bed sheet had stains and
 spots that appeared to be blood.
 
3. At that time, [the CW] could only remember hiding
in the bushes by Waiehu Beach Road and being attacked and
punched by an unknown person in her jaw. Upon further
 
9
 







 






 


 







 

 






 


 

 









 

 











 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
questioning, she was able to inform the officers that she
had been out earlier that night with her friend [K.T.] and
Defendant Brandon Kahai, who was her cousin. [The CW] did
not remember any details of that evening except that she had
been drinking at the Ale House in Kahului with the above two
people and was later dropped off by them and subsequently
attacked by an unknown person when she went for a walk on
Waiehu Beach Road.
 
4. Officer Galaraza [sic] contacted [K.T.] and was
able to confirm that [the CW] had been with her and
Defendant earlier that evening and that she left [the CW]
with Defendant in his vehicle. Although it wasn't true,
[K.T.] also informed the officer that neither [the CW] or
Defendant was intoxicated at that time. Pursuant to a
 license check, police learned that Defendant resided at [a
specified address] in Wailuku.
 
5. At approximately 3:50 a.m., Officer Galarza with
two other officers arrived at Defendant's above residence. 
Based on the above information, Defendant was not a suspect
at that time. As with [K.T.], police were seeking to find
out if Defendant could provide any information pertaining to
[the CW]. Moreover, it was not the intention of the police
to conduct a search of Defendant's residence for evidence.
 
6. As Officer Galarza entered onto Defendant's
 
property, he observed Defendant's vehicle parked within the
driveway. He noticed that the open carport's lights were on
and that the house remained in darkness. As he approached
the front door located within the carport, he observed, in
plain view, a pair of men's gray shorts lying on the ground
as if someone had stepped out of them. Officer Galarza also
 noticed, in plain view, a white t-shirt and tank top hanging
from a utility sink approximately five feet away from the
front door. The t-shirt and tank each had dark red stains
 which resembled dry blood.
 
7. At about 4:40 a.m., police spoke with [the CW]
further and learned that [the CW] believed she had been
sexually assaulted by the perpetrator because she was
menstr[u]ating and uses tampons but now noticed that the
tampon had been "shoved all the way up there". [The CW]
stated she was not sure who the responsible was but stated
that "it must have been Brandon", and that she had been at
his house with him, then proceeded to walk home, where upon
she was attacked in the area of Waiehu Beach Road and Lower
 Waiehu Beach Road.
 
8. At about 5:45 a.m[.], police went to Waiehu Beach
Road and Lower Waiehu Beach Road, to look for evidence in
connection with the attack on [the CW]. Upon arrival they
observed a woman's high heel shoe on the roadway, another
high heel shoe and a pool of blood on the driveway leading
to Church of Christ, 810 Waiehu Beach Road, Maui, Hawaii.
In addition, police located a pair of "inside out" denim
jeans and female underpants on a trail just west of the
Church. Furthermore, police observed in the brush area,
more red fluid resembling blood on a white cardboard
flattened box and carpet.
 
10
 
 

 


 


 



 



 


 


 



 



 


 

 


 

 

 


 

 

 



 


 





 

 




 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
9. Police noticed that the area where the items were
 
located contained a lot of debris, wood, shredded wood,
leaves, and dirt. The debris at this location was
 consistent with the type of debris observed on [the CW] that
morning.
 
10. While securing the scene, police observed a male
matching the description of Defendant driving a white Ford
sedan pass the scene. Police learned that Defendant's
 mother owned a white 2008 Ford sedan, with Hawaii License
Plate [**W-**5], which was the same vehicle the Defendant
was seen driving.
 
11. At about 7:50 a.m., police again observed the
Ford Sedan traveling North on Waiehu Beach Road. At that
 time, police stepped into the roadway, and stopped the
vehicle. Defendant Brandon Kahai was the lone occupant. He
 was immediately advised of his rights, acknowledged same,
and was then placed under arrest for sexual assault, and
taken to the Wailuku Police Station.
 
12. At all times during the entire investigation,
police were acting in concert by communicating with each
other via police radio and in person[.]
 
13. The Court finds the testimony of Officer Denton
Galarza and Officer Terrence Gomez to be credible.
 
14. The Court finds credible the facts contained in
 
Officer Heather Gilroy's police report, which was stipulated
into evidence by the parties.
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
1. A search or an arrest without a warrant is valid
 
only where an officer has probable cause to believe a crime
is being, was, or is about to be committed. State v.
 
Delmondo, 54 Haw. 552 (Haw. 1973);
 
2. Probable cause has been established when it can be
 
said that a reasonable person viewing the evidence would
have a strong suspicion that a crime had been committed.
Id.
 
3. A law enforcement officer has probable cause to
make an arrest when the facts and circumstances within the
 officer's knowledge and of which the officer has reasonably
trustworthy information are sufficient in themselves to
warrant a person of reasonable caution in the belief that a
crime has been or is being committed. Haw. Rev. Stat. 
§ 803-5(b) (1993).
 
4. Probable cause to believe that the accused
 
committed the offense with which he is charged is not
equivalent to a belief that he is guilty beyond a reasonable
doubt, and a distinction must be drawn between the evidence
required in each situation. State v. Cannon, 56 Haw. 161,
163 (Haw. 1975).
 
11
   


 

 




 

 



 

 


 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5. What is known or perceived by an officer to give
him a probable cause to make an arrest or a search need not
amount to evidence sufficient to convict. State v.
 
Delmondo, at 554.
 
6. ["]While police officers are acting in concert and
are keeping each other informed of the progress of a
particular investigation, the knowledge of each is deemed to
be the knowledge of all." State v. Barnes, 58 Haw. 333, 336
(1977).
 
7. A warrantless arrest may be valid if police have
probable cause to arrest the defendant for a different
though closely related offense. See State v. Vance, 61 Haw.
291, 297 (1979).
 
In this case, the Court concludes that, based upon the
totality of the circumstances, police had probable cause to 

stop and arrest the Defendant when the facts and 

circumstances within the police's knowledge and of which the 

police had reasonably trustworthy information were 

sufficient in themselves to warrant a person of reasonable 

caution in the belief that the Defendant committed the 
 
 
crimes of sexual assault and/or the closely related offense 

of assault. Accordingly, this Court concludes that a 

reasonable person viewing the evidence would have a strong 

suspicion that the Defendant committed a crime, and thus, 

police properly arrested the Defendant based upon probable 

cause. 
 
 

ORDER

 
Based on the foregoing Findings of Fact and 

Conclusions of Law, Defendant's Motion to Suppress 

Confession is DENIED. 
 
 
C.
 
Kahai filed a Motion for Reconsideration. In denying
 
 
the motion, the Circuit Court, explained in relevant part:
 
 
The primary argument I think that the defense is
 
making here in this motion for reconsideration, which has
 
been made before, is that neither [the CW] nor [K.T.] were
 
credible or reliable witnesses on the night in question or
 
during the early morning hours in question. 
 
But the Court has reviewed their various statements to
 
 
the police, some of which were correct, some of which were
 
not correct. But I think what is essentially demphasized
 
[sic] by the defense is the strength of the corroborative
 
evidence which the police observed prior to the defendant's 

arrest, and speaking in particular, of the blood and the 

clothing along the dirt pathway identified as the scene of 

the crime when they went out to go to the area where [the 

CW] described where the assault took place. 

I'm talking about the men's shorts, which it appeared 

someone stepped out of and left on the ground of his garage 

with dirt on them, and that was testified to by one of the 

officers who walked into the carport, that there was dirt on 

the shorts. 
 
 
12
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
And the observation of blood, or what appeared to be
 
blood on the tank top and T-shirt that were, I think,
 
hanging on some sink that was in the carport in plain view,
 
and the light was on in the carport at about three something
 
in the morning with the defendant's car in the driveway.
 
 
DISCUSSION
 I.
 Kahai argues that the Circuit Court erred in denying
 
his Motion to Suppress Confession because he claims that the
 police lacked probable cause to arrest him and therefore his
 confession should have been suppressed as the fruit of an
 unlawful arrest. Kahai concedes that the police had probable
 cause to believe the CW had been attacked. He contends, however,
 that the police lacked probable cause to believe that he was the
 person responsible for the attack. As explained below, we reject
 Kahai's claim that the police lacked probable cause to arrest
 him.
 
A.
 1.
 
We review a trial court's ruling on a motion to 
suppress evidence, including the trial court's determination of whether probable cause to arrest exits, de novo to determine whether the ruling was right or wrong. State v. Kaleohano, 99 
Hawai
'i 370, 375, 56 P.3d 138, 143 (2002); State v. Maganis, 109 
Hawai'i 84, 86, 123 P.3d 679, 681 (2005). 
The proponent of the motion to suppress has the burden of
establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that thestatements or items sought to be excluded were unlawfullysecured and that his or her right to be free fromunreasonable searches or seizures was violated under the fourth amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, section 7 of the Hawai' i Constitution. 
Kaleohano, 99 Hawai 'i at 375, 56 P.3d at 143 (2002). We review a 
trial court's findings of fact under the clearly erroneous
 
standard, and its conclusions of law de novo. Id.
 
2.
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has used different 
formulations to describe the probable cause standard. In 
13
 
 

 

 

 




 

 

 

 


 





 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Maganis, the supreme court basically adopted the standard set
 
3
forth in Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 803-5(b) (1993) in

 
describing probable cause as follows:
 
Probable cause exists when the facts and circumstances
 
within one's knowledge and of which one has reasonably
trustworthy information are sufficient in themselves to
warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe that an
offense has been committed. This requires more than a mere
 
suspicion but less than a certainty. This standard has two
 
components. The first sentence describes the standard for
 
determining the presence of probable cause. The second
 sentence describes the quantum of proof necessary to satisfy
the standard.
 
Maganis, 109 Hawai 'i at 86, 123 P.3d at 681 (internal quotation 
marks, citations, and footnote omitted; emphasis in original). 
 
The supreme court also has held that probable cause means or is
 
 
established by "a state of facts as would lead a person of
 
 
ordinary caution or prudence to believe and conscientiously
 
 
entertain a strong suspicion of the guilt of the accused." State
 
 
v. Atwood, 129 Hawai 'i 414, 419, 301 P.3d 1255, 1260 (2013) 
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted); State v. Naeole,
 
 
80 Hawai 'i 419, 424, 910 P.2d 732, 737 (1996) (internal quotation 

 marks and citation omitted).4 
  
The United States Supreme Court has observed that the
 
 
probable cause standard "is a practical, nontechnical conception"

 
 
that deals "with probabilities" that are not technical, but are
 
 
"the factual and practical considerations of everyday life on
 
 
which reasonable and prudent men, not legal technicians, act." 
 
Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 231 (1983) (internal quotation
 
 
3HRS § 803-5(b) provides in relevant part: "[A] police officer has
probable cause to make an arrest when the facts and circumstances within the
officer's knowledge and of which the officer has reasonably trustworthy
information are sufficient in themselves to warrant a person of reasonable
caution in the belief that a crime has been or is being committed."
 
4
See also Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 5(c)(2)(ii) (2014)
(requiring that for a defendant to waive preliminary hearing on a felonycomplaint, he or she must sign a written statement acknowledging "[t]hat inorder to establish probable cause the State must offer sufficient evidence to'lead a person of ordinary caution or prudence to believe and conscientiouslyentertain a strong suspicion' that the defendant has committed the felonycharged or an included felony[.]" 
14
 
 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
marks and citations omitted). "[P]robable cause is a fluid
 
concept -- turning on the assessment of probabilities in
 particular factual contexts -- not readily, or even usefully,
 reduced to a neat set of legal rules." Id. at 232. 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated: "[P]robable cause 
is generally based upon a combination of factors, which together form a sort of mosaic, of which any one piece by itself often might not be enough to constitute probable cause, but which, when viewed as a whole, does constitute probable cause." State v. 
Chong, 52 Haw. 226, 231, 473 P.2d 567, 571 (1970). The probable cause determination is based on the totality of the circumstances. State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawai
'i 409, 431, 23 P.3d 
744, 766 (App. 2001). Among the relevant circumstances for the court to consider are the training and experience of the investigating police officers. See Naeole, 80 Hawai
'i at 424, 
910 P.2d at 737; Chong, 52 Haw. at 232, 473 P.2d at 571; State v. Spillner, 116 Hawai
'i 351, 358, 173 P.3d 498, 505 (2007) (noting 
that due to police officers' experience and specialized training, they are able to draw inferences from and make deductions about "the cumulative information available to them that 'might elude an untrained person'" (citation omitted)). 
B.
 
Based on the evidence presented at the hearing on
 
Kahai's Motion to Suppress Confession, we conclude that there was
 probable cause to arrest Kahai. At the time Officer Gomez
 arrested Kahai, the following facts and circumstances of which
 Officer Gomez had reasonably trustworthy information, were known
 to him: (1) the CW had been a victim of physical assault, which
 resulted in a large laceration to her head and extensive
 bleeding, and left her with a large of amount of dried blood, as
 well as grass, dirt, and leaves in her hair; (2) when first
 interviewed by the police, the CW was visibly upset, was crying,
 was disoriented, and had a strong odor of liquor; (3) at that
 time, the CW was only wearing a shirt, had a sheet wrapped around
 her waist but was otherwise naked from the waist down, and was
 
15
 
 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
barefoot; (4) the CW reported that she had been out drinking with
 Kahai and her friend K.T.; (5) at Kahai's residence, which
 Officer Gomez visited a short time after the CW's initial
 interview, men's shorts, with dirt on them, that appeared to have
 been "stepped out of" were found on the carport floor and a 
T-shirt with dark red stains that appeared to be blood was seen
 hanging over a utility sink; (6) the CW was re-interviewed and
 reported that she believed she had been sexually assaulted,
 because she was menstruating and noticed her tampon had been
 "shoved all the way up there"; (7) the CW, who was now calmer and
 more coherent, recalled going alone with Kahai to his residence,
 feeling uncomfortable there, leaving Kahai's residence and
 attempting to walk home, and being attacked in the area of Waiehu
 Beach Road and Lower Waiehu Beach Road; (8) while not sure who
 was responsible for the attack, the CW stated several times that
 "It must have been Brandon"; (9) Kahai was the last person known
 to have been with the CW before she was attacked; (10) on the
 shoulder of Waiehu Beach Road, Officer Gomez found a women's high
 heel shoe and a puddle of blood next to the second shoe; (11)
 down a nearby trail that led to some bushes and brush, Officer
 Gomez found blood-stained cardboard and carpet, a pair of jeans
 and women's underwear turned inside out, and lots of debris,
 shredded wood, leaves, and dirt, similar to the debris in the
 CW's hair earlier that morning; (12) while at this apparent crime
 scene, Officer Gomez saw Kahai drive by, driving slowly and
 staring at the police without paying attention to the road, and
 then saw Kahai drive by again a short time later, coming from the
 opposite direction; and (13) when Officer Gomez approached Kahai
 after stopping his car, Kahai was very nervous, and Kahai was
 shaking, clenching the steering wheel, and sweating profusely.
 
We conclude that the facts and circumstances within
 
Officer Gomez's knowledge and of which he had reasonably
 trustworthy information were sufficient to warrant a person of
 reasonable caution to believe that Kahai had sexually and
 physically assaulted the CW. Because Officer Gomez had probable
 
16
 
 

 

 

 

 


 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
cause to arrest Kahai for sexual assault by strong compulsion as
 well as second-degree assault, Officer Gomez's arrest of Kahai
 was lawful. See State v. Vance, 61 Haw. 291, 297-98, 602 P.2d
 
933, 938-39 (1979) (holding that an arrest is valid if the police
 have probable cause to arrest the defendant for an offense
 closely related to the one for which the defendant was arrested). 
Accordingly, Kahai's confession was not the fruit of an unlawful
 arrest, and the Circuit Court correctly denied Kahai's Motion to
 Suppress Confession.
 
C.
 
Kahai argues that probable cause was lacking because
 
the information obtained from the CW was not reasonably
 trustworthy, and therefore, there was insufficient evidence to
 warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe that Kahai was
 responsible for the assault on the CW. We disagree. 
The CW informed the police that she had been physically
 
assaulted and believed she had been sexually assaulted; gave the
 police the approximate location of the assault; told them that
 immediately prior to the assault, she been with Kahai at his
 residence and decided to walk home, in the early morning when it
 was still dark, because she felt uncomfortable; and repeatedly
 expressed her belief that the perpetrator "must have been" Kahai. 
Although the CW, particularly in the initial interview, appeared
 to be upset, disoriented, and intoxicated, the police did not
 simply rely on the CW's uncorroborated recollection of what had
 happened. Instead, the key information provided by the CW,
 including her belief that Kahai was the perpetrator, was
 corroborated by other evidence gathered during the investigation. 
The CW's statement that she had been physically
 
assaulted was corroborated by the observation by the police of
 the obvious injuries she had sustained, and she explained her
 belief that she had been sexually assaulted by her subsequent
 discovery of the location of her tampon. The CW's information
 regarding the physical and sexual assault, and the approximate
 location of the assault, was further corroborated by Officer
 
17
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 


 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Gomez's discovery of high-heel shoes and a fresh puddle of blood
 
on the shoulder of Waiehu Beach Road, and his discovery nearby of
 blood-stained cardboard and carpet, with jeans and women's
 underwear turned inside out, and debris that matched the debris
 the police saw in the CW's blood-matted hair. The CW's belief
 that Kahai must have been the perpetrator was corroborated by the
 discovery of shorts with dirt on them and a blood-stained T-shirt
 at Kahai's residence; the fact that he was the last person known
 to have been with the CW prior to the assault; Kahai's return to
 the crime scene, and his strange behavior in staring at the
 police then turning around for another look, which indicated an
 abnormal interest in the police investigation and a guilty
 conscience, and served to link Kahai to the assault of the CW;
 and Kahai's extreme nervousness, shaking and sweating profusely,
 when stopped by Officer Gomez.
5
 
Although Officer Gomez may not have had definitive 
proof that Kahai has sexually and physically assaulted the CW before placing Kahai under arrest, the information provided by the CW, as corroborated by and combined with the other evidence gathered during the investigation, was sufficient to "warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe" that Kahai had sexually and physically assaulted the CW. See Maganis, 109 Hawai
'i at 86, 
123 P.3d at 681. Each individual piece of evidence gathered by the police "might not [have been] enough to constitute probable cause," but together the evidence gathered "form[ed] a sort of mosaic, . . . which, when viewed as a whole," constituted probable cause to arrest Kahai. See Chong, 52 Haw. at 231, 473 
P.2d at 571. 
D.
 
In addition to generally challenging the Circuit
 
Court's determination of probable cause, Kahai challenges certain
 
5We note that the Circuit Court discounted the significance of, and did
not rely on, Officer Gomez's observation of Kahai's extreme nervousness when
Kahai was stopped. However, we may consider such evidence given the de novo
 
standard of review. 
18
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the Circuit Court's findings of fact (FOF) and conclusions of
 
law (COL). We conclude that these challenges do not affect our
 determination that Officer Gomez had probable cause to arrest
 Kahai.
 
1.
 
Citing the Hawai
'i Supreme Court's decision in Maganis, 
Kahai contends that the Circuit Court's COL 2 misstates the probable cause standard. The Circuit Court stated in COL 2 that: "[p]robable cause has been established when it can be said that a reasonable person viewing the evidence would have a strong suspicion that a crime had been committed." Kahai contends that the Circuit Court's use of the "strong suspicion" standard impermissibly reduces the quantum of proof required for probable cause. We disagree. 
Citing United States Supreme Court cases, this court 
had concluded in our Maganis opinion that probable cause required "more than a bare suspicion or possibility that the defendant committed a crime" but less than "proof by a preponderance of the evidence" or "proof that the defendant's guilt is more likely than not." State v. Maganis, 109 Hawai
'i 89, 93, 123 P.3d 684, 
688 (App. 2005). On certiorari review, the Hawai 'i Supreme Court 
concluded that our formulation of the probable cause standard had "water[ed] down" the standard. Maganis, 109 Hawai
'i at 88, 123 
P.3d at 683. The supreme court instead opted for a more flexible standard for probable cause that requires "'more than a mere suspicion but less than a certainty[.]'" Id. ("We believe that 
the probable cause standard of requiring 'more than a mere suspicion but less than a certainty' provides the flexibility necessary in determining probable cause, and preserves the necessary balance between the competing interests of law-abiding citizens and law enforcement.") 
"Strong suspicion" is "more than a mere suspicion but
 
less than a certainty." Therefore contrary to Kahai's claim, the
 Circuit Court's reference to "strong suspicion" in articulating
 the probable cause requirement does not conflict with the supreme
 
19
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court's decision in Maganis. Indeed, as previously noted, the supreme court has also used the term "strong suspicion" in formulating the probable cause standard. See Atwood, 129 Hawai
'i 
at 419, 301 P.3d at 1260; Naeole, 80 Hawai 'i at 424, 910 P.2d at 
737; see also Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 
5(c)(2)(ii). 
In any event, in addition to its reference to "strong
 
suspicion" in COL 2, the Circuit Court in COL 3 fully stated the
 standard for probable cause set forth in HRS § 803-5(b), which
 was essentially adopted by the supreme court in Maganis. We have
 applied the supreme court's Maganis standard in conducting our de
 novo review and in concluding that Officer Gomez had probable
 cause to arrest Kahai. Accordingly, Kahai's challenge to COL 2
 does not advance his claim on appeal or provide a basis for
 relief.
 
2.
 
 
The same is true of Kahai's challenges to FOF 3, 4, and
 
 
12. Kahai challenges FOF 3 because it refers to information
 
 
provided by the CW. However, as previously noted, the key
 
 
information provided by the CW was corroborated by other evidence
 
 
uncovered during the investigation, and therefore, Kahai's
 
 
challenge to FOF 3 is without merit. 
 
Kahai challenges the statement in FOF 4 that
 
 
"[a]lthough it wasn't true, [K.T.] also informed the officer that
 
 
neither [the CW] or [Kahai] was intoxicated at that time." 
 
Although this finding was not supported by any evidence presented
 
 
at the hearing on Kahai's Motion to Suppress Confession, it was
 
 
not relevant to the determination of probable cause. Thus, the
 
 
Circuit Court's error in making this finding was harmless. 
 
Kahai challenges the statement in FOF 12 that "[a]t all
 
times during the entire investigation, police were acting in
 concert by communicating with each other via police radio and in
 person[.]" The evidence presented at the hearing showed that the
 main officers involved in the investigation, Officers Gomez, 
Galarza, and Gilroy, were acting in concert and communicating
 
20
 
 

 

 

 

 

 


 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 







 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with each other during the investigation.6 Accordingly, there
 
was substantial evidence to support the Circuit Court's finding
 
that the police were acting in concert by communicating with each
 other, and this finding was not clearly erroneous. In any event,
 in determining that Officer Gomez had probable cause to arrest
 Kahai, it is not necessary for us to rely on any information held
 by the other officers that was not communicated to Officer Gomez. 
There was probable cause to arrest Kahai based on the information
 Officer Gomez testified he personally knew and which he testified
 had been communicated to him by Officers Galarza and Gilroy.
 
II.
 
In accepting Kahai's no contest pleas, the Circuit
 
Court agreed to bind itself to the parties' agreed-upon
 sentences, including a ten year sentence as to Count 4. Kahai
 argues that the Circuit Court erred in failing to comply with its
 sentencing commitment and instead sentenced Kahai to twenty years
 of imprisonment. The State concedes error on this point and we
 agree with this concession of error.
 
HRPP Rule 11 permitted the Circuit Court to bind itself
 
to the parties' plea agreement. See HRPP Rule 11(e)(1) and
 
(e)(3) (2007). The Circuit Court bound itself to the parties'
 plea agreement that provided for a ten-year sentence of
 imprisonment as to Count 4. Accordingly, the Circuit Court erred
 in failing to sentence Kahai to the agreed-upon ten-year term on
 Count 4.
 
CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the portion of the 
Circuit Court's Judgment that imposed the sentence on Kahai as to
 Count 4, and we remand the case with directions that the Circuit 
6Kahai correctly notes that no specific evidence was presented that the
officers had communicated via police radio. However, the Circuit Court's
reference to communication via police radio in its finding was immaterial.
Officer Gomez testified that he had been working in concert with Officers
Galarza and Gilroy and that those officers had relayed information to him
during the investigation. 
21
 
 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court impose a ten-year term of imprisonment on Count 4. We 
affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment in all other respects. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, October 31, 2014. 
On the briefs:

 
Summer M.M. Kupau
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Richard K. MinatoyaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
22
 