NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000109
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JACQUELINE TAMMAN, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
SAMI TAMMAN, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 07-1-1120)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this post-decree divorce proceeding, Defendant-
Appellant Sami Tamman (Sami) failed to physically appear for a
 
scheduled trial after he was specifically warned that he would be
 defaulted if he failed to appear in person. The Family Court of
 
1
the First Circuit (Family Court)  defaulted Sami, and it
partially granted the motion for post-decree relief of Plaintiff-
Appellee Jacqueline Tamman (Jacqueline) by imposing additional

 
restrictions on Sami's visitation rights. The Family Court 
1The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided over the proceedings
relevant to this appeal.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entered its "Order Regarding Trial of January 4, 2013"
 
(Visitation Order) on February 20, 2013. It entered its Findings
 of Fact and Conclusions of Law with respect to the Visitation
 Order on May 7, 2013.
 
Sami appeals from the Visitation Order and challenges
 
the portion of the Visitation Order which partially granted
 Jacqueline's request to impose additional restrictions on his
 visitation rights.
2 Sami argues that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion in defaulting Sami, denying Sami the opportunity to
 appear by phone, and failing to permit Sami's attorney to
 participate in the trial on Jacqueline's motion. Under the
 particular circumstances of this case, we affirm.
 
BACKGROUND
 
The termination of the marriage between Sami and 
Jacqueline has generated extensive litigation, including several decisions by our appellate courts. See Tamman v. Tamman, No. 
CAAP-10-0000032, 2011 WL 5926186 (Hawai
'i App. Nov. 29, 2011), 
vacated by No. SCWC-10-0000032, 2012 WL 1035720 (Hawai 'i Mar. 28, 
2012); Tamman v. Tamman, CAAP-10-0000032, 2012 WL 1473426 (Hawai
'i App. Apr. 27, 2012), cert. denied, Tamman v. Tamman, 
CAAP-10-0000032, 2012 WL 3240735 (Hawai 'i Aug. 9, 2012); Tamman 
v. Tamman, CAAP-12-0000597, CAAP-12-0000718, 2013 WL 6095450 (Hawai
'i App. Nov. 18, 2013). During the times relevant to this 
appeal, Sami resided in Switzerland and Jacqueline and the children resided in Hawai
'i. 
I.
 
On April 11, 2008, the Family Court held a short trial3
 
on the issue of jurisdiction as well as on financial issues
 raised by Jacqueline in a motion for pre-decree relief. Sami
 appeared by telephone. The Family Court described problems with
 
2The Visitation Order also denied Sami's motion for post-decree relief
without prejudice for lack of prosecution. Sami does not challenge the denial
of his motion for post-decree relief
 
3
 The Honorable Kenneth E. Enright presided.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and expressed concerns about Sami's appearance by telephone:
 
Please understand that you do not control this
courtroom.
 
We are at the mercy of the fact that we can't stop you
from talking because you're on the phone . . . . You don't
take over this courtroom and say whatever you want at any
time you want.
 
In addition, Sami repeatedly complained about difficulty hearing,
 
which led the Family Court to remark, "I'm afraid your choice to
 appear by telephone . . . has inherent problems for you."
 
At a hearing held in February 2009, Sami was allowed to
 
appear by telephone. During the hearing, Sami accused the Family
 Court of extortion and blackmail, talked over the Family Court
 and attorneys for both sides, argued with and fired his own
 attorney, and then hung up on the Family Court. Based on these
 
actions, the Family Court required Sami to be physically present
 
for the next hearing.
 
In May 2010, the Family Court held a trial on custody
 
and child support issues at which Sami was physically present. 
At the conclusion of the trial, the Family Court, on July 8,
 2010, issued its Order Granting Custody, Visitation, and Support"
 (July 2010 Order). The Family Court awarded sole physical and
 legal custody to Jacqueline; granted Sami in-person visitation
 with his children pursuant to an established schedule as well as
 visitation through daily Skype video conferencing or telephone
 contact; ordered Sami to pay child support in the amount of
 $7,810 per month; and found that as of May 31, 2010, Sami owed
 $261,080 in outstanding child support. The Family Court issued
 Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law in support of the July
 2010 Order. With respect to Sami's failure to make child support
 and other payments, the Family Court found that Sami "possessed
 the means to comply with [its] child support, alimony, and
 housing orders. Nevertheless, [Sami] intentionally and
 inexcusably ignored the court's orders." (Emphasis added.) The
 Family Court also found that Sami was not credible based on his
 testimony at the May 2010 trial; that Sami deceived the Family
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Court with respect to his financial status and position; and that 
Sami had intentionally misrepresented his income, assets, and debts. Sami appealed the Family's Court's July 2010 Order, which was ultimately affirmed on appeal. Tamman v. Tamman, No. CAAP-10-0000032 (Hawai
'i App. Apr. 27, 2012). 
II.
 
On November 21, 2011, Jacqueline filed a motion for
 
post-decree relief regarding the terms of Sami's visitation and
 to enforce Sami's delinquent child support and other payments. 
On January 18, 2012, the Family Court held a hearing to set a
 trial date for Jacqueline's motion.
4 At the hearing, the Family
 
Court set the trial for May 21 to 22, 2012, and it ordered that
 both Sami and Jacqueline be physically present, stating to Sami's
 attorney, "I'm not taking any excuses." 
The Family Court subsequently bifurcated the trial on
 
Jacqueline's motion into a trial regarding enforcement of Sami's
 support obligations to be held on May 21, 2012, and trial
 regarding the terms of Sami's visitation to be held on January
 14, 2013. Prior to the May 21 trial, Sami filed his own motion
 for post-decree relief, which sought to change custody and reduce
 his child support obligations. On April 4, 2012, the Family
 Court held an order to show cause hearing on Sami's motion, but
 Sami and his attorney both failed to appear. The Family Court
 dismissed Sami's motion without prejudice for failure to
 prosecute and awarded attorney's fees to Jacqueline. Sami
 
refiled this motion on May 2, 2012.
 
On May 18, 2012, the Family Court held a Rule 16
 
conference on Jacqueline's and Sami's pending motions.
5 This
 
conference specifically addressed a request by Sami to appear at 
4The Honorable Bode A. Uale presided.
 
5
 The Honorable Catherine H. Remigio presided 
4
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
trial by telephone. The Family Court denied Sami's request. The
 
minutes of the Rule 16 conference state:
 
THE COURT REVIEWED THE MINUTES & PULLED THE CD OF THE
 
1/18/12 HEARING BEFORE JUDGE UALE. IT WAS VERY CLEAR BOTH
 PARTIES TO BE PRESENT AT TRIAL. MR. TAMMAN NEEDS TO BE
 
PRESENT OR HE WILL BE DEFAULTED.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
Sami appeared in person and testified at the May 21
 
trial regarding Jacqueline's motion to enforce Sami's payment
 
obligations. After the trial, the Family Court, on May 25, 2012,
 entered a Judgment against Sami and in favor of Jacqueline in the
 amount of $420,338 for delinquent child support and temporary
 alimony owed to Jacqueline through April 30, 2012.
 
III.
 
On July 25, 2012, the Family Court held a hearing to 
determine whether Sami should be held in civil contempt for failure to comply with its July 2010 Order, which ordered Sami to pay child support and other payments. Sami was expected to appear in person at this hearing, but failed to appear. Sami's 
counsel represented at the hearing that Sami had broken his nose 
and pursuant to doctor's orders, was unable to fly to Hawai
'i. 
The Family Court continued the hearing until July 30, 2012, to give Sami time to travel to Hawai
'i, but Sami failed to appear in 
person at the continued hearing. 
On July 31, 2012, the Family Court entered "Findings
 
and Judgment of Civil Contempt of Court" against Sami. The
 Family Court found by clear and convincing evidence that Sami 
"presently has the ability and power to comply" with the order of
 the Family Court to pay child support and alimony, but is
 refusing to comply with the order without any privilege, right,
 or lawful basis. The Family Court therefore adjudged Sami in
 
civil contempt of court in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
(HRS) ยง 710-1077(6). Based on Sami's "current ability and
 refusal to cease the contumacious conduct," the Family Court
 ordered that he be committed to the custody of the Director of
 
5
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Public Safety, Intake Service Center, and held there until he
 
"agrees to comply with the court order." 
The Family Court subsequently issued additional
 
findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding its
 adjudication of Sami in civil contempt of court. Among other
 things, the Family Court found and concluded that Sami had made
 no payments toward the support arrearages established in its July
 2010 Order; that "[i]n considering [Sami's] demeanor, manner of
 testifying, and candor, in addition to the substance of his
 testimony," Sami "was not credible about his income and assets";
 and that "[Sami] intentionally and inexcusably ignored the
 court's orders." 
Sami appealed from the Family Court's $420,338 
"Judgment for Delinquent Child Support and Alimony" and its "Findings and Judgment of Civil Contempt of Court," which were both affirmed by this court. Tamman v Tamman, CAAP-12-0000597, 
CAAP-12-0000718, 2013 WL 6095450 (Hawai
'i App. Nov. 18, 2013). 
On August 23, 2012, Sami failed to appear for a custody
 
evaluator review hearing. The Family Court's minutes state that
 
it reserved any consequences for Sami's failure to be present at
 
the hearing. On December 27, 2012, Sami failed to appear for a
 
settlement conference. 
IV.
 
On January 14, 2013, the case was called for trial on
 
Jacqueline's motion to modify the terms of visitation and Sami's
 
motion to change custody and reduce child support. Sami failed
 to appear in person for the trial, and the Family Court placed
 this fact on the record. Although acknowledging that "two judges
 have said that [Sami] cannot appear by phone in this case,"
 Sami's counsel moved to allow Sami to appear by phone. Sami's
 counsel contended that a telephone appearance was necessary
 because Sami had informed counsel that: (1) Sami did not have the
 money to travel due to the Family Court's Judgment and
 Jacqueline's attempts to enforce it which had tied up Sami's
 finances; and (2) Sami had sustained injuries to his ribs and
 
6
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
lungs on January 2 which prevented him from traveling. Sami's
 
counsel offered no evidence to support Sami's claims.
 
The Family Court denied Sami's request to appear by
 
telephone, noting that it had been made "very clear . . . several
 times" that Sami had been "denied the request to appear by
 phone." Jacqueline moved that Sami be defaulted for his failure
 
to appear. The Family Court granted Jacqueline's motion, stating
 
that Sami "has had a lot of warning that he could be defaulted if
 he does not appear." After defaulting Sami, the Family Court did
 not permit Sami's counsel to participate and excused Sami's
 counsel from the trial. The Family Court then heard testimony on
 Jacqueline's motion to modify Sami's visitation. 
The Family Court subsequently filed its Visitation
 
Order, in which it memorialized its decision to deny Sami's oral
 motion to appear by phone and to grant Jacqueline's oral motion
 to find Sami in default for failure to appear. The Visitation
 Order granted in part and denied in part Jacqueline's motion to
 modify the terms of Sami's visitation.
6 The Family Court reduced
 
Sami's Skype/telephone visitation to once a week, although it
 allowed the children to initiate a call with Sami at any time. 
It also ordered a three-month suspension of all physical
 visitation, after which visitations would be supervised, not to
 exceed two hours in duration, and scheduled according to the
 prior schedule set by the Family Court. In its findings of fact
 
regarding the Visitation Order, the Family Court, among other
 
things, found that "[Sami] was aware through the court's orders
 and directives dating back to January 18, 2012, that he was
 required to physically appear at the January [14, 2013] trial,
 and that failure to appear would result in default."
 
DISCUSSION
 
Sami argues that the Family Court abused its discretion
 
in defaulting him, denying him the opportunity to appear by
 
6The Visitation Order also denied without prejudice for lack of
prosecution Sami's motion to change custody and reduce child support. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
phone, and failing to permit his attorney to participate in the
 
trial on Jacqueline's motion. We disagree.
 
I.
 
Courts have inherent power to control the litigation 
process, to curb abuses, and to promote a fair process, which includes the imposition of the sanction of dismissal in severe circumstances. See Richardson v. Sport Shinko (Waikiki Corp.), 
76 Hawai
'i 494, 507, 880 P.2d 169, 182 (1994). In this case, the 
Family Court properly exercised its inherent power to control the litigation process and promote a fair process by requiring Sami to appear in person for trial. The record shows that allowing Sami to appear by telephone on prior occasions had been disruptive and detrimental to the proceedings. The Family Court had been unable to control Sami in his phone appearances: he refused to stop talking, talked over the other participants, and on one occasion hung up on the Family Court. Sami's appearance in person would also enhance the Family Court's ability to assess his credibility, which would likely be important to the Family Court's decision on the visitation claims before it. Finally, the Family Court had adjudged Sami in civil contempt of court for his contumacious conduct in refusing to pay his support obligations, and allowing him to appear by telephone would facilitate his continued evasion of his support obligations. 
II.
 
The sanction of default is a harsh one and is not 
favored. See In re TW, 124 Hawai
'i 468, 472, 248 P.3d 234, 238 
(App. 2011). However, a trial court has discretion in imposing sanctions, including default, for violations of its orders, and we review the court's imposition of sanctions for abuse of discretion. See Weinberg v. Dickson-Weinberg, 123 Hawai
'i 68, 
71, 229 P.3d 1133, 1136 (2010); Berry v. Berry, 127 Hawai 'i 243, 
254, 277 P.3d 968, 979 (2012). "In determining whether the sanction of dismissal constituted an abuse of discretion, we look to the entire procedural history of the case." Long v. Steepro, 
213 F.3d 983, 986 (7th Cir. 2000). Although "[t]he choice of 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
appropriate sanctions is primarily the responsibility of the
 
[trial] court, . . . the sanction selected must be one that a
 reasonable jurist, apprised of all the circumstances, would have
 chosen as proportionate to the infraction." Id. (internal
 
quotation marks and citation omitted). "A deliberate and
 contumacious disregard of the court's authority will justify
 application of [the] severest of sanctions [of striking a party's
 pleadings], as will bad faith, willful disregard or gross
 indifference to an order of the court, or conduct which evinces
 deliberate callousness." Kamhi v. Waterview Towers Condo. Ass'n,
 
793 So.2d 1033, 1036 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2001).
 
III.
 
In this case, the Family Court sanctioned Sami for his
 
violation of its order to physically appear by not only
 precluding Sami from participating in the trial on Jacqueline's
 motion, but also precluding Sami's counsel from participating. 
Ordinarily, we would look with disfavor on a trial court's
 precluding a party's counsel from participating in a trial-like 
proceeding as a sanction for the party's failure to physically
 appear. We believe, however, that this case presents
 circumstances that are atypical and egregious. 
In light of the particular circumstances of this case,
 
its procedural history, and the totality of Sami's actions and
 conduct, we cannot say that the Family Court abused its
 discretion in sanctioning Sami for violating the Family Court's
 order to appear in person by defaulting Sami and not permitting
 his counsel to participate in the trial on Jacqueline's motion. 
The record shows that prior to the January 14, 2013, trial, the
 Family Court had found that Sami had "intentionally and
 inexcusably ignored the court's orders"; that Sami was not
 credible; that Sami had deceived the Family Court and
 intentionally misrepresented his financial condition; that he
 engaged in "contumacious conduct" in refusing to pay his support
 obligations which he had the ability and power to pay; and that
 he was in civil contempt of court and subject to incarceration
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
until he complied with the Family Court's support orders. Sami
 
had failed to appear at other proceedings at which his attendance
 in person was expected, including the contempt hearing that had
 been continued at his request. In addition, he was given ample
 warning that his appearance in person at the January 14, 2013,
 trial was required. While Sami's counsel stated at the January
 14 trial that Sami claimed he could not attend in person because
 Sami did not have enough money and was too injured to travel, no
 evidence was offered to support these claims. Nor did Sami
 present evidence to support these claims after the January 14
 trial in connection with a motion for reconsideration or to set
 aside the default.
 
Under these circumstances, we conclude that the Family 
Court did not abuse its discretion in defaulting Sami and precluding Sami's attorney from participating in the trial on Jacqueline's motion. Although the Family Court imposed these sanctions, it still required Jacqueline to meet her burden of proving her entitlement to the modification of Sami's visitation rights, and it only granted Jacqueline's motion in part. The sanctions imposed by the Family Court in the exercise of its discretion were justified by the totality of Sami's "deliberate and contumacious" disregard of the Family Court's authority and his "willful disregard or gross indifference to" the Family Court's orders. See Kamhi, 793 So.2d at 1036; Berry, 127 Hawai
'i 
at 250, 253-54, 277 P.3d at 975, 978-79 (rejecting husband's claim that the Family Court abused its discretion in entering default against him "for failing to travel from Florida to Hawai
'i, instead of allowing him to appear [at a rescheduled 
settlement conference] by telephone," where husband had notice that the Family Court would default him if he failed to appear).
7 
7
Although Sami relies on Long v. Long, 101 Hawai' i 400, 69 P.3d 528
(App. 2003), that case is clearly distinguishable. Unlike in Long, Sami had
prior notice that his failure to appear in person would result in default. In addition, Sami's behavior and history of misconduct was far more egregiousthan the behavior of the appellant in Long. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We also conclude for the reasons previously discussed and under
 
the circumstances of this case, that the Family Court did not
 abuse its discretion in denying Sami's oral motion, made on the
 day of trial, to appear by telephone.
 
CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Family Court's 
Visitation Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, December 31, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Samuel P. King, Jr.
For Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Ronald Y. AmemiyaJonathan W. Ware, pro hac vicefor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge

 
11
 