 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-11-0000958
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
JUANA KERR, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
GILBERT SILVA, Respondent-Appellee.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
KO'OLAU POKO DIVISION
 
(CIVIL NO. 1SS10-1-00840)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Juana Kerr (Kerr) appeals from the
 
"Decision and Order Denying Petition for Injunction Against
 
Harassment" (Order Denying Petition) filed on November 16, 2011,
 in the District Court of the First Circuit (District Court).
1 On
 
appeal, Kerr contends that the District Court erred by: (1)
 making conflicting statements in support of its decision; (2)
 ignoring evidence; and (3) creating evidence. As explained
 below, we conclude that Kerr's contentions are without merit, and
 we affirm the District Court.
 
I.
 A.
 
Respondent-Appellee Gilbert Silva (Silva) is the owner 
of residential property (Premises) in Kâne' ohe. Silva is the 
1
 The Honorable Steven M. Nakashima presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
cousin of Kerr's husband, Teddy Kerr (Teddy). In May 2008, Silva
 
permitted Teddy's family, which included Teddy, Kerr, and their
 children (Kerrs), to live with Silva at the Premises on a
 temporary basis after the Kerrs had been evicted from their
 residence by other family members. Initially, Silva permitted
 the Kerrs to live rent free, but when their stay became
 prolonged, it was agreed that the Kerrs would pay rent and a
 portion of the utility bills. In November 2009, Silva told Teddy
 that the Kerrs needed to move out by February 2010 because Silva
 planned to begin renovations on the Premises. When the Kerrs did
 not move out as requested, Silva initiated an eviction action. 
However, before Silva could serve a summons in the
 
eviction action on the Kerrs, Teddy obtained an ex parte
 temporary restraining order (TRO) against Silva. The TRO was
 dissolved on July, 13, 2010, and on July 14, 2010, Silva and his
 brother went to the Kerrs' portion of the Premises to serve Teddy
 with an "eviction notice." Teddy refused to accept service. 
Words were exchanged between Teddy and Silva, and Kerr
 
joined in the argument. While Silva was attempting to return to
 his portion of the Premises, Kerr stepped in his path. As the
 District Court observed, both Silva and Kerr "are not skinny
 people and their bellies protrude somewhat." Silva and Kerr made
 contact with each other, but the extent of that contact was
 disputed. Kerr and members of her family testified that Silva
 "body slammed" her across the room; Silva testified that he came
 into slight contact with Kerr with his belly. Kerr also stated
 that she suffered injuries as a result of the contact, which
 required treatment at the emergency room.
 
B.
 
The District Court found that based on the testimony
 
presented, there was contact between Silva and Kerr that was
 sufficient to cause Kerr to go backwards and lose her balance. 
It further found, however, that "while there is conflicting
 testimony on this point, the Court gives credence to Respondent
 Silva that at no time did he intend to come in contact with
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Petitioner Kerr and there was never any intent to cause injury or
 
distress to Petitioner Kerr." 
The District Court stated:
 
[T]he Court's conclusion is that even if Petitioner Kerr may
have suffered injuries, the Court gives credence to the
testimony of Respondent Silva that he never intended to come
in contact with Petitioner Kerr. The Court gives credence
to that portion of Respondent Silva's testimony that he was
intending to walk towards his portion of the house. The
 Court also gives credence to Respondent Silva's testimony
that he had no interest in talking to Petitioner Kerr, that
Respondent Silva was intending to go to his portion of the
house and he did not expect Petitioner Kerr to step into his
path when the contact between the two occurred. Thereafter,
Petitioner Kerr's balance was sufficiently affected so that
she ended up falling backwards and catching herself at the
end of the couch.
 
Based on its determination that Silva did not intend
 
the physical contact that occurred between Silva and Kerr, the
 
District Court concluded that there was no basis to issue the
 injunction against harassment sought by Kerr against Silva, and
 it denied Kerr's petition for injunction against harassment.
 
II.
 
We are guided by the following principles in reviewing
 
a trial court's factual determinations:
 
It is for the trial judge as fact-finder to assess the
credibility of witnesses and to resolve all questions of
fact; the judge may accept or reject any witness's testimony
in whole or in part. As the trier of fact, the judge may
draw all reasonable and legitimate inferences and deductions
from the evidence, and the findings of the trial court will
not be disturbed unless clearly erroneous. An appellate
court will not pass upon the trial judge's decisions with
respect to the credibility of witnesses and the weight of
the evidence, because this is the province of the trial
judge.
 
State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai' i 131, 139, 913 P.2d 57, 65 (1996) 
(citations omitted).
 
"[O]n appeal, this court will not attempt to reconcile
 
conflicting evidence, or interfere with a [trial court's]
 
decision based on the credibility of witnesses or the weight of
 the evidence." 
State v. Yamada,  116 Hawai' i 422, 442, 173 P.3d 
569, 589 (App. 2007) (format altered and citation omitted). "It
 is the province of the [trial court], not the appellate courts,
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to determine the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the 
evidence." State v. Smith, 106 Hawai' i 365, 372, 105 P.3d 242, 
249 (App. 2004). 
III.
 
Kerr's claims of error on appeal all boil down to an
 
attack on the District Court's credibility determinations, the
 inferences it drew from the evidence, and the weight it assigned
 to the evidence. For example, Kerr claims that the District
 Court ignored testimony because it believed Silva over other
 witnesses. Kerr contends that the District Court created
 evidence because it drew inferences over how the contact between
 Silva and Kerr occurred based on the evidence presented. Kerr
 also claims that the "[District Court] made conflicting
 statements" because it found that Silva did not intend to harm
 Kerr, even though Silva testified he was angry at Kerr. 
We conclude that under the applicable standard of
 
review, Kerr's challenges to the District Court's assessment of
 the evidence is unavailing. It was the province of the District
 Court, as the trier of fact, to determine the credibility of the
 witnesses, draw inferences from the evidence, and decide what
 weight to give to the evidence. There was substantial evidence
 to support the District Court's findings.
 
IV.
 
We affirm the District Court's Order Denying Petition. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 15, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Anthony P. Locricchio
for Petitioner-Appellant
 
Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
Michael W. Gibson
 
Michael R. Vieira
 (Ashford & Wriston
A Limited Liability Law Partnership LLP)
for Respondent-Appellee
 
4
 