NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000696 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF P CHILDREN
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 14-00112)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
 
Mother-Appellant (Mother) appeals from the "Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights" entered on November 14, 2016, in the
 
Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court).1/ The Family
 
Court terminated Mother's parental rights to her three children,
 FP, JP1, and JP2 (collectively, the Children), and appointed the
 Director of the Department of Human Services as the permanent
 custodian of the Children.
 
On appeal, Mother contends that: (1) the Family Court
 
clearly erred in finding by clear and convincing evidence that it
 was not reasonably foreseeable that Mother would become willing
 and able to provide the Children with a safe family home within a
 reasonable period of time; and (2) she was not given a reasonable
 opportunity to reunite with the Children before her parental
 rights were terminated. The principal basis for the Family
 Court's termination of Mother's parental rights was her inability
 to overcome her substance abuse problems and demonstrate
 consistent sobriety. As explained below, we affirm the Family
 Court.
 
1/ The Honorable Steven M. Nakashima presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
While pregnant with JP2, Mother tested positive for
 
methamphetamine on January 24, 2014, January 31, 2014, and
 
February 6, 2014. At that time, she was participating in the
 Salvation Army's outpatient drug treatment program. Although
 Mother and JP2 both tested negative for illicit drugs at JP2's
 birth, Mother admitted that she used crystal methamphetamine
 shortly after JP2's birth. JP2 was removed from Mother's care,
 and on June 12, 2014, the Department of Human Services
 (Department) filed a petition for temporary foster custody of JP2
 and for family supervision of FP and JP1. Mother stipulated to
 the relief sought in the petition, and the Family Court ordered
 temporary foster custody for JP2 and family supervision for FP
 and JP1.
 
On November 17, 2014, Mother had a positive drug test
 
and admitted that she had used drugs. The Department assumed
 foster custody of FP and JP1 on November 18, 2014. In response
 to the Department's motion for immediate review, Mother
 stipulated to foster custody for FP and JP1, and the Family Court
 ordered foster custody for these children.
 
On June 3, 2015, Mother tested positive for
 
methamphetamine, and she later admitted that she had used drugs.
 On October 26, 2015, the Department filed a motion to terminate
 Mother's parental rights to the Children. The Family Court set
 the motion for a trial on June 29, 2016, and on April 21, 2016,
 it set July 27, 2016, as an additional trial day to hear
 witnesses. 
On June 28, 2016, the Department filed a motion to
 
continue the trial. The Family Court held a hearing on the
 Department's continuance motion on June 29, 2016. At the
 hearing, the Department stated that while it was not changing its
 position that Mother's parental rights should be terminated, it
 was willing to give Mother a chance to show that she should be
 given more time to demonstrate she can provide a safe family home
 for the Children. In particular, the Department was willing to
 give Mother the opportunity to show how she interacted with FP,
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
since JP1 and JP2 were temporarily away from Hawai 'i with their 
foster caregivers. The Family Court granted the Department's 
motion for continuance, ordered a June 28, 2016, service plan, and also ordered Mother, who was present at the hearing, to submit to a drug test that day -- June 29, 2016. 
Mother failed to appear at the testing facility on June
 
29, 2016. Mother did not appear for testing even though the
 Department called Mother four times that day and left messages
 reminding her that a no-show was presumed to be a positive/dirty
 drug test. On July 5, 2016, the Department asked Mother to
 submit to a hair follicle test, which would show whether Mother
 had used illicit substances in the last 90 days. Mother failed
 to appear for a hair follicle test, even though the Family Court,
 on July 14, 2016, granted the Department's motion to compel
 Mother to submit to a hair follicle test, and Department social
 workers went to Mother's residence on two occasions to provide
 assistance in transporting Mother to the testing facility.
 
The Family Court held a trial on the Department's
 
motion to terminate parental rights on July 27, 2016, September
 23, 2016, and October 5, 2016. At the conclusion of the trial,
 the Family Court granted the motion and terminated Mother's
 parental rights to the Children.
 
II.
 
In order to terminate a parent's parental rights, the
 
family court must, among other thing, determine by clear and
 convincing evidence that:
 
(1)	 A child's parent whose rights are subject to
termination is not presently willing and able to
provide the parent's child with a safe family home,
even with the assistance of a service plan;
 
(2)	 It is not reasonably foreseeable that the child's
parent whose rights are subject to termination will
become willing and able to provide the child with a
safe family home, even with the assistance of a
service plan, within a reasonable period of time,
which shall not exceed two years from the child's date
of entry into foster care[.]
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 587A-33(a)(1), (a)(2) (Supp.
 
2016). The Family Court made both these determinations by clear
 and convincing evidence in terminating Mother's parental rights.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We apply the following standards in reviewing the
 
Family Court's decision to terminate parental rights:
 
Generally, the "family court possesses wide discretion
in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set
aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion." 
Thus, we will not disturb the family court's decisions on
appeal "unless the family court disregarded rules or
principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment
of a party litigant . . . and its decision clearly exceeded
the bounds of reason."
 
In re Jane Doe, 95 Hawai 'i 183, 189-90, 20 P.3d 616, 622-23 
(2001) (citations and brackets omitted; ellipsis points in 
original). The family court's findings of fact are reviewed under the "clearly erroneous" standard and its conclusions of law are reviewed de novo. Id. at 190, 20 P.3d at 623. The family 
court's determinations "with respect to (1) whether a child's parent is willing and able to provide a safe family home for the child and (2) whether it is reasonably foreseeable that a child's parent will become willing and able to provide a safe family home within a reasonable period of time present mixed questions of law and fact" which are reviewed under the "clearly erroneous" standard. Id. 
"[T]he family court's determination of what is or is
 
not in a child's best interests is reviewed on appeal for clear
 error." Id. "Moreover, the family court 'is given much leeway
 
in its examination of the reports concerning a child's care,
 custody, and welfare, and its conclusions in this regard, if
 supported by the record and not clearly erroneous, must stand on
 appeal.'" Id. (citation and brackets omitted).
 
III.
 
We resolve the arguments presented by Mother on appeal
 
as follows:
 
A.
 
Mother contends that the Family Court clearly erred in
 
finding by clear and convincing evidence that it was not
 reasonably foreseeable that Mother would become willing and able
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to provide the Children with a safe family home within a
 
reasonable period of time.2/ We disagree.
 
The Family Court relied on Mother's inability to
 
overcome her substance abuse problems and demonstrate consistent
 sobriety in finding that it was not reasonably foreseeable that
 Mother would become willing and able to provide the Children with
 a safe family home within a reasonable period of time. Mother
 cites periods of time during which she tested clean for drugs,
 and she disputes that her substance abuse problems were
 sufficient to show that she would not be able to provide a safe
 family home within a reasonable period of time. 
However, the record indicates that after testing
 
positive while pregnant with JP2 and undergoing drug treatment,
 Mother relapsed several times, including during a critical period
 immediately before the scheduled June 29, 2016, trial on the
 Department's motion to terminate her parental rights. Mother's
 last positive drug test before her scheduled trial was in June
 2015. However, she failed to appear for testing as ordered by
 the Family Court on June 29, 2016, and she refused to submit to a
 hair follicle test ordered by the Family Court on July 14, 2016,
 even though she was aware that the failure to submit to testing
 would be viewed as a positive test for drugs. Mother's actions
 indicate that she had not maintained her sobriety and had been
 using drugs during the period immediately preceding her scheduled
 June 29, 2016, trial. We conclude that there was substantial
 evidence to support the Family Court's finding that "[d]uring the
 course of this case, Mother was never able to demonstrate that
 she had the ability to maintain long term sobriety such that she
 had the ability to provide a safe family home for her
 children."
3/
 
2/ Mother does not contest the Family Court's finding that she was not
presently willing and able to provide a safe family home for the Children.
See HRS § 587A-33(a)(1). 
3/ Although Mother challenges the Family Court's finding that "despite
engaging in a range of parenting services, Mother was never able to
demonstrate that she could adequately care for and parent her children," she
does not present any argument to support this challenge. We conclude that
 there was substantial evidence to support this finding. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mother contends that it was improper for the Family
 
Court to use her refusal to submit to testing in June and July of
 
2016 against her because a positive drug test could have exposed
 her to possible criminal charges. However, as the Department
 notes, Mother did not raise this argument before the Family
 Court, and thus it is waived. In addition, if possible exposure
 to criminal prosecution was the reason for Mother's refusal to
 submit to testing, she could have sought the protection provided
 by HRS § 587A-20 (Supp. 2016).
4/ Mother did not seek the
 
protection provided by HRS § 587A-20. Mother's contention that
 it was improper for the Family Court to consider her refusal to
 submit to testing is without merit.
 
Contrary to Mother's claim, we conclude that the Family
 
Court did not err in determining that it was not reasonably
 foreseeable that Mother would become willing and able to provide
 the Children with a safe family home within a reasonable period
 of time.
 
B.
 
Mother argues that she was not given a reasonable
 
opportunity to reunite with the Children before her parental
 rights were terminated. In support of her argument, she cites
 the fact that although the Department moved to continue the trial
 and issued a new service plan on June 28, 2016, to give Mother
 more time to demonstrate her ability to provide a safe family
 home, the trial began only 28 days after the new service plan.
 
We reject Mother's argument that she was not given a
 
reasonable opportunity to reunite with the Children. JP2 had
 been in foster custody for two years and FP and JP1 had been in
 foster custody for 20 months when the trial began. The record
 indicates that the Department had moved to continue the trial
 
4/ HRS § 587A-20 provides: 
The court may order that testimony or other evidence
produced by a party in a proceeding under this chapter shall be
inadmissible as evidence in any other state civil or criminal
action or proceeding if the court deems such an order to be in the
best interests of the child.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
from June 29, 2016, until July 27, 2016, to give Mother a last
 
chance to demonstrate that she could provide a safe family home,
 particularly with respect to FP, the eldest child. The
 Department stated that if Mother showed progress in her
 interactions with FP, it would consider a further continuance of
 the trial to give Mother more time to show that she could provide
 a safe family home. The Department, however, asked that Mother
 submit to a drug test on June 29, 2016, because she had a history
 of relapsing and the Department wanted to ensure that she
 remained clean.
 
Mother's repeated refusal to submit to testing raised
 
concerns with the Department about her sobriety and expanding her
 visits with FP. The Department did not know that Mother would
 refuse to submit to testing when it moved for a continuance of
 the trial and sought a new service plan. The Family Court also
 did not know that Mother would refuse to submit to testing when
 it continued the trial and ordered the new service plan. In
 response to Mother's refusal to submit to testing, the Department
 decided to proceed with the trial on July 27, 2016. Given the
 circumstances, we conclude that Mother was given a reasonable
 opportunity to reunite with the Children before termination of
 her parental rights.
 
IV.
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Family Court's 
"Order Terminating Parental Rights." 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 29, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Herbert Y. Hamada
 
for Mother-Appellant. 
Gay M. Tanaka
Julio Herrera
 Deputy Attorneys General for Petitioner-Appellee
Department of Human Services.
 Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
7
 