  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
---o0o--
-
AARON ARBLES, ROBERT BAILEY, REUBEN CHUN, MICHAEL 
GAHAN, MICHAEL HAYASHIDA, GARRET KOMATSU, 
GERALD KOSAKI, STEVE LOYOLA, JERRY LUM, 
TY MEDEIROS, PAUL PAIVA, RAYMOND ROWE,
JR., WARREN SUMIDA, and ALVIN TOBOSA, 
Appellants-Appellants, 
v. 
MERIT APPEALS BOARD, COUNTY OF HAWAI# I, MITCH ROTH, 
MAYOR, COUNTY OF HAWAI# I, and WAYLEN L.K. 
LEOPOLDINO, DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RESOURCES, 
COUNTY OF HAWAI I #,
Appellees-Appellees1  
NO. CAAP-17-0000072 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO.  16-1-0106) 
JUNE 30, 2022 
GINOZA, CHIEF JUDGE, HIRAOKA AND NAKASONE, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY NAKASONE, J. 
1 Pursuant to Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP ) Rule 
43(c)(1), Mitch Roth, the current Mayor of the County of Hawai #i is 
substituted as an Appellee-Appellee herein in place of Harry Kim; and Waylen
L.K.
 Leopoldino, the current Director of Human Resources, County of Hawai i #, 
is substituted as Appellee-Appellee herein in place of Sharon Toriano.    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
This appeal considers the application of Hawaii Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 89C-3(b)(2),2 which requires government 
employers to make adjustments to the compensation and benefit 
packages of civil service employees excluded from collective bargaining to ensure that the compensation and benefit packages of the excluded employees are at least equal to the compensation and benefit packages of their subordinates covered by collective bargaining.  The appellants claim that the county employer violated HRS § 89C-3(b)(2) by paying appellants hourly rates less than the highest hourly rates paid to their subordinates. 
Appellants-Appellants Aaron Arbles, Robert Bailey, 
Reuben Chun, Michael Gahan, Michael Hayashida, Garret Komatsu, Gerald Kosaki, Steve Loyola, Jerry Lum, Ty Medeiros, Paul Paiva, Raymond Rowe, Jr., Warren Sumida, and Alvin Tobosa (collectively,Battalion Chiefs or Chiefs) appeal from the (1) December 27, 2016 
Decision and Order Denying Appellants' Appeal (Decision and 
Order) and (2) January 26, 2017 Final Judgment, filed and entered 
2 HRS § 89C-3 (2012) states: 
§89C-3 Adjustments for excluded civil service employees. 
(a) Each jurisdiction shall provide adjustments for its
respective excluded civil service employees based onrecommendations from its respective personnel director. 
(b) In formulating recommendations to the appropriate
authority, the respective director shall: 
(1) Establish procedures that allow excluded civil
service employees and employee organizations representing
them to provide input on adjustments that are relevant and
important to them for the director's approval; 
(2) Ensure that adjustments for excluded civil service
employees result in compensation and benefit packages thatare at least equal to the compensation and benefit packagesprovided under collective bargaining agreements forcounterparts and subordinates within the employer'sjurisdiction; and 
(3) Ensure that proposed adjustments are consistent
with chapter 76 and equivalent or not less than adjustmentsprovided within the employer's jurisdiction. 
(Emphases added).  "'Adjustment' means a change in wages, hours, benefits, orother term and condition of employment."  HRS § 89C-1.5 (2012). 
2    FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court)3 in 
favor of Appellees-Appellees Mitch Roth, Mayor of the County of 
Hawai# i, and Waylen L.K. Leopoldino, Director of Human Resources, 
County of Hawai# i (collectively, County) and the Merit Appeals 
Board (MAB).4 
On appeal, the Battalion Chiefs, who are excluded civil 
service employees, contend that the Circuit Court erred by affirming the MAB's conclusion that the County provided the Battalion Chiefs "compensation and benefit packages that [we]re at least equal to the packages of their subordinate Captains [(Fire Captains)] who were receiving higher hourly rates of pay 
because they had more years of service or were assigned to 
specialty stations, and therefore did not violate H.R.S § 89C-3(b)(2)."  The Battalion Chiefs specifically contend that the Circuit Court and the MAB erred in excluding "Hazmat and Rescue" differentials (hazardous assignment differential)
5 paid to 
certain Fire Captains and not considering pay inversions6 due to 
"years of service" in the evaluation of the respective compensation and benefit packages of the Battalion Chiefs and Fire Captains under HRS § 89C-3(b)(2).  The Battalion Chiefs also contend that the Circuit Court erred when it concluded that 
3 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided. 
4 
Brief. On appeal, the MAB filed a joinder to the County's Answering 
5 The Battalion Chiefs refer to the differential at issue as the 
"Hazmat and Rescue" differential; the Circuit Court's Decision and Order
refers to it as the "hazardous duty pay differential," "hazardous dutydifferential," and "hazardous duty premium differential."  Because the 2011-2017 Collective Bargaining Agreement ( CBA) uses the term "hazardous assignment
differential," we use this terminology in this Opinion for consistency andclarity. 
6 As used in this case, the term "pay inversion" refers to instances
found by the Circuit Court in which a Battalion Chief may not have receivedbase compensation at least equal to higher paid subordinate Fire Captainsbecause "the Fire Captains that received higher base pay each had longer yearsof service" than the respective Battalion Chief.  The Circuit Court determined that this situation did not violate HRS § 89C-3(b)(2). 
3   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Arciero v. City and Cty. of Honolulu, No. 30160, 2011 WL 6355166, 
at *1 (App. Dec. 15, 2011) (mem.) "did not apply."7 
We hold that the County's exclusion of the hazardous 
assignment differential and failure to consider pay inversions due to "years of service" resulted in the compensation and benefit packages of the Battalion Chiefs not being "at least equal to" their subordinates' packages, in violation of HRS § 89C-3(b)(2).  For the reasons explained infra, we vacate and remand. 
I. BACKGROUND 
On August 27, 2014, the Battalion Chiefs filed a 
complaint with the County and then- Hawai# i Fire Department Fire 
Chief Darren J. Rosario, requesting retroactive and future adjustment of their compensation and benefit packages in compliance with HRS § 89C-3.  The County denied their request, and on December 22, 2014, the Battalion Chiefs appealed the denial to the MAB.  Following four days of evidentiary hearings in August and September 2015, the MAB issued its February 24, 2016 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, Decision and Order Granting In Part and Denying In Part Appeal of Appellant Aaron Arbles and Denying Appeals of Robert Bailey, Reuben Chun, Michael Gahan, Michael Hayashida, Garret Komatsu, Gerald Kosaki, Steve Loyola, Jerry Lum, Ty Medeiros, Paul Paiva, Raymond Rowe, Jr., Warren Sumida, and Alvin Tobosa (FOFs/COLs and Order). 
7 In Arciero, this court considered whether the Honolulu Battalion
Chiefs were receiving "compensation and benefit packages that [we]re at least
equal to the compensation and benefit packages" of their subordinate FireCaptains, where the Chiefs were excluded from the opportunity to participatein an overtime program called "Rank for Rank," resulting in some Fire Captainsbeing paid more than the Battalions Chiefs.  HRS § 89C-3(b)(2).  We upheld thecircuit court's holding that this disparity –- where the adjustment providedto the Battalion Chiefs did not include the Rank for Rank benefit, and thesubordinate Fire Captains' compensation and benefit package did include theRank for Rank benefit -- violated HRS § 89C-3(b)(2).  Arciero, 2011 WL 6355166, at *5. 
Arciero is an unpublished decision that is not binding but may be
cited for "persuasive value."  HRAP Rule 35(c)(2).  In light of our resolutionof the primary contentions on appeal, it is not necessary for us to addresswhether the Circuit Court correctly concluded that Arciero did not apply. 
4   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
The Battalion Chiefs appealed to the Circuit Court 
pursuant to HRS § 91-14.  At the November 4, 2016 hearing, the 
Circuit Court affirmed the MAB's FOFs/COLs and Order.  The Circuit Court filed its Decision and Order on December 27, 2016. The Battalion Chiefs timely appealed the January 26, 2017 Final Judgment. 
The Decision and Order sets forth the relevant 
procedural history, factual findings,8  and legal conclusions as 
follows: 
The Hawai #i Fire Department divides Hawai #i Island into 
two operational Battalions.  The First Battalion covers the 
east side of the island and the Second Battalion the west. There are eleven stations in the First Battalion. Nine are commanded by Fire Captains and two by Fire EquipmentOperators.  The Second Battalion has nine stations.
[9]  
Within each battalion, there are also two specialty
fire stations.  One provides rescue operations such aswater, high angle, and helicopter rescue.  The other provides hazardous materials ("HAZMAT") operations.Firefighters assigned to these stations need to completespecialized training. 
Firefighter IIIs and Captains assigned to specialty
units (rescue or HAZMAT) are entitled to an hourly rateincrease of 8.126% above their rank and longevity rate. Thisdifferential is paid for all hours worked regardless ofwhether the firefighter actually participates in a rescue orHAZMAT activity. 
The Hawai #i Fire Fighters Association ("HFFA") is the
union representing firefighters working for the counties inthe State of Hawai #i.  The HFFA negotiates with the Counties
to reach a Collective Bargaining Agreement ("CBA") thatapplies uniformly for all members of HFF A across the Stateof Hawai i #.  Thus, HFFA members have the same compensation
and benefit packages under the CBA regardless of whetherthey work for the County of Hawai #i or the City and County 
of Honolulu.  The HFFA is designated as Bargaining Unit 11. Firefighter IIIs and Captains assigned to specialty units 
8 Unchallenged findings are binding on appeal.  See State v. 
Rodrigues
, 145 Hawai i # 487, 497, 454 P.3d 428, 438 (2019). 
9 Additional background from the MAB's FOFs pertinent to the role of
the Battalion Chiefs, which was not included in the Decision and Order, is setforth as follows:  each Battalion Chief in the First and Second Battalions commands more than nine Captains and more than fifty total firefighters whileon duty, MAB FOF 62; because firefighters work 24-hour shifts, "[t]hreeBattalion Chiefs are assigned to each Battalion and work in consecutive shiftsto provide continuous command over each Battalion at all times[,]" MAB FOF 63;and there are a total of six operational Battalion Chiefs, id. 
5  
 
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
(rescue or HAZMAT) are members of Unit 11 and represented by
the HFFA. 
The CBA for Bargaining Unit 11 for 2011-2017 provides
for the 8.126% differential.  Section 44D of the CBA states,in part, that employees assigned to units that aredesignated for search and rescue which require them to betrained and/or certified beyond that which is required forother members of their class (and such is not recognized inthe pricing of their class) shall be paid a hazardousassignment differential of 8.126% of the employee's regular
salary in addition to base pay and applicable differentials
and premiums.  The 8.126% differential is only paid tospecially trained and qualified personnel assigned tospecialty fire stations and not to all members of BargainingUnit 11, unlike Rank for Rank, which was the focus of theArciero case. 
Battalion Chiefs are excluded managerial positions.
They are not members of Bargaining Unit 11.  During the period [sic] January 1, 2005 to January 15, 2015, no Battalion Chief has ever been assigned to any of the 
Hawai i # County 
Fire Department's two HAZMAT and two Rescue stations.[10] 
10 The Battalion Chiefs are not "assigned" to the specialty stations
or any other station, because they are assigned to battalions, and eachbattalion includes two specialty stations.  See Decision and Order; MAB FOFs 62, 63.  The record before the MAB reflects that Battalion Chiefs are requiredto have the specialized HAZMAT training to oversee the specialty stations andto serve as Battalion Chiefs: 
Q. [(BY COUNSEL FOR BATTALION CHIEFS)]  Okay. Now withrespect to [(CBA Section 44)] D, you see where D says,notwithstanding the above, employees assigned to units that are designated for search and rescue responses, which require them to be trained or certified, beyond that which is required of other members of their class, shall be paid a hazardous assignment differential of 8.126 percent of theemployee's regular salary.  Do you see that? 
A. [(BY BATTALION CHIEF MICHAEL HAYASHIDA)]  Yes. 
Q. Now, do they have to actually jump in the water to 
get the 8.126 percent? 
A. No. They just have to be on duty at the station, so
as long as they report for duty at 0800 hundred hours, they automatically get the pay. 
Q. But they also have to be trained or certified, is 
that right? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And do BCs [(Battalion Chiefs)] have to be trained or
certified? 
A. Yes. 
(continued...) 
6   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Appellants' claim they did not receive compensation
and benefit packages since 2005 that are at least equal to
the compensation and benefit packages provided underapplicable collective bargaining agreements for counterpartsand subordinates was primarily based on the report andtestimony of their expert, a certified public accountant. The expert's report was admitted into evidence during thehearings on the merits. 
The expert identified the highest hourly rates for
Fire Captains in Hawai i # County over the time period covered
in the County's payroll records.  He compared the highestCaptain's hourly rate to each Battalion Chiefs actual hourlyrate for the same pay periods.  The conclusions in the expert's report were based on his premise the 8.126 % [sic]hazardous duty pay differential was an "adjustment". 
Appellants' expert did not identify any instances in
which a Battalion Chief did not receive compensation andbenefit packages at least equal to that of subordinate FireCaptains that did not arise from the assumption that the8.126 % [sic] hazardous duty differential was an adjustment. 
As mentioned above, the 8.126% hazardous duty
assignment is only paid to specially trained and qualifiedpersonnel assigned to specialty fire stations and not to allmembers of Bargaining Unit 11.  Excluding consideration ofthe hazardous duty premium differential available only tobargaining unit employees assigned to specialty HAZMAT andRescue Stations, none of the Appellants identified anyspecific instance in which any Appellant did not receivecompensation and benefit packages at least equal to that ofany subordinate Fire Captain. 
The hazardous duty premium differential identified in
§ 44 D. of the CBA is not available to employees who are notspecially trained and not assigned to specialty HAZMAT andRescue stations.  It does not comprise an "adjustment" tocompensation nor is it part of a benefit package forpurposes of ensuring that excluded civil service employeesreceive compensation and benefit packages that are at leastequal to the compensation and benefit packages providedunder collective bargaining agreements for counterparts and 
10(...continued)
Q. And the training or certification that BCs are required to have is what? 
A. HAZMAT. Q. And that's part of your requirement to oversee these
divisions, is that correct? 
A. Yes. 
(Emphases added).  Thus, the Chiefs possess the same HAZMAT and rescue
training required for the specialty stations that they are required tooversee, but they do not receive the hazardous assignment differential underthe CBA because they are excluded employees. 
7   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
subordinates within the employer's jurisdiction .[11]  The 
CBA, at Section 32-A entitled COMPENSATION ADJUSTMENTS,
defines "basic rate of pay" as "the rate of pay assigned tothe salary range and step an employee is receiving ascompensation."  The definition does not include "differentials". 
Moreover, Section 32-A, Paragraph I., sub-paragraphs 1
and 2 of the CBA, state that Temporary Differential andPermanent Differential pay shall not be considered part ofan Employee's basic rate of pay. (Emphasis added). 
In addition to the above, from July 2007 to June 2015,
the Battalion Chiefs in the County of Hawai #i Fire 
Department were paid a base salary at least equal to FireCaptains. 
V. Instances of Pay Inversion 
During the [August 26-27, 2015 and September 24-25,
2015] evidentiary hearings [before the MAB],[12] the Employer
identified limited instances in which a Battalion Chief maynot have received base compensation at least equal to asubordinate fire captain.  The Employer determined that, inaddition to the highest and lowest compensation, there wereintermediate steps as well as inversions.  The Employeridentified inversions for three of the Appellants, namely,Battalion Chiefs Arbles, Gahan and Lum. 
The inversions in pay identified by the County for
Appellant Arbles for years 2007, 2008, and 2009 violateHawai #i Revised Statutes § 89C-3(b)(2) because the highest
paid non-specialty Fire Captain with equal or lesser yearsof service than Appellant Arbles received higher base paythan Appellant Arbles.  HRS § 89C-3(b)(2).  As a result of Appellant Arbles' promotion early in his career, there wasperiod of three years in which he did not receivecompensation at least equal to that of the highest paid ficaptain. 
 a
re
11 This bolded portion of the Decision and Order is a near verbatim
recitation of MAB COL 8, which stated: 
8.  The hazardous pay differential identified in § 44
D. of the operative collective bargaining agreements is not
available to employees who are not specially trained and notassigned to specialty HAZMAT and Rescue stations and doesnot comprise an "adjustment" nor part of a benefit packagefor purposes of ensuring that excluded civil serviceemployees receive compensation and benefit packages that areat least equal to the compensation and benefit packagesprovided under collective bargaining agreements for
counterparts and subordinates within the employer's
jurisdiction. 
The Chiefs specifically argue that COL 8 was wrong, and the Circuit Courterred in affirming it.  
12 In its Decision and Order, the Circuit Court erroneously dated the
hearings as "August 26-27, 2016 and September 24-25, 2016." 
8   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
The inversions in pay identified by the County for
Appellants Gahan and Lum did not violate HRS § 89C-3(b)(2)
because the Fire Captains that received higher base pay eachhad longer years of service than Appellants Gahan andLum.
[13]  Hawai i # Revised Statutes § 76-1 et seq.; § 
89C-3(b)(2).  The inversions in which Appellants Gahan andLum may not have received base compensation at least equalto the most highly paid subordinate fire captain resultedfrom their respective promotions to Battalion Chief in theearly stages of their career in the fire department. 
VI. Seniority and the Merit Principle. 
The Court has reviewed the wording of HRS §
89C-3(b)(2), the statute relied upon by the Appellants.However, the Court finds that is not the only statuterelevant to this case.  The Court finds HRS Chapter 89C,Public Officers and Employees Excluded from CollectiveBargaining, must be read as a whole.  In addition, thelanguage of the applicable collective bargaining agreementand the merit principle, HRS §76-1, must also be taken into
account. 
HRS § 89C-2(3) allows an Employer to make adjustments
for excluded employees subject to the guideline and
limitation that any adjustment made for excluded civilservice employees shall be consistent with the meritprinciple and shall not diminish any rights provided underChapter 76, Civil Service Law, 
Hawai i # Revised Statutes. 
(Emphasis added). 
HRS § 89C-3(b)(2) requires that the Employer ensure
that adjustments for excluded civil service employees resultin compensation and benefit packages that are at least equalto the compensation and benefit packages provided undercollective bargaining agreements for counterparts and
subordinates within the employer's jurisdiction.  
Hawai i #
Revised Statutes § 89C-3(b)(2). (Emphasis added). 
Hawai #i Revised Statutes § 89C-3(b)(3) requires that
the Employer ensure that proposed adjustments are consisten
with chapter 76 and equivalent or not less than adjustmentsprovided within the employer's jurisdiction. Hawai i # Revised
Statutes § 89C-3(b)(3).  (Emphasis added). 
t
 
The Hawai #i Firefighters CBA provides for the payment
of differentials.  The differentials are not to be 
13 This bolded portion of the Circuit Court's Decision and Order is
substantially similar to MAB COL 15, which stated: 
15. The inversions in pay identified by the County for 
Appellants Gahan and Lum in its Exhibit "WWW" did not violate Hawaii Revised Statutes § 89C-3(b)(2) because the Fire Captains that received higher base pay eaeh [sic] had longer years of service than Appellants Gahan and Lum.  Hawaii Revised Statutes § 76-1 et seq.; § 89C-3(b)(2). 
The Chiefs specifically argue that COL 15 was wrong, and the Circuit Courterred in affirming it. 
9   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
considered to be part of basic pay.  Exclusion of 
differentials, such as the one for 8.126% for hazardous dutypay, in the comparison of the compensation packages betweenFire Captains and Battalion Chiefs by the Merit AppealsBoard was not in error. 
The Merit Appeals Board could consider matters of
service and longevity in deciding whether the Employer wasin compliance with HRS §89C-3(b)(2).  Service and longevityare factors in the general structure of public worker payscales.  Pay schedule and the longevity steps based on yearsof service and the various step increases are matters thatare properly considered in determining whether a
compensation package is at least equal to a subordinate's
pay within the employer's jurisdiction as provided bystatute.  This principle is embodied in the CBA. 
The Board concludes Hawai #i Revised Statutes §
89C-3(b)(2) is properly understood and to be interpretedconsistent with the merit principle codified in Chapter 76,Hawai #i Revised Statutes, which merit principle allows for
differences in pay among counterparts and subordinatesconsistent with years of service. HRS §§ 76-1 et seq.;89C-3(b)(2). 
The facts and evidence show the Appellants, with the
exceptions noted above, were paid compensation and benefitpackages at least equal to the subordinates immediatelybelow them. 
Lastly, there is no language in the legislative
history indicating that one of the purposes of HRS §89C-3(b)(2) was to bestow upon battalion chiefs a benefitthat was not given across-the-board to all bargaining unit
members. 
(Bolding and footnotes added). 
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Secondary Appeal 
Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon its
review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal.  The standard of review is one in which [the appellate] courtmust determine whether the circuit court was right or wrongin its decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS§ 91-14(g) (1993) to the agency's decision. 
HRS § 91-14, entitled "Judicial review of contested cases,"
provides in relevant part: 
(g) Upon review of the record the court may affirm
the decision of the agency or remand the case withinstructions for further proceedings; or it mayreverse or modify the decision and order if thesubstantial rights of the petitioners may have beenprejudiced because the administrative findings,conclusions, decisions, or orders are: 
10   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or 
(4) Affected by other error of law; or 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the
whole record; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized
by abuse of discretion or clearlyunwarranted exercise of discretion. 
Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law arereviewable under subsections (1), (2), and (4);questions regarding procedural defects undersubsection (3); findings of fact under subsection (5);and an agency's exercise of discretion undersubsection (6). 
United Pub. Workers, AFSCME, Local 646, AFL-CIO v. Hanneman, 106 
Hawai# i 359, 363, 105 P.3d 236, 240 (2005) (brackets omitted) 
(quoting Paul's Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai# i 412, 
416, 91 P.3d 494, 498 (2004)).  "Pursuant to HRS § 91-14(g), an 
agency's conclusions of law are reviewed de novo."  Id. (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).  "A circuit court's conclusions of law are subject to de novo review."  Paul's Elec. Serv., 104 Hawai# i at 420, 91 P.3d at 502 (citation omitted). 
B. Statutory Interpretation 
"Statutory interpretation is a question of law 
reviewable de novo." JD v. PD, 149 Hawai# i 92, 96, 482 P.3d 555, 
559 (App. 2021) (citation omitted). In construing statutes, we observe the following principles: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory
interpretation is the language of the statute itself.Second, where the statutory language is plain andunambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plainand obvious meaning.  Third, implicit in the task ofstatutory construction is our foremost obligation toascertain and give effect to the intention of thelegislature, which is to be obtained primarily from thelanguage contained in the statute itself.  Fourth, whenthere is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctiveness 
11   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
or uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, an
ambiguity exists. 
Id. (citation omitted). 
III. DISCUSSION 
A. The Circuit Court erred when it affirmed the MAB's exclusion of the hazardous assignmentdifferential in comparing the respectivecompensation and benefit packages underHRS § 89C-3(b)(2). 
The Battalion Chiefs contend that the Circuit Court 
erred in affirming the MAB's COL 8 that HRS § 89C-3(b)(2) was not 
violated where the Chiefs' compensation and benefit packages were not at least equal to the packages of their subordinate Captains "who were receiving higher hourly rates of pay" because they were "assigned to specialty stations[.]"  COL 8 stated in pertinent part that because the hazardous assignment differential in CBA Section 44D
14  "is not available to employees who are not 
specially trained and not assigned to specialty HAZMAT and Rescue stations," it "does not comprise an 'adjustment'" and is not "part of a benefit package for purposes of ensuring" that the Battalion Chiefs' compensation and benefit packages were at least equal to the compensation and benefit packages provided under the CBA to the Fire Captains. 
14 CBA Section 44, entitled "Hazardous Duty," provides in subsection 
D that: 
D. Notwithstanding the above, Employees assigned to units
that are designated for search and rescue responses
which require them to be trained and/or certified
beyond that which is required for other members of
their class (and such is not recognized in the pricingof their class), shall be paid a hazardous assignmentdifferential of 8.126% of the Employee's regularsalary in addition to base pay and applicabledifferentials and premiums.  The minimum compensable period shall be one shift.  It is provided that suchhazardous assignment differential shall be in lieu ofthe above provisions except as provided in subsectionB.1.c. relating to HAZMAT. 
(Emphases added). 
12   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Relying on the CBA, the County argues that the 
hazardous assignment differential "falls outside the scope of HRS 
§ 89C-3" because the statute "does not apply to differentials," which are "factors applied after-the-fact to wages that are 'not considered part of an employee's basic rate of pay'" under CBA Section 32-A(I)(1)(b).
15  The MAB agreed with the County, 
concluding in COL 8 that the hazardous assignment differential "does not comprise an 'adjustment' nor part of a benefit package" for purposes of ensuring that the respective compensation and benefit packages were at least equal under HRS § 89C-3(b)(2). This conclusion was erroneous. 
Regardless of how the hazardous assignment differential 
is characterized under the CBA, i.e., not part of an employee's "basic rate of pay," the hazardous assignment differential is clearly part of the Fire Captains' "compensation and benefit packages" for purposes of HRS § 89C-3(b)(2).  The hazardous assignment differential, as described in the Decision and Order, is an amount "8.126% of the employee's regular salary" that is "paid" to certain qualifying employees, and is clearly a type of compensation.  From a plain reading of the statute, there are no exceptions for specialty assignments or hazardous assignment differentials in HRS § 89C-3(b)(2).  See JD, 149 
Hawai# i at 96, 
482 P.3d at 559.  
The CBA is a contract between the union representing 
covered employees and the County, and is reviewed de novo, similar to how we interpret statutes.  See Casumpang v. ILWU, Local 142, 94 
Hawai# i 330, 343, 13 P.3d 1235, 1248 (2000) 
(citation and formatting omitted) ("Collective-bargaining agreements are the principal form of contract between an employer and a labor organization."); Koga Eng'g & Constr., Inc. v. State 
15 CBA Section 32-A(I)(1)(b) provides:  "The TD [(Temporary
Differential)] pay shall not be considered part of an Employee's basic rate of
pay."  The Decision and Order concluded, citing Section 32-A(I), that: "Temporary Differential and Permanent Differential pay shall not be consideredpart of an Employee's basic rate of pay." 
13   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
of Hawai# i, 122 Hawai# i  60, 72, 222 P.3d 979, 991 (2010) (stating 
that the construction of a contract is a question of law, and 
"absent an ambiguity, the contract terms should be interpreted according to their plain, ordinary, and accepted sense in common speech.") (citation and brackets omitted)). 
A plain reading of the CBA, in general and specifically 
in Section 44D, indicates that the hazardous assignment differential is part of the Fire Captains' "compensation." Section 44D states that the employee "shall be paid
" the 
differential if the qualifying conditions are met.  CBA Section 44D (emphasis added).  It also sets a "minimum compensable period" for the hazardous assignment differential.  Id. (emphasis added).  Both the Circuit Court's Decision and Order and the County rely on the CBA language in Section 32-A that defines "basic rate of pay" to exclude differentials, and thus support the exclusion of the hazardous assignment differential from the "compensation and benefit packages" of the Fire Captains.
16  The 
exclusion of differentials under a CBA definition, however, does not mean that the hazardous assignment differential in this case is not part of a "compensation and benefit" package under HRS § 89C-3(b)(2).  Furthermore, Section 32-A, upon which the County and the Circuit Court relied, is entitled "Compensation Adjustments," which is a subsection under the section entitled "Wages."  Under the CBA's own categorization, differentials are clearly classified as a type of compensation, for which eligible employees are entitled to "pay adjustments" under the 
16 The Circuit Court noted that Section 32-A defined "basic rate of 
pay" to exclude differentials.  CBA Section 32-A(A)(2) pertinently provides: 
2. For purposes of this section, "basic rate of pay"
means the rate of pay assigned to the salary range and step
an Employee is receiving as compensation.  For an Employeewhose position is not assigned to the salary range, "basicrate of pay" shall mean the actual rate of compensation theEmployee is receiving as remuneration for services performedin a particular position, not including any differentials. 
(Emphasis added).  
14   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
"Compensation Adjustments" Section 32-A.  See CBA Section 32-
A(A)(5)17 (providing a formula for computing pay adjustments for 
employees working less than a normal month, consisting of a "monthly basic rate of pay" plus various categories of differentials).  Thus, the language and structure of the CBA, treating differentials as a type of compensation adjustment, support our conclusion that the hazardous assignment differential is part of the Fire Captains' compensation, and is encompassed within the Captains' "compensation and benefit packages" under 
HRS § 89C-3(b)(2).  (Emphasis added).  The Circuit Court and the 
MAB erred in concluding that the hazardous assignment differential was not a part of the Fire Captains' compensation and benefit packages for purposes of assessing whether the compensation and benefit packages of the Battalion Chiefs were at least equal thereto under HRS § 89C-3(b)(2).  See United Pub. Workers
, 106 Hawai i # at 363, 105 P.3d at 240. 
B. The Circuit Court erred when it affirmed the 
MAB's failure to consider pay inversions due to "years of service" when comparing therespective compensation and benefit packages of the Battalion Chiefs and their subordinates under HRS § 89C-3(b)(2). 
The Battalion Chiefs contend that the Circuit Court and 
the MAB erred in concluding that HRS § 89C-3(b)(2) was not 
violated because the higher hourly rates of pay that some subordinate Fire Captains received were due to those Captains having more years of service than some Battalion Chiefs.  The Battalion Chiefs assert that there is no "years of service" 
17 CBA Section 32-A(A)(5) provides, 
Pay adjustments for Employees who work less than a normal
month shall be computed pursuant to the following formula:Employee's monthly basic rate of pay (as shown on theappropriate salary schedule) plus Permanent Differential(PD), Temporary Differential (TD), Conversion Differential(CD), or Temporary Compression Differential (TCD), asapplicable multiplied by (number of days worked divided bynumber of working days in a month, including holidays). 
15   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
exception to the requirements of HRS § 89C-3(b)(2); and that the 
subsection (b) requirement that adjustments be "consistent" with the HRS § 76-1 merit principle does not mean that "years of service" can justify Fire Captains being compensated more than Battalion Chiefs.  The Chiefs point out that the merit principle in HRS § 76-1 does not mention "'years of service' or any similar concept," and argue that the Circuit Court erroneously affirmed the MAB's COL 15.  We also address COL 16, which contains the MAB's interpretation of the pertinent statutes relevant to COL 15.  COLs 15 and 16
18 state: 
15. The inversions in pay identified by the County
for Appellants Gahan and Lum in its Exhibit "WWW" did not
violate Hawaii Revised Statutes § 89C-3(b)(2) because the Fire Captains that received higher base pay eaeh [sic] had longer years of service than Appellants Gahan and Lum.  Hawaii Revised Statutes § 76-1 et seq.; § 89C-3(b)(2). 
16. The Board concludes Hawaii Revised Statutes § 
89C-3(b)(2) is properly understood and interpreted
consistent with the merit principle codified in Chapter 76,
Hawaii Revised Statutes, which merit principle allows fordifferences in pay among counterparts and subordinateseonsistent [sic] with years of service.  Hawaii Revised Statutes §§ 76-1 et seq.; 89C-3(b)(2). 
The issue presented here is, as to the excluded Battalion Chiefs 
under HRS Chapter 89C, when interpreting the parity requirement of HRS § 89C-3(b)(2) consistent with the merit principle, whether increased pay for subordinate employees' "years of service" must be considered as part of the subordinates' "compensation and benefit" package.  We conclude that it must. 
18 These COLs were adopted and incorporated into the Circuit Court's 
Decision and Order, as stated supra. 
16   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Under HRS § 76-1,19 the merit principle is "the 
19 HRS § 76-1 (2012) provides: 
§76-1.  Purposes; merit principle. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to require each
jurisdiction to establish and maintain a separatelyadministered civil service system based on the meritprinciple.  The merit principle is the selection of personsbased on their fitness and ability for public employment andthe retention of employees based on their demonstrated
appropriate conduct and productive performance.  It is also 
the purpose of this chapter to build a career service ingovernment, free from coercive political influences, torender impartial service to the public at all times,according to the dictates of ethics and morality and incompliance with all laws. 
In order to achieve these purposes, it is the declared
policy of the State that the human resource program withineach jurisdiction be administered in accordance with thefollowing: 
(1) Equal opportunity for all in compliance with all
laws prohibiting discrimination. No person shallbe discriminated against in examination,appointment, reinstatement, reemployment,promotion, transfer, demotion, or removal, withrespect to any position when the work may beefficiently performed by the person withouthazard or danger to the health and safety of theperson or others; 
(2) Impartial selection of individuals for public
service by means of competitive tests which arefair, objective, and practical; 
(3) Incentives for competent employees within the
service, whether financial or promotionalopportunities and other performance based group
and individual awards that encourage continuous
improvement to achieve superior performance; 
(4) Reasonable job security for competent employees
and discharge of unnecessary or inefficientemployees with the right to grieve and appealpersonnel actions through the: 
(A) Contractual grievance procedure for
employees covered by chapter 89; or 
(B) Internal complaint procedures and the merit
appeals board for employees excluded fromcoverage under chapter 89; 
(5) Equal pay for equal work shall apply between
classes in the same bargaining unit amongjurisdictions for those classes determined to be
(continued...) 
17   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
selection of persons based on their fitness and ability for 
public employment and the retention of employees based on their demonstrated appropriate conduct and productive performance." HRS § 76-1 lists various policy directives in subsections (1) through (6) to achieve the purposes of Chapter 76, including the merit principle (merit principle policies).  These merit 
principle policies include equal opportunity and non-
discrimination under subsection (1); impartial selection through competitive tests under subsection (2); financial or promotional incentives for competent employees under subsection (3); reasonable job security for competent employees and discharge of unnecessary or inefficient employees through contractual grievance procedures for Chapter 89 employees or by internal complaint and the MAB for employees excluded from Chapter 89, under subsection (4); equal pay for equal work between classes in the same bargaining unit under subsection (5); and harmonious and cooperative relations between government and its employees under subsection (6).  See HRS § 76-1. 
"Years of service," referenced in COL 16, is apparently 
a term related to the CBA calculating a covered employee's "step movement" or increase in basic rate of pay to the next higher step within a pay range.
20  COL 16 appears to express part of the 
19(...continued)  
equal through systematic classification of
positions based on objective criteria andadequate job evaluation, unless it has beenagreed in accordance with chapter 89 tonegotiate the repricing of classes; and 
(6) Harmonious and cooperative relations betweengovernment and its employees, including employeeorganizations representing them, to develop andmaintain a well-trained, efficient, andproductive work force that utilizes advancedtechnology to ensure effective governmentoperations and delivery of public services. 
(Emphases added). 
20 CBA Section 32-A(O), entitled "Step Movement," provides: 
(continued...) 
18   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
merit principle policy in subsection (5) of HRS § 76-1, which 
states: 
(5) Equal pay for equal work shall apply between classes
in the same bargaining unit among jurisdictions forthose classes determined to be equal throughsystematic classification of positions based onobjective criteria and adequate job evaluation, unlessit has been agreed in accordance with chapter 89 tonegotiate the repricing of classes[.] 
This merit principle policy does not apply to excluded employees 
like the Battalion Chiefs, who are not in a "bargaining unit." 
20(...continued)
1. Definitions - The following definitions shall be 
applicable to this subsection: 
a. "Step movement" means an increase of an
Employee's basic rate of pay to the next
higher step within the pay range which maybe granted as provided in Section 32. 
Wages. 
b. "Service anniversary date" means the date
the Employee is granted a step movement,
which shall be the anniversary of theEmployee's last date of hire (adjusted forperiods of time not creditable as providedin subsection (3.) below). 
c. "Service" means employment service for the
Employer in an existing or previouslyexisting class or position which is or hasbeen included in or excluded from the bargaining unit for which the Union is
certified as the exclusive bargaining
representative under the provisions of theHawaii Collective Bargaining in PublicEmployment Law.  Service shall include service in all Employer jurisdictions. 
2. Eligibility for Step Movement - Any Employee at
a step or rate below the maximum step of the payrange shall be eligible for and shall receive astep movement on the Employee's serviceanniversary date, provided the Employee hascompleted the cumulative years of servicecorresponding to the next higher step asspecified in the following: 
. . . . 
[(sets forth the cumulative years of service 
range for each step)].  
(Emphasis added). 
19   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
This case concerns HRS Chapter 89C excluded employees 
not covered by a CBA, for whom any HRS § 89C-3(b)(2) parity 
adjustment made must be "consistent" with the HRS § 76-1 merit principle.  HRS § 89C-2 (2012), entitled "Adjustments authorized; limitations, restrictions," provides that:  "(3) Any adjustment made for excluded civil service employees shall be consistent with the merit principle and shall not diminish any rights provided under chapter 76 . . . ."  (Emphasis added).  HRS § 89C-3(b)(3) also requires that the employer "[e]nsure that proposed adjustments are consistent with chapter 76 . . . ." 
We have closely examined the merit principle policies 
under HRS § 76-1, and the merit principle policy that is most applicable to the circumstances of this case under HRS § 89C-3(b)(2) is HRS § 76-1(3), which states:  "[i]ncentives for competent employees within the service, whether financial or promotional opportunities and other performance based group and individual awards that encourage continuous improvement to achieve superior performance . . . ."  Thus, it would be contrary to merit principle policies for a fire captain who is promoted to battalion chief to be paid less than a fire captain with more years of service.  Such a practice would be a financial disincentive for qualified fire personnel to seek to be promoted to battalion chief. 
HRS §§ 89C-2(3) and 89C-3(b)(3) simply state that the 
adjustments must be "consistent" with the "merit principle" or "Chapter 76."  Fulfillment of the merit principle expressed in HRS § 76-1(3) includes  providing incentives to "competent employees," such as "financial or promotional opportunities" to "encourage continuous improvement" by these competent employees. Conducting an HRS § 89C-3(b)(2) comparison that allows for differences in pay based on years of service, where subordinate Fire Captains end up with higher compensation than their superior Battalion Chiefs as described in COL 15, provides a financial disincentive for Fire Captains to pursue promotional 
20   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
opportunities to become Battalion Chiefs.  See HRS § 76-1(3). 
Such an anomalous result does not encourage employees to seek continuous improvement over the course of their government careers and is contrary to the merit principle.  See id. 
At oral argument,
21 the County asserted that it would 
not be able to fairly re-price compensation for Battalion Chiefs every time a Fire Captain with many years of service retires. HRS § 89C-3 does not require such immediate re-pricing.  As asserted by the Battalion Chiefs, HRS § 89C-3(b)(1) provides that the respective personnel director of a jurisdiction "[e]stablish procedures that allow excluded civil service employees and employee organizations representing them to provide input on adjustments that are relevant and important to them for the director's approval[.]"  The County can properly address re-pricing due to "years of service" under HRS § 89C-3 by establishing procedures as set out in subsection (b)(1). 
Thus, it was error for the Circuit Court and the MAB, 
in COL 16, to fail to consider pay inversions caused by "years of service" calculations when evaluating the respective compensation and benefit packages of the Battalion Chiefs and subordinate Fire Captains for required adjustments under HRS § 89C-3(b)(2) consistent with the merit principle.  See United Pub. Workers
, 
106 Hawai i # at 363, 105 P.3d at 240.  The pay inversion described 
in COL 15 violated HRS § 89C-3(b)(2) to the extent the compensation package of a battalion chief was less than that of a subordinate fire captain with more years of service, and was inconsistent with the merit principle under HRS § 76-1(3).  
See 
id. 
C. The legislative history supports the result
reached in this case. 
The plain language of HRS § 89C-3(b)(2) requires a 
government jurisdiction to make adjustments to ensure that excluded civil service employees' compensation and benefit 
21 Oral argument was held in this case on June 1, 2022. 
21   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
packages are "at least equal to" the packages of their 
subordinates under collective bargaining agreements.  The language of the statute does not contain any exceptions for specialty assignments, exclusion of differentials, or pay inversions due to "years of service."  The legislative history supports the analysis and result reached in this case. 
"[T]he plain language rule of statutory construction 
does not preclude an examination of sources other than the language of the statute itself even when the language appears clear upon perfunctory review."  Sato v. Tawata, 79 
Hawai# i 14, 
17, 897 P.2d 941, 944 (1995) (citations and punctuation omitted). We may examine "sources other than the language of the statute itself" to "discern the underlying policy which the legislature seeks to promulgate . . . to determine if a literal construction would produce an absurd or unjust result, inconsistent with the policies of the statute."  State v. Demello, 136 Hawai# i 193, 
197, 361 P.3d 420, 424 (2015) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
In 2005, the Legislature amended HRS § 89C-3 to include 
the language "at least equal to," requiring that employers ensure that adjustments for excluded civil service employees result in compensation and benefit packages that are at least equal to their counterparts and subordinates under CBAs.  2005 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 2, § 1 at 788.
22  The Legislature recognized that there 
was a "disparity in compensation and benefits" between excluded 
22 Act 2 amended subsection (b)(2) as follows: 
(2) Ensure that adjustments for excluded civil service
employees result in compensation and benefit packagesthat are [appropriate for what they do and thecontribution they make in consideration of] at leastequal to the compensation and benefit packagesprovided under collective bargaining agreements forcounterparts and subordinates within the employer'sjurisdiction; and 
. . . . 
2005 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 2, § 1 at 788. 
22   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
civil service employees and their counterparts and subordinates 
covered by CBAs.  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1857, in 2005 Senate Journal, at 1901.  The bill was introduced "in the interest of fairness and equity" because while the prior version of HRS § 89C-3 seemed "equitable on its face," the current bill "level[ed] the playing field by requiring excluded employees to be compensated at a level that is at least equal to the compensation and benefit packages provided under collective bargaining agreements for their counterparts and subordinates."  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1177, in 2005 Senate Journal, at 1588; S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1857, in 2005 Senate Journal, at 1901.  The Legislature recognized that excluded civil service employees "should not be treated less favorably than their counterparts who are covered by collective bargaining agreements" and emphasized that the purpose of having equivalent compensation and benefit adjustments for excluded civil service employees was to maintain fairness and increase morale.  H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 106, in 2005 House Journal, at 1088; S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1177, in 2005 Senate Journal, at 1588.  Thus, it was "necessary to adequately compensate these excluded employees at a level which is at least equal to their counterparts who are covered by collective bargaining."  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1177, in 2005 Senate Journal, at 1588. 
The legislative history confirms that the Legislature 
intended to eliminate any unfairness and "disparity in compensation and benefits" for excluded civil service employees under HRS § 89C-3.  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1857, in 2005 Senate Journal, at 1901; see Demello, 136 
Hawai# i at 197, 361 P.3d at 
424.  The Legislature viewed an employer's adjustment to the compensation and benefit packages for excluded civil service employees as necessary to ensure equitable compensation and increase morale under HRS § 89C-3.  See S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 1177, in 2005 Senate Journal, at 1588.  Both a plain reading of 
23   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
HRS § 89C-3 and the legislative history support the result 
reached in this case. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the (1) December 
27, 2016 Decision and Order Denying Appellants' Appeal and (2) January 26, 2017 Final Judgment, filed and entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit, and remand to the Circuit Court with instructions to remand to the Merit Appeals Board for proceedings in accordance with this Opinion. 
On the briefs: 
Robert M. Hatch,
Margery S. Bronster,(Bronster Fujichaku RobbinsA Law Corporation)for Appellants-Appellants. 
D. Kaena Horowitz,
Mark D. Disher,Deputies Corporation Counsel,County of 
Hawai i #, 
for Appellees-AppelleesMitch Roth, Mayor of County ofHawai i # and Waylen L.K. 
Leopoldino, Director of HumanResources, County of Hawai i #. 
James E. Halvorson,Deputy Attorney General,for Appellee-AppelleeMerit Appeals Board. /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate Judge 
24 