 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000498
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
DAVID PAUL OBRIEN, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 15-1-1304)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
On August 19, 2015, Defendant-Appellant David Paul
 
Obrien (Obrien) was charged with Unauthorized Possession of
 
Confidential Personal Information (UPCPI) in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708-839.55 (2014).
1
 
On February 22, 2016, Obrien filed a "Motion to Dismiss
 
[the UPCPI charge] for Unconstitutionally Broad, Vague and
 Punitive Statute, and for Violation of Due Process" (Motion to
 Dismiss). On June 2, 2016, the Circuit Court of the First
 
Circuit (Circuit Court)
2 issued its "Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law, and Order Granting in Part and Denying in
 
Part Defendant's Motion to Dismiss [the UPCPI charge] for
 
1
 HRS § 708-839.55 provides, in relevant part:
 
Unauthorized possession of confidential personal
information.  (1) A person commits the offense of
unauthorized possession of confidential personal information
if that person intentionally or knowingly possesses, without
authorization, any confidential personal information of
another in any form, including but not limited to mail,
physical documents, identification cards, or information
stored in digital form.
 
2
 The Honorable Shirley M. Kawamura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Unconstitutionally Broad, Vague and Punitive Statute, and for
 
Violation of Due Process" (Order).
 
The State of Hawai' i (State) appeals from the Circuit 
Court's Order. The State contends that the Circuit Court erred
 in entering conclusions of law 3, 4, 5, 6, and 8, and in
 dismissing the UPCPI charge.
 
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant
 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues
 
raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve the
 State's points of error as follows:
 
The challenged conclusions provide:
 
3.	 The doctrine of overbreadth, although closely related
to a vagueness claim, is distinct in that while a
statute may be clear and precise in its terms, it may
sweep so broadly that constitutionally protected
conduct as well as unprotected conduct is included in
its proscriptions. 
4.	 Usually, an individual raising an overbreadth claim
cannot challenge it on the ground that it is
unconstitutional to others, but the overbreadth
doctrine as applied to the First Amendment is an
exception to that traditional rule. 
5.	 With regard to the right to privacy and First
Amendment rights, a person whose rights are not
violated may raise them for others. 
6.	 Here, HRS § 708-839.55 impacts the fundamental rights
of expression and of the press as guaranteed by the
First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution and
 Article 1, Section 4 of the Hawaii State Constitution.
Thus, Defendant may challenge the statute on the
grounds that it might be unconstitutionally applied in
circumstances that are not presented in the instant
case.
 
. . . .
 
8.	 While the State has a significant public interest in
preventing identity theft and the misuse of
confidential personal information, HRS § 708-839.55 as
written places a potentially sweeping restriction on
the exercise of the freedoms of speech and of the
press which are liberties guaranteed by both the U.S.
Constitution and the Hawaii State Constitution. The
 statute is not narrowly tailored to serve the State's
interest in preventing the misuse of personal
information. The law sweeps so broadly that
constitutionally protected conduct as well as
unprotected conduct is included in its proscriptions.
This includes conduct protected by the fundamental
right of freedom of expression and the press found in
both the U.S. Constitution and the Hawaii State
 Constitution. The UPCPI statute, therefore, is 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unconstitutionally overbroad, and [the UPCPI charge]
must be dismissed.
 
The Circuit Court "[ordered] that the Defendant's Motion is
 
granted in part[,]" and the UPCPI charge was dismissed with
 prejudice, explaining that "[t]he Motion is granted on the basis
 that the UPCPI statute is unconstitutionally overbroad and denied
 as to the statute being unconstitutionally vague and punitive."
 
Conclusions 3, 4, and 5 are correct statements of the 
law.
3 However, conclusions 6 and 8, upon which the Circuit Court 
based its dismissal of this case, are contrary to the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court's decision in State v. Pacquing, 139 Hawai' i 302, 
389 P.3d 897 (2016). 
Pacquing was charged with one count of UPCPI in 
violation of HRS § 708-839.55. Id. at 306, 389 P.3d at 901. 
Pacquing moved to dismiss on the basis that HRS §§ 708-800 and 708-839.55 (UPCPI statutes) were overbroad and vague under the Due Process Clauses of the United States and Hawai' i 
Constitutions. Id. The supreme court determined that 
"[a]lthough one can argue . . . that the UPCPI statutes would criminalize a press member's possession of confidential personal information that the Hawai' i and U.S. Constitutions protect," the 
Court did not "interpret the UPCPI statutes to sweep that far." Id. at 312, 390 P.3d at 907. 
The Pacquing court reasoned that, although the UPCPI
 
statutes prohibit the intentional or knowing possession of
 confidential personal information without authorization, under
 HRS § 708-839.55, "authorization" does not necessarily mean that
 authorization must be given by the person whose confidential
 
3
 See State v. Kaneakua, 61 Haw. 136, 143, 597 P.2d 590, 594 (1979)
("The doctrine of overbreadth, although closely related to a vagueness claim,
is distinct in that while a statute may be clear and precise in its terms, itmay sweep so broadly that constitutionally protected conduct as well asunprotected conduct is included in its proscriptions."); State v. Pacquing,139 Hawai 'i 302, 309, 389 P.3d 897, 904 (2016), reconsideration denied, 139
Hawai'i 414, 391 P.3d 1236 (2017) ("An overbreadth challenge is typically
available only to individuals who assert that their constitutionally protectedconduct is being prosecuted by the State. In instances where it is contended that the challenged statute affects constitutionally protected freedom ofexpression or reaches a substantial amount of constitutionally protectedconduct, then an individual may initiate a facial challenge to the statute asoverbroad on these grounds" (citations, internal quotation marks, and bracketsomitted)). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
personal information is at issue, or who has control over that
 
information. Id. Rather, "authorization" means with "legal
 
authority, official permission, or sanction." Id. Therefore,
 
the court concluded that "a member of the press who lawfully
 obtains, possesses, and thereafter publishes truthful information
 may not be punished for doing so under U.S. Supreme Court
 precedents[.]" Id. at 907-08, 390 P.3d at 312-13. Consequently,
 
the possession by the press of "confidential personal
 information" under those circumstances is authorized and falls
 outside the scope of the UPCPI statutes. Id. at 908, 390 P.3d at
 
313. The court therefore concluded that "the UPCPI statutes are
 
not facially and unconstitutionally overbroad." Id. 
Thus, the Circuit Court's conclusions 6 and 8 do not
 
correctly reflect the rule of law and are in error and did not
 support the dismissal of the UPCPI charge.
 
For the foregoing reasons, the Circuit Court of the
 
First Circuit's June 2, 2016 "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
 Law, and Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendant's
 Motion to Dismiss Count 2 for Unconstitutionally Broad, Vague and
 Punitive Statute, and for Violation of Due Process" is vacated
 and this case is remanded for further proceedings.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 26, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
James S. Tabe,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellee.
 Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
4
 