NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
     NO. CAAP-11-0000758
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MICHAEL W. BASHAM, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-0663)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Michael W. Basham (Basham) appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered in the
 
1
Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court) on September
19, 2011. Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) charged 
Basham with assault in the first degree in violation of Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-710 (1993) arising from a September 
22, 2007 incident involving Basham, Steven Bloom (Bloom) and 
Basham's two sons. Basham was found guilty as charged and was 
sentenced to ten years of imprisonment. 
Though Basham raises five points on appeal, the points
 
have been summarized into four issues for review. 
On appeal,
 
Basham contends the circuit court erred when it:
 
1
 The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) denied Basham's motion for mistrial in light of the
 
numerous instances of prosecutorial misconduct;
 
(2) abused its discretion in admitting prejudicial
 
photographs;
 
(3) sustained Basham's conviction despite insufficient
 
evidence; and
 
(4) sentenced Basham for uncharged conduct in violation
 
of HRS §§ 706-606 and 706-621.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude Basham's
 
appeal is without merit.
 
(1) Basham contends the circuit court abused its
 
discretion by denying Basham's motion for mistrial after
 
instances of prosecutorial misconduct during the closing
 
argument.
 
To determine whether there were improper comments that 
prejudiced Basham's right to a fair trial, the comments are 
examined as to "(1) the nature of the conduct; (2) the promptness 
of curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the 
evidence against the defendant." State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai' i 
20, 26, 108 P.3d 974, 980 (2005). 
Basham contends the prosecutor committed misconduct by
 
commenting on matters outside the evidence. During closing
 remarks, the following exchange occurred: 
[Prosecutor]: The defense would make a big deal how
come [former officer] isn't here to testify? Well, as
[police officer] told you, [former officer] is no longer a
policeman. In fact [former officer] no longer lives on the
island of Oahu. 
[Defense Counsel]: Objection, Your Honor.
 
[Prosecutor]: State versus Padilla.
 [Defense Counsel]: Move to strike. May we approach?
 The Court: Sustained. Ladies and gentleman, you are to
disregard the last comment. Sustained. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The prosecutor's comments that referenced the former 
officer's off-island status were based on information outside the 
evidence admitted at trial. However, the circuit court sustained 
Basham's objection and ordered the jury to disregard the comment. 
"A prosecutor's remarks are generally considered cured by the 
court's instructions to the jury, because it is presumed that the 
jury abided by the court's admonition to disregard the 
statement." State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai' i 405, 415, 984 P.2d 1231, 
1241 (1999) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). The circuit court's prompt instruction to the jury to disregard the 
prosecutor's comments, cured any prejudice to Basham. 
Basham takes issue with the prosecutor's statement
 
attacking the credibility of his co-defendant: 
[
Prosecutor ]: You see, he couldn't come up and say I
wasn't there or I wasn't argumentative or I didn't touch Mr.
Bloom because to do so would make his version so incredible,
so unworthy of belief that he would automatically have to be
discredited. And so what he did was he tracked the 
statement. And [defense counsel] said it, [co-defendant's]
statement tracks Mrs. Bloom's dictated statement to [former
officer]. It does that because –- the reasonable inference is
 that [co-defendant] read the statement and said well –-
[Defense Counsel]: Objection, Your Honor. 
The Court: Sustained.
 [Defense Counsel]: Move to strike.
 The Court: Ladies and gentleman, you are to disregard
the last comment. Sustained.
 
Basham contends the prosecutor's statement constituted 
impermissible generic tailoring. Given the circuit court's 
prompt action sustaining Basham's objection and providing a 
curative instruction to the jury to disregard the statement, any 
misconduct was cured. Rogan, 91 Hawai' i at 415, 984 P.2d at 
1241. 
Basham contends the prosecutor improperly attacked
 
Basham's credibility, though his credibility was not at issue. 
During closing remarks, the prosecutor stated, 
[Prosecutor]: You know that [Basham] lied to the
police. How do you know that? When [police officer], the
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
second police officer who testified, he had the suit and the
–- the stubble, he told you his only job at the scene was to
document the minor motor vehicle collision. And whom did he
 identify as the operators? [Bloom], [Basham]. Who could
 the only source of that information be? Not Steven Bloom
 who had been knocked unconscious. [Basham]. In other
 words, he took the role of his son as the driver and thus
lied to the police.
 
Basham asserts that this attack on his credibility is
 
improper since Basham did not testify during trial. During
 
closing remarks, the prosecutor referenced the testimony of one
 
of the police officers that responded to the incident. The
 
police officer identified Basham as the driver of the vehicle
 
involved in the collision.
 
Where the prosecutor's statement draws a reasonable 
inference from the evidence, the comment does not constitute an 
improper comment. See, State v. Tuua, 125 Hawai' i 10, 14, 250 
P.3d 273, 277 (2011). The prosecutor made a permissible and reasonable inference based on evidence in the record that Basham 
misrepresented himself as the driver involved in the collision. 
Basham contends the prosecutor misstated the law on
 
accomplice liability, confusing the jurors as to the elements of
 
assault. During closing statements, the following exchange
 
occurred:
 
[Prosecutor]: A person is an accomplice of another if
in the commission of Assault in the First Degree, with
intent to promote or facilitate the commission of Assault in
the First Degree, the person aids or agrees or attempts to
aid the person in the planning or the commission of the
offense.
 
Let's define a couple of those words and put it in
everyday English that we can understand.
 
A person is an accomplice if with intent to promote -- what
does that "promote" mean? It simply means for our purposes to
encourage, the desire to bring about.
 
[Defense Counsel]: I'm going to object. Approach, Your
Honor.
 
The Court: Approach.
 
(The following proceedings were held at the bench:)
 [Defense Counsel]: Ask the Court to instruct the jury the
use of the word "intent" clearly under Hawai' i state law, State v. 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Yip, Yabasuki, Soares, the words "intent to promote" is used in
very narrow circumstances, meaning that with regard to accompliceliability proof must be had beyond a reasonable doubt that thedefendant had the intent to promote the commission of theparticular offense. And [Prosecutor's] use of it is a far cryfrom what the legal definition is under the Hawai' i case law and 
intent has to be construed in terms of the intentional state of mind that the Court has given. So his argument is highlymisleading and prejudicial if you let it stand. 
[Co-defendant's Counsel]: Join in that.
 
The Court: Overruled.
 
Though Basham contends the prosecutor misled the jury
 
by improperly dismantling the intent component of the statute,
 
the prosecutor's statements do not support this contention. The
 
jury instructions as read by the circuit court included an
 
instruction for accomplice liability which stated, "[a] person is
 
an accomplice of another in the commission of an offense if, with
 
the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of the
 
offence, he aids or agrees or attempts to aid the other person in
 
the planning or commission of the offense." The statute from
 
which the language derived, HRS § 702-222 (1993), does not define
 
"promote" or "facilitate." In his closing remarks, the
 
prosecutor did not misstate the law, but referenced the plain
 
meaning of the words.
 
Basham contends the prosecutor improperly diverted the
 
jury away from the evidence by raising the societal impact of the
 
verdict. The prosecutor commented, "[t]he verdict that's
 
rendered is important. It's important not only to the defendants
 
but it's important to an orderly community. We resolve things by
 
avoiding the use of violence." Basham contends that such
 
comments impermissibly call on the jury to decide the merits of
 
the case based on societal implications.
 
However, the circuit court instructed the jury to 
decide the verdict based on the evidence and the law and 
clarified that remarks by counsel are not evidence. In Klinge, 
the Supreme Court of Hawai' i concluded that a prosecutor's 
isolated, improper reference to "the people's safety" during 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
closing arguments was not reversible error where the court later 
instructed the jury that statements made by counsel were not 
evidence. Klinge, 92 Hawai' i 577, 591-92, 994 P.2d 509, 523-24 
(2000). Similarly, in the instant case the prosecutor made one isolated reference to which Basham failed to object, and any 
error was cured by the circuit court's instruction to the jury. 
Furthermore, the strength of the evidence against
 
Basham renders the comment harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
During trial, Basham's co-defendant and Bloom's wife testified
 
that Basham pushed Bloom to the ground. Bloom's wife testified
 
that Basham held Bloom to the ground.
 
(2) Basham contends the circuit court abused its
 
discretion in admitting three photographs into evidence due to
 
their highly prejudicial content and low probative value. The
 
photographs were of Bloom and his wife prior to the assault. 
The State offered one of the photographs, Exhibit 3, to
 
show Bloom's relative weight and size on the day of the incident
 
in response to Basham's argument that Basham's actions were in
 
self-defense. Basham asserts Exhibit 3 is prejudicial because it
 
depicts Bloom holding his "pregnant wife" with his hand on her
 
stomach. The State offered two other photographs, Exhibits 4 and
 
5, to corroborate Bloom's testimony that Bloom and his wife were
 
sightseeing together just prior to the incident. The circuit
 
court denied Basham's motion in limine as to the photographs and
 
admitted the photographs as relevant and probative to corroborate
 
the narrative of events.
 
Photographs may be admitted into evidence if the 
content is relevant. State v. Torres, 60 Haw. 271, 275-76, 589 
P.2d 83, 86 (1978). Photographs may be relevant to corroborate testimony. State v. Edwards, 81 Hawai' i 293, 916 P.2d 703 (1996) 
Exhibits 4 and 5, photographs depicting the Blooms in
 
front of their home in Ewa Beach and sightseeing, corroborated
 
the narrative that the Blooms were searching for a beach near
 
their new home on the day of the alleged assault.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Basham further claims the photographs were cumulative. 
Basham takes issue with Exhibits 4 and 5 for depicting the Blooms 
in individual poses sightseeing as needlessly cumulative and 
highly prejudicial. Photographs depicting similar scenes may not 
be considered cumulative so long as each photograph depicts 
images not evident from the other photographs. See, Edwards, 81 
Hawai'i at 299, 916 P.2d at 709. Exhibit 4 shows Bloom 
sightseeing and Exhibit 5 shows his wife sightseeing. The 
photographs served to corroborate that just prior to the alleged 
assault, the Blooms were sightseeing together in the nearby 
vicinity. As such, the circuit court did not abuse its 
discretion in allowing the photographs into evidence. 
(3) Basham contends there was insufficient evidence to
 
support a conviction for assault under accomplice liability.
 
Basham concedes the evidence shows Basham pushed or grabbed Bloom
 
before Bloom fell to the ground, and that Basham held Bloom to
 
the ground. However, Basham maintains the evidence does not
 
sufficiently demonstrate intent to assault since Basham ceased
 
holding Bloom to the ground once the driver (identified as one of
 
Basham's sons) began punching Bloom.
 
Sufficiency of evidence is established where 
substantial evidence supports the jury's conclusion, as was the 
case here. State v. Fields, 115 Hawai' i 503, 511-12, 168 P.3d 
955, 963-64 (2007). 
(4) The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in
 
sentencing Basham to ten years imprisonment. Basham contends the
 circuit court sentenced Basham for an uncharged crime, namely for
 
failing to control his son and for failing to prevent the assault
 
on Bloom.
 
The circuit court properly exercised its discretion in
 
considering Basham's "candor, conduct, remorse, background . . .
 
as well as circumstances of the crime and many other factors[.]" 
State v. Nunes, 72 Haw. 521, 525, 824 P.2d 837, 840 (1992).
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Basham further asserts that the circuit court erred in
 
emphasizing the sentencing factor of "extent of injury" over
 
other factors that weighed in Basham's favor such as "no history
 
of prior delinquency or criminal activity" and "has led a law
 
abiding life" (quoting HRS § 706-621(2)(e) (1993) (repealed
 
2001)).
 
HRS § 706-606 (1993) requires the circuit court to 
consider the enumerated factors, but does not compel the court to 
give each factor equal weight. The circuit court may exercise 
discretion in prescribing a sentence that fits the particular 
defendant and the circumstances of the case. State v. Kahapea, 
111 Hawai' i 267, 281, 141 P.3d 440, 454 (2006). The circuit 
court addressed the required factors necessary for the 
consideration of probation, and did not abuse its discretion in 
deciding to sentence Basham to ten years imprisonment for his 
participation in the assault. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment and Conviction
 
entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit on September
 19, 2011 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, December 31, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Summer M.M. Kupau
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant. 
Chief Judge 
James M. Anderson Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
8
 