NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000517 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE SHIRLEY S. TANIGUCHI TRUST,
DATED DECEMBER 27, 2002, AS AMENDED 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(TRUST NO. 17-1-0040) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
The sole issue presented by this appeal is:  "Who 
succeeds Stephen T. Taniguchi (Stephen)1 as successor trustee of 
a trust that owns real property located in Mânoa  Valley and an 
associated bank account (the Mânoa Property)?"  The Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit2 confirmed Co-Petitioners-Appellees Kimii 
Taniguchi and Jonathan M. Taniguchi as successor co-trustees. Respondent-Appellant Paula E. Taniguchi appeals from the "Order 
Granting Petition to Confirm Successor Co-Trustees" and the 
"Judgment on Order Granting Petition to Confirm Successor Co-Trustees," both entered by the circuit court on June 7, 2017.  We affirm the circuit court's order and judgment. 
I. 
Shirley S. Taniguchi was the settlor and initial 
trustee of The Shirley S. Taniguchi Trust, dated December 27, 
1 Because all parties in this case share the same surname, we refer
to them by their given names. 
2 The Honorable R. Mark Browning presided.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2002 (the Original Trust).  Shirley was married to Paul T. 
Taniguchi.  Shirley and Paul owned the Mânoa  Property.  By 
warranty deed dated December 27, 2002, Shirley and Paul conveyed 
the Mânoa Property to Shirley, as trustee of the Original Trust.3 
Shirley and Paul had two children: Paula and Stephen. 
Stephen was married to Kimii.  Stephen and Kimii had two sons, Jonathan and Matthew M. Taniguchi.
4 
Shirley amended the Original Trust on December 22, 
2011.  She died ten days later, on January 1, 2012.  The Original Trust, as amended, provided that upon Shirley's death, Stephen would be the successor trustee.  If Stephen "fails to qualify or ceases to act," Paula was named as successor trustee.  Stephen accepted the appointment as successor trustee of the Original Trust on February 1, 2012. 
The Original Trust, as amended, provided that after 
Shirley's death all of her jewelry would be distributed to Paula. Shirley's personal property located on the 
Mânoa  Property was to 
pass with the Mânoa Property.  For any remaining personal property, the successor trustee was directed to distribute to Stephen what Stephen desired; the remainder was to be sold or otherwise disposed of, with the proceeds to be included in Shirley's residual estate. 
After Shirley's death, the
 Mânoa Property became part 
of the Original Trust residue.  The successor trustee was directed to allocate the residue between two residual trusts: the Residuary Trust and the Children's Trust.
5  The Original Trust, 
as amended, provided: 
Each TRUSTEE serving [as trustee of the Original Trust]
shall also serve as TRUSTEE of any separate trusts createdhereunder unless specified otherwise and shall have all thepowers and authority of the INITIAL TRUSTEE. 
In the case of a separate trust created for a
beneficiary of the SETTLOR under § 5.03 [the Residuary 
3 The record on appeal does not contain a copy of the deed, but it
is referenced in the property description contained in a subsequent deed. 
4 Matthew is not a party to these proceedings. 
5 The Children's Trust is not at issue in this appeal. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Trust] . . . such beneficiary is appointed as the sole
TRUSTEE of such separate trust when such beneficiary attainsthe age of thirty (30) years, and the then serving TRUSTEEshall, in such event, be deemed to have resigned. 
(Underscoring added.)  Stephen, as the successor trustee of the 
Original Trust, was to be the trustee of the Residuary Trust until the beneficiary of that trust attained the age of thirty years, at which time Stephen was deemed to have resigned and the Residuary Trust beneficiary would become the successor trustee. Stephen was also the beneficiary — and accordingly the successor trustee — of the Residuary Trust. 
On February 1, 2012, Stephen, as successor trustee of 
the Original Trust, conveyed the Mânoa  Property to himself, as 
trustee of the Residuary Trust, by limited warranty deed. 
Stephen died on March 29, 2016.  After Stephen's death 
a dispute arose between Paula and Kimii, Jonathan, and Matthew concerning ownership of, and control over, the 
Mânoa Property. 
On March 23, 2017, Kimii and Jonathan filed a petition asking that the circuit court confirm them as successor co-trustees of the Residuary Trust (which owned the Mâ noa Property).  Paula 
opposed the petition, contending that she was the "Successor Trustee of [Paul's] life estate in the Manoa [sic] house . . . per the terms of the [Original Trust][.]"  The petition was heard on May 11, 2017.  On June 7, 2017, the circuit court entered an order confirming Kimii and Jonathan as successor co-trustees of the Residuary Trust.  A judgment was entered the same day. 
On June 16, 2017, Paula filed a motion for (1) a stay 
of circuit court proceedings pending an appeal to the inter
-
mediate court of appeals and (2) an order vacating the June 7, 2017 order and judgment.  The circuit court's minutes indicate that the motion was denied.  The record on appeal does not contain a copy of a written order denying the motion. 
II. 
Paula filed this appeal on June 28, 2017.  She contends 
that the circuit court erred by (1) confirming Kimii and Jonathan 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as successor co-trustees of the Residuary Trust, (2) denying her 
motion to stay the proceedings pending this appeal and refusing to vacate the order and judgment confirming Kimii and Jonathan as successor co-trustees of the Residuary Trust, and (3) denying her constitutional rights to due process and equal protection. 
The construction of a trust is a question of law which this
court reviews de novo. 
When construing a trust, this court is guided by principles
relating to the interpretation of trusts as well as thoserelating to the interpretation of wills.  A fundamental rule when construing trusts is that the intention of the settloras expressed in a trust instrument shall prevail unlessinconsistent with some positive rule of law.  Additionally,in construing a trust document to determine the settlor'sintent, the instrument must be read as a whole, not infragments. 
In re Robinson Trust, 110 Hawai# i 181, 184, 130 P.3d 1046, 1049 
(2006) (cleaned up). 
A. The circuit court properly confirmed Kimii andJonathan as successor trustees of the ResiduaryTrust. 
The Original Trust, as amended, provided: 
Upon the death, resignation, or incapacity of the INITIALTRUSTEE [Shirley], STEPHEN T. TANIGUCHI is appointedSUCCESSOR TRUSTEE.  In the event he fails to qualify orceases to act, then PAULA E. TANIGUCHI is appointedSUCCESSOR TRUSTEE. 
Shirley died on January 1, 2012.  Stephen accepted the 
appointment as successor trustee on February 1, 2012. 
Paula contends that she "was appointed as Successor 
Trustee when and if Stephen Taniguchi ceased to act or failed to qualify.  Stephen Taniguchi died on March 29, 2016[.] . . . Paula E. Taniguchi was the next successor trustee when her brother died."  Paula is correct that she was named to succeed Stephen as trustee under the Original Trust.  After Shirley's death, however, the Original Trust no longer owned the 
Mânoa 
Property.  As directed by the terms of the Original Trust, Stephen, as successor trustee of the Original Trust, conveyed the 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mânoa  Property to himself, as trustee of the Residuary Trust, by 
limited warranty deed.6 
Stephen was the beneficiary and the original trustee of 
the Residuary Trust.  If Stephen was under the age of thirty when 
Shirley died, he also became the successor trustee of the Residuary Trust when he reached the age of thirty.  The Original Trust made no provision for a successor trustee of the Residuary Trust after Stephen died, but gave the beneficiary (Stephen) a power of appointment: 
(2) Termination of Trust.  This [Residuary] trust
shall terminate upon the death of the Beneficiary, and the
TRUSTEE shall distribute the trust property as provided insubparagraphs (3) and (4) hereof. 
(3) Distribution Upon Termination of Trust for
Beneficiary Who Is STEPHEN TAKESHI TANIGUCHI. 
(a) Special Power of Appointment.  Upon termination
of the [Residuary] trust for the Beneficiary who is STEPHENTAKESHI TANIGUCHI, the property shall be distributed to suchone or more of the issue of the Beneficiary, and on suchterms or conditions, either outright or in trust, as theBeneficiary shall appoint by will specifically referring toand exercising this power of appointment. 
Stephen exercised his power of appointment in his will, which 
provides: 
I am married to KIMII TANIGUCHI, hereinafter referred
to as my spouse. 
. . . . 
6 Paula contends that Shirley gave Paul a life estate in the Mânoa 
Property, such that Paul is entitled to "the assets of the life estate
including the funds in the Bank of Hawaii account constituting the rent fromthe Manoa [sic] house."  The Original Trust, as amended, provided: 
B. Provision Regarding [the Mânoa Property]. 
Regardless of which Trust the [ Mânoa Property] is allocated
to [
i.e., the Residuary Trust or the Children's Trust], the
TRUSTEE shall allow [Paul] the right to reside in theProperty free of rent, during his lifetime; provided,however, that he pays for all the expenses incurred inconnection with the upkeep and maintenance of the Property(i.e., real property taxes, insurance, general repairs, andmaintenance). 
The nature and extent of Paul's interest, if any, in the Mânoa Property is not
at issue in this appeal and we express no opinion on that issue. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I hold a special power of appointment over the 
separate trust created for me in § 5.03 of The Shirley S.
Taniguchi Trust dated December 27, 2002, as amended onDecember 22, 2011  ("SST Trust").  I hereby exercise such
special power of appointment as follows: 
A. Successor Trustee of the SST Trust.  I hereby
appoint my spouse and JONATHAN M. TANIGUCHI as the SuccessorCo-Trustees of the SST Trust. 
(Bold typeface added.)  Stephen's will, read in conjunction with 
the power of appointment contained in the Original Trust, appointed Kimii and Jonathan as successor co-trustees of the Residuary Trust.
7  We conclude that the circuit court properly 
confirmed Kimii and Jonathan as successor co-trustees of the Residuary Trust. 
B. The circuit court did not abuse its discretion by
denying Paula's motion for a stay pending appealor vacation of the order and judgment. 
Paula contends that the circuit court erred by not 
granting her motion to stay proceedings pending this appeal and 
to vacate the order and judgment confirming Kimii and Jonathan as successor co-trustees of the Residuary Trust.
8  Her only 
discernable argument is that the circuit court should have realized it committed reversible error in issuing the order and judgment, and therefore should have (either) stayed proceedings until the order and judgment were vacated on appeal, or vacated the order and judgment before an appeal was necessary.  Because the circuit court properly confirmed Kimii and Jonathan as successor trustees for the Residuary Trust, it did not abuse its discretion by denying Paula's motion for a stay pending appeal or vacation of the order and judgment. 
7 Although the Residuary Trust terminated upon Stephen's death, the
successor co-trustees have the power to distribute the property of the
Residuary Trust according to the terms of Stephen's will.  See Restatement (Third) of Trusts § 89 (2007) ("The powers of a trustee do not end on thetrust's termination date but may be exercised as appropriate to the perform-ance of the trustee's duties in winding up administration, including makingdistribution, in a manner consistent with the purposes of the trust and theinterests of the beneficiaries."). 
8 Had the circuit court granted either of Paula's requests, the
other would have become moot. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C. Paula was not deprived of due process or equal
protection. 
Paula argues: 
By granting the Petition and appointing [Kimii and
Jonathan] as Co-Trustees of the Trust, the Circuit Courtviolated [Paula] Taniguchi’s constitutional rights to dueprocess and equal protection by denying [Paula] and herfather property, possession, and ownership interests in thetrust property in which [Paul] Taniguchi has a life estate. 
She makes no discernable argument concerning procedural or 
substantive due process, or equal protection of or under the law, other than contending that the circuit court erred when it confirmed Kimii and Jonathan as successor co-trustees.  Paula's constitutional arguments lack merit. 
III. 
For the foregoing reasons, the "Order Granting Petition 
to Confirm Successor Co-Trustees" and the "Judgment on Order Granting Petition to Confirm Successor Co-Trustees," both entered by the circuit court on June 7, 2017, are affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 24, 2020. 
R. Steven Geshell,
for Respondent-AppellantPaula E. Taniguchi. 
Emily Kawashima Waters, 
for Co-Petitioners-AppelleesKimii Taniguchi and Jonathan M. Taniguchi. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
7 