NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000807
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
DARNELL GRIFFIN, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(S.P.P. NO. 12-1-0035 (CR. NO. 07-1-0647))
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Petitioner-Appellant Darnell Griffin (Griffin) appeals
 
from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's (Circuit Court)1
 
September 6, 2012 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order
 
Denying Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to
 Release Petitioner from Custody (Rule 40 Order)
 
On appeal, Griffin argues the Circuit Court erred 
because it denied Griffin's Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP) Rule 40 petition for post-conviction relief without a hearing despite the presentation of colorable claims for ineffective assistance of trial and appellate counsel.
I.
 
In the underlying criminal matter involved here,
 
Griffin was charged with and found guilty of Murder in the Second
 Degree pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-701.5
 (2014)
2 and sentenced to life in prison without the possibility
 
1
 The Honorable Judge Dexter D. Del Rosario presided.
 
2
 
Murder in the second degree.  (1) Except as provided
in section 707-701, a person commits the offense of murder
(continued...)
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of parole pursuant to HRS §§ 706-656(2) (1993 and Supp. 2013) and
 
706-657 (Supp. 2013)3 based on a prior conviction for murder.4
 
On July 11, 2012 Griffin filed his Petition to Vacate,
 
Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner for
 Custody (Petition) pursuant to HRPP Rule 40 alleging fourteen
 grounds for relief.
5
 
2(...continued)
in the second degree if the person intentionally or
knowingly causes the death of another person.
 
(2) Murder in the second degree is a felony for which
the defendant shall be sentenced to imprisonment as provided
in section 706-656.
 
3
 
§706-657 Enhanced sentence for second degree murder.
The court may sentence a person who has been convicted of
murder in the second degree to life imprisonment without the
possibility of parole under section 706-656 if the court
finds . . . that the person was previously convicted of the
offense of murder in the first degree or murder in the
second degree in this State or was previously convicted in
another jurisdiction of an offense that would constitute
murder in the first degree or murder in the second degree in
this State.
 
4 Griffin appealed his conviction for Murder in the Second Degree in
the present case, where he "challeng[ed] the conduct of grand jury counselleading to his indictment, the exclusion of prior sexual conduct evidence andadmission of certain pre-trial statements made by him, and the sufficiency ofthe evidence presented at trial." State v. Griffin, 126 Hawai' i 40, 43, 266
P.3d 448, 451 (App. 2011). This court affirmed Griffin's conviction, andfound the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying Griffin'schallenge to dismiss the indictment, id. at 53-54, 266 P.3d at 461-62, did noterr in excluding evidence of the decedent's prior sexual behavior, id. at 55,266 P.3d at 463, and did not err in allowing Officer Lombardi's testimonyregarding Griffin's statements made to his wife over the phone while Griffinwas in custody, id. at 56, 266 P.3d at 464, and that sufficient evidence wasprovided such that the jury's unanimous verdict of guilty was supported, id.at 58, 266 P.3d at 466. Following the affirmation of the trial court'sJudgment, the Hawai' i Supreme Court rejected Griffin's March 5, 2012
application for writ of certiorari. State v. Griffin, SCWC-29981, 2012 WL 
1293150 (Apr. 16, 2012). 
5 Griffin's grounds for post-conviction relief were as follows:
 
Ground one: Ineffective assistance of trial counsel 
Ground two: Conviction was tainted by perjured testimony of
two HPD officers. 
Ground three: Prosecutorial misconduct 
Ground four: Ineffective assistance of appellate counsel 
Ground [five]: Due process violation by not allowing
testimony regarding victim's recent past (Rule 412(b) [sic].
 
(continued...)
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5(...continued)
Ground [six]: 
Grand jury counsel improper statements
violated due process rights, statements were prejudicial,
not harmless. 
Ground [seven]: Insufficiency of Evidence - the state did
not prove every element of the charge. There was no
 evidence presented that proved that I was the person who
knowingly committed the crimes against the victim. Evidence
 was offered that proved I was not the last person seen with
the victim. I did not match the description of the suspect.
 
Ground [eight]: The trial court erred by not questioning
the jury and removing any affected by the reports in the
media (radio, newspaper, and TV) that were constantly
reporting news about a prior conviction in 1983. This
 coverage introduced evidence of prior bad acts that are
excluded in court, but was offered via the media. Even
 during deliberations there were constant media reports of
this information.
 
Ground [nine]: Trial counsel knew of missing evidence (a
picture of a black male taken by victim) that victim's
husband reported as matching the identity of the suspect,
yet did not bring this point to the attention of the court,
which may have exculped [sic] me.
 
Ground [ten]: Trial counsel failed to investigate or
attempt to locate vehicle matching the description of the
suspects [sic] vehicle. Counsel knew of the police report
that stated a Mr. Dubois and his vehicle matched
 descriptions given. The police report also had the license
number of the vehicle and counsel knew of the whereabouts of
 Dubois prior to trial and did not seize vehicle for testing
of possible DNA or other evidence which could have
exhonorated [sic] me.
 
Ground [eleven]: Trial counsel failed to subpoena possible
alibi witness Andre Smith, who's story could have
corroborated my wife's alibi testimony. Counsel's
 investigator made only one attempt to talk with witness
after first meeting.
 
Ground [twelve]: Trial counsel was in possession of an
enlarged photo of a state license bearing my photo dated
within days of the crime (which proved I did not match the
description of the suspect). He failed to call any of the
witnesses who saw and described the suspect or question them
about my identity (me or using the photo) which could have
convinced the jury that I was not the same person that
committed the crime.
 
Ground [thirteen]: Trial court erred by not granting a
judgment of acquittal citing respect for the jury's decision
and not relying on the evidence and the lack of evidence
that would be efficient to find a verdict of guilty. There
was clearly insufficient evidence presented.
 
Ground [fourteen]: Trial counsel was ineffective in cross-
examination of Officer Lombardi, Officer Sunia, and
regarding other found dna [sic] (cat hairs), all of which
was harmful to my defense by not presenting the officers'
statements (evidence) as perjured and other evidence to
(continued...)
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On September 6, 2012 the Circuit Court issued its Rule
 
40 Order. Based on a review of the Petition and Respondent­
Appellee's State of Hawai 'i's answer, the Circuit Court denied 
Griffin's Petition without a hearing pursuant to HRPP Rule
 40(f).
6 On September 20, 2012, Griffin brought this appeal.7
 
II.
 
A. Trial Counsel. 
Griffin was represented at trial and on direct appeal
 
by the Office of the Public Defender. "Where petitioner has been
 represented by the same counsel both at trial and on direct
 appeal, no waiver of the issue of trial counsel's performance
 occurs because no realistic opportunity existed to raise the
 issue on direct appeal." Briones v. State, 74 Haw. 442, 459, 848
 
5(...continued)
clear me, such as the lack of my dna [sic] in the victim's
pants.
 
6
 
(f) Hearings. If a petition alleges facts that if
proven would entitle the petitioner to relief, the court
shall grant a hearing which may extend only to the issues
raised in the petition or answer. However, the court may
deny a hearing if the petitioner's claim is patently
frivolous and is without trace of support either in the
record or from other evidence submitted by the petitioner.
The court may also deny a hearing on a specific question of
fact when a full and fair evidentiary hearing upon that
question was held during the course of the proceedings which
led to the judgment or custody which is the subject of the
petition or at any later proceeding.
 
The petitioner shall have a full and fair evidentiary
hearing on the petition. The court shall receive all
evidence that is relevant and necessary to determine the
petition, including affidavits, depositions, oral testimony,
certificate of any judge who presided at any hearing during
the course of the proceedings which led to the judgment or
custody which is the subject of the petition, and relevant
and necessary portions of transcripts of prior proceedings.
The petitioner shall have a right to be present at any
evidentiary hearing at which a material question of fact is
litigated.
 
Where the petition alleges the ineffective assistance
of counsel as a ground upon which the requested relief
should be granted, the petitioner shall serve written notice
of the hearing upon the counsel whose assistance is alleged
to have been ineffective and said counsel shall have an
 opportunity to be heard.
 
7
 Griffin initially defaulted on his appeal by failing to file a
jurisdictional statement and an opening brief. However, we set aside his
default and later granted his motion for appointment of counsel to assist him
in his appeal.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.2d 966, 975 (1993). The Circuit Court therefore erred in
 
ruling that Griffin had waived his claims of ineffective
 assistance of trial counsel by failing to raise them on direct
 appeal.
 
The Circuit Court also denied Griffin's ineffective
 
assistance of counsel claims without a hearing on the ground that
 they were patently frivolous and without a trace of support
 either in the record or other evidence submitted. HRPP Rule
 40(f) requires the court to hold a hearing if a petition alleges
 facts that if proven would entitle a petitioner to relief. The
 court, however, may deny a hearing where the petitioner's claim
 is "patently frivolous and is without trace of support either in
 the record or from other evidence submitted by petitioner." HRPP
 Rule 40(f). We conclude that Griffin's claims of ineffective
 assistance of counsel were not all patently frivolous and without
 a trace of support, and therefore, the Circuit Court erred in
 denying Griffin's claims without a hearing.
 
The prosecution of Griffin involved a "cold" case that 
was charged many years after the murder of the victim was committed. Although DNA evidence placed Griffin with the victim on or about the date when she was last seen uninjured, proof that Griffin had committed the murder was circumstantial. As a result of his conviction, Griffin was sentenced to life without parole, the greatest possible punishment under Hawai
'i law. 
We conclude that Griffin's allegations that his trial 
counsel provided ineffective assistance in advising him not to testify for fear that he may open the door to past bad acts was not patently frivolous and raised a colorable claim for relief. See Jones v. State, 79 Hawai
'i 330, 902 P.2d 965 (1995) (noting 
that the provision of erroneous legal advice to a defendant about the types of evidence that could be used to impeach him on cross-examination could constitute a "lack of skill" required for competent representation.) Griffin also alleged that his trial counsel failed to obtain evidence showing that the car he possessed at the time of the murder did not have a tow hitch and that trial counsel failed to interview witnesses who saw the victim leave with the suspected murderer and show them his 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
photograph, which Griffin contended would have demonstrated that
 
he did not resemble the suspected murderer. We construe these
 allegations as a claim by Griffin that trial counsel failed to
 perform a sufficient investigation to competently represent him
 and conclude that this claim is not patently frivolous and raised
 a colorable claim for relief. See State v. Aplaca, 74 Haw. 54,
 
69-70, 837 P.2d 1298, 1306-07 (1992) (noting that the failure to
 adequately investigate the underlying facts of a case may
 constitute incompetent representation).
 
The record in this case does not indicate that trial
 
counsel was served with the Petition and in any event does not
 include an explanation by trial counsel of his advice to Griffin
 regarding whether he should testify, the reasons for such advice,
 or the efforts made by trial counsel to investigate the
 underlying facts in preparing Griffin's defense. Under the
 circumstances of this case, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 erred in denying Griffin's Petition without a hearing.
B. Appellate counsel.
 
Griffin also alleges that the Circuit Court "clearly
 
erred by not granting Trial counsel's objection to the enhanced
 sentencing being decided by a judge instead of a jury." Griffin
 contends that "[b]ecause Appellate counsel failed to raise on
 appeal the trial court's error in overruling Trial counsel's
 objection to having the judge determine whether a enhanced
 sentence of life without the possibility of parole should be
 imposed, this sentence should be summarily reversed," or in the
 alternative, "a Rule 40 hearing on this issue should be granted." 
Griffin raised neither this sentencing issue nor the failure of
 his appellate counsel to assert this sentencing issue on his
 direct appeal or as a ground for his ineffective assistance of
 appellate counsel claim in the Petition. Therefore, the ground
 is waived.
 
Griffin further alleges appellate counsel erred in
 
failing to raise ineffective assistance of trial counsel in his
 direct appeal and due to this and "many potential issues of
 ineffective assistance of trial counsel, a hearing on Griffin
 counsel's failure to raise these issues should be granted as
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
well." As we have concluded the Circuit Court must hold a
 
hearing on Griffin's ineffective assistance of trial counsel
 claims, we do not reach whether his appellate counsel was
 ineffective for not raising these claims in his direct appeal.
III.
 
Based on the foregoing, the September 6, 2012 Findings
 
of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Denying Petition to Vacate,
 Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from
 Custody entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit is
 vacated and we remand the case for a hearing on Griffin's claims
 that his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance in
 advising him not to testify and in failing to sufficiently
 investigate the case to adequately represent him. We express no
 opinion on the merits of these claims or how the Circuit Court
 should decide them on remand.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 23, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Lars Robert Issacson,
for Petitioner-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
 
Donn Fudo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Respondent-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
7
 