NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
1 The Honorable Richard K. Perkins presided.NO. CAAP-16-0000493
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
MELVIN DE FREITAS JR., Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Respondent-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(S.P.P. NO. 15-1-0012; CR. NO. 95-1996)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
Petitioner-Appellant Melvin Freitas, Jr., aka Melvin De
Freitas, Jr. and Elliot Freitas (Freitas) appeals from the
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Petition
to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release
Petitioner from Custody Without a Hearing," filed on May 27, 2016
in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).1
On August 18, 1997, Freitas was convicted of three
counts of Kidnapping, and one count each of Robbery in the Second
Degree, Assault in the Second Degree, Terroristic Threatening in
the First Degree, and Assault in the Third Degree.  Both of the
State's Motion for Sentencing as a Repeat Offender and Motion for
Extended Term of Imprisonment were granted and Freitas was
sentenced to Life Imprisonment with a mandatory minimum of 13
years and four months for each count of Kidnapping, 20 yearsNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
2imprisonment with a mandatory minimum of six years and eight
months for Robbery in the Second Degree, ten years imprisonment
with a mandatory minimum of three years and four months for
Assault in the Second Degree, ten years imprisonment with a
mandatory minimum of three years and four months for Terroristic
Threatening in the First Degree, and one year imprisonment for
Assault in the Third Degree, all sentences to run concurrently
with each other and any other sentence Freitas was currently
serving.
On October 23, 1998, in appeal No. 20954, this court
vacated Freitas' conviction for Assault in the Second Degree but
affirmed all other convictions and ordered the Circuit Court to
resentence Freitas accordingly.  Freitas did not file a writ of
certiorari to the supreme court from this court's opinion in No.
20954.  
On June 14, 2000, an Amended Judgment was entered
against Freitas for three counts of Kidnapping, and one count
each of Robbery in the Second Degree, Terroristic Threatening in
the First Degree, and Assault in the Third Degree.  Freitas did
not appeal his resentencing. 
 On April 11, 2002, Freitas filed a Petition to Vacate,
Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from
Custody (First Petition), which was docketed as S.P.P. No. 02-1-
0028.  Freitas claimed that (1) his conviction was obtained by a
jury which was unconstitutionally selected and impaneled because
a juror was an adult corrections officer and his attorney refused
to excuse the juror after being instructed to do so by him, (2)
the Circuit Court forced him to wear leg irons during trial in
the presence of the jury, (3) he was provided ineffective
assistance of counsel, and (4) his right to compel witnesses in
his favor was violated. 
On August 28, 2003, the Circuit Court entered a
Decision and Order Denying Petition for Post-Conviction Relief
Without a Hearing, which denied the First Petition.
On January 28, 2005, the supreme court dismissedNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
3Freitas' appeal from the denial of the First Petition for lack of
appellate jurisdiction because his appeal was untimely.
On December 1, 2004, Freitas filed a Petition to
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner
from Custody (Second Petition), which was docketed as S.P.P. No.
04-1-0096.  To the extent we can discern, Freitas claimed (1) the
Hawaii Penal Code requires that a presentence report be provided
to the court, (2) the judge exceeded his authority in enhancing
the sentence, (3) a jury did not determine the facts that
enhanced his sentence, (4) his sentence for kidnapping was
illegal because he had not possessed the requisite state of mind,
(5) the judge did not make sufficient findings to support his
enhanced sentencing as there was insufficient evidence in the
record, (6) he did not know what facts and information the judge
would consider in sentencing, (7) a fact pertaining to an
enhanced sentence is an element of the offense, (8) sentencing
must conform to the Sixth Amendment, (9) his rights were violated
because the judge did not inform him of the risks of trial, and
(10) the judge received and considered hearsay and erroneous
information.
On May 13, 2005, the Circuit Court issued a Decision
and Order Dismissing Petition for Post-Conviction Relief Without
a Hearing, which denied the Second Petition.
On November 28, 2006, in appeal No. 27342 this court
affirmed the denial of Freitas' Second Petition.
On January 30, 2006, a United States Magistrate Judge
issued findings and a recommendation to dismiss Freitas' Amended
Petition for a Writ of Habeas Corpus with prejudice because it
was time-barred.
On February 17, 2006, a United States District Court
Judge adopted the Findings and Recommendation of the United
States Magistrate Judge.
On September 23, 2008, the United States District Court
for the District of Hawaii dismissed Freitas' second petition for
a writ of habeas corpus.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
4On February 20, 2009, Freitas filed a Petition to
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner
from Custody (Third Petition), which was docketed as S.P.P. No.
09-1-0010.  Freitas claimed statutory changes to HRS § 706-662
and State v. Maugaotega , 115 Hawai #i 432, 168 P.3d 562 (2007),
applied retroactively to his extended sentence, therefore, his
extended sentence was illegal.
On April 13, 2009, the Circuit Court issued its
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Petition
for Post-Conviction Relief Without a Hearing, which denied the
Third Petition.
On May 21, 2010, in appeal No. 29808, this court
affirmed the denial of Freitas' Third Petition.
On August 12, 2010, the supreme court denied Freitas'
application for writ of certiorari without prejudice because
Freitas applied for the writ prior to issuance of a final
judgment by this court.
On November 1, 2010, in SCWC-10-0000003, the supreme
court rejected Freitas' application for writ of certiorari
regarding the denial of his Third Petition.
On May 26, 2015, Freitas filed a Petition to Vacate,
Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from
Custody (Fourth Petition), which was docketed as S.P.P. No. 15-1-
0012.  Freitas claimed (1) HRS § 706-662 violates due process and
his Sixth Amendment right to a fair and impartial jury because a
jury must hear all evidence regarding extended term sentencing,
(2) he was entitled to written notice of any evidence applicable
to imposition of an extended sentence in that it must be alleged
in the charging instrument, (3) HRS § 706-662 is facially
unconstitutional in violation of the Sixth Amendment and is,
thus, void from inception, (4) the court did not have
jurisdiction to impose an extended sentence pursuant to HRS §
706-662 because it was invalidated by Maugaotega , (5) the court
did not have subject matter jurisdiction to impose an extended
sentence pursuant to HRS § 706-662 because it was invalidated.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
5[Id.]
On May 27, 2016, the Circuit Court issued its Findings
of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Petition to
Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner
from Custody Without a Hearing, which denied the Fourth Petition.
On appeal, Freitas contends (1) HRS § 706-662 violated
his Sixth Amendment right to a fair and impartial jury, (2) he
was not given an opportunity to conduct voir dire in a fashion
that would adequately address extended term sentencing issues in
violation of his Sixth Amendment right, (3) an extended term
sentencing hearing was a separate criminal proceeding from trial
of the underlying offense, (4) the State was required to
establish all relevant issues beyond a reasonable doubt, (5) he
was entitled to a full panoply of relevant protections under due
process, (6) the rules of evidence applied to extended term
sentencing, thus, the court erred by admitting the presentence
report into evidence, (7) the record failed to show that he was
represented by counsel during prior offenses for which he was
convicted or that he intentionally and voluntarily waived his
right to counsel, (8) he was entitled to written notice of any
evidence applicable to the imposition of an extended term, thus,
it must be alleged in the charging document, (9) HRS § 706-662
was invalidated by Maugaotega  in 2007, and (10) the court did not
have subject matter jurisdiction to impose an extended sentence
pursuant to HRS § 706-662 because it was invalidated.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Freitas' points of error as follows:
Freitas did not prove the existence of extraordinary
circumstances to justify his failure to raise points of error on
appeal (1) and (2) in his prior petitions.  Therefore, relief is
unavailable.  HRPP Rule 40(a)(3).
Points of error on appeal (3), (4), (5), (6) and (7)
were not raised in the Fourth Petition.  Thus, Freitas cannotNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
6point to where in the record the alleged error was objected to or
brought to the attention of the court below.  Therefore, these
points of error on appeal are waived.  HRAP Rule 28(b)(4).  In
addition, Freitas did not prove the existence of extraordinary
circumstances to justify his failure to raise the issues in his
prior petitions.  Therefore, relief is unavailable.  HRPP Rule
40(a)(3).
Points of error on appeal (8), (9) and (10) were
previously raised and ruled upon in Freitas' prior petitions. 
Therefore, relief is not available.  HRPP Rule 40(a)(3).
As this court has previously held when affirming the
denial of Freitas' Third Petition, Maugaotega  does not apply
retroactively to his conviction.  Thus, at the time of his
sentencing, HRS § 706-662 was valid.  Therefore, the Circuit
Court did not lack jurisdiction to impose an extended term
sentence, pursuant to HRS § 706-662, at the time it imposed an
extended sentence in Freitas' case.
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Findings of
Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying Petition to Vacate,
Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to Release Petitioner from
Custody Without a Hearing, filed on May 27, 2016 in the Circuit
Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawaii, June 28, 2017. #
On the briefs:
Melvin De Freitas Jr.
Petitioner-Appellant.
Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Respondent-Appellee.,Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge