     NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-20-0000497 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI
#I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
MICHAEL PALANI MAWAE, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO.  5CPC-19-0000065) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Michael Palani Mawae (Mawae
) 
appeals from the July 15, 2020 Amended Judgment of Guilty 
Conviction and Probation Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of 
the Fifth Circuit (C
ircuit Court).1 On February 10, 2020, 
pursuant to a plea agreement with Plaintiff-Appellee State of 
Hawai# i (State), Mawae pled no contest to second-degree burglary 
amended from first-degree burglary, Abuse of Family or Household 
Members, and the State agreed to dismiss a charge of fourth-
degree criminal property damage. 
Mawae was sentenced to four 
years of probation with one year of incarceration, with credit for time served for the burglary charge, and two years of 
1 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
probation for the abuse charge. The Circuit Court also ordered 
restitution in the amount of $2,400 to the victim, which was 
later reduced to $1,904. 
On appeal, Mawae contends that the Circuit Court erred 
by abusing its discretion when it sentenced Mawae: (1) to pay 
restitution; and (2) to a term of incarceration "in excess of the 
Court's inclination . . . ." 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we 
affirm. 
No Error Regarding Restitution 
Mawae contends that the Circuit Court "abused its 
discretion" by sentencing Mawae to pay restitution because Mawae 
was "induced to enter into a plea agreement in part because of 
the State's representation that 'it is not aware of any 
restitution that shall be sought.'" 
In the plea agreement letter that was attached to the 
February 10, 2020 Change of Plea (COP) form, Mawae agreed inter 
alia, to pay restitution in an amount to be determined by Adult 
Client Probation Services (ACPS), and the State also represented 
that it was "not aware" of any restitution being sought by the 
victim, as follows: 
15. The Defendant agrees to pay restitution in an amount
determined by Adult Client Probation Services as to all
charges, including any cases or charges to be dismissed , and
will not request a restitution hearing; the Defendant agrees
to execute a Free Standing Order of Restitution as to thefull amount of restitution. The Defendant understands that the Court must order restitution for reasonable and verifiable losses requested by a victim or when the crimevictim compensation fund makes an award; that restitutioncannot be waived or converted to community service; andthat, unless the amount of restitution has already beendetermined, the Court cannot determine what a possible 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
restitution amount will be until a later time. (State is
not aware of any restitution that shall be sought)[.] 
(first emphasis in original and second emphasis added). In the 
May 27, 2020 pre-sentence report prepared for Mawae's June 4, 
2020 sentencing date, the "Victim/Restitution Information" 
section stated that the victim could not be located. The victim 
contacted the prosecutor via email on May 29, 2020, requesting 
$2,400 in restitution for therapy visits, supported by a letter 
from her therapist. The victim also attended the June 4, 2020 
sentencing and addressed the Circuit Court. The State requested 
$2,400 in restitution for the victim, which the Circuit Court 
ordered Mawae to pay. After sentencing, Mawae filed a First 
Amended Motion for Reconsideration of Sentence requesting an 
evidentiary restitution hearing and for the Circuit Court to 
strike the restitution because the request was not vetted by 
ACPS. At the first hearing on the motion on July 2, 2020, the 
Circuit Court directed the prosecutor to submit the victim's 
restitution request to ACPS, as stated in the plea agreement. 
ACPS subsequently determined that restitution of $1,904 was 
reasonable, and at the continued hearing on the reconsideration 
motion on July 9, 2020, the Circuit Court reduced the restitution 
to $1,904 from $2,400. 
Mawae claims that the State's representation in the 
plea offer letter about being unaware of restitution being 
sought, was ambiguous, and that any ambiguity in a plea agreement 
"is strictly construed in favor of the defendant," citing State 
v. Nakano, 131 Hawai# i 1, 7, 313 P.3d 690, 696 (2013) (citation 
omitted). 
Mawae argues that despite the Circuit Court's 
advisements regarding restitution during the change of plea 
hearing, "a Defendant might reasonable [sic] conclude that such a 
warning does not matter if they have reason to believe that no 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
restitution will be sought by the victim." Mawae's contentions 
are without merit. 
The State's representation in the plea agreement that 
it was unaware of restitution being sought was not ambiguous, nor 
did it render the plea agreement ambiguous. Immediately 
preceding this statement in the plea agreement letter is an 
advisement that "unless the amount of restitution has already 
been determined, the Court cannot determine what a possible 
restitution amount will be until a later time." In addition, the 
Circuit Court gave similar on-the-record advisements to Mawae 
during the COP colloquy that it was legally obligated to order 
restitution "for reasonable and verifiable losses claimed by the 
victim," that restitution could not be waived, and that the 
Circuit Court could not determine restitution until a later time, 
in accordance with State v. Kealoha, 142 Hawai# i 46, 414 P.3d 98 
(2018).2 Mawae confirmed that he understood these advisements.3 
2 In Kealoha, the Hawai #i Supreme Court held that trial courts must
ensure that defendants understand the penalty of restitution that could be
imposed as a consequence of conviction, and accordingly required that: 
(1) the court must order restitution for reasonable andverifiable losses requested by a "victim" or when the crimevictim compensation fund makes an award; (2) the courtcannot waive the restitution amount or convert it to community service; and (3) unless the amount of restitutionhas already been determined, the court cannot determine whata possible restitution amount will be until a later time. 
142 Hawai #i at 61-62, 414 P.3d at 113-14 (emphasis in original). 
3 The COP hearing transcript provides in pertinent part: 
THE COURT: . . . So regarding restitution, the Court
must order restitution for reasonable and verifiable losses claimed by the victim or when the crime victim compensationfund makes an award. The Court cannot waive restitution or convert it to community service work. The Court cannot determine the amount of restitution until a later time. 
So, Mr. Mawae, is that your understanding of the plea
bargain? 
4          
           
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The record reflects that Mawae was clearly apprised before he 
entered his No Contest plea, that restitution was required if 
requested, the restitution amount had not yet been determined, 
and that the amount could not be determined until a later time. 
There was no ambiguity in the plea agreement itself, and the 
Circuit Court's restitution advisements complied with Kealoha, 
id. Thus, Mawae's contention is without merit. 
Assuming arguendo that the State's representation in 
the plea agreement letter that it was unaware of any restitution 
being sought was ambiguous, Mawae has not articulated the relief 
he seeks on appeal. Mawae relies on Nakano for the proposition 
that "any ambiguity in the plea agreement is strictly construed 
in favor of the defendant," 131 Hawai# i at 7, 313 P.3d at 696, 
but Nakano also states that the remedy for a defendant who successfully rescinds a plea agreement is to be "returned to 
their status prior to their plea agreement . . . ." Id. at 8 
n.8, 313 P.3d at 697 n.8 (citation omitted). This means that "the defendant must again face all of the charges in the original 
complaint." Id. In Mawae's situation, a rescinded "global plea 
agreement" means Mawae must face not only the original charges in this case, but all of the original charges in the three 
additional Fifth Circuit criminal cases covered by the 
agreement.
4 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, your Honor. 
THE COURT: [Defense Counsel], is that your
understanding of the plea bargain? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Yes, your Honor. 
(emphases added). 
4 The global plea agreement in this case encompassed four criminal
cases, consisting of three Circuit Court matters which included the current case
5CPC-19-000065, 5CPC-19-000092, and 5CPC-19-000217, and one district court 
5  
         
              
               
             
     NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 In this case, however, Mawae is not claiming that his 
pleas were not knowingly and voluntarily entered due to the 
restitution ambiguity he complains of; nor is Mawae requesting to 
withdraw his pleas. In fact, Mawae repeatedly asserts in his 
Opening Brief and Reply Brief that he is not requesting to 
withdraw his pleas in this appeal.5 The Opening Brief does not 
present any argument regarding the specific relief sought as to 
restitution, even assuming arguendo the plea agreement is 
ambiguous. On the contrary, the Opening Brief only specifies 
what relief Mawae does not want. This does not comply with 
Hawai# i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(9) 
(requiring that the relief sought be specified with 
particularity). 
An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has 
clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregards principles of 
law to the substantial detriment of a party. State v. Austin, 
143 Hawai# i 18, 29, 422 P.3d 18, 29 (2018) (citation omitted). 
The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in sentencing 
Mawae to pay restitution, and this contention is without merit. 
See id. 
No Error Regarding Sentencing 
Mawae contends that the Circuit Court "abused its 
discretion by varying from its sentencing inclination" and 
sentencing Mawae to probation with a term of incarceration that 
was beyond the credit for time served that Mawae claims he 
matter, 5DCW-20-000039. 
5 The Opening Brief states: "Mr. Mawae is not necessarily requesting
an opportunity to withdraw his plea." The Reply Brief reiterates: "Mr. Mawae is 
not asking that the plea agreement be set aside," and "If this Court is of theview that Mr. Mawae must withdraw his plea to secure the relief requested, hedoes not wish to do so." 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
expected to receive. Mawae specifically argues that the Circuit 
Court's "apparent representations during plea discussions amount 
to statements of 'inclination'" under State v. Sanney, 141 
Hawai# i 14, 404 P.3d 280 (2017). Mawae acknowledges, however, 
that at the change of plea hearing, the Circuit Court "did explain to Mr. Mawae that it did not view its inclination to be 
binding." 
Preliminarily, the record does not reflect that the 
Circuit Court gave a sentencing inclination; on the contrary, the 
record reflects that the Circuit Court explicitly did not promise 
any particular sentence. The only evidence of the sentencing 
"inclination" comes from Mawae himself, in the COP form: 
. . . . 
8. I have not been promised any kind of deal or
favor or leniency by anyone for my plea, except
that I have been told that the government hasagreed as follows (if none, write "None"): 
See plea offer attached. 
The defendant 
was also told by the undersigned attorney thatafter discussions between the Court and counsel for both parties the court indicated that itthought the defendant had done enough time andif he entered a plea the Court would impose asentence of probation upon such terms andconditions as the Court deems appropriate.
 /   I know that the court is not required to
follow any deal or agreement between the
Government and me. I know that the court has not promised me leniency.
The court has agreed to follow the plea
agreement pursuant to Rule 11, Hawaii Rules ofPenal Procedure. 
9. I further state that (if none, write
"None"):
The defendant understands that the [sic]
while this plea is not tendered pursuant to Rule
11 the plea is tendered in consideration of whathe was told by his attorney as reflected above. 
(emphases added). Mawae claims that this statement in the COP 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
form constituted an inclination for a sentence of credit for time 
served that he expected to receive. However, the words "credit 
for time served" are not in the COP form. The words "defendant 
had done enough time" in the COP form appeared in the same 
sentence as the words "the Court would impose a sentence of 
probation upon such terms and conditions as the Court deems 
appropriate." This combination of phrases does not convey a 
credit for time served sentence. Mawae's premise that these 
words constitute a credit for time served inclination is 
unfounded. 
The record reflects that the Circuit Court explicitly 
informed Mawae that the Circuit Court was "not bound" by "any 
statement made" during any discussions with the attorneys, and 
the Circuit Court further reminded Mawae, more than once, that it 
had not made any promises, as follows: 
THE COURT: So when I look at paragraph
eight, it says -- in small print, it says: See plea offer
attached. The defendant was also told by the undersignedattorney that after discussions and the -- between theCourt and counsel for both parties, the Court indicatedthat it thought the defendant had done enough time, and ifhe entered a plea, the Court would impose a sentence ofprobation upon such terms and conditions as the Courtdeems appropriate. 
Okay. So here's the thing. I'm not making
any promises. You need to understand this is not a Rule 11 situation. I want to be clear. A Rule 11 situation means the Court is bound by any -- any statement made.I'm not bound by anything. I haven't promised youanything. So you need to be aware of the maximumpenalties. You understand that? So this is not a Rule 11. 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, your Honor. 
THE COURT: You understand that? Knowing
that I'm not bound by any discussions we had between theattorneys regarding this case, you still want to goforward with the change of plea proceeding today? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, your Honor. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(emphases added). At a later point during the colloquy, the 
Circuit Court again clearly disavowed any promise of leniency: 
THE COURT: Okay. So -- basically what I want to tell
you is that I haven't promised you leniency at time of
sentencing. The State can argue for whatever sentence.[Defense Counsel] can argue on your behalf for whateversentence is appropriate. The Court can decide whatever sentence is appropriate for you. So - basically everybodycan make arguments for the Court to decide what'sappropriate at the time of sentencing. You understand that? 
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, your Honor. 
(emphases added). 
The transcript of the COP hearing reflects that even if 
Mawae had incorrectly understood the Circuit Court to have stated 
during plea negotiations that it would not impose an open term of 
imprisonment or that it would not impose further incarceration as 
a condition of probation, the Circuit Court explicitly corrected 
any misimpression Mawae or Mawae's counsel may have had. 
Therefore, Mawae's contention that there was a "sentencing 
inclination" is not supported by the record, and is without 
merit. 
Mawae's argument relying on Sanney is also without 
merit. The Sanney Court set forth a new rule that: 
[i]f a defendant pleads guilty or no contest in response to
a court's sentencing inclination, but the court laterdecides not to follow the inclination, then the court mustso advise the defendant and provide the defendant with theopportunity to affirm or withdraw the plea of guilty or nocontest. 
141 Hawai# i at 25, 404 P.3d at 291. In Sanney, the trial court's 
sentencing inclination of probation with up to 18 months 
incarceration was clearly on the record and confirmed by the 
trial court. Id. at 17, 404 P.3d at 283. Sanney does not apply 
to this case because this record does not show that there was a sentencing inclination, nor does it show that Mawae pled no 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
contest "in response" to any inclination. Id. at 25, 404 P.3d at 
291. 
Mawae also complains on appeal that the Circuit Court 
"did not, however, provide Mr. Mawae with an opportunity to 
withdraw his plea at sentencing, as is required by Sanney." This 
argument is waived because Mawae never moved, or requested to 
withdraw his plea at the sentencing hearing on June 4, 2020; nor 
did Mawae request to withdraw his plea at the reconsideration 
hearings on July 2 or July 9, 2020. See State v. Hoglund, 71 
Haw. 147, 150, 785 P.2d 1311 1313 (1990) ("Generally, the failure to properly raise an issue at the trial level precludes a party 
from raising that issue on appeal."). 
Finally, Mawae presents no authority for his requested 
relief that his sentence "be reduced in accordance with the 
Court's sentencing inclination." Under the authority of Sanney 
that Mawae himself relies on, the remedy is for the trial court 
to give Mawae an "opportunity" to affirm or withdraw his no 
contest plea. 141 Hawai# i at 25, 404 P.3d at 291. See also 
Nakano, 131 Hawai# i at 8 n.8, 313 P.3d at 697 n.8 (recognizing 
that "ordinarily, a defendant who successfully rescinds a plea 
agreement is returned to their status prior to their plea 
agreement . . . ."). 
Yet, as noted supra
, Mawae takes the 
incongruous position in his opening and reply briefs, that he is 
not requesting to withdraw his plea.6 No authority supports 
6 Mawae explains his inconsistent position as follows: 
If this Court is of the view that Mr. Mawae must 
withdraw his plea to secure the relief requested, he does
not wish to do so. However, Mr. Mawae's position is thathe has detrimentally relied upon the terms of the pleaagreement and endured 6 months of incarceration since thedate that he was sentenced in reliance upon its terms. In such circumstances, requiring withdrawal of the plea wouldbe unfair to Mr. Mawae, just as it would be unfair to allow 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mawae's requested relief for a reduced term of incarceration 
without withdrawing his pleas and undoing the global plea 
agreement, and thus Mawae's contention is patently without merit. 
The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in the sentence it 
imposed on Mawae, which was consistent with the plea agreement. 
See Austin, 143 Hawai# i at 29, 422 P.3d at 29. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Amended 
Judgment of Guilty Conviction and Probation Sentence, entered on 
July 15, 2020, in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit, is 
affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 12, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
Matthew Mannisto 
(Law Office of MatthewMannisto)for Defendant-Appellant /s/ Keith K. HiraokaPresiding Judge
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate JudgeTracy MurakamiDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Kaua# i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
the State to reinstitute the cases dismissed under the plea
agreement. 
Mawae has not presented any authority supporting the above justification forthese inconsistent positions he advances on appeal. The authority of State v. Guity, 144 Hawai #i 557, 445 P.3d 138 (2019) Mawae relies on in the Reply
Brief, is inapposite. The 
Guity Court held that where the ICA correctly
concluded that Guity was entitled to withdraw his plea in one of his criminalcases in a global plea agreement, Guity must be allowed to withdraw his pleain the remaining criminal case that was included in the agreement. Id.
 at 
563, 445 P.3d at 144. 
11 