_________________________ 
_________________________ NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOS. CAAP-13-0003274, CAAP-13-0000406 and CAAP-12-0001085
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
SHAUN WRIGHT and ANNETT WRIGHT,
Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants/Appellees,
v.
 
MIYAKE CONCRETE ACCESSORIES, INC., DOE DEFENDANTS 1-100,
Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/
Third-Party Plaintiff/Appellant,
and
 
MIYAKE CONCRETE ACCESSORIES, INC.,
Third-Party Plaintiff/Appellant,
v.
 
SAMUEL S. KIYABU, dba KIYABU CONSTRUCTION, INC.,
SANDPIPER CONSTRUCTION, INC., a Hawaii corporation,
DESPINS GENERAL CONSTRUCTION, INC., a Hawaii corporation,
BRIAN SHIMOMURA and BRIAN SHIMOMURA AND ASSOCIATES, LLC,
a Hawaii Limited Liability Company, JOHN DOES 1-10,
Third-Party Defendants/Appellees,
(CIVIL NO. 09-1-0748(3))
 
DESPINS GENERAL CONSTRUCTION, INC.,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellee,
v.
 
SHAUN WRIGHT and ANNETT WRIGHT,
Defendants/Counterclaim-Plaintiffs/Appellees,
and
 
SHAUN WRIGHT and ANNETT WRIGHT,
Counter-Claimants/Appellees,
v.
 
DESPINS GENERAL CONSTRUCTION, INC.,
Counter-Defendant/Appellee
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-0191(3))
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
MIYAKE CONCRETE ACCESSORIES, INC., a Hawaii Corporation,
Plaintiff/Appellant,
v.
 
BRIAN S. SHIMOMURA and BRIAN SHIMOMURA AND ASSOCIATES, LLC,
a Hawaii Liability Company, Defendants/Appellees
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-0153(3))
 
APPEALS FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this consolidated appeal, Defendant/Third-Party
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Miyake Concrete Accessories, Inc. (Miyake)
 
appeals from the following orders filed in the Circuit Court of
 
the Second Circuit (circuit court)1: 
(1) the "Order Denying Defendant and Third-Party
 
Plaintiff Miyake Concrete Accessories, Inc.'s Motion for Relief
 from Court Ordered Settlement Agreement Filed on August 15, 2012;
 Order Granting Plaintiffs Shaun and Annett Wright's Motion to
 Compel Compliance with Settlement Agreement and Order Filed on
 August 10, 2012" (Order Denying Motion for Relief from Settlement
Agreement; Order Granting Motion to Compel Compliance With
Settlement Agreement), filed on November 15, 2012; 
(2) the "Order Denying Defendant and Third-Party
 
Plaintiff Miyake Concrete Accessories, Inc.'s Motion to Set Aside
 
Garnishee Summons Filed February 13, 2013, and to Release
 Garnishees Bank of Hawaii, First Hawaiian Bank, and Central
 Pacific Bank, Filed February 21, 2013, and Garnishee Order"
(Order Denying Motion to Set Aside Garnishee Summons), filed on
 
April 8, 2013; and 
(3) the "Order Granting in Part and Denying Without
 
Prejudice in Part Plaintiffs Shaun and Annett Wright's Motion to
 
Compel Defendant Miyake Concrete Accessories Inc. to Execute a
 Stipulation for Partial Dismissal With Prejudice in Accordance
 With the Parties' Settlement Agreement and for Award of
 Attorneys' Fees and Costs Filed June 14, 2013" (Order to Execute
Stipulation for Dismissal with Prejudice), filed on September 3,
 
2013. 
1
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Miyake contends the circuit court:
 
(A) erred when it denied Miyake's Motion for Relief from the
 
Settlement Agreement; (B) erred when it granted Plaintiffs-
Appellees Shaun and Annett Wrights' (the Wrights) Motion to
 
Compel Compliance with Settlement Agreement; (C) erred when it
 
denied Miyake's Motion for Leave to File Supplemental Answer and
 Counterclaim; (D) lacked jurisdiction and erred when it granted
 the Wrights' Motion for Entry of Judgment; (E) lacked
 jurisdiction and erred when it issued the garnishee summons and
 erred when it awarded attorneys' fees and costs; and (F) lacked
 jurisdiction and erred when it granted in part and denied in part
 the Wrights' Motion to Compel Miyake to Execute Stipulation for
 Partial Dismissal.
 
For the reasons discussed below, we affirm in part,

 
vacate in part, and remand for further proceedings.
I. Background
 
This appeal involves challenges to post-judgment orders 
related to a Settlement Agreement entered into with the intent of 
settling three consolidated civil proceedings.2 The consolidated 
civil proceedings all arose from contract disputes related to the construction of the Wrights' home in Kula, Maui, Hawai
'i. 
3
On January 25, 2012, the Wrights, Miyake,  Despins
4
General Construction, Inc. (Despins),  and Brian Shimomura and
5
Brian Shimomura & Associates, LLC (Shimomura)  entered the terms
 
2 The three civil proceedings are: (1) Wright v. Miyake, Civil No. 09­
1-0748(3); (2) Despins v. Wright, Civil No. 10-1-0191(3); and (3) Miyake v.
Shimomura, Civil No. 11-1-0153(1).
3 On November 27, 2006, Miyake as Surety signed a Uniform Performance
Bond, Assignment of Contract and Agreement Bond (Uniform Performance Bond).
Miyake agreed that in the event that Samuel S. Kiyabu dba S. Kiyabu
Construction (Kiyabu) (the general contractor for the Wrights' home) defaulted
under the construction contract with the Wrights, Miyake, "shall within thirty
(30) days of determination of such default, take over and assume completion of
said Contract and become entitled to the payment of the balance of the
contract price." 
4
 The Wrights hired Despins as their general contractor after Kiyabu
defaulted on its obligation as general contractor under the contract for the
construction of the Wrights' home.
5
 Shimomura was the architect of record for the construction of the
 
Wrights' home. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of their Settlement Agreement onto the record. The terms of the
 
Settlement Agreement were, in pertinent part, as follows: (1) the
 total settlement amount was $390,000 to be paid to the Wrights
 consisting of $90,000 held by First Hawaiian Bank, $150,000 paid
 on behalf of Miyake, $75,000 paid on behalf of Despins, and
 $75,000 paid on behalf of Shimomura; and (2) "[t]he settlement
 agreement will be a mutual release and indemnity agreement. All
 the parties will be releasing all other parties in this case and
 all claims against each other that have been made or could have
 been [made] in this lawsuit." Each party confirmed on the record
 that they agreed to the terms of the Settlement Agreement. 
On May 25, 2012, Miyake filed a Motion to Enforce
 
Settlement Agreement.
6 Miyake argued that the parties had agreed
 
to all the terms and language in the Settlement Agreement except
 for the language of the mutual indemnification provision that was
 agreed to on the record on January 25, 2012. Miyake included in
 its motion a mutual indemnity provision that it argued should be
 enforced because it accurately reflected the terms agreed to on
 the record. On June 18, 2012, Despins filed a Memorandum in
 Opposition to Miyake's Motion to Enforce Settlement Agreement or
 in the Alternative Cross-Motion to Enforce Settlement Agreement.
 Despins requested that the circuit court deny Miyake's Motion to
 Enforce Settlement Agreement and instead grant and enforce the
 Settlement Agreement that Despins attached to its memorandum,
 which it claimed accurately reflected the settlement agreement
 the parties had entered onto the record on January 25, 2012. 
On June 20, 2012, the circuit court filed an "Order (1)
 
Denying [Miyake's] Motion to Enforce Settlement Agreement; (2)
 Denying [Despins'] Cross-Motion to Enforce Settlement Agreement;
 and (3) Issuing Court's Order Enforcing Settlement Agreement"
(Order Enforcing Settlement Agreement). In the order, the
 
circuit court stated that Miyake's and Despins' proposed
 
6
 Many of the filings in this case were filed ex officio in the Circuit
Court of the First Circuit. "The ex officio filing date of any document
prevails over the file-stamped date to the extent that the dates differ from
each other." Cochrane v. Azman, No. 29562, 2011 WL 661714, at *1 n.3 (Haw.
App. Feb. 22, 2011) (mem. op.) (citations omitted).
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
settlement agreements were identical except for 
(1) the language in paragraph 4 of each proposed settlement
agreement relating to mutual indemnity, (2) DESPINS'
proposed settlement agreement contains an additional
paragraph, to wit, paragraph 10 relating to surety's
reservation of rights, and (3) because of the additional
paragraph in DESPINS' proposed settlement agreement, all
subsequent paragraphs are one number higher than the same
paragraphs in MIYAKE'S proposed settlement agreement. 
The circuit court concluded:
 
While the parties have been unable to agree on the
specific language for the mutual indemnity paragraph, there
is no dispute that on January 25, 2012 the parties placed on
the record the essential terms of their settlement
 agreement. With respect to mutual indemnity, the parties
confirmed on the record the following agreement:
The settlement agreement will be a mutual

release and indemnity agreement. All parties
will be releasing all other parties in [these
cases] and all claims against each other that
have been made or could have been [made] in
[these lawsuits].
There is no dispute concerning what was placed on the
record on January 25, 2012. Accordingly, the court will
enforce the mutual indemnity language agreed to by the
parties at the time the settlement agreement was placed on
the record and not the language proposed by MIYAKE and
DESPINS.
 
On August 10, 2012, the Wrights filed a Motion to
 
Compel Compliance with Settlement Agreement and Order. In the
 
Memorandum in Support of Motion, the Wrights stated, "[t]o date,
 Miyake has not complied with the terms of the settlement
 agreement by paying the required consideration" and "the Wrights
 have not received any payments from the parties of the
 consideration due under the terms of the parties' settlement
 agreement." 
On August 15, 2012, Miyake filed a Motion for Relief
 
From Settlement Agreement pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 7 and 60(b).
 
On September 25, 2012, Miyake filed a Motion for Leave
 
to File First Supplemental Answer and Counterclaim Against the
 Wrights. Miyake contended that new transactions, occurrences,
 and events happened since Miyake filed its Answer on November 5,
 2009, "which entitle Miyake to supplement said Answer with
 affirmative defenses against the Wrights' claim for payment under
 the Settlement Agreement and to also supplement said Counterclaim
 by adding claims for declaratory judgment, breach of the
 
5

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Settlement Agreement and impairment of Miyake's suretyship
 
status."
 
On November 15, 2012, the circuit court filed the Order
 
Denying Motion for Relief from Settlement Agreement; Order
 Granting Motion to Compel Compliance With Settlement Agreement.
 In the order, the circuit court directed and ordered the Clerk of
 the Court to sign the Settlement Agreement on behalf of any party
 who did not submit their signature pages by November 13, 2012. 
On December 17, 2012, Miyake filed a Notice of Appeal
 
from the Order Denying Motion for Relief from Settlement
 Agreement; Order Granting Motion to Compel Compliance With
 Settlement Agreement, which became appellate case No. CAAP-12­1085.
 
On December 17, 2012, the circuit court filed an Order
 
Denying Miyake's Motion for Leave to File First Supplemental
 Answer and Counterclaim Against the Wrights (Order Denying Motion
for Leave to File First Supplemental Answer and Counterclaim). 
On December 21, 2012, the Wrights filed a Motion for
 
Entry of Judgment, requesting a Judgment in favor of the Wrights
 
and against Miyake to effectuate the terms and intent of the
 Settlement Agreement and the Court's Order Compelling Compliance.
 On January 2, 2013, Miyake filed a Memorandum in Opposition to
 the Wrights Motion for Entry of Final Judgment. On February 11,
 2013, the circuit court filed an Order Granting the Wrights'
 Motion for Entry of Judgment. However, the record does not
 reflect that a Judgment was thereafter entered. 
On February 13, 2013, the Wrights filed five (5)
 
separate Ex Parte Motions for Issuance of Garnishee Summons, in
 which the Wrights requested that the circuit court issue
 Garnishee Summons directed to Central Pacific Bank, First
 Hawaiian Bank, Bank of Hawaii, Territorial Savings Bank, and
 American Savings Bank. The circuit court granted all five of the
 motions.
 
On February 21, 2013, Miyake filed a Motion to Set
 
Aside Garnishee Summons. On April 8, 2013, the circuit court
 filed the Order Denying Motion to Set Aside Garnishee Summons,
 which included an order that First Hawaiian Bank "pay the Wrights
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the sum of $150,000.00, interest of $4,767.60 plus per diem
 
interest of $41.10 after March 15, 2013, attorneys' fees of
 $21,882.67 and costs of $1,586.33."
 
On April 12, 2013, Miyake filed a Notice of Appeal,

 
appealing from the Order Denying Motion to Set Aside Garnishee
 Summons, which became appellate case No. CAAP-13-406.
 
On June 14, 2013, the Wrights filed a Motion to Compel
 
Miyake to Execute a Stipulation for Partial Dismissal in
 Accordance with the Parties' Settlement Agreement and For Award
 of Attorneys' Fees and Costs. The Wrights sought an order
 compelling Miyake to execute a stipulation for partial dismissal
 of all claims by and against Despins and Shimomura.
 
On July 3, 2013, the circuit court held a hearing
 
regarding the Wrights' Motion to Compel Miyake to Execute a
 Stipulation for Partial Dismissal. At the hearing, the court
 orally ordered the parties to sign a stipulation according to
 what they agreed to in the Settlement Agreement, which provides
 for all parties dismissing all claims, not a partial dismissal. 
The circuit court also authorized the Clerk of Court to execute
 the stipulation if the stipulation was not signed within seven
 (7) days of the hearing.
 
On July 15, 2013, a Stipulation for Dismissal with
 
Prejudice of All Claims and All Parties was filed, in which the
 Wrights, Miyake, Despins, and Shimomura stipulated, pursuant to
 HRCP Rule 41(a)(1)(B), that the Complaints, Third-Party
 Complaints, Counterclaims, Cross-Claims, and other claims were
 dismissed with prejudice. Counsel for the Wrights, Despins, and
 Shimomura signed the stipulation and the Clerk of Court signed
 for Miyake's counsel. On September 3, 2013, the circuit court 
filed the Order to Execute Stipulation for Dismissal with
 Prejudice.
 
On September 6, 2013, Miyake filed its Notice of Appeal
 
from the Order to Execute Stipulation for Dismissal with
 Prejudice, which became appellate case No. CAAP-13-3274.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
II. Standards of Review
 
A. HRCP Rule 60(b)
 
"A circuit court's denial of a motion for relief from 
judgment filed pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b) is reviewed for abuse of discretion." Leslie v. Estate of Tavares, 91 Hawai
'i 394, 
399, 984 P.2d 1220, 1225 (1999). "The trial court abuses its discretion when it clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Id. (citation 
omitted).
B. Motion to Set Aside Garnishee Order
 
The decision whether to grant or deny a motion to
dissolve a garnishee order is a question of law. "Questions
of law are reviewable de novo under the right/wrong standard
of review." Ditto v. McCurdy, 90 Hawai' i 345, 351, 978 P.2d
783, 789 (1999) [citations omitted]. Under the de novo or 
right/wrong standard, this court "examine[s] the facts andanswer[s] the question without being required to give any
weight to the trial court's answer to it." Pelosi v. Wailea 
Ranch Estates, 91 Hawai' i 478, 487, 985 P.2d 1045 (1999). 
Bank of Haw. v. DeYoung, 92 Hawai 'i 347, 351, 992 P.2d 42, 46 
(2000).
C. Statutory Interpretation
 
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law
 
reviewable de novo under the right/wrong standard. Id.
 
III. Discussion
 
A. Jurisdiction Over Points of Error C and D.
 This case involves three appeals from three "post­
judgment" orders. The appealable "judgment" was the June 20, 
2012 Order Enforcing Settlement Agreement because under the collateral order doctrine, an order enforcing a settlement agreement is a collateral order which is appealable.
7 Cook v. 
Sur. Life Ins., Co., 79 Hawai 'i 403, 407-08, 903 P.2d 708, 712-13 
(App. 1995). The June 20, 2012 Order Enforcing Settlement Agreement qualifies as a "judgment" for purposes of the civil 
7
 "A collateral order is in that small class of orders which finally
determines claims of right separable from, and collateral to, rights asserted
in the action, too important to be denied review and too independent of thecause itself to require that appellate consideration be deferred until thewhole case is adjudicated." Cook v. Sur. Life Ins., Co., 79 Hawai' i 403, 407,
903 P.2d 708, 712 (1995) (citation, internal quotation marks, and bracketsomitted). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
procedure rules because under HRCP Rule 54(a), a "'[j]udgment" as
 
used in these rules includes a decree and any order from which an
 appeal lies." (Emphasis added.) None of the parties appealed
 from the Order Enforcing Settlement Agreement and therefore this
 court does not have jurisdiction to review the Order Enforcing
 Settlement Agreement.
 
However, once the circuit court entered the appealable 
"judgment" (i.e., the Order Enforcing Settlement Agreement), any subsequent post-judgment orders are appealable final orders under Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 641-1(a) (Supp. 2015) "if the order[s] end[ed] the proceedings, leaving nothing further to be accomplished." Ditto v. McCurdy, 103 Hawai
'i 153, 157, 80 P.3d 
974, 978 (2003). The three orders from which Miyake appealed — the (1) Order Denying Motion for Relief from Settlement Agreement; Order Granting Motion to Compel Compliance with Settlement Agreement; (2) Order Denying Motion to Set Aside Garnishee Summons; and (3) Order to Execute Stipulation for Dismissal with Prejudice — are all final appealable post-judgment orders because they ended the proceedings associated with each order, leaving nothing further to be accomplished. Thus, we have jurisdiction over the points of error related to the three orders from which Miyake appealed. In these circumstances, where Miyake appeals from post-judgment orders and did not appeal from a final judgment on all claims, "this court will only consider other orders which were preliminary rulings upon which the subject Order was predicated or were part of the series of orders which collectively led to that Order." Cook, 79 Hawai
'i at 409, 903 
P.2d at 714. 
In its opening brief, Miyake raises two points of error
 
(points of error C and D) related to two orders that were not
 referenced in any way in Miyake's notices of appeal. In point of
 error C, Miyake challenges the circuit court's Order Denying
 Motion for Leave to File First Supplemental Answer and
 Counterclaim. In point of error D, Miyake challenges the circuit
 court's Order Granting Motion for Entry of Judgment. Neither of
 the orders addressed in points of error C or D "were preliminary
 rulings upon which [an appealed order] was predicated or were
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
part of the series of orders which collectively led to [the 
appealed order]. Cook, 79 Hawai 'i at 409, 903 P.2d at 714; see 
also Chun v. Bd. of Trs. Of Emps. Ret. Sys., 92 Hawai 'i 432, 448, 
992 P.2d 127, 143 (2000) ("The notice of appeal 'shall designate the judgment, order[,] or part thereof appealed from.'" (quoting Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 3(c) (1996)). 
Therefore, we lack appellate jurisdiction to address
 
Miyake's points of error C and D regarding the Order Denying
 Motion for Leave to File First Supplemental Answer and
 Counterclaim and the Order Granting Entry of Judgment.
B.	 Order Denying Motion for Relief From Settlement
Agreement
 
1.	 HRCP Rule 60(b)(3)
 
Miyake asserts that the circuit court erred in denying
 
Miyake's August 15, 2012 Motion for Relief From Settlement
 
Agreement brought under HRCP Rule 60(b)(3). The circuit court
 denied Miyake's motion in its order issued on November 15, 2012.
 
Pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(3), Miyake contends that
 
the Wrights never intended to perform under the indemnity
 agreement and therefore misrepresented their intentions, because
 the Wrights disagreed that the indemnity provision in the
 Settlement Agreement indemnified Miyake against the counterclaims
 of Samuel S. Kiyabu dba S. Kiyabu Construction (Kiyabu), in a
 
separate litigation between Miyake and Kiyabu. That separate
 
litigation was not consolidated with the three civil actions in
 this case, but is related to the construction of the Wrights'
 home.
8
 
HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) provides:
 
(b) Mistakes; inadvertence; excusable neglect; newly
discovered evidence; fraud, etc. On motion and upon such
terms as are just, the court may relieve a party or a
party's legal representative from a final judgment, order,
or proceeding for the following reasons: . . . (3) fraud
(whether heretofore denominated intrinsic or extrinsic),
misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an adverse
party[.]
 
8
 On March 12, 2009, in Civil No. 09-1-094(3), Miyake filed a Complaint
against Kiyabu. On June 1, 2009, Kiyabu filed a Counterclaim against Miyake.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
To obtain relief under HRCP Rule 60(b)(3), "the movant 
must, (1) prove by clear and convincing evidence that the verdict 
was obtained through fraud, misrepresentation, or other misconduct[, and] (2) establish that the conduct complained of prevented the losing party from fully and fairly presenting his case or defense." Kawamata Farms, Inc. v. United Agri Prods., 86 
Hawai
'i 214, 252, 948 P.2d 1055, 1093 (1997) (citation omitted). 
Miyake contends it should be relieved from its duties
 
under the settlement agreement because the Wrights falsely
 represented their mutual indemnity agreement on the record.
 Miyake points to statements in the Wrights' Memorandum in
 Opposition to Miyake's Motion for Relief From Settlement
 Agreement, filed on September 17, 2012, as evidence of the
 Wrights' misrepresentations to Miyake about their intentions to
 perform under the indemnity provision. The following are the
 Wrights' statements that Miyake points to as establishing the
 Wrights' misrepresentations:
 
Miyake incorrectly indicates that "the Wrights
misrepresented (intentionally or negligently) their
agreement to indemnify [Miyake] against the Kiyabu
Counterclaim to induce [Miyake] to enter into the Settlement
Agreement." As indicated and confirmed in [Shimomura's]
Motion for Reconsideration and Relief from Order filed on
 July 18, 2012, all of the parties understood and agreed that
the intent of the settlement was that all of the parties
would receive complete releases from each other and that
parties would not be mired in any further litigation as a
result of actions by a settling party . . . . The intention
that no party would indemnify Miyake in its pursuit of
claims in the ongoing Kiyabu Lawsuit could not have been
made clearer to Miyake and, as such, there was no
misrepresentation by the Wrights. Any suggestion now by
Miyake that it entered into the instant settlement unaware
of this, is disingenuous at best.
 
(Emphasis added.) The above statements merely provide the
 
Wrights' position with regard to the indemnity agreement. Both
 Despins and Shimomura, in other documents, state a similar
 understanding that no party agreed it would indemnify Miyake from
 claims in its litigation with Kiyabu and the purpose of the
 Settlement Agreement was to release all claims against all
 parties to the Settlement Agreement.
 
For example, prior to Miyake's Motion for Relief From
 
Settlement Agreement, on July 18, 2012, Shimomura filed a Motion
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
for Reconsideration and Relief from Order Enforcing Settlement
 
Agreement. In its Memorandum in Support of Motion, Shimomura
 stated that Miyake's attempt to tender indemnification from the
 Kiyabu lawsuit under the terms of the Settlement Agreement was a
 "distorted interpretation of the indemnity provision[,] is
 contrary to the parties' contemplated scope of the indemnity[,]
 and violates the spirit behind the settlement reached on January
 25, 2012." Shimomura further stated that the intent of the
 Settlement Agreement was "that the parties would receive complete
 releases from one another." Thus, the Wrights' statements that
 Miyake points to do not establish any misrepresentations.
 
Next, Miyake contends under the "objective standard" 
set forth in Standard Management, Inc. v. Kekona, 99 Hawai
'i 125, 
53 P.3d 264 (App. 2001), that the Wrights cannot claim that they never misrepresented their intentions because they never stated on the record that they did not intend to indemnify Miyake against any claims made by Kiyabu. However, Kekona addresses a different issue than the issue in this case. Miyake quotes from portions of Kekona in which this court addresses whether "a binding settlement was in fact formed upon the mutual assent of both parties." Id. at 134, 53 P.3d at 273. In this appeal, the 
issue before this court is not whether there was mutual assent to form a binding settlement agreement. Rather, a binding settlement agreement was established when the circuit court issued its Order Enforcing Settlement Agreement on June 20 2012, and no party appealed from that order. Here, the issue on appeal is whether Miyake should be relieved from the June 20, 2012 Order Enforcing Settlement Agreement under HRCP Rule 60(b)(3) because of alleged misrepresentations by the Wrights. Thus, the "objective standard" from Kekona is inapplicable to this appeal. 
Miyake also asserts arguments in its opening brief that
 
the summary judgment standard should apply. In the alternative,
 Miyake contends if summary judgment is not warranted, Miyake is
 entitled to an evidentiary hearing on any material questions of
 fact. We disagree. Miyake did not appeal from the June 20, 2012
 Order Enforcing Settlement Agreement and cannot now contest that
 order. The subject November 15, 2012 order relevant to this
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
appeal was made pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(3). Therefore, the
 
summary judgment standard is inapplicable to this appeal.
 
Finally, we find no merit in Miyake's other contentions
 
that there were misrepresentations or fraud on the part of the
 Wrights in entering into the Settlement Agreement.
 
Miyake fails to show that the Settlement Agreement was
 
obtained through fraud, misrepresentation, or other misconduct. 
Therefore, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion when it
 denied Miyake's Motion for Relief from Settlement Agreement
 pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(3).
2. HRCP Rule 60(b)(5)
 
9
Pursuant to HRCP Rule 60(b)(5)  Miyake contends the
circuit court should have granted Miyake's Motion for Relief From

 
Settlement Agreement because Miyake's duty to pay the Wrights
 under the Settlement Agreement had been discharged and no longer
 existed.
 
HRCP Rule 60(b)(5) provides that the court may relieve

 
a party from a final judgment if "the judgment has been
 satisfied, released, or discharged, or a prior judgment upon
 which it is based has been reversed or otherwise vacated, or it
 is no longer equitable that the judgment should have prospective
 application[.]"
 
In its Motion For Relief From Settlement Agreement
 
filed in the circuit court, Miyake argued that the Wrights
 breached the Settlement Agreement by refusing to sign it and thus
 Miyake's suretyship status was somehow impaired and its
 obligations under the Settlement Agreement were discharged. On
 appeal, Miyake cites to provisions in the Restatement (Third) of
 Suretyship and Guaranty, as well as Honolulu Roofing Company v.
 Felix, 49 Haw. 578, 605, 426 P.2d 298, 317 (1967), to argue that
 its suretyship status was impaired and it was entitled to a pro
 tanto discharge of its duty to pay the Wrights under the
 Settlement Agreement. Miyake did not raise arguments based on
 
9
 In its opening brief, Miyake does not cite to HRCP Rule 60(b)(5) as
the basis for its argument. However, in its Motion for Relief from Settlement
Agreement, Miyake's argument for discharge is made pursuant to HRCP Rule
60(b)(5).
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Restatement (Third) of Suretyship and Guaranty or Felix in 
its Motion For Relief From Settlement Agreement, thus Miyake waived these arguments. See Assoc. of Apartment Owners of Wailea 
Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai
'i 97, 107, 58 P.3d 608, 618 
(2002) ("Legal issues not raised in the trial court are ordinarily deemed waived on appeal."). 
In any event, the record does not reflect that the
 
Wrights refused to sign the Settlement Agreement. Miyake
 contends that the Wrights' refusal to sign the settlement
 agreement occurred on July 6, 2012, citing to an email exchange
 between counsel for the parties. 
The email exchange, which occurred after the circuit
 
court entered its Order Enforcing Settlement Agreement on June
 20, 2012, consisted of the following. On July 2, 2012, counsel
 for Despins sent an email to counsel for Miyake stating: 
I have Despins signed page. [Counsel for the Wrights] is
obtaining the Wrights and will send it to me. [Counsel for
Shimomura] is also getting Shimomura's and will send it to
me. Do you want to send over Miyake's signature. I will
 compile all and send out to everyone with the Final
Settlement Agreement and exhibits.
 
Counsel for Miyake responded to counsel for Despins on the same
 
day stating "[p]lease advise when you receive Wrights' and
 Shimomura's signatures." 
On July 5, 2012, counsel for Miyake emailed counsel for
 
Despins asking "[a]ny response?" On the same day, counsel for
 Despins responded to counsel for Miyake stating, "I should be
 getting the Wright's [sic] signature today. I have not heard
 from [Counsel for Shimomura] on the status of Shimomura's
 signature." 
On July 6, 2012, counsel for Miyake emailed counsel for
 
Despins asking "[d]id you get the Wrights' signatures yet?" 
About an hour later, counsel for Miyake again wrote an email to
 counsel for Despins stating "[l]ooks like you might need the
 Court's assistance if you don't get all signatures by today. 
Let's set up a status conference for Monday." Within the hour on
 the same day, counsel for Shimomura responded to counsel for
 Miyake stating "I was not aware that there is a specific deadline
 to exchange our respective client's signatures. However, I have
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
been informed that Shimomura's signed agreement is in the mail. 
We will provide you with a copy as soon as we receive it." Also
 within the hour counsel for the Wrights responded to counsel for
 Miyake stating "I was also unaware of any deadlines. In any
 event, does everyone have their checks?" The response from the
 Wrights stating they were unaware of a deadline and asking if
 everyone has their checks ready is apparently what Miyake
 suggests constitutes the Wrights' refusal to sign the Settlement
 Agreement and thus, the discharge of Miyake's responsibility
 under the Settlement Agreement.
 
The circuit court's June 20, 2012 Order Enforcing
 
Settlement Agreement did not specify a deadline for the parties
 to sign the Settlement Agreement. Thus, the Wrights' statement
 that they were unaware of any deadlines and asking if everyone
 had their checks, does not appear to be a refusal to sign the
 Settlement Agreement. Miyake's arguments do not support relief
 under HRCP Rule 60(b)(5).
 
The circuit court did not abuse its discretion when it
 
denied Miyake's Motion for Relief from Settlement Agreement based
 on HRCP Rule 60(b)(5).
C.	 Order Granting Motion to Compel Compliance With
Settlement Agreement
 
Miyake contends that the circuit court erred when it
 
granted the Wrights' Motion to Compel Compliance with Settlement
 
Agreement because the Wrights' motion "was based solely upon
 false evidence taken out of context[.]" In addition, Miyake
 contends the Wrights' motion should have been denied because
 Miyake's Memorandum in Opposition to the Wrights Motion to Compel
 Compliance of Settlement Agreement attached a declaration of
 Junsuke Otsuka "showing specific facts that genuine issues of
 material fact existed."
 
The Wrights' August 10, 2012 Motion to Compel
 
Compliance With Settlement Agreement was filed after the circuit
 court filed the Order Enforcing Settlement Agreement on June 20,
 2012. In their motion, the Wrights sought an order compelling
 payment of the amounts owed to them under the Settlement
 Agreement. Miyake's arguments on appeal are again essentially a
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
challenge to the June 20, 2012 Order Enforcing Settlement 
Agreement, from which no party appealed. Miyake's arguments thus
 lack merit.
 
D. Order Denying Motion to Set Aside Garnishee Summons
 
Miyake contends that pursuant to HRS § 652-1(b) (1993),
 
the circuit court lacked jurisdiction and erred when it denied
 
Miyake's Motion to Set Aside Garnishee Summons because there was
 not a valid judgment in place at the time the Garnishee Summonses
 were entered.
 
The Wrights contend that the circuit court did not err
 
when it denied the Motion to Set Aside Garnishee Summons because
 the November 15, 2012 Order Granting Motion to Compel Compliance
 with Settlement Agreement was an appealable judgment under HRCP
 Rule 54(a).
10 Therefore, the Wrights contend that their motions
 
satisfied the requirements for post-judgment garnishment under
 HRS Chapter 652. In our view, however, whether an order is an
 appealable "judgment" under HRCP Rule 54(a) is a materially
 different issue than whether there is a judgment which can be
 enforced by way of garnishment.
 
HRS § 652-1(b) provides:
 
(b) After judgment. Wages may be garnisheed after
judgment at the rate specified in subsection (a). In any
action brought by a creditor against a debtor, the creditor
may, after judgment rendered in the creditor's favor,
request the court to summon any garnishee to appear
personally, upon a day appointed in the summons for hearing
the cause as against the garnishee, and make full
disclosure; or in any action brought in the district court
by a creditor against a debtor, the creditor may, ten days
after judgment rendered in the creditor's favor, file a
certified copy of the judgment and the creditor's affidavit
as to the amount due and unpaid on account of the judgment
with the employer of the judgment debtor and the employer
shall thereupon either file a disclosure within one week or
shall withhold from the wages of the judgment debtor the
amounts as provided herein and pay the same to the judgment
creditor.
 
(Emphasis added.) Additionally, HRS § 652-2 (1993 & Supp. 2015)
 
provides in pertinent part: "[i]f judgment is rendered in favor
 
10 HRCP Rule 54(a) provides: "'Judgment' as used in these rules
includes a decree and any order from which an appeal lies. A judgment shall
not contain a recital of pleadings, the report of a master, or the record of
prior proceedings."
 
16
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the plaintiff, and likewise in all cases in which the
 
garnishee is summoned after judgment, the garnishee fund, or such
 part thereof as may be sufficient for that purpose, shall be
 liable to pay the same."
 
"The primary purpose of a garnishment is to enforce the 
payment of a judgment." Int'l Sav. & Loan Ass'n. v. Wiig, 82 
Hawai
'i 197, 202, 921 P.2d 117, 122 (1996). Further, "[a] 
garnishment 'is an incident to or an auxiliary of judgment rendered in [the] principal action, and is resorted to as a means of obtaining satisfaction of judgment by reaching credits or property of judgment debtor.'" Id. (quoting Blacks Law 
Dictionary 680 (6th ed. 1990)); see also Frank F. Fasi Supply Co. v. Wigwam Inv. Co., 308 F. Supp. 59, 61 (D. Haw. 1969) (stating garnishment "generally pertains to the satisfaction of an indebtedness out of property or credits of the debtor in the possession of, or owing by, a third person"); 6 Am. Jur. 2d Attachment and Garnishment § 2 (2008) ("'Garnishment' is a proceeding in which the property, money, or credits of a debtor that are in the possession of another, i.e., the garnishee, are applied to the payment of a debt."); 6 Am. Jur. 2d Attachment and Garnishment § 44 (2008) ("As a general rule, a judgment must be definite and certain to be enforceable in a garnishment proceeding[.]"). Further, "[t]he remedy of garnishment under our statute is limited to actions brought by a 'creditor' against his 'debtor.'" Welsh v. Woods, 47 Haw. 252, 254, 386 P.2d 886, 887 
(1963). 
Thus, to execute on a judgment in garnishment 
proceedings, a creditor must first obtain a judgment in the creditor's favor that specifies payment by the debtor to the creditor. See Wiesenberg v. Univ. of Haw., 138 Hawai
'i 210, 217, 
378 P.3d 926, 933 (2016)(recognizing that additional language in an amended judgment, including language that specified amounts owed from the plaintiff to the defendant, "creates new obligations and legal consequences that did not exist under the Original Judgment[,]" including that the defendant could execute on the amended judgment by initiating a garnishment action); DeYoung, 92 Hawai
'i at 353, 992 P.2d at 48 ("It is well 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
established that under our garnishment statutes, HRS Chapter 652,
 
the debt must be owing at the time of the service of the
 garnishee process upon the garnishee, and that if the debt is
 contingent, the garnishment lien does not attach.")(citation and
 internal quotation marks omitted).
 
On December 21, 2012, the Wrights filed a Motion for
 
Entry of Judgment. On February 11, 2013, the circuit court filed
 the Order Granting Wrights' Motion for Entry of Judgment. 
However, based on a review of the record, a judgment was never
 entered. 
Although the Order Compelling Compliance with 
Settlement Agreement was an appealable order and thus a "judgment" as defined in HRCP Rule 54(a), it did not constitute a judgment for purposes of HRS §§ 652-1(b) and 652-2. The Order Compelling Compliance with Settlement Agreement was not otherwise a judgment and did not order Miyake to pay any sum to the Wrights. The order simply concluded that the Motion to Compel Compliance with Settlement Agreement was granted and it further ordered that "all parties shall submit their signature pages to [counsel for Despins] no later than October 2, 2012." The Clerk of Court was directed and ordered to sign the settlement agreement on behalf of any party that did not submit their signature pages by November 13, 2012. Even after the Settlement Agreement was fully executed, with the Court Clerk signing for Miyake, this did not convert the agreement to a judgment. Rather, the parties then had a binding contractual agreement. See Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc. v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co., 116 Hawai
'i 277, 288, 172 P.3d 1021, 1032 (2007) (stating that 
settlement agreements are a species of contract and are governed by principles of contract law). 
Given the above, we conclude that the circuit court
 
erred when it denied Miyake's Motion to Set Aside Garnishee
 Summons.
 
E. Stipulation for Dismissal
 
Miyake contends that the circuit court erred when it
 
entered the Order to Execute a Stipulation for Dismissal with
 Prejudice. Miyake contends that the stipulation must be vacated
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
because it was entered sua sponte, while an appeal was pending,
 
and without notice to Miyake of the court's decision to grant
 complete rather than partial dismissal, thereby denying Miyake
 its due process rights.
 
The Settlement Agreement provides:
 
15. Dismissal With Prejudice. Concurrently with the
execution and delivery of this Settlement Agreement and
subject to paragraph 11 above, counsel for the Parties shallexecute and cause a stipulation for dismissal with prejudiceto be filed in the Consolidated Lawsuits in accordance with Rule 41(a)(1)(B) and (c) of the Hawai
'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure. [11] 
On June 14, 2013, the Wrights filed a Motion to Compel

 
Miyake to Execute Stipulation for Partial Dismissal. In the
 
Memorandum in Support of Motion, the Wrights requested the
 circuit court enter an "Order enforcing the terms of the parties'
 settlement agreement by compelling Miyake to execute the
 Stipulation for Partial Dismissal of all claims by and against
 Despins and Shimomura or . . . to have the Clerk of the Court
 execute said document on behalf of Miyake." In the alternative,
 the Wrights requested that the circuit court dismiss the claims
 by and against Shimomura and Despins pursuant to HRCP Rule 41.
 
On June 24, 2013, Miyake filed its Memorandum in
 
Opposition to Motion to Compel Miyake to Execute Stipulation for
 Partial Dismissal. In the memorandum Miyake argued that the
 circuit court was not authorized to execute a "stipulation for
 partial dismissal" because the terms of the settlement agreement
 provided for a "stipulation for dismissal." Thus, to add the
 term "partial" constituted an "unauthorized alteration, 
amendment, modification or change to Paragraph 15 of the
 Settlement Agreement[.]" Miyake further argued that the 
Wrights' proposed Stipulation is unenforceable and must be
rejected because (1) the title and text fail to identify the
Wrights and Miyake as parties being dismissed, (2) it fails
to identify all of the claims being dismissed by the Wrights
and Miyake against Despins and Shimomura and (3) it fails to
identify the parties and claims that remain in the action or
to state that there are no remaining parties and/or claims
in the text.
 
11 This is quoted from the final unsigned Settlement Agreement attached
to Miyake's Motion for Order Directing Court Clerk to Sign Settlement
Agreement. The signed Settlement Agreement is not in the record, however the
parties do not dispute that this language is in the Settlement Agreement. 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On July 3, 2013, the circuit court held a hearing on
 
the Motion to Compel Miyake to Execute a Stipulation for Partial
 
Dismissal. At the hearing, with regard to a stipulation for
 
partial dismissal, Miyake stated:
 
We never agreed to sign this. We agreed to sign a
stipulation for dismissal, that's true. But this was before
 
[counsel for the Wrights], acting in bad faith, stalled that
Kiyabu trial, and now we are sitting here today without a
trial date.
 
Now, your Honor, the plain fact is that none of the
parties agreed to sign a partial stipulation for dismissal
and the plain fact is that if this partial stipulation for
dismissal is granted, then Despins and Shimomura are going
to be put into bad faith if they are forced to sign it; and
the case still won't be over.
 . . . .
 
So, your Honor, we believe that the motion should be
denied; and that if there is going to be a motion to compel
the execution of a stipulation, that it should be, if at
all, on the one which we agreed to sign, and not on one
which nobody has agreed to sign.
 
The circuit court stated the following at the hearing:
 
Here, in the Court's view, the parties did enter into
agreement, a settlement agreement. This particular motion
is asking the Court to issue an order with respect to a
stipulation for partial dismissal.
What I am going to do today is to order that the
parties sign the stipulation that they agreed to sign –- the
stipulation for dismissal that they agreed to sign at the
time they entered into settlement agreement; and that
relates to all of the parties.
So the order I am going to issue at this time is an
order that requires that to occur; and if doesn't occur . .
 . then the clerk of the court is authorized to execute the
 stipulation for dismissal that the parties agreed to. When
 I say, "stipulation for dismissal," I am talking about the
stipulation the parties agreed to originally, not the
stipulation for partial dismissal.
 
On July 15, 2013, a Stipulation for Dismissal With
 
Prejudice of All Claims and All Parties was filed in which the
 
Clerk of the Court signed for Miyake. Thereafter, on September
 3, 2013, the circuit court filed the Order to Execute Stipulation
 for Dismissal With Prejudice.
 
Based on the record, Miyake's contention that the
 
circuit court entered the order sua sponte and denied Miyake's
 due process rights is without merit. In Miyake's Memorandum in
 Opposition and at the hearing on the motion, Miyake argued that
 the Settlement Agreement called for a stipulation for dismissal
 with regard to all parties and not a partial stipulation for 
20

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dismissal. Thus, the circuit court essentially entered an order
 
consistent with Miyake's argument.
 
Miyake also contends that the circuit court did not
 
have jurisdiction to entertain the Wrights' motion because Miyake
 had an appeal pending.
 
"Generally, the filing of a notice of appeal divests 
the trial court of jurisdiction over the appealed case." TSA 
Int'l Ltd. v. Shimizu Corp., 92 Hawai
'i 243, 265, 990 P.2d 713, 
735 (1999) (citation omitted). However, notwithstanding the general rule, "the trial court retains jurisdiction to determine matters collateral or incidental to the judgment, and may act in aid of the appeal." Id. 
In this case, Miyake did not appeal from the Order
 
Enforcing Settlement Agreement. Instead Miyake appeals from
 several post-judgment orders. Thus, the pending appeals did not
 divest the circuit court of jurisdiction to address the Wrights'
 motion related to further enforcement of the Order Enforcing
 Settlement Agreement, which was not part of Miyake's appeals.
 
Therefore, the circuit court did not err when it
 
entered the Order to Execute a Stipulation for Dismissal with
 Prejudice.
IV. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the following orders entered by
 
the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit are affirmed:
 
(1) the "Order Denying Defendant and Third-Party
 
Plaintiff Miyake Concrete Accessories, Inc.'s Motion for Relief
 
from Court Ordered Settlement Agreement Filed on August 15, 2012;
 Order Granting Plaintiffs Shaun and Annett Wright's Motion to
 Compel Compliance with Settlement Agreement and Order Filed on
 August 10, 2012," filed on November 15, 2012; and
 
(2) the "Order Granting in Part and Denying Without
 
Prejudice in Part Plaintiffs Shaun and Annett Wright's Motion to
 Compel Defendant Miyake Concrete Accessories Inc. to Execute a
 Stipulation for Partial Dismissal With Prejudice in Accordance
 With the Parties' Settlement Agreement and for Award of
 Attorneys' Fees and Costs Filed June 14, 2013," filed on
 September 3, 2013.
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We vacate the "Order Denying Defendant and Third-Party
Plaintiff Miyake Concrete Accessories, Inc.'s Motion to Set Aside
 
Garnishee Summons Filed February 13, 2013, and to Release
 Garnishees Bank of Hawaii, First Hawaiian Bank, and Central
 Pacific Bank, Filed February 21 2013, and Garnishee Order," filed
 on April 8, 2013.
 
 
This case is remanded to the circuit court for further
 
proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai 'i, November 30, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Samuel P. King, Jr.,
and 
Roy Y. Yempuku,
for Miyake Concrete Accessories, Inc.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
Michael D. Tom, 
Mark K. Morita,
(Tom Petrus & Miller, LLLC)
for Shaun Wright and Annett Wright.
 
Jeffre W. Juliano,
Lahela H. F. Hite,
(O'Connor Playdon & Guben, LLP)
for Despins General Construction, Inc.
 
22
 