NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000655
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
PHILLIP DEJESUS DELEON, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 09-1-1237)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Phillip DeJesus DeLeon (DeLeon)
appeals from the August 5, 2015 Circuit Court of the First
Circuit's1 (Circuit Court) Judgment, Guilty Conviction, and
Sentence.  After a jury trial, the Circuit Court convicted DeLeon
of Manslaughter in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
§ 707-702(1)(a) (2014)2 (Count 2), and Carrying or Use of Firearm
in the Commission of a Separate Felony in violation of HRS § 134-
21 (2011)3 (Count 4).  DeLeon was sentenced to twenty years in
1The Honorable Colette Y. Garibaldi presided.
2HRS § 707-702 provides, in relevant part:
Manslaughter.   (1) A person commits the offense of
manslaughter if:
(a) The person recklessly causes the death of
another person[.]
3HRS § 134-21 provides, in relevant part:
Carrying or use of firearm in the commission of a separate
felony; penalty.  (a) It shall be unlawful for a person to
knowingly carry on the person or have within the person's
immediate control or intentionally use or threaten to use a
firearm while engaged in the commission of a separate
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Count 2, and twenty years with a mandatory minimum of fifteen
(15) years in Count 4, with credit for time served and concurrent
with any other term of imprisonment.
On appeal, DeLeon maintains the Circuit Court erred
when it:  (1) excluded evidence of the prior assault convictions
of, and acts of violence by, decedent Shawn Powell (Powell) and
Jermain Beaudoin (Beaudoin) for the purpose of proving they were
the first aggressors; (2) prohibited expert witness testimony
that cocaine amplifies the effects of alcohol and that the
combination of cocaine, alcohol, and cocaethylene increase the
risk of violent behavior, thereby depriving DeLeon of his right
to present a complete defense in violation of his constitutional
rights; and (3) refused DeLeon's request to instruct the jury
they could consider the lesser included offense of assault in the
second degree based on recklessly causing serious bodily injury.
After reviewing the points on appeal, the parties'
arguments, the record on appeal, and legal authorities, we
resolve DeLeon's points on appeal as follows and affirm.
1.  DeLeon contends that the Circuit Court erred in not
admitting evidence of prior assault convictions and specific acts
of violence for the purpose of proving that Powell and Beaudoin4
were the first aggressors.  The trial court excluded Powell's two
(2) June 13, 2000 convictions for assault in the second degree. 
DeLeon sought to introduce this evidence under Hawai# i Rules of
Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(a)(2)5 to show Powell was the first
3(...continued)
felony, whether the firearm was loaded or not, and whether
operable or not[.]
4Although Beaudoin was not the victim in either of the charges
involved in this trial, he was part of the group that approached DeLeon before
Powell was shot.
5HRE Rule 404(a)(2) provides, 
Character evidence not admissible to prove conduct;
exceptions; other crimes.   (a) Character evidence generally.
Evidence of a person's character or a trait of a person's
character is not admissible for the purpose of proving
action in conformity therewith on a particular occasion,
except:
. . . .
(continued...)
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
aggressor.  The trial court also denied DeLeon's motion to
present Beaudoin's August 8, 2000 conviction for assault in the
second degree, and his October 29, 1998 conviction for assault in
the third degree.  DeLeon sought to introduce this evidence under
HRE Rule 404(b)6 to show Beaudoin was the first aggressor.
Where self-defense is claimed as a justification,
Hawai#i courts look to who was the initial aggressor.  See State
v. Straub , 9 Haw. App. 435, 444, 843 P.2d 1389, 1393-94 (1993). 
"[A] defendant who claims self-defense to a charge of homicide is
permitted to introduce evidence of the deceased's violent or
aggressive character either to demonstrate the reasonableness of
his apprehension of immediate danger or to show that the decedent
was the aggressor."  State v. Lui , 61 Haw. 328, 329, 603 P.2d
151, 154 (1979).  "[T]he determination of whether proper
foundation has been established lies within the discretion of the
trial court."  State v. Eid, 126 Hawai# i 430, 440, 272 P.3d 1197,
1207 (2012) (citation omitted).  In Lui, the Hawai #i Supreme
Court held that the evidence in the record did not support a
factual dispute as to who was the aggressor and consequently,
evidence of the victim's prior violent crimes could not be used
5(...continued)
(2) Character of victim.  Evidence of a pertinent
trait of character of the victim of the crime
offered by an accused, or by the prosecution to
rebut the same, or evidence of a character trait
of peacefulness of the victim offered by the
prosecution in a homicide case to rebut evidence
that the victim was the first aggressor[.]
6HRE Rule 404(b) provides, 
(b)   Other crimes, wrongs, or acts.  Evidence of
other crimes, wrongs or acts is not admissible to prove the
character of a person in order to show action in conformity
therewith.  It may, however, be admissible where such
evidence is probative of another fact that is of consequence
to the determination of the action, such as proof of motive,
opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity,
modus operandi, or absence of mistake or accident.  In
criminal cases, the proponent of evidence to be offered
under this subsection shall provide reasonable notice in
advance of trial, or during trial if the court excuses
pretrial notice on good cause shown, of the date, location,
and general nature of any such evidence it intends to
introduce at trial.
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to prove the "deceased's aggression."  61 Haw. at 332, 603 P.2d
154.
Here, as DeLeon concedes in his opening brief, at the
close of the State's case the evidence adduced clearly
demonstrated that DeLeon was the aggressor.  In his case-in-
chief, DeLeon testified that in the parking lot someone in the
group said, "there's that fucking Mexican;" because the group was
already five to ten feet from him, he decided to retrieve the gun
from his trunk; after he told the group to stay back and fired
several warning shots, two members of the group ran away but
Powell and two others continued to approach DeLeon, who pointed
the gun at Powell; and Powell put his hands up and said, "What,
you think one gun is going to stop us all?"  DeLeon admitted that
Powell did not attempt to take the gun away from DeLeon and that
Powell's hands were open and raised and he was unarmed when
DeLeon shot him.  After DeLeon's testimony, DeLeon's counsel
moved to have the assault convictions admitted on the basis there
was a factual dispute regarding who was the first aggressor. 
Following argument by the parties, the Circuit Court found,
The evidence is that Mr. Powell was the individual
standing alone, palms-open gesture, no movement. This, and
the testimony of the defendant that Mr. Powell made no
movement other than to have his hand open and he was
walking, the record does not appear to support that there is
a factual dispute as to who was the aggressor.
And the facts in Mr. DeLeon's matter, as [deputy
prosecutor] indicated, are very similar to those that are
cited in State v. [Lui] , 61 Hawai #i 328. 
Subsequently, the request to use the bad acts, violent
character evidence concerning Mr. Powell's prior conviction
is denied as well.
While the Circuit Court excluded evidence of Powell's
June 2000 assault convictions, it permitted evidence of Powell's
2006 or 2007 assault on a prosecution witness and Powell's attack
on DeLeon earlier in the evening before the shooting.  On this
record, we cannot say the Circuit Court abused its discretion in 
excluding evidence of Powell's prior convictions.
Similarly, as to Beaudoin, the Circuit Court found no
evidence that Beaudoin was the first aggressor in the parking
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
lot, as the court noted, "Mr. Powell was the individual standing
alone[.]"  The evidence also showed that Beaudoin was apparently
one of the individuals to scatter prior to DeLeon shooting
Powell.  Therefore, the Circuit Court did not abuse its
discretion in excluding the evidence of prior convictions and
violent acts.
2.  DeLeon contends that the Circuit Court erred in
excluding the expert testimony of Dr. Edward Fisher (Dr. Fisher)
because it denied his right to present a complete defense.  
Specifically, the Circuit Court precluded Dr. Fisher from
explaining to the jury that the combination of cocaine,
cocaethylene, and alcohol in a person's blood could increase the
risk the person would engage in violent and aggressive conduct.
Whether or not expert testimony will be permitted is an
inquiry made under HRE Rule 702.7  Expert testimony assists the
trier of fact by providing "a resource for ascertaining truth in
relevant areas outside the ken of ordinary laity."  State v.
Batangan, 71 Haw. 552, 556, 799 P.2d 48, 51 (1990) (citations
omitted).  "[T]he touchstones of admissibility for expert
testimony under HRE Rule 702 are relevance and reliability.
State v. Vliet , 95 Hawai #i 94, 106, 19 P.3d 42, 54 (2001).  The
standard of review for the admission of expert testimony is abuse
of discretion.  Barcai v. Betwee,  98 Hawai# i 470, 479, 50 P.3d
946, 955 (2002).
On appeal from the first judgment in this case, the
Supreme Court of Hawai# i held "HRE Rule 702 does not require a
specific degree of certainty for the admission of scientific or
other expert testimony[,]" State v. DeLeon , 131 Hawai# i 463, 481,
319 P.3d 382, 400 (2014) (DeLeon I), and that "trial courts
should not require a 'reasonable degree of scientific certainty'
7HRE Rule 702 states:
If scientific, technical, or other specialized
knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the
evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness
qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience,
training, or education may testify thereto in the form of an
opinion or otherwise. In determining the issue of assistance
to the trier of fact, the court may consider the
trustworthiness and validity of the scientific technique or
mode of analysis employed by the proffered expert.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
before admitting expert opinions but may exclude expert testimony
based on speculation or possibility." Id. at 484, 319 P.3d at
403.  During the first trial, the expert was willing to testify
that Powell was under the influence of cocaine to a reasonable
degree of scientific probability , but not willing to testify that
Powell was under the influence of cocaine to a reasonable degree
of scientific certainty  as the circuit court erroneously
required.  Id.
In preparation for the trial on remand under
consideration here, DeLeon sought to introduce the expert
testimony of Dr. Fisher that Powell was under the influence of
cocaine at the time of the shooting in the parking lot.  After
examination by the parties during an HRE Rule 104 hearing,8
Dr. Fisher was able to conclude that Powell was under the
influence of cocaine and alcohol at some point on the night of
July 31, 2009.  However, Dr. Fisher conceded he could only
conclude to a reasonable degree of scientific probability that
8HRE Rule 104 provides:
(a) Questions of admissibility generally. Preliminary
questions concerning the qualification of a person to be a
witness, the existence of a privilege, or the admissibility
of evidence shall be determined by the court, subject to the
provisions of subsection (b). In making its determination
the court is not bound by the rules of evidence except those
with respect to privileges.
(b) Relevancy conditioned on fact. When the relevancy
of evidence depends upon the fulfillment of a condition of
fact, the court shall admit it upon, or subject to, the
introduction of evidence sufficient to support a finding of
the fulfillment of the condition.
(c) Hearing of jury. Hearings on the admissibility of
confessions shall in all cases be conducted out of the
hearing of the jury. Hearings on other preliminary matters
shall be so conducted when the interests of justice require
or, when an accused is a witness, if the accused so
requests.
(d) Testimony by accused. The accused does not, by
testifying upon a preliminary matter, subject oneself to
cross-examination as to other issues in the case.
(e) Weight and credibility. This rule does not limit
the right of a party to introduce before the jury evidence
relevant to weight or credibility.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Powell was under the influence of alcohol at the time he was
shot; he could not say whether Powell was under the influence of
cocaine at the time he was shot.  On redirect, defense counsel
asked, "[b]ased on the information we have, can anyone testify or
can anyone tell whether or not [Powell] was under the influence
of cocaine at the time that he was shot?"  Dr. Fisher answered,
"[n]o.  No one could."
In ruling on the admissibility of Dr. Fisher's
proffered testimony, the Circuit Court concluded that it "would
be confusing to the jury to receive his testimony with respect to
the effects of cocaine in combination with alcohol, given that
Dr. Fisher is unable to render the opinion that Mr. Powell was
under the influence [of cocaine] at the time of the offense[.]" 
Mindful that the Hawai# i Supreme Court had held the trial court,
"may exclude expert testimony based on speculation or
possibility[,]" the Circuit Court exercised its discretion to
exclude evidence based on speculation or possibility.  Given that
Dr. Fisher was unable to testify that Powell was under the
influence of cocaine during the relevant time period, we cannot
say that the court abused its discretion in excluding testimony
regarding the effect of the combination of cocaine and alcohol on
the risk of violence.
3.  DeLeon contends the Circuit Court erred when it
refused his request to instruct the jury that they could consider
the offense of reckless assault in the second degree as a lesser
included offense of murder in the second degree (Murder II).  The
Circuit Court permitted an instruction on the lesser included
offenses of reckless manslaughter under HRS § 707-702 and assault
in the second degree based on intentionally or knowingly causing
substantial bodily injury under HRS § 707-711(1)(a), but refused
the instruction on assault in the second degree based on
recklessly causing serious bodily injury under HRS § 707-
711(1)(b) (2014) (Reckless Assault II).
Murder in the Second Degree (Murder II) and Reckless
Assault II are both comprised of a state of mind and the
causation of a physical injury, and the crimes differ both in
state of mind and the degree of physical injury.  A person
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
commits the offense of Murder II "if the person intentionally or
knowingly caused the death of another person."  HRS § 707-701.5
(2014).  As requested by DeLeon, a person commits Reckless
Assault II if the person recklessly9 causes serious bodily
injury10 to another.  HRS § 707-711(1)(b).
Under HRS § 701-109(4)(a) (2014), "[a]n offense is so
included when . . . [i]t is established by proof of the same or
less than  all the facts required to establish the commission of
the offense charged." (emphasis added).  In State v. Haanio , the
Hawai#i Supreme Court held that "trial courts must instruct
juries as to any included offenses when 'there is a rational
basis in the evidence for a verdict acquitting the defendant of
the offense charged and convicting the defendant of the included
offense.'"  94 Hawaii# 405, 413, 16 P.3d 246, 254 (2001),
overruled on other grounds , State v. Flores, 131 Hawai# i 43, 314
9 HRS § 702-206 (2014) in relevant part provides,
Definitions of states of mind
. . . .
(3) "Recklessly."
(a) A person acts recklessly with respect to his
conduct when he consciously disregards a substantial and
unjustifiable risk that the person's conduct is of the
specified nature.
(b) A person acts recklessly with respect to attendant
circumstances when he consciously disregards a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances exist.
(c) A person acts recklessly with respect to a result
of his conduct when he consciously disregards a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that his conduct will cause such a
result.
(d) A risk is substantial and unjustifiable within the
meaning of this section if, considering the nature and
purpose of the person's conduct and the circumstances known
to him, the disregard of the risk involves a gross deviation
from the standard of conduct that a law-abiding person would
observe in the same situation.
10HRS § 707-700 defines serious bodily injury as "bodily injury
which creates a substantial risk of death or which causes serious, permanent
disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily
member or organ."
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
P.3d 120 (2013)).  The test for giving a lesser-included offense
instruction focuses on whether under "any view of the
evidence[,]" there is a rational basis for the jury to acquit of
the charged offense and convict of the lesser-included offense. 
State v. Flores  131 Hawai #i at 53, 314 P.3d at 130.
State v. Kaeo, 132 Hawaii 451, 465, 323 P.3d 95, 109
(2014), upon which DeLeon primarily relies, is distinguishable. 
There, the court found a rational basis in the evidence for an
instruction on assault in the first degree--the intentional or
knowing causation of serious bodily injury-- because Kaeo
testified that he was only trying to hurt the victim, he did not
know how seriously he was trying to hurt the victim, he attacked
the victim with an improvised weapon, he only attacked the victim
through the car window rather than escalating by opening the
door, he did not aim for any particular part of the victim's
body, it was dark and he "couldn't see blood[,]" afterwards he
attempted to take the victim to the hospital, and there was
conflicting testimony as to whether Kaeo had said he wanted to
kill the victim.  Id.  at 458, 465-66, 323 P.3d at 101, 109-10. 
Here, the State presented evidence that DeLeon fatally shot
Powell--who was unarmed--once, at close range, in the heart. 
DeLeon testified that he did not mean to kill Powell, but meant
to shoot him in the shoulder in self-defense.  Thus, DeLeon's
testimony established that he intended to shoot Powell, and
although he may not have intended to kill Powell, the gunshot
resulted in Powell's death.  The jury found DeLeon guilty of the
included offense of reckless manslaughter.  Given the
circumstances of this case, an intentional gunshot fired at
Powell which hit him in the heart and resulted in his death, we
conclude that there was no rational basis for acquitting DeLeon
of reckless manslaughter, yet convicting him of reckless
second-degree assault. In other words, there was no rational
basis based on the evidence presented for the jury to find that
DeLeon recklessly caused serious bodily injury but did not
#
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
recklessly cause death.  Therefore, the Circuit Court did not err
in failing to instruct on reckless second-degree assault.
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the August 5, 2015
Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawaii, November 13, 2017. #
On the briefs:
William H. Jameson, Jr.,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Sonja P. McCullen,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
10