NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000501
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I
CHRISTOPHER A. WEBSTER,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
DAVID TIMKO AND DONNA DAUM TIMKO,
Defendants-Appellants
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. RC-13-1-0335)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Hiraoka, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant David Timko (Timko) appeals from
the Judgment entered by the District Court of the Fifth Circuit
(District Court ) on June 6, 2016.   2 1
In this landlord-tenant dispute, Timko asserts the
District Court erred due to the following points of error: (1)
there was no duly executed inventory of the property ( Property),
and thus, upon the termination of the lease, it should have been
presumed that the Property was in the same condition as when
1  The Honorable Edmund D. Acoba presided.   
2  Timko’s wife, Donna Daum Timko ( Mrs. Timko ), was also originally a
defendant in this case.  However, the District Court filed an Order dismissing
the Complaint with prejudice as to Mrs. Timko on October 31, 2014.  Thus, we
will refer only to David Timko as the defendant in this case.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Timko first took occupancy; (2) the wrong witness testified about
the Shell Builders Proposal ( Shell Proposal ) that the District
Court relied on for its award of structural damages, and the
proposal was for work to improve the Property; (3) there was no
direct evidence that Timko eliminated the swale on the Property;
and (4) because the Judgment should be reduced, the attorney’s
fees awarded in favor of the Plaintiff-Appellee Christopher A.
Webster (Webster ) should also be reduced. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we affirm. 
The Property at issue was purchased by Webster from
Billy DeCosta ( DeCosta), who then rented the Property for about
eleven months, until approximately 2004.  In approximately March
2004, Timko and his then-girlfriend, Jennifer Lewis (Lewis),
began renting the Property.  Neither Timko nor Lewis entered into
a written rental agreement with Webster.  
Lewis later moved out of the Property.  Sometime after,
Timko met Mrs. Timko, who moved into the Property in the summer
of 2006.  The Timkos did not enter into a written rental
agreement with Webster at that time.  
It appears that on February 1, 2009, Timko and Webster
entered into a written rental agreement.  It also appears that on
that same date, Timko completed and signed a "Uniform Inventory
Checklist" (Uniform Inventory Checklist ), which documented the
condition of the Property.   3
The Timkos moved out of the Property on March 5, 2013 . 
Webster filed a Complaint for Assumpsit-Money Owed
against Timko on May 20, 2013 for $23,000.00, claiming "damage to
property, unpaid utilities, clean-up of property " ( Complaint ). 
In his Post Trial Brief, Webster requested damages for a higher
3  Timko argues that his signature on both the rental agreement and
Uniform Inventory Checklist was forged.  However, Timko did not object when
they were admitted into evidence.  
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
amount of $33,066.86, consisting of:  $1,249.20 for unpaid rent,
$602.01 for unpaid utilities, $6,200.00 for swale replacement,
$6,465.00 for carpet replacement, $14,408.38 for structural
repairs, $2,642.27 for miscellaneous repairs, $1,500.00 deferred
rent.  Webster also requested an award of attorney’s fees.
Timko filed a Counterclaim on September 10, 2013,
seeking a judgment of $20,641.41 for moving expenses, attorney
fees, damages, security deposit, property damage, and refund of
water bills (Counterclaim ). 
After a bench trial, the District Court filed its
Judgment in favor of Webster for a principal amount of
$22,524.00, and attorney’s fees of $5,631.00, for a total
Judgment amount of $28,155.00.  
Point of error (1):  Timko first argues that, under
Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 521-42(a) (2018), because there
was no duly executed inventory of the Property, the Property
should have been presumed to be in the same condition upon
termination of the lease as when he first took occupancy.  Thus,
Timko asserts he should not be responsible for purported damage
to the Property. 
Timko did not make this argument in the District Court. 
He only brings up HRS § 521-42(a) and his related argument for
the first time on appeal.  "Legal issues not raised in the trial
court are ordinarily deemed waived on appeal."  Ass'n of
Apartment Owners of Wailea Elua v. Wailea Resort Co., 100 Hawai# i
97, 107, 58 P.3d 608, 618 (2002) (citation omitted).  Thus, Timko
has waived the issue in his first point of error.  
Point of error (2):  Timko challenges the Shell
Proposal which the District Court appears to have relied upon for
its award of structural damages.  Timko appears to challenge the
admissibility of the Shell Proposal, and further argues that it
included work to improve the Property, not just to repair it.  4
4  It appears that the District Court relied on the Shell Proposal for
its award of structural repairs because that proposal was for $14,408.38, and
the District Court awarded $14,408.38 for structural repairs. 
3 (2018)NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
At trial, Robert Mark Rycewicz (Rycewicz ), who was
employed by Shell in 2013, testified in support of the Shell
Proposal.  Timko apparently contends that David Shell should have
testified regarding the proposal because David Shell prepared the
proposal.  However, as Webster points out and Timko does not
dispute, Timko is the party who offered the Shell Proposal into
evidence.  Further, Rycewicz testified that he was an estimator
for Shell Builders, he physically walked through the Property
with David Shell, he was the one who provided the actual estimate
found in the proposal, and both he and David Shell went over the
proposal together.  Thus, Rycewicz had sufficient personal
knowledge of the proposal to testify regarding its contents.
Timko also takes issue with the District Court's award
for certain items in the Shell Proposal, arguing that the
proposal includes items to improve the premises, not just repair
damage caused by Timko.  However, the nature and extent of
damages caused by Timko was very much at issue in the bench
trial, and Webster testified regarding the various types of
damage he claims was caused by Timko.  It is the province of the
District Court, as the fact finder in this case, to assess the
credibility of the witnesses and to weigh the evidence.  LeMay v.
Leander, 92 Hawai# i 614, 626, 994 P.2d 546, 558 (2000).  Webster
testified that he approached two companies, South Paw
Construction and Shell Construction, to "fix" or to provide
"remediation" for major problems with the property which Webster
attributed to Timko.  The Shell Proposal was the lower of the two
estimates.  We conclude there was sufficient evidence in the
record for the District Court to find that the work in the Shell
Proposal was necessary due to damage caused by Timko.
Point of error (3):  Timko argues that there was only
indirect testimony and thus inadequate evidence that a swale that
was purportedly previously part of the Property was eliminated by
Timko.  
Although no one testified that they saw Timko himself
eliminate the swale, the neighbor to the Property, Steve Macklin
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(Macklin), DeCosta, and Webster testified that there was a swale  
on the Property when Timko occupied it, and Macklin and Wester  
testified that the swale was eliminated during Timko's occupancy. 
Webster testified further that he did not authorize the  
elimination of the swale.  
Thus, again recognizing the province of the fact finder  
to determine credibility and weigh the evidence, there was  
substantial circumstantial evidence to support the award of  
damages for the elimination of the swale, and the District Court
was not wrong when it awarded those damages.  LeMay, 92 Hawai #i 
at 626, 994 P.2d at 558.
Point of error (4) :  Finally, Timko argues that because
the Judgment amount should be reduced, HRS § 607-14 (2016)  
requires that the award of attorney’s fees be reduced to 25% of  
the lower judgment amount.  However, we conclude above that the  
District Court did not err in the amount awarded in the Judgment,
and therefore the attorney's fee award need not be revised. 
 
Therefore, we affirm the Judgment entered by the
District Court of the Fifth Circuit on June 6, 2016.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, March 6, 2020.
On the briefs:
Mitchell S. Wong, 
for Defendants-Appellants.  
Daniel G. Hempey,
(De Costa Hempey Meyers LLC)
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
5