 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
RONALD W. BENNER, Defendant-Appellant,
and
 
JOHN and MARY DOES 1-10, Defendants
 
NO. CAAP-13-0002164
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-0799-04)

 
April 6, 2016
 
NAKAMURA, C.J., FUJISE and GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, J.
 
Defendant-Appellant Ronald W. Benner (Benner) appeals

 
from the Judgment filed on March 6, 2013, in the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit (circuit court).1 On appeal, Benner challenges
 
the: (1) "Order Granting Plaintiff JPMorgan Chase Bank, National
 Association's Motion for Summary Judgment Filed October 26, 2012
 
1
 The Honorable Bert I. Ayabe presided.
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and for Writ of Ejectment Against Defendant Ronald W. Benner"
 
(Order Granting Summary Judgment), filed on March 6, 2013; and
 (2) "Order Denying Defendant Ronald W. Benner's Motion to
 Reconsider the Court's Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion for
 Summary Judgment and for Writ of Ejectment" (Order Denying Motion
 for Reconsideration), filed June 21, 2013. 
In his points of error, Benner contends the circuit
 
court erred when it: (1) granted summary judgment to Plaintiff-
Appellee JPMorgan Chase Bank, National Association (JPMorgan
 Chase) because there was a genuine issue of material fact as to
 whether JPMorgan Chase had authority to conduct the non-judicial
 foreclosure sale; (2) granted summary judgment, determining that
 
the three-year statute of repose pursuant to the Truth in Lending
 
Act (TILA) expired before Benner exercised his rights under the
 Act; (3) granted summary judgment, determining that an Unfair and
 
Deceptive Acts or Practices (UDAP) claim could not be asserted
 
against JPMorgan Chase; and (4) denied Benner's Motion for
 Reconsideration.
 
For the reasons set forth below, we vacate and remand. 
I. Brief Background
 
On May 7, 2007, Benner executed an Adjustable Rate Note
 
(Note) in favor of Washington Mutual Bank, FA (Washington
 Mutual). On January 6, 2009, Washington Mutual sent a Notice of
 Collection Activity to Benner stating that Benner had failed to
 make the required monthly payments under the terms of the Note
 and that Benner had thirty days to cure the default. 
On June 24, 2009, an Assignment of Mortgage and Note
 
from Washington Mutual to JPMorgan Chase was recorded. 
On July 2, 2009, JPMorgan Chase recorded a Notice of
 
Mortgagee's Non-Judicial Foreclosure Under Power of Sale. On
 August 25, 2009, JPMorgan Chase recorded Mortgagee's Affidavit of
 Foreclosure Under Power of Sale (Affidavit of Sale), which
 provides, inter alia, that JPMorgan Chase purchased the property
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at the non-judicial foreclosure sale. 
On April 13, 2010, JPMorgan Chase filed a Complaint for
 
Ejectment against Benner. On October 26, 2012, JPMorgan Chase
 
filed a motion for summary judgment. 
On March 6, 2013, the circuit court filed the Order
 
Granting Summary Judgment to JPMorgan Chase, the Judgment, and a
 Writ of Ejectment.
II. Discussion
 
In this case, Benner challenges the circuit court's
 
Order Granting Summary Judgment to JPMorgan Chase and Benner's
 
points of error all involve defenses to the validity of the non­judicial foreclosure sale conducted by JPMorgan Chase. 
We review the circuit court's grant or denial of 
summary judgment de novo. Kondaur Capital Corp. v. Matsuyoshi, 
136 Hawai
'i 227, 240, 361 P.3d 454, 467 (2015). “Summary 
judgment is appropriate if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” Id. (citations and brackets omitted). "The 
moving party has the initial burden of 'demonstrating the absence of a genuine issue of material fact.'" Id. (citation omitted). 
"Only with the satisfaction of this initial showing does the burden shift to the nonmoving party to respond 'by affidavits or as otherwise provided in [Hawai'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP)] Rule 56, ... setting forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.'" Id. at 240-41, 361 P.3d at 467-68 (citation, emphasis, and brackets omitted, ellipses in original). 
To maintain an ejectment action, the plaintiff must (1)
 
"'prove that he or she owns the parcel in issue,' meaning that he
 or she must have 'the title to and right of possession of' such
 parcel" and (2) "establish that 'possession is unlawfully
 withheld by another.'" Id. at 241, 361 P.3d at 468 (citations
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4and brackets omitted).  When a party receives title to a propert y
through a non-judicial foreclosure sale, the strength and
validity of the title "is unavoidably intertwined with the
validity of the foreclosure sale."  Id.
In Kondaur , the Hawaii Supreme Court recently
clarified that "the duties set forth in [ Ulrich v. Security Inv.
Co., 35 Haw. 158 (Haw. Terr. 1939)] remain viable law and are
applicable to non-judicial foreclosures of real property
mortgages."  Kondaur, 136 Hawai #i at 229, 361 P.3d at 456.  As
stated in Kondaur:#
Ulrich requires mortgagees to exercise their right to
non-judicial foreclosure under a power of sale in a manner
that is fair, reasonably diligent, and in good faith, and to
demonstrate that an adequate price was procured for the
property.  In instances where the mortgagee assumes the role
of a purchaser in a self-dealing transaction, the burden is
on the mortgagee, or its quitclaim transferee or non-bona
fide successor, to establish its compliance with these
obligations. Its failure to do so would render the
foreclosure sale voidable and could therefore be set aside
at the timely election of the mortgagor.
Id. at 240, 361 P.3d at 467 (citations and footnotes omitted). 
Thus, in a self-dealing transaction, where the mortgagee is the
purchaser in a non-judicial foreclosure sale, the mortgagee has
the "burden to prove in the summary judgment proceeding that the
foreclosure 'sale was regularly and fairly conducted in every
particular.'"  Id. at 241, 361 P.3d at 469 (citation omitted). 
"A prima facie case demonstrating compliance with the foregoing
requirements [shifts] the burden to [the mortgagor] to raise a
genuine issue of material fact."  Id. at 242, 361 P.3d at 469. 
In Kondaur , the mortgagee that conducted the non-
judicial foreclosure on the subject property was Resmae
Liquidation Properties LLC (RLP).  At auction, RLP was the
highest bidder and thereby obtained title to the property.  Id.
at 230, 361 P.3d at 457.  RLP then executed a quitclaim deed
conveying the property to Kondaur and Kondaur brought an
ejectment action against the mortgagor.  Id. at 230-31, 361 P.3d
at 457-58.  Based on the quitclaim deed to Kondaur, the supremeFOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5court held that Kondaur had "whatever rights RLP had on the
Property[,]" and that "the strength and validity of Kondaur's
title is unavoidably intertwined with the validity of the
foreclosure sale."  Id. at 241, 361 P.3d at 468.  Kondaur thus
needed "to demonstrate that the foreclosure sale was conducted in
accordance with Ulrich[.]"  Id.
Kondaur filed a summary judgment motion and the only
evidence it produced with respect to the manner in which the non-
judicial foreclosure sale had been conducted was based on
mortgagee RLP's Affidavit of Sale, which certified that mortgagee
RLP had complied with the mortgage and Hawaii Revised Statutes
(HRS) §§ 667-5 through 667-10 (1993 & Supp. 2011).  Id.   In
addressing Kondaur's summary judgment motion, the supreme court
stated that the "Affidavit of Sale fails to provide any averments
as to the fairness and regularity of the foreclosure sale or as
to whether RLP conducted the foreclosure sale in a diligent and
reasonable manner[,]" the document did not speak to why the
foreclosure sale was conducted on a different island than where
the property was located, and, although the document identified
the purchase price, it did not "make any declaration concerning
the adequacy of this price."  Id. at 242-43, 361 P.3d at 469-70. 
The "mortgagee's minimal adherence to the statutory requirements
and terms of the mortgage under which the foreclosure sale is
conducted . . . does not establish that the foreclosure sale
similarly satisfied the Ulrich requirements."  Id.  at 243, 361
P.3d at 470.
As a result, because Kondaur failed to satisfy its
initial burden of showing that the non-judicial foreclosure sale
had been conducted in a manner that was fair, reasonably
diligent, in good faith, and would obtain an adequate price for
the property, the burden never shifted to the mortgagor and the
mortgagor did not have to raise any genuine issue of material
fact.  Id.   Thus, the supreme court vacated the summary judgment
ruling and remanded for further proceedings.  Id. at 244, 361FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
P.3d at 471.
 
Kondaur is dispositive for purposes of the instant
 
case. Here, JPMorgan Chase assumed the role of a purchaser in a
 
self-dealing transaction because JPMorgan Chase was the mortgagee
 and the highest bidder at the non-judicial foreclosure sale. 
Thus, pursuant to Kondaur and Ulrich, JPMorgan Chase had the
 initial burden to establish that the non-judicial foreclosure
 sale was conducted in a manner that was fair, reasonably
 diligent, and in good faith, and to demonstrate that an adequate
 price was procured for the property. 
Like in Kondaur, the Affidavit of Sale prepared by
 
JPMorgan Chase's attorney was the only evidence produced in this
 case to show the manner in which the non-judicial foreclosure
 sale was conducted, and it provides that JPMorgan Chase complied
 with the mortgage and HRS §§ 667-5 through 667-10. However,
 similar to the affidavit in Kondaur, the Affidavit of Sale does
 not attest to anything concerning the adequacy of the purchase
 price. Thus, given Kondaur, JPMorgan Chase did not satisfy its
 initial burden of showing that the foreclosure sale was conducted
 in a manner that was fair, reasonably diligent, in good faith,
 and would obtain an adequate price for the property. Because
 JPMorgan Chase did not satisfy its initial burden for summary
 judgment, the burden never shifted to Benner to raise any genuine
 issue of material fact. Thus, we need not address Benner's
 points of error as they relate to defenses to the ejectment
 action. Under Kondaur, the grant of summary judgment for
 JPMorgan Chase was in error.
III. Conclusion
 
Based on the foregoing, the Judgment filed by the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit on March 6, 2013, entered
 
pursuant to the summary judgment ruling in favor of 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
JPMorgan Chase, is vacated. This case is remanded to the circuit
 
court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 
On the briefs:

 
Gary V. Dubin,
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,
Andrew Goff,
(Dubin Law Offices),
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Jade L. Ching,

Melissa M. Uhl,
(Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing),
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
7
 