      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS  AND PACIFIC REPORTER    
    
 
CAAP-12-0001004
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
JEANNE L. BALOG, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
CRYSTAL A. WAKITA, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
NORTH AND SOUTH HILO DIVISION
 
(CIVIL NO. 3RC11-1-839)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
In this landlord-tenant dispute, Defendant-Appellant
 
Crystal A. Wakita (Wakita), appeals pro se from the Judgment
 
entered by the District Court of the Third Circuit (District
 Court)
1
 on October 19, 2012.  We affirm.
 
I.
 
Plaintiff-Appellee Jeanne L. Balog (Balog), as the
 
landlord, and Wakita, as the tenant, entered into an agreement 
for the rental (Rental Agreement) of a residential premises
 (Premises) which commenced on July 15, 2010. 
Wakita received
 
financial assistance to pay a portion of her rent from the Office
 of Housing and Community Development (County Housing) pursuant to
 a program commonly known as "Section 8." In about April 2011,
 Wakita became delinquent in her payment of rent. In response to
 
1The Honorable Barbara T. Takase presided.
           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    
Balog's demands for payment, Wakita notified Balog of complaints
 
she had regarding the Premises. County Housing intervened in the
 dispute, and Balog and Wakita signed a mutual termination
 agreement which acknowledged that the Rental Agreement would
 terminate on June 30, 2011. County Housing assistance payments
 ended on July 1, 2011. 
Wakita did not vacate the Premises on June 30, 2011. 
Wakita did not pay her portion of the rent for June 2011 and did
 not pay rent for July and August 2011. 
On August 3, 2011, Balog filed a complaint seeking
 
possession of the Premises, unpaid rent, damages, and attorney's
 fees. Wakita was served with the complaint and entered a general
 denial. On August 24, 2011, the District Court established a
 rent trust fund. The District Court ordered Wakita to pay $1,300
 into the rent trust fund by the second business day of each
 month, and it further ordered that a writ of possession and
 judgment for possession would be issued forthwith if Wakita
 failed to timely deposit the required payment into the rent trust
 fund. On December 9, 2011, the District Court issued a Writ of
 Possession and Judgment for Possession in favor of Balog based on
 Wakita's failure to comply with the rent trust fund order, and
 Wakita was evicted from the Premises. On December 12, 2011,
 Wakita filed a counterclaim, which sought judgment against Balog
 for $500,000.
 
The District Court held a trial on Balog's complaint
 
(except for the claim for possession which had been resolved) and
 Wakita's counterclaim. The District Court found in favor of
 Balog and against Wakita on Balog's complaint and Wakita's
 counterclaim. On October 8, 2012, the District Court entered its
 "Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law" and its Judgment in
 favor of Balog and against Wakita in the total amount of
 $18,136.61, after crediting Wakita with $650.00 for her security
 deposit.
 
2
           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    
II.
 
On appeal, Wakita contends that: (1) the District Court
 
erred in determining that she entered into a rental agreement
 
with a one-year term, and instead should have applied rules
 applicable to a month-to-month tenancy; (2) this error caused the
 District Court to improperly impose rental obligations on her as
 a holdover tenant; (3) because Balog failed to prepare a written
 inventory of the Premises prior to Wakita's initial occupancy,
 the District Court erred in finding Wakita responsible for
 damages to the Premises; (4) the District Court erred in applying
 Wakita's security deposit towards the amounts it determined she
 owed to Balog; and (5) the District Court erred in rejecting
 Wakita's claim that Balog owed her money for repairs and cleaning
 Wakita had done with respect to the Premises.
 
We note that Wakita's pro se opening brief is seriously 
deficient. It fails to comply with Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b) (2010) in numerous respects, including that it: fails to contain "[a] concise statement of the points of error set forth in separately numbered paragraphs"; fails to state "where in the record the alleged error occurred"; fails to state, "when the point involves a finding or conclusion of the court . . . , either a quotation of the finding or conclusion urged as error or reference to appended findings and conclusions"; and fails to contain a section on the standard of review. 
Even if we were to overlook these deficiencies in
 
Wakita's opening brief, because her appeal essentially challenges
 the findings and conclusions made by the District Court after
 presiding over her trial, we cannot overlook Wakita's failure to
 make the trial transcripts part of the record on appeal.
 
The appellant has the burden of providing the appellate 
court with a sufficient record on appeal to address the issues raised. Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai
'i 225, 230–231, 909 
P.2d 553, 558–559 (1995). HRAP Rule 10 (2012) imposes an obligation on the appellant to order transcripts of oral 
3
           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    
proceedings before the trial court when the appellant "desires to 
raise any point on appeal that requires consideration of [such] oral proceedings[.]" HRAP Rule 10(b)(1)(A); see Bettencourt, 80 Hawai
'i at 230, 909 P.2d at 558. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has 
also specifically stated: 
When an appellant desires to raise any point on appeal
that requires the consideration of the oral proceedings
before the court appealed from, the appellant bears the
burden to show error by reference to matters in the record,
and he or she has the responsibility of providing the
relevant transcript.
 
State v. Hoang, 93 Hawai 'i 333, 334, 3 P.3d 499, 500 (2000). 
Without the trial transcripts, Wakita cannot show that
 
the District Court erred in its findings of fact.2 Because the
 
District Court's findings of fact support its conclusions of law,
 
and because Wakita fails to demonstrate that the District Court
 misapplied the law, we affirm the District Court's Judgment.
 SGM Partnership v. Nelson, 5 Haw. App. 526, 529, 705 P.2d 49, 52
 (1985) (determining that "[a] conclusion of law which is
 supported by the trial court's findings of fact and which
 reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be
 overturned" on appeal).
 
III.
 
A.
 
Wakita contends that the District Court erred in
 
determining that she entered into a rental agreement with a one-
year term, and instead should have applied rules applicable to a
 month-to-month tenancy. Wakita's claim is apparently based on
 the fact that the Rental Agreement on its first page incorrectly
 identifies the address of the Premises as a Noe Street address,
 which is Balog's residence address, instead of the Ainaola Drive
 address for the Premises. However, Wakita does not dispute that
 
2We also note that Wakita does not specifically challenge
any of the District Court's findings of fact, and "unchallenged
factual findings are deemed to be binding on appeal[.]" Okada 
Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai 'i 450, 459, 40 P.3d
73, 82 (2002). 
4
           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    
she knew the correct address for the Premises or that the correct
 
address for the Premises appears under her signature on the
 Rental Agreement. More importantly, the District Court made the
 following factual findings:
 
1.	 [Balog], as Landlord, entered into that certain Hawaii
Residential Lease Agreement (the "Rental Agreement")
dated June 13, 2010 with [Wakita], as Tenant, for the
rental of premises located at [an Ainaola Drive
address] (the "Premises").
 
2.	 The term of the Rental Agreement was for a period of
one year, commencing on July 15, 2010 and terminating
on June 30, 2011.
 
Without the trial transcripts, this Court has no basis
 
for disputing the District Court's factual findings. Based on
 
the District Court's factual findings, we reject Wakita's claim
 that the District Court erred in determining that she entered
 into a rental agreement with a one-year term, instead of a month-
to-month tenancy. 
B.
 
Wakita's claim that the District Court improperly
 
imposed rental obligations on her as a holdover tenant is
 premised on her contention that she was a month-to-month tenant. 
Wakita contends that the notice of termination she received from
 Balog was insufficient to terminate the tenancy of a month-to­month tenant on June 30, 2011. Because the premise for Wakita's
 claim is refuted by the District Court's factual findings that
 Wakita had entered into a one-year lease that terminated on June
 30, 2011, and because Wakita cannot show that those findings are
 erroneous, we reject her claim. We conclude that Wakita fails to
 show that the District Court erred in imposing rental obligations
 on her as a holdover tenant.
 
C.
 
Wakita contends that because Balog failed to prepare a
 
written inventory of the Premises prior to Wakita's initial
 occupancy, the District Court erred in finding her responsible
 for damages to the Premises that were discovered after she
 vacated the premises. Wakita relies on Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
5
           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    
(HRS) § 521-42(a) (2006), which provides that if the landlord,
 
prior to the initial date of occupancy, fails to prepare a
 written inventory detailing the condition of the premises and any
 furnishings or appliances provided, upon the termination of the
 tenancy, the condition of the premises and such furnishings or
 appliances "shall be rebuttably presumed to be the same as when
 the tenant first occupied the premises." 
However the presumption set forth in HRS § 521-42(a) is
 
not conclusive; it may be rebutted by contrary evidence. The
 District Court found that County Housing had inspected the
 Premises on July 14, 2010 (prior to the commencement of Wakita's
 occupancy) "at which time the Premises passed inspection"; that
 "[t]his pre-occupancy inspection did not identify any damage to
 doors, holes in the drywall, mildew or mold on the Premises,
 missing or broken toilet seats or shower rods, broken medicine
 cabinets, broken windows or screens, stains on the carpet, [or]
 rats in the Premises"; and that an inspection conducted after
 Wakita vacated the Premises revealed damages to the Premises,
 including "four broken doors, three missing towel bars, holes in
 the drywall, a broken medicine cabinet, missing light and
 doorbell covers and stain in the carpet."
 
We have no basis for disputing these findings. Even
 
assuming that Balog failed to prepare the written inventory
 required by HRS § 521-42(a) and that the rebuttable presumption
 set forth in the statute applied, we cannot conclude that the
 evidence presented at trial was insufficient to rebut the
 presumption. Wakita therefore failed to show that the District
 Court erred in finding her responsible for damages to the
 Premises that were discovered after she vacated the Premises. 
D.
 Wakita argues that the District Court erred in
 
applying her security deposit towards the amounts it determined
 she owed to Balog. Wakita relies on HRS § 521-44(c) (2006),
 which generally provides that a landlord shall not be entitled to
 retain any portion of a security deposit unless the landlord
 
6
           
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    
provides a tenant with written notice, not later than fourteen
 
days after termination of the rental agreement, of the landlord's
 intent to retain any amount of the security deposit.
 
However, without the trial transcripts, we cannot
 
determine whether Balog failed to comply with HRS § 521-44(c).
3
 
In addition, Wakita cites no authority to support a claim that a
 landlord's failure to comply with the requirements of HRS § 521­44(c) would preclude the District Court from applying a tenant's
 security deposit as a credit against amounts the District Court
 determined were owed to the landlord after a trial. We conclude
 that Wakita failed to show that the District Court erred in
 applying her security deposit towards the amounts she owed to
 Balog.
 
E.
 
Wakita argues that the District Court erred in
 
rejecting her claim that Balog owed Wakita money for repairs and
 cleaning Wakita had done regarding the Premises. Without the
 trial transcripts, Wakita cannot demonstrate that the District
 Court erred.
 
IV.
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the District Court's
 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 30, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Crystal A. Wakita
Defendant-Appellant pro se Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Robert D. Triantos 
Edmund W. K. Haitsuka (Carlsmith Ball LLP)for Plaintiff-Appellee 
3Balog asserts in her answering brief that "[t]here is no
evidence in the record before this Court that [Balog] did not
furnish the written security deposit notice to [Wakita] within
fourteen days after the Rental Agreement was terminated on June
20, 2011."
 
7
           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER    
Associate Judge
 
8
 