NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000777
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE MATTER OF THE
 
ELLEN K. KALAHELE REVOCABLE LIVING TRUST
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(TRUST NO. 10-1-0141)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant Thalia K. White-Ching (White-
Ching), beneficiary of the Ellen K. Kalahele (Ellen) Revocable
 
Living Trust (Kalahele Trust), appeals from the (1) April 18,
 2011 "Order Granting Petition of Brian M.C. Pang For Appointment
 Of A Guardian Ad Litem, Determination Of Successor Trustee And
 For Vesting Order For The Ellen K. Kalahele Revocable Living
 Trust" (Vesting Order); and (2) August 7, 2012 "Amended Judgment
 On Order Granting Petition Of Brian M.C. Pang For Appointment Of
 A Guardian Ad Litem, Determination Of Successor Trustee And For
 Vesting Order For The Ellen K. Kalahele Revocable Living Trust"
 
1
both entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit
court).
 
White-Ching's opening brief specifies the following
 
points of error by the Estate and Probate Branch (probate court):
 
1
 The Honorable Derrick H. M. Chan presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) adopting the Report of the Kokua Kanawai (Kokua
 
Kanawai Report) without holding an evidentiary hearing;
 
(2) declining to defer issuance of its Vesting Order
 
while the parties were awaiting a post-trial ruling in regard to
 
guardianship issues;
 
(3) adopting the Kokua Kanawai Report, which contained
 
recommendations that contradicted Ellen's expressed wishes and
 intentions regarding who should and should not be her fiduciaries
 and beneficiaries;
 
(4) adopting the Kokua Kanawai Report's recommendation
 
that the September 2010 trust document should be the operative
 trust document; and
 
(5) adopting the Kokua Kanawai Report's recommendation
 
to appoint Brian M.C. Pang, Esq. (Pang) and Karen Fujiyama
 (Fujiyama) as successor co-trustees.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude White­Ching's appeal is without merit.
 
The probate court acted within its jurisdiction when it 
adopted the Kokua Kanawai Report, issued its Vesting Order, and filed its judgment notwithstanding the Family Court of the First Circuit (family court) proceedings. "The [probate] court has jurisdiction over protective proceedings and the family court has jurisdiction over guardianship proceedings." Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 560:1-302(c) (2006 Repl.); In re Estate of Kam, 110 Hawai
'i 8, 20, 129 P.3d 511, 523 (2006) (noting that probate 
courts and circuit family courts may have concurrent jurisdiction over guardianship of the property proceedings) (citation omitted). "Where protective and guardianship proceedings relating to the same person have been initiated, they may be consolidated in the [probate] court or in the family court as the [probate] court and the family court in the exercise of their discretion shall determine." HRS § 560:1-302(d) (2006 Repl.). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Similarly, "[w]here protective and guardianship proceedings
 
relating to the same person have been initiated, they may be
 consolidated in the [probate] court as the [probate] court in the
 exercise of its discretion shall determine." HRS § 560:5-106(3)
 (Repl. 2006). The probate court was not required to consolidate
 its proceedings with those of the family court nor was the
 probate court required to stay its proceedings or orders pending
 the resolution of the guardianship matter in the family court. 
The probate court did not abuse its discretion in
 
declining to hold an evidentiary hearing on Kalahele Trust
 matters. The Kokua Kanawai Report recommended against setting
 the instant case for trial because: (1) Ellen would be burdened
 with additional legal fees and costs; (2) speedy resolution of
 disputes concerning the trusteeship were necessary to permit
 access to First Hawaiian Bank account monies, which were needed
 to pay Ellen's real property taxes; and (3) timely resolution of
 these issues would be appropriate in view of Ellen's advanced
 age. Ellen was 93 years old at the time that the Kokua Kanawai
 Report was prepared in 2011. Accordingly, the probate court
 concluded that Ellen's best interests would be served by granting
 Pang's "Petition Of [Pang] For Appointment Of A Guardian Ad
 Litem, Determination Of Successor Trustee And For Vesting Order
 For The Ellen K. Kalahele Revocable Living Trust" (Petition) and
 not allowing the Petition to be litigated as a contested case and
 not holding an evidentiary hearing.
 
The probate court did not abuse its discretion in
 
adopting Kokua Kanewai Report recommendations because it
 contained findings that contradicted those of the family court. 
The family court's findings and conclusions were based on a four-
day trial and review of White-Ching's and her nephew Nolan
 George's filings concerning the fitness of White-Ching to serve
 as Ellen's guardian. Pang was not a party to the family court
 proceedings. Further, in granting White-Ching's guardianship
 petition, the family court relied on an order of priorities for
 qualifying a guardian of the person under HRS § 560:5-310 (Repl.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
2006), whereas the probate court granted Pang's petition pursuant
 
to statutes concerning the appointment of trustees, HRS §§ 560:5­106; 560:7-201 (2006 Repl.), and 560:7-206 (2006 Repl.).
 
Finally, White-Ching provides no argument in support of 
her contention that the probate court reversibly erred in adopting recommendations that Pang and Fujiyama be appointed successor trustees. We are not obliged to address matters for which appellants have failed to present discernible arguments and decline to do so here. Exotics Hawaii-Kona, Inc., 116 Hawai
'i 
277, 288, 172 P.3d 1021, 1032 (2007). 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Circuit Court of the
 
First Circuit's: (1) April 18, 2011 "Order Granting Petition of
 Brian M.C. Pang For Appointment Of A Guardian Ad Litem,
 Determination Of Successor Trustee And For Vesting Order For The
 Ellen K. Kalahele Revocable Living Trust;" and (2) August 7, 2012
 "Amended Judgment On Order Granting Petition Of Brian M.C. Pang
 For Appointment Of A Guardian Ad Litem, Determination Of
 Successor Trustee And For Vesting Order For The Ellen K. Kalahele
 Revocable Living Trust" are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 8, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Thalia K. White-Ching
Respondent-Appellant pro se. 
Brian M.C. Pang
Petitioner-Appellee pro se. 
Stephen G. Bess
for Respondent-Appellee NolanGeorge. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 
4
 