NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000211 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
CODY M. SAFADAGO, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(Case No. 5CPC-17-0000167) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: 
Ginoza, Chief Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Cody M. Safadago (S
afadago) was 
charged with (1) Theft in the Second Degree by Shoplifting and 
(2) Attempted Theft in the Third Degree by Shoplifting. The charges were based on two incidents that took place in Havaiki Oceanic and Tribal Art (Havaiki), a retail shop in Hanalei, 
Kaua# i. A jury found him guilty as charged. The Circuit Court 
of the Fifth Circuit
1 entered a Judgment of Conviction and 
Sentence (Judgment) on March 6, 2019. Safadago appealed. His 
opening brief states the following points of error: 
A. denial of his motion in limine no. 1 to exclude 
any evidence of the value of the items he stole; 
B. denial of his motion in limine no. 2 to exclude 
statements he made to one of the Havaiki co-owners; 
C. denial of his motion to suppress all evidence 
obtained after he was arrested; 
D. following an improper procedure for deciding his 
motion to suppress; 
1 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
E. refusal to admit evidence of a statement made by a 
police officer to Dylan Thomas (Thomas), one of the Havaiki co-
owners; 
F. denial of his motions in limine nos. 3 and 4 to 
exclude security videos from January 4, 2017, and January 7, 
2017; 
G. refusal to give his proposed jury instructions; 
H. denial of his motion for new trial; and 
I. denial of his "Prejudicial Joinder Motion" for 
separate trials on the two counts. 
Although not identified as a point of error, Safadago's 
opening brief argues that the circuit court plainly erred by failing to advise him of his rights under Rule 48 of the Hawai# i 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) and his constitutional right to a 
speedy trial. As we explain below, the circuit court erred by 
denying Safadago's motion for new trial. 
We vacate the Judgment 
and remand for a new trial. 
Safadago's points of error challenge, among other 
things, pretrial orders entered by the circuit court after it conducted an evidentiary hearing. The orders contained findings of fact. Safadago has not challenged any finding of fact in the manner required by Rule 28(b)(4)(C) of the 
Hawai# i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP). 
Accordingly, the findings of fact 
are binding upon Safadago in challenging those orders. Kawamata 
Farms, Inc. v. United Agri Prods., 86 Hawai# i 214, 252, 948 P.2d 
1055, 1093 (1997) (holding that appellants who failed to comply with HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(C) waived any challenge to findings of fact, and unchallenged findings of fact were binding upon appellants). The unchallenged findings of fact provide some context for this case: 
1. On January 7, 2017, [Safadago] entered into Havaiki
LLC. 
2. While there Dylan Thomas recognized [Safadago] from aprior theft incident.[
2] 
2 Victoria Juvrud and Thomas are two of the owners of Havaiki. On 
January 5, 2017, Juvrud arrived at the shop and discovered that six braceletsthat had been on display the day before were missing from the display case.
(continued...) 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3. Dylan Thomas compared the surveillance footage from
the prior incident to [Safadago] and thought it wasthe same person. 
4. Dylan Thomas told [Safadago] that he was going to gooutside and throw out some boxes. 
5. Dylan Thomas then saw [Safadago] re-enter the store. 
6. Dylan Thomas followed [Safadago] into the store. 
7. Dylan Thomas saw [Safadago] stuffing merchandise intohis pocket. 
8. Dylan Thomas used his left arm to hold [Safadago]'sright arm and told [Safadago] to put the merchandiseback. 
9. [Safadago] removed some of the merchandise [from hispocket]. 
10. Dylan Thomas told [Safadago] to take all of themerchandise out of his pocket. 
11. [Safadago] removed more merchandise [from his pocket]. 
12. Dylan Thomas told [Safadago] that he knew [Safadago]had stolen merchandise before and told [Safadago] that[Safadago] could either return the merchandise orDylan Thomas would call the police. 
13. [Safadago] told Dylan Thomas that he had already soldsome of the merchandise but would retrieve the merchandise from the pavilion area where he wasstaying. 
14. Dylan Thomas asked [Safadago] for his identification. 
15. [Safadago] said that he did not have anyidentification. 
16. Dylan Thomas told [Safadago] that if he did notprovide identification then Dylan Thomas would callthe police. 
17. [Safadago] gave Dylan Thomas his identification. 
18. [Safadago] left the store after Dylan Thomas told himthat he had until the afternoon of the following dayto return the merchandise. 
19. Dylan Thomas is not and has never been a policeofficer. 
20. Dylan Thomas did not give [Safadago] his Mirandarights. 
21. Dylan Thomas did not frisk or pat down [Safadago]. 
2 (...continued)
Juvrud told Thomas that the bracelets were missing. Thomas reviewed Havaiki's security video from January 4, 2017. He found the point in the video when thebracelets no longer appeared on the display. An unidentified man was at the display case at the time. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
22. Dylan Thomas did not put his hands into [Safadago]'s
pockets at any time. 
(Footnote added.) 
A. The circuit court's denial of motion in limine no. 1 was not reversible error. 
A motion in limine requests a pretrial order enjoining 
opposing counsel from asking certain questions or eliciting 
certain evidence at a later jury trial. Kobashigawa v. Silva, 
129 Hawai# i 313, 321-22, 300 P.3d 579, 587-88 (2013). The denial 
of a motion in limine to exclude questions or evidence is an interlocutory order subject to reconsideration when the question is actually asked, or the evidence is actually offered, during the trial. 
The "denial of a motion in limine to exclude, in 
itself, is not reversible error. The harm, if any, occurs when the evidence is improperly admitted at trial." Id. at 322, 300 
P.3d at 588 (cleaned up). 
Safadago's statement of the points of 
error does not contain "a quotation of the grounds urged for the objection and the full substance of the evidence admitted" at trial, as required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(A). We disregard this point of error. Kakinami v. Kakinami, 127 Hawai# i 126, 144 n.16, 
276 P.3d 695, 713 n.16 (2012). 
In addition: 
[W]hen the court cannot render an unequivocal pretrial
ruling on the admissibility of the particular evidencebecause it must wait until foundational prerequisites areestablished at trial or a proper trial record is otherwisefirst developed, the court should accordingly refrain fromrendering a pretrial ruling and defer such ruling for trial.If the trial court must defer ruling on the motion inlimine, its decision should be expressly communicated to theparties and placed on the record. 
Kobashigawa , 129 Hawai# i at 325, 300 P.3d at 591 (cleaned up). 
Safadago's motion in limine no. 1 requested exclusion of "any 
State evidence regarding the value of any allegedly stolen items." The circuit court's order denying the motion stated: 
The issues in [Safadago]'s Motion in Limine #1: To Prevent
Any Evidence of Valuation of Any Items in Count l, filed onJanuary l7, 2018 are issues for trial and are not properlybefore the Court as a Motion in Limine. 
It was appropriate for the circuit court to deny the motion in 
limine; the admissibility of evidence of value would depend upon 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
whether the State could lay a foundation for the evidence. 
Safadago's opening brief does not specify what evidence of value was admitted at trial over his objection. He has waived any evidentiary error concerning the value of any allegedly stolen items. 
B. The circuit court's denial of motion in 
limine no. 2 was not reversible error. 
Safadago's motion in limine no. 2 requested exclusion 
of statements he made to Thomas (one of the co-owners of Havaiki) 
after Thomas caught him putting merchandise into his pocket. The "denial of a motion in limine [to exclude], in itself, is not reversible error." Kobashigawa, 129 Hawai# i at 322, 300 P.3d at 
588. Safadago's statement of this point of error does not 
contain "a quotation of the grounds urged for the objection and the full substance of the evidence admitted" at trial, as required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(A). We disregard this point of error. Kakinami, 127 Hawai# i at 144 n.16, 276 P.3d at 713 n.16. 
C. The circuit court did not err by denying the
motion to suppress. 
Safadago argues that he was "illegally" arrested by 
Thomas, that he was not committing a crime when he was arrested, 
and his "statements should have been suppressed because of the illegal arrest and being forced to answer questions without being Mirandized."
3 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 803-3 (2014) provides: 
Anyone in the act of committing a crime, may be
arrested by any person present, without a warrant. 
HRS § 708-830 (2014), titled "Theft," provides in relevant part: 
A person commits theft if the person does any of the
following: 
. . . . 
3 See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 444, 471 (1966) (holding
that before any custodial interrogation, the suspect must be warned that they
have the right to remain silent, that any statement they do make may be usedas evidence against them, and that they have the right to consult with alawyer, either retained or appointed, and to have the lawyer with them duringthe interrogation). 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(8) Shoplifting. 
(a) A person conceals or takes possession of
the goods or merchandise of any store or retail estab-
lishment, with intent to defraud. 
HRS § 705-500 (2014), titled "Criminal attempt," provides inrelevant part: 
(1) A person is guilty of an attempt to commit a
crime if the person: 
. . . . 
(b) Intentionally engages in conduct which, under
the circumstances as the person believes them to be,
constitutes a substantial step in a course of conductintended to culminate in the person's commission of thecrime. 
After Thomas told Safadago (whom Thomas suspected was the person 
thought to have previously stolen merchandise from Havaiki) that he was going to step away from the shop, he saw Safadago quickly re-enter the shop, pull items off the display shelf, and conceal them in his pocket. We conclude that it was reasonable for Thomas to believe that Safadago was in the act of committing or attempting to commit the crime of theft by shoplifting and the element of immediacy justified the "citizen's arrest"
4 of 
Safadago. State v. Keawe, 107 Hawai# i 1, 6, 108 P.3d 304, 309 
(2005) (holding that HRS § 803-3 envisions a situation in which a crime is in progress and, thus, the element of immediacy justi-fies the departure from the general warrant requirement in HRS § 803-1 (2014) and Article I, section 7 of the Hawai# i 
Constitution). 
Safadago cites no authority in support of his argument 
that a "private citizen" is obligated to advise an arrestee of their Miranda rights before a custodial interrogation. To its 
4 Thomas arguably never "arrested" Safadago. HRS § 803-6 (2014)
provides, in relevant part: 
(a) . . . [I]f the person makes the arrest without warrant
in any of the cases in which it is authorized by law, the
person . . . shall require the party arrested to submit and
be taken to the police station  or judge. This done, the
arrest is complete. 
(Emphasis added.) Thomas did not threaten to report Safadago to the policeuntil after Safadago admitted taking merchandise from Thomas's shop, andThomas ultimately allowed Safadago to leave the shop without calling thepolice. 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
credit, the State cites to State v. Bowe, 77 Hawai# i 51, 881 P.2d 
538 (1994). 
In that case, police suspected then-University of 
Hawai# i basketball player Troy Bowe of being involved in a fight 
at one of the dormitories on campus. The police contacted then-
men's basketball head coach Riley Wallace and asked him to help them interview Bowe. Coach Wallace instructed Bowe to go to the police station and make a statement. Bowe believed that if he did not follow Coach Wallace's instructions he would be suspended from the basketball team and his athletic scholarship could be revoked. Wallace accompanied Bowe to the police station. Bowe was given Miranda
 warnings, waived his right to remain silent 
and, while being interrogated, admitted assaulting the complain-ing witness. The circuit court granted Bowe's motion to suppress his confession. The state appealed. The Hawai# i Supreme Court 
affirmed, but did not rule that a civilian must advise a person arrested by the civilian under HRS § 803-3 of their Miranda rights. Rather, the supreme court held that under article I, sections 5 and 10 of the Hawai# i Constitution, the coercive 
conduct of a private person may be sufficient to render a defendant's confession involuntary. Id. at 57, 881 P.2d at 544. 
However, the supreme court also stated: 
Nevertheless, we acknowledge that some sort of state
action is required to support a defendant's claim that
[their] due process rights were violated. . . . 
[A]lthough no state action is involved where an accused is
coerced into making a confession by a private individual, wefind that the state participates in that violation byallowing the coerced statements to be used as evidence. 
Id. at 59, 881 P.2d at 546. 
In this case, Safadago has not shown that any confes-
sion was coerced by Thomas, nor has Safadago shown that evidence 
of any confession was actually elicited by the State at trial over his objection. We are not obligated to search the record for information that should have been provided by Safadago. Haw. Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc.
, 114 Hawai# i 438, 480, 164 P.3d 
696, 738 (2007) (citing 
Lanai Co. v. Land Use Comm'n
, 105 Hawai# i 
296, 309 n.31, 97 P.3d 372, 385 n.31 (2004) (explaining that an appellate court "is not obligated to sift through the voluminous 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record to verify an appellant's inadequately documented 
contentions.") (citations omitted). The police had no involvement when Safadago apparently or implicitly confessed his previous theft to Thomas. Safadago has not established any State involvement in the actual use of his confession at his trial. We find no reversible error in the circuit court's denial of Safadago's motion to suppress. 
D. The procedure for deciding the motion to
suppress was not improper. 
Safadago argues that he "tried to testify about/ 
challenge the lawfulness of his arrest without a warrant at the 
beginning of the motion" but the circuit court improperly let the State call Thomas as the first witness for the evidentiary hearing. He cites no authority for the proposition. We find no error by the circuit court. See State v. Crowder, 1 Haw. App. 
60, 66, 613 P.2d 909, 914 (1980) ("Once [the defendant] challenged the lawfulness of the State's warrantless arrest and the search incidental thereto, the State had the burden of showing that the arresting officer had probable cause to make the arrest.") (citations omitted). 
E. The circuit court did not err when it refused 
to admit evidence of a police officer'sopinion. 
Safadago does not present a separate argument in 
support of this point of error, but touches on it in his argument 
about the denial of motion in limine no. 2. During the cross-examination of Thomas at the pretrial evidentiary hearing, Safadago's counsel asked whether the police officer who responded to Thomas's report told him that no crime had been committed by Safadago. The State objected. The circuit court sustained the objection. The statement at issue was made two days after Thomas caught Safadago in the store putting merchandise in his pocket; the police officer/declarant was not present at that time. No foundation for the officer's opinion was offered, and the issue was irrelevant to the proceedings. There was no error. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
F. The circuit court's denial of motions in 
limine nos. 3 and 4 was not reversible error. 
These motions in limine sought to exclude the Havaiki 
security videos from January 4, 2017, and January 7, 2017. The 
"denial of a motion in limine [to exclude], in itself, is not reversible error." Kobashigawa, 129 Hawai# i
 at 322, 300 P.3d at 
588. Safadago has not established that he objected when the State offered either of the videos as evidence during his trial, or that the circuit court erroneously overruled his objections attrial. The circuit court did not commit reversible error by denying motions in limine nos. 3 and 4.  
G. Safadago has waived any instructional error. 
Safadago's statement of the points of error does not 
contain "a quotation of the [jury] instruction, given, refused, or modified, together with the objection urged at trial[,]" as required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(B). We disregard this point of error. Kakinami, 127 
Hawai# i at 144 n.16, 276 P.3d at 713 n.16. 
H. The circuit court erred by denying Safadago's
motion for new trial. 
On September 20, 2018, the jury found Safadago guilty 
as charged. 
That evening an email was sent to the Kaua# i 
prosecutor's office and Safadago's defense counsel, among others.
The email stated:  
As an Officer of the Court I need to inform all 
parties and the Court of the following: 
I know one of the jurors that was in the Safadago
theft trial. After the verdict was reached, I was informed
that during deliberation and prior to verdict, a femalejuror told the other eleven jurors in the jury room that[Safadago] was the same individual that had killed a girl inKapaa while driving a stolen vehicle. She also told the other jurors that when she saw the Washington Driver'sLicense that was admitted as evidence in trial she realized 
or remembered that he was the same individual who was 
mentioned on Facebook as being a thief in the Hanalei areathat people should be on the look out [sic] for, and forbeing the person who killed the local girl while driving astolen vehicle. 
I was further told that the Foreperson told the other
jurors they needed to inform the Bailiff of thisinformation. However the Foreperson was then persuaded notto report it after the female said "she" could still be fairand impartial. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Please note that I used to represent Mr. Safadago in
his pending Manslaughter case until he requested I withdraw.
So I did. However, I believe I do still owe him an [sic]duty of loyalty. 
On September 24, 2018, Safadago filed a motion for new trial 
based on juror misconduct. The circuit court conducted an evidentiary hearing; eight of the twelve jurors testified. Thecircuit court denied the motion for new trial and entered the following findings of fact and conclusions of law:  
FINDINGS OF FACT 
1. On October 10, 2018, [Safadago] brought in eight (8)
jurors to testify, and all eight (8) did testify. 
2. Four (4) of the jurors did not recall hearing any
comment by another juror about other acts by [Safadago] or
other statements about [Safadago] on Facebook. 
3. The other four (4) jurors heard another juror comment,
during deliberations, about other acts by [Safadago] or
other statements about [Safadago] on Facebook. 
4. That juror was told by other jurors that the
information about [Safadago]'s other acts and other
Statements about [Safadago] on Facebook were not relevant. 
5. At least one juror took the initiative to stop the
person from further commenting[.] 6. Majority of the jurors recall deliberating for at
least a couple of hours if not more, and the comment(s) at
issue by the one juror occurred early in deliberations. 
7. After the one juror's comment(s) at issue were made
all the jurors continued deliberations. 8. The jurors watched the surveillance video in evidence
twice because they were weighing the evidence. 9. The jurors used the entirety of the deliberations to
review and discuss the evidence. l0. All the witnesses testified credibly. 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 
1. The initial burden is on [Safadago] to make a prima
facie showing that there has been substantial prejudice to
his right to a fair and impartial jury, and if that burdenis sustained then the State has the burden of rebutting thatpresumption. 
2. If the burden switches to the State the State must 
prove the prejudice was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 3. To make a prima facie showing that a juror's comments
during the deliberations deprived him of the right to a fair
trial and impartial jury [Safadago] must show that by anobjective evaluation of the comment at issue that (1) an 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
improper comment was made, and (2) the comment was used as a
circumstance against [Safadago]. 
4. The State concedes on the first prong, and the Court
finds that a juror made an improper comment. 5. Regarding the second prong; however, [Safadago] did
not show that the comment was used as a circumstance against
[him.] 
6. Because [Safadago] must show the second prong of test
[sic] [Safadago] did not meet his burden of [sic] make a
prima facie showing of [sic] that the juror's comment(s)during the deliberations deprived him of the right to a fairtrial and impartial jury. 
Conclusions of law nos. 1, 3, 5, and 6 are incorrect. 
When a motion for new trial is based upon juror misconduct, 
"[t]he defendant bears the initial burden of making a prima facie showing of a deprivation that could substantially prejudice [their] right to a fair trial by an impartial jury." State v. 
Chin, 135 Hawai# i 437, 443, 353 P.3d 979, 985 (2015) (cleaned up) 
(underscoring in original). 
In this case, the September 20, 2018 
email to the prosecutor's office and defense counsel, as well as finding of fact no. 3, made a prima facie showing that Safadago's right to a fair trial by an impartial jury could have been substantially prejudiced. See State v. Keliiholokai, 58 Haw. 
356, 569 P.2d 891 (1977) (noting the potential that jurors read news article about defendant's prior convictions could be substantially prejudicial); 
State v. Bailey, 126 Hawai# i 383, 271 
P.3d 1142 (2012) (noting that juror's statements to other jurors concerning defendant's prior convictions was sufficient to show potential prejudice to defendant's right to a fair trial by an impartial jury). 
"Once the defendant makes a prima facie showing of a 
deprivation, a rebuttable presumption of prejudice is raised . . . that triggers the court's obligation to investigate the totality of the circumstances." Chin
, 135 Hawai# i at 443, 353 
P.3d at 985 (cleaned up). "An investigation into the totality of circumstances includes an individual examination of potentially tainted jurors, outside the presence of the other jurors, to determine the influence, if any, of the extraneous matters." 
Id.
 at 448, 353 P.3d at 990 (cleaned up). "To overcome the pre-
sumption of prejudice, the State must prove that the outside 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
influence on the jury was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." 
Id. (citations omitted). "The trial court's investigation of the totality of the circumstances is a necessary prerequisite to finding that the misconduct was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." Id. (citation omitted). 
In this case, four of the jurors were not called to 
testify at the evidentiary hearing. "Because the right to an impartial jury in a criminal trial is so fundamental to our entire judicial system, it therefore follows that a criminal defendant is entitled to twelve impartial jurors." State v. 
Pitts, 146 Hawai# i 120, 129, 456 P.3d 484, 493 (2019) (emphasis 
added). 
The transcript of proceedings indicates that the juror 
who mentioned the fatal automobile accident and the Facebook post did not testify during the evidentiary hearing, nor was she identified by any of the jurors who did testify. The circuit court did not have before it the totality of circumstances surrounding the alleged juror misconduct. See State v. 
Williamson, 72 Haw. 97, 104, 807 P.2d 593, 597 (1991) ("[B]y not inquiring into the identity of the juror who brought the dictionary and obtaining a personal explanation from [them] as to its use, the trial court did not have before it the totality of circumstances surrounding the misconduct to decide whether it was harmless."). 
Having failed to call four of the jurors, the State 
did not sustain its burden of proving that the outside influence on the jury was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The circuit court erred by denying Safadago's motion for new trial. 
I. Safadago did not preserve his "Prejudicial
Joinder Motion" for appeal. 
Safadago argues that the circuit court erred in denying 
his Prejudicial Joinder Motion
5 because Count I and Count II 
involved "two similar offenses that happened on two separate 
days[,]" and "to try [him] on two different theft charges at the same time is simply unfair." Safadago filed his Prejudicial Joinder Motion pursuant to HRPP Rules 8 and 14, among others. 
5 The motion should have been filed as a motion to sever the charges
for separate trials. 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The order denying the motion was entered on May 24, 2018, before 
the start of trial. The record on appeal contains no indication that Safadago renewed his Prejudicial Joinder Motion either at the close of the State's case or at the close of all evidence. "[A] defendant's motion under [HRPP] Rule 14 for a severance of counts due to prejudicial joinder must be renewed at the close of the prosecution's evidence or at the conclusion of all the evidence and unless made at that time it is deemed waived." State v. Matias, 57 Haw. 96, 98-99, 550 P.2d 900, 902 (1976) (citations omitted) (underscoring added); see also State v. Balanza, 93 Hawai# i 279, 288, 1 P.3d 281, 290 (2000) (noting that 
failure to renew a pretrial motion for severance waives the claim). 
The Balanza
 court highlighted that "[t]his is due in 
part to the difficulty of making a finding of prejudice before trial." Id. at 288, 1 P.3d at 290 (citing Matias, 57 Haw. at 98, 
550 P.2d at 902). Safadago's "[f]ailure to renew the request for severance during the course of trial at least suggests that the prejudice now asserted to have resulted from the joinder may not have seemed so substantial to [Safadago] in the context of the trial[ ]." Matias, 57 Haw. at 100, 550 P.2d at 903 (citation 
omitted). Safadago's claim of error on this point is waived. Id. 
J. The circuit court did not plainly err by
allegedly failing to inform Safadago of hisright to speedy trial. 
Finally, Safadago contends that the circuit court 
violated HRPP Rule 48. He does not make a Rule 48 calculation of 
excluded periods under HRPP Rule 48(c) or (d); his only argument is that the circuit court never advised him that he had a right (constitutional or under HRPP Rule 48) to a speedy trial. The only case he cites for that proposition is State v. Libero
, 103 
Hawai# i 490, 83 P.3d 753 (App. 2003), 
abrogated by State v. 
Frisbee
, 114 Hawai# i 76, 156 P.3d 1182 (2007). In 
Libero
 we 
recognized that a criminal defendant's right to a speedy trial is guaranteed by the United States Constitution and the 
Hawai# i 
Constitution. Id.
 at 497-98, 83 P.3d at 760-61. We did not, 
however, rule that a trial court must sua sponte advise a 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
criminal defendant of those rights. We have located no published 
Hawai# i appellate decision so holding, and we decline to make 
such a ruling now. 
Based upon the foregoing, the Judgment entered by the 
circuit court on March 6, 2019, is vacated and this matter is remanded to the circuit court for a new trial. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 21, 2020. 
On the briefs: 
Justin F. Kollar,
Tracy Murakami,for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Lisa M. GinozaChief Judge
 
/s/ Derrick H.M. Chan
John H. Murphy,for Defendant-Appellant. Associate Judge
/s/ Keith K. HiraokaAssociate Judge 
14 