 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER HAWAIʻI  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000364 27-JAN-2026 08:07 AM Dkt. 117 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000364 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
STATE OF HAWAIʻ I, Plaintiff-Appellee, 
v. 
BRANDON GONZAGA, Defendant-Appellant. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2CPC-20-0000653)  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and McCullen, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Brandon Gonzaga appeals the 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit's  April 11, 2024 Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence on a single count of Sexual Assault in 
the First Degree, in violation of Hawaiʻ i Revised Statutes (HRS) 1
1 The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided. We note that at all relevant 
times, including at trial, the complaining witness (Minor) was under the age 
of eighteen.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
   
  
   
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
     
    
 
  § 707-730(1)(b) (2014).  On appeal, Gonzaga challenges: (1) the 
credibility and competency of the complaining witness (Minor); 
(2) the charging instrument; (3) the jury instructions; (4) the 
failure to further clarify the verdict; and (5) the failure to 
further investigate the alleged misconduct of an alternate 
juror. 3 2
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve the 
points of error as discussed below and affirm. 
In 2020, the State indicted Gonzaga on twenty-one 
counts of Sexual Assault in the First Degree and two counts of 
2 The 2014 version of HRS § 707-730(1)(b), "Sexual assault in the first 
degree," provides in relevant part that "[a] person commits the offense of 
sexual assault in the first degree if . . . [t]he person knowingly engages in 
sexual penetration with another person who is less than fourteen years 
old[.]" The definition of "sexual penetration" provides that " each act of 
sexual penetration shall constitute a separate offense." HRS § 707-700 
(2014). 
3 In addition, Gonzaga raises two other points of error that we decline 
to reach: 
First, Gonzaga alleges prosecutorial misconduct on appeal but makes no 
specific argument and cites no authority in his opening brief to explain how 
the identified conduct amounted to prosecutorial misconduct. See Hawaiʻi 
Rules of Appellate Procedure (
HRAP) Rule 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be 
deemed waived.") And Gonzaga did not object to any of the challenged 
statements at trial. Although this court may, at its option, review alleged 
prosecutorial misconduct for plain error, we decline to do so. See 
State v. 
Willis
, 156 Hawaiʻi 195, 204, 572 P.3d 668, 677 (2025); HRAP Rule 28(b )(4). 
Next
, Gonzaga argues that the circuit court abused its discretion when 
it declined to stay his judgment and sentence pending appeal pursuant to HRS § 804-4(b) (Supp. 2019), because the court applied the incorrect standard. 
Based on our disposition of the other issues in this case, we need not reach 
this point of error. 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 Sexual Assault in the Third Degree. Each count alleged 
different sexual acts involving Minor, who was under the age of 
fourteen at all times alleged, during various timeframes, 
usually spanning one or two months, between January 1, 2018, and 
August 31, 2019. 
Relevant to this appeal is Count Six, 
occurring between April 1 and May 31, 2018: 
That during or about the period of April 1, 2018,  
through May 31, 2018, inclusive, County  of Maui, State of 
[Hawaiʻi], BRANDON GONZAGA did knowingly engage in sexual 
penetration with another person who is less than fourteen 
(14) years old, by vaginal intercourse, thereby committing 
the offense of Sexual Assault in the First Degree in 
violation of Section 707- 730(1)(b) of the [Hawaiʻ i] Revised 
Statutes.  
During trial, Minor testified with specificity to the 
first time Gonzaga sexually assaulted her, explaining that after 
groping her breasts and butt while she was lying on her bed 
playing on her cellphone, Gonzaga pulled aside Minor's spandex 
shorts and penetrated her vagina with his penis. This occurred 
prior to April 2018, while Gonzaga and Minor's mother were 
dating but were still living separately. Minor was eleven years 
old at the time. 
In April 2018, Minor and her mother moved into a 
larger apartment with Gonzaga. The second apartment, which was 
on the same property, had become vacant in March 2018, following the death of the landowner's father, who had previously occupied 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
    
 the apartment.4 Minor testified that after moving into the 
larger apartment with Gonzaga, "the same kinds of things" 
continued to happen. Minor specifically testified that in April 
and May 2018, Gonzaga engaged in sexual intercourse with her 
several times a week, unless she was on her period. Minor 
testified that the abuse continued until August 2019. 
Minor explained that Gonzaga would buy her things in 
exchange for sex, including a new iPhone, an expensive microphone, and glue to make slime. Minor testified, "It was 
like a routine. It was happening every time. I knew when every 
time I wanted something, it would be for sex." 
Gonzaga exercised his right to not testify. The jury found Gonzaga guilty only as to Count Six. 
The circuit court entered its Judgment of Conviction and Sentence as to Count Six, and Gonzaga timely appealed. 
On appeal, Gonzaga challenges: (1) the credibility 
and competency of Minor; (2) the charging instrument; (3) the jury instructions; (4) the failure to further clarify the 
verdict; and (5) the failure to further investigate alleged 
misconduct of an alternate juror. We affirm. 
4 The death of the landowner's father, Harry Furomoto, and thus the 
approximate date of the move, was corroborated by his obituary, which was 
admitted into evidence. 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 (1)  First, challenging Minor's credibility and 
competency, Gonzaga contends that there was insufficient 
evidence adduced at trial to support his conviction. 
Gonzaga argues Minor was not credible as she "claimed 
that 'God' was 'speaking through her.'" However, "it is well-
settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues 
dependent upon the credibility of witnesses." State v. Pulse, 
83 Hawaiʻ i 229, 244-45, 925 P.2d 797, 812-13 (1996) (brackets 
omitted). 
Gonzaga also argues the circuit court committed plain 
error by not ordering a hearing on Minor's competency to 
testify. According to Gonzaga, Minor's testimony called into 
question her competency to testify pursuant to Hawaiʻ i Rules of 
Evidence (
HRE) Rule 603.1 and that, under State v. Kelekolio
, 74 
Haw. 479, 849 P.2d 58 (1993), the circuit court was required to 
order sua sponte a competency hearing for Minor "once [Minor] 
began claiming that she was no longer testifying herself, and 
that instead 'God' was testifying 'for her'." Gonzaga also 
argues that Minor's "claimed divine intervention" made it 
"impossible to successfully impeach her." 
As an initial matter, Gonzaga misstates Minor's 
testimony. While it is true that Minor initially testified "God 
just comes in and he speaks for me," she clarified on redirect that God "wasn't speaking for me. It was me speaking, but he 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  was speaking through me." She explained that her faith in God 
helped her overcome her fear of speaking about her experiences. 
And Minor testified that being asked questions by the attorneys 
"triggered" memories that she had tried to forget. 
Turning to Gonzaga's argument, under HRE Rule 603.1, 
"[a] person is disqualified to be a witness if the person is 
(1) incapable of expressing oneself so as to be understood, 
either directly or through interpretation by one who can understand the person, or (2) incapable of understanding the 
duty of a witness to tell the truth." 
In Kelekolio
, the Hawaiʻi Supreme Court held that a 
trial court commits plain error where a complainant's competency 
to testify is reasonably called into question and the trial 
court does not engage in an independent inquiry and make express 
findings as to competency. 74 Haw. at 528, 849 P.2d at 80. 
There, a "Handi-Van" driver was convicted of kidnapping and 
sexually assaulting his lone passenger, a woman with Down's 
Syndrome and "the cognitive level of a four- to seven-year-old 
child." Id.
 at 486-87, 849 P.2d at 62-63. The court noted the 
trial court made no finding of competency despite complainant's 
competency to testify being reasonably called into question 
because: 
6   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 (1) when asked whether lying was good or bad, the 
complainant responded, " Good"; (2) the complainant was 
unable to identify Kelekolio, who was present in court, 
although she repeatedly referred to him in her testimony by 
name; and (3) the complainant did not appear to understand 
the meaning of particular sexual and other terms (i.e., 
"rape" and "kidnap") that she employed in her testimony. 
Id. at 528, 849 P.2d at 80. 
Unlike Kelekolio, nothing in the record suggests that 
Minor did not understand relevant sexual or other terms during 
her trial testimony at the age of sixteen. See HRE Rule 603.1. 
Similarly, nothing in the record suggests that Minor suffered 
from any cognitive impairment that would limit her understanding 
of her duty to tell the truth. See id. Minor explained the 
differences in her testimony at trial and when she first reported the abuse as resulting from her age and lack of 
experience at the time of the sexual abuse compared to her 
increased knowledge at the time of trial: "I didn't even know 
what the heck half of the things were called that he was doing to me. I was just saying what happened. I was so innocent and 
young." The facts here differ materially from those of 
Kelekolio. 
Because Minor's competency had not been reasonably 
called into question, a competency hearing was not required. Thus, the circuit court did not plainly err. 
(2) In his second point of error, Gonzaga contends 
that, under State v. Modica, 58 Haw. 249, 567 P.2d 420 (1977), 
and State v. Sasai
, 143 Hawaiʻi 285, 429 P.3d 1214 (2018), he 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 should have instead been charged with a single count of 
Continuous Sexual Assault of a Minor Under the Age of Fourteen 
Years (Continuous Sexual Assault), in violation of HRS § 707-
733.6(1) (2014).  5
In Modica, the Hawaiʻ i Supreme Court explained, where 
the proof for two separate crimes is identical, a conviction 
under the statute prescribing the more severe sentence violates 
due process and equal protections under the law. 58 Haw. at 
251, 567 P.2d at 422. 
The "chief concern" of the Modica rule, 
5 HRS § 707-733.6, "Continuous sexual assault of a minor under the age 
of fourteen years," provides: 
(1) A person commits the offense of continuous 
sexual assault of a minor under the age of fourteen years 
if the person: 
(a) Either resides in the same home with a minor under the age of fourteen years or has recurring access to the minor; and 
(b) Engages in three or more acts of sexual penetration or sexual contact with the minor 
over a period of time, while the minor is under 
the age of fourteen years. 
(2) To convict under this section, the trier of 
fact, if a jury, need unanimously agree only that the requisite number of acts have occurred; the jury need not 
agree on which acts constitute the requisite number. 
(3) No other felony sex offense involving the same 
victim may be charged in the same proceeding with a charge under this section, unless the other charged offense 
occurred outside the period of the offense charged under 
this section, or the other offense is charged in the 
alternative. A defendant may be charged with only one 
count under this section, unless more than one victim is 
involved, in which case a separate count may be charged for 
each victim. 
(4) Continuous sexual assault of a minor under the 
age of fourteen years is a class A felony. 
8   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 the Hawaiʻ i Supreme Court has emphasized, is limiting 
"[u]nbridled prosecutorial discretion." Sasai, 143 Hawaiʻ i at 
296, 429 P.3d at 1225. 
The Hawaiʻ i Supreme Court subsequently restated the 
Modica rule in Sasai: 
In sum, the Modica  rule requires the court to answer 
three questions:   (1)  whether defendant's alleged conduct 
is punishable under either of two statutory provisions; 
(2)  whether the elements of proof essential to conviction 
under the statutes are exactly the same; and, (3)  whether 
the punishment for the offense with which the defendant was 
charged or convicted is greater than the punishment for the 
alternative offense.  
Id. at 296, 429 P.3d at 1225 (citing Modica, 58 Haw. at 250-51, 
567 P.2d at 421-22). Because the Modica test is stated in the conjunctive, all three prongs must be satisfied for a charging 
instrument to violate Modica. See, e.g., State v. Whitley, 65 
Haw. 486, 487, 654 P.2d 354, 355 (1982) (per curiam) (explaining that where a test is stated in the conjunctive, all prongs of 
the test must be satisfied to prevail). 
Focusing on the second prong, the elements of the two 
offenses are not "exactly the same." See Sasai, 143 Hawaiʻ i at 
296, 429 P.3d at 1225. Continuous Sexual Assault requires proof of three or more acts of penetration and that Gonzaga resided 
with or had recurring access to Minor. 
Sexual Assault in the 
First Degree does not. Contrast HRS § 707-733.6(1)(a), with
 HRS 
§ 707-730(1)(b); see State v. Barrios, 139 Hawai‘ i 321, 335, 389 
P.3d 916, 930 (2016) (explaining that "the State believed it was 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
   
 
 able to obtain convictions in individual counts of sexual 
assault, and charged Barrios accordingly," and "it was within 
the circuit court's discretion to sentence Barrios according to 
the number of felonies for which he was convicted instead of 
following the required sentence for a single conviction of 
continuous sexual assault"). 
Thus, contrary to Gonzaga's contention, the circuit 
court did not abuse its discretion by denying his motion to dismiss based on Modica. 
(3)  Third, Gonzaga challenges the circuit court's 
jury instructions on the basis that Jury Instruction 14  was 
6
6 Jury Instruction 14, as read to the j ury, provided: 
During the trial you heard the testimony of one or 
more witnesses who were described as experts. 
Training and experience may make a person an expert 
in a particular field.  The law allows that person to state 
an opinion about matters in that field.  Merely because 
such a witness has expressed an opinion does not mean, 
however, that you must accept this opinion.  It is up to 
you to decide whether to accept this testimony and how much 
weight to give it.  You must also decide whether the 
witness's opinions were based on sound reasons, judgment, and information.  
In this case, you heard testimony from William 
Kepler, M.D.   Dr. Kepler described the physical examination 
that he conducted of [ Minor]  and his findings.  It is up to 
you to decide whether to accept or reject this testimony and if accepted how much weight to give it.  
Dr. Kepler did not reach any conclusions or render 
any opinions on the cause of what he found during his physical examination of [ Minor].   You may not consider that 
testimony as evidence that the defendant had sexually penetrated or contacted [Minor].  
(Formatting altered and emphasis added.)  Gonzaga did not object to the 
instruction as read to the jury. 
10   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 misleading. Specifically, Gonzaga argues, Jury Instruction 14 
"ostensibly left the jury wondering why Dr. Kepler's expert 
testimony was admitted at all if they were not allowed to 
consider it for the very purpose for which it was offered — 
i.e., to evaluate whether the physical findings were consistent 
with sexual penetration, or not consistent." 
When jury instructions or the omissions thereof are 
at issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when 
read and considered as a whole, the instructions given are 
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or 
misleading. . . . In that context, the real question 
becomes whether there is a reasonable possibility that 
error might have contributed to conviction. If there is 
such a reasonable possibility in a criminal case, then the error is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, and the 
judgment of conviction on which it may have been based must be set aside. 
State v. Masuda-Mercado, 157 Hawaiʻ i 116, 124, 575 P.3d 749, 757 
(2025) (quoting State v. Nichols, 111 Hawaiʻ i 327, 334, 141 P.3d 
974, 981 (2006)). 
Dr. Kepler testified that the two deep hymenal notches 
observed during his examination of Minor were consistent with -
but not conclusive of - a history of sexual penetration. The 
circuit court instructed the jury, "You may not consider that 
testimony as evidence that the defendant had sexually penetrated 
or contacted [Minor]." 
Effectively, this limiting instruction precluded the 
jury from concluding, based on Dr. Kepler's testimony alone, that Gonzaga sexually assaulted Minor. This instruction was not 
inconsistent or misleading as Dr. Kepler had no medical basis to 
11
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  opine that Gonzaga sexually assaulted Minor. And Gonzaga makes 
no other argument as to how any potential error might have 
contributed to his conviction. 
Therefore, the circuit court's instruction did not 
amount to reversible error. 
(4) Fourth, Gonzaga contends the circuit court abused 
its discretion by failing "to clarify the record after the 
polling elicited further confusion and inconsistency on the verdict, and raised serious questions as to the unanimity of the 
guilty verdict." 
Here, the circuit court polled the jury as to Count 
Six to ensure unanimity. 
The record reflects that there was 
initial confusion about which count was being polled. However, the circuit court then took steps to clarify that it was polling 
as to Count Six, at which point polling of the jury showed 
unanimity as to result: guilty as charged. 
Gonzaga argues, "The trial court's failure to conduct 
further inquiry into the confusing status of the juror's unanimous agreement as to guilt, Defendant's fundamental right 
to a fair trial was violated." However, Gonzaga points to 
nothing in the record evincing confusion or inconsistency after 
the circuit court took appropriate steps to confirm the 
unanimity of the verdict. Indeed, the juror's ultimate response 
was identical to every other juror polled. 
12
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 On this record, we cannot conclude that the circuit 
court abused its discretion. 
(5) Finally, Gonzaga contends that the circuit court 
erred in denying his request for further investigation of 
alleged misconduct by an alternate juror because the circuit 
court did not follow the procedure required under State v. Chin, 
135 Hawaiʻ i 437, 353 P.3d 979 (2015). Specifically, Gonzaga 
argues that "[t]he record plainly indicates evidence that an 
alternate juror discussed the case with a co-worker during trial 
and debated Defendant's guilt prior to close of evidence" and 
that "[t]his was enough evidence to necessitate and trigger an 
inquiry of the alternate juror." 
Under controlling caselaw, if the court determines the 
juror's conduct rises to the level of potentially substantial prejudice, it must then investigate the totality of the 
circumstances. Chin, 135 Hawaiʻ i at 445, 353 P.3d at 987. 
Here, the record shows that the circuit court 
investigated the alleged misconduct at an evidentiary hearing. 
The court concluded, based on the credible testimony before it, 
that the alternate juror's conduct did not have the potential to 
substantially prejudice Gonzaga's right to a fair trial, because 
the alternate juror played no part in deciding the case and 
there was no evidence of misconduct by any other juror. 
13
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  Based on the foregoing, the circuit court did not 
abuse its discretion by concluding that, on the record before 
it, Gonzaga had failed to establish a prima facie showing that 
the complained of conduct could have substantially prejudiced 
his right to a fair trial because the alternate juror's 
statements, while inappropriate, were essentially benign and the 
alternate juror played no role in rendering a verdict. 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court's 
April 11, 2024 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i, January 27, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
 
Brandon M. Segal, for Defendant-Appellant. 
 
Gerald K. Enriques, Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, County of Maui, 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. /s/ Katherine G. Leonard Presiding Judge 
 /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
Associate Judge 
 /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen Associate Judge 
14
 