  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000446
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
IN THE INTEREST OF IL
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 14-00102)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Appellants Father and Mother appeal separately from the
 
Decision and Order, filed on May 26, 2016 in the Family Court of
 
1
the First Circuit ("Family Court"),  which terminated Father's
and Mother's parental rights to their child, IL. 
On appeal, both Father and Mother contend that he/she

 
was not given a reasonable opportunity to reunify with IL; that
 
there was not clear and convincing evidence that he/she could not
 provide a safe family home within a reasonable period of time,
 even with the assistance of a service plan; and that it was
 reasonably foreseeable that he/she would become willing and able
 to provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a
 service plan, within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed
 two years from the child's date of entry into foster care. 
Specifically, Father contests findings of fact ("FOF") 74, 75,
 83, and 85, and conclusions of law ("COL") 11–14, and Mother
 objects to FOF 70–72, 83, and 84. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Father's and Mother's points of error as follows:
 
1
 The Honorable Bode A. Uale presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[T]he family court possesses wide discretion in making 
its decisions and those decisions will not be set aside unless 
there is a manifest abuse of discretion." Fisher v. Fisher, 111 
Hawai'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) (quoting In re Doe, 95 
Hawai'i 183, 189, 20 P.3d 616, 622 (2001)). The Family Court's 
FOF are reviewed on appeal under the "clearly erroneous" standard, while its COL are reviewed de novo, under the right/wrong standard. Id. (quoting Doe, 95 Hawai
' at 190, 20 
P.3d at 623). "Moreover, the family court is given much leeway in its examination of the reports concerning a child's care, custody, and welfare, and its conclusions in this regard, if supported by the record and not clearly erroneous, must stand on appeal." Id. (quoting Doe, 95 Hawai
' at 190, 20 P.3d at 623). 
I.	 Father's willingness and ability to provide a safe family
home.
 
There was clear and convincing evidence that Father was
 
not willing and able to provide a safe family home, even with the
 
assistance of a service plan, and that it was not reasonably
 foreseeable that Father would be able to provide a safe family
 home, even with the assistance of a service plan, within a
 reasonable period of time, not to exceed two years from the date
 IL entered foster custody. 
While at the hospital at the time of IL's birth, Father
 
and Mother were involved in two altercations that resulted in
 Father being warned that he would be barred from the hospital
 room if another altercation occurred. Furthermore, according to
 Mother, Father had an extensive history of violence toward her. 
The alleged violence served as the basis for a temporary
 restraining order ("TRO") that Mother sought against Father on
 December 11, 2014. In her application for the TRO, Mother stated
 that on December 8, 2014 Father admitted that he was going to try
 to kill Mother and then kill himself; on November 8, 2014, Father
 appeared at the Women's Institute for Human Services Shelter,
 threatened Mother, and chased her around a gas station next door;
 on November 7, 2014 Father punched Mother's jaw hard twice at a
 bus stop in front of others; on November 1, 2014 Father pulled
 Mother's hair and threw her to the ground, kicked her while she
 
2

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
was on the ground, and pinched Mother's bleeding lips shut when
 
she screamed for help; on September 15, 2014 Father pulled Mother
 out of a truck by her hair, threw her onto the street, punched
 her nose causing it to bleed, and kicked and slapped her until
 another motorist stopped nearby; on September 6, 2014, Father
 beat Mother in their bedroom; and on June 13, 2014, Father pulled
 Mother's hair and was yelling at her. 
Father told the Department of Human Services ("DHS")
 
that he drank alcohol five times per year and used marijuana
 three times a week. In July 2014 Father was ordered to follow
 the May 16, 2014 service plan that required him to complete
 substance abuse assessment and recommended treatment, participate
 in random drug screenings, complete home-based parenting
 education, and submit to a psychological evaluation and
 recommended treatment after 90 days of sobriety. 
DHS reported that Father was terminated from his job
 
after testing positive for crystal methamphetamine, and as of
 December 2014, had failed to engage in any of the services
 described in the May 16, 2014 service plan. Father failed to
 appear at a January 8, 2015 periodic review hearing and default
 judgment was entered against him. In May 2015, DHS reported
 Father's continued failure to participate in any services or a
 psychological evaluation. Father testified that he voluntarily
 moved out of the State in May 2015. He also stated that a DHS
 social worker gave him a list of services from the service plan
 to do on the mainland because DHS does not provide support there. 
By May 2016, Father stated that he had completed drug
 
treatment and counseling in March 2016, was looking into
 parenting and domestic violence classes, but that parenting
 classes would take an additional six months. Father, however,
 did not present a certificate of completion of the substance
 abuse class. 
Lei Ayat-Verdadero, a DHS social worker, stated that
 
she was still concerned about domestic abuse in the family
 because Mother had moved to the mainland to live with Father. 
Ms. Ayat-Verdadero said that she believed that the domestic
 violence issue could not be resolved within the next six months
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
because the issue had not been addressed in two years. Ms. Ayat-
Verdadero testified that Father failed to demonstrate that he could provide a safe family home after failing to engage in recommended services while in Hawai
'i, voluntarily moving out of 
the state where services were not supported by DHS, and acknowledging that he had yet to complete parenting and domestic violence classes. Father was not currently able to provide a safe home given his past history of violence with Mother and his continued relationship with Mother without addressing any domestic violence issues for over two years, even with the assistance of a service plan. Further, she testified that Father was also not able to provide a safe family home in the foreseeable future, even with the assistance of a service plan, not to exceed two years from April 29, 2014, when IL entered foster care. 
Father claims that DHS made no effort to facilitate his 
visit or contact with IL. Therefore, he contends, DHS failed to provide an adequate opportunity to reunify with IL. Contrary to Father's claim, he was provided with a reasonable opportunity to reunify with IL. Father was initially provided with a service plan no later than July 2014. By December 2014, Father had failed to contact DHS to arrange any Ohana Time visits with IL. In May 2015, DHS reported that they had scheduled two visits for Father and had made multiple appointments to meet with him, but he failed to appear at any and had yet to contact DHS to arrange a visit. In August 2015, DHS moved to terminate Father's parental rights. Father failed to visit IL prior to the hearing to terminate his parental rights in May 2016. Father failed to engage in any of the services recommended by DHS for reunification while he was in Hawai
'i. Father also failed to 
complete all of the recommended services for reunification after he moved to the mainland. 
II.	 Mother's willingness and ability to provide a safe family
home
 
There was clear and convincing evidence that Mother was
 
not willing and able to provide a safe family home, even with the
 
assistance of a service plan, and that it was not reasonably
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
foreseeable that Mother would be able to provide a safe family
 
home, even with the assistance of a service plan, within a
 reasonable period of time, not to exceed two years from the date
 IL entered foster custody on April 29, 2014. 
Mother tested positive for methamphetamine when giving
 
birth to IL. In a May 16, 2014 Safe Family Home Report, Mother
 stated that she drank alcohol once or twice a week and used
 methamphetamine once a month. In May 2014 Mother was ordered to
 follow a service plan that required her to complete substance
 abuse assessment and recommended treatment, participate in random
 drug screening, complete home-based parenting education, and
 submit to a psychological evaluation and recommended treatment
 after 90 days of sobriety. 
In an effort to reunify Mother and IL, Mother agreed
 
that if she was given custody of IL, she would participate in the
 Women's Way treatment program. Pursuit of the TRO against Father
 was a condition of Mother's participation in the program. In May
 2015, however, Mother failed to appear for a hearing on the TRO
 against Father despite being informed about it by the Women's Way
 staff. DHS then reassumed foster custody of IL.
 
Contrary to Mother's assertion that removal of IL from
 
her custody after failure to pursue the TRO constituted an
 inadequate opportunity to reunify with IL, DHS was justified in
 reassuming foster custody given Mother's failure to demonstrate
 that she was willing to provide a safe family home that
 prohibited contact with Father, a person that had beaten her to
 the point where she required treatment at a hospital. In
 addition, Mother stated that she still wanted Father in her life
 despite the fact that Father did not participate in services. 
Although domestic violence classes were not recommended
 
for Mother until January 2016, Mother initially attended two
 different domestic violence services. However, Mother did not
 want to attend a domestic violence class in Waipahu and stopped
 attending classes in Waianae after she voluntarily relocated to
 the mainland to live with Father. At the time that Mother's
 parental rights were terminated in May 2016, she still had not
 completed domestic violence classes on the mainland, and
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
requested more time to complete them. Mother was unwilling and
 
unable to provide a safe family home for IL, even with the
 assistance of a service plan, because she refused to exclude a
 person from her home that had beat her. It was not reasonably
 foreseeable that Mother would become willing and able to provide
 a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service plan,
 not to exceed two years from April 29, 2014, the date IL entered
 foster custody. Mother voluntarily moved to the mainland to live
 with Father although family violence issues between Mother and
 Father had not been resolved and would not be resolved within two
 years after entry of IL into foster care.
 
III. Conclusion
 
In light of the evidence presented and the standards of
 
review that we must apply in evaluating the Family Court's
 
decision, there was clear and convincing evidence that neither
 Father nor Mother was willing and able to provide a safe family
 home, even with the assistance of a service plan, and that it was
 not reasonably foreseeable that Father or Mother would be able to
 do so within two years from the date that IL entered foster
 custody. Consequently, Father's challenges to FOF 74, 75, 83 and
 85, and COL 11-14, and Mother's objections to FOF 70-72, 83, and
 84 are without merit.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the May 26, 2016
 
Decision and Order, and the subsequent June 6, 2016 Order
 Terminating Parental Rights, filed in the Family Court of the
 First Circuit, are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 8, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Herbert Y. Hamada 
for Mother-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Tae Chin Kim for Father-Appellant. 
Julio C. Herrera,
Jay K. Goss, andEric J. Alabanza,Deputy Attorneys General,for Petitioner-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 