NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000849
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KEVIN L. HOUSE, HOUSE'S HOME INVESTMENT, LLC,
Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
 
MARK A. DIAZ and WILEMINA E. HEMMY,
Defendants-Appellants
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
HONOLULU DIVISION

 
(CASE NO. 1RC16-1-000560)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, and Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendants-Appellants Mark A. Diaz and Wilemina E.
 
Hemmy (collectively, "Appellants") appeal from the denial of the
 
Motion for Reconsideration or New Trial, filed on November 23,
 2016 in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu
 Division ("District Court").
1/ 
 
In the Statement of Points of Error in the Brief for
 
the Appellants, Appellants state that (1) a move-in fee paid by
 Diaz was not acknowledged, (2) Diaz obtained the keys to the
 premises as a rental, not a one time showing for sale of the
 premises, (3) the District Court lacked subject matter
 jurisdiction based on the testimony of Kevin L. House and House's
 Home Investments LLC, Plaintiffs-Appellees (collectively,
 "Appellees"), (4) the District Court did not enforce a subpoena
 on Appellees' witness, and (5) according to a contract admitted
 
1/
 The Honorable Hilary Gangnes presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
into evidence, Diaz was acting as an agent of Appellees which
 
deprived the District Court of subject matter jurisdiction. 
Appellants argue that Diaz was an agent of Appellees for twelve
 months prior to being instructed to rent out the premises for
 $9,000 and was given the keys to the premises to facilitate his
 renting-out of the property. Appellants further argue that it
 was only after Appellees suffered a business loss of $60,000 that
 Appellants were asked to move out of the premises and an
 ejectment suit started under false pretenses.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Appellants' points of error as follows:
 
Appellants timely filed a notice of appeal from the
 
denial of the Motion for Reconsideration or New Trial filed on
 November 23, 2016, which is an independently appealable final
 post-judgment order under Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") section
 641-1(a) (Supp. 2015). However, Appellants did not purport to
 appeal from or, in any event, timely appeal from the March 3,
 2016 Judgment for Possession and Writ of Possession or the
 March 10, 2016 execution of the Writ of Possession. Therefore,
 this court only has appellate jurisdiction to review the denial
 of the Motion for Reconsideration or New Trial filed on
 November 23, 2016.
 
The grounds argued in the Motion for Reconsideration or
 
New Trial were stated as follows:
 
1.	 Newly discovered evidence from new witness
 
testimony which by due diligence could not have
been discovered in time to move for a new trial
 under Rule 59(b).
2.	 Further, there was a mistake, inadvertence and
excusable neglect on the part of the defendants
oversight to bring a new critical arguments from
a 3rd party witness testimony.
3.	 The possession JUDGMENT IS VOID due to lack of
subject matter jurisdiction by way of plaintiff's
intrinsic fraud, perjured testimony, lack of
standing, misrepresentation and other misconduct
by the plaintiff and his attorney.
4.	 Insufficient process of service because the "writ
of ejectment" was not served on the defendants.
 
Thus, Appellants' motion appears to have been based on District
 
Court Rules of Civil Procedure ("DCRCP") 60(b)(1)(2)(4). 
Orders granting or denying motions for reconsideration
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
under DCRCP Rule 60(b)(1) and 60(b)(2) are reviewed for abuse of
 
discretion, while orders granting or denying motions under DCRCP
 Rule 60(b)(4) are reviewed de novo. Appellants failed to specify
 the new evidence or that it had been discovered post-trial. 
Moreover, they failed to establish any mistake, inadvertance, or
 excusable neglect with regard to any third party witness
 testimony. "Generally, to constitute an abuse of discretion a
 court must have clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or
 disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
 substantial detriment of a party litigant."
2/ Amfac, Inc. v.
 
Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 10, 26
 (1992). In this case, the District Court did not abuse its
 discretion in denying Appellants' motion for reconsideration
 based on DCRCP Rule 60(b)(1) or (2).
 
The District Court did not lack subject matter
 
jurisdiction and thus the possession judgment was not void. 
"Nothing in [HRS] section 604-5 shall preclude a district court
 from taking jurisdiction in ejectment proceedings where the title
 to real estate does not come in question at the trial of the
 action." Haw. Rev. Stat. ยง 604-6 (1993). In order to put title
 at issue, Appellants were required to assert "by a written answer
 or written motion, . . . the source, nature and extent of the
 title claimed by defendant to the land in question, and such
 further particulars as shall fully apprise the court of the
 nature of the defendant's claim." Haw. Dist. Ct. R. Civ. P.
 12.1. Appellants did not contest title to the property based on
 
the alleged $9,000/month oral lease agreement, and did not file a
 written answer or written motion setting forth the source, nature
 and extent of the title claimed.
3/  Thus, the District Court did
 
2/
 We construe the "writ of ejectment" that Appellants refer to in
their motion as the Writ of Possession, which was issued in conjunction with
the Judgment for Possession. Appellants' claim to the District Court that
there was insufficient service of the Writ of Possession is not a basis for
 reconsideration or a new trial. Service of the Writ of Possession follows
 issuance of the Writ of Possession. Thus, lack of service of the Writ of
Possession could not have affected the legitimacy of the writ itself. 
3/
 Before the District Court, Appellants moved to dismiss Appellees'
complaint for ejectment, contending that Appellees had quitclaimed the
premises to a family trust of which Diaz was the trustee and that the
quitclaim deed established title to the premises. The denial of the motion
 without prejudice is reflected only in the court minutes for February 26,
2016. Appellants do not appeal from that denial and do not raise or address
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
not lack subject matter jurisdiction over the ejectment action
 
and was not wrong in denying Appellants' motion for
 reconsideration based on DCRCP Rule 60(b)(4). 
To the extent that any of Appellants' arguments on
 
appeal differ from those made in the Motion for Reconsideration
 or New Trial, those arguments are waived. Haw. R. App. P.
 28(b)(4).
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the denial of the
 
Motion for Reconsideration or New Trial filed on November 23,
 2016, in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu
 Division, is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 23, 2017. 
On the brief: 
Mark A. Diaz and 
Wilemina E. Hemmy,Pro Se Defendants-Appellants. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge

 
that argument on appeal, however, and therefore it is waived.
4
 