NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001023
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
CHARLES McCAFFERY, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-13-03515)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Fujise, and Leonard, JJ.)

 
After a bench trial, Defendant-Appellant Charles
 
McCaffery (McCaffery) was found guilty of operating a vehicle
 
under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII), as a second offense
 within five years, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 ยง 291E-61(a)(1) and (b)(2) (Supp. 2015).
1 The District Court of
 
1HRS ยง 291E-61 provides in relevant part:
 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates or
assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 
(1)	 While under the influence of alcohol in an amount
 sufficient to impair the person's normal mental
faculties or ability to care for the person and guard
against casualty[.]
 
. . . .
 
(b) A person committing the offense of operating a vehicle
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2
the First Circuit (District Court)  sentenced McCaffery to 240
hours of community service, revocation of his driver's license
 
for eighteen months, a fine of $500, substance abuse treatment,
 and various fees. 
McCaffery appeals from the Judgment entered by the
 
District Court on August 5, 2014. On appeal, McCaffery contends:
 (1) the District Court erred in failing to engage McCaffery in a
 colloquy regarding his stipulation that Officer Billins was
 trained and qualified to conduct standardized field sobriety
 tests; (2) the Circuit Court erred in admitting evidence of a
 certified judgment and a certified abstract of McCaffery's prior
 OVUII conviction that had not been disclosed in discovery; (3)
 
1(...continued)
under the influence of an intoxicant shall be sentenced without
 
possibility of probation or suspension of sentence as follows:
 
. . . .
 
(2)	 For an offense that occurs within five years of a
prior conviction for an offense under this section or
section 291E-4(a):
 
(A)	 Revocation for not less than eighteen months nor
more than two years of license and privilege to
operate a vehicle during the revocation period
and installation during the revocation period of
an ignition interlock device on any vehicle
operated by the person;
 
(B) 	Either one of the following:
 
(i)	 Not less than two hundred forty hours of
community service work; or
 
(ii)	 Not less than five days but not more than
thirty days of imprisonment, of which at
least forty-eight hours shall be served
consecutively;
 
(C)	 A fine of not less than $500 but not more than
 $1,500;
 
(D)	 A surcharge of $25 to be deposited into the
neurotrauma special fund; and
 
(E)	 A surcharge of up to $50 if the court so orders,
to be deposited into the trauma system special
fund[.]
 
2The Honorable Michael Marr presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (DPA) committed prosecutorial
 
misconduct, most significantly in repeatedly asking leading
 questions to elicit evidence regarding McCaffery's demeanor; and
 (4) there was insufficient evidence to support McCaffery's
 conviction. We affirm.
 
I.
 
We resolve the arguments McCaffery raises on appeal as
 
follows:
 
1. The District Court was not required to engage 
McCaffery in a colloquy regarding his stipulation that Officer Billins was trained and qualified to conduct standardized field sobriety tests. As the DPA was about to question Officer Billins about his training in administering field sobriety tests, defense counsel interrupted and stated he was willing to stipulate to Officer Billins' training and qualifications. Defense counsel informed the District Court that McCaffery would stipulate that "Officer Billins is trained and qualified to administer and evaluate the standardized field sobriety tests under the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration regulation . . . or standards." Plaintiff Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) accepted 
McCaffery's stipulation. 
McCaffery cites no authority to support his claim that 
a trial court must colloquy the defendant when defense counsel offers to stipulate to a witness's training and qualifications. In State v. Murray, 116 Hawai
'i 3, 169 P.3d 955 (2007), the 
Hawai'i Supreme Court only imposed a colloquy requirement where a 
defendant stipulates to an element of the offense. See Murray, 
116 Hawai 'i at 14, 169 P.3d at 966. The supreme court in Murray 
did not overrule its prior decisions generally permitting defense counsel to stipulate to evidence as a matter of trial strategy without the necessity of a colloquy with the defendant. See 
State v. El'Ayache, 62 Haw. 646, 650, 618 P.2d 1142, 1144 (1980) (holding that the trial court did not err in admitting stipulations regarding witness testimony into evidence "without first determining whether defendant had knowingly and voluntarily 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
waived her constitutional right to confront and cross-examine the
 
witnesses"); State v. Oyama, 64 Haw. 187, 188-89, 637 P.2d 778,
 779-80 (1981) (rejecting the defendant's claim that the "trial
 court erred in admitting the stipulations without first examining
 [the defendant] to determine whether [he] knowingly and
 intelligently waived his constitutional right of confrontation"). 
We conclude that the District Court was not required to colloquy
 McCaffery regarding his stipulation; therefore, it did not err in
 failing to engage in a colloquy before accepting his stipulation. 
2. The Circuit Court did not err in admitting 
evidence of a certified judgment and a certified abstract of McCaffery's prior OVUII conviction, which McCaffery asserts had not been disclosed in discovery. The discovery obligations set forth in Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 16 (2012) 
do not apply to non-felony prosecutions, such as this case, unless required by the trial court. See HRPP Rule 16(a), (d). 
Even assuming that HRPP Rule 16 discovery obligations were applicable, the District Court did not err. 
Under HRPP Rule 16, the trial court has discretion to
 
fashion an appropriate remedy for discovery violations, and it
 "may order [the violating] party to permit the discovery, grant a
 continuance, or it may enter such other order as it deems just
 under the circumstances." HRPP Rule 16(e)(9)(i). 
McCaffery was charged with OVUII as a second offense
 
and thus was on notice that the State was required to prove that
 he had a prior OVUII conviction within five years of the
 currently charged offense. During trial, the State offered as
 evidence a certified judgment of McCaffery's prior OVUII
 conviction and a certified traffic abstract listing his prior
 OVUII conviction. McCaffery objected on the ground that he had
 not received such evidence in discovery. The DPA informed the
 District Court that a "discovery packet" had been made available
 for the defense, but the DPA did not know whether the certified
 judgment (or apparently the certified traffic abstract) had been
 included in the discovery. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The State first moved for the admission of the
 
certified judgment. The District Court offered to give McCaffery
 
time to review the certified judgment, but defense counsel
 responded, "I don't need to review that." The District Court
 admitted both the certified judgment and the certified traffic
 abstract into evidence. The District Court offered to grant a
 continuance to McCaffery after the State rested "to mitigate any
 prejudice that the defense . . . believes it may have suffered." 
However, McCaffery did not seek a continuance. Under these
 
circumstances, we conclude that the District Court did not abuse
 its discretion in permitting the State to introduce the certified
 judgment and the certified abstract of McCaffery's prior OVUII
 conviction. See State v. Dowsett, 10 Haw. App. 491, 495, 878
 
P.2d 739, 742 (1994) (stating that among the factors the trial
 court should consider in exercising its broad discretion in
 imposing sanctions under HRPP Rule 16 is the feasibility of
 rectifying the prejudice from a discovery violation through a
 continuance).
 
3. McCaffery argues that the DPA committed
 
prosecutorial misconduct, most significantly in repeatedly asking
 leading questions to elicit evidence regarding McCaffery's
 demeanor. We disagree. McCaffery did not seek a mistrial based
 on the DPA's alleged misconduct during trial. Our review of the
 record does not reveal any misconduct by the DPA which would
 warrant overturning McCaffery's conviction. 
McCaffery's objections on the ground that the DPA was 
asking leading question were generally sustained by the District Court. The fact that this was a bench trial further diminishes any prejudice from the DPA's alleged misconduct in asking questions. "[I]n a bench trial, the normal rule is that if there is sufficient competent evidence to support the judgment or finding below, there is a presumption that any incompetent evidence was disregarded and the issue determined from a consideration of competent evidence only." State v. Montgomery, 
103 Hawai
'i 373, 383, 82 P.3d 818, 828 (App. 2003) (format 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
altered and citation omitted); State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 353,
 
615 P.2d 101, 107 (1980) ("It is well established that a judge is
 presumed not to be influenced by incompetent evidence.").
 
4. We reject McCaffery's contention that there was
 
insufficient evidence to support his conviction. When viewed in
 the light most favorable to the State, the evidence showed that
 McCaffery was pulled over for speeding for traveling 71 miles per
 hour in a 55 mile per hour zone; he was also observed "straddling
 the right shoulder and Number 4 lane"; Officer Billins smelled a
 strong odor of alcohol emitting from McCaffery's truck and a
 moderate odor of alcohol coming from McCaffery's breath;
 McCaffery gave Officer Billins a false name; McCaffery admitted
 that he had been drinking before being stopped by Officer
 Billins; McCaffery performed poorly on the walk-and-turn and one-
leg stand tests; on the walk-and-turn test, he started too early,
 missed several heel-to-toe steps, raised his arms once, and
 stopped walking; on the one-leg stand test, he put his foot down
 and swayed; and he had previously been convicted of OVUII within
 five years of the currently charged OVUII offense. We conclude
 that there was sufficient evidence to support McCaffery's
 conviction. 
II. 
We affirm the District Court's Judgment. DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, December 30, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Daniel Kawamoto 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
James M. Anderson Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
6
 