 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000394
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
HUNTER EDWIN PARKER, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CASE NO. 1DTA-12-03875)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Defendant-Appellant Hunter Edwin Parker (Parker)
 
1
appeals from the Judgment entered on December 18, 2012,  in the
District Court of the First Circuit (District Court).2 Parker
 
was convicted of operating a vehicle under the influence of an
 
intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 § 291E-61(a)(1) and (a)(3) (Supp. 2013).
3 We affirm the District
 
Court's Judgment.
 
1/ The bar code affixed to the Judgment bears the date December 17,
2012, but the Judgment is file-stamped December 18, 2012.
 
2/ The Honorable David W. Lo presided.
 
3/ HRS § 291E–61(a) provides in relevant part:
 
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant if the person operates or
assumes actual physical control of a vehicle:
 
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair the person's normal mental faculties or ability tocare for the person and guard against casualty; [or] 
. . . 
(3) With .08 or more grams of alcohol per two hundred ten
liters of breath[.] NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
A police officer stopped the vehicle Parker was driving
 
after observing Parker go through an intersection against a red
 
light. The officer observed that Parker's eyes were red, watery,
 and glassy; that Parker's breath had a "pretty strong" odor of
 alcohol; and that Parker's speech was slurred to the point that
 the officer had difficulty understanding him. Parker performed
 poorly on the field sobriety tests administered by the officer,
 and Parker was placed under arrest for OVUII and taken to the
 police station. 
At the police station, the officer read to Parker a
 
form entitled "Use of Intoxicants While Operating a Vehicle
 Implied Consent for Testing" (Implied Consent Form). Parker
 agreed to take a breath test and refused a blood test. Parker's
 breath test showed that he had a breath alcohol concentration of
 .190 grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath -- a concentration
 that exceeded the legal limit. 
Parker testified at trial that he had consumed eight
 
vodka mixed drinks at his friends house, but had drank only water
 for an hour and a half before leaving. He testified that he was
 pulled over by a police officer after leaving his friend's house. 
Parker stated that he was pulled over after driving through an
 intersection against a red light and attempting to turn into the
 parking lot of a Jack-In-The-Box restaurant on his way home. 
Parker admitted that he knew the light was red, but stated that
 he decided to proceed through the intersection to the Jack-In-
The-Box because there was no traffic. After the defense rested,
 Parker orally moved to suppress the results of his breath test. 
The District Court denied Parker's motion to suppress. 
II.
 
On appeal, Parker challenges the District Court's
 
denial of his motion to suppress. Parker contends that the
 results of his breath test should have been suppressed because
 his consent to submit to the breath test was obtained (1) in 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
violation of his Miranda rights and (2) in violation of his
 
statutory right to counsel under HRS § 803-9 (1993).4
 
We recently rejected the same arguments in State v. 
Won, No. CAAP-12-0000858, --- Hawai 'i ---, --- P.3d ---, 2014 WL 
1270615 (Hawai 'i App. Mar. 28, 2014) (as amended on May 2, 2014). 
Based on Won, we conclude that the District Court properly denied Parker's motion to suppress. In addition, Parker does not challenge his OVUII conviction under HRS § 291E-61(a)(1). Even without the results of Parker's breath test, there was compelling evidence to show that he violated HRS § 291E-61(a)(1). Parker's violation of HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) provides an independent basis for affirming his OVUII conviction and sentence. 
III.
 
We affirm the District Court's Judgment.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 30, 2014. 
On the briefs: Chief Judge 
James B. Lewis 
(Law Offices of James B. Lewis)
for Defendant-Appellant. Associate Judge

 
Brandon H. Ito,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
4/
 Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i argues the we lack jurisdiction
over this appeal because Parker's notice of appeal was untimely. However,
under similar circumstances, the Hawai' i Supreme Court has held that in the
interests of justice, a criminal defendant may not be deprived of the right tohis or her first appeal by the failure of the defendant's attorney to file atimely notice of appeal. State v. Aplaca, 96 Hawai' i 17, 23, 25 P.3d 792, 798
(2001). Accordingly, we consider Parker's appeal on the merits. 
3
 