FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
---o0o---
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
SHAWN D. VISINTIN, Defendant-Appellant
NO. CAAP-14-0000391
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 13-1-0166)
FEBRUARY 20, 2018
LEONARD and GINOZA, JJ.
WITH NAKAMURA, C.J., CONCURRING AND DISSENTING SEPARATELY
OPINION OF THE COURT BY GINOZA, J.
Defendant-Appellant Shawn Daniel Visintin (Visintin )
appeals from his conviction for the offense of Place to Keep
Pistol or Revolver, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS)
§ 134-25 (2011), in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit
(circuit court).  Visintin was convicted pursuant to a
conditional no contest plea, which allowed him to pursue this
appeal.1
1  The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On August 7, 2012, Visintin was arrested for the
offense of Place to Keep Pistol, and on the same date, he secured
a bond for bail that had been set at $10,000.  Visintin was
issued a "Bail/Bond Receipt, Acknowledgment, and Notice to
Appear" ( BBRA), which stated he was to appear at the District
Court of the Fifth Circuit (district court ) on September 5, 2012. 
As of September 5, 2012, Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai #i
(State) had not filed any charge against Visintin and thus, on
that date, the State contends that the district court discharged
Visintin's bail bond as part of its "calendar call" procedure. 
Visintin was not present at the September 5, 2012 proceeding and
the record does not reflect any documents discharging Visintin's
bail bond or that he was notified that his bail bond had been
discharged.
Almost nine months after Visintin's arrest and the
posting of his bail bond, and after he had returned to his home
in Montana, the State issued an Indictment charging him with the
offenses of Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver, in violation of HRS
§ 134-25 (2011) ( Count 1), and Unregistered Firearm, in violation
of HRS §§ 134-3(a) (2011) and 134-17(b) (2011) ( Count 2).  A
bench warrant was also issued for Visintin's arrest.
After being arrested in Montana pursuant to a fugitive
complaint but then being released, Visintin voluntarily returned
to Hawai #i for arraignment on the charges.  He subsequently filed
a "Motion to Suppress Evidence Based on Illegal Stop, Illegal
Detention, Illegal Interrogation, Illegal Search, and Illegal
Arrest" (Motion to Suppress ).  He also filed a "Motion to Dismiss
Based on Rule 48, Speedy Trial, Right to Bail and Due Process"
(Motion to Dismiss ), alleging that his right to a speedy trial,
right against excessive bail, and due process rights had been
violated.  The circuit court denied both the Motion to Suppress
and the Motion to Dismiss.
Visintin subsequently entered a conditional plea under
which he pled no contest to the Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver
2FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
charge, and the Unregistered Firearm charge was dismissed.  Under
the conditional plea, Visintin was allowed to appeal the denial
of his motions.
On appeal, Visintin argues that the circuit court erred
by:
(1) denying his Motion to Dismiss because: (a) the
delay in bringing him to trial after his arrest and setting of
bail violated his right to a speedy trial under Hawai# i Rules of
Penal Procedure (HRPP ) Rule 48; (b) his right to a speedy trial
under the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution or
article I, section 14 of the Hawai# i Constitution was violated;
and (c) his right against excessive bail was violated; and
(2) denying his suppression motion because the
arresting officer lacked reasonable suspicion to detain him and
request his identification. 
We hold that under HRPP Rule 48, the six-month time
period for commencing Visintin's trial began to run when he was
arrested and bail was set on August 7, 2012.  Although the State
contends that Visintin's bail bond was discharged pursuant to the
calendar call procedure such that the time from the bail bond
discharge until filing of the Indictment should be excluded, the
record does not show that Visintin was notified that his bail
bond was discharged.  Given the circumstances in this case, we
conclude that the time requirement under HRPP Rule 48 was
exceeded.  However, we conclude that Visintin's constitutional
speedy trial rights were not violated, and that his demand for
dismissal based on his claim of excessive bail is unwarranted. 
We further hold that the arresting officer had
reasonable suspicion at the time he initially stopped Visintin,
and the officer's request for Visintin's identification was
proper.  Thus, the circuit court properly denied Visintin's
Motion to Suppress.
The case is remanded to the circuit court for dismissal
under HRPP Rule 48.  On remand, the circuit court must determine
3FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
whether to dismiss with or without prejudice, in the circuit
court's discretion.
I. Background
A. Events on August 7, 2012 and Visintin's Arrest
On August 7, 2012, Officer Brian Silva ( Officer Silva)
was on duty in his patrol car driving southbound on Kuhio
Highway, entering the Kawaihau District of Kaua# i.  Officer Silva
stated that there had been "a lot of calls of burglaries and
criminal activity" in the area in which he was patrolling prior
to that date, but he could not name any specific incidents and
was not responding to any report of criminal activity in progress
at that time.
At approximately 2:40 AM, as he approached an
institution known as the Friendship House,2 Officer Silva "saw a
figure of a person running across the street from the ocean side
. . . into the area of the entrance into the Friendship House."  
Visintin was the individual in question.  Officer Silva turned on
his vehicle's spotlight and began to turn into the driveway of
the Friendship House where he had seen Visintin running.  Officer
Silva described his spotlight as "very bright."  Using his
spotlight, Officer Silva saw Visintin "lowered into the bushes"
next to the driveway.  Officer Silva stated that he wanted to see
what Visintin was doing "hiding in the bushes" and that he
"obviously was trespassing" by doing so.  Officer Silva then
activated his patrol car's blue cruise lights; Officer Silva
estimated that there was "[m]aybe a second" between the time he
turned on his spotlight and the time he activated his cruise
lights.
At the time he activated his spotlight, Officer Silva
had determined that he wanted to "check it out," see what was
going on, and request identification.  Officer Silva stated that
the recent burglaries and the fact that the Friendship House
2  Officer Silva described the Friendship House as a facility providing
counseling. 
4FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
appeared to be closed factored into his decision to stop and
request identification from Visintin, but that he still would
have checked it out, even in the absence of the burglary reports. 
Additionally, Officer Silva testified that the fact that Visintin
ran across the road "alarmed [him] a little bit more than a
regular person[,]" but that he still would have stopped Visintin,
even if he had walked across the road.  Officer Silva had not
heard of Visintin prior to their encounter on August 7, 2012, had
no warrant to arrest or search him, and had no report that
Visintin or anyone matching his description had engaged in any
illegal activity.
After turning on his cruise lights, Officer Silva
immediately exited his vehicle and ordered Visintin to come out
of the bushes.  Visintin cooperated.  As Visintin approached him,
Officer Silva noted that Visintin was breathing heavily, sweating
a lot, and that he could smell alcohol coming from Visintin's
facial area.  Officer Silva took these considerations into
account when approaching Visintin.
Officer Silva then requested identification from
Visintin.  Officer Silva agreed that one of the things he
intended to do with Visintin's identification was to run a
warrant check.  Upon Officer Silva's request for identification,
Visintin reached into his wallet and produced a Montana driver's
license.  While Visintin was getting his driver's license,
Officer Silva observed a concealed weapons permit underneath the
clear plastic in the wallet.  This caused Officer Silva to
suspect that Visintin possibly had a firearm on his person, and
Officer Silva asked Visintin whether he had any weapons or
"anything that might hurt me[.]"  Visintin responded that he had
a handgun, and Officer Silva conducted a pat down and found an
unloaded Rock Island semi-automatic .45 caliber handgun in the
waistband of Visintin's pants.  Even if Visintin had not
responded to his question, Officer Silva stated he "still would
have patted him down for officer safety."  After retrieving the
5FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
handgun, Officer Silva advised Visintin that he was under arrest
for "Place to Keep" and advised him of his constitutional
rights.3
  B. Events After Visintin's Arrest
Incident to his arrest on August 7, 2012, Visintin's
bail was set at $10,000.  He paid approximately $1,000 for a bail
bond that was posted the same day as his arrest.  A BBRA signed
by Visintin on August 7, 2012, indicated a charge for "Place to
Keep Pistol" and referenced an arrest report number.  The BBRA
also directed Visintin to appear in district court on September
5, 2012.
On August 31, 2012, Visintin's counsel inquired via
email with the assigned Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (DPA ) as to
whether a complaint would be filed and whether the matter would
proceed on September 5, 2012.  The DPA responded by email that
her office had "not received the reports, so therefore no
Complaint has been filed."  As asserted by Visintin in his Motion
to Dismiss,4 and not disputed by the State,
By the September 5, 2012 court date . . . the [State]
had not filed a Complaint or any other document related to
the case.
[A]s of September 5, 2012[,] the State had not charged
[Visintin] with any crime.  The State did not file any sort
of Motion to modify [Visintin's] bail status.  The State
provided no notice to [Visintin] that the bail bond he
posted would or would not be discharged.  [Visintin] was
given no notice that there would be any change to his bail
status.  [Visintin] was not given an opportunity to be heard
as to whether his bail should be changed, or his speedy
trial rights derailed, or whether any ensuing delay was
based on good cause.
A video recording in the record reflects that Visintin did not
appear before the district court at the September 5, 2012
3  Visintin expressed his willingness to waive his rights and give a
statement.  In his statement, Visintin told Officer Silva that he had been out
drinking with friends earlier, he had crossed the street looking for his
friends, and he had gotten scared and hid in the bushes when Officer Silva
approached.  As to the handgun, Visintin stated that it was his gun but that
he was not carrying it on purpose and thought he had left it in his backpack.  
4 In support of Visintin's Motion to Dismiss, Visintin's counsel
attested that "[t]he facts, as set forth in the Motion are true and correct to
the best of my knowledge and belief."
6FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
proceeding, but that his case was among others that were called
pursuant to the court's calendar call system.  During this court
session, the district court announced that for individuals called
by the court, charges had not yet been filed and they were free
to go, any cash bail posted would be refunded, and any bail bonds
would be discharged.  Visintin contends, and it is not disputed
by the State, that his bail bond was apparently returned to the
bondsman without notice to him, Visintin did not receive any sort
of refund for the $1,000 that he paid to the bondsman to secure
the bail bond, and he at some point properly returned to his home
in Montana.5  The record does not contain any document showing a
discharge of Visintin's bail bond that had been issued on August
7, 2012.
On April 25, 2013, a Grand Jury returned the Indictment
charging Visintin with the offenses of Place to Keep Pistol or
Revolver and Unregistered Firearm.  The Indictment concerned the
conduct for which Visintin had been arrested and posted the bail
bond almost nine months earlier. 
On April 25, 2013, the same day the Indictment was
filed, the circuit court issued a bench warrant for Visintin's
arrest and set his bail at $10,000.6  On April 30, 2013, the DPA
sent an email to Visintin's counsel advising him that Visintin
had been indicted and that there was a bench warrant for his
arrest.  The DPA further recommended that Visintin return to
Kaua#i from Montana rather than be arrested and extradited.  As
of May 24, 2013, it appears that Visintin's counsel had not
indicated to the DPA whether Visintin would voluntarily return to
Hawai#i.
5  The record is unclear when Visintin returned to Montana.  Visintin
asserted that upon returning to Montana, he had taken "significant steps
toward beginning a career as a police [officer][.]"  The State disputed
Visintin's claims that he was a police officer, was in a police academy, or
was teaching any classes at a police academy.
6  Visintin argued in the circuit court that "the return on the Grand
Jury Indictment reveals that the State did not inform the Court that the
defendant had previously been admitted to bail."  In response, the State
argued that upon the Indictment it "did not mention the prior Bail Bond posted
because it had been discharged by the Court on September 5, 2012."
7FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On May 31, 2013, the County Attorney of Yellowstone,
Montana filed a "Fugitive from Justice Complaint," which stated
that a warrant had been issued for Visintin's arrest, that
Visintin "fled from justice or has been convicted of crimes in
[Hawai#i] and has escaped from confinement or has broken the
terms of his bail, probation or parole," and that authorities in
the circuit court had requested Visintin's arrest and indicated
they would extradite him.  Visintin alleged that this fugitive
complaint was based on false representations because the fact
that he had previously posted bail on the same matter was
withheld from the Montana Court.  Visintin was arrested by
Montana authorities at his parents' home on June 1, 2013, and
again posted bail, this time also for $10,000, to secure his
freedom during the Montana extradition proceedings.  On June 4,
2013, however, the Yellowstone County Attorney moved to dismiss
the fugitive complaint "on the grounds that it is not in the
interest of justice to pursue."  The Montana Court granted the
motion, dismissed the case without prejudice, and exonerated
Visintin's bond.
On August 1, 2013, Visintin filed in the circuit court
a motion to recall the bench warrant and to allow him to return
voluntarily to Kaua# i for arraignment, to return to Montana
during the pendency of the case, and be released on his own
recognizance.  The State did not oppose Visintin's motion.  On
August 6, 2013, the circuit court granted in part and denied in
part Visintin's motion, denying him release on his own
recognizance but reducing his bail to $100 and allowing Visintin
to return to Montana pending the outcome in the case so long as
he was present for all court appearances.  On August 6, 2013,
Visintin filed a waiver of extradition and was arrested and
arraigned on Kaua #i.  Visintin paid the $100 bail and was
released.
C. Visintin's Motion to Dismiss
On August 20, 2013, Visintin filed the Motion to
Dismiss, which alleged that his speedy trial rights had been
8FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
violated due to the delay in bringing him to trial since his
initial arrest, his due process rights were violated, and that
seeking and obtaining multiple postings of bail violated
constitutional prohibitions on excessive bail.
On September 10, 2013, the circuit court held a hearing
on the Motion to Dismiss.  With regard to the HRPP Rule 48 time
periods, the parties agreed that the 29-day period between
Visintin's initial arrest on August 7, 2012 and his initial court
date on September 5, 2012, should be charged to the State.  The
parties further agreed that the 14-day period between the
arraignment on August 6, 2013 to the filing of the Motion to
Dismiss on August 20, 2013, was charged to the State.  However,
the parties disputed the 231-day period from the day after the
initial court date (September 6, 2012) to the filing of the
Indictment (April 25, 2013).7
The State requested the circuit court take judicial
notice that the DPA assigned to Visintin's case had been in trial
with other cases from December 3, 2012 to December 11, 2012 and
from January 7, 2013 to March 6, 2013.  The circuit court took
judicial notice that the DPA had been assigned these cases but
expressed doubts as to whether this furnished good cause to
exclude the time under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) and noted that
administration and assignment of cases was handled within the
prosecutor's office.  The State additionally requested that the
circuit court take notice of the fact that 2012 was an election
year for the prosecutor's office, the election was held November
6, 2012, and a new prosecutor took office on December 3, 2012.
Arguments on the Motion to Dismiss primarily centered
upon the effect of the circuit court's calendar call procedure on
7  The parties also contested the 103—day period when Visintin was in
Montana between the issuance of the Indictment on April 25, 2013, and
Visintin's arraignment on August 6, 2013.  The circuit court rejected the
State's argument that this period was excludable under HRPP Rule 48(c)(5),
finding that Visintin was free to leave Hawai #i and thus did not make himself
unavailable as asserted by the State.  The State reserved the right to
challenge the ruling on this second contested period.  However, because the
Motion to Dismiss ultimately turns upon whether the 231-day contested period
counts toward the HRPP Rule 48 time requirement, this second contested period
is rendered immaterial and we need not address it.
9FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the 231-day contested period.  To explain this procedure, the
State called Vera Tabe ( Tabe), Court Administrator for the
circuit court, as a witness.  Tabe testified that, as part of her
duties, she was familiar with the calendar call list,8 which had
been in place the entire time she had been a court administrator,
a period of over ten years.  Tabe testified that the first step
of the procedure was the generation of a calendar call list,
which she described as an internal document listing defendants
who had been arrested, given a court date, and posted bail or
bond or been released on their own recognizance, but for whom a
complaint had not yet been filed by the prosecutor's office.9
Tabe explained that this list was generated by the
court's receipt of defendants' BBRA forms.  Tabe testified that
the Kaua #i Police Department would send the original BBRA to the
court, while a copy would be forwarded to the defendant.
According to Tabe, after the court receives a BBRA, it is file-
stamped without a case number,1
0 and then it is placed in a
pending file (actually a lateral drawer) for the assigned court
date.  A criminal number is not attached to a BBRA until a
complaint is filed by the prosecutor's office.
Tabe testified that, at the time of the court date
indicated on the BBRA, the cases on the calendar call list are
called "first thing in the morning by the Judge" prior to the
court's normal calendar.  In addressing the calendar call cases,
the judge would "read the list of names of the defendants [] and
indicate that no formal charges ha[d] been filed against them by
the prosecutor's office, but in the future if they do proceed,
they will be served with documents to appear when and where." 
8  During her testimony, Tabe sometimes referred to the procedure as the
"call list" or "call calendar."  For consistency, we will refer to it as the
calendar call list.
9  Tabe explained that in order for a case to be placed on the regular
calendar, a complaint "need[ed] to be filed at least a week prior to the court
date" and that cases in which this did not occur would be placed on the
calendar call list.
10  We note that the BBRA issued for Visintin on August 7, 2012 does not
appear to have a file stamp.
10FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Tabe testified that the court does not consider it a failure to
appear if a defendant does not appear for the calendar call, and
there are no consequences for not appearing for the calendar call
proceeding.
Tabe further testified that after the cases on the
calendar call list are called, the court retains the original
BBRAs.  For defendants who have paid cash bail, the judge issues
an unfiled order so that the defendant can go to the court's
fiscal window to receive a refund of the amount paid.  With
regard to a defendant who posted a bail bond, Tabe testified that
the judge "discharges the bond" and after the judge discharges it
the defendant is no longer under the bond.  The following
testimony was also given:
Q: And -- and in a case where it's a bond posted, the bond is simply 
automatically sent back to the bonding company?
A: We don't.  We keep the original BBRA, the original bond.  The bond
is just discharged.
Q: Okay.
A: So there is nothing more on that bond for that defendant.
Q: Okay.  Is there a record kept of the time that the bond is
discharged?
A: It would be just what's noted in the court proceeding on that
hearing date.
Q: Is the time of the bond discharge noted in the file?
A: No.
Q: Okay.
A: Because we don't have any case file.
Tabe noted that a criminal number can only be assigned
to a case once an initial charging document is filed.  Without a
criminal number or a complaint, Tabe agreed that there was no way
that a dismissal could be filed.  To that end, Tabe stated that,
to her knowledge, the prosecutor's office had never attempted to
request a written dismissal for a case on the calendar call list. 
However, Tabe acknowledged that defendants routinely filed
motions for permission to travel under the BBRA number.  Tabe
further testified that the State does not make any showing of
good cause for not filing a complaint in a case on the calendar
call list, the court makes no order as to whether speedy trial
rights are tolled after a case appears on the calendar call list,
and there are no means for a defendant to object to a bail bond
being discharged during the calendar call proceeding.
11FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
After Tabe's testimony, Visintin argued that HRPP Rule
48 and constitutional speedy trial jurisprudence provide that the
speedy trial clock begins once the defendant is arrested and bail
is set, and that the State's argument seeks "to judicially insert
language into Rule 48 that says if bail is somehow unset,
regardless of notice to the defendant, that that tolls the rule." 
Visintin further argued that the goals of HRPP Rule 48 "would be
subverted if the State is permitted, even after an arrest . . .
and a bail setting . . . to simply not show up, not file their
papers on time, and somehow effect this de facto dismissal
without prejudice."
In response, the State noted that for cases on the
calendar call list, no charges are filed at the time of the
initial court date, and the calendar call process causes any bail
or bond to be discharged or returned, effectively extinguishing
the case.  Therefore, the State argued that the calendar call
procedure acted as a de facto dismissal, which caused the period
between the calendar call and the Indictment to be excluded under
HRPP Rule 48(c)(6).  The State further argued that if this time
was not excludable under (c)(6), it was excludable for good cause
under (c)(8) because under the court's calendar call system,
there was no means for the State to dismiss the case.
The circuit court ultimately denied Visintin's Motion
to Dismiss, ruling that:
The purpose of the call list calendar is to get cases on
calendar so that defendants who have been arrested know that
their case is not active and is being dismissed. . . .  So
based on that, what the Court is finding is that the period
of September 6th to April 25th is an excludable period
pursuant to Rule 48(c)(6).
The circuit court directed the DPA to prepare a written
order for its denial of the Motion to Dismiss.  However, no
written order was entered memorializing the circuit court's oral
orders, and these oral orders did not specifically address
Visintin's arguments concerning his constitutional speedy trial
right or his right against excessive bail.
D. Visintin's Motion to Suppress Evidence
On August 15, 2013, Visintin filed the Motion to
Suppress, which sought to suppress "any and all evidence acquired
12FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
subsequent to Kauai Police Department Officer Brian Silva's
initial contact with Mr. Visintin on August 7, 2012."  
At the hearing on the Motion to Suppress, also held on
September 10, 2013, the circuit court heard the testimony of
Officer Silva concerning the circumstances of Visintin's arrest. 
In its argument, the State contended that Officer Silva's request
for identification was reasonable based on observing "somebody
run across the roadway and end up hiding in the bushes of a
closed business at . . . 2:40 in the morning" and that Officer
Silva's pat down was reasonable given Visintin's admission that
he had a firearm.  In response, Visintin argued that the issue
turned on the constitutionality of the stop, that the mere act of
crossing the road did not furnish the necessary reasonable
suspicion that criminal activity was afoot to justify this stop,
and that his action of crouching in the bushes was not
incriminating but rather a natural response to having the bright
spotlight shined upon him.
The circuit court orally denied the Motion to Suppress,
finding that "it was a late-night situation[,]" and the
facilities in the area were isolated and closed for business.  
The circuit court further found that Officer Silva observed
Visintin "running across the highway into the Friendship House
area[,]" and stated that "[a]t the very minimum, there's trespass
issues."  Finally, the circuit court found that Visintin was
"hiding" in the bushes and that these "circumstances would
indicate that these are facts -- specific and articulable facts 
. . . that there could be criminal activity afoot."  As to the
firearm, the circuit court noted that Officer Silva observed
Visintin's concealed firearm permit, questioned him whether he
had a firearm, Visintin responded in the affirmative, and Officer
Silva seized the firearm.11
11  The State also argued that the firearm would have been inevitably
discovered and requested a ruling on this issue.  In response, the circuit
court found that Officer Silva would have conducted a pat down even if
Visintin had not stated he had a gun, and thus "the weapon would have been
(continued...)
13FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Although the circuit court directed the DPA to prepare
an order, no written order was entered on the Motion to Suppress.
E. Visintin's Conditional Plea
On September 16, 2013, Visintin entered the conditional
no contest plea on Count 1, reserving the right to appeal any
pre-trial rulings.  As part of the plea, the State dismissed
Count 2.  Based on the pleas, the circuit court entered its
Judgment on January 30, 2014, sentencing Visintin to five years
of probation; sixty days imprisonment, in addition to time
served; and a $205 crime victim compensation fee and $150
probation services fee.  Visintin's sentence was stayed pending
appeal.  Visintin timely filed a notice of appeal.
II. Standards of Review
A. HRPP Rule 48
The Hawaii Supreme Court has recognized that: #
When reviewing a trial court's denial of an HRPP Rule 48
motion to dismiss, we apply both the "clearly erroneous" and
"right/wrong" tests:
A trial court's findings of fact (FOFs) in deciding an
HRPP Rule 48(b) motion to dismiss, are subject to the
clearly erroneous standard of review.... However,
whether those facts fall within HRPP Rule 48(b)'s
exclusionary provisions is a question of law, the
determination of which is freely reviewable pursuant
to the "right/wrong" test.
State v. White, 92 Hawai #i 192, 198, 990 P.2d 90, 96 (1999)
(citation omitted).
B. Constitutional Speedy Trial Right
"In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy
the right to a speedy and public trial . . . ."  Haw. Const. art.
I, § 14.  The sixth amendment to the United States Constitution
similarly provides that an accused in a criminal prosecution
"shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial . . . ."  The
constitutional speedy trial right is "a fundamental right
afforded to a criminal defendant."  White, 92 Hawai #i at 201, 990
P.2d at 99.  The determination of whether this right has been
(...continued)
discovered even if Mr. Visintin didn't turn it over."
14FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
violated is a conclusion of law which we review de novo .  State
v. Lau, 78 Hawai# i 54, 58, 890 P.2d 291, 295 (1995).
C. Motion to Suppress 
We review the circuit court's ruling on the Motion to
Suppress de novo to determine whether the ruling was right or
wrong.  State v. Eleneki , 106 Hawai #i 177, 180, 102 P.3d 1075,
1078 (2004) (citation omitted).
The proponent of the motion to suppress has the burden of
establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the
statements or items sought to be excluded were unlawfully
secured and that his or her right to be free from
unreasonable searches or seizures was violated under the
fourth amendment to the United States Constitution and
article I, section 7 of the Hawai #i Constitution.
State v. Spillner, 116 Hawai# i 351, 357, 173 P.3d 498, 504
(2007).
Appellate review of factual determinations made by the trial
court deciding pretrial motions in a criminal case is
governed by the clearly erroneous standard.  A finding of
fact is clearly erroneous when (1) the record lacks
substantial evidence to support the finding, or (2) despite
substantial evidence in support of the finding, the
appellate court is left with a definite and firm conviction
that a mistake has been made.  The circuit court's
conclusions of law are reviewed under the right/wrong
standard.
  
State v. Balberdi, 90 Hawai# i 16, 20-21, 975 P.2d 773, 777-78
(App. 1999) (quoting State v. Anderson, 84 Hawai# i 462, 467, 935
P.2d 1007, 1012 (1997)).
III. Discussion
A. Motion to Dismiss
Visintin challenges the circuit court's denial of his
Motion to Dismiss, arguing that dismissal was mandated under HRPP
Rule 48, his constitutional speedy trial right, and his right to
be free from excessive bail.  We address each argument in turn.
1.  HRPP Rule 48
We first address the circuit court's ruling under HRPP
Rule 48, which provides in relevant part:
Rule 48. Dismissal .
(a) By prosecutor . The prosecutor may by leave of
court file a dismissal of a charge and the prosecution shall
thereupon terminate.  Such a dismissal may not be filed
during the trial without the consent of the defendant.
(b) By court . Except in the case of traffic offenses
that are not punishable by imprisonment, the court shall, on
15FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
motion of the defendant, dismiss the charge, with or without
prejudice in its discretion, if trial is not commenced
within 6 months:
(1) from the date of arrest if bail is set
or from the filing of the charge, whichever is
sooner, on any offense based on the same conduct
or arising from the same criminal episode for
which the arrest or charge was made; or
(2) from the date of re-arrest or re-filing of the
charge, in cases where an initial charge was dismissed upon
motion of the defendant; or
(3) from the date of mistrial, order granting a new
trial or remand, in cases where such events require a new
trial.
. . .
(c)  Excluded periods . The following periods shall be
excluded in computing the time for trial commencement:
(1) periods that delay the commencement of trial and
are caused by collateral or other proceedings concerning the
defendant, including but not limited to penal
irresponsibility examinations and periods during which the
defendant is incompetent to stand trial, pretrial motions,
interlocutory appeals and trials of other charges;
. . .
(5) periods that delay the commencement of trial
and are caused by the absence or unavailability of the
defendant;
(6) the period between a dismissal of the charge
by the prosecutor to the time of arrest or filing of a
new charge, whichever is sooner, for the same offense
or an offense required to be joined with that offense;
[and]
. . .
      (8) other periods of delay for good cause.
      (d) Per se excludable and includable periods of time for
purposes of subsection (c)(1) of this rule .
      (1) For purposes of subsection (c)(1) of this rule,
the period of time, from the filing through the prompt
disposition of the following motions filed by a defendant,
shall be deemed to be periods of delay resulting from
collateral or other proceedings concerning the defendant:
motions to dismiss, to suppress , . . . .
(Emphasis added.)
"HRPP Rule 48 is intended to 'ensure an accused a
speedy trial, which is separate and distinct from [the]
constitutional protection to a speedy trial.'"  State v. Fukuoka ,
16FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
141 Hawai #i 48, 55, 404 P.3d 314, 321 (2017) (quoting State v.
Estencion, 63 Haw. 264, 268, 625 P.2d 1040, 1043 (1981)); State
v. Coyaso, 73 Haw. 352, 355-56, 833 P.2d 66, 68 (1992) (The
purpose of HRPP Rule 48 "is broader than the constitutional right 
to a speedy trial as found in the sixth amendment of the U.S.
Constitution and article I, § 14 of the Hawaii Constitution.")
[U]nder HRPP Rule 48, a court must dismiss the charges upon
the defendant's motion when trial has not commenced within
six months from the date of arrest if bail is set or from
the filing of the charge, whichever is sooner, taking into
account any periods of delay excluded under the rule.
Fukuoka, 141 Hawai# i at 55, 404 P.3d at 321; State v. Hoey, 77
Hawai#i 17, 28, 881 P.2d 504, 515 (1994).
In this case, the parties agree that the 29-day period
between August 7, 2012 (arrest and bail setting) to September 5,
2012 (initial court date) are charged to the State.  The parties
dispute whether to include the 231-day period between September
6, 2012 (day after initial court date) to April 25, 2013
(Indictment).  The parties agree that the 14-day period between
August 6, 2013 (arraignment) and August 20, 2013 (filing of
Motion to Dismiss) are charged to the State.12  Given these
circumstances, the dispositive issue is whether the 231-day
contested period should be charged to the State.
The State argues that it did not exceed the HRPP Rule
48 six-month deadline and that the 231-day contested period
should be excluded under HRPP Rule 48(c)(6) because the calendar
call procedure on September 5, 2012, acted as a 
de facto
dismissal.  Alternatively, the State argues that under HRPP Rule
48(c)(8), the inability to dismiss the case and other factors
provided good cause for its delay.  The circuit court agreed with
the State's first argument, reasoning that the purpose of the
calendar call list is to advise defendants who have been arrested
that their case is not active and "is being dismissed" and thus
12  Because Visintin filed his Motion to Suppress on August 15, 2013
(five days before he filed his Motion to Dismiss), it appears that only nine
(9) days should be charged to the State during this time period.  See HRPP
Rule 48(c)(1) and (d)(1).
17FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the 231-day contested period was excludable under Rule 48(c)(6).
Visintin argues that treating the calendar call
procedure as a de facto dismissal is contrary to the language and
policy of HRPP Rule 48.  He further contends that there was no
good cause to exclude the 231-day contested period.  Thus, he
argues that the circuit court erred in denying his Motion to
Dismiss under HRPP Rule 48.
In this case, Visintin was arrested and bail was set on
August 7, 2012, thus triggering the time to run under HRPP Rule
48(b)(1).  The record does not  reflect that Visintin was provided
notice that the bail bond he posted on August 7, 2012 was
discharged or that there was a change to his bail status.  Given
the plain language of HRPP Rule 48(b)(1) and the record in this
case, we conclude that the calendar call procedure did not stop
the HRPP Rule 48 time from running.
During the calendar call procedure, as established in
the record herein, the district court called out the name of
individuals on the calendar call list (including Visintin) and
verbally announced that those individuals may go, that cash bail
posted will be refunded, and that bail bonds will be discharged.  
However, Visintin did not appear at the September 5, 2012
proceeding and he asserted –- with the supporting declaration of
his counsel and without dispute from the State -- that the State
did not give him notice that his bail status would be or had been
changed.13
Under HRPP Rule 48(b), the trial court must "dismiss
the charge, with or without prejudice in its discretion, if trial
is not commenced within six months . . . from the date of arrest
if bail is set[.]" (Emphasis added).  The Hawai #i Supreme Court
has recognized generally that HRPP Rule 48 is "derived from the
ABA Standards [for] Criminal Justice, in particular, Part II of
the chapter setting forth standards relating to speedy trial." 
State v. White , 92 Hawai #i 192, 199, 990 P.2d 90, 97 (1999)
13 The record is unclear why Visintin did not appear on September 5,
2012.  We note that his counsel inquired and was told prior to that date that
no charge had been filed.
18FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(quoting State v. Jackson , 81 Hawai #i 39, 53, 912 P.2d 71, 85
(1996)).14  In turn, specifically as to HRPP Rule 48(b)(1), the
Hawai#i Supreme Court has relied upon § 12-2.2(a) of the American
Bar Association Standards for Criminal Justice, (2d ed. Supp.
1986) for purposes of determining when the speedy trial clock
begins to run.  Id. 
The applicable version of § 12-2.2(a) of the ABA
Standards for Criminal Justice (2d ed. Supp. 1986), in place when
HRPP Rule 48(b)(1) was amended in 2000,15 stated:
Standard 12-2.2.  When time commences to run
   The time for trial should commence running, without
demand by the defendant, as follows:
   (a) from the date the charge is filed, except that if the
defendant has been continuously held in custody or on bail
or recognizance  until that date to answer for the crime or a
crime based on the same conduct or arising from the same
criminal episode, then the time for trial should commence
running from the date the defendant was held to answer [.]
(Emphasis added.)
14 Effective as of July 1, 2000, HRPP Rule 48 (b)(1) was amended to add
the language "if bail is set."  See Order Amending the Hawai #i Rules of Penal
Procedure (Feb. 4, 2000).  Even before the 2000 amendment -- when HRPP Rule
48(b)(1) stated that the time began to run "from the date of the arrest or
from the filing of the charge, whichever is sooner" -- the Hawai #i Supreme
Court interpreted the rule consistent with the ABA Standards for Criminal
Justice related to speedy trials.  See State v. Johnson , 62 Haw. 11, 12, 608
P.2d 404, 405 (1980)(holding that where the defendant was arrested but
released within twenty-four hours without charges being filed, the
investigatory arrest did not trigger HRPP Rule 48(b)(1)); State v. Provard, 63
Haw. 536, 538, 631 P.2d 181, 183 (1981)(noting that in Johnson, the court held
that "if a defendant is released outright  some time after arrest but
thereafter is charged with the same offense for which he was arrested and held
to answer, the time runs from the date of the filing of the charge.")(emphasis
added).
As noted above, the parties in this case do not dispute that the 29-day
period between August 7, 2012 (arrest and bail setting) to September 5, 2012
(initial court date) is charged to the State.  We agree with the parties'
treatment of this period.  Unlike the individual in Johnson, Visintin was not
released outright after a twenty-four hour investigatory arrest.  Rather, he
was undisputedly subject to bail conditions for the 29-day period between
August 7, 2012, and September 5, 2012.
15 We note that in 2004, a third edition of the ABA Standards for
Criminal Justice, Speedy Trial and Timely Resolution of Criminal Cases was
adopted, which includes substantial revisions to Part II and § 12-2.2(a).  See
ABA Standards for Criminal Justice: Speedy Trial and Timely Resolution of
Criminal Cases (3d ed. 2006) (commentary added).  However, because the current
version of HRPP Rule 48 was last amended in 2000, we are guided in this case
by the earlier version of § 12-2.2(a).
19FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
As recognized in this § 12-2.2(a) ABA standard, the
setting of bail or recognizance is equivalent to being "held to
answer[.]"  In other words, a person on bail or recognizance is
not "released outright."  See generally Provard , 63 Haw. at 538,
631 P.2d at 183.  Thus, in this case, where the record
establishes that Visintin was arrested and bail was set on August
7, 2012, but the record does not establish that he was notified
that his bail was discharged, we conclude the effect is that he
reasonably believed he was still "held to answer" for the offense
asserted upon his arrest.  As noted in the commentary for § 12-
2.2(a) of the ABA Standards for Criminal Justice,
where the defendant is held to answer until the time the
charge is filed, it is appropriate to begin counting the
speedy trial time from the former event, as the right to
speedy trial is intended to prevent long periods of
detention, conditional release, personal anxiety, and public
suspicion.
ABA Standards for Criminal Justice, § 12-2.2(a) cmt. at 12-21 (2d
ed. Supp. 1986) (emphasis added).
We also conclude that the district court's calendar
call procedure should not be construed as a de facto dismissal of
the charge, and thus, does not trigger excludable time under HRPP
Rule 48(c)(6).  In our view, treating the calendar call procedure
as a de facto dismissal is contrary to the requirements of HRPP
Rule 48.  HRPP Rule 48(a) directly addresses dismissals and
provides that "[t]he prosecutor may by leave of court file a
dismissal of a charge and the prosecution shall thereupon
terminate.  Such a dismissal may not be filed during the trial
without the consent of the defendant."  (Emphasis added.)  For
the calendar call procedure, there is no "charge" to be
dismissed.  Moreover, the record reflects that nothing was
"filed" as part of the calendar call procedure.  HRPP Rule 49(f)
provides, in relevant part:
(f) Filing. The conventional filing of motions and
other documents with the court shall be made by filing them
with the clerk of the court, except that the judge may
permit the documents to be filed with the judge, in which
event the judge shall note thereon the filing date and
forthwith transmit them to the office of the clerk .
20FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(Emphasis added); see also  File, Black's Law Dictionary , (10th
ed. 2014)(defining "file" as "[t]o deliver a legal document to
the court clerk or record custodian for placement into the
official record[.]").  Under HRPP Rule 48(a), a dismissal of a
charge by a prosecutor should thus include a document filed with
the court.  However, based on our record, the calendar call
procedure in this case did not involve the filing of any document
with the court, whether for a purported dismissal or otherwise.
Finally, we do not agree with the State's alternative
ground that there was good cause under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) to
exclude the 231-day contested period.  In this regard, the State
argues that the Fifth Circuit's calendar call procedure
"precludes the State from filing a dismissal of the district
court case if a Complaint is not filed by the defendant's first
appearance date" and that "[i]t would be absurd for the time
period when a defendant is released outright to be included in
[the HRPP] Rule 48 calculation."  Although we agree that there is
no existing charge to dismiss under the calendar call procedure,
the record in this case does not reflect that Visintin was
released outright and that he was so informed.  Under the
circumstances of this case, the State has not shown good cause
under HRPP Rule 48(c)(8) to exclude the 231-day contested period.
Given the particular circumstances in this case, we
conclude that the 231-day contested period between September 6,
2012 (day after the initial court date) and April 25, 2013
(filing of the Indictment) must be charged to the State.16  Thus,
under HRPP Rule 48, the circuit court was required to dismiss the
charges against Visintin.  On remand, the circuit court must
determine whether to dismiss the charges with or without
prejudice, in the circuit court's discretion.
 2.
Constitutional Speedy Trial Right
Visintin also claims that the delay in bringing him to
trial violated his constitutional right to a speedy trial under
16 We limit our ruling to the circumstances in this case and do not
reach the question of the type of notice that must be given to a defendant
when he or she is released or discharged from bail.
21FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the sixth amendment to the United States Constitution and article
I, seciton 14 of the Hawai #i Constitution.  Unlike a violation of
HRPP Rule 48 which requires dismissal with or without prejudice
in the trial court's discretion, a violation of a defendant's
constitutional right to a speedy trial requires dismissal with
prejudice.  State v. Lau, 78 Hawai# i 54, 62, 890 P.2d 291, 299
(1995) (citations omitted).
We conclude that Visintin's constitutional right to a
speedy trial was not violated.  The circuit court did not
explicitly address this issue, but implicitly rejected it by
denying Visintin's Motion to Dismiss. 
We analyze whether the constitutional speedy trial
right has been violated "by applying the four-part test
articulated in [ Barker v. Wingo , 407 U.S. 514 (1972).]"  White,
92 Hawai #i at 201, 990 P.2d at 99 (internal footnote and citation
omitted).  "The four Barker factors are: (1) length of delay; (2)
the reasons for the delay; (3) the defendant's assertion of his
or her right to speedy trial; and (4) prejudice to the
defendant."  Id. at 201-02, 990 P.2d at 99-100 (citation
omitted).  Due to the "unusually amorphous" nature of the
constitutional speedy trial right and "the separate, often
conflicting interests of the accused and of the public in the
speedy disposition of cases, the weight accorded each of these
factors is to be determined on an ad hoc  basis."  Lau, 78 Hawai# i
at 62, 890 P.2d at 299 (citation omitted).  "None of these four
factors is to be regarded as either a necessary or sufficient
condition to the finding of a deprivation of the right to a
speedy trial, but rather they are related factors and must be
considered together with such circumstances as may be relevant." 
Id. (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).
First, we must determine when the constitutional speedy
trial clock began to run.  As recognized by the Hawai# i Supreme
Court, "it is either a formal indictment, or information, or else
the actual restraint imposed by arrest and holding to answer a
criminal charge that engages the particular protections of the
22FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
speedy trial provision of the Sixth Amendment."  White, 92
Hawai#i at 202, 990 P.2d at 100 (citations and brackets omitted)
(emphasis added).  The supreme court distinguished between an
investigatory arrest and an arrest where a defendant is "held to
answer" for a criminal charge.  Id.   The court analyzed its
ruling in Johnson, 62 Haw. 11, 608 P.2d 404 and noted that "this
court implicitly recognized that an investigatory arrest did not
amount to an arrest as a result of which a defendant was 'held to
answer' for a criminal offense."  Id.
When no indictment is outstanding, it is the "actual
restraints imposed by arrest and holding to answer  a criminal
charge that engage the particular protections of the speedy trial
provision of the Sixth Amendment."  United States v. Marion, 404
U.S. 307, 320 (1971) (emphasis added).  The right to a speedy
trial is "designed to minimize the possibility of lengthy
incarceration prior to trial, to reduce the lesser, but
nevertheless substantial, impairment of liberty imposed on an
accused while released on bail, and to shorten the disruption of
life caused by arrest and the presence of unresolved criminal
charges."  United States v. MacDonald , 456 U.S. 1, 8 (1982).
In this case, Visintin was not simply released after
being arrested by the police, but was released upon posting a
bail bond.  Visintin's arrest was not an investigatory arrest,
but rather more akin to an arrest where he was held to answer for
a criminal charge.  Further, although he was not charged by the
time of his initial court date twenty-nine days later, and the
State contends that his bail bond was discharged via the calendar
call procedure, the record does not show that the State notified
Visintin that his bail bond had been discharged.  Under these
circumstances, as discussed earlier, Visintin reasonably
understood that he was still being "held to answer" for the
offense for which he was arrested.  Indeed, although the
circumstances leading to his arrest in Montana remain unclear,
officials in Montana initially believed that Visintin was a
fugitive, which led to his arrest in Montana.  We conclude in
23FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
this case that the constitutional speedy trial clock began to run
following Visintin's arrest and posting of bail on August 7,
2012.
A little over twelve months elapsed between Visintin's
arrest and posting of bail on August 7, 2012, to the filing of
his Motion to Dismiss on August 20, 2013.  This is a sufficient
time period to "warrant an inquiry into the other Barker
factors."  Lau, 78 Hawai# i at 63, 890 P.2d at 300 (footnote
omitted).
With regard to the second factor, we conclude that the
reason for the delay weighs slightly in favor of the State. 
Visintin makes no concrete assertion that the delay in his case
was an intentional attempt on the part of the State to hinder his
defense.  The State explains its delay in seeking an indictment
against Visintin by noting the unavailability of the DPA assigned
to his case due to her involvement in two other major
prosecutions and the change in leadership in the prosecutor's
office.  While these explanations do not provide overwhelming
justifications for the delay, they provide a reasoned basis for
the delay and are weighted less heavily.  See White , 92 Hawai #i
at 203-04, 990 P.2d at 101-02; Lau, 78 Hawai# i at 63, 890 P.2d at
300.  Additionally, a portion of the delay (several months) was
attributable to the time necessary to bring Visintin back to
Hawai#i from Montana, which was reasonable.
For the third Barker factor, we consider whether
Visintin asserted his right to a speedy trial.  Visintin argues
that he "has always demanded a speedy trial" and notes that he
"even filed a Motion to enforce it."  This comment apparently
refers to Visintin's Motion to Dismiss.  However, a motion to
dismiss for a speedy trial violation does not itself constitute a
demand for a speedy trial, unless it is "accompanied in some way
by an alternative demand, even if made implicitly, for a speedy
trial[.]"  Lau, 78 Hawai# i at 64, 890 P.2d at 301 (citation
omitted); State v. Wasson , 76 Hawai #i 415, 421, 879 P.2d 520, 526
(1994)("[I]n the absence of some other indication that a
24FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
defendant making a motion to dismiss actually desires a speedy
trial, the motion, standing alone, does not weigh in his or her
favor.") (citation omitted).  Like his Opening Brief, Visintin's
Motion to Dismiss asserts that he "has always demanded a speedy
trial[,]" but no information is provided to show when he
otherwise demanded a speedy trial or asserted this right.  In
short, other than relates to his Motion to Dismiss seeking
complete dismissal of the charges against him, the record does
not reflect any other assertion by Visintin indicating he
actually desired a speedy trial.  We therefore conclude that this
factor weighs in favor of the State.
The fourth and final Barker factor examines whether the
delay has resulted in prejudice to the defendant.  Visintin
argues that he suffered prejudice by having to post bail three
times and by his arrest in Montana.  There are three factors
considered when determining whether a delay in trial is
prejudicial to the defendant, specifically: (1) "oppressive
pretrial incarceration[,]" (2) anxiety to the defendant, and (3)
impairment of the defense.  White, 92 Hawai #i at 204, 990 P.2d at
102.
Visintin was released on bail the same day he was
initially arrested, on August 7, 2012.  Visintin was also granted
bail and released from incarceration after he was arrested in
Montana and after he returned to Kaua# i for arraignment.  In
total, it appears from the record that he was detained in
pretrial incarceration approximately three days.  We cannot say
that he suffered oppressive pretrial incarceration.
As to anxiety to the defendant, "something more than a
bare assertion of disquietude is generally required before this
form of prejudice will weigh in favor of the accused."  Wasson,
76 Hawai# i at 422, 879 P.2d at 527 (citations omitted).  "The
government will prevail unless the defendant offers objective,
contemporaneous evidence of anxiety, such as prompt and
persistent assertion of the desire for a speedy trial coupled
with a demonstrable basis for the court's believing the delay is
25FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
traumatic."  State v. Ferraro , 8 Haw. App. 284, 300, 800 P.2d
623, 632 (1990) (citation and internal brackets omitted). 
Visintin has not offered such evidence here.
Impairment of the defense is the most critical interest
considered in determining whether the defendant has been
prejudiced.  Lau, 78 Hawai# i at 65, 890 P.2d at 302.  Impairment
of the defense is considered critical "because the inability of a
defendant adequately to prepare his case skews the fairness of
the entire system."  Wasson, 76 Hawai #i at 421, 879 P.2d at 526
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted).  In his
appellate briefs, Visintin does not claim any specific impairment
to his defense due to trial delay.  In his Motion to Dismiss, he
asserted that he was "prejudiced because memories have faded and
even police witnesses who 'searched the area for criminal
activity with negative results' have apparently retired."
However, the Hawai #i Supreme Court has endorsed the proposition
that the "possibility of prejudice is not sufficient to support
[defendants'] position that their speedy trial rights were
violated."  Lau, 78 Hawai# i at 65, 890 P.2d at 302 (citation
omitted).  Further, in addressing alleged pre-indictment delays,
the U.S. Supreme Court has concluded that the possibility "that
memories will dim, witnesses become inaccessible, and evidence be
lost" are inherent in any delay, limited by the applicable
statute of limitations, and thus "not in themselves enough to
demonstrate that appellees cannot receive a fair trial and to
therefore justify the dismissal of the indictment."  Marion, 404
U.S. at 325-26; State v. Dunphy, 71 Haw. 537, 542, 797 P.2d 1312,
1315 (1990) (holding that "a mere claim of loss of memory coupled
with a lapse of time does not, of itself, establish prejudice")
(citations omitted).
Visintin also notes that the length of the delay in
bringing him to trial is considered presumptively prejudicial. 
While the Barker test requires the court to determine whether the
length of the delay was sufficient to render it presumptively
prejudicial as to trigger consideration of the other factors, the
26FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
fact that a delay is classified as presumptively prejudicial, by
itself, does not mean that it is considered prejudicial for
purposes of the fourth factor, unless it is so "exceedingly long"
as to create a "strong presumption of prejudice[.]"  Lau , 78
Hawai#i at 65, 890 P.2d at 302.  The twelve month period involved
in this case does not constitute such an exceedingly long delay.
Accordingly, we conclude that Visintin was not denied
his constitutional speedy trial right.
3. Excessive Bail
Visintin argues that the State's practice of seeking
and obtaining multiple postings of bail in this case, especially
without disclosing to the circuit court the initial posting of
bail when the State sought a second bail, violated the Eighth
Amendment of the United States Constitution and article I,
section 12 of the Hawaii Constitution.  Visintin claims that the
circuit court thus should have granted his Motion to Dismiss
based on a violation of his right against excessive bail.
Visintin cites to cases that generally address the
purpose of bail and the proposition that bail entails an ongoing
"custody of the law."  See e.g. U.S. v. Holmes , 452 F.2d 249, 261
n.11 (7th Cir. 1971).  However, Visintin cites no authority for
the proposition that where a person's right against excessive
bail is violated, he or she is entitled to dismissal of criminal
charges.  To the contrary, we conclude there is no independent
basis for dismissing the criminal charges against Visintin based
on his claim of excessive bail.  See People v. Standish , 135 P.3d
32, 48 (Cal. 2006)("We have not discovered any authority
suggesting that the remedy, when excessive bail has been set
prior to the preliminary examination, is an order setting aside
the information.  Rather, it is settled that defendants may
correct error in the setting of bail by seeking a writ of habeas
corpus or other extraordinary writ ordering reconsideration of
custody status or release."); cf. State v. Johnson , 980 S.W.2d
414, 421 (Tenn.Crim.App. 1998)(holding that failure of the trial
court to set bond did not give rise to a dismissal of the
indictment).
27FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Visintin also makes a brief argument to the effect that
the State should not be allowed to toll the time under HRPP Rule
48 given the handling of bail in this case.  We have already
addressed the implications of the bail setting for purposes of
HRPP Rule 48 in section III.A.1 above.
B. Motion to Suppress
Visintin next alleges that the circuit court erred in
denying his Motion to Suppress.  Visintin specifically argues
that Officer Silva lacked "any reasonable articulable suspicion
of unlawful activity[,]" which would entitle him to stop
Visintin.  Furthermore, Visintin claims that "even if the initial
stop was constitutionally justified, the immediate demand for
identification was not."  The primary cases Visintin relies upon
are State v. Dawson , 120 Hawai #i 363, 205 P.3d 628 (App. 2009)
and State v. Silva , 91 Hawai #i 80, 979 P.2d 1106 (1999).  We view
these as unconvincing in light of the circumstances of this case. 
Therefore, as to Visintin's arguments regarding his Motion to
Suppress, we disagree.  Officer Silva's observations provided a
reasonable basis for him to stop and investigate Visintin's
conduct, and his request for identification was justified and
within the scope of this initial stop.  Accordingly, we affirm
the circuit court's denial of the Motion to Suppress.
As an initial matter, we must "determine when, if at
all, a 'seizure' in the constitutional sense occurred during the
encounter" so as to trigger the protections of the Fourth
Amendment of the United States Constitution and article I,
section 7 of the Hawai# i Constitution.  State v. Kearns , 75 Haw.
558, 566, 867 P.2d 903, 907 (1994).  "[A] person is seized if,
given the totality of the circumstances, a reasonable person
would have believed that he or she was not free to leave."  Id. 
We conclude that Visintin was seized when Officer Silva
approached him, ordered him to come out from the bush, and
requested identification.
The Fourth Amendment's prohibition on unreasonable
seizures "applies to all seizures of the person including brief
28FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
investigatory stops."  State v. Koanui , 3 Haw. App. 255, 257, 649
P.2d 385, 387 (1982).  Furthermore, "[a] warrantless seizure is
presumed invalid unless and until the prosecution proves that the
seizure falls within a well-recognized and narrowly defined
exception to the warrant requirement."  Eleneki, 106 Hawai# i at
180, 102 P.3d at 1078 (citation, internal quotation marks, and
ellipses points omitted).  Visintin was seized without a warrant.
Among the exceptions permitting a warrantless seizure,  
police may temporarily seize or detain an individual to
investigate possible criminal behavior based on reasonable
suspicion, even if there is no probable cause for an arrest. 
To justify an investigative detention under the reasonable
suspicion standard, the police officer must be able to point
to specific and articulable facts which, taken together with
rational inferences from those facts, reasonably warrant
that intrusion.
Dawson, 120 Hawai# i at 369, 205 P.3d at 634 (internal citations
and quotation marks omitted).  In determining whether reasonable
suspicion supported an investigative stop, the "ultimate test
. . . must be whether from these facts, measured by an objective
standard, a man of reasonable caution would be warranted in
believing that criminal activity was afoot and that the action
taken was appropriate."  State v. Perez, 111 Hawai# i 392, 398,
141 P.3d 1039, 1045 (2006).  Examining "the totality of the
circumstances[,]" Spillner , 116 Hawai #i at 357, 173 P.3d at 504,
we conclude that Officer Silva testified to sufficient
articulable facts providing an objective basis to believe that
criminal activity was afoot and justifying Visintin's temporary
seizure. 
Although Officer Silva was not responding to a crime at
the time of the incident, he stated that there had been multiple
burglaries in the area prior to that date.  As such, Officer
Silva had grounds to be suspicious when he observed a figure
running across the highway at approximately 2:40 AM.  Officer
Silva stated that his suspicions were further aroused by the fact
that Visintin ran, rather than walked across the highway, and by
the fact that Visintin's entry onto the Friendship House's
property might constitute a potential trespass, since he believed
the building was closed.  Additionally, when Officer Silva
29FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
activated his spotlight, he observed Visintin "hiding in the
bushes."17  Given these factors, Officer Silva had an objective
basis to believe criminal activity was afoot warranting an
investigative stop, and we agree with the circuit court that
these facts, taken together, provided reasonable suspicion for
Officer Silva's actions.  Dawson, 120 Hawai# i at 374-75, 205 P.3d
at 639-40 ("Neither the fourth amendment nor the Hawai #i
Constitution 'require a policeman who lacks the precise level of
information necessary for probable cause to arrest to simply
shrug his shoulders and allow a crime to occur or a criminal to
escape.  On the contrary, . . . it may be the essence of good
police work to adopt an intermediate response.'" (internal
quotation marks omitted)).   
Visintin next argues that, "even if the initial stop
was constitutionally justified, the immediate demand for
identification was not[,]" and that Officer Silva's demand for
identification went beyond any legitimate investigatory purpose
of the initial stop.  Visintin is correct that even where a
seizure was justified at its inception, it may become
impermissible where it exceeds the "scope [of] the circumstances
which justified the interference in the first place[.]" 
Estabillio , 121 Hawai #i at 270, 218 P.3d at 758.  To this end, an
investigative stop must not be "stretched so far as to allow
detentive stops for generalized criminal inquiries[,]" Eleneki,
106 Hawai #i at 183, 102 P.3d at 1081, must be "no greater in
intensity than absolutely necessary under the circumstances[,]" 
State v. Barros , 98 Hawai #i 337, 342, 48 P.3d 584, 589
17  Below and on appeal, Visintin argues that his conduct of crouching
in the bushes was not incriminating behavior furnishing reasonable suspicion
but rather a natural response to having a bright spotlight of unknown origin
directed at him.  However, in its ruling, the circuit court found that
Visintin was indeed "hiding" in bushes, and Visintin's explanation alone is
insufficient to prove this finding clearly erroneous.  Dan v. State , 76
Hawai#i 423, 428, 879 P.2d 528, 533 (1994).  Moreover, when accompanied by
"other, more probative grounds for reasonable suspicion," "nervous, evasive
behavior can be a pertinent factor in determining reasonable suspicion[.]" 
Estabillio , 121 Hawai #i at 274, 218 P.3d at 762 (internal citations and
quotation marks omitted); see also Koanui, 3 Haw. App. at 258, 649 P.2d at
387-88.  Therefore, we disagree with Visintin's argument that his conduct did
not contribute to reasonable suspicion of criminal activity.
30FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(2002)(citation omitted), and must "last no longer than is
necessary to effectuate the purpose of the detention-- i.e.,
transpire for no longer than necessary to confirm or dispel the
officer's reasonable suspicion that criminal activity is afoot." 
Estabillio, 121 Hawai #i at 270, 218 P.3d at 758 (citation
omitted).  We hold that Officer Silva's request for
identification did not cause Visintin's seizure to exceed the
scope, intensity, or duration permissible under the
circumstances.
Officer Silva testified that his original intent in
approaching Visintin was to check out the situation and request
identification, and, as noted above, there was reasonable
suspicion to briefly detain and investigate, in particular
because Visintin appeared to be trespassing on the Friendship
House property at 2:40 AM and was hiding in the bushes.  After
stopping Visintin and ordering him out of the bushes, Officer
Silva noted that Visintin was breathing heavily, sweating
profusely, and smelled of alcohol, factors that provided
additional suspicion for him to investigate.  Identifying the
detained person may be a reasonable and natural step in
attempting to confirm or dispel the suspicion that prompted the
investigatory stop.  State v. Melear , 63 Haw. 488, 493, 630 P.2d
619, 624 (1981) ("A brief stop of a suspicious individual, in
order to determine his identity or to maintain the status quo
momentarily while obtaining more information, may be most
reasonable in light of the facts known to the officer at that
time.")(citation omitted); State v. Silva , 91 Hawai #i 111, 118,
979 P.2d 1137, 1144 (App. 1999)(noting that a common
investigative technique is "interrogation, which may include both
a request for identification and inquiry concerning the
suspicious conduct of the person detained"). 
It is true that Officer Silva testified that one of the
things he intended to do with Visintin's identification was to
run a warrant check.  While the Hawai# i Supreme Court has noted
that police may not prolong the detention of individuals
31FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
subjected to brief, temporary investigative stops solely for the
purpose of performing a check for outstanding warrants, Barros,
98 Hawai# i at 342, 48 P.3d at 589, there is no indication that
this occurred here.  Officer Silva's testimony indicates that the
request for identification was his first communication after
ordering Visintin to come out of the bushes, and there is no
indication that he prolonged Visintin's seizure in order to
conduct a warrant check.  Rather, the request for identification
was within the scope of Officer Silva's initial investigation to
address his reasonable suspicion of criminal activity.
In sum, the circuit court did not err in denying
Visintin's Motion to Suppress.
IV. Conclusion
For the reasons set forth above, we vacate the Judgment
entered on January 30, 2014, and remand the case to the circuit
court for dismissal pursuant to HRPP Rule 48.  On remand, the
circuit court shall determine whether the dismissal should be
with or without prejudice.
On the briefs:
Daniel G. Hempey, 
for Defendant-Appellant.
Tracy Murakami,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
Office of the Prosecuting Attorney,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
32