NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000349
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
JOHN C. HORVATH, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
HONOLULU DIVISION
(CASE NO. 1DTA-16-03579)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, C.J., Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant John C. Horvath (Horvath ) appeals
from the "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
Plea/Judgment" (Judgment ) entered on April 3, 2017 in the
District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division (district
court).1  After a bench trial, the district court found Horvath
guilty of operating a vehicle under the influence of an
intoxicant (
OVUII), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS)
§§ 291E-61(a)(1) and (b)(1) (Supp. 2017) .2 
1  The Honorable Lanson K. Kupau presided.
2  HRS § 291E-61(a)(1) provides, in relevant part:
§291E-61  Operating a vehicle under the influence of
an intoxicant.  (a) A person commits the offense of
operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if
the person operates or assumes actual physical control of a
(continued...)NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Horvath contends that the district court
erred by: (1) failing to administer a proper Tachibana colloquy;
and (2) denying Horvath's motion to suppress certain statements
because they were made without prior Miranda warnings.   Horvath
additionally argues that, without the improperly admitted
evidence described in his Motion to Suppress, there would not
have been substantial evidence to support his conviction. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant legal authorities, we resolve Horvath's
points of error as follows and affirm.
(1)  Ultimate Tachibana Colloquy.  
Prior to the State calling its first witness, the
district court offered its prior-to-trial advisement of Horvath's
right to testify or not testify:3
THE COURT:  Okay.  Also too I need to advise you that
you have the constitutional right to testify or not testify
in your own behalf.  No one can force you to make that
decision.  That decision is yours and yours alone to make. 
If you decide to testify on your own behalf, then you'll be
placed under oath and subject to cross-examination by the
prosecutor.  Do you understand that?
[HORVATH]:  Yes, I do. 
THE COURT:  If you decide not to testify, then that's
perfectly fine.  This court cannot and will not hold that
against you or have any negative inference made against you
as a result of your decision not to testify.  The court will
simply make a decision based upon the evidence presented
without your testimony.  Do you understand that?
[HORVATH]:  Yes, I do, Your Honor. 
THE COURT:  At a later point in time the court's going
to discuss this matter with you again.  At that point in
time I'll go ahead and give you the opportunity to speak to
your attorney and then let me know what your decision is. 
(...continued)
vehicle:
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an
amount sufficient to impair the person's normal
mental faculties or ability to care for the
person and guard against casualty[.]
3  See State v. Lewis, 94 Hawai #i 292, 297, 12 P.3d 1233, 1238 (2000).
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Okay?
[HORVATH]:  Thank you.  Yes. 
THE COURT:  Do you have any questions for me before we
start? 
[HORVATH]:  No, Your Honor. 
THE COURT:  Okay.  Thank you very much.  If you would
please have a seat.
Following the State's case-in-chief, the defense
indicated that it had no witnesses.  The district court
administered the ultimate Tachibana  colloquy,4 stating:
THE COURT:  All right.
And then, Mr. Horvath, as I had mentioned previously,
you have the constitutional right to testify or not testify
in your own behalf.  That decision is yours and yours alone
to make.  Uh, at this point in time if you choose to testify
on your own behalf, you'll be subject to cross-examination
by the State.  Do you understand that?
[HORVATH]:  Yes, Your Honor.
THE COURT:  If you choose not to testify, that's
perfectly fine.  This court cannot and will not hold that
against you or have any negative inference as the result of
your decision not to testify.  Do you understand that?
[HORVATH]:  Yes, Your Honor. 
THE COURT:  Okay.  Do you have any questions for the
court?
[HORVATH]:  No, Your Honor. 
4  Trial courts are required to "conduct an 'ultimate colloquy' in cases
in which a defendant has not testified prior to the close of the case."  State
v. Monteil, 134 Hawai #i 361, 370, 341 P.3d 567, 576 (2014).  Tachibana
provided trial courts with the following specific guidance for the "ultimate
colloquy" to ensure that defendants are informed of their rights regarding
their testimony:
[H]e or she has a right to testify, that if he or she wants
to testify that no one can prevent him or her from doing so,
and that if he or she testifies the prosecution will be
allowed to cross-examine him or her.  In connection with the
privilege against self-incrimination, the defendant should
also be advised that he or she has a right not to testify
and that if he or she does not testify then the jury can be
instructed about that right.
Tachibana v. State , 79 Hawai #i 226, 236 n.7, 900 P.2d 1293, 1303 n.7 (1995)
(original brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Neuman, 371 S.E.2d 77, 82
(1988)).
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
THE COURT:  Okay.  Now I'll give you an opportunity to
discuss this matter with your counsel, and then you can let
me know what your decision is. 
[HORVATH]:  Uh, I choose not to testify. 
THE COURT:  Okay.  And is anyone forcing you,
threatening you, or promising you anything in exchange for
your decision not to testify?
[HORVATH]:  No, Your Honor. 
THE COURT:  You [sic] doing this of your own free
will?
[HORVATH]:  Yes, Your Honor. 
THE COURT:  All right.  Are you currently under the
influence of any drug, medication, alcohol, suffering from
or being treated for any mental illness that would affect
your ability to think clearly today? 
[HORVATH]:  No, Your Honor.
 
THE COURT:  Your mind is clear?
[HORVATH]:  Yes, sir.
THE COURT:  Okay.  Thank you very much.  
On appeal, Horvath first contends that the district
court's ultimate Tachibana  colloquy was "actually a litany of
rights/advisements" in which the court lumped all the rights and
advisements associated with the right to testify into a single
question, "Do you understand that?" and then did the same with
the rights and advisements associated with the right not to
testify.  We conclude the district court's Tachibana colloquy was
not deficient.
"[A] colloquy is an oral exchange in which the judge
ascertains the defendant's understanding of the proceedings and
of the defendant's rights."  State v. Pomroy , 132 Hawai #i 85, 93,
319 P.3d 1093, 1101 (2014) (quoting State v. Han, 130 Hawai# i 83,
90, 306 P.3d 128, 135 (2013)) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court held in Pomroy that the district
court's recitation of a litany of rights, coupled with the
district court's failure to "ascertain that [defendant]
understood what it had told him, or, more importantly, understood
his right to testify (or not testify)" did not amount to a true
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
colloquy.  132 Hawai #i at 93–94, 319 P.3d at 1101–02.
Recently, in State v. Celestine, 142 Hawai# i 165, 415
P.3d 907 (2018), the Hawai #i Supreme Court stated:
To accomplish the purposes of a true colloquy, we have
suggested that the trial court engage in a verbal exchange
with the defendant at least twice during the colloquy in
order to ascertain the defendant's "understanding of
significant propositions in the advisement."  The first time
is after the court informs the defendant of the right to
testify and of the right not to testify and the protections
associated with these rights
.  The purpose of this exchange
is for the court to ascertain the defendant's understanding
of these important principles.
The second time we suggested a verbal exchange should occur
is after the court indicates to the defendant its
understanding that the defendant does not intend to testify.
This inquiry enables the court to determine whether the
defendant's decision to not testify is made with an
understanding of the principles that have been explained to
the defendant.  As part of this inquiry, the trial court
elicits responses as to whether the defendant intends to not
testify, whether anyone is forcing the defendant not to
testify, and whether the decision to not testify is the
defendant's.
Id. at 170-71, 415 P.3d 912-13 (citations and footnote omitted)
(emphasis added).
In this case, the district court did not simply recite
a litany of rights during the ultimate colloquy with Horvath. 
Instead, the district court advised Horvath of his rights and
during that process, also engaged in several verbal exchanges
with Horvath consistent with Celestine.  We thus conclude that
the district court engaged in a true colloquy with Horvath.
We note that the district court did not explicitly
advise Horvath that "if he [] wants to testify that no one can
prevent him [] from doing so[.]"  See Tachibana, 79 Hawai #i at
236 n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n.7 (citation omitted).  Rather, the
district court advised Horvath that his decision whether to
testify "is yours and yours alone to make" and also asked
Horvath, "is anyone forcing you, threatening you, or promising
you anything in exchange for your decision not to testify?" 
Given the totality of the circumstances, we conclude that the
colloquy in this case was not deficient.
The constitutional right to testify is violated when the
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Tachibana colloquy is inadequate to provide an "objective
basis" for finding the defendant "knowingly, intelligently,
and voluntarily" relinquished his or her right to testify.
In determining whether a waiver of the right to testify was
voluntarily and intelligently made, this court looks to the
totality of the facts and circumstances of each particular
case.
Celestine, 142 Hawai #i at 171, 415 P.3d at 913 (citations
omitted).  In Celestine , the following colloquy transpired
between the defendant and the district court:
THE COURT: Okay.  Just in caution, okay, I had explained to
you, okay, on the 12th that you had the right to testify and
the right to remain silent, okay.  They call this your
Tachibana rights.  It's based on a case law that the
appellate court found that the trial court needed to inform
you of your rights, okay.  If you chose not to testify, the
Court could infer no guilt because of your silence;
basically you would be invoking your Fifth Amendment right
against self-incrimination.  Okay.  On the other hand, if
you do wish to testify, you need to be sworn in, you also
will be subject to cross-examination by the State's
attorney.
Okay.  Your attorney just indicated to the Court that you
will not be testifying.  Is that correct?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, sir.
THE COURT: Okay.  Is anybody forcing you not to testify?
THE DEFENDANT: No, sir.
THE COURT: Okay.  It's your own decision?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, sir.
THE COURT: Okay, very good, why don't you have a seat. . . .
Id. at 175, 415 P.3d at 917.  The supreme court held that
Celestine's response of "Yes, sir" to the court's question
regarding her attorney's indication to the court did not indicate
whether she was expressing that she did not wish to testify or
merely confirming that her attorney had just told the court she
would not be testifying.  Id. at 172, 415 P.3d at 914 (citing
Han, 130 Hawai# i at 91, 306 P.3d at 136 (holding that although
the defendant responded "Yes" to the court's statement that
"[t]he decision not to testify is yours and yours alone after you
have discussed the matter with your attorney," it was unclear if
the defendant was responding "Yes"--that he understood the
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
decision was his alone, or "Yes"--that he had discussed the
matter with his attorney)).
The supreme court further held that Celestine's "No"
response to the court's inquiry of whether anyone was forcing her
not to testify did not indicate that she understood she had a
constitutional right to testify, only that no one was forcing her
not to testify.  Id. (citing Han, 130 Hawai #i at 91, 306 P.3d at
136 (holding that the defendant's "No" response to the court's
inquiry as to whether anyone was threatening or forcing him not
to testify did not demonstrate his understanding of his right to
testify)).  Further, the final question ("It's your own
decision?") did not cure the inadequacy in the court's colloquy
as the court "did not inquire into other matters of
constitutional magnitude."  Id.  (citations omitted).  Therefore,
the district court did not engage in a sufficient colloquy with
Celestine to ascertain whether her waiver of the right to testify
was based on her understanding of the principles related by the
district court, and as such, the record did not demonstrate that
Celestine's waiver of the right to testify was knowingly,
intelligently, and voluntarily made.  Id.
In the instant case, the district court advised Horvath
in pertinent part: "you have the constitutional right to testify
or not testify in your own behalf.  That decision is yours and
yours alone to make."  (Emphasis added).  The district court
asked Horvath, "[d]o you understand that?"  Horvath replied that
he understood.  After Horvath stated "I choose not to testify"
(emphasis added), the district court asked Horvath "is anyone
forcing you, threatening you, or promising you anything in
exchange for your decision not to testify?" to which Horvath
responded, "[n]o, Your Honor."  The district court then asked
"[y]ou doing this of your own free will?" to which Horvath
replied, "[y]es, Your Honor."  Together, the district court's
advisements and exchanges with Horvath objectively indicate that
Horvath was aware that he had a right to testify and that no one
could prevent him from doing so.
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Based on the totality of the circumstances, there is an
objective basis for determining that Horvath knowingly,
intelligently, and voluntarily relinquished his right to testify.
(2)  Miranda Warning.   Horvath next contends that his
statements and non-verbal communication after being placed in
"custody" should have been suppressed.  Horvath thus asserts that
the district court erred in not suppressing evidence related to:
his agreement to participate in the Standard Field Sobriety Tests
(SFSTs), his answers to the medical rule-out questions, his
statements that he understood Officer Thomas Billins' ( Officer
Billins) instructions on the SFSTs, and his performance on the
SFSTs.  Horvath does not dispute, however, that he was initially
pulled over pursuant to a valid traffic stop after Officer Lordy
Cullen (Officer Cullen) observed his vehicle weaving on the
freeway and straddling two lanes on Kinau Street for about ten
seconds after exiting the freeway.5 
At trial, the prosecution called Officer Cullen and
Officer Billins as its witnesses.
Officer Cullen testified that, on October 1, 2016, at
about 3:10 a.m., he effected a traffic stop of a car being driven
by Horvath.  At that time, Horvath's car was traveling on the H-1
freeway, "weaving in a snakelike motion" between two lanes.  
Officer Cullen followed Horvath for about half a mile, until
Horvath exited onto Kinau Street, at which point Officer Cullen
observed Horvath straddling two lanes for about ten seconds.  
After activating the blue lights and siren on his patrol car,
Officer Cullen directed Horvath to pull over, and Horvath
complied.  Officer Cullen explained to Horvath why he was
5  Horvath cites State v. Tsujimura, 140 Hawai #i 299, 400 P.3d 500
(2017), for the proposition that his post-seizure statements and non-verbal
communicative responses were obtained in violation of his right to remain
silent.  In Tsujimura, the supreme court held that a person has the right to
remain silent before an arrest is made.  
Id. at 310-11, 400 P.3d at 511-12. 
Tsujimura, however, is distinguishable because, in that case, the issue was
whether the defendant's pre-arrest silence could be used against him
substantively as an implication of guilt, not whether Miranda warnings were
required.  
Id. at 311-14, 400 P.3d at 512-15.
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
stopping him and subsequently asked for his license, insurance,
and registration.  Although Horvath retrieved his license without
delay, he had trouble locating the other documents.  Horvath gave
Officer Cullen three expired insurance cards and two expired
registration documents before presenting current versions. 
Officer Cullen further testified that, while conversing
with Horvath, he noticed a strong odor of a consumed alcoholic
beverage emanating from Horvath's breath, that Horvath's eyes
were red, watery, glassy and bloodshot, that his face was flushed
pink, and that his speech was slurred.  Officer Cullen returned
to his patrol car, at which point Officer Billins arrived.  
Officer Cullen instructed Officer Billins to administer the SFSTs
to Horvath. 
Officer Billins testified that, prior to administering
the SFSTs, he asked Horvath "medical rule-out questions" to
determine if Horvath had any medical conditions that would affect
his ability to perform the tests.  Officer Billins then asked
Horvath whether he was taking medication, if he has seen an eye
doctor or a dentist recently, if he is diabetic or epileptic, if
he has a fake or glass eye, and if he has any speech impediments. 
Officer Billins testified that Horvath answered "no" to all of
these questions.  
Officer Billins further testified regarding his
observations of Horvath's performance during the SFSTs.  During
the horizontal gaze nystagmus test, Horvath swayed from side to
side about two inches as he stood.  During the walk-and-turn
test, Horvath missed some heel-to-toes on the first nine steps,
stumbled when he turned around, and took sixteen rather than the
instructed nine return steps.  During the one-leg stand test,
Horvath failed repeatedly to keep his foot six inches above the
ground as instructed, could not keep his arms by his sides as
instructed, and swayed his body throughout the test.  Horvath was
arrested after completing the SFSTs. 
A defendant is not in custody for purposes of Miranda
merely because he or she has been pulled over pursuant to a valid
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
traffic stop.  State v. Kaleohano, 99 Hawai #i 370, 376, 56 P.3d
138, 144 (2002); see also Berkemer v. McCarty, 468 U.S. 420, 437-
39 (1984) (holding that persons temporarily detained pursuant to
ordinary traffic stops are not in custody for purposes of
Miranda).  Here, Horvath was not in custody merely by virtue of
being pulled over during a traffic stop.  Further, based on the
totality of the circumstances, Horvath was not subjected to
custodial interrogation prior to or while performing the SFSTs,
and thus, he was not required to be advised of his rights under
Miranda v. Arizona , 384 U.S. 436 (1966).  See also State v.
Kahana, No. CAAP-17-0000359, 2018 WL 2316511, at *1-2 (Hawai #i
App. May 22, 2018); State v. Uchima , No. CAAP-17-0000081, 2018 WL
898225, at *1-2 (Hawai# i App. Feb. 15, 2018).
In order for a defendant's statements to be admitted
into evidence, it need not be shown that the defendant was
advised of his or her rights, if the defendant's statements are
not the product of custodial interrogation.  Kaleohano, 99
Hawai#i at 377-78, 56 P.3d at 145-46.  As stated above, Horvath
was not in custody and, thus, he was not subjected to custodial
interrogation which required advisement of his Miranda  rights.
Therefore, his statements to Officer Billins were  admissible.
Further, admission of Horvath's performance on the
SFSTs did not violate his right against self-incrimination.  The
right against self-incrimination is not necessarily implicated
whenever a person suspected of criminal activity is compelled in
some way to cooperate in developing evidence which may be used
against him.  State v. Wyatt, 67 Haw. 293, 302, 687 P.2d 544, 551
(1984).  In Wyatt, the supreme court stated that observations of
a defendant's performance on field sobriety tests were an
exhibition of physical characteristics of coordination.  Id.  at
303, 687 P.2d at 551.  Thus, the Wyatt court held that since the
performance on field sobriety tests was not communication nor
testimony, the trial court did not err by refusing to suppress
the field sobriety test observations.  Id. at 301-03, 687 P.2d at
550-51.
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
For these reasons, the district court did not err in
denying Horvath's motion to suppress.
(3)  Sufficiency of the Evidence.  Horvath additionally
contends that, absent the erroneously admitted statements and
observations of his performance on the SFSTs, there was no
substantial evidence to support his conviction.  However, we have
concluded that the district court did not err by refusing to
suppress evidence of the police officers' observations of
Horvath's actions and the statements made by Horvath.
The evidence in this case was sufficient to support
Horvath's conviction.
Therefore, the District Court of the First Circuit,
Honolulu Division's "Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
Plea/Judgment," entered on April 3, 2017, is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 28, 2018.
On the briefs:
Alen M. Kaneshiro, 
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge
Brian R. Vincent, 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge
Associate Judge
11