NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000340
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
SCOTT E. ARGUS, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
HONOLULU DIVISION
(1DCC-16-0004790)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Scott E. Argus (Argus) appeals from
the District Court of the First Circuit's (District Court)
March 17, 2017 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence.   After a
bench trial, the District Court convicted Argus of Negligent
Failure to Control a Dangerous Dog in violation of Revised
Ordinances of Honolulu (ROH) § 7-7.2(a)  (1990 & Supp. No. 12, 2-
08) (NFCDD).  Argus was sentenced to pay a fine of $500.21
On appeal, Argus contends the District Court erred
because there was insufficient evidence to prove every element of
the offense beyond a reasonable doubt.
1The Honorable Michael A. Marr presided.
2ROH 7-7.2 provides, in relevant part:
Prohibited acts—Conditions on owner—Penalties.
(a) A dog owner commits the offense of negligent failure
to control a dangerous dog, if the owner negligently
fails to take reasonable measures to prevent the dog
from attacking, without provocation, a person or
animal and such attack results in: . . . (2) bodily
injury to a person other than the owner.  A person
convicted under this subsection shall be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor for a first offense[.]NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues
raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve
Argus's appeal as follows and affirm.
Argus contends the District Court erred because there
was insufficient evidence to prove every element of the offense
beyond a reasonable doubt.  Specifically, Argus argues that the
State failed to prove:  (1) the identity of the specific dog that
bit the complaining witness (CW); (2) that he negligently failed
to take reasonable measures to prevent the attack; and (3) the
attack was unprovoked.
As charged in this case, the offense of NFCDD requires
proof that the accused:  (1) owned, harbored, kept, or had
custody of a dog; (2) negligently failed to take reasonable
measures to prevent the dog from attacking without provocation;
and (3) which resulted in bodily injury to a person other than
the owner.  ROH § 7-7.2.  "Reasonable measures to prevent the dog
from attacking" is defined by the ordinance as including, but not
limited to, measures required to be taken under Article 4 of
chapter 7 to prevent the dog from becoming a stray.  ROH § 7-
7.2(b).  A "stray" is, inter alia, any dog in a public place
except if under the control of the owner by use of a physical
restraint, such as a leash.  ROH § 7-4.1 (2011).3
In addition, ROH § 7-7.1 (1990 & Supp. No. 12, 2-08)
provides definitions for terms used in ROH § 7-7.2, in relevant
part: 
"Attack" means aggressive physical contact with a
person or animal initiated by the dog which may include, but
is not limited to, the dog jumping on, leaping at or biting
a person or animal.
3The full definition provides, 
"Stray" or "stray dog" means any dog:  (1) on the premises
of a person other than the owner of the dog, without the
consent of an occupant of such premises; or (2) on a public
street, on public or private school grounds, or in any other
public place, except when under the control of the owner by
leash, cord, chain or other similar means of physical
restraint; provided, that such leash, cord, chain or other
means is not more than eight feet in length; and provided
further, that this provision shall not be construed to
permit that which is prohibited by any other law.
ROH § 7-4.1.  Further, Article 4 provides that it is unlawful for an owner to
allow his or her dog to become a stray.  ROH § 7-4.2 (2000).
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
"Bodily injury" means the same as that term is defined
in [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)] Section 707-700.
. . . .
"Dangerous dog" means any dog which, without
provocation, attacks a person or animal.  A dog's breed
shall not be considered in determining whether or not it is
dangerous.
. . . .
"Negligently" shall have the same meaning as is
ascribed to the term in HRS Section 702-206.
 
"Owner" means any person owning, harboring or keeping
a dog[.]
"Provocation" means the attack by a dog upon a person
or animal was precipitated under the following
circumstances:
(1) The dog was protecting or defending its owner or
a member of its owner's household from an attack
or assault;
(2) The person attacked was committing a crime or
offense while on the property of the owner of
the dog;
(3) The person attacked was teasing, tormenting,
abusing or assaulting the dog or at any time in
the past had teased, tormented, abused or
assaulted the dog;
(4) The dog was attacked or menaced by the animal or
the animal was on the property of the owner of
the dog;
(5) The dog was responding to pain or injury
inflicted by the attacked person or animal;
(6) The dog was protecting itself, its kennels or
its offspring from the attacked person or
animal;
(7) The person or animal attacked was disturbing the
dog’s natural functions, such as sleeping or
eating, while the dog was on its owner's
property; or
(8) The dog was responding to a command or
encouragement to attack the person or animal.
HRS § 707-700 (2014) (amended 2016) defines "bodily
injury" as, "physical pain, illness, or any impairment of
physical condition."  
The Hawai#i Supreme Court has 
long held that evidence adduced in the trial court must be
considered in the strongest light for the prosecution when
the appellate court passes on the legal sufficiency of such
evidence to support a conviction; the same standard applies
whether the case was before a judge or a jury. The test on
appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a
reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to support the conclusion of the trier of fact. Indeed, even
if it could be said in a bench trial that the conviction is
against the weight of the evidence, as long as there is
substantial evidence to support the requisite findings for
conviction, the trial court will be affirmed. 
"Substantial evidence" as to every material
element of the offense charged is credible evidence
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to
enable [a person] of reasonable caution to support a
conclusion. And as trier of fact, the trial judge is
free to make all reasonable and rational inferences
under the facts in evidence, including circumstantial
evidence.
State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 248–49, 831 P.2d 924, 931 (1992)
(citations omitted).
State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai# i 149, 157–58, 166 P.3d 322, 330–31
(2007).
In State v. Bereday, this court held that "ROH § 7-7.2
does not require the prosecution to identify the dog by name, but
simply requires the prosecution to establish that it was a dog
owned by the defendant that committed the attack."  120 Hawai#i
486, 496, 210 P.3d 9, 19 (App. 2009).  Here, CW identified Argus
at trial and testified that he got out of a van with three dogs,
the "chocolate-colored one" was on a leash held by Argus, and one
of the other two, vanilla-colored dogs bit her on her upper
thigh, causing pain and bleeding.  She described the biting dog
as a large, shaggy white dog stained with red dirt on its belly
and a little on its back.   CW stated that, after the bite, Argus
pulled off the biting dog by the scruff and led it around the
corner from where his van was parked.  The State also submitted
into evidence photographs of CW's injury depicting substantial
bruising at the site of the bite.  The District Court found CW to
be credible as it found facts consistent with the CW's testimony
and rejected testimony by Argus.  "'[T]he testimony of a single
witness, if found by the trier of fact to have been credible,
will suffice' to provide substantial evidence."  State v.
Kalaola, 124 4
Hawai#i 43, 50–51, 237 P.3d 1109, 1116–17 (2010)
(quoting In re Doe, 95 Hawai#i 183, 196, 20 P.3d 616, 629
(2001)).  Therefore, ample evidence that Argus owned all three of
4Moreover, Argus presented as evidence a scan of his own and each
of his dogs' pet therapy identification badges as an exhibit.  Among the three
dogs pictured, despite the low quality of the picture, the dog named Gus
appears to match CW's description.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the dogs that CW encountered, and that the larger of the two
vanilla-colored dogs, with shaggy, red-dirt-stained fur on its
stomach, attacked CW causing bodily injury, was presented,
meeting the requirements of ROH § 7-7.2(a).
Next, Argus contends the State failed to prove that he
failed to take reasonable measures to prevent the attack.  
Essentially, Argus claims that he was not negligent in the
handling of his dogs.
ROH § 7-7.1 provides, in relevant part, "'Negligently'
shall have the same meaning as is ascribed to the term in HRS
Section 702-206."  HRS § 702-206(4) (2014) provides:
"Negligently." 
(a)A person acts negligently with respect to his conduct
when he should be aware of a substantial and
unjustifiable risk taken that the person's conduct is
of the specified nature. 
(b)A person acts negligently with respect to attendant
circumstances when he should be aware of a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances exist.
(c)A person acts negligently with respect to a result of
his conduct when he should be aware of a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that his conduct will cause
such a result. 
(d)A risk is substantial and unjustifiable within the
meaning of this subsection if the person's failure to
perceive it, considering the nature and purpose of his
conduct and the circumstances known to him, involves a
gross deviation from the standard of care that a
law-abiding person would observe in the same
situation.
HRS § 702-206 is a criminal statute and the standard for criminal
negligence under the Hawai#i Penal code is higher than that of
tort law.  See State v. Bayly, 118 Hawai#i 1, 9, 185 P.3d 186,
194 (2008).
The offense of NFCDD requires proof that the accused
negligently failed to take "reasonable measures to prevent the
dog from attacking" which includes measures that would prevent
the dog from becoming a stray.  ROH § 7-7.2(a) and (b).  Under
ROH § 7-4.1, a "stray dog" is any untethered dog in a public
place and CW testified that the dog that bit her while she was on
a public sidewalk, was unleashed.  Thus, under the plain language
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of the ordinance, Argus failed to take reasonable measures to
prevent his dog from attacking.5
Finally, relying on the examples of provocation (1) and
(6) contained in ROH § 7-7.1, Argus claims that the prosecution
failed to present sufficient evidence of the lack of provocation
by CW.  Argus argues that the undisputed evidence shows that CW's
action, by jogging or running up to the rear of Argus's vehicle
when he and his dogs were nearby, provoked the attack.  That is
to say, that the dog could have attacked CW in an attempt to
protect itself and/or Argus because CW ran toward it.
It is undisputed that the prosecution was required to
prove the lack of provocation by CW.  The appellate court reviews
the sufficiency of evidence on appeal as follows:
[E]vidence adduced in the trial court must be considered in
the strongest light for the prosecution when the appellate
court passes on the legal sufficiency of such evidence to
support a conviction; the same standard applies whether the
case was before a judge or jury.  The test on appeal is not
whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but
whether there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion of the trier of fact.
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai#i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998)
(quoting State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai# i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576
(1997)).  Furthermore, "[U]nder such a review, we give full play
to the right of the fact finder to determine credibility, weigh
the evidence, and draw justifiable inferences of fact."  State v.
Grace, 107 Hawai#i 133, 139, 111 P.3d 28, 34 (App. 2005)
(citations omitted).
Here, CW testified that she approached Argus's vehicle,
and "when [she] saw him getting the dogs onto the sidewalk, [she]
didn't want to get onto the sidewalk in front of them so then I
kind of went really close to the car on the street side to go
around" them.  CW noticed the chocolate-colored dog had a leash
and the two larger, vanilla-colored dogs behind it.  She assumed
that all the dogs were on leash, but when she noticed "the third
one didn't have a leash and then that one came towards me and it
5Argus argues that, as ROH § 7-4.1 allows a leash of up to eight
feet in length and CW ran within "leash range" of the dogs, his failure to
keep all of his dogs on a leash "would have made no difference in preventing
the attack."  However, as Argus himself admits, the failure to keep his dogs
on a leash constitutes negligence on his part, and because the distance
between CW and Argus when his dog began its attack is not known, his argument
is speculative at best.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
bit my upper right thigh."  CW testified that she did not try to
pet the dogs or get close to them to touch them.  She was still
"towards the back of the car, like still kind of on the street or
side and then the dog was on the sidewalk and so as I kind of --
as I went towards it, the dog came towards me so it was sort of,
like, a diagonal, just straight shot."  The dog came at her in
"one quick swift movement. . . went [] just straight for [her]
thigh," at which point Argus "grabbed the dog by the back of the
neck and then pulled him, pulled him off."   6
Taking the evidence in the light most favorable to the
prosecution, there was ample, credible evidence to support the
conviction.  CW testified that she moved "towards" Argus and his
dogs, but did not try to pet or get close to them and indeed,
moved onto the grassy area next to his vehicle and away from
them.  There is no evidence that the other two dogs acted in a
similar fashion, making it reasonable to infer CW's actions were
not provocative to dogs generally.  The District Court listened
to the testimony of CW and Argus and the argument by counsel,
which discussed in substantial part the issue of provocation, and
found that CW approached Argus and his dogs and as she got
closer, the light-colored dog bit her, and that "the evidence
indicates that--that it was caused by the dog, not caused by
anybody else or anything else."
Therefore, Argus's argument is without merit.
For the foregoing reasons, the District Court of the
First Circuit, Honolulu Division's March 17, 2017 Judgment of
Conviction and Sentence is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, July 26, 2019.
On the briefs:
Phyllis J. Hironaka,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
6Argus disputed that the incident occurred at all and denied that
his dogs had ever displayed any type of aggressive behavior.
7