NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000338 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
JASON KIRIAKO, Appellant-Appellant,
v. 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES,
Appellee-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-1460) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Appellant Jason Kiriako (Kiriako
) appeals from the 
Judgment (Judgment
) in favor of Appellee State of Hawai# i 
Department of Human Services (DHS) entered by the Circuit Court 
of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)1 on March 29, 2016. Kiriako 
raises two points of error: 
1. The Circuit Court erred by finding that Kiriako's 
constitutional right to due process was not violated in the 
administrative hearing; and 
2. The Circuit Court erred by finding there was 
sufficient evidence to support the hearing officer's decision. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the relevant statutory and case law, we affirm the Judgment for the reasons explained below. 
1 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. 
On June 12, 2014, DHS was informed of possible child 
abuse after Kiriako's then-wife (Mother) obtained a restraining 
order against Kiriako for herself and on behalf of their seven-
month old daughter (Child).2 Mother had reported that on June 5, 
2014, she heard Child "screaming" while in the living room with Kiriako, and later that night "found a handprint on [Child's] upper right back and two vertical long red marks." On December 23, 2014, DHS notified Kiriako it had confirmed that Kiriako was the perpetrator of physical harm or abuse to a child. On January 22, 2015, Kiriako requested an administrative hearing. Kiriako's request was made on a DHS form on which was pre-printed: 
I would like an Administrative Hearing because I do not
agree with the decision of the Child Welfare Services (CWS)child abuse and/or neglect investigation. 
Below the pre-printed language Kiriako typed: 
I request that DHS file a Petition in Family court as I donot agree to jurisdiction. 
The administrative hearing was held on April 28, 2015. The 
hearings officer issued a decision (Agency Decision) on June 29, 
2015. The Agency Decision contained eighty-eight findings of 
fact, twenty-two conclusions of law, and a discussion of slightly more than two pages. The Agency Decision concluded with the following order: 
The undersigned Hearing Officer, having carefully reviewed
testimony presented at hearing, as well as all evidence,statutes and administrative rules in regard to this matter,issues a decision favorable to the Department. The Department's action is therefore affirmed and the statecentral registry shall reflect this decision.§[ ]17-1610-18, Hawaii Administrative Rules.
3 
2 Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 350-1.1 (2015) requires that
employees or officers of the courts who, in their professional or officialcapacity, have reason to believe that child abuse has occurred, immediatelyreport the matter to DHS. 
3 Hawaii Administrative Rules ( HAR) § 17-1610-18 is titled
"Registration of reports" and provides: 
(continued...) 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(footnote added). Kiriako filed a notice of appeal on July 27, 
2015. Briefing was completed and the Circuit Court heard oral arguments on March 4, 2016. On March 29, 2016, the Circuit Court entered an order affirming the Agency Decision and the Judgment. This appeal followed. 
II. 
Our review of a circuit court decision on an appeal 
from an administrative agency determination is a secondary appeal; we must determine whether the circuit court was right or wrong in its decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS § 91–14(g) (2012) to the agency's decision. 
Flores v. Board of 
Land and Natural Resources, 143 Hawai# i 114, 120, 424 P.3d 469, 
475 (2018) (citations omitted). 
HRS § 91–14, entitled "Judicial review of contested 
cases," provides in relevant part: 
(g) Upon review of the record, the court may affirm the
decision of the agency or remand the case with instructions for
further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the decision andorder if the substantial rights of the petitioners may have beenprejudiced because the administrative findings, conclusions,decisions, or orders are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutoryprovisions; or 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdictionof the agency; or 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or 
(4) Affected by other error of law; or 
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative,and substantial evidence on the whole record; or 
(6) Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized by abuse ofdiscretion or clearly unwarranted exercise ofdiscretion. 
"Under HRS § 91-14(g), conclusions of law are reviewable under 
subsections (1), (2), and (4); questions regarding procedural defects under subsection (3); findings of fact under 
3 (...continued)
Reports that are accepted by [DHS] for investigation or
assessment shall be registered into [DHS]'s information system,
which is the state central registry, in accordance withdepartmental procedures. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
subsection (5); and an agency's exercise of discretion under 
subsection (6)." Id. at 121, 424 P.3d at 476 (citations omitted). 
An agency's conclusions of law are reviewed de novo, while
an agency's factual findings are reviewed for clear error.A conclusion of law that presents mixed questions of factand law is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standardbecause the conclusion is dependent upon the facts andcircumstances of the particular case. 
As a general matter, a finding of fact or a mixeddetermination of law and fact is clearly erroneouswhen (1) the record lacks substantial evidence tosupport the finding or determination, or (2) despitesubstantial evidence to support the finding ordetermination, the appellate court is left with thedefinite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. Substantial evidence is credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enablea person of reasonable caution to support aconclusion. 
Del Monte Fresh Produce (Hawaii), Inc. v. International Longshore 
and Warehouse Union, Local 142, AFL-CIO, 128 Hawai# i 289, 302, 
287 P.3d 190, 203 (2012) (citation omitted). 
"A court reviewing 
an agency's decision cannot consider the weight of the evidence to ascertain whether it weighs in favor of the administrative findings, or review the agency's findings of fact by passing upon the credibility of witnesses or conflicts in testimony[.]" Sierra Club v. D.R. Horton-Schuler Homes, LLC, 136 Hawai# i 505, 
522, 364 P.3d 213, 230 (2015) (citation, quotation marks and ellipses omitted). 
III. 
Kiriako's Opening Brief did not include a copy of the 
Agency Decision as required by Hawai# i Rules of Appellate 
Procedure (
HRAP) Rule 28(b)(3). The only finding of fact or 
conclusion of law quoted in the Opening Brief's Points of Error as required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(4)(C) are those made by the Circuit Court: 
2. The hearing decision did not violate any
constitutional or statutory provisions. 
4 A. DHS Did Not Violate any Constitutional
or Statutory Provisions NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
3. The hearing decision was not made upon unlawful
procedure. 
We consider each point in turn. 
For his first point of error Kiriako contends that he 
was denied due process because DHS conducted a contested case 
hearing under HRS Chapter 91  rather than file an action in the 
Family Court. Ironically, the case law in this area ordinarily involves parties claiming a constitutional right to have a contested case hearing. See, e.g., Flores, supra. 4
An administrative agency must hold a contested case 
hearing when such a hearing is required by law. Flores, 143 Hawai# i at 124, 424 P.3d at 479 (citations omitted). A contested 
case hearing is required by law when it is required by: (1) statute; (2) administrative rule; or (3) constitutional due process. Id. HRS § 350-2(a) provides: 
Upon receiving a report concerning child abuse or neglect,
the department shall proceed pursuant to chapter 587A [theHawai i # Child Protective Act] and the department's rules. 
HRS § 587A-11 (2017) gives DHS authority to investigate reports 
that a child has been harmed. The DHS rules pertaining to such investigations are contained in HAR Title 17, Chapter 1610, Subchapter 3.
5 DHS conducted the mandated investigation. The 
last investigative entry is dated December 22, 2014. On December 23, 2014, DHS notified Kiriako that he had been confirmed as the perpetrator of physical harm or abuse to a child. On January 22, 2015, Kiriako requested an administrative 
4 HRS § 91-1(5) defines a "contested case" as "a proceeding in which
the legal rights, duties, or privileges of specific parties are required by
law to be determined after an opportunity for agency hearing." Under HRS §91-1(6), an "agency hearing" is a "hearing held by an agency immediately priorto judicial review of a contested case as provided in section 91-14." HRS §91-1(1) defines "agency" as "each state or county board, commission,department, or officer authorized by law to make rules or to adjudicatecontested cases, except those in the legislative or judicial branches." HRS §§ 91-9 through 91-12 delineate the procedural requirements that apply in thecontext of a contested case hearing held by an administrative agency. 
5 Kiriako has not sought declaratory relief on the validity of the
DHS rules pursuant to HRS § 91-7. 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hearing. The hearing was held on April 28, 2015, and the 
procedures mandated by HRS §§ 91-9 through 91-12 were followed. The hearings officer issued the Agency Decision on June 29, 2015. Kiriako appealed to the Circuit Court on July 27, 2015. He was afforded due process by DHS. 
Kiriako contends that the Family Court had exclusive 
jurisdiction over his objections to DHS's investigative findings, citing HRS §§ 587A-5 and 571-11(9) (2006). Those statutes provide, in relevant part: 
§ 587A-5. Jurisdiction 
Pursuant to section 571-11(9), the [Family Court] shall have
exclusive original jurisdiction: 
(1) In a child protective proceeding concerning any
child who is or was found within the State at 
the time specified facts and circumstancesoccurred, are discovered, or are reported to thedepartment. These facts and circumstances constitute the basis for the court's findingthat the child's physical or psychologicalhealth or welfare is subject to imminent harm,has been harmed, or is subject to threatenedharm by the acts or omissions of the child'sfamily[.] 
§ 571-11. Jurisdiction; children 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the [Family
Court] shall have exclusive original jurisdiction in proceedings: 
. 
. . . 
(9) For the protection of any child under chapter
587A[.] 
(underscoring added). Section 587A-5 authorizes, but does not 
require, DHS to initiate protective proceedings in Family Court.6 
In this case DHS maintains it did not initiate a protective proceeding for Child because its investigation, including review of a Multidisciplinary Team Conference Report prepared by Kapi# olani Child Protection Center, indicated that Mother "was 
assessed as an adequate caretaker with services" and Mother's "home is assessed as safe with services." The investigation also indicated that Mother had separated from Kiriako, the temporary 
6 See, e.g., In re A.S., 130 Hawai #i 486, 312 P.3d 1193 (App. 2013),
aff'd, 132 Hawai #i 368, 322 P.3d 263 (2014) (termination of parental rights,
placement of child in foster care). 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
restraining order remained in place, and Kiriako "has not been 
granted any visitation." We conclude that Kiriako was not deprived of due process in the DHS contested case hearing. 
B. The Hearing Decision Was Not
Made upon Unlawful Procedure 
For his second point of error Kiriako contends that the 
Circuit Court "erred by finding there was sufficient evidence to 
support the hearing officer's decision." 
Kiriako's Opening Brief 
did not include a copy of the Agency Decision as required by HRAP Rule 28(b)(3). Nevertheless, we have reviewed the Agency Decision and the transcript of the contested case hearing. There was substantial evidence in the record to support the hearings officer's findings and determination, which were specifically based on an evaluation of witness credibility. In this secondary appeal we "cannot consider the weight of the evidence to ascertain whether it weighs in favor of the administrative findings, or review the agency's findings of fact by passing upon the credibility of witnesses or conflicts in testimony[.]" D.R. Horton-Schuler Homes, LLC, 136 Hawai# i at 522, 364 P.3d at 230 
(citation, quotation marks and ellipses omitted). 
The Circuit 
Court did not err by finding there was sufficient evidence to support the hearings officer's decision. 
IV. 
Based upon the foregoing, the Judgment in favor of DHS 
and against Kiriako entered by the Circuit Court on March 29, 2016 is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, January 30, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Daphne E. Barbee,
for Appellant-Appellant  Presiding Judge 
Heidi M. Rian,Candace J. Park,Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Appellee-Appellee Associate Judge
Associate Judge 
7 