 
 

 

 


 

 





 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000909
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
 
RONALD MELVIN BARNES, Defendant-Appellant
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
 
(FC-CR. NO. 12-1-0057)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Ronald Melvin Barnes (Barnes) 
appeals from the October 26, 2015 Judgment of Conviction and 
Sentence (Judgment) filed in the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit (Circuit Court).1  
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) indicted 
Barnes on nine counts of Sexual Assault in the First Degree under 
2
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-730(1)(b) (2014)  and six
 
 
1
 The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided. 
2
 HRS § 707-730(1)(b) (2014) states: 
Sexual assault in the first degree
. (1) A person
commits the offense of sexual assault in the first degree
if: 
. . . 

(b) The person knowingly engages in sexual penetration with

another person who is less than fourteen years old;

 
(continued...) 
   
 

 

 

 

 


 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 



 




 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
counts of Sexual Assault in the Third Degree under HRS § 707­
732(1)(b) (2014).
3 The charges alleged that Barnes sexually
 
assaulted two minors. After a dismissal of certain counts, and a
 jury trial, the jury found Barnes guilty of five counts of Sexual
 Assault in the First Degree - Counts 1, 3, 5, 6, and 13. The
 Circuit Court sentenced Barnes to twenty years of imprisonment in
 Counts 1, 3, 5, and 6, to be served concurrently with each other. 
The Circuit Court sentenced Barnes to twenty years of
 imprisonment in Count 13, to be served consecutive to Counts 1,
 3, 5 and 6. 
On appeal, Barnes raises a single point of error,
 
contending that the Circuit Court abused its discretion in
 sentencing Barnes to a term of imprisonment for Count 13
 consecutive to the concurrent terms of imprisonment for Counts 1,
 3, 5, and 6.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Barnes's point of error as follows:
 
2(...continued)
 
. . .

 
(2) Sexual assault in the first degree is a class A felony.
 
3
 HRS § 707-732(1)(b) (2014) states:
 
Sexual assault in the third degree
. (1) A person
commits the offense of sexual assault in the third degree
if:
 
. . . 

 (b) The person knowingly subjects to sexual contact

another person who is less than fourteen years old or causes
such a person to have sexual contact with the person;
. . . 
 
(2) Sexual assault in the third degree is a class C felony.

 
2
     
 











 





















 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in
imposing a sentence. The applicable standard of review for
sentencing or resentencing matters is whether the court
committed plain and manifest abuse of discretion in its
decision. Factors which indicate a plain and manifest abuse
of discretion are arbitrary or capricious action by the
judge and a rigid refusal to consider the defendant's
contentions. And, generally, to constitute an abuse it must
appear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reason
or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to the
substantial detriment of a party litigant.
 
State v. Kong, 131 Hawai 'i 94, 101, 315 P.3d 720, 727 (2013) 
(citation omitted). 
"A sentencing court has discretion to order multiple
 
 
terms of imprisonment to run concurrently or consecutively." Id.
 
 
(citing HRS § 706-668.5(1) (2008)). HRS § 706-668.5(2) (2014)
 
 
states: "The court, in determining whether the terms imposed are
 
 
to be ordered to run concurrently or consecutively, shall
 
 
consider the factors set forth in section 706-606." HRS § 706­
606 (2014) provides:
 
 
The court, in determining the particular sentence to be
imposed, shall consider:
(1) The nature and circumstances of the offense and 
the history and characteristics of the defendant;
(2) The need for the sentence imposed:
(a) To reflect the seriousness of the offense, to
promote respect for law, and to provide just
punishment for the offense;
(b) To afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;
(c) To protect the public from further crimes of
the defendant; and
(d) To provide the defendant with needed
educational or vocational training, medical
care, or other correctional treatment in the
most effective manner;
(3) The kinds of sentences available; and
(4) The need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities
among defendants with similar records who have
been found guilty of similar conduct.
 
"Absent clear evidence to the contrary, it is presumed
 
 
that a sentencing court will have considered all factors before
 
 
imposing concurrent or consecutive terms of imprisonment under
 
 
HRS § 706–606." Kong, 131 Hawai 'i at 102, 315 P.3d at 728 
3
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 


 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 


 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(citation and brackets omitted). However, "circuit courts must
 state on the record at the time of sentencing the reasons for
 imposing a consecutive sentence." Id. (citation and emphasis
 
omitted). "[T]he sentencing court is not required to articulate
 and explain its conclusions with respect to every factor listed
 in HRS § 706–606 [,]" but rather must "articulate its reasoning
 only with respect to those factors it relies on in imposing
 consecutive sentences." Id. (citations omitted). 
Here, the Circuit Court considered the HRS § 706-606
 
factors, including the nature and circumstances of the offense,
 which the court found "most serious as they involved the sexual
 molestation of two young children as to whom defendant was in a
 position of trust as" their stepfather. The court observed that
 "these two children apparently suffered harm from the sexual
 assaults, and that harm apparently remains with the children
 notwithstanding counseling." The Circuit Court also noted the
 characteristics of the defendant, including that Barnes's
 criminal acts "spanned a substantial period of time and involved
 acts of deception both as to the children and to adults." The
 court stated that Barnes was "uncooperative in the preparation of
 any aspect of the presentence report and does not appear to have
 expressed any sadness that the two children suffered harm of any
 kind." 
The Circuit Court found that a consecutive sentence was
 
required to reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote
 respect for the law, and to provide just punishment for the
 offense under HRS § 706-606(2) because, inter alia, the crimes
 
4
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were "to not one but two small children." The court further
 found that the consecutive sentence was necessary to afford
 adequate deterrence to criminal conduct and to protect the public
 from further crimes of Barnes, especially against children.
 
On appeal, Barnes notes the existence of some
 
mitigating factors, such as that he cooperated with the police in
 Tacoma and Honolulu, he purportedly had no prior criminal
 history, and the convictions stem from a single indictment. 
However, the presence of some mitigating factors does not compel
 this court to conclude that the Circuit Court abused its
 discretion, especially in light of the Circuit Court's clear
 rationale for imposing a consecutive sentence.
 
We also reject Barnes's arguments that, in essence,
 
suggest that he did not sexually assault the minor victims, as
 the underlying premise is inconsistent with the jury's verdict
 and does not implicate any abuse of discretion in the Circuit
 Court's sentence.
 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not
 
abuse its discretion in imposing a consecutive sentence. The
 Circuit Court's October 26, 2015 Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
',i, April 13, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Shawn A. Luiz,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Loren J. Thomas,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
5
 