SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
 
 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000549
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
 
CARL LEDUNE, Defendant-Appellant.
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
 
(CR. NO. 15-1-136K)

 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Carl Ledune (Ledune) by amended complaint 
with harassment (Count 1) and first-degree terroristic threatening (Count 2). The complaining witness for Count 1 (CW1) was a tow truck driver, and the complaining witnesses for Count 2 were police officers. A jury trial was commenced on the charged offenses. At the close of the State's case, the Circuit Court of 
1/
the Third Circuit (Circuit Court)  granted Ledune's motion for
 
 
judgment of acquittal as to Count 2. By agreement of the
 parties, the Circuit Court dismissed the jury and continued with
 a bench trial on Count 1. At the conclusion of the trial, the
 Circuit Court found Ledune guilty as charged of harassment, in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 711-1106(1)(f)
 
1/ The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.
 
 


 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 


 

 
 

 

 

 

 


 

	 




 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2014).2/ The Circuit Court sentenced Ledune on Count 1 and
 
entered its Judgment on July 6, 2016. 
On appeal, Ledune contends that there was insufficient
 
evidence for the Circuit Court to find him guilty of harassment. 
We disagree and affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment.
 
I.
 
The State presented evidence that Ledune was a large
 
individual, standing about six feet two inches tall and weighing
 about 275 to 280 pounds. CW1, a tow truck driver, received an
 assignment from the County's Abandoned Vehicle Division to tow
 seven vehicles abandoned in the area of the Hawaiian Ocean View
 Estates. The vehicles were located on the side of the road next
 to Ledune's driveway. When CW1 arrived at the scene, he got out
 of his truck to inspect the abandoned vehicles. Ledune came out
 from his property and confronted CW1. Ledune appeared "kind of
 angry" and was swearing at CW1. CW1 told Ledune that he was
 there to check on the cars and tow them away. In response,
 Ledune said, "You not towing no fuckin cars." CW1 explained that
 he was just doing his job, and Ledune said, "I don't give shet
 about your job." CW1 jumped into his truck and drove it up the
 road because Ledune was angry, Ledune had started walking toward
 his house, and CW1 did not know whether Ledune was "going in his
 house [to] grab something" or what he was doing. 
CW1 drove his truck up the road then turned around to
 
face Ledune's property, about "one half of one football field" or
 "one football field" away. CW1 called his dispatcher to see what
 the County wanted to do because he did not want to get into a
 conflict with Ledune and CW1 had heard there had been problems
 with these vehicles before. The dispatcher called 911.
 
2/ HRS ยง 711-1106(1)(f) provides:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of harassment if, with
intent to harass, annoy, or alarm any other person, that person:
 
. . . 
(f)	 Makes a communication using offensively coarse
language that would cause the recipient to reasonably
believe that the actor intends to cause bodily injury
to the recipient or another or damage to the property
of the recipient or another.
 
2
 
 

 

 

 


 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In the meantime, CW1 saw Ledune emerge from his
 
property with a bat. The CW1 saw Ledune "whack" one of the cars
 that CW1 was assigned to tow with the bat, smashing the driver's
 window.
3/ CW1 thought Ledune hit the window because of CW1. 
When the CW1 saw Ledune smashing the window, CW1 also heard
 Ledune yelling and screaming that "Nobody's taking my shet." 
After Ledune smashed the car's window, he waived the bat while
 facing CW1's truck and looking at CW1. CW1 "felt kind of
 treatened with the bat" so he decided to drive away from the
 area.
 
Ledune admitted that he said "fuck you" when CW1 was
 
present and that he told CW1 that "You ain't taking my vehicle."
 
II.
 
When an appellate court reviews a defendant's claim 
that there was insufficient evidence to support a guilty verdict, we must view the evidence adduced at trial in the light most favorable to the prosecution. State v. Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 
33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 (1998). "The test on appeal is not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of fact." Id. (block quote format altered; 
citation omitted). Applying the applicable standard of review, we conclude that there was sufficient evidence to support the Circuit Court's finding that Ledune was guilty of harassment, in violation of HRS ยง 711-1106(1)(f). 
Accordingly, we affirm the Circuit Court's Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 9, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
John Knoebber 
for Defendant-Appellant. Chief Judge 
David Blancett-Maddock Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Hawai
'i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3/ At trial, the State introduced a black baseball bat that the police
had recovered from the scene.
 
3
 