NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000694 
  
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
 
 
THE ESTATE OF SAMUEL MALANAO BLANCAFLOR, Deceased. 
  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(P. NO. 15-1-0214) 
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.)
 
 
  Petitioners-Appellants Rico A. Blancaflor, Gia B. 
Ramos (Gia
), Jaime A. Blancaflor, Edgardo A. Blancaflor, and 
Mamerto A. Blancaflor (collectively Objectors) appeal from the 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit's (probate court) amended 
judgment and several other decisions.1 
                                                           
1  The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided.  Objectors appeal from the 
following: 
 
(1) The November 26, 2016 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of 
Law Regarding Decedent's Domicile in Hawai‘ i; 
 
(continued . . .) 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
2 
 In 2014, Decedent Samuel Malanao Blancaflor (Decedent) 
executed a trust (2014 Trust) and pourover will (2014 Will).   
The 2014 Trust divided Decedent's estate among five of his eight 
children; named his daughter, Sonia B. Taimanao (Sonia), as 
successor trustee; and specifically stated that he "has 
purposefully left out children, Mert A. Blancaflor, Gia B. Ramos 
and James A. Blancaflor."  About a year later, Decedent's 
sibling, Nida Temperante (Nida) witnessed Decedent sign a note 
(Note) purporting to revoke his 2014 Will while in his hospital 
bed in the Philippines. 
Following Decedent's death, Sonia filed for formal 
determination of testacy, which Objectors opposed.  Ultimately, 
                                                           
(. . . continued) 
 
(2) 
The July 5, 2017 Court's Findings of Fact, Conclusions 
of Law Regarding Decedent's Last Will and Testament 
(Will Findings and Conclusions);  
 
(3) The July 10, 2017 Judgment on Court's Findings of Fact, 
Conclusions of Law Regarding Decedent's Last Will and 
Testament[,] Order Filed July 5, 2017;  
 (4) The July 14, 2017 Amended Judgment on Court's Findings 
of Fact, Conclusions of Law Regarding Decedent's Last 
Will and Testament[,] Order Filed July 5, 2017;  
 (5) The August 29, 2017 Order Denying Petitioners/ 
Objectors' Non- Hearing Motion to (1) Alter or Amend the 
Amended Judgment Filed on July 14, 2017[,] (2) Certify 
for Appeal the Findings of Facts, Conclusions of Law 
Regarding Decedent's Domicile in Hawaii, Filed 
November 21, 2016; and  
 
(6) The September 7, 2017 Order Denying Petitioners/ 
Objectors' Non- Hearing Motion for Reconsideration of 
Court's Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law Regarding Decedent's Last Will and Testament Filed July 5, 2017 
(Filed July 12, 2017). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
3 
 the probate court determined that the Note was not a will and 
did not revoke the 2014 Will.  On appeal, Objectors raise two 
points of error, and challenge several findings of fact (FOF) 
and conclusions of law (COL). 
  Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve the 
points of error and arguments as discussed below, and affirm.   
  (1) In their first point of error, Objectors contend 
that the probate court abused its discretion by refusing "to 
postpone the evidentiary hearing on the revocation note, despite 
a change of counsel shortly before the scheduled date, while 
discovery, including depositions, remained pending."  Objectors 
argue that the refusal to continue the evidentiary hearing 
resulted in the loss of testimony by Decedent's brother, Eliseo 
Blancaflor (Eliseo), which was highly prejudicial to Objectors. 
  In State v. Williander, the Hawai‘ i Supreme Court held 
"the relevant factors to consider in evaluating whether a motion 
for continuance should be granted are: (1) whether counsel 
exercised due diligence in seeking to obtain the attendance of the witness; and (2) whether the witness provides relevant and 
material testimony that benefits the defendant."  142 Hawai‘ i 
155, 163-64, 415 P.3d 897, 905-06 (2018).  See also  State v. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
4 
 Villiarimo, 132 Hawai‘ i 209, 223, 320 P.3d 874, 888 (2014) 
(Nakayama, J., concurring) (explaining that the Hawai‘ i Supreme 
Court has used due diligence and materiality factors to 
determine whether the trial court abused its discretion in 
denying a motion to continue to obtain testimony of a witness).   
   A trial court's decision to grant or deny a motion to continue is reviewed for an abuse of discretion.  Onaka v. 
Onaka, 112 Hawai‘ i 374, 378, 146 P.3d 89, 93 (2006); see Amfac, 
Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 114, 839 P.2d 
10, 26 (1992) (noting abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has "clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or disregarded 
rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant"); Ek v. Boggs, 102 Hawai‘ i 289, 
294-95, 75 P.3d 1180, 1185-86 (2003) ("Furthermore, the burden 
of establishing abuse of discretion is on appellant, and a 
strong showing is required to establish it.") (citation, 
internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). 
Here, the March 28, 2017 motion to continue merely 
stated that "Objectors respectfully request a continuance of the evidentiary hearing to depose the following individuals in the 
Philippines and Hawaii: . . . Eliseo Malanao Blancaflor . . . ."   
The declaration and exhibits attached to the March 28, 2017 
motion did not provide an offer as to Eliseo's expected NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
5 
 testimony or its relevancy, or efforts to obtain his testimony.   
And the Objectors presented no additional arguments or 
information during the March 31, 2017 hearing on their motion to 
continue. 
In a previous motion to continue, filed nearly a year 
earlier in April 2016, Objectors requested a continuance stating 
that "key witnesses are unable to fly to Maui to testify at the 
Evidentiary Hearing" and listing Eliseo among others.  The April 2016 motion explained that Eliseo, "the brother of the Decedent 
and an attorney in the Philippines, is unable to fly to Maui and 
testify at the Evidentiary Hearing due to health issues."  This 
motion did not indicate the substance or relevancy of Eliseo's 
expected testimony. 
In a December 12, 2015 "Attestation letter," Nida 
stated that on May 7, 2015, Decedent had her look for the Note, 
and "Manong Ely who was with Manong Sammy earlier during the day 
went home already for he did not want to be caught by night fall."  Nida further stated, "As I read what was written on the 
piece of paper Manong Sammy said to me 'Anyway that will be 
formalized by Eli.'" 
Notably, this letter was not provided with Objectors' 
March 28, 2017 motion to continue, and did not establish that 
Eliseo was present when the Note was drafted or that Eliseo 
could testify about whether Decedent wrote material portions of NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
6
  the Note.  Considering Decedent's health predicament, strikingly 
absent from Nida's letter is any mention of Eliseo formalizing 
or attempting to formalize the Note between May 7, 2015 when 
Nida first saw the Note in the hospital and July 2, 2015 when 
Decedent flew to Guam escorted by his physician.  Instead, 
Nida's letter shows that Objectors had over fifteen months to 
preserve Eliseo's testimony or identify his expected testimony 
to present to the probate court, but did not. 
In sum, Objectors did not support their March 28, 2017 
motion by showing Eliseo would "provide[] relevant and material 
testimony that benefits" them.  Williander, 
142 Hawai‘ i at 163, 
415 P.3d at 905.  Objectors also did not provide information in their March 28, 2017 motion to show that they "exercised due 
diligence in seeking to obtain" Eliseo's attendance or to preserve his testimony.  Id.  Without a proffer as to the 
relevance and materiality of Eliseo's testimony and the efforts made to obtain Eliseo's attendance or to preserve his testimony, 
we cannot say the probate court abused its discretion in denying 
Objectors' March 28, 2017 motion to continue. 
  (2) In their second point of error, Objectors contend 
that the probate court "erred in its decision regarding the 
revocation Note," arguing that the court misinterpreted Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 560:2-502, 560:2-503, and 560:2-507 
(2006). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
7 
     In reviewing a will, appellate courts must determine 
the intention of the testator from the words within the will.  
Tr. Created Under the Will of Damon, 76 Hawai‘ i 120, 127, 869 
P.2d 1339, 1346 (1994).  Further, "a heightened level of proof 
[is] applicable to the disavowment of a duly-executed legal 
instrument."  In re Ishida-Waiakamilo Legacy Tr., 138 Hawai‘ i 98, 
104, 377 P.3d 39, 45 (App. 2016) (noting clear and convincing 
evidence standard applies when trustor seeks equitable relief 
"from the clear and unambiguous terms of a trust instrument on 
the grounds of mistake of fact or law").  
(a) First, HRS § 560:2-502 sets forth the requirements 
for a valid will: 
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) and in sections 
560:2-503, 560:2- 506, and 560:2- 513, a will must be: 
 
(1) In writing; 
 
(2) Signed by the testator or in the testator's name 
by some other individual in the testator's 
conscious presence and by the testator's 
direction; and  
 
(3) Signed by at least two individuals, each of whom 
signed within a reasonable time after the 
individual witnessed either the signing of the 
will as described in paragraph (2) or the 
testator's acknowledgment of that signature or 
acknowledgement of the will. 
 
(b) A will that does not comply with subsection (a) is 
valid as a holographic will, whether or not witnessed, 
if the signature and material portions of the document 
are in the testator's handwriting. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
8 
 (c) Intent that the document constitute the testator's will 
can be established by extrinsic evidence, including, for 
holographic wills, portions of the document that are not 
in the testator's handwriting. 
 
HRS § 560:2-502 (formatting altered).  Furthermore,  
 
To serve as a will, a holographic instrument must 
demonstrate that the testator had a testamentary intent and that intent must be clearly expressed in the handwritten 
portion.  A holographic will, like any will, must manifest 
the testator's intent of making a last and final 
disposition of his or her property.  A testamentary intent 
must accompany the performance of the statutory 
requirements for a holographic will, and this must be 
proven in a manner which conforms to applicable rules of 
evidence and procedure.  
 
79 Am. Jur. 2d Wills § 604 (2022) (footnotes omitted).   
Here, although the Note was in writing and signed by 
Decedent, Nida was the only witness to sign the Note.  Thus, the 
Note did not meet the requirements of subsection (a) because it 
was not "[s]igned by at least two individuals, each of whom 
signed within a reasonable time after the individual witnessed . 
. . the signing of the will . . . ."  HRS § 560:2-502(a).   
  Turning to subsection (b), the evidence established 
that the signature on the Note was in Decedent's handwriting.  
However, there was no evidence establishing that Decedent drafted the Note, and Sonia testified the body of the Note 
"doesn't look like his writing."  Thus, the evidence supported 
the probate court's determination that the Note did not meet the 
requirements for a holographic will under subsection (b) because 
there was no evidence that "material portions of the document 
are in the testator's handwriting."  HRS § 560:2-502(b). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
9 
   Regarding subsection (c), Objectors state that 
subsection "(c) does not immediately come into play, as 'intent' 
is not mentioned in part (a) or part (b), but to some extent, 
extrinsic evidence, by way of the testimony of Nida and Rustum 
Temperante [(Rustum)] establishes the Decedent's intent."   
Specifically, Objectors rely on statements by Nida and Rustum 
that Decedent "told them that Eli was to formalize the Note -- 
but [Eliseo's] testimony was unavailable, as a result of the court's refusal to continue the April 12, 2017 hearing - a 
ruling that was highly prejudicial to [their] case." 
Again, Objectors provided no offer as to Eliseo's 
expected testimony and their efforts to obtain or preserve his 
testimony.  T
estimony that Eliseo was to formalize the Note 
could only be extrinsic evidence of intent if the testimony of certain witnesses was found to be credible.  See generally HRS 
§ 560:2-502(c); Black's Law Dictionary 732, 1778 (11th ed. 
2019).  The probate court, however, found that "based upon all the evidence including the credibility and demeanor of all 
witnesses that [Decedent] did not intend to revoke his Will."   
FOF 30.  See Tamashiro v. Control Specialist, Inc., 97 Hawai‘ i 
86, 92, 34 P.3d 16, 22 (2001) ("[T]he credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony are within the 
province of the trier of fact and, generally, will not be 
disturbed on appeal.")  In addition, w
hen asked if Decedent NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
10 
   indicated what he intended to do, Nida responded, "No."  Thus, 
the probate court did not misinterpret HRS § 560:2-502, and did 
not err in concluding that Objectors failed to show by clear and 
convincing evidence that Decedent intended to replace his 2014 
Will.   
(b) Next, under HRS § 560:2-503, a document or writing 
constitutes a will if there is clear and convincing evidence of 
the decedent's intent:  
Although a document or writing added upon a document was 
not executed in compliance with [ HRS §] 560:2-502, the 
document or writing is treated as if it had been executed 
in compliance with the section if the proponent of the 
document or writing establishes by clear and convincing 
evidence that the decedent intended the document or writing 
to constitute: 
 
(1) The decedent's will; 
 (2) A partial or complete revocation of the will; 
 
(3) An addition to or an alteration of the will; or  
 (4) A partial or complete revival of the decedent's 
formerly revoked will or of a formerly revoked 
portion of the will. 
 
HRS § 560:2-503 (formatting altered); see Kekona v. Abastillas, 
113 Hawai‘ i 174, 180, 150 P.3d 823, 829 (2006) (clear and 
convincing evidence "is that degree of proof which will produce 
in the mind of the trier of fact a firm belief or conviction as to the allegations sought to be established, and requires the 
existence of a fact to be highly probable") (citation omitted). NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
11 
 Nida testified that when she asked about the word 
"intestate," Decedent said it meant "let the State decide[,]" 
supporting Objectors' position that Decedent intended to revoke 
his 2014 Will.  But, the probate court did not find this 
testimony credible.  FOF 26.  Also, w hen asked if Decedent 
indicated what he intended to do, Nida responded, "No."  
In contrast, the attorney who drafted Decedent's 2014 
Will and the 2014 Trust, indicated that Decedent was careful and 
deliberate in drafting his estate plan.  The attorney testified 
that he remembers being pleasantly surprised at how intelligent 
Decedent was and that Decedent "filled out his information sheet 
with more detail than I've seen any of my other clients fill it 
out."  The attorney also testified, "[w]e went over why he chose 
those five kids.  He believed the other three were already 
successful."  The attorney noted that Sonia objected at the 
appointment, saying she "didn't want him to make the plan that 
way" and that Gia "would be upset."  But, Decedent responded that "it's his money, so he doesn't care."  The probate court 
found the attorney's testimony "remarkable and credible."  
FOF 8. 
Again, credibility determinations are the province of 
the probate court and will not be disturbed on appeal.  See 
Tamashiro, 97 Hawai‘ i at 92, 34 P.3d at 22.  Based on the record 
before this court, the probate court did not err in determining NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
12 
   that Objectors failed to establish by clear and convincing 
evidence that Decedent intended the Note to constitute a 
revocation under HRS § 560:2-503.   
  (c) Finally, HRS § 560:2-507 sets forth the 
requirements for revoking a will:  
(a) A will or any part thereof is revoked by: 
 
(1) Executing a subsequent will that revokes the 
previous will or part expressly or by inconsistency; or 
 (2) Performing a revocatory act on the will, if the 
testator performed the act with the intent and 
for the purpose of revoking the will or part or if another individual performed the act in the 
testator' s conscious presence and by the 
testator' s direction.  For purposes of this 
paragraph, "revocatory act on the will" i ncludes 
burning, tearing, canceling, obliterating, or 
destroying the will or any part of it.  A 
burning, tearing, or canceling is a " revocatory 
act on the will" , whether or not the burn, tear, 
or cancellation touched any of the words on the 
will.  
 
 (b) If a subsequent will does not expressly revoke a 
previous will, the execution of the subsequent will wholly revokes the previous will by inconsistency if the testator 
intended the subsequent will to replace rather than supplement the previous will. 
 
 (c)  The testator is presumed to have intended a 
subsequent will to replace rather than supplement a previous will if the subsequent will makes a complete disposition of the testator' s estate.  If this presumption 
arises and is not rebutted by clear and convincing evidence, the previous will is revoked; only the subsequent 
will is operative on the testator' s death. 
 
 (d) The testator is presumed to have intended a 
subsequent will to supplement rather than replace a previous will if the subsequent will does not make a 
complete disposition of the testator' s estate.  If this 
presumption arises and is not rebutted by clear and NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
13 
  
(continued . . .) convincing evidence, the subsequent will revokes the 
previous will only to the extent the subsequent will is 
inconsistent with the previous will; each will is fully 
operative on the testator' s death to the extent they are 
not inconsistent.  
HRS § 560:2-507. 
  Subsections (a)(1) and (b)-(d) provide for revocation by a subsequent will, but as discussed above, the Note was not a 
will or holographic will.  As for subsection (a)(2), "[t]o 
revoke a will by act, the testator must perform a revocatory act 
on the will with the intent to revoke" like "burning, tearing, 
canceling, obliterating, and destroying" the will.  Restatement 
(Third) of Prop.: Wills & Donative Transfers § 4.1 (Am. Law 
Inst. 1999)
.  "Cancellation encompasses acts such as crossing 
out or marking through the will or part of it or writing words on the will such as 'canceled' or 'null and void.'"  Id.  Here, 
there was no evidence that Decedent performed a revocatory act 
on the 2014 Will.  Thus, the probate court did not err in 
determining that HRS § 560:2-507 did not apply.   
(3) Although not included within a point of error, 
Objectors challenge certain findings2 and conclusions.  See 
Hawai‘i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 28(b)(4)(C). 
                                                           
2  Objectors challenge as "inaccurate" FOF 22, 25, 26, 28, 30, and 
31, which stated as follows:     
 
22. Other than the signature, date, and location of [Decedent] on the Note, no party submitted any evidence 
that [Decedent] actually wrote the Note, understood its NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
14 
  For FOF 22, to show error, Objectors primarily rely on 
Nida's "let the State decide" testimony, which the probate court 
found not credible.  Because we will not disturb the probate 
court's credibility finding, Nida's "let the State decide" 
testimony does not establish that the probate court erred in 
rendering FOF 22. 
                                                           
(. . . continued) 
 
contents and meaning; or that he expressly intended this 
Note serve as a holographic will or a revocation in his 
estate plan.
 
 
. . . . 
 
 25. The written and notarized statement conflicts in 
several critical aspects with the testimony of Nida and 
Rustum offered in court.  
26. The Court finds that Nida
's testimony that [Decedent] 
explained to her that the Note meant to " let the state 
decide" is not credible.  This testimony is inconsistent 
with this Court' s finding that [Decedent] had been very 
careful and prudent with his financial planning.  The Court 
further finds that the credible evidence of Mr. Ing shows 
that [Decedent] would not defer to "let the state decide," 
especially after he employed an attorney to plan his estate.  
 
. . . . 
 
 28. The Court finds that there is no credible evidence from 
any witness to support the contention that the Note is a holographic will.  
 
. . . . 
 
 
30. The Court finds based upon all the evidence including 
the credibility and demeanor of all witnesses that 
[Decedent] did not intend to revoke his Will.  
 
31. The Court finds that the Will offered for probate has 
not been revoked. 
 
 
(Formatting altered.) NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
15 
  
(. . . continued) For FOF 25, Objectors take issue with the word 
"critical" in: "[t]he written and notarized statement conflicts 
in several critical aspects with the testimony of Nida and 
Rustum offered in Court."  In the notarized December 12, 2015 
"Attestation letter," Nida stated that Decedent asked her to 
look for the paper "I signed[.]"  She testified, however, that 
she "saw him sign it."  Whether Nida witnessed Decedent sign the 
Note is a critical aspect of her testimony because it goes to providing direct proof of one element of a holographic will, 
i.e., that the signature on the Note was Decedent's handwriting.  
See HRS § 560:2-502(b).  Despite later efforts to rehabilitate 
her testimony, there was a conflict between her in-court testimony and her December 12, 2015 statement.   
For FOF 26, 28, and 30, the probate court relies on 
credibility determinations, which this court will not disturb.  
See Tamashiro, 97 Hawai‘ i at 92, 34 P.3d at 22.  And for FOF 31, 
as discussed above, the probate court did not err in finding 
that "the Will offered for probate has not been revoked." 
Objectors also argue that COL 6-103 were wrong, and 
address these conclusions in the context of their argument 
                                                           
3   COL 6- 10 state as follows: 
 
6. A holographic will requires the signature and material 
portions of the document to be in the testator's 
handwriting.  HRS
 § 560:2- 502(b).  The [c]ourt concludes as  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
 
16 
 stating, "Rather than repeat the argument above, that the court 
fully erred in its decision on the revocation note, [Objectors] 
incorporate that argument by reference . . . ."  We address 
these conclusions in a similar manner and, reiterate that the 
                                                           
(. . . continued) 
 
a matter of law that the Note fails to qualify as a  
holographic will because the Objectors failed to prove that
[Decedent] wrote the material portion of the Note in his 
own handwriting, and the [c]ourt cannot make such an 
independent finding in the absence of evidence.    
 
7. The [c]ourt also concludes as a matter of law that the 
Note also fails to qualify as a writing intended as a will 
pursuant to HRS §560:2-503 because the statute requires 
establishing by clear and convincing evidence that the [D]ecedent intended the writing to constitute his [W]ill, a partial or complete revocation of his Will, or a partial or 
complete revival of a formerly revoked will.  The [c]ourt 
concludes as a matter of law that the Objectors failed to establish by clear and convincing evidence that [Decedent] 
intended to replace or revoke his carefully planned and executed Will with the Note executed on his hospital bed.
  
 8. 
Finally, a will or any part therefore may be revoked by 
either (1) executing a subsequent will that revokes the previous will or part expressly or by inconsistency, or (2) performing a revocatory act on the will with the intent 
and for the purpose of revoking the will or a part thereof. HRS [§ ]560:2- 507(a). 
 9. The [c]ourt concludes as a matter of law that because the Objectors have failed to meet their burden of proof the 
Note cannot be accepted as a later will.  Nor did Objectors 
offer any credible evidence indicating . . . [Decedent] had 
performed a revocatory act on the Will.  The Note is not a 
revocation of [Decedent's] Will. 
 
10. The [c]ourt concludes as a matter of law that the 
Objectors have not met their burden by establishing prima 
facie proof that [Decedent] wrote those portions of the [N]ote that might constitute substantive changes to his estate plan.  
 
(Formatting altered.)  We note that the COL challenged in Objectors' 
brief are misnumbered.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
2/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza 
Chief Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth 
Associate Judge 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge For the above reasons, we affirm the orders and 
judgments from which Objectors appeal. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai ‘i, December 16, 2022. 
On the briefs: 
Robert E. Chapman, Reginald K.T. Yee, and Mary Martin, 
(Clay Chapman Iwamura Pulice
& Nervell), for Petitioners-Appellants.  
Deborah K. Wright, Keith D. Kirschbraun, and Douglas R. Wright 
(Wright & Kirschbraun) 
For Petitioner-Appellee Sonia B. Taimanao. 
Lisa Strandtman, Jason M. Tani, and Bryan M. Harada, (Rush Moore), 
for Beneficiary-Appellee
Jocelyn B. Untalan. probate court did not err in determining the Note did not revoke 
Decedent's 2014 Will. 