NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000533
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
LANDAN L. TOLENTINO, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
HONOLULU DIVISION
(CASE NO. 1DTA-15-05126)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Landan L. Tolentino appeals from
the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment
entered by the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu
Division ("District Court"),1 on June 5, 2017 ("Judgment").
Tolentino was convicted of operating a vehicle under the
influence of an intoxicant ("OVUII"), in violation of Hawaii
Revised Statutes section 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2014).
Tolentino appeals from the Judgment on the basis that
he did not intelligently, knowingly, and voluntarily waive his
right to testify because the District Court failed to (1) inform
him that if he were to testify, the prosecution would be allowed
to cross-examine him, or (2) engage him in a true oral exchange
to ascertain his understanding of his individual rights as
provided in Tachibana v. State , 79 Hawai #i 226, 900 P.2d 1293
(1995), and as required under State v. Pomroy , 132 Hawai #i 85,
319 P.3d 1093 (2014).
1/The Honorable Juan Montalbano presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
address Tolentino's points of error as follows and affirm:
(1) After Tolentino entered his not-guilty-plea, and
prior to the State calling its first witness, the District Court
offered its prior-to-trial-advisement of Tolentino's right to
testify or not testify pursuant to State v. Lewis , 94 Hawai #i
292, 297, 12 P.3d 1233, 1238 (2000): 
THE COURT:  Mr. Tolentino, before we commence with your
trial, I need to address a couple of things with you.  The
first is your right to testify and your right to remain
silent.  
You have a constitutional right to testify on your own
–- in your own defense.  
Do you understand?
[TOLENTINO]:  Yes.
THE COURT: And if you decide to testify, that decision
is yours and yours alone, and nobody can prevent you from
taking the stand and testifying in your defense.  
Do you understand?
[TOLENTINO]:  Yes.
THE COURT:  However, I'm here to advise you that 
do take the stand, the prosecutor will be able to cross-
examine you, and you'll be compelled to answer pretty much any
question she asks unless your attorney can think of an
objection that is sustained.  
Do you understand?if 
you
[TOLENTINO]:  Yes.
THE 
COURT:  You also have the constitutional right to
remain silent.  
Do you understand that right?
[TOLENTINO]:  Yes.
THE COURT:  If you choose to remain silent and not
testify in this case, the Court will not hold that against you
in its deliberations regarding the charges that you're facing. 
Do you understand?
[TOLENTINO]:  (No audible response.)
THE COURT:  At the close of the Defense's trial, I'm
going to ask you once again what is your preference regarding
your right to testify or your right to remain silent.  In
consultation with your attorney, you can make a decision as to
what you think is going to be the best outcome for you and
your case.  But nobody can prevent you from taking the stand
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
if you wish.  
Do you understand?
[TOLENTINO]:  Yes.
(Emphasis added.) 
The State called a single witness, Honolulu Police
Department Sergeant Zane Hamrick to testify against Tolentino.
Following the State's case-in-chief, Tolentino indicated that he
would not be testifying.  Because trial courts are required to
"conduct an 'ultimate colloquy' in cases in which a defendant has
not testified prior to the close of the case," State v. Monteil,
134 Hawai #i 361, 370, 341 P.3d 567, 576 (2014), the District
Court then administered the ultimate Tachibana colloquy,2
stating:
THE COURT:  All right.  Mr. Tolentino, I told you that
at the –- before the close of your counsel's case I was going
to speak with you once again about your right to testify or to
remain silent.  
One second, please.  
Have you had an opportunity to discuss with your
attorney whether or not it would be good for you to testify in
this matter?
[TOLENTINO]:  Yes.
THE COURT: And what is your decision, sir?
[TOLENTINO]:  We're not going to testify.
THE COURT:  Do you understand that you have a
constitutional right to testify on your own defense?
[TOLENTINO]:  Yes, sir.
THE COURT:  And you understand that nobody can prevent
you from testifying if you choose to do so?
2/Tachibana  provided trial courts with the following specific
guidance for the "ultimate colloquy" to ensure that defendants are informed of
their rights regarding their testimony:
[H]e or she has a right to testify, that if he or she wants to
testify that no one can prevent him or her from doing so, and
that if he or she testifies the prosecution will be allowed to
cross-examine him or her.  In connection with the privilege
against self-incrimination, the defendant should also be
advised that he or she has a right not to testify and that if
he or she does not testify then the jury can be instructed
about that right.
Tachibana , 79 Hawai #i at 236 n.7, 900 P.2d at 1303 n.7 (original brackets
omitted) (quoting State v. Neuman , 371 S.E.2d 77, 82 (1988).
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
[TOLENTINO]:  Yes.
THE COURT:  And if you choose to remain silent, that
will not be held against you today, after the conclusion of
the evidence.  
You understand?
[TOLENTINO]:  Yes, sir.
THE COURT: All right.  So –-
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Defense rests, Your Honor.
THE COURT:  All right.  
And the decision you're making, Mr. Tolentino, is that
in consultation with your attorney?
[TOLENTINO]:  Yes.
THE COURT:  All right.  Court finds the defendant has
knowingly, intentionally, voluntarily waived his right to
testify with a full understanding of his rights regarding his
right to testify and his right to remain silent.
After closing argument, the District Court found that Officer
Hamrick testified credibly and that the State had proven the
OVUII charge beyond a reasonable doubt.
Tolentino's first point of error is premised upon the
fact that the District Court failed to inform Tolentino in its
ultimate Tachibana  colloquy that if he were to testify, the
prosecution would be allowed to cross-examine him.  The State
contends that because "there was a short time between the pre-
trial advisement and the ultimate advisement" any error was
harmless.
We agree with Tolentino that the District Court erred
in failing to include in its ultimate Tachibana  colloquy that if
Tolentino were to testify, the prosecution would be allowed to
cross-examine him, State v. Johnson, No. CAAP-15-0000680, 2017 WL
436381, at *4 (Hawai #i App. Jan. 31, 2017); we disagree with the
State that such error was harmless because of the short time
between pre-trial and ultimate advisements, State v. Eduwensuyi,
141 Hawai #i 328, 335, 406 P.3d 732, 739 (2018); but conclude that
based on the totality of the facts and circumstances such error
was harmless because advising Tolentino that if he testified, he
would be subject to cross-examination, would "only tend to make
him less likely to testify, not more likely to testify." 
Johnson, 2017 WL 436381, at *4; see also State v. Dykas , No.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
CAAP-17-00000352, 2018 WL 852202, at *2 (Hawai #i App. Feb. 14,
2018), as amended (Feb. 28, 2018) (holding that the district
court's failure to inform defendant in the ultimate colloquy that
no adverse inference could be drawn by the trier of fact if the
defendant did not testify was harmless because the omitted
advisement had and could have had no effect on defendant's
decision not to testify).3 
(2) Tolentino additionally asserts that "pursuant to
State v. Pomroy , 132 Hawai #i 85, 319 P.3d 1093 (2014), the
District Court failed to engage [Tolentino] in a true colloquy"
because "there was no true oral exchange to ascertain
[Tolentino's] understanding of the individual rights comprising
the Tachibana colloquy."  The record, we conclude, demonstrates
to the contrary.
"[A] colloquy is an oral exchange in which the judge
ascertains the defendant's understanding of the proceedings and
of the defendant's rights."  Pomroy , 132 Hawai #i at 93, 319 P.3d
at 1101 (quoting State v. Han, 130 Hawai# i 83, 90, 306 P.3d 128,
135 (2013)) (internal quotation marks omitted).  The Hawai #i
Supreme Court held in Pomroy that the district court's recitation
of a litany of rights, coupled with the district court's failure
to "ascertain that [defendant] understood what it had told him,
or, more importantly, understood his right to testify (or not
testify)" did not amount to a true colloquy.  132 Hawai #i at 93-
94, 319 P.3d at 1101-02.  
3/Eduwensuyi  does not compel a different conclusion in light of the
principal and critical distinction that, in Edewensuyi , the district court
failed to include in its ultimate colloquy an advisement to the non-testifying
defendant that (1) no one could prevent him from testifying, (2) that this
decision was his and his alone to make, and (3) that if he decided not to
testify, the factfinder would not use that decision against him.  The first
colloquy component relates to the defendant's right to testify, while the
third component relates to the defendant's right not to testify.  The second
component relates to both the right to testify and the right not to testify. 
In concluding that the error was not demonstrably harmless in Eduwensuyi , the
supreme court focused on the errors that affected the defendant's right to
testify and held that "it is 'impossible to conclude' that violating
Eduwensuyi's right to testify was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt."  141
Hawai#i at 336-37, 409 P.3d at 740–41 (emphasis added).  Here, the single
alleged error affects only Tolentino's right not to testify, which he
nevertheless exercised.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Pomroy, however, is inapposite.4  First, the District
Court did not recite a litany of rights during the ultimate
colloquy with Tolentino.  Contra Pomroy, 132 Hawai# i at 89, 319
P.3d at 1097.  Instead, during the ultimate colloquy in this
case, the District Court engaged in an exchange with Tolentino
that reiterated his rights given in the pretrial advisement and
invited Tolentino to indicate if he understood, which he did.
Second, the record is devoid of any indication that Tolentino was
confused about his right to testify, and Tolentino does not
contend that he was confused or did not understand his rights.
Contra Pomroy, 132 Hawai #i at 93, 319 P.3d at 1101 (holding no
true Tachibana  colloquy where defendant told the district court
"I don't understand what you're saying" and "mistakenly believed
4/The district court in Pomroy gave the defendant the following
advisement before asking him if he would be testifying:
THE COURT:  Alright.  Mr. Pomroy, before your attorney [rests
the defense's case], let me advise you. You have a right to
testify on your own behalf.  That decision is yours and yours
alone.  If you choose to testify you will be subject to cross-
examination by the state.  If you choose not to testify, I
cannot hold that against you.  But the only evidence I will
have is what the State has presented, unless you have other
witnesses; you understand that? 
THE DEFENDANT:  Yes, ma'am.
THE COURT:  Alright.  It is your choice to testify or not?
THE DEFENDANT:  I think I have already said what has happened,
yeah.  I don't have to testify.
THE COURT:  Alright.  I don't know what you mean by "I've
already said" because - 
THE DEFENDANT:  In my report, when I made it two years ago,
what had happened.  That's pretty much what it is.
THE COURT:  So you're talking about what the officer testified
to?  Because you understand the police report is not in
evidence.  You understand that?
THE DEFENDANT:  I don't understand what you're saying.
(Discussion between Counsel and Defendant)
THE COURT:  Alright.
THE DEFENDANT:  I don't need any testimony I guess.
THE COURT:  Your choice not to testify?
THE DEFENDANT:  Yes ma'am.
132 Hawai #i at 89, 319 P.3d at 1097.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
that whatever [defendant] said in a police report was before the
court"); Han, 130 Hawai #i at 92-93, 306 P.3d at 137-38 (holding
no true Tachibana colloquy where language barrier existed and
where defendant needing an interpreter "implicate[d] the
importance of proper questioning to confirm that the [defendant]
understood each of his rights with respect to his decision not to
testify.")  Accordingly, the District Court engaged in a true
colloquy with Tolentino, and he intelligently, knowingly, and
voluntarily waived his right to testify.
Therefore, the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order
and Plea/Judgment, filed on June 5, 2017, in the District Court
of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division, is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 23, 2018.
On the briefs:
Brian S. Kim
(Park & Kim, LLLC)
for Defendant-Appellant.
Loren J. Thomas,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City & County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
7