NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000770
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
SYLVIA CABRAL, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
CARLSMITH BALL WICHMAN CASE ICHIKI, ATTORNEYS AT LAW;
TOM LEUTENEKER, ESQ.; PAUL UEOKA ESQ.; DOE DEFENDANTS 1-100;
JOHN DOES 1-100; JANE DOES 1-100; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-100;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-100; (UNKNOWN DEFENDANTS) COMPANIES
OR CORPORATIONS, Defendants-Appellees.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0574(3))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Sylvia Cabral (Cabral), pro se,
 
appeals from a Final Judgment and Decree Dismissing Complaint

 
With Prejudice, entered September 20, 2012, in the Circuit Court
 
1
of the Second Circuit  (circuit court).  Judgment was entered
 
against Cabral and in favor of Defendants-Appellees Carlsmith
 
2
Ball Wichman Case and Ichiki, LLC,  Tom Leuteneker, and Paul
Ueoka, (collectively, the Defendants) pursuant to an Order
 
Granting Defendants' Motion to Dismiss and/or For Summary
 Judgment. 
1
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 
2
 Carlsmith Ball Wichman Case and Ichiki, LLC, were known as Carlsmith
Ball, LLP, by time the Judgment was entered.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3
 As best as can be discerned, Cabral contends the
circuit court erred by (1) striking Cabral's memoranda in
 
opposition to the Defendants' Motion to Dismiss and/or For

 
Summary Judgment for untimeliness and excessive length; and
 (2) granting Defendants' motion because there were genuine issues
 of material fact as to whether the statute of limitations lapsed
 and whether Cabral stated a claim upon which relief could be
 granted.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Cabral's
 points of error as follows and affirm.
(1) Alleged Striking of Cabral's Memoranda in Opposition.
 
In granting the Defendants' Motion to Dismiss and/or 
For Summary Judgment, the circuit court noted that because Cabral's memoranda in opposition to the motion was untimely under the Rules of the Circuit Courts of the State of Hawai
'i (RCC) 
Rule 7(b) and exceeded the page limit of 20 pages provided in RCC Rule 7.1, the memoranda in opposition could be stricken, which would result in the granting of the Defendants' motion.
4 
However, the circuit court did not enter an order striking Cabral's memoranda in opposition and instead considered Cabral's 
3 Cabral's opening brief fails to comply with Hawai' i Rules of 
Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28 in many ways, which alone raises the
potential for dismissal of the appeal and/or waiver of issues sought to beraised. Bettencourt v. Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i 225, 230, 909 P.2d 553, 558
(1995); HRAP Rule 30 ("When the brief of an appellant is otherwise not inconformity with these rules, the appeal may be dismissed . . . ."); HRAP Rule28(b)(4) & (7). However, we seek to address cases on the merits wherepossible and thus we address Cabral's arguments to the extent they arediscernable. See Bettencourt, 80 Hawai' i at 230, 909 P.2d at 558. 
4 Pursuant to RCC Rules 7 and 7.1, Cabral's memoranda in opposition to
the Defendants' motion was untimely and exceeded the page limit. RCC Rule
 7(b) mandates that opposition to any motion must be filed not less than eight
days before the date of the hearing. Cabral does not dispute that she filed
her memoranda in opposition five days before the hearing. RCC Rule 7.1
 mandates that memoranda in opposition to any motion shall not exceed twenty
pages in length exclusive of affidavits, exhibits and attachments. In
 response to the Defendants' motion, Cabral filed a 24-page "Plaintiff's
Objections to Motion to Dismiss", a 12-page "Memorandum in Support", and a 5­page purported "Declaration of Sylvia Cabral", all of which provided
substantive argument and amount to memoranda in opposition.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
arguments in ruling against her on the merits of the Defendants'
 
motion. Therefore, this point of error lacks merit.
(2) Motion to Dismiss and/or For Summary Judgment.
 
The circuit court did not err in granting the
 
Defendants' Motion to Dismiss and/or For Summary Judgment. The
 circuit court granted the Defendants' motion on the grounds that
 the complaint was time barred and that Cabral failed to state a
 claim upon which relief could be granted.
5
 
The circuit court referred to both Hawai 'i Rules of 
Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12 and Rule 56 in granting the motion. However, because the Defendants attached a declaration and exhibits to their motion, which it appears the circuit court considered, the motion was transformed into an HRCP Rule 56 motion for summary judgment. Wong v. Cayetano, 111 Hawai
'i 462, 
476, 143 P.3d 1, 15 (2006). 
Cabral appears to contend that the circuit court erred
 
because there are genuine issues of material fact whether the
 statute of limitations lapsed and whether she has alleged
 colorable claims. We conclude that summary judgment was properly
 granted because Cabral's claims are barred by the statute of
 limitations. 
In her complaint filed on June 6, 2012, Cabral
 
specified two causes of action: (1) Tortious Interference
 ("Contractual Breach of Good Faith Fair Dealing" and "Aiding and
 Abetting Breach of Contract") and (2) Negligence. Cabral appears
 to assert that the Defendants interfered with her contractual
 relationship with Palisade Pointe Estates (Palisade Pointe),
 which allegedly agreed to sell property to Cabral in 1997. The
 Defendants represented Edward Bates (Bates), owner of Palisade
 Pointe, and Palisade Pointe in the 1997 transaction. Palisade
 Pointe's alleged failure to convey the property led to Cabral
 filing a complaint in 2003 against Palisade Pointe and Bates
 (2003 Lawsuit). The Defendants appear to have represented
 Palisade Pointe and Bates in at least part of the 2003 Lawsuit.
 
5
 The circuit court also noted that the complaint was an effort to
relitigate a prior ruling from a separate case.
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
As part of her claims in this case, Cabral alleges that the
 
Defendants conspired to defraud Cabral of title to property by
 aiding Palisade Pointe in its breach of contract.
 
6
Based on her allegations of two torts,  the pertinent
statute of limitations is two years after the cause of action accrues, Hawaii Revised Statute (HRS) § 657-7 (1993), which occurred when Cabral knew or should have known of the Defendant's alleged tortious actions. See Kaho'ohanohano v. State, 117 
Hawai
'i 262, 315, 178 P.3d 538, 591 (2008). 
In support of their motion, the Defendants attached the
 
complaint in the 2003 Lawsuit, a first amended complaint in the
 2003 Lawsuit, Cabral's 2011 motion to bring claims against the
 Defendants as third-party defendants in the 2003 Lawsuit that
 alleged the Defendants were complicit in preventing conveyance of
 
7
the property,  and the order denying Cabral's motion to bring
claims against the Defendants in the 2003 Lawsuit. As asserted
 by the Defendants, their motion taken together with the
 pleadings, affidavits, and attached exhibits, establish that
 there is no genuine issue of material fact that by at least 2003,
 Cabral knew of the failed transfer of the property and that the
 Defendants represented Palisade Pointe in the transaction. 
Cabral chose to only file suit against Palisade Pointe and Bates
 in the 2003 Lawsuit. Moreover, the allegations made in Cabral's
 complaint in this case and in her pleadings in the 2003 Lawsuit
 show that she knew or should have known, more than two years
 before the filing of the instant complaint, of the Defendants'
 alleged actions that purport to support her claims in this case.
8
 
6 The elements of tortious interference are "(1) a contract between the
plaintiff and a third party, (2) the defendant's knowledge of the contract,
(3) the defendant's intentional inducement of the third party to breach the
contract, (4) absence of justification on the defendant's part, (5) the
subsequent breach of the contract by the third party, and (6) damages to the
plaintiff." Beclar Corp. v. Young, 7 Haw. App. 183, 193, 750 P.2d 934, 940
(1988) (citations and block format omitted).
7
 This motion is substantially similar in language to Count I of the
complaint in the instant matter.
8
 Even assuming that Cabral asserts other types of claims and that the
six-year statute of limitations applies, under either HRS § 657-1(1) or (4)
(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In her response to the Defendants' motion in this case,
 
Cabral did not present admissible evidence of when she discovered
 
the Defendants' alleged tortious actions, and she presented no
 argument or admissible evidence as to why she reasonably could
 not have discovered her claims against the Defendants until after
 June 2010, within two years of filing her complaint in this case. 
Instead, Cabral noted that the relevant exhibits "have been in
 the record since 2003."
9 Further, Cabral provided a document
 
entitled "Declaration of Sylvia Cabral" but it fails to comply
 with the requirements of a declaration in lieu of affidavit. See
 
RCC Rule 7(g); RCC Form C-4; HRCP Rule 56(e). Thus, she did not
 submit any admissible evidence in addressing the Defendants'
 motion. Cabral has failed to demonstrate that there is a genuine
 issue of material fact as to whether the statute of limitations
 bars her claims in this case. 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Final Judgment
 
and Decree Dismissing Complaint With Prejudice, entered
 September 20, 2012, in the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 30, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Sylvia Cabral, pro se
 
Chief Judge
Tom C. Leuteneker
 
Michael J. Scanlon
 (Carlsmith Ball LLP)
for Defendants-Appellees Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
8(...continued)
(1993), the statute of limitations still lapsed prior to the filing of the

2012 complaint in this case.
9
 To the extent that Cabral's claims are based on alleged mortgages
purportedly recorded in 2005, Cabral's memoranda in opposition to the
Defendants' motion asserted that the documents were filed in the Bureau of
 Conveyances, thus they were part of the public record and discoverable through
due diligence at a time when Cabral's 2003 Lawsuit was pending.
 
5
 