 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000009
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CHAD GETZ, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-0608)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., Leonard, Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Chad Getz (Getz) appeals from the
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, filed on December 7, 2011 in
 
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).1
 
A jury found Getz guilty of Robbery in the Second
 
Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 708­
841(1)(a) (Supp. 2012 ).2
 
1 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2 HRS § 708-841 states:
 
§708-841 Robbery in the second degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of robbery in the second degree if, in the
course of committing theft or non-consensual taking of a motor
vehicle:
 
(a) The person uses force against the person of
anyone present with the intent to overcome that
person's physical resistance or physical power of
resistance;
(b) The person threatens the imminent use of force against
the person of anyone who is present with intent to
compel acquiescence to the taking of or escaping with
the property; or
 
(continued...)
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Getz contends there was insufficient
 
evidence to convict him of Robbery in the Second Degree. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Getz's point of error as follows:
 
When the evidence is considered in the strongest light 
for the prosecution, State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 
1227, 1241 (1998), there was substantial evidence to support Getz's conviction for Robbery in the Second Degree. 
HRS § 708-842 (Supp. 2012) states:
 
Robbery; "in the course of committing a theft".  An act
 
shall be deemed "in the course of committing a theft or
non-consensual taking of a motor vehicle" if it occurs in an
attempt to commit theft or non-consensual taking of a motor
vehicle, in the commission of theft or non-consensual taking
of a motor vehicle, or in the flight after the attempt or
commission.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Jessie Saffrey, a loss prevention officer, testified
 
that Getz selected a Coach handbag from the store, attempted to
 
conceal it behind another shopping bag, and walked out of the
 
store. Angela Rueber (Rueber), another loss prevention officer,
 
testified that she caught up to Getz outside of the store and
 
asked him to return to the store with her but Getz refused. As
 
Getz walked toward a stairwell, Rueber grabbed the Coach handbag
 
but Getz refused to release it. Instead, Getz continued to walk
 
to the stairwell, they were "playing tug-of-war" with the
 
handbag, Getz walked down the stairs, and Rueber went with him.
 
Rueber then attempted to block Getz with her arm by putting it in
 
front of him and grabbing onto a handrail. Getz broke through
 
using the force of his body weight and continued down the stairs
 
2(...continued)
(c) The person recklessly inflicts serious bodily injury
upon another.
(2) Robbery in the second degree is a class B felony.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
while still holding the handbag. Rueber eventually pulled the
 
handbag away but Getz continued down the stairs while Rueber
 
attempted to stop him. After a police officer arrived at the
 
stairs, Getz became compliant. In whole, Rueber and Getz had
 
gone down three flights of stairs.
 
"[G]iven the difficulty of proving the requisite state 
of mind by direct evidence in criminal cases, '[w]e have 
consistently held that . . . proof by circumstantial evidence and 
reasonable inferences arising from circumstances surrounding the 
[defendant's conduct] is sufficient. . . . Thus, the mind of an 
alleged offender may be read from his acts, conduct and 
inferences fairly drawn from all the circumstances.'" State v. 
Stocker, 90 Hawai' i 85, 92, 976 P.2d 399, 406 (1999) (citation 
omitted). 
There was substantial evidence for the jury to conclude
 
that in the course of committing theft of a handbag, Getz used
 
force against Rueber with the intent to overcome her physical
 
resistance or physical power of resistence in the flight after
 
the commission of the theft. Therefore, there was substantial
 
evidence as to every material element of the offense charged.
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence, filed on December 7, 2011 in the Circuit Court of
 the First Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 18, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Summer M. M. Kupau
Deputy Public Defenderfor Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
James M. Anderson Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
3
 