FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
VICENTE KOTEKAPIKA HILARIO, Defendant-Appellant
 
NO. CAAP-13-0003039
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-0023)
 
APRIL 19, 2017
 
FUJISE, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD AND GINOZA, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FUJISE, J.
 
I.
 
Defendant-Appellant Vicente Kotekapika Hilario
 
(Hilario) appeals from the July 25, 2013 Judgment of Conviction
 
and Sentence for Murder in the First Degree in violation of
 Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-701(1)(c) (Supp. 2016) and
 Bribery of a Witness in violation of HRS § 710-1070(1) (2014)
 entered by the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit (Circuit
 Court)
1.
 
1
 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.
 
The jury also found Hilario guilty of Retaliating Against a
Witness and Intimidating a Witness. These counts were merged with his
conviction for Murder in the First Degree for purposes of sentencing.
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We consider two points of error raised by Hilario.2
 
Hilario argues that the Circuit Court (1) erred in denying his
 
Motion for New Trial, based on his claim the Circuit Court denied
 his "right to meaningfully participate in trial based [on] the
 trial court's process of conducting extensive individual juror
 questioning at the bench and the denial or impairment of his
 right [to] peremptory challenges" and (2) deprived him of a fair
 trial by admitting evidence related to the so-called "Safeway
 Robbery."
 
II.
 
A.
 
This case stems from the December 17, 2010 shooting of 
Aureo Moore (Moore) near the Anahola Beach Park on Kauai. Moore was the complaining witness in a robbery that took place on August 21, 2010, in the parking lot of the Safeway supermarket in Kapa
'a (Safeway Robbery). Kyle Akau (Akau), Hilario's friend, 
was accused of the Safeway Robbery and it was said that Hilario was the driver.
3 On August 24, 2010, three days after the 
4
Safeway Robbery, police arrested Akau and Hilario  for the
Safeway Robbery. Initially, Hilario was driving and Akau was his
 passenger. 
However, Akau had tried to flee on foot and after a
 
short search of the area, police found Akau and recovered a
 backpack in Akau's vicinity in which a camping permit, timecards,
 a paycheck stub, and Aston Hotel receipts bearing Hilario's name
 were found. The backpack also contained a loaded Jennings .22
 
2 This case is before us on remand from the Hawai' i Supreme Court,
which decided the Circuit Court properly denied Hilario's Motion to Dismiss
based on an alleged violation of Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP)
Rule 48. See State v. Hilario, SCWC-13-0003039, 2016 WL 4272904 (Aug. 12,
2016) (mem.). 
3
 At trial in the instant case, Hilario admitted that on August 21,
2010, Akau was a passenger in his car when he took another friend to Safeway.
Hilario testified that, while they were in the parking lot, Moore, whom
Hilario knew of but had not met, walked up to them and stuck his head into the
car. When Hilario told Moore to leave, he did, and shortly thereafter, Akau
left the car. Akau met up with Hilario again after Hilario dropped off the
friend. As he and Akau were heading towards Hanalei, Hilario saw Moore in the
Safeway parking lot with police.
 
4
 The parties stipulated that Hilario was arrested on August 24,
2010 and subsequently charged with Robbery in the First Degree and Accomplice
to Robbery in the First Degree for the Safeway Robbery, but on September 13,
2010, his charges were dismissed without prejudice.
 
2
FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
caliber pistol and additional ammunition, a loaded Colt single-
action Army .45 caliber pistol, 125 Oxycodone pills, and a
 dealership key tag for a gray 2006 Nissan Altima.
 
Angienora "Pua" Crawford (Crawford) testified that she 
was addicted to OxyContin and oxycodone pills and that she knew Moore as a user and a supplier and Hilario as one of her suppliers. On August 21, 2010, between the Kapa
'a Safeway and 
5
Foodland supermarkets, she saw a male  yelling at Moore, "Where
is it at? Where is it at?" and understood that Moore was being
 robbed. 
Because she was angry with Moore at that time, saw no
 
weapon, and did not think Moore would be hurt, she walked on by. 
However, when she got to the end of the walkway, she heard a
 gunshot and realized the seriousness of the situation. Shortly
 thereafter, the police arrived and Crawford gave a statement to
 the police.
 
Crawford also testified that in September through
 
October 2010, Hilario asked Crawford several times, in exchange

 
for pills or money, to testify that the person she saw robbing
 Moore was not actually the robber.
6 From her discussions with
 
Hilario, Crawford understood that Hilario wanted to help out this
 guy because "was his family." Hilario told Crawford that he was
 not at the robbery. Hilario also expressed concern that although
 the charges against him had been dismissed, he was concerned that
 they could be brought again. However, she understood that
 Hilario was more concerned about the person who was facing trial
 for the Safeway Robbery. Ultimately, Crawford was never asked to
 testify about the Safeway Robbery, and she never gave Hilario an
 answer to his requests.
 
Crawford testified that, at some point in October or
 
November, Hilario's requests changed from testifying to arranging
 
5
 Crawford testified that she had never seen the male before that
 
day, but had been close enough to be able to identify the male "at that time."
 
6
 Hilario denied telling Crawford to change her testimony regarding
the Safeway Robbery as he said Crawford told him she did not see anything, had
not heard gunshots, and had not seen "this guy" Kyle Akau. Hilario also
 denied offering Crawford money or pills for her testimony.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
a meeting between himself and Moore.7 Hilario made ten or more
 
of these requests. Crawford testified that she thought the
 
requests odd because Hilario could set up a meeting with Moore
 himself. However, Hilario did not want Moore to know about
 setting up a meeting. Crawford did not refuse but put Hilario
 off.
 
On the day before the shooting, Hilario called
 
Crawford, asking her if she wanted more pills, and whether she
 could bring Moore to "the ABC Store." Crawford told Hilario,
 "no," they had pills.
 
The following day, December 17, 2010, Moore called
 
Crawford to ask if she knew anyone who had pills. Knowing that
 Hilario had pills, she called Hilario, thinking that she could be
 the "middle man" in the transaction and be able to benefit as a
 result. At the time, Crawford knew that Moore did not want to
 meet with Hilario and that Hilario wanted to see Moore, "but not
 in a nice way." She thought that there would be a talk and
 perhaps a fight. Ultimately, Crawford agreed to bring Moore to
 the lookout at Anahola because it was a little more out in the
 open, there was a lifeguard station there, and it was frequented
 by campers.
 
Crawford then called Moore to tell him she was coming;
 
she did not tell Moore she was driving him to meet Hilario. 
Crawford picked Moore up and dropped him off at the Anahola
 lookout, where Moore gave her $100 for six pills, and she drove
 off to meet Hilario nearby.
 
When Crawford met Hilario, Hilario was wearing a white
 
t-shirt with a dark design or picture on the front and black
 cargo shorts and was driving a dark-colored Nissan. Hilario gave
 Crawford five oxycodone pills and refused her money, saying, "No,
 
7
 Hilario admitted that he asked Crawford to set up a meeting
between he and Moore. He testified this was because he wanted to find out
 
what motivated Moore to bring false charges against him. He denied pressuring
Crawford for the meeting and testified that, although he knew where Moore
"hung out," it was where drug transactions were conducted and drugs were being
used, and that he could not "talk to someone about that stuff in that
environment."
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that's for you." Hilario then told her, "When you leave, just go
 
out the other direction, and if anybody asks, you never saw me."8
 
Crawford followed his instructions and saw that Hilario
 
drove in the opposite direction, towards where she left Moore. 
While Crawford was driving around Anahola town, she heard sirens
 and saw emergency vehicles racing by. Later that day, Crawford
 heard through word-of-mouth that there had been a shooting in
 Anahola. She did not go to the police until two days later,
 after she heard the police were looking for her, and did not tell
 the police about her involvement with a drug transaction or that
 Hilario had given her pills on that day.
 
Manaku testified under an immunity agreement that he
 
was a childhood friend of Hilario and was a close friend of both
 Hilario and Joseph Kainoa Hansen-Loo (Kainoa). Manaku also
 testified that he helped Hilario collect drug money owed to
 Hilario. Kyler is Kainoa's younger brother.
 
Manaku testified that, on December 17, 2010, Hilario,
 
Kyler and Manaku planned to go fishing. Manaku and Kyler were
 clad only in surf shorts and Hilario was wearing a white t-shirt,
 surf shorts, black hoodie and slippers.
9 In December 2010,
 
Manaku was about six feet one-inch tall and weighed 300 pounds. 
On the way to Anahola Beach Park, Hilario stopped at a "pull off"
 with a big pine tree and told Manaku and Kyler to get out of the
 car and go over the guardrail. As they did so, Hilario drove
 off.
 
While sitting on the other side of the guardrail,
 
Manaku heard a loud vehicle drive up and saw a Caucasian male get
 out of the vehicle and sit near the pine tree. Shortly
 
8
 Hilario had a slightly different take on the events. He agreed
that he ultimately told Crawford that the $100 was "for you," but explained
that was because he did not have any change to give her. He also testified
 that he was concerned about keeping David Kawika Kawaihalau-Manaku (Manaku)
and Jens Kyler Hansen-Loo (Kyler) waiting, so he told her, "Just keep it. You
 figure out whatever you guys got to figure out with [Moore] or whatever, and
I'll just talk to you about it later." Hilario denied telling Crawford "you
never saw me," but did admit he told her, when Crawford mentioned that Moore
"thinks it's you we're meeting," "You don't have to tell him."
 
9
 Hilario testified that he was wearing a white shirt and surf
shorts; Manaku wore a green polo shirt, a hoodie jacket, surf shorts inside of
black shorts, and a beanie.
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
10
thereafter, Hilario walked up from behind them,  now wearing a
beanie/ski mask that he then pulled down over his face, stepped
 
over the guardrail with Manaku and Kyler following, and fired two
 shots in the direction of the Caucasian. The Caucasian yelled,
 got up and took two steps before two more shots were fired and
 the man fell to the ground. Hilario walked up to the man and
 fired two more shots at the back of the man's head. Manaku,
 Kyler, and Hilario all ran away from the scene.
 
At one point while they were running, Manaku lost sight

 
of Hilario for ten to twenty seconds, after which Hilario
 reappeared without the hoodie. Manaku testified that he saw
 Hilario wrapping up something in what looked like the beanie and
 throwing it in the water in the "three rocks" area of the beach. 
A Raven Arms Model P-25 .25 caliber semi-automatic handgun was
 recovered from the water in this area on December 20, 2010.
 
Kyler's testimony was broadly consistent with Manaku's,
 
but differed as to the critical facts. He testified that he was
 six feet or six feet one-inch tall and at trial weighed about 180
 pounds. He also agreed that, at the time of the offense, he was
 taller than Manaku and Hilario. Kyler testified that on
 December 17, 2010, it was Manaku that wore a black jacket and a
 beanie, and after Hilario dropped them off at the pull-off and
 another vehicle left a male, it was Manaku that pulled the beanie
 over his face, shot the male six times, and threw the gun and
 beanie into the ocean as they ran away from the scene. According
 to Kyler, they met up with Hilario close to their fishing spot,
 when Manaku boasted to Hilario that he "aced that guy" and
 Hilario looked surprised.
 
Cheryl Corneal (Corneal) testified that she was setting
 
up her pastele stand on Manai Road when two gunshots from up the
 road drew her attention and she saw two people running in her
 direction a few feet before the ironwood tree. The men stopped,
 one leaned over and shot towards the ground twice, and she could
 see a person's leg move up, making her realize a person had been
 
10
 Hilario testified that he did not go to meet Moore because
Crawford told Hilario Moore was "thinking about just dropping it and saying
that he doesn't remember anything happening" and Hilario did not want to "stir
up any feelings."
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
shot. The shooter was of medium build, wearing a green or blue
 
plaid shirt with a hoodie, a baseball cap or a long pony tail,
 and long, dark shorts. The other person was huskier, wearing
 only dark long shorts. Although she could not see the shooter's
 face, Corneal knew Hilario and the shooter matched Hilario's
 general height and weight.
 
On December 17, 2010, Rusty Kaimipono Brewer Ah Loo
 
(Ah Loo) was standing at the bottom of the hill on Anahola Road
 adjusting his iPod when he saw two men come out of the bushes
 near the ironwood tree. Ah Loo testified that he saw one person
 come out from behind the tree and shoot the other as the latter
 was running and fell forward, then when the person was on the
 ground, more shots were fired aimed at the back and head area. 
Ah Loo heard a total of five shots. Ah Loo described the shooter
 as "skinny and tall" and wearing a ski mask, a long-sleeved 
shirt, long pants, and shoes.
 
Kaimakana Wedemeyer (Wedemeyer) was on duty as a
 
lifeguard on Anahola Beach on December 17, 2010. He testified
 that he heard five shots, began to scan with his binoculars and
 saw that the "pastele lady" looked "really alarmed." As he
 continued to scan up the road, he saw two individuals running up
 the road; one was a shirtless male, the other looked like a male
 wearing a green and black hoodie which covered his head. The
 shirtless individual was facing the other and had his hands
 raised, as if to say, "what are you doing?" The person with the
 hoodie had his hands down, as if they were in his pockets. It
 appeared as if the two were arguing as they ran. Wedemeyer drove
 his truck up Manai Road and could still see the two individuals
 running further up the road; when he reached the ironwood tree he
 saw a male face down and realized the male was a gunshot victim.
 
On December 17, 2010, Brehden Kamibayashi and Austin
 
Kekoa Alfiler were driving away from the "Crack 14" area of
 Anahola beach, when they saw three men running; the three men
 slowed to a walk as they drove by. They next encountered police,
 who told them the police were looking for people who were
 running; they told the police what they had seen. When they
 subsequently were shown a photo lineup by the police, they
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
identified the first of the three as Kyler and the last of the
 
three as Manaku, but could not identify the second person, who
 was wearing a dark hoodie and looked away from them.
 
Hilario maintained that as he was driven past where
 
Moore was supposed to be and where he dropped off Manaku and
 Kyler, he saw "somebody laying there," a couple of trucks parked,
 and people standing around. He told his driver to continue
 driving and asked to be dropped off at the dead end of a road in
 a nearby housing development. From that point, he walked on a
 path towards the fishing spot at which he expected Manaku and
 Kyler to be waiting, but met them as they jogged down to meet
 him. Hilario testified that Manaku admitted to shooting Moore
 multiple times.
 
B.
 
Prior to the trial, the Circuit Court ruled that it
 
would admit an audio recording of Moore's preliminary hearing
 testimony (Moore's Testimony) regarding the Safeway Robbery. 
Moore's Testimony was determined to be relevant to the instant
 case because Moore was murdered ten days before trial for the
 Safeway Robbery was scheduled to begin, and Hilario was aware of
 the content of Moore's Testimony because Hilario was present at
 the preliminary hearing.
 
The audio tape of Moore's Testimony was played for the
 
jury. The jury was instructed that information in Moore's
 Testimony could not be used to conclude that Hilario was of bad
 character and therefore more likely to have committed the charged
 crimes. Moore's Testimony included statements that he saw
 Hilario drive to the Safeway parking lot, where Akau exited
 Hilario's vehicle. Several days after Moore's Testimony was
 played for the jury, the Circuit Court ruled that it would allow
 evidence of the contents of the backpack found with Akau when he
 was arrested on August 24, 2010, three days after the August 21,
 2010 Safeway Robbery. However, the Circuit Court decided that
 only evidence connecting Hilario to the Safeway Robbery, and
 thereby relevant to motive, opportunity, intent, and preparation
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with regard to the instant offenses under Hawai 'i Rules of 
Evidence (HRE) Rule 404(b), would be admitted. 
On March 8, 2013, Hilario was convicted of Murder in
 
the First Degree (Count 1), Retaliating against a Witness
 
(Count 3), Intimidating a Witness (Count 4), and Bribery of a
 Witness (Count 5).
 
On May 2, 2013, the Circuit Court heard three motions: 
(1) for a new trial, (2) for judgment of acquittal, and (3) to
 strike the motion for judgment of acquittal. The Circuit Court
 denied all three motions.
 

This appeal followed.

 
III.
 
A.
 
The Circuit Court Erred in Excluding Hilario
from All Voir Dire Sidebars.
 
Hilario moved for a new trial on the basis that he was
 
denied his right to be present under HRPP Rule 43 when he was
 
excluded from sidebars11 conducted to examine veniremembers
 
during jury selection. 
As a general matter, the granting or denial of a motion for
new trial is within the sound discretion of the trial court
 and will not be disturbed absent a clear abuse of
 discretion. . . . The trial court abuses its discretion
 when it clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards
rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial
detriment of a party litigant.
 
State v. Yamada, 108 Hawai 'i 474, 478, 122 P.3d 254, 258 (2005) 
(quoting State v. Kim, 103 Hawai 'i 285, 290, 81 P.3d 1200, 1205 
(2003)). 
The interpretation of a court rule is reviewed de novo, 
Sierra Club v. Dep't of Transp., 120 Hawai 'i 181, 197, 202 P.3d 
1226, 1242 (2009), and "[w]hen interpreting rules promulgated by 
the court, principles of statutory construction apply." Gap v. 
11
 "1. A discussion among the judge and counsel. usu. over an
evidentiary objection, outside the jury's hearing. -- Also termed bench
 
conference.  2. A discussion, esp. during voir dire, between the judge and a
juror or prospective juror. -- Often shortened to sidebar." Black's Law
 
Dictionary, 1592 (10th ed. 2014) (defining "sidebar conference")
 
9
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Puna Geothermal Venture
, 106 Hawai 'i 325, 331, 104 P.3d 912, 918 
(2004) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Statutory construction is guided by the following rules: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutory

interpretation is the language of the statute itself.
Second, where the statutory language is plain and
unambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its
plain and obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the
task of statutory construction is our foremost
obligation to ascertain and give effect to the
intention of the legislature, which is to be obtained
primarily from the language contained in the statute
itself. Fourth, when there is doubt, doubleness of
meaning, or indistinctiveness or uncertainty of an
expression used in a statute, an ambiguity exists.
And fifth, in construing an ambiguous statute, the
meaning of the ambiguous words may be sought by
examining the context, with which the ambiguous words,
phrases, and sentences may be compared, in order to
ascertain their true meaning.
 
Carlisle v. One (1) Boat, 119 Hawai' i 245, 256, 195 P.3d
1177, 1188 (2008) (quoting In re Contested Case Hearing onWater Use Permit Application, 116 Hawai' i 481, 489-90, 174
P.3d 320, 328-29 (2007)) (block quotation format altered). 
State v. Woodfall , 120 Hawai 'i 387, 391, 206 P.3d 841, 845 
(2009).
 
The rule at issue here, HRPP Rule 43(a), reads the same
 
today as it did during Hilario's trial:
 
(a) Presence Required.  The defendant shall be present
at the arraignment, at the time of the plea, at evidentiary
pretrial hearings, at every stage of the trial including the
impaneling of the jury and the return of the verdict, and at
the imposition of sentence, except as otherwise provided by
this Rule.
 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has long recognized that HRPP 
Rule 4312 codifies the presence requirement of the Confrontation
 
and Due Process clauses of both the United States and Hawai 'i 
Constitutions. State v. Okumura, 58 Haw. 425, 427, 570 P.2d 848,
 
851 (1977). The HRPP is modeled after the Federal Rules of
 
Criminal Procedure (FRCP) and FRCP Rule 43, as well as cases
 interpreting its language, are instructive in considering
 questions presented under HRPP Rule 43. State v. Samuel, 74 Haw.
 
141, 155, 838 P.2d 1374, 1381 (1992) (considering federal cases
 applying FRCP Rule 43 to jury instruction settlement
 
12
 The Hawaii Rules of Criminal Procedure were replaced with the HRPP
in 1977. HRPP Rule 43 has been substantially amended since, but not in ways
that affect our analysis here.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conferences). FRCP Rule 43's scope is broader than the reach of
 
constitutional provisions protecting the right to be present as
 it also incorporated the "more expansive common law understanding
 of the right." 
United States v. Reyes , 764 F.3d 1184, 1189 (9th
 
Cir. 2014) and United States v. Washington, 705 F.2d 489, 497
 (D.C. Cir. 1983).
13
 
With this backdrop, we turn to an examination of the
 
procedure employed by the Circuit Court here. As the Circuit
 Court explained to the first venire at the beginning of the
 selection process,
 
I'm going to bring you here, and most of our discussion will
occur at the bench outside the presence of the other jury
panel members. What that means is there's going to be some
delay, because we're going to have you walk from where you
are seated to the bench. And then when you're done, we're
going to have you walk back. Part of the reason I like to
 conduct jury selection at the bench is because much of the
information that you will be giving the Court might be
personal, personal to you.
 
And while the attorneys need to know that
14
[ ] information,  there is probably zero reason why the other
jury panels [sic] need to hear your personal information.

And so, what I'm going to do is I'm going to try and do my
best to protect your private information. There's an
 inconvenience or delay because you're going to walk back and
forth, and it's going to take additional time. But the
 Court in weighing the need to protect your privacy versus
some of the inconvenience, I'm leaning towards protecting
your privacy.
 
The Circuit Court began by reading a synopsis of the
 
case and the indictment to the venire and announced that matters
 
concerning qualification to serve would be discussed first. The
 
13 Pertinent to this case, we note that HRPP Rule 43(a), like FRCP
Rule 43(a), requires a defendant's presence "at every stage of the trial
including the impaneling of the jury." To "empanel" means "[t]o swear in (a
jury) to try an issue or case. Also spelled impanel."  Black's Law
 
Dictionary, 638 (10th ed. 2014). As both rules mandate presence "at every
 
stage of the trial including" empanelment, and consistent with cases applying
FRCP Rule 43, we include jury selection in our analysis under HRPP Rule 43.
See Washington, 705 F.2d at 497, Reyes, 764 F.3d at 1188.
 
14
 In its oral ruling denying Hilario's motion for a new trial, the
Circuit Court remarked, 
Now, in regards to bench conferences, I'm not aware of any
court where whenever there's a bench conference, the
Defendant comes up to participate in the discussions of the
bench conference. Because if you're saying that the
Defendant has to fully participate including coming up for
bench conferences, I'm not aware of any situation where the
Defendant walks up and down with the attorney to participate
fully at the bench conference.
 
11
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court instructed veniremembers to raise their hand, if
 
any of them had an answer they wished to keep private or believed
 was embarrassing, and they would be allowed to answer at the
 bench. Although the initial questions pertained to
 qualifications for service, veniremembers often raised at the
 bench instead, or in addition, other topics more accurately
 characterized as exemptions or excuses from service, such as
 conflicts in their schedules, claims of hardship, or medical
 conditions. Occasionally, veniremembers also took the
 opportunity during these sidebars to raise issues that involved
 potential bias. These matters were taken up at the same sidebar,
 with court and counsel conducting an examination of the
 veniremember. 
Eventually, in open court, the Circuit Court also asked
 
veniremembers if they had heard or read anything about the case,
 had religious reasons or any other unwillingness to sit in
 judgment of a person, were unable to apply the reasonable doubt
 standard, had prior experience as a witness, knew or had
 relationships with any of the parties or potential witnesses, or
 had any contacts with law enforcement, or any other reason they
 could not be fair and impartial. If jurors raised their hand
 indicating an issue, a sidebar was then typically held with the
 juror.
 
At the bench, the Circuit Court took the lead in
 
questioning but counsel also examined, or were given the
 opportunity to examine, the veniremember at each of the sidebars. 
This procedure was followed throughout the remainder of the
 eleven-day jury selection process, continued during general voir
 dire, and during further examination as a result of peremptory
 challenges.
 
With this understanding of the procedure actually
 
employed, the question becomes whether it was a violation of HRPP
 Rule 43 to exclude Hilario from these sidebar examinations of
 veniremembers. We conclude, on these facts, that it was.
 
The plain language of HRPP Rule 43 supports this
 
conclusion as it requires that the defendant be present "at every
 stage of the trial including the impaneling of the jury." It is
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
true that Hilario was in the courtroom when these sidebars were
 
held. However, as his counsel argued before the Circuit Court, 
Hilario has a right to challenge any particular jurors for
cause as well as he has a right to exercise his preemptory
[sic] challenges. And a key component to adequately
exercising those rights is to be able to hear the
[veniremember's] questions and answers, [and] to view
[their] demeanor. . . . And he was just not able to do that.
. . . . So, without being able to fully assess the demeanor
and the answers and the way that they answered, we were
denied his right to participate in his trial.
 
Given the combination of rights the rule was designed
 
to preserve, a defendant's physical presence in the courtroom,
 
without the ability to hear what is said or observe the facial
 expressions of the persons being examined during these
 proceedings would frustrate the purpose of the rule. See
 
Okumura, 58 Haw. at 431, 570 P.2d at 853, quoting Bustamante v.
 Eyman, 456 F.2d 269, 274 (9th Cir. 1972) ("The right to be
 present at trial stems in part from the fact that by physical
 presence the defendant can hear and see the proceedings, can be
 seen by the jury, and can participate in the presentation of his
 rights."); Reyes, 764 F.3d at 1194 (ability to see and hear
 questioning of veniremembers "allows him to observe the
 prospective jurors' answers and demeanor so that he can assist
 his attorney in constructing an impartial jury.")
 
Although Hawai
'i courts have not specifically examined 
the exclusion of defendants from sidebars during jury selection, a number of federal courts have weighed in, ruling that, upon request, FRCP Rule 43 requires defendant's presence at sidebars or in camera examinations. Reyes, 764 F.3d at 1190, United 
States v. Cuchet, 197 F.3d 1318, 1319-20 (11th Cir. 1999), United States v. Ford, 88 F.3d 1350, 1369 (4th Cir. 1996), Washington, 705 F.2d at 497, United States v. Alessandrello, 637 F.2d 131, 138 (3rd Cir. 1980) (voir dire of veniremembers held in a separate room in which only attorneys were present). 
As a preliminary matter, because the right to be
 
present under FRCP Rule 43 is not absolute, federal courts have
 required a specific request to be included, or an objection to
 being excluded, from sidebars; the failure to invoke the right
 results in a waiver. See United States v. Gagnon, 470 U.S. 522,
 
13
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
528-29 (1985). Here, Hilario objected to being excluded while
 
screening of the first venire for qualifications was still
 ongoing.
15
 
Here, the potential impact on Hilario's ability to
 
participate in jury selection was substantial. It appears that
 nine of the twelve jurors who were ultimately selected for
 service were examined at a sidebar and six of the nine
 participated in more than one sidebar.
16 These sidebars included
 
examination regarding more than administrative matters, i.e.,
 statutory qualifications, conflicts in scheduling, or claims of
 hardship due to jury service. See Cohen v. Senkowski, 290 F.3d
 
485, 489-90 (2nd Cir. 2002) (distinguishing the "administrative
 
15 Hilario did not initially voice an objection to this procedure.
However, preliminary to the second day of voir dire, during which the
examination for qualifications and exemptions or excuses continued, the
following exchange occurred:
 
MR. SHIGETOMI: 
Your Honor, in chambers, we've
discussed that the procedure the Court is going to follow is
the same as it did yesterday; that the Court will screen the
individual jurors at the bench.
 
And today, because we're getting into knowledge of the

case, knowledge of witnesses, I had requested that
Mr. Hilario be allowed to participate in those conferences.
I was told that the Court's not going to allow that. I'm
 just making my objection at this point on that procedure.
 
THE COURT: 
What we'll do, then, Mr. Shigetomi, is
prior to you making decisions, we'll allow you to walk over
and confer with Mr. Hilario.
 
MR. SHIGETOMI: 
That's fine.
 
THE COURT:  
Okay.
 
MR. SHIGETOMI:  
I still object to the procedure.
 
THE COURT:  
Okay. But we'll give you the opportunity
to confer with Mr. Hilario regarding any decisions you feel
that you need to confer with him.
 
MR. SHIGETOMI:  
I understand.
 
Hilario's objection was made before any of the sidebars with jurors eventually

empaneled were had. Cf. Washington, 705 F.2d at 498 (making distinction
between sidebars with veniremembers held before or after counsel's objection);
Ford, 88 F.3d at 1369 (ruling that a failure to object before the empanelment
of the jury waived the right). Given the facts of this case, we deem
Hilario's objection to be timely.
 
16
 Of those veniremembers who were eventually excused on Hilario's
peremptory challenges, eleven of the twelve were examined at sidebars on
multiple occasions.
 
14
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
empanelment process" from examination regarding potential bias
 
from pretrial publicity). The subjects discussed at these
 sidebars included exposure to pretrial publicity, knowledge of or
 relationships with potential witnesses, prior experience with law
 enforcement, prior jury service, and other sources of potential
 bias or inability to follow the court's instructions. While
 counsel addressed the venire and exercised their peremptory
 challenges in open court, upon the veniremember's request,
 further questioning was conducted at the bench without Hilario
 present. Based on the extent and the nature of this sidebar
 procedure, which resulted, at a minimum, in half of the empaneled
 jurors examined on matters of potential bias at sidebars, we
 cannot say that Hilario's absence from those sidebars did not
 affect his ability to participate in the jury selection. 
Therefore, we conclude that the sidebar procedure followed here
 violated Hilario's right to be present under HRPP Rule 43.
17
 
This does not end our inquiry, as violations of HRPP 
Rule 43 are analyzed under a harmless error standard, where we determine "whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error complained of might have contributed to the conviction." State v. Pauline, 100 Hawai
'i 356, 378, 60 P.3d 306, 328 (2002) 
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
We have considered the accommodation provided by the
 
Circuit Court here, allowing Hilario's counsel to consult with
 
17 The State argues that the right to be present "is subject to
limitation, when security is an issue." We agree that security can be a
consideration in modifying courtroom procedures. Washington, 705 F.2d at 497
 
n.4. However, the State does not point to, and we do not find, any indication
in the record that the Circuit Court employed this procedure due to safety
concerns. Rather, the Circuit Court clearly articulated that the reason for
its decision was the privacy of the veniremembers. While we recognize that
court security may be a legitimate concern, without findings by the Circuit
Court regarding the nature and severity of those concerns in the instant case,
we decline the invitation to speculate on whether safety considerations rose
to the level justifying the sidebar procedure used here. Even the case that
 the State relies upon provides that "unless safety is an issue (in which case
the judge should clearly state his or her concerns for the record), a
defendant should be physically present at sidebar [during voir dire]." State
 
v. W.A., 875 A.2d 882, 892 (N.J. 2005).
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
him about the substance of the sidebars.18 See Reyes, 764 F.3d
 
at 1195 (citing Gagnon, 470 U.S. at 526-27) ("[T]he ease and
 
reliability with which an attorney can relay the details of a
 
side bar exchange to the defendant is one factor that affects
 whether the defendant's absence might undermine the fundamental
 fairness of the proceeding." ). However, the number and the
 length of some of these sidebars make it doubtful at best that
 counsel's synopsis of the side bar could serve as a functional
 equivalent of Hilario's presence.
19
 
Nor can we say that the evidence presented at trial was
 
overwhelming. Reyes, 764 F.3d at 1193 (concluding defendant's
 
presence at the single sidebar would not have changed the verdict 
where the evidence--defendant's confession, eyewitness
 identification testimony, and video footage of the scene--was
 overwhelming). The jury found Hilario guilty of Murder in the
 First Degree, Retaliating Against a Witness, Intimidating a
 Witness, and Bribery of a Witness. Hilario denied all charges
 and testified that he was elsewhere when Moore was shot. The two
 eyewitnesses to the shooting, testified to irreconcilably opposed
 
18 The Circuit Court observed in denying Hilario's motion for new
trial:
 
There is no prohibition stopping the attorneys from
consulting with their clients. Mr. Shigetomi had every
opportunity to consult with Mr. Hilario regarding any matter
that occurred here at any time. There was no prohibition
stopping Mr. Shigetomi from asking for a break to consult
with his client. All of those opportunities were available.
Mr. Shigetomi, as the attorney, has the ability to use his
discretion when he believes consultation should occur. The
 Court relies on that discretion, and the holding of bench
conferences to conduct jury selection and during the course
of trial, the Court believes was appropriate. So that's not
 an issue.
 
19
 We decline the State's suggestion that we opine on the use of
technology to provide Hilario with the ability to hear and see what transpired
at a sidebar, as it was not employed here. We note that veniremembers who
 voiced the need for assistance in hearing the proceedings were provided with
headphones. However, it is not clear that the headphones that were provided
could also relay the sound from the bench during sidebars. We assume that
 access to the sidebar discussions was somehow blocked from the hearing of
other veniremembers as access would have defeated the purpose of the sidebars.
 
We also note that video recordings of proceedings in this case
included sidebars as copies of those recordings have been included in the
record before us. However, it appears that the perspective captured by the
camera is from the gallery to the bench and consequently does not reveal the
veniremember's face during the sidebars.
 
16
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
versions of the event. The State does not argue on appeal that
 
the evidence was overwhelming. Consequently, we cannot conclude
 that the error was harmless.
20
 
B.
 
The Circuit Court's Admission of the "Safeway
Robbery" Evidence Did Not Violate Hilario's
Right to a Fair Trial. 
1.
 
In his second point of error, Hilario challenges the
 
presentation of "the preliminary hearing testimony of Moore and
 
others in Cr. No.[] 10-1-0285" to the jury in this case. In his
 argument in support, Hilario points to other evidence-­"prescription bottles recovered from Moore, the arrest of Akau,
 the search of his backpack and the arrest of Hilario and the
 search of his person" as improperly admitted during trial.
21
 
Hilario contends this evidence "did not have the tendency to make
 the existence of any fact or consequence to the determination of
 the underlying criminal charges more or less probable than it
 would be without the evidence" and that "[s]uch evidence only
 served to show bad character of Hilario and his friend [Akau]." 
We do not agree.
 
2.
 
"'Relevant evidence' means evidence having any tendency
 
to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the
 determination of the action more probable or less probable than
 
20 In light of this conclusion, we need not address Hilario's
argument that the Circuit Court erred in denying his challenges to certain
veniremembers for cause. 
21 Challenge to this evidence was not included in Hilario's points on
appeal and we could therefore disregard it. Hawai' i Rules of Appellate
Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4). While Hilario provides record citations--inhis statement of the case--for his objection and the court's ruling, becausehe does not include a quotation of "the full substance of the evidenceadmitted[,]" we cannot say with certainty precisely what evidence hechallenges. Id. Counsel is cautioned that future violations may result in
sanctions. 
In any event, based on the lack of specificity in the description
of the evidence challenged, we presume Hilario refers to testimony
establishing the fact of the arrests and the items he names in his argument
that were recovered from the backpack seized with Akau. He does not specify
what evidence he challenges arising out of the search of his person upon his
arrest. Therefore, we decline to address it.
 
17
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
it would be without the evidence." HRE Rule 401. Hilario was 
charged, not only with Moore's murder as a witness against Hilario, but with retaliating against Moore for that testimony, intimidating Moore to influence future testimony, and bribing Crawford to influence her testimony or to induce her not to give testimony in a future proceeding. Evidence of "other crimes, wrongs, or acts" is admissible to prove, among other things, motive, intent, or knowledge. HRE Rule 404(b).
22 We review the 
trial court's determination of relevance de novo. State v. 
Richie, 88 Hawai 'i 19, 36-37, 960 P.2d 1227, 1244-45 (1998). 
First, in the audio tape of Moore's Testimony, Moore
 
identified both Hilario and Akau, who were present in court, 
described Hilario and Akau's involvement in the Safeway Robbery,
 including Hilario's presence in the driver's seat of a "smoky
 gray" Nissan in which Akau was a passenger while in the Safeway
 parking lot, and Akau's use and threatened use of a .22 handgun
 to coerce Moore's surrender of money and Akau's physical taking
 of Moore's prescription medications from Moore's pocket. This
 evidence was relevant to establishing that Moore was a witness in
 a criminal proceeding, and that Hilario knew Moore was a witness
 against him and Akau. Moore's Testimony regarding the facts
 underlying the Safeway Robbery charge was also relevant to
 establishing the seriousness of the crime and extent of Hilario
 and Akau's involvement, which in turn supported the strength and
 
22 HRE 404(b) provides, 
Other crimes, wrongs, or acts. Evidence of other crimes,
wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of
a person in order to show action in conformity therewith.
It may, however, be admissible where such evidence is
probative of another fact that is of consequence to the
determination of the action, such as proof of motive,
opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity,
modus operandi, or absence of mistake or accident. In
criminal cases, the proponent of evidence to be offered
under this subsection shall provide reasonable notice in
advance of trial, or during trial if the court excuses
pretrial notice on good cause shown, of the date, location,
and general nature of any such evidence it intends to
introduce at trial.
 
The Rule 404 Commentary states, "The specific items listed in the
rule as possible relevant facts justifying admissibility are illustrative of
the various situations in which common law courts have admitted this kind of
 evidence."
 
18
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
existence of a motive and intent to commit the offenses charged
 
in this case. State v. Renon, 73 Haw. 23, 36-37, 828 P.2d 1266,
 
1272-73 (1992) (evidence of motive "is admissible to prove the
 state of mind that prompts a person to act in a particular way;
 an incentive for certain volitional activity." (citation and
 internal quotation marks omitted)).
 
In addition, evidence of Hilario and Akau's arrests
 
along with the contents of the backpack recovered during Akau's
 arrest, are similarly relevant to the intent and motive for the
 charged offenses here. The arrests of Akau and Hilario, as they
 came three days after the Safeway Robbery and involved Hilario
 driving what appeared to be the same vehicle used as transport to
 the Safeway Robbery, supported what Moore himself could not
 directly testify to, that Hilario was the driver for the pair's
 activities. More important was the testimony describing what was
 recovered when Akau was arrested: a backpack containing the
 possible weapon used in the Safeway Robbery, pills of the same
 kind taken from Moore, and items bearing Hilario's name, tying
 him to the gun and drugs, and therefore the robbery. Again, this
 evidence was relevant to Hilario's motive and intent to commit
 the murder, intimidation, and retaliation against Moore.
 
Thus, we agree with the Circuit Court that this
 
evidence was relevant.
 
3.
 
As the Commentary to HRE Rule 404(b) observes, "[w]hen
 
offered for the specified purposes other than mere character and
 propensity, however, 'other crimes, wrongs, or acts' evidence may
 be admissible provided the Rule 403 test is met." Rule 403
 provides that relevant evidence "may be excluded if its probative
 value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
 prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
 considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless
 presentation of cumulative evidence." In weighing the probative
 value of the evidence against the possible prejudicial effect, we
 consider
 
19
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the strength of the evidence as to the commission of the
other crime, the similarities between the crimes, the
interval of time that has elapsed between the crimes, the
need for the evidence, the efficacy of alternative proof,
and the degree to which the evidence probably will rouse the
jury to overmastering hostility.
 
State v. Behrendt, 124 Hawai 'i 90, 106, 237 P.3d 1156, 1172 
(2010) (citation omitted). The HRE Rule 403 balancing is 
reviewed for an abuse of discretion. Richie, 88 Hawai 'i at 37, 
960 P.2d at 1245. 
Here, the evidence of Hilario and Akau's involvement in
 
the Safeway Robbery was strong. The complaining witness, Moore,
 had seen both men and could identify them and the possible fruits
 of and weapon used in the crime were found with the men three
 days later. Crawford saw the Safeway Robbery and knew Moore
 well, so could identify him and corroborate part of his
 testimony. Although four months elapsed between the Safeway
 Robbery and the shooting in this case, Crawford testified that
 during that interval Hilario contacted her on numerous occasions
 to set up a "meeting" with Moore. There was great need for this
 evidence as it provided the motive and evidence of intent for the
 instant offenses. There was no alternate proof, as Moore was
 dead and while Crawford testified that she saw the Safeway
 Robbery being committed, she did not know who Akau was and could
 not testify to what was said between Moore and Akau or whether
 the crime had been completed. 
Finally, the evidence would not have "roused the jury 
to overmastering hostility" as they were well aware that the Safeway Robbery was alleged to have been the reason for the charged offenses. In addition, limiting instructions were given before the jury heard the audiotape of Moore's Testimony and before the testimony of each of the two arresting officers was given. The jury was instructed that information in Moore's Testimony could not be used to conclude that Hilario was of bad character and therefore more likely to have committed the crimes he was charged for in the instant case. It is presumed that the jury will follow the court's instructions. State v. Acker, 133 
Hawai
'i 253, 278, 327 P.3d 931, 956 (2014) (limiting instructions 
regarding use of defendant's convictions "dissipated the risk of 
20
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
prejudice to [defendant] because a jury is presumed to follow the
 
instructions it is given by the court.")
IV.
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the July 25, 2013
 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence entered by the Circuit Court
 of the Fifth Circuit and remand this case for proceedings
 consistent with this Opinion.
 
21
 