   Defendant-Appellant Joan A. Vannatta (Vannatta) appeals
 
from the (1) January 24, 2013 "Order Granting Plaintiffs' Motion
 
for Summary Judgment and For Writ of Possession and Writ of
 
Ejectment Against [Vannatta] Filed September 10, 2012" and the 
(2) January 24, 2013 Writ of Possession and Writ of Ejectment
 
1 
entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit
 
court).
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NOS. CAAP-13-0000112 AND CAAP-13-0003063
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
PAUL RICHARD CASSIDAY, Trustee under that certain
Trust Agreement made by Charlotte Harriet
Lucas Cassiday dated February 28, 1974 and
TRACY P. ALLEN, Trustee of the Tracy Allen Trust
dated April 1, 2008 , Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
 
JOAN A. VANNATTA, Defendant-Appellant
and
 
BANK OF HAWAI 'I, a domestic Profit Corporation,
JOHN DOES 1-20, JANE DOES 1-20, and
DOE ENTITIES 1-20, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-1886-06)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Vannatta contends the circuit court erred by: (1)
 
considering Cassiday's complaint because it lacked subject matter
 
jurisdiction pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 666-6
 
1
 The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(1993); (2) denying her counsel's second motion for a continuance
 
to complete discovery; and (3) granting Plaintiffs-Appellees Paul
 
Richard Cassiday (Cassiday) and Tracy P. Allen's (Allen)
 
(together, Appellees) motion for summary judgment.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude
 
Vannatta's appeal is without merit.
 
Vannatta contends the circuit court lacked jurisdiction
 
because Cassiday's complaint sought declaratory relief under HRS
 
§ 632-1 (1993), which excepts from circuit court jurisdiction
 
those cases for which "a special form of remedy" exists under a
 
separate statute, and that HRS Chapter 666 provided that special
 
remedy in the instant case. HRS § 666-6, provides "summary
 
possession proceedings" shall be prosecuted "in the district
 
courts of the circuit wherein the lands and premises in question
 
are situated." Id. 
Under HRS § 666-6, district courts have sole
 
jurisdiction over "actions to dispossess lessees involving
 
short-term rental agreements or other leases that grant lessees
 
solely the right of possession . . . ." Queen Emma Found. v.
 
Tingco, 74 Haw. 294, 305-06, 845 P.2d 1186, 1191 (1992), citing
 HRS § 666-6.
 
Vannatta's efforts to distinguish Tingco based on the 
expiry of her long-term lease are unpersuasive. The action 
involved Vannatta's holdover tenancy from a long term lease of 55 
years, her interest in a house built on the premises, and 
property taxes previously assessed against Vannatta. The Tingco 
court considered such factors in concluding that the difference 
in "sophistication" between mere possessory interests of short 
term lessees and long-term lessees rendered summary possession 
proceedings inappropriate to adjudicating disputes concerning the 
latter. See Tingco, 74 Haw. at 302 n.10, 845 P.2d at 1190 n.10; 
see also Hawaiian Properties, Ltd. v. Tauala, 125 Hawai
'i 176, 
183, 254 P.3d 487, 494 (App. 2011) (arrangement under which 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
defendant had a 1% interest in cooperative housing was "clearly,
 
and by design, more complex than the typical short-term
 
landlord-tenant relationship in which the lessee is granted
 
'solely the right of possession'" and thus was within the circuit
 
court's, and not the district court's, jurisdiction).
 
Summary possession proceedings under HRS § 666-6 would 
have been an inappropriate means for disposing of issues raised 
by Cassiday's complaint. Taula, 125 Hawai 'i at 183, 254 P.3d at 
494; see Tingco, 74 Haw. at 305, 845 P.2d at 1191 ("[L]ong-term residential ground leases . . . cannot be cancelled or forfeited 
in a district court summary possession action . . . ."). HRS 
§ 666-6 did not provide a statutory exception to provisions for 
declaratory relief under HRS § 632-1 and therefore the circuit 
court properly asserted jurisdiction over the case. 
Vannatta further contends the circuit court erred by 
denying her second Hawai
'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 
56(f) motion for a continuance and that this court should review the circuit court's denial of her motion de novo because the 
circuit court granted Appellees' summary judgment motion prior to 
denying her HRCP Rule 56(f) motion. Citing Garrett v. City & 
Cnty. of San Francisco, 818 F.2d 1515, 1519 (9th Cir. 1987). In 
Garrett, the Ninth Circuit reviewed a federal district court's 
"fail[ure] to exercise its discretion" when it granted a 
defendants' motion for summary judgment and thereafter refused to 
review a plaintiff's motion to compel production of documents 
because it was "moot[ed]" by prior grant of summary judgment. 
Garrett, 818 F.2d at 1519. 
Here, at the November 7, 2012 hearing, the circuit
 
court orally granted Appellees' motion for summary judgment just
 
prior to stating: 
Yes, the [circuit] court is denying the second request for a
[HRCP] Rule 56F continuance. The [circuit] court did review
the declaration [by Vannatta's counsel] that was submitted
this morning and does not find that it raises issues that
would create a genuine issue of material fact as to the
[Appellees'] claim for possession of the [Haleola Property].
 
Unlike Garrett, the circuit court did not conclude that
 
Vannatta's second motion for a continuance was "moot" as a result
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of the circuit court's grant of summary judgment to Appellees, 
but rather first reviewed Vannatta's counsel's declaration and 
found it did not support Vannatta's second HRCP Rule 56(f) 
motion. Therefore, we review the circuit court's denial of 
Vannatta's second HRCP Rule 56(f) motion under an abuse of 
discretion standard. Associates Fin. Services of Hawai 'i, Inc. 
v.
 Richardson, 99 Hawai 'i 446, 454, 56 P.3d 748, 756 (App. 2002).
 HRCP Rule 56(f) requires the party opposing a motion
 
for summary judgment to "make an adequate request for a
 continuance for the purpose of completion of discovery." Acoba
 
v. General Tire, Inc., 92 Hawai
'i 1, 12, 986 P.2d 288, 299 
(1999). An adequate request for a continuance pursuant to HRCP 
Rule 56(f) "demonstrate[s] how the requested continuance would 
enable [the party opposing the motion for summary judgment] 
through obtained discovery to rebut [the moving parties'] showing 
of absence of a genuine issue of fact." Richardson, 99 Hawai 'i 
at 454, 56 P.3d at 756. 
At the October 3, 2012 hearing on Vannatta's first HRCP
 
Rule 56(f) motion for a continuance, the circuit court proceeded
 to grant her motion and instructed Vannatta to produce an
 
affidavit or declaration that complied with HRCP Rule 56(f)
 
requirements or conduct discovery. At the November 7, 2012
 
hearing on Appellees' motions for summary judgment and
 
possession, Vannatta did not contest Appellees' allegation that
 
she had not filed any depositions, notices, or third-party
 
complaints since her first request for a continuance.
 
Appellees' motion for summary judgment sought a
 
declaration that Vannatta had no interest in the Haleola Property
 
because Appellees were fee-simple owners and a finding that
 
Vannatta would be liable to Appellees for damages and holdover
 
rent in amounts to be determined at a later hearing. Thus, at
 
issue in the summary judgment motion was whether Appellees were
 
fee-simple owners of the Haleola Property; whether their fee-
simple ownership entitled them to a writ of possession and writ
 
of ejectment against Vannatta; and whether Vannatta would be
 
liable for damages in an amount to be determined at a later
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
hearing. To comply with HRCP Rule 56(f) requirements, Vannatta's 
motions for continuances were required to demonstrate how the 
requested continuance would enable Vannatta to rebut Appellees 
showing that no genuine issue of material fact existed as to 
their fee-simple ownership of the Haleola Property or Vannatta's 
liability for damages related to her continued tenancy. 
Richardson, 99 Hawai 'i at 454, 56 P.3d at 756. 
Vannatta's counsel submitted a declaration in support
 
of Vannatta's second HRCP Rule 56(f) motion for a continuance,
 
which stated that he had other legal work requiring his
 
attention, was currently in the process of negotiating with
 
Appellees' counsel, and sought more time to investigate potential
 
disputes as to whether Appellees negotiated in good faith and
 
whether Appellees' Trustee First Hawaiian Bank's (FHB)
 
representative intentionally misled Vannatta. Vannatta sought an
 
additional 30 days "to flesh out additional disputed facts and
 
law" and specified disputes that could support potential claims
 
in equity against Appellees' conduct during negotiations for the
 
purchase of the Haleola Property.
 
Vannatta's identification of potential claims did not
 
raise issues material to the factual question of whether
 
Appellees owned the Haleola Property or if Vannatta had a right
 
to continue to possess the property beyond the termination of the
 
lease. The circuit court did not abuse its discretion by denying
 
Vannatta's second HRCP Rule 56(f) motion for a continuance.
 
Vannatta contends the circuit court erred by granting
 
Appellees' motion for summary judgment because: (1) "summary
 
judgment cannot be granted without a complete record[;]" and (2)
 
"[Vannatta] presented sufficient evidence of a promissory
 
estoppel defense to defeat [Appellees'] summary judgment
 
motion[.]" (Format altered.) According to Vannatta, a "complete
 
record" would contain information concerning a potential
 
promissory estoppel defense, which she sought to obtain through
 
her second HRCP Rule 56(f) motion for a continuance. Vannatta
 
misstates the requirements for summary judgment. A "complete
 
record" is not required. A motion for summary judgment 
shall be rendered forthwith if the pleadings, depositions,
answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine
issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is
entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. 
HRCP Rule 56(c).
Notwithstanding her contention that further discovery
 
was needed to produce evidence in support of her promissory
 
estoppel claim, Vannatta also contends that she "Presented
 
Sufficient Evidence of a Promissory Estoppel Defense to Defeat
 
Owners' Summary Judgment Motion[.]" Vannatta's second contention
 
is based on the circuit court's alleged failure to recognize
 
FHB's representations regarding the status of negotiations over
 
the Haleola Property sale and lease. These issues are not
 
material to the fact of Appellees' ownership of the Haleola
 
Property, nor do they establish that Appellees are not entitled
 
to a writ of possession or a writ of ejectment as a matter of
 
law. 
Appellees were entitled to judgment and a writ of
 
possession if they proved to the satisfaction of the court that
 
they were entitled to possession of the premises. See HRS § 666­
11 (Supp. 2013). Appellees' entitlement to possession of the
 Haleola Property and Vannatta's liability for remaining on the
 
premises was established by the following undisputed record
 
evidence: 
(1) the 1954 document conveying the Haleola Property to
 
a Trust;
 
(2) the 1956 Lease between the Hawaiian Trust Company,
 
acting as Trustee, with Ray S. Shirai, as Lessee, for 55 years;
 
(3) Shirai's 1957 assignment to Vannatta and her
 
husband;
 
(4) the 1974 Cassiday and 1974 Mary Pfleuger Trust
 
documents, conveying their respective interests from the 1954
 
Trust;
 
(5) the 1997 Warranty Deed, conveying to Cassiday and
 
James Pflueger two-thirds and one-third interest in the Haleola
 
Property, respectively;
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(6) the 2012 Quitclaim Deed conveying an undivided one-
third interest in the Haleola Property from the James Pflueger
 
Trust to Allen, acting as Trustee of the Tracy Allen Trust; and
 
(7) that Vannatta remained on the premises after the 55
 
year lease expired on October 31, 2011. The circuit court did
 
not err in granting Appellees' motion for summary judgment.
 
Therefore,
 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the January 24, 2013 "Order
 
Granting Plaintiffs' Motion for Summary Judgment and For Writ of
 Possession and Writ of Ejectment Against Defendant Joan Vannatta
 
Filed on September 10, 2012" and January 24, 2013 Writ of
 
Possession and Writ of Ejectment entered in the Circuit Court of
 
the First Circuit in favor of Appellees are affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 24, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Jack Schweigert
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 Kevin S.W. Chee

 
Devon I. Peterson
 
Joely A.A. Chung
(Chee Markham & Feldman)
for Plaintiffs-Appellees.
 
7

 