NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000358
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ROYCE C. GOUVEIA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-1474)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.,
with Nakamura, C.J., dissenting)
 
The jury submitted two notes: 
one announced that it
 
had reached a verdict in the manslaughter case; the other
 
expressed concern for the jurors' safety after observing a man,
 on the prosecutor's side of the courtroom, "glaring and whistling
 at defendant[.]" Without taking or reading the verdict, the
 trial court questioned the jurors about the note expressing
 concern for their safety. The jurors all indicated in their
 responses that the incident itself and their discussions
 concerning the incident did not affect their deliberations, but
 the trial court found that the jurors' responses on this point
 were not credible. Some jurors had testified that other jurors
 were worried about their safety, and one juror testified that
 other jurors' concern for their safety appeared to have an impact
 on those jurors' decisions. Over the defendant's objection, the
 trial court granted the prosecution's motion for mistrial based
 on "manifest necessity." Defendant subsequently moved to dismiss
 the indictment on double jeopardy grounds, which the trial court
 denied.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The question presented in this appeal is whether there
 
was "manifest necessity" for the trial court's declaration of a
 
mistrial, which would permit a retrial without violating the
 defendant's protection against double jeopardy. We hold that the
 trial court did not abuse its broad discretion in determining
 that manifest necessity existed for a mistrial, and therefore,
 retrial is not barred by double jeopardy. Accordingly, we affirm
 the trial court's "Order Denying Motion to Dismiss for Violation
 of Double Jeopardy."
 
BACKGROUND
 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai
'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Royce C. Gouveia (Gouveia) with recklessly causing the death of Albert Meyer (Meyer), thereby committing the offense of Manslaughter, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-702(1)(a) (Supp. 2014).
1 The charge stemmed from an 
incident in which Gouveia struck Meyer, causing Meyer to fall and hit his head on the pavement, resulting in Meyer's death. The trial was held in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit Court (Circuit Court).
2 
The following evidence was presented at trial.
 
I.
 A.
 
The State called Dash Kelly (Kelly) and Kevin Espino
 
(Espino), who were friends of Meyer and were present during the
 incident that led to Meyer's death. On the evening of
 September 27, 2012, Meyer and Espino went to visit Kelly at
 Kelly's home. According to Kelly, while the three men were
 "talking story" outside, Gouveia drove up in a car. Kelly heard
 Meyer tell Gouveia to pull over so that he could "talk story." 
Gouveia got out of his car, met Meyer in the middle of the road,
 and they exchanged a few words. Then Meyer "got hit." Kelly did
 not actually see Gouveia hit Meyer, but Kelly heard a "hit kind
 of sound" and saw Gouveia's arm appear to be finishing a
 
1
 HRS § 707-702(1)(a) provides in relevant part that "[a] person
commits the offense of manslaughter if . . . [t]he person recklessly causes
the death of another person[.]" (Formatting altered.)
 
2
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
punching-type motion. Meyer fell "straight back[,]" "was out
 
cold . . . from the top of the fall[,]" and hit his head on the
 pavement. Kelly acknowledged that he "didn't see any
 threatening behavior on the part of [Gouveia]." Kelly also
 acknowledged that he was "tweaking," i.e., "under the influence
 of ice" when he observed the incident.
 
Kelly testified that after Meyer hit the pavement,
 
Gouveia looked around, picked Meyer up from the back, and pulled
 him to the side of the road. Kelly then called the police,
 because "it was obvious that [Meyer] needed help."
 
Espino testified to a similar version of events leading
 
up to Meyer's death. Espino also did not witness Gouveia
 actually hit Meyer, but only remembered hearing a "thud" and then
 seeing "somebody standing over another person . . . laid out on
 the ground."
 
Meyer was taken to the hospital by ambulance and
 
pronounced brain dead two days later. According to Dr. Masahiko
 Kobayashi (Dr. Kobayashi), the deputy medical examiner who
 performed the autopsy, Meyer's injuries were consistent with
 Meyer "falling down and slamming the back of his head against the
 pavement[.]" The "[c]ause of death was cranial cerebral
 injuries, and . . . the injuries to the skull and brain were due
 to blunt force head trauma due to a fall."
 
B.
 
Gouveia testified that Meyer was his friend and that
 
they grew up together. However, an "incident" occurred between
 him and Meyer at Gouveia's father's house. According to Gouveia,
 Meyer offered an ice pipe to Gouveia's father and asked if he
 wanted to smoke. Gouveia did not appreciate this and told Meyer
 to leave. Meyer "seemed mad at me[,]" so Gouveia decided to stay
 away from him for a while.
 
On September 27, 2012, Gouveia was driving with two of
 
his friends when he saw Meyer, Kelly, and Espino. Meyer told
 Gouveia to pull over, which Gouveia did "[t]o [t]alk story, see
 what's up." At first, Meyer "seemed normal," but as Meyer
 approached, Gouveia could tell that Meyer "was mad at me" and
 that he was glaring. Gouveia testified that Meyer said, "in a
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
mad tone[,]" "hey, you fucka, why you tell me for leave that
 
time?" Gouveia thought that Meyer was referring to the incident
 that had occurred at Gouviea's father's house and told Meyer that
 it was "because you went offer my dad ice." Meyer then pushed
 Gouveia, which made Gouveia "mad."
 
Gouveia testified that Meyer looked like he was high on
 
drugs. Gouveia had regularly seen Meyer high on ice before, and
 when Meyer is "high on ice" "he gets aggressive" and "talks
 stupid." Gouveia became concerned that Meyer was about to attack
 and hit Gouveia. Gouveia explained, "that's why I went slap'em"
 in the face. Gouveia denied punching Meyer and said he did not
 want to hurt Meyer. Gouveia further explained that he slapped
 Meyer in the face "[t]o stop him[] [f]rom hitting me[,] to "stun
 him" so that Meyer could "wake up and realize that this is me,
 this is your friend." Gouveia testified that he did not intend
 to hurt Meyer or cause him to fall.
 
Gouveia said that Meyer fell backwards and hit his
 
head. Gouveia observed that Meyer was knocked out and was
 "shocked" and "panicked[,]" thinking Meyer was hurt. Gouveia
 then went to help Meyer by picking him up, pulling him out of the
 middle of the road, telling Espino to call 911, and trying to
 wake Meyer up by giving him water. Gouveia left the scene when
 he heard the sirens because he "got scared" and "wasn't thinking
 clearly."
 
II.
 
A.
 
After the jury had deliberated for less than a day, the
 
Circuit Court reconvened and notified the parties that it had 
received two communications from the jury. The first
 communication, signed at 2:20 p.m., stated: "We reached a
 verdict." The second communication, signed four minutes later,
 stated: "Concern. This morning on prosecutor's side of crtroom
 [sic] there was a man, shaved head, glaring and whistling at
 defendant. We have concern for our safety as jurors."
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court initially indicated that it planned
 
to take the verdict. However, after further discussion, the
 
Circuit Court, with the agreement of counsel for both the State
 and Gouveia, decided to individually question the jurors about
 their safety concerns and its effect on their deliberations. 
The Circuit Court and the parties did not know what verdict the
 jury had reached. 
B.
 
The Circuit Court and counsel proceeded to individually
 
question the jurors, with the Circuit Court making it clear that
 the jurors should not disclose the verdict that had been reached.
 The jurors who had witnessed the incident described it as
 follows:
 
--Juror 7 stated:
 
I was sitting there and I looked over as everyone was
sitting down getting situated, and I saw a him [sic]
in the second row sitting on the edge, larger build,
he had white shirt and he was just making these really
angry faces, and he wouldn't move from that spot, he
wanted to make sure that -- he was trying to get
defendant's attention, whistling "whoo-whoo-whoo"
demonstrating.
 
--Juror 4 noticed a man who appeared "hostile" and
was "glaring" in a certain direction of the
courtroom, but was not certain whether "he was
glaring at the defendant or not[.]"
 
--Juror 6 saw a man "glaring at the defendant" and
thought "he was trying to get his attention by
whistling." Juror 6 thought that the man was part
of the prosecutor's side.
 
--Juror 3 heard whistling that morning.
 
The jurors gave conflicting answers regarding when the
 
incident was discussed. Most of the jurors stated that the
 
incident was discussed before the verdict was reached, but a few
 stated that it was not discussed until after. The jurors who
 stated the incident was discussed before the verdict was reached
 differed on whether the incident was discussed at the beginning,
 middle, or end of the deliberations and on the amount of time
 they spent discussing the incident. The jurors indicated that
 some of the jurors, particularly the women, were worried about
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
their safety, expressed concern about possible retaliation, and
 
"felt slightly intimidated." Each of the jurors responded that
 the incident and any safety concern did not affect their own
 decision in the case. However, one juror stated that three or
 four other jurors participated in a conversation about the
 incident or said they saw the incident; that the jurors
 describing the incident sounded concerned, and she believed the
 conversation about the incident appeared to have an impact on
 other jurors' decisions; and that concern for their safety
 impacted other jurors' decisions. The jurors generally agreed
 that the decision to send the communication to the Circuit Court
 regarding their safety concerns came after they had reached a
 verdict.
 
III.
 
A.
 
The questioning of the jurors took place over a two day
 
period. After it was completed, the Circuit Court asked defense
 counsel whether Gouveia wanted to move for a mistrial prior to
 taking the verdict. Defense counsel responded that Gouveia
 wanted to take the verdict and did not want to move for a
 mistrial. The State then moved for a mistrial based on manifest
 necessity.
 
In support of the State's motion, the deputy prosecutor
 
argued that there were three jurors who indicated that the
 incident raising the jurors' safety concerns came up early in the
 deliberations, that one juror stated the discussion lasted for
 about ten minutes, and that another juror believed it had an
 impact on other jurors' decision or deliberation process. In
 addition, the deputy prosecutor pointed out that,
 
this [case] did have an issue of first aggressor, and, you
know, it's unclear whether what they saw in the gallery that
they did associate with the prosecution and the decedent
side, whether that had any impact on them as to whether they
thought maybe it lended [sic] more credibility to
Mr. Gouveia's testimony as he testified, again, considering
things that are not –- that were not presented as part of
the evidence.
 
The deputy prosecutor argued that the verdict had been tainted by
 
extraneous inappropriate circumstances and requested that the
 Circuit Court declare a mistrial based on manifest necessity.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7In response, defense counsel argued that the jurors
were instructed by the court to make a decision solely based on
the evidence, that jurors are presumed to follow instructions,and that every single juror stated that the discussion of theincident had no impact on his or her decision.  Defense counselasserted there was no "manifest necessity" to justify thedeclaration of a mistrial.
After considering counsel's arguments, the Circuit
Court orally granted the State's motion for a mistrial and
explained its reasoning as follows:
Well, it's pretty clear to the court what everybody thinks
the verdict is based on your arguments and your motions and
lack of such.  I don't know what the verdict is.  I honestly
literally don't know what the verdict is.  There's no way I
could know.  We haven't taken the verdict yet.  And, anyway,
I think it's immaterial.  I think it's literally immaterial
to this discussion, this issue in my ruling here.  And it's
a really, really close ruling as far as I'm concerned.  I
think that's probably clear from what I've -- you know, this
discussion right now.  I mean, really, it's difficult, very
difficult, but of course nobody forced me.  
You know, the bottom line to me, and it's my decision,
and as I say, [defense counsel], it could be proved wrong in
the fullness of time, but I find it difficult, I really do,
I find it difficult to really believe when I, you know,
apply my reason and common sense to this that at least some
of these jurors have this, what strikes me as a really
serious concern for their personal safety and it came up
according to, at least as I count, four or five of them, it
came up, was one of the first things, one of the first
things, one of the first topics of discussion when they got
back in the room and started deliberating the case. 
Somebody brought it up and they started talking about it. 
It frankly beggars [sic] my reason and common sense that it
would have no bearing on the deliberations in this case and
therefore the verdict.
I'm going to grant the State's motion for mistrial.
I'm going to find there's manifest necessity for such based
on what I said and all the -- and everything else that's
been put on the record, including my questions to counsel.
The verdict's going to be sealed for future purposes,
if any, but obviously we're not going to take the verdict. 
I'm declaring a mistrial and I'm finding manifest necessity
for that, because I don't think there's anything short of a
mistrial that's going -- that can cure it.  The verdict's
tainted, in my view, based on my findings.
And to be explicit about it, as the finder of fact, I
don't find it credible that all 12 of these people despite
the answer they gave me about no impact on their decision, I
think at least one, and probably more than one of them,
probably the three or four women according to [Juror 9], and
that's neither here nor there except he brought it up, who
had these serious concerns about their safety.  It really
beggars [sic] my reason and common sense that it could not NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
have had any impact on their deliberations and decision in
this case.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
B.
 
On October 22, 2013, the Circuit Court filed its
 
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting State's
 
Oral Motion for Mistrial Based on Manifest Necessity."
 
The Circuit Court made the following pertinent findings
 
of fact (FOF):
 
7.	 The Court questioned the jurors individually and both
counsel for the State and for Defendant were given
adequate opportunity to question each juror regarding
Communication No.2 [(the communication expressing the
jurors' safety concerns)].
 
8.	 Four jurors witnessed an individual seated on the
prosecutor's side of the courtroom whistling and/or
glaring at Defendant ("incident") prior to commencing
deliberation.
 
9.	 Seven of the jurors indicated discussion of the
incident occurred before the verdict, ranging from
within ten minutes of commencing deliberation to the
end of deliberation. At least four of these seven
 jurors indicated discussion of the incident occurred
at the beginning of deliberations, specifically that
it was one of the first topics discussed.
 
10.	 During the discussion of the incident prior to
verdict, the jurors who actually observed the incident
communicated to the other jurors fear for their own
safety.
 
11.	 Some of the juror answers regarding Communication No.2
and the incident included the following:
 
a.	 Some jurors were worried about
retaliation;
 
b.	 The unidentified male's look appeared
hostile during the incident;
 
c.
	 Some jurors were concerned;
 
d.	 Some jurors felt intimidated; and
 
e.	 The incident impacted other jurors'
decisions.
 
12.
	 Although all twelve jurors indicated that neither the
incident itself nor the discussion regarding the
incident during the deliberations affected their own
decision, at least one juror indicated that the
incident appeared to have impacted the deliberation
process and decision.
 
13.	 The incident was not part of the evidence in the case
at hand.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
14.	 The verdict was never taken for this case. At no
 
point during the proceedings did the Court take, read
or otherwise get any indication of the jury's verdict.
 
15.	 The Court finds that the jurors' statements that the
incident did not affect their decision making process
and/or deliberations are not credible as evidenced by
the plain language of Communication No.2 and answers
of the voir dire of each individual juror.
 
16.	 The Court further finds that the concern for personal
safety as expressed by the jurors had an impact on the
jurors' decisions based on the totality of the
circumstances present and thus its effect on the
subsequent verdict was not harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt.
 
The Circuit Court made the following pertinent
 
conclusions of law (COL):
 
3.	 "The sixth amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, section 14 of the Hawai' i Constitution 
guarantee the criminally accused a fair trial by animpartial jury. If any juror was not impartial, a newtrial must be granted. However, not all jurormisconduct necessarily dictates the granting of a newtrial. A new trial will not be granted if it can beshown that the jury could not have been influenced bythe alleged misconduct." (Emphasis added) State v. Kim, 103 Hawai' i 285, 290-91, 81 P.3d 1200, 1205-06
(2003); see State v. Gabalis, 83 Hawai' i 40, 45, 924
P.2d 534, 539 (1996). 
4.	 "Where the trial court does determine that such alleged deprivation is of a nature which couldsubstantially prejudice the . . . right to a fairtrial, a rebuttable presumption of prejudice israised. The trial judge is then duty bound to furtherinvestigate the totality of circumstances surroundingthe alleged deprivation to determine its impact onjury impartiality. The standard to be applied inovercoming such a presumption is that the allegeddeprivation must be proved harmless beyond areasonable doubt." State v. Bailey, 126 Hawai' i 383,
400, 271 P.3d 1142, 1159 (2012); see Furutani, 76Hawai'i at 177, 873 P.2d at 56. 
5.	 Communication No.2 raised the concern of the Court and
 both counsel that the incident may have substantially
prejudiced the right to a fair trial. After further
 investigating the totality of circumstances
surrounding Communication No.2, the Court concluded at
least some of the jurors were not credible, although
explicitly indicated they were not lying. The Court's
 concern is that although all twelve jurors unanimously
agreed to release Communication No. 2, no juror
admitted that the incident affected their own decision
 making process. Furthermore, reason and common sense
dictates that the incident did have an effect on the
 deliberations hence the impartiality of the jurors,
which is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt[.] 
6.	 Communication No.2 and the underlying incident could
not be proven harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
7.	 "[T]he trial court must grant a motion for new trial
if any member (or members) of the jury was notimpartial; failure to do so necessarily constitutes anabuse of discretion." State v. Sugiyama, 71 Hawai' i 
389, 391, 791 P.2d 1266, 1267 (1990). 
8.	 Under the totality of the circumstances in light of
the plain language of Communication No. 2 and the voir
dire of the individual jurors, the Court finds that
the jury was not impartial in their deliberation and
decision-making process. Based on the foregoing,
there is no other remedy short of a mistrial to cure
the issue at hand as neither a continuance nor a
 further jury instruction would appropriately address
the issue of an impartial jury and its subsequent
tainted verdict.
 
9.	 "Even in the absence of a defendant's express orimplied consent to a mistrial, principles of doublejeopardy pose no bar to reprosecution after dischargeof a jury if there was a manifest necessity for themistrial, or the ends of public justice wouldotherwise be defeated. Manifest necessity is definedas a sudden and overwhelming emergency beyond [the]control of [the] court and unforeseeable[, undercircumstances in which] it becomes no longer possibleto conduct [the] trial or to reach a fair result basedupon the evidence." State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai' i 128,
143, 938 P.2d 559, 574 (1997); State v. Minn, 79Hawai'i 461, 903 P.2d 1282 (1995). 
10.	 The incident underlying Communication No.2 was both
beyond the court's control and unforeseeable.
Accordingly, based on Communication No.2, and the
totality of the circumstances, there is manifest
necessity for a mistrial.
 
(Some bracketed material added.)
 
IV.
 
Gouveia subsequently moved for an order dismissing the
 
indictment on double jeopardy grounds. The Circuit Court denied
 
the motion and on December 19, 2013, issued its "Order Denying
 Motion to Dismiss for Violation of Double Jeopardy." This appeal
 followed. For purposes of the appeal, this court unsealed the
 verdict. The verdict was not guilty.
 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, Gouveia argues that (1) the Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion in declaring a mistrial because "manifest
 necessity" was not present in the instant case; and (2)
 reprosecution is barred by double jeopardy. As explained below,
 we disagree.
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I.
 
The Double Jeopardy clause of the Fifth Amendment 
protects a defendant from being tried multiple times for the same 
criminal offense and is applicable to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment. Benton v. Maryland, 395 U.S. 784, 794 
(1969). The Hawai
'i Constitution provides double jeopardy 
protection against multiple trials through an analogous clause. See Haw. Const. art. I, § 10. Jeopardy attaches when the jury is empaneled and sworn. State v. Moriwake, 65 Haw. 47, 51, 647 P.2d 
705, 709 (1982). 
When a trial is terminated over the objection of the 
defendant, the test for lifting the double jeopardy bar to a second trial is the "manifest necessity" standard. Arizona v. 
Washington, 434 U.S. 497, 504 (1978). "A mistrial is properly declared and retrial is not barred by the defendant's right against double jeopardy where the defendant consented to the mistrial or there was manifest necessity for the mistrial." State v. Wilmer, 97 Hawai
'i 238, 242-43, 35 P.3d 755, 759-60 
(2001) (emphasis added). As explained by the United States Supreme Court, 
[b]ecause of the variety of circumstances that may make it
necessary to discharge a jury before a trial is concluded,
and because those circumstances do not invariably create
unfairness to the accused, his valued right to have the
trial concluded by a particular tribunal is sometimes
subordinate to the public interest in affording the
prosecutor one full and fair opportunity to present his
evidence to an impartial jury.
 
Washington, 434 U.S. at 505.
 
"Manifest necessity is defined as circumstances in 
which it becomes no longer possible to conduct the trial or to 
reach a fair result based upon the evidence." Wilmer, 97 Hawai 'i 
at 244, 35 P.3d at 761 (citation, internal quotation marks, and ellipsis omitted). With respect to a trial court's decision regarding the existence of manifest necessity and appellate review of such decision, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has stated: 
There are especially compelling reasons for allowing a trial
judge to exercise broad discretion in deciding whether or
not manifest necessity exists. Thus, great deference will
be given to the trial court when it finds manifest
necessity. Because manifest necessity is a high standard
not to be declared lightly, a trial judge should record his
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
or her reasons for declaring a mistrial and include the
reasons for finding manifest necessity.
 
State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai 'i 128, 143, 938 P.2d 559, 574 (1997) 
(format altered; emphasis added) (quoting State v. Lam, 75 Haw. 
195, 205, 857 P.2d 585, 591 (1993)). When examining the record for evidence of manifest necessity, we must determine whether the trial court sufficiently considered less severe alternatives available, balancing the defendant's rights against the public interest. State v. Minn, 79 Hawai
'i 461, 465, 903 P.2d 1282, 
1286 (1995). 
II.
 
In State v. Napulou, 85 Hawai 'i 49, 936 P.2d 1297 (App. 
1997), this court addressed a situation similar to the instant case and articulated a procedure that the trial court should follow in deciding whether to declare a mistrial based on possible juror tainting by outside influences. In Napulou, on the second day of jury deliberations, the court received a communication written by two of the jurors, which read as follows: 
Some jurors have noticed members of Napulou's family
following them downstairs and toward the car garage. If a
 guilty verdict is given, could there be danger to some of us
or has some arrangement been made for protection. (More
than one juror)
 
Napulou, 85 Hawai 'i at 51-52, 936 P.2d at 1299-1300 (brackets 
omitted). 
The court then conducted a voir dire of each juror to
 
determine whether, among other things, "the incidents and/or the
 
discussion affected the ability of any juror to be fair and
 impartial, and whether the jurors could consider only the
 evidence and the law and deliberate fully and fairly." Id. at
 
52, 936 P.2d at 1300. All of the jurors responded that they
 could continue to deliberate on the evidence fairly and
 impartially, and the trial court found the jurors to be credible. 
Id. at 54, 56, 936 P.2d at 1302, 1304. Nevertheless, defense
 counsel moved for a mistrial, which the trial court denied. Id.
 
at 54, 936 P.2d at 1302. The jury subsequently found Napulou
 guilty of attempted second-degree murder and other offenses. Id.
 
at 51, 936 P.2d at 1299.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On appeal, Napulou argued that
 
because one or more jurors improperly commented or implied
that Napulou's family members might have followed them to
the parking area, or that Napulou's family might pose a
danger to jurors if they found Napulou guilty, the jury was
tainted, resulting in substantial prejudice to Napulou's
right to a fair and impartial jury.
 
Id. at 55, 936 P.2d at 1303. Napulou further argued that the
 
jurors' responses when questioned about the communication
 suggested that one or more jurors was lying or concealing
 information about matters raised in the communication, and that
 such jurors could be equally dishonest about remaining fair and
 impartial. Id.
 
In evaluating Napulou's claims, this court stated that
 
when a trial court learns that the jury has been exposed to an
 outside influence that might jeopardize a defendant's right to a
 fair trial, "the initial step for the trial court to take . . .
 is to determine whether the nature of the [outside influence]
 rises to the level of being substantially prejudicial." Id. at
 
55, 936 P.2d at 1303 (citation omitted and block formate
 altered). We further stated:
 
Where the trial court does determine that such influence is
 
of a nature which could substantially prejudice the
defendant's right to a fair trial, a rebuttable presumption
of prejudice is raised. The trial judge is then duty bound
to further investigate the totality of circumstances
surrounding the outside influence to determine its impact on
jury impartiality. The standard to be applied in overcoming
such a presumption is that the outside influence on the jury
must be proven harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The
 trial court, in its investigation of the totality of
circumstances, should include individual examination of
potentially tainted jurors, outside the presence of the
other jurors, to determine the influence, if any, of the
extraneous matters.
 
Id. at 55-56, 936 P.2d at 1303-04.
 
We concluded that the trial court had proceeded
 
properly when confronted with the jury's communication and that
 
its findings were not clearly erroneous. Id. at 56, 936 P.2d at
 
1304. We stated that "[t]he trial judge, as the trier of fact,
 was empowered to assess the credibility of the jurors." Id. We
 
further stated that the record supported the conclusion that the
 jurors' concerns were in the abstract rather than the specific,
 that the panel could serve as impartial jurors, and that the
 effect of any jurors' improper comments was harmless beyond a
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reasonable doubt. Id. Accordingly, we held the trial court did
 
not abuse its discretion in denying Napulou's motion for a
 
mistrial. Id.
 
III.
 
In the instant case, both parties agree that the
 
Circuit Court undertook the proper procedure3
 when it
individually questioned each juror regarding Communication No. 2. 
Based on this questioning, the Circuit Court found:
 
9.	 Seven of the jurors indicated discussion of the
incident occurred before the verdict, ranging from
within ten minutes of commencing deliberation to the
end of deliberation. At least four of these seven
 jurors indicated discussion of the incident occurred
at the beginning of deliberations, specifically that
it was one of the first topics discussed.
 
10.	 During the discussion of the incident prior to
verdict, the jurors who actually observed the incident
communicated to the other jurors fear for their own
safety.
 
11.	 Some of the juror answers regarding Communication
No. 2 and the incident included the following:
 
a.	 Some jurors were worried about
retaliation;
 
b.	 The unidentified male's look appeared
hostile during the incident;
 
c.	 Some jurors were concerned;
 
d.	 Some jurors felt intimidated; and
 
3 Although not raised by either party, we note that Hawaii Rules of
Evidence (HRE) Rule 606(b) provides:
 
(b) Inquiry into validity of verdict or indictment.
Upon an inquiry into the validity of a verdict or
indictment, a juror may not testify concerning the effect of
anything upon the juror's or any other juror's mind or
emotions as influencing the juror to assent to or dissent
from the verdict or indictment or concerning the juror's
mental processes in connection therewith. Nor may the
juror's affidavit or evidence of any statement by the juror
indicating an effect of this kind be received.
 
However, even if the Circuit Court should not have permitted the
jurors to be questioned, and should not have considered their testimony, about
whether the incident affected their decision under HRE Rule 606(b), Gouveia
did not object to this questioning or the Circuit Court's consideration of the
jurors' testimony regarding whether the incident affected their decision.
Indeed, in the Circuit Court and on appeal, Gouveia relies on the jurors'
testimony that the incident did not affect their own decision as the basis for
arguing that the Circuit Court erred in determining that there was manifest
necessity for a mistrial. We therefore conclude that Gouveia has waived any
claim of error based on HRE Rule 606(b).
 
14
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
e.	 The incident impacted other jurors'
decisions.
 
Gouveia did not challenge these findings on appeal and 
they are therefore binding on this court. See Bremer v. Weeks, 
104 Hawai 'i 43, 63, 85 P.3d 150, 170 (2004). In any event, there 
was substantial evidence in the record to support these findings, 
and we conclude that they are not clearly erroneous. 
The focus of Gouveia's appeal is his challenge to the
 
Circuit Court's finding that the jurors' statements that the
 incident did not affect their decisionmaking process and/or their
 deliberations were not credible. Gouveia contends that "[a]ll
 twelve jurors informed the trial court that his or her individual
 decision was not influenced by the incident in court or the
 discussion of it. There was no evidence to the contrary."
 
The Circuit Court, as the trier of fact on this issue, 
"was empowered to assess the credibility of the jurors." See 
Napulou, 85 Hawai
'i at 56, 936 P.2d at 1304. The Circuit Court 
found: 
12.	 Although all twelve jurors indicated that neither the
incident itself nor the discussion regarding the
incident during the deliberations affected their own
decision, at least one juror indicated that the
incident appeared to have impacted the deliberation

process and decision. [ 4]
. . . .

 
15.	 The Court finds that the jurors' statements that the
incident did not affect their decisionmaking process
and/or deliberations are not credible as evidenced by
the plain language of Communication No. 2 and answers
of the voir dire of each individual juror.
 
"An appellate court will not pass upon the trial 
judge's decisions with respect to the credibility of witnesses 
and the weight of the evidence, because this is the province of the trial judge." State v. Barros, 105 Hawai
'i 160, 170, 95 P.3d 
14, 24 (App. 2004) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Having presided over the trial and the questioning of the jurors, the Circuit Court was in a better position than this court to assess the credibility of the jurors, understand the 
4
 The record reflects that in response to questioning, Juror 11
specifically stated that the jurors describing the incident sounded concerned,
and she believed that this concern for their safety impacted their decision.
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
dynamics of the trial process in this case, and evaluate the 
effect that the external incident had on the jurors' deliberations. See Quitog, 85 Hawai
'i at 143, 938 P.2d at 574 
("There are especially compelling reasons for allowing a trial judge to exercise broad discretion in deciding whether or not manifest necessity exists.") (citation omitted). In light of the Circuit Court's credibility findings, which we decline to overturn, and under the circumstances presented in this case, we cannot say that the Circuit Court abused its broad discretion in determining that manifest necessity existed for a mistrial. Id.
5 
IV.
 
Gouveia argues that the Circuit Court erroneously 
denied his motion to dismiss the indictment, which he sought on double jeopardy grounds. This argument fails in light of our conclusion that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in finding manifest necessity for a mistrial. When a trial court declares a mistrial that is supported by a proper finding of manifest necessity, "retrial is not barred by the defendant's right against double jeopardy[.]" Wilmer, 97 Hawai
'i at 242-43, 
35 P.3d at 759-60. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit Court
 
of the First Circuit's "Order Denying Motion to Dismiss for
 Violation of Double Jeopardy."
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, April 30, 2015. 
Keith S. Shigetomi,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Associate Judge
Donn Fudo,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,

City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appeellee. Associate Judge
 
5
 With respect to whether options less severe than a mistrial were
available, the Circuit Court concluded that "neither a continuance nor a
further jury instruction would appropriately address the issue of an impartial
jury and its subsequent tainted verdict." Although Gouveia asserts that the
Circuit Court erred in granting a mistrial, he did not argue in the Circuit
Court, and does not argue on appeal, that the Circuit Court erred in failing
to consider options less severe than a mistrial. We have no basis for
 concluding that the Circuit Court erred in failing to use options less severe
than a mistrial. 
16
 