NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-21-0000339 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
S
TATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
N
ICHOLAS ABARCAR, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
(CR. NO. 
3CPC-20-0000734) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and Nakasone, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Nicholas Abarcar (Abarcar), appeals 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment), filed on 
May 17, 2021 by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit 
Court).  In accordance with a plea agreement with Plaintiff-
Appellee State of Hawai# i (State), Abarcar pled guilty to 
Negligent Homicide in the Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-703(1), and three counts of 
Negligent Injury in the Second Degree, in violation of HRS § 707-
706(1). 21
1 The Honorable Robert D.S. Kim presided. 
2 This case arose out of a fatal head-on collision that occurred on 
November 10, 2019, on Queen Ka#ahumanu Highway, in Kailua-Kona, Hawai #i Island,
between Abarcar's vehicle and a vehicle driven by the decedent, Cassandra
Ellis (Decedent ). Abarcar was charged with manslaughter, first-degree and
second-degree negligent homicide against Decedent; two counts of first-degreenegligent injury, and one count of second-degree negligent injury againstDecedent's two daughters and one of her daughter's friends; and one count ofoperating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant. Pursuant to the plea agreement, three of the counts were dismissed with prejudice. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Abarcar contends the Circuit Court "plainly 
and manifestly abused its discretion" by disregarding the 
sentencing factors under HRS § 706-606,  resulting in a sentence 
that was "unduly harsh, violating [Abarcar's] substantial right to be punished appropriately and justly." 3
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration tothe arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve Abarcar's point of error as follows, and affirm.  
Abarcar argues that the Circuit Court disregarded the 
HRS § 706-606 factors by "relying upon extraneous experiences andnotions." Abarcar asserts that "there were a variety of dispositions available" pursuant to HRS §§ 706-605  and 706-
4 
3 HRS § 706-606 (2014), entitled "Factors to be considered in
imposing a sentence," provides: 
The court, in determining the particular sentence to
be imposed, shall consider: 
(1) The nature and circumstances of the offense and 
the history and characteristics of thedefendant; 
(2) The need for the sentence imposed; 
(a) To reflect the seriousness of the offense,
to promote respect for law, and to providejust punishment for the offense; 
(b) To afford adequate deterrence to criminalconduct; 
(c) To protect the public from further crimesof the defendant; and 
(d) To provide the defendant with needededucational or vocational training,medical care, or other correctionaltreatment in the most effective manner; 
(3) The kinds of sentences available; and 
(4) The need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities among defendants with similarrecords who have been found guilty of similarconduct. 
4 HRS § 706-605 (2014), entitled "Authorized disposition of
convicted defendants," sets forth the authorized dispositions for criminaloffenses, such as sentences for probation, payment of a fine, imprisonment,and performance of community service. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
605.1,5 but the Circuit Court's statements at the sentencing 
hearing indicated that Arbacar's sentence was "not based solely 
on applying HRS Chapter 706." Abarcar also argues that the punishment imposed upon him was contrary to the Presentence Diagnosis and Report (PSI Report), and focused on retribution and 
deterrence, leading to Abarcar's "disparate treatment at 
sentencing." 
We review a sentencing court's imposition of sentence 
for an abuse of discretion. 
A sentencing judge generally has broad discretion in
imposing a sentence. The applicable standard of review for
sentencing or resentencing matters is whether the courtcommitted plain and manifest abuse of discretion in itsdecision. Factors which indicate a plain and manifest abuseof discretion are arbitrary or capricious action by thejudge and a rigid refusal to consider the defendant'scontentions. And, generally, to constitute an abuse it mustappear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds of reasonor disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to thesubstantial detriment of a party litigant. 
State v. Mundon , 121 Hawai#i 339, 349, 219 P.3d 1126, 1136 (2009) 
(quoting 
State v. Kahapea
, 111 Hawai#i 267, 278, 141 P.3d 440, 
451 (2006)). "The weight to be given the factors set forth in 
HRS § 706-606 in imposing sentence is a matter generally left to the discretion of the sentencing court, taking into consideration the circumstances of each case." 
State v. Akana
, 10 Haw. App. 
381, 386, 876 P.2d 1331, 1334 (1994). A sentencing court "is not required to articulate and explain its conclusions with respect to every factor listed in HRS § 706-606. Rather, it is presumed that a sentencing court will have considered all factors before imposing concurrent or consecutive terms of imprisonment under HRS § 706-606." Lewi v. State
, 145 Hawai#i 333, 350-51, 452 P.3d 
330, 347-48 (2019) (quoting 
State v. Kong
, 131 Hawai#i 94, 102, 
315 P.3d 720, 728 (2013) (internal quotation marks and footnote omitted) (emphasis added)). 
5 HRS § 706-605.1 (2014 & Supp. 2016), entitled "Intermediate
sanctions; eligibility; criteria and conditions," sets forth alternative,
intermediate sanctions, such as house arrest, drug court programs, residentialprograms, and other similar programs. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Here, the record reflects that at the May 17, 2021 
sentencing, the Circuit Court indicated that it had reviewed the 
PSI Report, the records and files of the case, and stated that it considered "all the factors" in its review. The PSI Report contained the pre-sentence investigator's review of the HRS § 706-606 sentencing factors, and detailed letters from both the prosecutor and Abarcar's trial counsel addressing all of the factors. The PSI Report also included victim impact statements, as well as approximately 50 letters for Abarcar and 14 letters for the victims, from their respective families, friends, and community members. The Circuit Court stated that it had "reviewed every letter from both sides." 
At sentencing, the State argued for the maximum 
sentence of five years imprisonment on the Negligent Homicide offense concurrent with the Negligent Injury offenses because of Abarcar's "decision making process he took that day, along with his prior DUI." Abarcar's counsel referenced and summarized his argument "[a]pplying the factors under 706-606" as detailed in the report, and requested a sentence of probation with community service, and if the court felt necessary, house arrest, electronic monitoring or "even intermittent jail if the Court believes that incarceration is appropriate[.]" 
The Circuit Court imposed sentence as follows: 
THE COURT: Okay. So the Court has reviewed the 
presentence report, I've reviewed all the letters, all the
attachments. I'm not aware of any media stories that saidwhatever you're referring to. I did not know of it. I did not consider it. The Court based my review on the
presentence report and the records and files of this case. 
There is a lot of attention to this case by the
respective families. The question when I came into courtthis morning as a judge was, what is justice. Cause that's why we're here. What is justice. On the one side I'm beingasked to send Mr. Abarcar to prison. On the other side I'm being asked to consider his record and to give him probationand community service and maybe intermittent jail. 
This is my analysis of the case. In the blink of an 
eye someone is dead. [Decedent] died horribly in front ofher daughters. Her two-year-old daughter [ ] wonders whymom is gone. I can only conclude that this tragedy wassenseless. It was negligence. But it was senseless. There's no –- no rhyme or reason. 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Looking at the radio to attempt to sink [sic] a phone
while driving, a lot of young people do that. You drive on 
the road, you see them. Adults do it too. I drive, I livein the community, I see people on their phones. I see them looking down, jamming on their brakes when they don't payattention. The overriding thing about this tragedy is thatit was completely avoidable. It was completely avoidableand it was senseless and it caused such destruction to the [Decedent's] family as well as the Abarcar family. 
And so based upon my review, considering all the
factors
, it is the judgment and conviction of the Court as
follows as to the charges to which Defendant pled.Negligent Homicide in the Second Degree, Count Three. Count Four, Negligent Injury in the Second Degree, lesser includedoffense. Count Five, Negligent Injury in the Second Degree,lesser included offense. And Count Six, Negligent Injury inthe Second Degree. Defendant is convicted and found guiltyof the charges to which Defendant pled. 
It is the judgment and sentence of the Court as
follow
s. Defendant is committed to the custody of the
Director of the Department of Public Safety forincarceration for an indeterminate period of five years asto Count Three. One year as to Counts Four, Five, and Sixwith credit for any and all time served. Terms of incarceration shall run concurrent as to all counts. 
. . . . 
Defendant entered the pleas indicated, it is adjudged
that the Defendant has been convicted of and is guilty ofthe offense stated above, committed in the manner and setforth in the charge. It is further ordered that bail conditions are cancelled. 
You're going to spend some time in prison. 
You're 
young, you're going to get out, you have promise. But what you did, you have to pay the price. 
And this is a warning to all who get distracted of
what can happen. And it's a message not only to you but tothe community as to –- pay attention, our roads, we alldrive on the roads. 
[Decedent] had nothing but happiness followed by
death. 
Mittimus forthwith. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Your Honor, would the Court
entertain a motion to stay the sentence pending appeal? 
THE COURT: No. Denied. 
(Emphases added). 
The record reflects that the Circuit Court considered 
the "nature and circumstances of the offense[s]" under subsection 
(1) of HRS § 706-606, by noting the tragic nature of the case, the fact that someone died, and how the Decedent "died horribly 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in front of her daughters." The Circuit Court also considered 
the "history and characteristics" of Abarcar under subsection (1), by noting that it was "being asked to consider his record and to give him probation . . . ." The Court noted the "kinds of sentences available" to it under subsection (3), and expressed that it was weighing two different sentencing options from the opposing sides: prison or "probation and community service and maybe intermittent jail." Under HRS § 706-606(2)(a) and (2)(b), the Circuit Court considered the need for the sentence imposed to reflect the "seriousness of the offense[s]," to "provide just punishment," and to afford deterrence, by noting the seriousness of the inattentive driving conduct, that others in the community drove in a similarly distracted manner, and stating that the Court had contemplated "[w]hat is justice" in light of the "destruction to the [Decedent's] family[.]" 
Although the Circuit Court did not expressly articulate 
or address every HRS § 706-606 sentencing factor or explain its conclusions as to every factor, it was "not required" to do so. Lewi
, 145 Hawai#i at 350-51, 452 P.3d at 347-48. The Circuit 
Court is presumed to have considered all of the factors before imposing its sentence. 
See id. The record reflects that the 
Court considered "all the factors," and that it had reviewed the PSI Report that contained extensive HRS § 706-606 factor-specific written argument from both sides. 
We cannot conclude from this 
record that the Circuit Court committed "plain and manifest" abuse of its broad sentencing discretion when it sentenced Abarcar to concurrent terms of imprisonment, and rejected a sentence of probation. Mundon
, 121 Hawai#i at 349, 219 P.3d at 
1136. In deciding in favor of the more severe penalty of imprisonment for Abarcar, the record does not reflect that the Court was "arbitrary or capricious" or expressed a "rigid refusal" to consider Abarcar's mitigating arguments. 
Id.
; see 
Kahapea
, 111 Hawai#i at 282, 141 P.3d at 455 ("While stern, the 
circuit court's sentence furthers the statutory penological goals of retribution, incapacitation, and deterrence and does not 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reflect 'arbitrary or capricious action' or 'a rigid refusal to 
consider the defendant's contentions.'") (citation omitted)). 
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment of Conviction 
and Sentence, filed on May 17, 2021 by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit, is affirmed. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai#i, February 23, 2022. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Lisa M. Ginoza
Chief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Karen T. Nakasone
Associate JudgeJason R. Kwiat (Schlueter, Kwiat & Kennedy)for Defendant-Appellant 
Stephen L. Frye
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney County of 
Hawai#i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee 
7 