      
  
        
        
           
       
        
       
         
      NOT  FOR  PUBLICATION  IN  WEST'S  HAWAI I  REPORTS  AND  P ACIFIC  REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000702 17-FEB-2026 08:10 AM Dkt. 59 SO 
NO.  CAAP-23-0000702 
IN  THE  INTERMEDIATE   COURT  OF  APPEALS 
OF  THE  STATE  OF  HAWAI I 
D.S.,  Petitioner-Appellant,  v. 
W.G.,  Respondent-Appellee 
APPEAL  FROM  THE  FAMILY  COURT  OF  THE  THIRD  CIRCUIT 
(CASE  NO.  3FDA-23-0001036) 
SUMMARY   DISPOSITION   ORDER 
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge,
 Leonard and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant   DS  (DS)  appeals   from  the  Family  
Court  of  the  Third  Circuit's   (Family  Court) October   30,  2023 
order  denying   DS's  Petition   for  an  Order  for  Protection  on  Behalf 
of  Family  or  Household  Members  [(Petition  for  Protection )]  (Order 
Denying  Petition )  entered  in  favor  of  Respondent-Appellee  WG 
(WG).  1 
DS raises
 four points of error, contending that the 
Family Court erred in denying the Petition for Protection 
because: (1) the Family Court failed to construe the pro se 
Petition for Protection liberally to facilitate access to 
justice; (2) the Petition for Protection complies with the 
factual and statutory requirements of Hawaii Revised Statutes 
(HRS) chapter 586; (3) res judicata was not applicable because 
1 The Honorable Jeffrey W. Ng presided.          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
        
        
           
    
        
         
         
      
          
           
         
         
        
          
        
         
          
        
         
        
         
          
        
         
        
       
      
        
        
       the allegations stated in the Petition for Protection clearly 
reference acts of harassment, stalking, and coercive control that 
occurred in 2023; and (4) no good cause was shown to justify 
denying the Petition for Protection. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, we resolve DS's 
points of error as follows: 
(1) DS argues that the Family Court failed to construe 
her pro se petition liberally. However, DS does not point to 
anything in the record to support this particular contention. 
While the Family Court may have misapprehended, in part, DS's 
rationale for reciting allegations of past abuse, which were 
addressed in a prior proceeding, it appears that the Family Court 
recognized DS's arguments that there were abusive incidents in 
2023, as the court concluded that "[a]llegations do not establish 
a basis for relief under H.R.S. Chapter 586 and issues were 
litigated in 3DA221000050" (emphasis added). Accordingly, we 
conclude that the first point of error is without merit. 
(2-4) DS argues that the Petition for Protection 
satisfied the factual and legal requirements of HRS chapter 586 
(2018; Supp. 2021). HRS § 586-4 (2018) states, in pertinent 
part: 
§ 586-4 Temporary restraining order. (a) Upon 
petition to a family court judge, an ex parte temporary 
restraining order may be granted without notice to restrain 
either or both parties from contacting, threatening, or 
physically abusing each other, notwithstanding that a 
complaint for annulment, divorce, or separation has not been 
filed[.] 
   . . . . 
(c
) The family court judge may issue the ex parte 
temporary restraining order orally, if the person being 
2          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
          
           
          
          
        
          
       
         
         
          
          
         
          
     
        
      
      
         
         
          
       
        
     
       
   
        
     
       
     
   
  
    
 
        
     
     
      
     
       
   restrained is present in court. The order shall state that 
there is probable cause to believe that a past act or acts 
of abuse have occurred, or that threats of abuse make it 
probable that acts of abuse may be imminent. The order 
further shall state that the temporary restraining order is 
necessary for the purposes of: preventing acts of abuse or 
preventing a recurrence of actual domestic abuse and 
ensuring a period of separation of the parties involved. 
The order shall also describe in reasonable detail the act 
or acts sought to be restrained. Where necessary, the order 
may require either or both of the parties involved to leave 
the premises during the period of the order; may also 
restrain the party or parties to whom it is directed from 
contacting, threatening, or physically abusing the 
applicant's family or household members; and may enjoin or 
restrain both parties from taking, concealing, removing, 
threatening, physically abusing, or otherwise disposing of 
any animal identified to the court as belonging to a 
household, until further order of the court. The order 
shall not only be binding upon the parties to the action, 
but also upon their officers, agents, servants, employees, 
attorneys, or any other persons in active concert or 
participation with them. . . . 
Relevant definitions related to abuse under HRS chapter 
586 include the following: 
§ 586-1 Definitions . As used in this chapter: 
"Coercive  control"  means  a  pattern  of  threatening, 
humiliating,  or  intimidating  actions,  which  may  include 
assaults,  or  other  abuse  that  is  used  to  harm,  punish,  or 
frighten  an  individual.   "Coercive  control"  includes  a 
pattern  of  behavior  that  seeks  to  take  away  the  individual's 
liberty  or  freedom  and  strip  away  the  individual's  sense  of 
self,  including  bodily  integrity  and  human  rights,  whereby 
the  "coercive  control"  is  designed  to  make  an  individual 
dependent  by  isolating  them  from  support,  exploiting  them, 
depriving  them  of  independence,  and  regulating  their 
everyday  behavior  including: 
(1
) Isolating the individual from friends and 
family; 
(2) Controlling how much money is accessible to the 
individual and how it is spent; 
(3) Monitoring the individual's activities, 
communications, and movements; 
(4) Name-calling, degradation, and demeaning the 
individual frequently; 
(5) Threatening to harm or kill the individual or a 
child or relative of the individual; 
(6) Threatening to publish information or make 
reports to the police or the authorities; 
(7) Damaging property or household goods; and 
(8) Forcing the individual to take part in criminal 
activity or child abuse. 
3    . . . .          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
  
      
      
    
     
     
       
        
       
       
      
        
      
       
         
      
         
         
            
        
       
        
          
         
         
        
            
          
            
           
            
          
          
             
         "Domestic abuse" means: 
(1) Physical harm, bodily injury, assault, or the 
threat of imminent physical harm, bodily injury, 
or assault, extreme psychological abuse, 
coercive control, or malicious property damage 
between family or household members; or 
(2) Any act which would constitute an offense under 
section 709-906, or under part V or VI of 
chapter 707 committed against a minor family or 
household member by an adult family or household 
member. 
"Extreme psychological abuse" means an intentional or 
knowing course of conduct directed at an individual that 
seriously alarms or disturbs consistently or continually 
bothers the individual, and that serves no legitimate 
purpose; provided that such course of conduct would cause a 
reasonable person to suffer extreme emotional distress. 
Here, on the court-approved form for a "Petition for an 
Order for Protection on Behalf of Family or Household Members," 
DS stated that an act of abuse occurred on October 26, 2023; she 
indicated "extreme psychological abuse" (only) as the form of 
abuse, but said "please see attached statement." 
In the attached statement, there is no alleged abuse 
that occurred on October 26, 2023. However, in addition to 
reciting past allegations that were the subject of a prior 
proceeding, DS alleged that on September 16, 2023, "[WG's] friend 
approached [Daughter] directly on the street with messages from 
her father making her so terrified, she is too scared to go out 
on the public street[!]" The contents of the alleged messages 
are not stated. DS also alleged that WG sent family friend Saci 
a text message on September 1, 2023, in which WG allegedly became 
angry with Saci, and asked if she had seen DS and Daughter and 
expressed that he (WG) wanted to find them. Additionally, DS 
alleged that on September 5, 2023, Hilo police contacted her and 
said WG had made out a welfare check to her; that same day, WG 
allegedly called a café and another store allegedly looking for 
4
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
           
         
        
           
       
   
         
        
           
        
        
          
          
           
     
         
          
           
         
          
         
         
       
        
        
          
          
           
             
          
  DS and Daughter. Aside from the above, and an allegation that 
the parties's daughter witnessed a sexual assault by WG (which 
was the subject of prior proceedings in 3DA221000050),2 DS 
alleges no specific act or conduct by WG, and instead details the 
extent of Daughter's alleged fear, diagnoses, anxiety, and 
concomitant medical conditions. 
To the extent that the Family Court denied relief based 
on allegations that the parties' daughter witnessed a sexual 
assault by WG, the Family Court did not err in concluding that 
further litigation of those issues was foreclosed because they 
were previously litigated in 3DA221000050. Relitigation of those 
issues is barred by principles of res judicata because they were 
raised and ruled on in 3DA221000050. See, e.g., Smallwood v. 
City & Cnty. of Honolulu , 118 Hawai i 139, 146-47, 185 P.3d 887,  
894-95 (App. 2008) (explaining res judicata ). 
To the extent that the Family Court denied relief based 
on "new" allegations – those grounded in alleged acts or conduct 
occurring in 2023 – we conclude that the Family Court did not 
abuse its discretion in denying the Petition for Protection. 
Even assuming the truth of the factual allegations stated in the 
Petition for Protection, we cannot conclude that the Family Court 
erred or abused its discretion in concluding that WG's alleged 
inquiries concerning his ex-wife and daughter, and/or the 
incident of messaging through a third party, constituted extreme 
2 This court takes judicial notice of the proceedings in 
3DA221000050 wherein, after an evidentiary hearing, a family court dissolved a 
temporary restraining order and denied a petition for order of protection, 
which was based on allegations that the parties' daughter witnessed a sexual 
assault of another child by WG. The family court's ruling in 3DA221000050 was 
affirmed by this court in CAAP-22-0000507; DS's petition for writ of 
certiorari was rejected. 
5          NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
           
            
            
          psychological  abuse  to  the  daughter,  or  an  alternative  form  of 
abuse,  under  HRS  chapter  586. 
Accordingly,  the  Family  Court's  October   30,  2023  Order 
Denying  Petition  is  affirmed.3 
DATED:   Honolulu,   Hawai i,  February  17,  2026. 
On  the  briefs: 
Jamae  K.K.  Kawauchi 
(Jamae  K.K.  Kawauchi  AAL  LLC), 
for  Petitioner-Appellant. 
Jo  Kim, 
for  Respondent-Appellee. /s/  Karen  T.  Nakasone 
Chief
  Judge 
/s/  Katherine  G.  Leonard 
Associate  Judge 
/s/  Clyde  J.  Wadsworth 
Associate  Judge 
3 We note that DS filed a motion for reconsideration of the Order 
Denying Petition, which was also denied. Although that motion is mentioned in 
briefing, DS raises no point of error and makes no discernible argument that 
the Family Court abused its discretion in denying the motion for 
reconsideration. 
6 