NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000128
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
BANK OF AMERICA, N.A., SUCCESSOR BY MERGER TO BAC HOME LOANS
SERVICING, LP FKA COUNTRYWIDE HOME LOANS SERVICING LP,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
JOHN YEH, Defendant-Appellant,
and
LAY MENH YEH; BILLY YEH; GARY CHAN; ASSOCIATION OF
APARTMENT OWNER, Defendants-Appellees, 
and
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA; BANK OF HAWAII,
Defendants-Appellees,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-50; JANE DOES 1-50; DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-50;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50;
and DOE GOVERNMENTAL UNITS 1-50, 
Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-3074)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.;
with Nakamura, C.J., concurring and dissenting separately)
Defendant-Appellant John Yeh ( Yeh) appeals from the (1)
"Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law; Order Granting
Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment Against All Parties and
For Interlocutory Decree of Foreclosure"; and (2) Judgment, both NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1  The Honorable Virginia L. Crandall presided.
2entered on February 2, 2016, in the Circuit Court of the First
Circuit ( circuit court).1
On appeal, Yeh contends that the circuit court erred
when it granted summary judgment in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee
Bank of America, N.A., Successor By Merger to BAC Home Loans
Servicing, LP FKA Country Wide Home Loans Servicing, LP (BANA)
because genuine issues of material fact exist as to whether (1)
Yeh's loan was in default; and (2) foreclosure was precluded
under the doctrines of promissory estoppel, unclean hands, breach
of implied duty of good faith and fair dealing, and unfair and
deceptive acts and practices.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant legal authorities, we resolve Yeh's points
of error as follows and we vacate and remand.
(1) Yeh's Alleged Loan Modification
Yeh contends that the circuit court erred in granting
summary judgment because genuine issues of material fact exist as
to whether BANA was entitled to foreclose on the property, given
BANA's representations to Yeh that it would allow Yeh to modify
his loan.  Yeh essentially argues that BANA did not act in good
faith during the process of potentially modifying his loan and
therefore should be estopped from foreclosing on his property. 
[A] plaintiff-movant is not required to disprove affirmative
defenses asserted by a defendant in order to prevail on a
motion for summary judgment.  The plaintiff is only
obligated to disprove an affirmative defense on a motion for
summary judgment when the defense produces material in
support of an affirmative defense.  Generally, the defendant
has the burden of proof on all affirmative defenses, which
includes the burden of proving facts which are essential to
the asserted defense.
U.S. Bank Nat'l Ass'n v. Castro , 131 Hawai #i 28, 41, 313 P.3d
717, 730 (2013) (citations, quotation marks, and footnote
omitted).NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3Here, Yeh attached a declaration to his memorandum in
opposition to BANA's summary judgment motion, dated October 21,
2014, in which Yeh attested that: (1) after he received a Notice
of Intent to Accelerate, he contacted BANA and was directed to
stop making monthly payments in order to qualify for a loan
modification; (2) in June 2010, Yeh successfully completed a
four-month trial payment plan with BANA; (3) Yeh was advised
several times between June 2010 and November 2011, by BANA
representatives Roslum Collins, Michael Guerrero, John Hayden,
and Maria Ashkar, that a permanent loan modification offer would
be mailed to him; and (4) Yeh never received any loan
modification offer in the mail.  Yeh further attested that: 
17.  Despite my diligence in making the monthly
payments pursuant to the trial payment plan, Plaintiff
failed to follow through with its promise to roll my trial
plan into a permanent modification and has in bad faith
induced me to stop payment on my mortgage loan. 
18.  I reasonably relied on Plaintiff's promise, to my
detriment, and yet Plaintiff breached its promise to
permanently modify the loan as agreed upon in the trial
period payment plan, and initiated the instant foreclosure
action.  
On October 29, 2014, Yeh filed a supplemental
declaration in which he attested that he had received a phone
call that morning from "Madeline," a representative from BANA's
Home Retention Department, stating that she discovered that Yeh's
mortgage loan was previously approved for permanent loan
modification and that his loan should currently be in a permanent
loan modification.  Yeh further attested that Madeline advised
him that a permanent loan modification offer was approved on
September 27, 2011.
On November 10, 2014, BANA filed the Declaration of
Scott Horowitz ( Horowitz) in support of BANA's summary judgment
motion in which he attested that "no representatives of BANA have
ever advised [Yeh] of any approval for a loan modification in
2011."  Horowitz attached several letters to his Declaration that
were sent from BANA and addressed to Yeh.  In the letters dated
April 21, 2011, July 2, 2011, and July 23, 2011, BANA notifiedNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4Yeh that he was not eligible for the Home Affordable Modification
Program.  However, the letters dated July 2, 2011, and July 23,
2011, state that Yeh's loan 
may be eligible for a loan modification offered by Fannie
Mae, which is a program for loans that are not eligible for
the Home Affordable Modification Program.  Under the Fannie
Mae program, we will review your current financial situation
to determine if we can help you modify your mortgage to give
you an affordable mortgage payment.
A letter dated August 1, 2011, states that a workout plan could
not be offered to Yeh due to his failure to return certain
documents; however, the letter dated July 23, 2011, states that
Yeh must return the needed documentation by August 2, 2011.  A
letter dated December 27, 2011, states that Yeh's loan was not
eligible for a loan modification because BANA "service[s] your
loan on behalf of an investor or group of investors that has not
given [BANA] the contractual authority to modify your loan." 
On November 2, 2015, after further discovery had taken
place, Yeh filed a supplemental memorandum in opposition to
BANA's summary judgment motion to which Yeh attached several
documents that BANA produced in discovery.  The documents
included, inter alia , a document entitled HomeSaver-Workout
Notes, which appears to be a record of communications between
BANA and Yeh regarding his loan.  An entry dated September 27,
2011 states: "***LOAN CLEARED FOR DECISION/ELIGIBILITY REVIEW***
Received all supporting documentation and required information to
review loan for all workout options.[ ] Called homeowner to advise
the loan qualifies for a modification[.] Submitted modification
package to TML/MSSL for approval[.]"  (Emphasis added.)  Yeh also
attached a copy of an email exchange between a representative of
BANA (the loan servicer) and a representative of Fannie Mae REMIC
Trust 2004-W4 ( Fannie Mae ) (the apparent owner of the loan).  In
an email dated December 27, 2011, which is after the Workout
Notes reflect that Yeh was notified that he qualifies for loan
modification, the representative of BANA stated:  
We have completed income verification and now we are at a
stage where we can draft an analysis and determine mod
terms.  However, due to the delegation I will need to know
if we can proceed with the mod or move the file to
liquidation options.NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5The representative from Fannie Mae responded on the same day
stating that Yeh's loan was not eligible for modification and to
proceed to liquidation options. 
Yeh presented evidence that BANA, through various
representatives, communicated with him regarding loan
modification, at one point advised him to stop making monthly
payments to qualify for a loan modification, and subsequently
represented that he qualified for permanent modification and that
a permanent loan modification offer would be mailed to him. 
BANA, in turn, produced evidence that BANA notified Yeh that he
did not qualify for loan modification, however, the final letter
dated December 27, 2011 stating that BANA did not have
contractual authority to modify Yeh's loan, is dated after Yeh
attests that representations were made that he qualified for loan
modification and after he claims to have been induced to stop
payment on his loan.  
Based on the evidence presented, and viewing the
evidence in the light most favorable to Yeh, there are genuine
issues of material fact as to whether BANA acted in good faith in
its representations to Yeh regarding modification of his loan. 
See Bank of Hawaii v. Mostoufi , No. CAAP-13-0001679, 2016 WL
3615664, at *2 (Haw. App. June 30, 2016).  Moreover, there appear
to be genuine issues of material fact as to the amount Yeh
properly owes under the subject Promissory Note ( Note).  In
granting summary judgment, the circuit court determined that, as
of January 3, 2014, Yeh owed BANA a total of $499,624.15 under
the Note, which included interest in the amount of $114,279.19
accruing from November 1, 2008 through January 3, 2014.  The
interest amount apparently includes the period that Yeh attests
he began the loan modification process.
Given the record, therefore, summary judgment was not
warranted.
(2) Bank of America, N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo
The holding in Bank of America, N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo,
139 Hawai #i 361, 390 P.3d 1248 (2017), issued after the JudgmentNOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2  On the same day BANA filed its summary judgment motion, BANA's
attorney, Robin Miller, filed an Affirmation of Attorney, which relies on the
Declaration of Indebtedness submitted by Roberts.  Roberts's declaration fails
to establish that BANA held the Note when it filed the Complaint.  On October
20, 2015, BANA subsequently submitted a further declaration by one of its
counsel attesting to having personally reviewed the original "wet-ink" Note
indorsed in blank.  However, again, this declaration does not establish that
BANA held the Note when the Complaint was filed.
6in this case, also precludes summary judgment for BANA.  In
Reyes-Toledo , the Hawai# i Supreme Court held that to establish
the right to foreclose, the foreclosing plaintiff must establish
standing, or entitlement to enforce the subject Note, at the time
the action was commenced.  Id. at 367-70, 390 P.3d at 1254-57.  
The supreme court stated that the "foreclosing
plaintiff's burden to prove entitlement to enforce the note
overlaps with the requirements of standing in foreclosure actions
as '[s]tanding is concerned with whether the parties have the
right to bring suit.'" Id. at 367, 390 P.3d at 1254.  The supreme
court further noted that "a foreclosing plaintiff does not have
standing to foreclose on mortgaged property unless the plaintiff
was entitled to enforce the note that has been defaulted on." 
Id. at 368, 390 P.3d at 1255.  The supreme court concluded that
the foreclosing plaintiff must prove its entitlement to enforce
the note at the commencement of the proceedings because it
"provides strong and necessary incentives to help ensure that a
note holder will not proceed with a foreclosure action before
confirming that it has the right to do so."  Id. at 369, 390 P.3d
at 1256 (citation omitted).
Here, BANA did not prove its entitlement to enforce the
Note at the commencement of the proceeding.  Similar to Reyes-
Toledo, the circuit court granted BANA summary judgment and a
decree of foreclosure.  In support of its summary judgment
motion, BANA attached, inter alia, two documents to demonstrate
that it possessed the subject Note: (1) a Declaration of
Indebtedness by Ashley Marie Roberts (Roberts ), executed on
February 24, 2014, stating that she is familiar with the type of
records maintained by BANA and that BANA, directly or through an
agent, "has possession" of the promissory Note; and (2) the Note,
which is endorsed in blank.2NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
7BANA did not present evidence to establish its
entitlement to enforce the Note at the time the action commenced. 
On December 6, 2012, BANA filed a Complaint for Foreclosure,
which states that BANA "is the holder of the Note and record
assignee of the Mortgage."  However, the Note is not attached to
the Complaint and there is no evidence that BANA held the Note at
the time the Complaint was filed.
Thus, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable
to Yeh, there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether
BANA was entitled to enforce the subject Note at the time this
foreclosure action was commenced.  Pursuant to Reyes-Toledo , the
circuit court erred in granting BANA's summary judgment motion. 
Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai #i at 370-71, 390 P.3d at 1257-58.
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the (1) "Findings
of Fact and Conclusions of Law; Order Granting Plaintiff's Motion
for Summary Judgment Against All Parties and For Interlocutory
Decree of Foreclosure"; and (2) Judgment, both entered on
February 2, 2016, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit, are
vacated.  This case is remanded to the circuit court for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 29, 2017.
On the briefs:
Gary V. Dubin,
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,
for Defendant-Appellant.Associate Judge
David B. Rosen,
David E. McAllister,
Justin S. Moyer,
Christina C. Macleod
(Aldridge Pite, LLP)
        and
Patricia J. McHenry,
Allison Mizuo Lee
(Cades Schutte)
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge