  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000829
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
STANLEY RICHARD BENTO, JR., Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-0239)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
 
(Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Stanley Richard Bento, Jr. (
Bento),
 
appeals from an August 13, 2012 judgment of the Circuit Court of
 
1
the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).  At the conclusion of a jury
 
trial, Bento was found guilty of one count of Theft of Copper, in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 708-835.7 (Supp.
 
2012).2
 
Bento raises two points of error on appeal, arguing
 
that: (1) the prosecution committed prosecutorial misconduct
 
that unduly prejudiced the jury's verdict against Bento; and (2)
 
Bento received ineffective assistance of counsel because his
 
attorney did not properly object to the testimony of witness
 
Albert Maldonado, a police custodian of evidence.
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided. 
2
 HRS § 708-835.7 provides in relevant part: "A person commits the
offense of theft of copper if the person commits theft of copper that weighs a
pound or more, but not including legal tender of the United States."
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Bento's points of error as follows:
 
(1) When an appellant alleges prosecutorial 
misconduct, this Court must decide: "(1) whether the conduct was 
improper; (2) if the conduct was improper, whether the misconduct 
was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt; and (3) if the misconduct 
was not harmless, whether the misconduct was so egregious as to 
bar reprosecution." State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai' i 20, 26, 108 
P.3d 974, 980 (2005). 
Here, Bento argues that the prosecutor's actions in 
conjunction with introducing and laying a foundation for demonstrative evidence were unnecessary, unduly dramatic, and 
constituted prosecutorial misconduct. However, whether or not to 
permit demonstrative evidence is entirely within the sound 
discretion of the trial court. State v. Espiritu, 117 Hawai' i 
127, 139, 176 P.3d 885, 897 (2008) (citing Monlux v. General Motors Corp., 68 Haw. 358, 363, 714 P.2d 930, 933 (1986)). Bento 
cites no authority contrary to the proposition that the 
prosecutor was required to lay a foundation to authenticate the 
evidence introduced. Rule 901(a) of the Hawaii Rules of Evidence 
(HRE) notes that "[t]he requirement of authentication or 
identification as a condition precedent to admissibility is 
satisfied by evidence sufficient to support a finding that the 
matter in question is what its proponent claims." While the 
prosecutor's presentation may have been conducted in a manner 
(arguably) intended to focus and maintain the jury's attention 
and interest, and was somewhat drawn out – in part due to defense 
counsel's objections - there is nothing in the record to support 
Bento's contention that it was improper. 
(2) To establish ineffective assistance of counsel, an
 
appellant must meet the following two-part test: "1) that there
 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of 
skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or 
omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial 
impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." State v. 
Metcalfe, 129 Hawai' i 206, 222, 297 P.3d 1062, 1078 (2013) 
(citations, internal quotations marks and footnotes omitted). 
Bento contends that defense counsel was ineffective 
because she should have requested an offer of proof prior to the 
testimony regarding the chain of custody of the demonstrative 
evidence and she should have raised an objection to the 
prosecutor's detailed foundation questions, rather than trying to 
establish a break in the chain of custody. Here, the prosecutor 
properly introduced Exhibit 114 as demonstrative evidence of the 
type of copper pipe Bento had allegedly stolen. Defense counsel 
properly objected to two instances where the prosecutor failed to 
lay a sufficient foundation for the testimony of the evidence 
custodian. However, as introduction of the demonstrative 
evidence was within the discretion of the trial court, Espiritu, 
117 Hawai' i at 139, 176 P.3d at 897, Bento has not pointed to any 
errors or omissions of defense counsel during the trial proceedings that reflected counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or 
diligence. Indeed, defense counsel's decision concerning how to 
approach the admissibility of this particular piece of evidence 
constituted a legitimate tactical choice. "Defense counsel's 
tactical decisions at trial generally will not be questioned by a 
reviewing court." State v. Antone, 62 Haw. 346, 352, 615 P.2d 
101, 106 (1980) (citation omitted). 
Lawyers require and are permitted broad latitude to make on-
the-spot strategic choices in the course of trying a case.
A defense attorney's freedom to make such decisions,
however, is not without limits. Where trial counsel makes a
 critical tactical decision which would not be made by
diligent, ordinarily prudent lawyers in criminal cases, the
right to effective assistance of counsel may be denied.
 
Id. (citations omitted). While a different lawyer might have
 
employed a different tactic here, Bento fails to show that his
 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
lawyer's strategy was imprudent or inattentive, or even that this
 
particular episode constituted a "critical tactical decision".
 
Finally, Bento has not demonstrated that a potentially
 
meritorious defense was impaired or withdrawn through his
 
counsel's alleged lack of skill, judgment, or diligence. Here,
 
the jury was informed that the trial would likely take one week;
 
it ultimately took four days, even with the "lengthy" examination
 
of the evidence custodian. As such, Bento has not shown
 
substantial and prejudicial delay as argued on appeal.
 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court's August 13, 2012
 
Judgment of Conviction is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 19, 2013. 
On the briefs: 
Lionel M. Riley
Al Thompsonfor Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Andrew D. Son Deputy Prosecuting AttorneCounty of Hawai' i 
for Plaintiff-Appellee y
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
4 