NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000350
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
CHARLY HERNANE, also known as CHARLIE HERNANE,
Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 11-1-0699)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Hiraoka, JJ.)
A jury convicted Defendant-Appellant Charly Hernane,
also known as Charlie Hernane ( Hernane), of Murder in the Second
Degree.  He appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
(Judgment) entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
(Circuit Court)  on April 17, 2018.  Hernane contends that the
Circuit Court erred by:
1.denying his motion to dismiss the indictment; and
2.giving prohibited "Allen charges" to the jury.
For the reasons explained below, we affirm the
Judgment.1
I.
On May 18, 2011, Hernane was charged by indictment with
Murder in the Second Degree.  In 2013 a jury found him guilty as
charged.  He appealed.  We reversed the conviction and remanded
1The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
for a new trial.  State v. Hernane, No. CAAP-13-0005212, 2015 WL
7726353 (Haw. Ct. App. Nov. 30, 2015) (mem.).  The State applied
to the Hawai# i Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari.  The
application was rejected.  State v. Hernane, No. SCWC-13-0005212,
2016 WL 1204425 (Haw. Mar. 23, 2016).
Hernane's second trial was set for February 5, 2018. 
His attorney informed the Circuit Court and the State that he
intended to move to dismiss the indictment for violation of
Hawai#i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP ) Rule 48 (2000).  The
motion was filed and heard on February 5, 2018.  The State called
one witness, Malia Rausch (Rausch ) and offered four exhibits that
were admitted into evidence for purposes of the hearing.  After
hearing arguments from counsel, the Circuit Court orally denied
the motion and began the jury trial.  The jury returned a verdict
against Hernane on February 15, 2018.  The Circuit Court entered
its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying
Defendant's Motion to Dismiss Indictment ( FOF&COL) on
February 27, 2018.  This appeal followed.
II.
A. The Circuit Court Did Not Err When it
Denied the Rule 48 Motion to Dismiss 
HRPP Rule 48 provides, in relevant part:
(b) By court . . . . [T]he court shall, on motion of
the defendant, dismiss the charge, with or without prejudice
in its discretion, if trial is not commenced within 6
months:
. . . .
(3) from the date of . . . remand, in cases
where such events require a new trial.
. . . .
(c) Excluded periods.  The following periods shall be
excluded in computing the time for trial commencement:
. . . .
(5) periods that delay the commencement of trial
and are caused by the absence or unavailability of the
defendant[.]
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The rule does not define the term "unavailability" but we have
adopted the standard established by the Federal Speedy Trial Act,
18 U.S.C.S. § 3161(h)(3)(B) (Law. Co-op. 1979):
a defendant . . . shall be considered unavailable whenever
his [or her] whereabouts are known but his [or her] presence
for trial cannot be obtained by due diligence.
State v. Jackson, 8 Haw. App. 624, 630, 817 P.2d 130, 135 (1991)
(original brackets deleted).
Due diligence is a fluid concept that must be determined on
a case by case basis, and is a question of fact subject to
the clearly erroneous standard of review . . . . However,
whether those facts fall within one of Rule 48(c)'s
exclusionary provisions is a question of law, the
determination of which is freely reviewable.
Id. at 630-31, 817 P.2d at 135 (citations omitted).  "A lower
court's finding of fact is clearly erroneous when even though
there is evidence to support it, the appellate court, based on
the entire record, is left with a definite and firm conviction
that a mistake has been made."  Id. at 631, 817 P.2d at 135
(citation omitted).
Hernane was confined in a prison on the mainland and
had to be returned to Honolulu for trial.  He concedes that a
portion of the time between the supreme court's rejection of the
State's application for certiorari and the start of his second
trial was chargeable to him under HRPP Rule 48(c)(1) and (3).  2
2HRPP Rule 48(c) provides, in relevant part:
(c) Excluded periods.  The following periods shall be
excluded in computing the time for trial commencement:
(1) periods that delay the commencement of trial
and are caused by collateral or other proceedings
concerning the defendant, including but not limited to
penal irresponsibility examinations and periods during
which the defendant is incompetent to stand trial,
pretrial motions, interlocutory appeals and trials of
other charges;
. . . .
(3) periods that delay the commencement of trial
and are caused by a continuance granted at the request
or with the consent of the defendant or defendant's
counsel[.]
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The issue presented by this appeal is whether the State used due
diligence to procure Hernane's return to Honolulu for trial.
In determining whether a state used due diligence to procure
a defendant's presence for trial, the focus is on what was
done by the state rather than on what was not done. [S]ee
also Ingram v. State, 703 P.2d at 431 ("In determining
whether due diligence has been shown, our primary emphasis
must be on the reasonableness of the efforts actually made,
not on the alternatives that might have been available."). 
It has been held that when authorities follow the procedure
suggested by the custodian jurisdiction, justifiably relying
on its assertions, then due diligence is established.
Jackson, 8 Haw. App. at 632, 817 P.2d at 135-36 (some citations
omitted).
Hernane challenges the following findings of fact made
by the Circuit Court:
9.Following the April 12, 2016 status conference, the
Department of the Prosecuting Attorney (Honolulu
Prosecutor's Office) began making efforts to procure
Defendant’s return to Honolulu for retrial.
. . . .
12.There is an established procedure for the Honolulu
Prosecutor's Office to request the return of a Hawaii
prisoner who is incarcerated in an out-of-state
facility.  The Honolulu Prosecutor's Office submits a
request to the Department of Public Safety (DPS) and
relies on DPS to return the Defendant for trial.
Hernane does not challenge the following findings of fact:
13.The Honolulu Prosecutor's Office exercises no control
over DPS.  Furthermore, the Honolulu Prosecutor's
Office does not have the authority or capability to
remove a Hawaii prisoner incarcerated in an out-of-
state facility for Hawaii charges and return that
Hawaii prisoner to Hawaii for trial.
14.On April 13, 2016, Deputy Prosecuting Attorney Scott
Bell (DPA Bell) sent an email to Ms. Rausch and [DPA
paralegal] Ms. Chinen with the following message:
"Please submit the request to the Department of Public
Safety to have Defendant Charly D. Hernane returned to
Hawaii for retrial."
15.Ms. Chinen forwarded this request to . . . DPS.
16.On Thursday, April 14, 2016, Ms. Chinen sent an email
to DPA Bell informing him that [DPS] confirmed that
Defendant would be brought to Hawaii on the next
charter set for July 2016.
. . . .
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
21.On Monday, July 11, 2016, Ms. Rausch informed DPA Bell
via email that, according to [DPS], Defendant was
scheduled to return on Tuesday, July 19, 2016.
22.Defendant returned to Hawaii on Tuesday, July 19,
2016.
The testimony of Rausch, a paralegal with the trials division of
the Department of the Prosecuting Attorney ( DPA), and the
exhibits in evidence for the hearing support the contested
findings of fact.  Findings of fact nos. 9 and 12 are not clearly
erroneous.
Hernane also challenges the Circuit Court's conclusions
of law nos. 13, 14, 15, and 16.  A trial court's label of a
finding of fact or a conclusion of law is not determinative of
the standard of review.  Crosby v. State Dep't of Budget & Fin.,
76 Hawai#i 332, 340, 876 P.2d 1300, 1308 (1994).  A conclusion of
law that is supported by the trial court's findings of fact and
reflects an application of the correct rule of law will not be
overturned.  Est. of Klink ex rel. Klink v. State, 113 Hawai#i
332, 351, 152 P.3d 504, 523 (2007).  When a conclusion of law
presents mixed questions of fact and law, we review it under the
"clearly erroneous" standard because the court's conclusions are
dependent on the facts and circumstances of each individual case. 
Id.  Conclusion of law no. 13 states:
13. In this case, the Honolulu Prosecutor’s Office made
[sic] exercised due diligence and made good faith
efforts to return Defendant to Hawaii for retrial.
This presents mixed findings of fact and conclusions of law.  For
the reasons explained above, it is not clearly erroneous.
Conclusions of law nos. 14 and 15 state:
14. Defendant was "unavailable" for purposes of HRPP Rule
48(c)(5) while Defendant was incarcerated in Arizona
until he was returned to Hawaii on July 19, 2016.  The
court concludes that the following time periods are
excluded under HRPP Rule 48(c)(5), 48(c)(8), and
Jackson:
a.March 23, 2016 to July 19, 2016: 118 days; and/or
b.April 12, 2016 to July 19, 2016: 98 days; and/or
c.May 3, 2016 to July 19, 2016: 77 days.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
15. Based on the foregoing, the court concludes as
follows:
a.The total time from the March 23, 2016 "Order
Rejecting Application for Writ of Certiorari" to
the February 5, 2018 filing of Defendant's
"Motion to Dismiss for Violation of HRPP Rule 48
and Speedy Trial" is 684 days.
b.The time from July 22, 2016 to December 7, 2017
(503 days) is excluded due to continuances
requested by the defense and Defendant's lack of
fitness to proceed.
c.The difference between 684 days and 503 days is
181 days.
d.181 days less the time period attributed to
Defendant's unavailability, see Conclusion of
Law 14, supra, results in a difference of less
1than 180 days.
          
1 This is true regardless of which of the
three alternatives is used.
(footnote in original).  These are mixed findings of fact and
conclusions of law.  For the reasons explained above, they are
not clearly erroneous.
Conclusion of law no. 16 states:
16. Accordingly, Defendant's right to trial commencement
under HRPP Rule 48 has not been violated.
This conclusion of law is supported by the Circuit Court's
findings of fact and reflects an application of the correct rule
of law.  The Circuit Court's FOF&COL is affirmed.
B. The Circuit Court Did Not Err When it
Responded to the Jury Communications 
Hernane also contends that the Circuit Court erred by
giving prohibited "Allen charges" to the jury in response to two
jury communications.  The term refers to the case of Allen v.
United States, 164 U.S. 492 (1896), in which the trial court
instructed a deadlocked jury:
that, if much the larger number were for conviction, a
dissenting juror should consider whether his [or her] doubt
was a reasonable one which made no impression upon the minds
of so many men [and/or women], equally honest, equally
intelligent with himself [or herself].  If, upon the other
hand, the majority was for acquittal, the minority ought to
ask themselves whether they might not reasonably doubt the
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
correctness of a judgment which was not concurred in by the
majority.
State v. Fajardo, 67 Haw. 593, 596-97, 699 P.2d 20, 22 (1985)
(quoting Allen, 164 U.S. at 501).  In Fajardo, a jury in a murder
trial reported being deadlocked on the fourth day of
deliberations and requested instruction.  The trial court's
response, among other things, included the following statements:
I am going to ask that you continue your deliberations in an
effort to agree upon a verdict, and I have additional
comments I would like you to consider as you do so.
. . . .
. . . Each juror who finds himself [or herself] to be in the
minority should reconsider his [or her] views in the light
of the opinion of the jurors of the majority.
Id. at 594-95, 699 P.2d at 21 (emphasis omitted).  One hour
later, the jury returned a manslaughter verdict.  The Hawai#i
Supreme Court held that giving the Allen instruction was
prejudicial and reversible error, and categorically disapproved
its use.  Id. at 601, 699 P.2d at 25.
In this case, the jury began deliberating on Monday,
February 12, 2018, just before 1:00 p.m.  Shortly thereafter, the
jury sent Communication No. 1, requesting certain transcripts. 
At 2:20 p.m. the court responded:
The transcripts for this trial are not available for your
review.  Please rely upon your collective recollection of
the testimony and evidence at trial.
At 3:25 p.m. the jury sent Communication No. 2, which stated:
We can not unanimously agree on any of the 6(charges)/.
[sic] verdicts.
The Circuit Court responded at 3:50 p.m.:
Consistent with all of the instructions provided by the
court, please continue to deliberate with a view toward
reaching a unanimous verdict.  Each of you must decide the
case for yourself, but it is your duty to consult with one
another and to deliberate with a view to reaching an
agreement, if you can do so without violating your
individual judgment.  In the course of your deliberations,
do not hesitate to re-examine your own views and change your
opinion if convinced it is erroneous.  But do not surrender
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
your honest belief as to the weight or effect of evidence
for the mere purpose of returning a verdict.
The Court is releasing you for the day. Please return
tomorrow (Tuesday) at 1:00 p.m. for further deliberations.
Hernane argues that the Circuit Court's failure to ask the jury
"whether more time would assist it in reaching a unanimous
verdict" made the court's response a prohibited Allen
instruction.  We disagree; the Circuit Court's response was not
an Allen instruction because it neither stated nor implied that
the jurors in the minority should reconsider their position in
light of the findings of the majority.  To the contrary, the
Circuit Court's response was consistent with what the supreme
court suggested would have been appropriate in Fajardo, 67 Haw.
at 601 n.2, 699 P.2d at 25 n.2, and was not error.
Three of the jurors were unable to return on Tuesday as
directed.  The jury was instructed to return on Wednesday,
February 14, 2018, at 8:30 a.m.  At 1:40 p.m. that day the jury
sent Communication No. 3, which stated:
One or more jurors are not following the court guidelines
and we can not unanimously agree on a verdict.s. [sic]  We
are at a stand still.
The Circuit Court responded at 2:25 p.m.:
You are released for today.  Please return tomorrow at 8:30
a.m. for further instructions.
Hernane again argues that the Circuit Court's "failure to ask the
jury whether more time would assist it in its deliberations" made
the court's response a prohibited Allen instruction.  Hernane
contends that any time a trial court fails to ask, in response to
a jury communication concerning a deadlock, whether more time
would assist the jury in reaching a verdict, the court's
instruction to continue deliberating is an impermissible Allen
instruction.  We disagree.  An Allen instruction is one in which
the trial court suggests that the jurors holding the minority
view reconsider their evaluation of the evidence, implying – or,
in the Allen case, actually stating – that "the minority ought to
ask themselves whether they might not reasonably doubt the
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
correctness of a judgment which was not concurred in by the
majority."  Allen, 164 U.S. at 501.
Citing to Justice Acoba's concurring opinion in State
v. Matavale, 115 Hawai #i 149, 171, 166 P.3d 322, 344 (2007),
Hernane argues that the Circuit Court impermissibly "pressured
the jury to reach a verdict based on compromise and expediency" 
(alterations omitted).  That was not the holding of Matavale. 
The majority opinion3 declined to address the Allen issue because
the holding that there was insufficient evidence to support the
conviction rendered the Allen issue moot.  Id. at 169, 166 P.3d
at 342.
When a jury reports a deadlock:
Good trial practice requires a judge to determine whether
future deliberations will be futile by questioning the
jurors and by considering the nature and complexity of the
case, the length of the trial, and the time spent in
deliberations. A judge may summon the jury to inquire into
the status of its deliberations or may follow instead the
more cautious procedure of waiting until the jury takes the
initiative. The judge may question the foreperson or may
poll the other jurors as well. A jury's firm statement of
deadlock may be accepted by the judge or further
deliberations may instead be required, with or without
additional instructions relating to elements in the case,
the burden of proof, or the nature of the unanimity
requirement.
State v. Moriwake, 65 Haw. 47, 53 n.6, 647 P.2d 705, 710 n.6
(1982) (citation omitted).
Hernane's jury had deliberated for less than seven
hours over the span of two days.  At 8:30 a.m. on the third day
of deliberations, the Circuit Court provided the following
supplemental response to Communication No. 3:
The Court is in receipt of Communication No. 3 which reads
as follows:  "One or more jurors are not following the court
guidelines and we cannot unanimously agree on a verdict.  We
are at a standstill."
3Chief Justice Moon authored the majority opinion, joined in by
Justice Levinson.  Justice Acoba concurred in the result, agreeing that the
evidence was insufficient to rebut the defendant's parental justification
defense under Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 703-309(1) (1993).  The
dissenting opinion, authored by Justice Nakayama and joined in by Justice
Duffy, noted that the instruction at issue "was virtually identical to the
instruction recommended in Fajardo" and therefore "did not amount to an
impermissible Allen-like instruction."  Id. at 180, 166 P.3d at 353.
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
As to the first part of the communication which reads, "One
or more jurors are not following the court guidelines," the
Court reminds you that each juror is required to follow all
of the court's instructions regardless of any personal
disagreement or difference you may have regarding these
instructions.  Both sides are entitled to a fair and
impartial jury which objectively decides the facts and
dispassionately applies the law.  Page 1 of the Court’s
instructions reads in pertinent part:
You are the judges of the facts of this case. 
You will decide what facts were proved by the
evidence.  However, you must follow these
instructions even if you disagree with them.
You must consider all the instructions as a
whole and consider each instruction in the light
of all the others.  Do not single out any word,
phrase, sentence or instruction and ignore the
others.  No word, phrase, sentence or
instruction is more important just because it is
repeated in these instructions. 
Without providing any information concerning the effect of
anything upon any juror's mind, emotions or mental
processes, are all 12 jurors able to follow all of the
Court's instructions?  Please answer in the appropriate
space below.
. . . .
If your answer is "No," please cease all deliberations and
summon the bailiff to retrieve your response. 
If your answer is "Yes," please answer the following
question:  With all 12 jurors able to follow the Court's
instructions, will more time assist the jury in reaching a
unanimous verdict? 
. . . . 
If your answer is "Yes," please continue to deliberate
consistent with the entirety of all of the Court's
instructions.
If your answer is "No," please cease all deliberations and
summon the bailiff to retrieve your response.
This was not a prohibited Allen instruction.  The Circuit Court's
question "will more time assist the jury in reaching a unanimous
verdict?" addressed the issue raised by Justice Acoba in
Matavale, and was appropriate as noted by the footnote in
Moriwake quoted above.  At 8:45 a.m. the foreperson answered both
questions "Yes."  The jury continued to deliberate.  At 10:31
a.m. on February 15, 2018, the Circuit Court received
Communication No. 4 indicating the jury reached a verdict.  There
was no instructional error.
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
III.
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment of Conviction
and Sentence is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 11, 2019.
On the briefs:
Jon N. Ikenaga,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
11