NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-10-0000107
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
EDWARD KAEKOA MANOA, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 10-1-0114(1))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Edward Kaekoa Manoa (Manoa) appeals
 
from the amended judgment entered on December 1, 2010 by the
 
1
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (circuit court)  convicting
him of Assault in the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-711(1)(b) (Supp. 2011).
 
On appeal, Manoa's point of error challenges the charge
 
by Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) for Assault in the 
Second Degree, asserting the charge was:
 
fatally insufficient because it failed to allege the
essential element that Mr. Manoa caused a major avulsion,
laceration, or penetration of the skin; a burn of at least
second degree severity; a bone fracture; a serious
concussion; or tearing, rupture, or corrosive damage to the
esophagus, viscera, or other internal organs and/or caused
bodily injury which creates a substantial risk of death or
which causes serious, permanent disfigurement, or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or
organ.
 
1
 The Honorable Joel E. August presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised therein, as well as
 the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Manoa's point of
 error as follows.
 
"Whether a charge sets forth all the essential elements 
of a charged offense is a question of law, which we review under the de novo, or right/wrong, standard." State v. Mita, 124 
Hawai'i 385, 389, 245 P.3d 458, 462 (2010) (citation omitted) 
(internal quotation marks, brackets, and ellipsis omitted). 
Manoa was charged with the offense of Assault in the
 
Second Degree pursuant to HRS § 707-711(1)(b), which states:
 
§707-711 Assault in the second degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the second degree if:
 
.  .  .
 
(b)	 The person recklessly causes serious or
substantial bodily injury to another[.]
 
The Felony Information filed against Manoa stated in relevant
 
part:
 
That on or about the 28th day of June, 2009, in the
County of Maui, State of Hawaii, WILLIAM KAWIKA MANOA SR.,
and/or WILLIAM KAIEWA MANOA, and/or EDWARD KAEKOA MANOA, as
principals and/or accomplices, did recklessly cause serious
or substantial bodily injury to Kaimi Konaaihele, thereby
committing the offense of Assault in the Second Degree in
violation of Sections 707-711(1)(b) of the Hawaii Revised
Statutes.
 
In this case, the charge against Manoa tracked the 
language of the statute setting forth the offense, and the charge 
contained all of the essential elements for the offense because the phrase "serious or substantial bodily injury" did not create any additional elements. See State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i 383, 
219 P.3d 1170 (2009); Mita, 124 Hawai' i at 391, 245 P.3d at 464. 
2
Moreover, the definitions of "serious bodily injury"  and
2
 "Serious bodily injury" is defined as follows: 
"Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury which
creates a substantial risk of death or which causes serious,
permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of
the function of any bodily member or organ.
 
HRS § 707-700 (1993 Repl.).
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3
"substantial bodily injury"  are consistent with their commonly
understood meaning. See Mita, 124 Hawai' i at 392-93, 245 P.3d at 
465-66.
 
In Mita, the Hawai' i Supreme Court held that there were 
two significant factors in that case that distinguished it from
 
Wheeler. First, the definition of "animal nuisance" at issue in
 Mita "[did] not create an additional essential element of the
 offense[.]" 124 Hawai' i at 391, 245 P.3d at 464. Second, "in 
any event, the definition of 'animal nuisance' [was] consistent
 with its commonly understood meaning and therefore Mita had fair
 notice of the offense charged." Id. The Mita court further
 
explained:
 
Wheeler does not require that the State provide statutory
definitions in every charge which tracks the language of a
statute that includes terms defined elsewhere in the code. Requiring the State to do so would render charges undulycomplex, in contravention of the policy reflected in HRPPRule 7(d) that "[t]he charge shall be a plain, concise anddefinite statement of the essential facts constituting theoffense charged." Rather, as this court concluded in
Wheeler, the State need only allege the statutory definition
of a term when it creates an additional essential element of the offense, and the term itself does not provide a personof common understanding with fair notice of that element.
See Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i at 393, 219 P.3d at 1180 ("In
general, '[w]here the statute sets forth with reasonableclarity all essential elements of the crime intended to bepunished, and fully defines the offense in unmistakableterms readily comprehensible to persons of commonunderstanding, a charge drawn in the language of the statuteis sufficient.'") (citations omitted) (brackets inoriginal). 
124 Hawai' i at 391-92, 245 P.3d at 464-65. 
Because the Felony Information in this case tracked the
 
language of the statute and set forth all of the essential
 
3 "Substantial bodily injury" is defined as follows:
 
"Substantial bodily injury" means bodily injury which
causes:
 
(1) A major avulsion, laceration, or penetration of
the skin;
(2) A burn of at least second degree severity;
(3) A bone fracture;
(4) A serious concussion; or
(5) A tearing, rupture, or corrosive damage to the
esophagus, viscera, or other internal organs.
 
HRS § 707-700 (Supp. 2011).
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
elements of the offense, it was sufficient. Further, "serious
 
bodily injury" and "substantial bodily injury" are defined in a
 manner consistent with their commonly understood meaning. Manoa
 was thus adequately apprised of the charge against him.
 
THEREFORE, the amended judgment of the circuit court
 
entered on December 1, 2010 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, April 20, 2012. 
On the briefs: 
Joseph C. Rome
(Ison and Rome, L.L.C.)for Appellant Presiding Judge 
Richard MinatoyaDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Mauifor Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
4
 