NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000885
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
CARLTON LOO, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 1DTC-15-018682)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By: Ginoza, C.J., and Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
After a bench trial, Defendant-Appellant Carlton Loo
was convicted of driving without a license, in violation of
Hawaii Revised Statutes ("HRS") section 286-102 (2007).1/  The
District Court of the First Circuit ("District Court")2/ entered
its Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment on
October 21, 2015 ("Judgment"). 
On appeal, Loo contends that: (1) the District Court
erred in admitting a Division of Motor Vehicle ("DMV") printout
1/At the time relevant to this case, HRS section 286-102 provided,
in pertinent part:
(a) No person, except one exempted under section 286-105,
one who holds an instruction permit under section 286-110, one who
holds a provisional license under section 286-102.6, one who holds
a commercial driver's license issued under section 286-239, or one
who holds a commercial driver's license instruction permit issued
under section 286-236, shall operate any category of motor
vehicles listed in this section without first being appropriately
examined and duly licensed as a qualified driver of that category
of motor vehicles.
Haw. Rev. Stat. ยง 286-102(a).
2/The Honorable Michael A. Marr presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
because using a declaration by a DMV custodian of records to lay
the foundation for admission of the DMV printout violated Loo's
right to confrontation; and (2) there was insufficient evidence
to support his conviction.  As explained below, we affirm.  
BACKGROUND
  On January 8, 2015, Honolulu Police Department Officer
Milo Kalama stopped a white four-door Jetta after observing it
make a prohibited turn on a red light.  Officer Kalama approached
the vehicle and asked the driver for his driver's license,
registration, and proof of insurance.  The driver provided
Officer Kalama with the automobile registration and proof of
insurance, but did not provide a driver's license.  Officer
Kalama testified, "I asked [the driver] where his driver's
license was, and he said he didn't have one." 
Officer Kalama obtained personal identifying
information from the driver.  The date of birth and last four
digits of the social security number provided by the driver
matched Loo's date of birth and social security number Officer
Kalama received from dispatch.  At trial, Officer Kalama
identified Loo as the driver of the vehicle.  
Over Loo's objection, the District Court admitted into
evidence State's Exhibit 1, a one-page document entitled
"Driver's License Root Maintenance" ("DMV printout").  The
foundation for the admission of the DMV printout was a printed
declaration that was signed by Jacqueline Windrath as "legal
Custodian of Records" for the Driver License Branch, Division of
Motor Vehicle, Licensing and Permits.  Windrath's declaration
stated:
The undersigned legal Custodian of Records does hereby
certify under seal and attest that the representations
herein are correct and the record to which the seal is
affixed is a correct and complete copy of the official
public record in the custody of the Driver License Branch,
Division of Motor Vehicle, Licensing and Permits, Department
of Customer Services, City & County of Honolulu, a public
agency of the City & County of Honolulu.  I am familiar with
the record-keeping system of this agency.  This official
public record sets forth the activities of this agency that
are authorized by law to be recorded.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Loo testified in his own defense at trial.  Loo denied
that he was the driver of the vehicle pulled over by Officer
Kalama on January 8, 2015.  Loo's theory of defense was that it
was not him, but his brother, who was driving the car that was
pulled over by Officer Kalama.  Loo testified that his brother
told Loo that the brother was stopped by a police officer, did
not have identification, and misrepresented his identity by using
Loo's name and giving the officer Loo's personal information. 
Loo stated that he and his brother resemble each other and that
the brother knew Loo's personal information, including Loo's
social security number, date of birth, and address.  
On cross-examination, Loo was asked, "Do you have a
driver's license?"  Loo responded, "Uh, no, I don't." 
The District Court found Loo guilty as charged of 
driving without a license.  
DISCUSSION
We first consider Loo's second point of error where he
contends that there was insufficient evidence to support his
conviction because Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i ("State")
failed to present substantial evidence that: (1)  he was not duly
licensed as a qualified driver on January 8, 2015, the date of
the alleged offense; and (2) he did not fall within the statutory
exceptions to the licensing requirement.  We disagree.  
A.
Loo argues that even if the DMV printout was
admissible, its meaning could not be deciphered by the District
Court without additional evidence to interpret the entries (which
include what appear to be codes or abbreviations).  Loo therefore
argues that the DMV printout was insufficient to establish that
he was not duly licensed as a qualified driver on January 8,
2015.  He further contends that while the trial evidence may have
been sufficient to show that he did not have a driver's license
in his possession when he was allegedly stopped by Officer Kalama
on January 8, 2015, it was insufficient to show that he was not
duly licensed on that date. 
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The State concedes that the meaning of the DVM printout
with respect to whether Loo was duly licensed was not established
by the evidence presented at trial.  Therefore, we need not
address the confrontation claims raised in Loo's first point of
error because both parties agree that, given the record in this
case, the DMV printout does not establish whether Loo was duly
licensed on the date of the alleged offense.  However, the State
argues that without considering the DVM printout, there was
sufficient evidence to show that Loo was not duly licensed on the
date of the charged offense.  We agree.
At trial, Officer Kalama identified Loo as the driver
of the vehicle that Officer Kalama stopped on January 8, 2015. 
The State presented evidence that in response to Officer Kalama's
question of where Loo's driver's license was, Loo stated that he
did not have a driver's license.  If Loo had a driver's license
which merely was not in his possession at the time of the stop,
one would expect him to respond to the question of where his
driver's license was by identifying the location of his license,
or indicating that he had a license but did not know where it
was.  Therefore, a fair inference from Loo's response that he did
not have a driver's license was that Loo was not duly licensed at
that time.  In addition, Loo's defense at trial was mistaken
identity -- that Officer Kalama had stopped Loo's brother who
lied and gave Officer Kalama Loo's personal information -- and
not that Loo was duly licensed, but did not have his license with
him at the time of the stop.  Indeed, at trial, when asked "Do
you have a driver's license?" on cross-examination, Loo
responded, "[N]o, I don't."
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the
State, we conclude that there was sufficient evidence for the
District Court to find that Loo was not duly licensed as a
qualified driver on the date of the charged offense.
B.
Loo further contends that the State was required to
prove as part of its prima facie case that Loo did not fall
within the statutory exceptions to the licensing requirement
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
described in HRS section 286-102(a).  In effect, Loo contends
that the statutory exceptions are essential elements that the
State has the burden of negating in every prosecution for driving
without a license.  In support of his argument, Loo cites this
court's opinion in State v. Matautia , 81 Hawai #i 76, 83, 912 P.2d
573, 580 (App. 1996).  However, we recently overruled the
language in Matautia  on which Loo relies in State v. Castillon,
140 Hawai #i 242, 244-47, 398 P.3d 831, 833-36 (App. 2017), cert.
granted, No. SCWC-16-0000421, 2017 WL 5899258 (Haw. Nov. 29,
2017).  In Castillon , we held that the "statutory exceptions
referred to in HRS ยง 286-102(a) are not elements of the [driving
without a license] offense, but constitute defenses to the
offense."  Id. at 247, 398 P.3d at 836.  Here, Loo did not offer
any evidence that he qualified for any of the statutory
exceptions, and therefore, the burden never shifted to the State
to disprove the exceptions.  Id.   Based on Castillon , we reject
Loo's claim that the evidence was insufficient because the State
failed to offer proof that he did not fall within the statutory
exceptions.
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the District
Court's Judgment entered on October 21, 2015.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, June 28, 2018.
On the briefs:
James S. Tabe,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Public Defender,
City & County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.  Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
5