NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000869
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MAKUOLA KEALIIKEKAI COLLINS, also known as Maku,
Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-0077)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Fujise, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Makuola Kealiikekahi Collins (Collins), also 
known as "Maku," with: attempted first-degree murder for attempting to cause the deaths of more than one person, namely, Joel Botelho (Joel) and Leon Botelho (Leon), in the same or separate incident (Count 1); attempted second-degree murder of Leon (Count 2); second-degree murder of Joel (Count 3); carrying or use of a firearm in the commission of a separate felony (Counts 4 and 5); place to keep a firearm (Count 6); third-degree promoting a dangerous drug for possession of methamphetamine (Count 7); and unlawful use of drug paraphernalia (Count 8). 
Collins and Joel grew up together, and they were
 
friends, classmates, and teammates on their high school football
 team. Leon was Joel's younger brother and also knew Collins. 
The murder, attempted murder, and firearms charges in this case
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stemmed from an incident that began at a bar, where Leon without
 
warning punched Collins in the face, and ended in the street
 outside the Botelhos' family home.
 
With respect to Counts 1 through 6, the jury found
 
Collins not guilty of Count 1 and guilty as charged of Counts 2
 through 6. Collins pleaded no contest to Counts 7 and 8, the
 drug-related counts. The Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
1
(Circuit Court)  sentenced Collins to life with the possibility
of parole and a mandatory minimum term of fifteen years of

 
imprisonment as to Counts 2 and 3; twenty years of imprisonment
 as to Counts 4 and 5; ten years of imprisonment as to Count 6;
 and five years of imprisonment as to Counts 7 and 8. The Circuit
 Court imposed the sentences on Counts 2, 3, 4, and 5 to run
 concurrently with each other. It imposed the sentences on Counts
 6, 7, and 8 to run concurrently with each other, but consecutive
 to the sentences on Counts 2, 3, 4, and 5. 
On appeal, Collins argues that: (1) the Circuit Court

 
erred by not striking the medical examiner's expert opinion that
 Joel was on his knees when he was shot, as a sanction for the
 State's violation of its discovery obligations in failing to
 disclose the medical examiner's opinion on this issue; (2) with
 respect to the murder and attempted murder charges, the Circuit
 Court plainly erred in failing to sua sponte instruct the jury on
 the affirmative mitigating defense of extreme mental or emotional
 disturbance; and (3) the Circuit Court erred in dismissing
 Collins' "Motion to Set Aside Verdicts and For New Trial" (Motion
 for New Trial) for lack of jurisdiction.
 
As explained below, we conclude that the State violated
 
its discovery obligations by failing to disclose the medical
 examiner's expert opinion relating to Joel being in a kneeling
 position when he was shot. We further conclude that under the
 circumstances of this case, the State's violation of its
 discovery obligations was particularly harmful to Collins'
 
1The Honorable Karen S.S. Ahn presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
defense and resulted in substantial prejudice to Collins. We
 
therefore vacate Collins' convictions on Counts 2 through 6 and
 remand the case for a new trial on these counts.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The following underlying facts are not disputed by the
 
parties. Collins, whose nickname is "Maku," and Joel were
 friends. They graduated together in 2002 from Castle High
 School, were teammates on the Castle High School football team,
 and their families lived a short distance from each other. 
Joel's brother, Leon, who was several years younger than Joel,
 also knew Collins. Leon's relationship with Collins, however,
 was strained because Kayla, Leon's ex-girlfriend and the mother
 of his child, had been "cruising" with Collins for a period of
 time after she broke up with Leon.
 
After graduating from high school, Joel moved from 
O
'ahu to the Big Island. On January 1 , 2011, Joel was back on 
O'ahu to spend time with his family and to celebrate his 
birthday, which was on January 1. From the afternoon on January 1, Joel and Leon had been eating and drinking at their house with friends. At about 2:00 a.m. on January 2, Joel and Leon, along with several friends, went to a nearby bar, Club Komo Mai. 
At Club Komo Mai, Joel and Leon were sitting in a
 
booth, when Collins walked up to them. Collins and Joel had not
 seen each other for several years. Collins greeted Joel warmly,
 hugged him, and they had a friendly conversation. Collins also
 greeted Leon, and they hugged. However, without warning, Leon
 punched Collins in the face. Bouncers at the bar intervened, and
 Leon was escorted out of the bar. Leon and Joel left the bar,
 with Joel driving Leon's car, a Jeep Cherokee (Jeep). Collins
 also left the bar along with his girlfriend, Chevante, Chevante's
 sister, Lanchelle, and Lanchelle's boyfriend, Bernard. 
Collins called his brother, Bucksand, and his cousin,
 
Antone, and they all met at Collins' house. Antone also brought
 his girlfriend, Kailani, and their infant son. While the group
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
was at Collins' house, they saw Leon and Joel drive by,
 
apparently headed to the Botelhos' home. The Collins group
 decided to follow Leon and Joel.
 
Joel parked the Jeep near his family home. Leon got
 
out of the Jeep and grabbed an unregistered rifle he had hidden
 under a shed. The Collins group parked their cars up the street,
 a distance away from the Botelhos' house, and all the males -­Collins, Bucksand, Antone, and Bernard -- got out of the cars. 
It was very dark. Three shots were fired, one of which was from
 Leon's rifle. A bullet struck Joel on the left side of his chest
 and traveled at an acute downward angle before lodging adjacent
 to his spine on the right side of the lower back. This bullet
 killed Joel. The fatal bullet was not shot from Leon's rifle,
 but could have been fired from various handguns. After Joel was
 shot, the Collins group left the scene. The police recovered
 Leon's rifle at the scene but did not recover a handgun.
 
II.
 
During closing arguments, the parties expressed their
 
differing views on what had happened and what the evidence had
 shown. The Deputy Prosecuting Attorney (DPA) argued that Collins
 went to the Botelhos' house to seek revenge because Collins was
 angry and upset that Leon had "false-cracked" him at the bar. 
The DPA suggested that when Collins heard Leon shoot the rifle
 into the ground, Collins assumed that Leon had shot one of the
 people in Collins' group. Collins then reacted by pointing the
 gun at Joel and shooting him in the chest. When Leon ran over to
 see what had happened, Collins fired a shot at Leon, but missed.
 
Collins' counsel argued that Collins did not fire a gun
 
at anyone. Collins' counsel suggested that in addition to the
 rifle, Leon also had a hangun, and that Leon was out of control,
 as shown by his blind-side attack on Collins at the bar. Defense
 counsel argued that in an attempt to shoot Collins, Leon missed
 and accidentally shot his brother, Joel. Defense counsel also
 asserted that the statements that Leon gave to the police were
 inconsistent with his trial testimony and filled with lies.
 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
The State presented the following relevant evidence in
 
its case in chief. 
A.
 
Leon testified that while he and Joel were sitting in a
 
booth at Club Komo Mai, Collins came over. Collins and Joel
 
greeted each other and were "smiling." While Joel appeared happy
 to see Collins, Leon felt "tension" because of Collins' prior
 relationship with Leon's ex-girlfriend, Kayla, who was the mother
 of Leon's child. After Leon and Kayla broke up in 2010, Leon
 believed that Kayla had some sort of involvement with Collins. 
Collins greeted Leon, and they shook hands and hugged. 
According to Leon, he indicated to Collins that he was 
over Kayla and had no hard feelings toward Collins. However,
 Collins told Leon, "[N]o, let's take it outside," which meant to
 Leon that Collins wanted to fight. Leon initially declined and
 told Collins that he and Joel were there to celebrate Joel's
 birthday. But then Leon decided to take "[his] odds, and [he]
 used it against [Collins]. And [he] punched [Collins] first." 
When Collins looked away, Leon punched him in the face. The
 bouncers at the bar grabbed Leon and escorted him out. Joel was
 
upset and "pissed off" at Leon for punching Collins, and Joel was
 
yelling at Leon as Joel drove Leon's Jeep away from the bar. 
Joel and Leon subsequently returned to the bar to
 
retrieve a phone that Leon had left behind, and then they headed
 home. They had to pass Collins' house to get home. As Joel and
 Leon passed the Collins' house, they saw Collins standing outside
 with a group of people. Leon heard Collins swear, saw the
 Collins' group "scrambling towards their car[s]," and then saw
 "headlights coming on from their direction." 
After Joel parked the Jeep and while Joel and Leon were 
walking toward their home, Leon saw Collins' car turn down the 
lane to Leon's home accompanied by other cars. Leon grabbed his
 rifle, which he had hidden under a shed, and loaded it with one
 round. Leon told Joel to get into Leon's Jeep and follow Leon. 
5
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As Leon ran on foot up the lane towards Collins' car, Joel
 
followed behind in the Jeep and eventually parked in a grassy
 area. Leon saw some people walking towards him. Leon saw a man
 in a red shirt, later identified as Bernard from Collins' group,
 in the grassy area where Joel eventually parked. Leon ran up to
 
Bernard, told him to "beat it," and hit Bernard in the head with
 
the "back end" of the rifle. Leon then saw Antone in the middle
 of the road, told Antone to leave, and hit Antone with the rifle.
 
After hitting Antone, Leon noticed someone standing at
 
the back end of his Jeep. Leon believed his brother was by the
 Jeep. Leon fired a round from his rifle into the ground to scare
 the Collins group away. Leon then saw a flash and heard the boom
 of a gunshot. The person who fired the shot was standing at the
 
back of Leon's Jeep. Leon ran towards this person, saw that it
 
was Collins, and called him a "fucking faggot." As Collins ran
 away from Leon, Collins fired a shot at Leon from a distance of
 about twenty feet, which missed Leon. 
Leon looked for his brother but could not find him. 
Leon ran home, saw his father outside, and told him to get back
 into the house. Leon ran back to his Jeep to look for his
 brother, and he "dumped" his rifle in a grassy area -- he was
 afraid of being caught with the gun by the police. Leon got into
 the Jeep, reversed out, and then saw his brother lying down in
 the doorway of a house. Leon went to his brother, saw a hole in
 his chest and noticed he was breathing hard, and ran for help.
 
B.
 
On cross-examination, defense counsel impeached Leon's
 
trial testimony with various prior statements he had made
 regarding the incident. Leon admitted that when the police first
 arrived at the scene, he did not tell them about his possession
 and use of the rifle. The rifle was an assault rifle and was not
 a "legal registered firearm." Leon admitted that he lied about
 the rifle because he wanted to protect himself from getting in
 trouble.
2
 
2Leon admitted that he was "pretty jealous" regarding his ex-girlfriend,
Kayla, and that he could lose his temper when he gets jealous.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Leon answered yes when defense counsel asked if he had
 
"testified in court today that you clearly saw [Collins] holding
 
a gun, pointing in the direction where you believed your brother
 to be, and shooting." Leon also agreed with defense counsel that
 Leon testified that it was "just clear in [his] mind" that he
 could "see [Collins] pointing that gun and essentially executing
 [Joel]." However, Leon admitted that in his interview at the
 police station with Detective Deena Thoemmes (Detective Thoemmes)
 two hours after the incident on January 2, he did not say he saw
 Collins pointing a gun where he believed his brother was and
 firing. In his first statement to Detective Thoemmes, which was
 recorded, Leon said he was scuffling with Antone, he heard shots,
 he ran to the Jeep to look for his brother, at which point,
 Collins fired a shot at Leon. Leon acknowledged that he lied to
 Detective Thoemmes about what had happened at the bar, that he
 did not mention the rifle, and that his first statement to the
 detective was "very inaccurate." 
Leon gave a second recorded interview to Detective
 
Thoemmes a couple hours after the first recorded interview. By
 this time, Leon knew the police had recovered the rifle. He also 
knew the police had tested his hands, and he believed they would
 find gunshot residue. Leon still lied about the rifle, telling
 Detective Thoemmes that Bernard, the first person he had
 encountered, had the rifle and fired it while Leon was scuffing
 with Antone. Leon said that he was then able to wrestle the
 rifle away from Bernard. Leon told Detective Thoemmes that right
 after the rifle shot, he heard another gunshot, which he thought
 was "probably the one that got [his] brother." Leon's statement
 to Detective Thoemmes regarding the timing of when Collins shot
 at him was different from what he testified at trial. In the
 version he told Detective Thoemmes, he ran to the Jeep, then went
 to talk to his father, then ran back to the Jeep, at which time
 Collins shot at him.
 
Defense counsel also impeached Leon's trial testimony
 
with Leon's testimony at the preliminary hearing. At trial, Leon
 testified that there were three shots: Leon shooting his rifle,
 
7
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
followed by Collins firing a gun standing at the back of the
 
Jeep, and Collins firing a shot at Leon when Leon ran to the
 Jeep. At the preliminary hearing, Leon testified that there were
 five shots: (1) a gunshot by the Jeep; (2) Leon then shot his
 rifle; (3) a second shot by the Jeep; (4) Collins shooting at
 Leon as Leon was running toward the Jeep; and (5) Collins
 shooting at Leon after Leon had arrived at the Jeep. At trial,
 Leon testified that Collins was running away from Leon when
 Collins shot at Leon; at the preliminary hearing, Leon testified
 that Collins took a shot at Leon while running away from Leon and
 then took another shot at Leon while running back toward Leon.
 
C.
 
Thomas Perri (Perri), who lived near the Botelhos, had
 
security cameras mounted around his house. One of the cameras,
 
which constantly recorded in both audio and video, was recording 
during the early morning incident that occurred on January 2,
 2011 at about 3:00 a.m. The video appeared as a blank screen
 
because it was dark, but sounds were captured in real time. 
The State introduced State's Exhibit 51, the audio of
 
the security recording which had been enhanced, and it was played
 
for the jury. In his opening brief, Collins describes the
 recording as follows: "About two minutes in, a loud bang like a
 gunshot is heard. About six seconds later, a second gunshot
 sound is heard. About seven seconds after that, a third gunshot
 sound is heard. The time between the first and third shots is
 approximately thirteen seconds."
3
 
3We note that in response to our request to the Circuit Court to
physically transmit State's Exhibit 51 to this court, the Circuit Court clerk
reported that State's Exhibit 51 was missing and could not be located. The
 State, in its answering brief, does not controvert Collins' description of the
security recording. Collins' description is also consistent with the
representations of both counsel at trial. In opening statement, the DPA
referred to the security recording as revealing "[t]hree loud bangs" and a
first gunshot followed "seconds later" by a second gunshot. In closing
argument, the DPA also indicated that the second and third shots were "about
seven seconds apart." Collins' counsel, in closing argument, stated that the
security recording showed that there was about thirteen seconds between the
first shot and the third shot. For purposes of this appeal, we will rely on
Collins' description of the security recording as set forth in his opening
brief. 
8
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
D.
 
Marilyn Keohokalole (Keohokalole), a retired registered
 
nurse, lived close to the Botelhos. According to Keohokalole, in
 
the early morning between about 2:00 and 3:00 on January 2, 2011,
 she was sleeping in her bedroom when she was awakened by "cars,
 and yelling, and screeching tires." She heard between four and
 
six gunshots. She looked out her bedroom window, closed the
 
window, and went to the bathroom to look out, but it was too dark
 to see. She went back into the bedroom, woke up her husband, and
 walked down the hall, and either she or her sister-in-law woke up
 her son. Keohokalole then went to use the bathroom, and while
 there, she heard a "lot of voices yelling and screaming" and the
 sounds of people running through the yard. 
Keohokalole testified that she then heard another
 
gunshot or two and male voices arguing. She did not recognize
 those voices at the time. Keohokalole testified that the male
 voices were muffled; she could tell by the tone of their voices
 that they were arguing, but she could not "really recall" what
 was being said beyond that there was some swearing. The DPA
 attempted to refresh Keohokalole's recollection with the
 transcript of an interview she gave to the police on January 7,
 2011, five days after the incident.
4 After reading a portion of
 
the transcript, Keohokalole testified that there were some things
 she remembered and some things she did not. 
With respect to what she remembered, Keohokalole
 
testified:
 
I remember the -- I remember who I assume to be Joel
 
getting out of the truck. I remember him trying to reason
with the other guy that had -- apparently had a gun. And
 they were talking about -- Joel was trying to talk to him
about that they were -- had been friends in high school.
And that they had either played football together, or tried
out for football together. And that they knew each other.
And the other man didn't seem to recall, or didn't want to
recall.
 
4Keohokalole also gave a statement to the police in the morning on
January 2, 2011. 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
And eventually -- eventually, he asked about Bubba.[ 5
] 
And Joel said he's not here. I'm here for him. 
And then at
 
some point, he told Joel to get down on his knees. And then
 
I didn't hear any voices. And then there was a shot. And I
 don't know who fired the shot or where it came from. But -­
but he shot Joel.
 
Keohokalole testified that she recalled that Joel may
 
have told the other man to put the gun down; that there was a
 
long silence; and that she believed there may have been another
 shot after the one she just described, but could not remember
 when this other shot happened. She heard a woman screaming "he
 shot him, he shot him," a lot of crying and screaming, footsteps
 running and getting into a car, and cars turning around and
 driving away. 
On cross-examination, Keohokalole acknowledged that she
 
had trouble remembering a lot of things even after reading her
 interview statement, that she told the police that she had
 trouble with her memory, and that she was forgetful at times. 
Keohokalole admitted that she could not see anything that night
 and did not recognize any of the voices, but that she used names
 such as Joel, Bubba, and Collins in talking to the police to fit
 the names to whom she assumed the people were. She stated that
 she told the police that the conversation she heard between the
 two males seemed like twenty minutes, but the conversation was
 probably something like two or three minutes. The conversation
 she heard "was not a ten-second little conversation," but
 involved a give and take between the two individuals and also
 gaps of silence during the conversation, including a period of
 silence before the gunshot. She told the police that a third
 person with an "older voice" joined in the conversation. 
Keohokalole further testified on cross-examination that
 
she recalled voices yelling out to whom she believed were Joel
 and Bubba and asking if they needed a rifle and others who
 sounded like residents threatening to shoot. 
5Leon's nickname is "Bubba."
 
10
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
E.
 
The State called the former Chief Medical Examiner of
 
the City and County of Honolulu, Kanthi DeAlwis (Dr. DeAlwis). 
Dr. DeAlwis was qualified as an expert in the field of forensic
 pathology "to render opinions as to the cause of death of a
 person." Dr. DeAlwis had performed the autopsy on Joel's body. 
Dr. DeAlwis testified that Joel suffered a gunshot wound, which
 she described as a "distant wound," meaning that the gun was
 fired from beyond 18 inches to 2 feet.
6 She could not say
 
whether the gun was fired from 3 feet, six feet, or beyond. The
 bullet entered on the left front side of Joel's chest, about two
 inches below the left nipple and three and a half inches from the
 midline, traveled at a very acute downward angle, and lodged
 adjacent to his spine on the right side of the lower back. Dr.
 DeAlwis opined that Joel bled to death from injuries to his
 internal organs resulting from the gunshot. 
On direct examination, Dr. DeAlwis opined that the
 
injuries suffered by Joel were consistent with Joel having been
 on his knees when he was shot. On questioning by defense
 counsel, Dr. DeAlwis testified that her opinion regarding the
 scenario of Joel being on his knees when he was shot was to a
 reasonable degree of medical probability. At the conclusion of
 Dr. DeAlwis' testimony, defense counsel moved to strike her
 opinion testimony regarding Joel being on his knees when he was
 shot because the State had not disclosed this opinion in
 discovery. The Circuit Court denied the motion. 
F.
 
Bruno Heldt (Heldt) lived near the Botelhos and next to
 
Perri. At about 2:00 or 3:00 in the morning on January 2, 2011,
 he was awakened by some loud pops in the neighborhood. Heldt
 went outside to his patio and saw two cars and at least two
 people on the road. Heldt testified that he heard someone
 
6Dr. DeAlwis's opinion that Joel was not shot at very close range was
based on her examination of the area surrounding the entry wound and her
understanding that he had not been wearing a shirt when he was shot.
 
11
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
saying, "Moku, drop the gun."7 After being shown the statement
 
he gave to the police on January 2, 2011, Heldt testified that he
 
heard, "Moku, hide the gun." On cross-examination, Heldt
 testified that he never "heard the word Maku anywhere," but upon
 further questioning by defense counsel, Heldt indicated that he
 maybe recalled someone screaming "Maku, let's fucking go."
 
G.
 
Daniel Stone (Stone) lived near the Botelhos. On
 
January 2, 2011, at around 3:00 a.m., Stone was awakened by a
 loud noise and then heard two or three more loud noises that
 sounded like gunshots. The time between the first and second
 loud noises "was pretty quick." He looked out the window and saw
 two cars. Stone heard a male yelling from one of the two cars,
 "[G]et rid of it. Get rid of the gun." He then heard something
 that sounded like a weapon hitting the ground. From the area of
 the two cars, Stone heard a male yelling, "Why you gotta go do
 that for?" and later from a different area, "Dad, he's down." He
 
also heard, "Get out of here. Just go. Get out of here." 
H. 
Detective Thoemmes, the lead detective in the
 
investigation, testified that Leon identified Collins as the
 
shooter. Detective Thoemmes stated that Leon lied and withheld
 information when providing statements to her, including failing
 to tell her about his having a rifle. As far as she knew, no
 charges had been brought against Leon.
 
Detective Thoemmes testified that when the police
 
arrived at the scene, Officer Doreen Teramae (Officer Teramae)
 spoke with Leon. According to Officer Teramae's police report,
 Leon told Officer Teramae that Collins shot at Leon and missed,
 and that was how Joel got hit. In her report, Officer Teramae
 never wrote that Leon said he saw Collins shoot Joel or shoot in
 the direction of Joel. 
7
 As noted, Collins' nickname is "Maku" apparently from his first name
"Makuola."
 
12
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Criminalist Cindee Lorenzo testified that the bullet
 
that killed Joel was consistent with being a caliber .38 class
 
jacketed bullet, and that this type of bullet could be fired by
 various handguns. She testified that Leon's rifle could not have
 
fired the bullet that killed Joel. The State also introduced
 
photographs of Joel's body, which showed blood in the area around
 his knees.
 
The police performed gunshot residue tests on various
 
individuals and items seized by the police, including Collins and
 clothing seized from Collins's residence. The only test that
 came back positive for gunshot residue was the test done on 
Leon's hands.
 
IV.
 
A.
 
Collins testified in his own defense at trial. Collins
 
testified that he was a "good friend" of Joel. Collins went to
 school with Joel in the same grade from elementary school through
 high school, and they played baseball and basketball together in
 youth sports leagues. They were also teammates for four years on
 the Castle High School junior varsity and varsity football teams. 
In their senior year, Collins was one of the defensive captains
 and Joel was one of the offensive captains of the football team. 
On the night of January 1, 2011, Collins went out with
 
a group of friends that included his girlfriend, Chevante,
 Chevante's sister, Lanchelle, and Lanchelle's boyfriend, Bernard.
 They eventually ended up at Club Komo Mai. When Collins went to
 use the bathroom, he noticed Joel and Leon sitting in a booth. 
Collins greeted Joel, whom he had not seen for several years. 
They shook hands and reminisced about "the good old days." When
 Joel went to the bar, Leon asked to speak to Collins.
 
According to Collins, Leon asked if Collins had been
 
taking out Leon's ex-girlfriend, Kayla. Collins admitted the he
 had taken Kayla out a couple of times, but explained that she was
 single and that he was not the only one she was seeing. Leon
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
said that he appreciated Collins being honest. Leon told Collins
 
that "everything's all good" and they hugged each other. 
However, when Collins turned, Leon without warning punched
 Collins in the face. Collins was dazed. He received three more
 punches to his throat, he grabbed Leon, and they both fell to the
 floor before being separated by bouncers. Collins had recently
 undergone a hernia surgery and the stitches had not yet been
 removed, and therefore, he could not fight. 
Collins left Club Komo Mai with Chevante, Lanchelle,
 
and Bernard. Collins called his brother, Bucksand, and his
 cousin, Antone, and they all met at Collins' house. Collins was
 mad about being punched without warning by Leon, but Bucksand and
 Antone told him to relax and settle the matter the next day
 during the daytime. As they were talking, Leon's car drove by
 and Leon leaned out the passenger window and yelled, "Fuck you,
 you fucking faggots, let's go." Collins decided to settle the
 matter "right now," not by fighting, but by talking to Joel and
 telling Joel to control his brother. Collins explained he had
 been allowing Leon to get away with all kinds of things because
 he loved and respected Joel. This included an incident a couple
 of years ago between Leon and Collins' family where Collins'
 family did not press charges against Leon. Due to his hernia
 stitches, Collins could not fight, but Collins believed he would
 be safe if accompanied by his relatives. 
It was a two to three minute drive from Collins' house
 
to the Botelhos' residence. The Collins group took two cars: 
Collins, Bernard, Lanchelle, and Chevante were in Collins' car
 and Antone, Bucksand, Antone's girlfriend, Kailani, and their
 young child were in Antone's car. 
When they arrived at the lane leading to the Botelhos'
 
house, both cars made U-turns and faced toward the main road. 
Everyone but Kailani and the young child got out. It was pitch
 black, and Collins had difficulty seeing. 
As Collins was walking down the lane towards the
 
Botelhos' house, he heard the sound of footsteps rapidly
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
approaching and then a car drive full speed toward the Collins
 
group. Collins jumped to his right to evade the oncoming car,
 which veered to his left and stopped. Just before jumping to the
 right and falling to the ground, Collins heard a loud bang coming
 from behind the car. As he was on the ground, Collins heard a
 loud noise and saw a flash, which he believed was a gunshot, come
 from his right about ten to fifteen feet away. Collins started
 backpedaling away from the loud noise and flash "towards the
 vehicle," and he saw a shadowy figure to his right. Although
 Collins could not see who the figure was, he recognized Leon's
 voice yelling, "Fuck you, you fuckers." Collins saw something
 like a hand pointing towards him and there was another loud bang
 and a flash directed at Collins. Collins ran back to his car and
 heard a lot of yelling and screaming. He put Chevante and
 Lanchelle in his car and told them to take off. He ran to
 Antone's car, got in the backseat, and they drove off. 
Collins denied bringing a gun when he went to the
 
Botelhos' residence and denied seeing anyone in his group with a
 gun that night. Collins testified that the only person he
 noticed with a gun was Leon. Collins testified that he did not
 shoot Joel and stated he had no reason to be mad a Joel because
 he did not blame Joel for the things that Leon did. 
Collins was dropped off at his house. By happenstance,
 
his ex-girlfriend, Cozylee, drove by and gave him a ride to
 Chevante's house. Collins did not know that Joel had been shot. 
Collins left Chevante's house and drove around, worried that Leon
 was still looking for him, before returning to Chevante's house
 and going to sleep. He was awakened by a phone call from
 Chevante's father, who told him to get out of the house because
 he was wanted for shooting Joel. Collins drove to his
 grandmother's house. He then had a friend drive him home, where
 he took a shower and went to sleep. When he woke up, the police
 were there to arrest him. 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
Kailani, Antone's girlfriend, testified that in the
 
early morning on January 2, 2011, she went with Antone to
 
Collins' house. She brought their young son along because she
 thought the car ride would calm him down. From Collins' house,
 Antone drove the car and stopped by Leon's house. After Kailani
 heard a loud noise, Bucksand said to her that Leon was shooting
 and told her to call 911. After several tries, Kailani got
 through to 911 and told the person there was a "shooting on
 Waikalua." Kailani testified that she did not see Collins or
 anyone with her group with a gun. 
C.
 
Eamon Gray (Gray) lived near the Botelhos. In the
 
early morning of January 2, 2011, Gray was awakened by screams
 and a gunshot. He looked outside his window and saw an outline
 of a person who appeared to be holding a gun. He then saw two
 muzzle flashes and heard two pops. The person appeared to be
 firing in the direction from the ocean to the mountain.
8
 
D.
 
Detective Peter Boyle (Boyle) testified that on January
 
2, 2011, at about 8:00 a.m., he took a brief statement from
 Keohokalole. Detective Boyle testified that in speaking with
 Keohokalole, "there was no discussion about a[n] extended
 conversation relating to the shooting that [Keohokalole]
 overheard or a description of what could sound like somebody
 being executed or anything like that[.]"
 
Detective Theodore Coons (Detective Coons) testified
 
that on January 2, 2011, he did a walk-through of the scene with
 Leon. Detective Coons testified that Leon told Detective Coons
 that when Leon was near the Jeep, Collins fired a gun in Leon's
 direction twice, that Joel was behind Leon, that Leon "later
 
8In closing argument, defense counsel argued that Gray's testimony
regarding this direction is consistent with the theory that Leon fired the
shots.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
turned around and he saw his brother down, and that's when his
 
brother had apparently been shot." 
V.
 
The jury acquitted Collins of Count 1 and found him
 
guilty as charged on Counts 2 through 6. The Circuit Court
 sentenced Collins and filed its Amended Judgment on August 21,
 2012. 
DISCUSSION
 
I.
 
Collins argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
failed to strike Dr. DeAlwis's previously undisclosed expert
 opinion that Joel was on his knees when he was shot. As
 explained in greater detail below, we conclude that the State
 violated its discovery obligations by failing to disclose Dr.
 DeAlwis's expert opinion relating to Joel being in a kneeling
 position when he was shot. We further conclude that under the
 circumstances of this case, the State's discovery violation
 resulted in substantial prejudice to Collins. We therefore
 vacate Collins' convictions on Counts 2 through 6 and remand the
 case for a new trial on these counts.
 
A.
 
The context in which the discovery dispute regarding
 
Dr. DeAlwis's testimony arose was as follows.
 
1.
 
Keohokalole testified that she heard two male voices

 
arguing outside her house -- one voice she assumed was Joel and
 the other voice, based on the content of the conversation she
 described, was presumably Collins. According to Keohokalole's
 testimony, Collins told Joel to "get down on his knees," there
 was a period of silence when no voices were heard, and then a
 gunshot. Although Keohokalole did not know who fired the shot or
 where it came from, she believed that this is when Collins shot
 Joel. Keohokalole's testimony, however, was subject to
 impeachment because the timing of the events she described and
 the several shots she heard did not match the timing of the shots
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
heard on the security recording. She also acknowledged
 
difficulty remembering many things about the incident and having
 trouble with her memory.
 
2. 
The day after Keohokalole testified, the State called
 
the former Chief Medical Examiner, Dr. DeAlwis. Dr. DeAlwis
 testified that Joel was not shot at very close range, but from a
 distance of at least 18 inches to 2 feet; that the bullet
 traveled at an acute downward angle, entering on the left side of
 Joel's chest and lodging adjacent to his spine on the right side
 of his lower back; and that he bled to death because of injuries
 to his internal organs. At the end of the State's direct
 examination, the DPA referred to Keohokalole's testimony and Dr.
 DeAlwis opined that Joel's injuries were consistent with Joel
 having been on his knees when he was shot:
 
[DPA] Q.  Now, Doctor, there is testimony that a witness had
heard this two males talking. 
One male telling the other to
get on your knees. And that male who was told to get on his
knees did comply, and did get on his knees. And that
 witness then heard a gunshot. Would the injury that you
described, as well as found, on the body of Joel Botelho be
consistent with Joel having been on his knees when he was
shot?
 
[Dr. DeAlwis] A.  
Yes. Because of the very acute downward
angle from head to toe.
 
On cross-examination, defense counsel questioned Dr.
 
DeAlwis about this opinion, including the following:
 
[Defense Counsel] Q.  Now, the Prosecutor asked you, said
there was a witness or a hypothetical about an angle, about

Joel being on his knees. That's not an exclusive opinion.
I mean, it does not mean he was on his knees when he was
shot. Correct?
 
[Dr. DeAlwis] A.  
It's very highly consistent with that,
because of that acute angle going from top to bottom.
 
. . . .

 
Q. Now, and the angle, you don't know the positioning of
the body at the time the bullet entered the body, correct?
 
A. That's why I said whether it's consistent with this,
because of the acute angle, in the anatomical position.
 Q. But what I'm saying is, is the angle of a body, if
somebody's leaning over, that can make a difference also,
 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
correct?
 
A. It can make a difference. But this was a very acute
angle going downwards.
 Q. So if a person is leaning over, it could still help
explain some of the angle.
 A. It can somewhat, yes.
 
On redirect examination, the DPA elicited testimony
 
from Dr. DeAlwis that during twenty-five years, she had performed
 
over 7,500 autopsies, including more than a thousand related to
 gunshot wounds. The DPA then got down on his knees and had Dr.
 DeAlwis use the DPA's body to demonstrate and describe the angle
 of Joel's bullet wound and how the gun was pointed. Dr. DeAlwis
 estimated the angle to be approximately 45 degrees. 
On recross-examination, Dr. DeAlwis testified about how
 
certain she was of her opinion regarding Joel being on his knees
 when he was shot.
 
[Defense counsel] Q. Okay. Thank you. Now, again, you
cannot give a opinion to a scientific certainty that that is

the -- that the individual was on his knees, correct?
 
[Dr. DeAlwis] A.  
It's very consistent with that given
scenario.
 
Q. Doctor, you testify a lot in court all the time. 
And
 
you're asked to give an opinion to a reasonable scientific
certainty. But in this case, it is possible it could happen
that way.
 
A. Probable.
 
Q. But it is not -- there are other ways it could happen,
correct?
 A. Probability versus possibility. Anything's possible.
But in -- the body gives a lot of tales from the injuries.
So having had that angle, and given that scenario, it's to a
high probability, a reasonable scientific probability, as
it's consistent with. That doesn't mean I can be very
specific, this is exactly how it happened. But that's what
 the angle tells me, to a reasonable degree of medical
probability. Yes.
 
Q. But nothing in your report -- now, when you wrote this
report, you had no information about a hypothetical that
somebody said he was on his knees. Correct?
 
A. We never include hypotheticals, even if somebody gives.
That's why the report is a factual report. And if you
notice, I did give the direction and the angle. So that is,
when all the information comes, then that's where, as a
forensic pathologist, we can assist in the witness
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
statements, given the hypothetical scenarios.
3.
 
Immediately after Dr. DeAlwis completed her testimony,
 
defense counsel asked for a bench conference. At the bench
 
conference, defense counsel moved to strike Dr. DeAlwis's expert
 opinion testimony regarding Joel being on his knees at that time
 he was shot on the ground that this opinion had not been
 disclosed in discovery. Defense counsel argued: 
In none of the materials provided to the Defense is there
any aspect of an expert -- that an expert opinion was going
to be rendered that said the individual is on their knees at
 the time the bullet is fired. That is a critical,
significant medical opinion, expert opinion, that needed to
be disclosed to the Defense before she testified.
 
. . . .
 
. . . And there was no disclosure that this witness
 
would be rendering a specific expert opinion that this -­
that the decedent was on his knees at the time, it was
probable that he was on his knees at the time he was shot.
That's not -- they did not provide that. And at the very
least, they should have disclosed that prior to putting the
witness on, so at least we could have addressed this issue.
 
Defense counsel also represented that after reading Dr. DeAlwis's
 
report, he asked her if there was anything unusual or something
 different in her testimony. Defense counsel was not told that
 Dr. DeAlwis would say that Joel was on his knees when he was
 shot.
 
The DPA argued that experts are entitled to render
 
opinions on hypotheticals that are based on trial testimony, and
 therefore, after Keohokalole testified at trial, it was proper to
 ask Dr. DeAlwis her opinion regarding whether Joel was on his
 knees when he was shot. The DPA acknowledged that based on his
 discussions with Dr. DeAlwis, the DPA knew about a month before
 trial that Dr. DeAlwis would render an opinion that Joel's
 injuries were consistent with his being on his knees when he was
 shot. The DPA indicated that he was not aware that Dr. DeAlwis
 would render an opinion that Joel was on his knees to a
 reasonable degree of medical probability, which Dr. DeAlwis
 stated in response to questioning by the defense.
 
20
       NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defense counsel responded that the DPA still knew that
 
the State's expert would be giving a specific opinion that was
 
"explosive" but "not mentioned anywhere" and not disclosed to the
 defense. Defense counsel indicated that at minimum, the Circuit
 Court should strike the portion of Dr. DeAlwis's opinion that it
 was probable and there was a high probability, a reasonable
 
degree of medical probability, and a reasonable scientific
 
probability that Joel was on his knees when he was shot.  The
 
Circuit Court denied Collins' motion to strike Dr. DeAlwis's
 
testimony regarding Joel being on his knees at that time he was
 shot, advising defense counsel that he had made his record. 
B.
 
The State was required to disclose the information it 
had relating to Dr. DeAlwis's expert opinion that Joel was on his knees when he was shot. With respect to reports or statements of experts, Hawai
'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 16 
(b)(1)(iii) (2007) requires the prosecutor to disclose to the defense the following material and information within the prosecutor's possession or control: 
(iii) any reports or statements of experts, which were
made in connection with the particular case or which the
prosecutor intends to introduce, or which are material to
the preparation of the defense and are specifically
designated in writing by defense counsel, including results
of physical or mental examinations and of scientific tests,
experiments, or comparisons[.] 
Shortly after Collins was indicted, he sent a written request for
 
discovery to the State which included a request for reports and
 statements of experts which are material to the preparation of
 the defense. HRPP Rule 16(e)(2) (2007) also imposes a continuing
 duty on the parties to promptly disclose, upon discovery, any
 additional material or information subject to disclosure under 
HRPP Rule 16.
 
Here, the record shows, and the State does not dispute,
 
that the DPA knew about a month before trial that it was Dr.
 DeAlwis's expert opinion that Joel's injuries were consistent
 with his being on his knees when he was shot. The record also
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
shows that this opinion was a statement that the DPA intended to
 
introduce at trial. Indeed, Dr. DeAlwis's testimony that Joel's
 injuries were consistent with his being on his knees when he was
 shot was elicited by the DPA through a specific question seeking
 this opinion. It is also clear that this opinion was a
 statement, which the defense had requested in writing, that was
 material to the preparation of the defense. Dr. DeAlwis's
 testimony at trial regarding this opinion served to bolster and
 corroborate Keohokalole's testimony, and Keohokalole's testimony
 was integral to the State's proof that Collins was the person who
 shot Joel. Accordingly, the State violated its discovery
 obligations by failing to disclose Dr. DeAlwis's opinion that
 Joel's injuries were consistent with Joel being on his knees when
 he was shot.
 
C.
 
The question then becomes whether the State's violation
 
of its discovery obligations resulted in substantial prejudice to
 the defense. We conclude that it did. 
"[T]he goal of pre-trial discovery in both civil and 
criminal cases has been to promote the fact-finding process and to eliminate the tactical advantage of surprise by either side." State v. Ahlo, 79 Hawai
'i 395, 397-98, 903 P.2d 690, 702-03 
(1995). In discussing the civil discovery rules, we have noted that "[e]ffective cross-examination of an expert witness requires advance preparation." Lee v. Elbaum, 77 Hawai
'i 446, 454, 887 
P.2d 656, 664 (App. 1993) (quoting Advisory Committee Note of 1970 to Amended Subdivision (b) of Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 26, 28 U.S.C.A. Rule 26 at 29). 
1. 
The only purported eyewitness to identify Collins as
 
the person who shot Joel was Joel's brother, Leon. However, Leon
 was not a neutral witness and his credibility was strongly
 challenged by the defense. Leon was Joel's brother; Leon had
 instigated the dispute with Collins by "false-cracking" him at
 the bar; Leon had armed himself with a rifle that he did not
 
22
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
lawfully possess; Leon had lied to and withheld information from
 
the police; and unlike his testimony at trial, Leon had not
 claimed in statements he made to the police that he saw Collins
 pointing a gun where he believed his brother was and firing.
 
Keohokalole was a key witness for the State because she
 
was the only person besides Leon whose testimony served to
 identify Collins as the shooter. However, Keohokalole's
 testimony was also subject to impeachment. In particular, her
 testimony regarding the timing of when she heard the gunshots,
 and her description of a fairly extensive conversation between
 the two males outside her house before the critical shot was
 fired, was inconsistent with the security recording.
9
 
The security recording indicated that there were three
 
gunshots, with only approximately thirteen seconds elapsing
 between the first shot and third shot. Keohokalole testified
 that she heard more than three gunshots, with significant
 intervals between the gunshots. According to Keohokalole, she
 was awakened and heard a series of gunshots. She then looked out
 the bedroom and bathroom windows, woke up her husband, walked
 down the hall, then used the bathroom before hearing another
 gunshot or two and men arguing. She described the argument,
 which included statements by the men that served to identify them
 as Joel and Collins, such as they were friends in high school and
 had played football or tried out for football together. She
 heard a man, presumably Collins, tell Joel to get down on his
 knees, there was a period of silence, and then she heard another
 gunshot -- the one that presumably killed Joel. In addition to
 Keohokalole's testimony being inconsistent with the security
 recording, she admitted having problems with remembering the
 incident and with her memory in general.
 
2.
 
Corroboration of Keohokalole's testimony was therefore
 
very important to the State's proof. For that same reason,
 
9Keohokalole's testimony regarding the timing of the gunshots was also
inconsistent with testimony provided by other witnesses at the trial.
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence that would corroborate and support Keohokalole's
 
testimony was very damaging, and therefore highly material, to
 the defense. Dr. DeAlwis's opinion that Joel's injuries were
 consistent with his being on his knees when he was shot
 corroborated and bolstered Keohokalole's testimony. However,
 because the State failed to disclose Dr. DeAlwis's opinion in
 discovery prior to trial, the defense did not have a fair
 opportunity to prepare a response to this damaging testimony. 
The State's compliance with its discovery obligations would have
 given the defense the opportunity to consider retaining its own
 expert and to prepare for cross-examination of Dr. DeAlwis on her
 opinion. Instead, as the defense argues, defense counsel "was
 caught flat-footed" and placed in the position of having to
 address Dr. DeAlwis's damaging opinion without prior notice.
 
3. 
We are not persuaded by the State's argument that
 
defense counsel "invited the error" because the most damaging
 aspects of Dr. DeAlwis's opinion testimony -- that it was to a
 reasonable degree of medical probability and to a high
 probability that Joel was on his knees when he was shot -- came
 in response to questioning by defense counsel. The State's
 failure to comply with its discovery obligations deprived defense
 counsel of a fair opportunity to prepare for cross-examination. 
Thus, to the extent that defense counsel's cross-examination
 regarding Dr. DeAlwis's opinion revealed additional damaging
 testimony, this was also attributable to the States' violation of
 its discovery obligations.
 
4.
 
The State specifically relied upon Dr. DeAlwis's
 
undisclosed opinion in its closing arguments to the jury. In the
 State's rebuttal closing argument, the DPA stated:
 
We would submit to you that Joel was on his knees, as
Marilyn [Keohokalole] heard Joel being instructed to do,
"Get on your knees." And the defense used the word
 "execute." We will use that as well. Joel was executed.
 
24
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The doctor, again -- excuse me, I jumped ahead.
Doctor DeAlwis testified where the gunshot wound was, the
entry again, and it was consistent with Joel being on his
knees at the time he was shot, that's her expert opinion.
Dr. DeAlwis, a forensic pathologist, having done autopsies
over 7,000 times, almost half gunshot wounds, she knows her
stuff. We submit to you that Dr. DeAlwis helped to recreate
what happened that night.
 
Two notes submitted by the jury during its
 
deliberations highlight the significance of Keohokalole's
 
testimony and thus the importance of Dr. DeAlwis's undisclosed
 opinion. These communications also suggest that the jury may
 have had questions about Keohokalole's credibility. In its first
 communication, the jury stated: "We the jury would like to review
 all of Marilyn Keohokalole (Witness:) testimony in court and her
 police report statement." In the jury's last communication
 before reaching its verdicts, the jury stated: "Can the jury have
 a copy of Marilyn Keohokalole's (Witness) statement to the
 police, dated Jan 2nd? (Her 1st statement to the police after the
 shooting).
10
 
The Circuit Court did not take any remedial action in
 
response to the State's discovery violation and Collins' motion
 to strike. The State's violation of its discovery obligations
 was particularly harmful to Collins' defense. The undisclosed
 opinion not only served to corroborate a key witness for the
 State, whose testimony was subject to impeachment, but it painted
 Collins in a very negative light by indicating that he had
 deliberately "executed" his friend Joel. Under the circumstances
 of this case, we conclude that the State's violation of its
 discovery obligations resulted in substantial prejudice to
 Collins. We therefore vacate Collins' convictions on Counts 2
 though 6.
 
II.
 
In light of our decision to vacate Counts 2 through 6
 
based on the State's discovery violation, we need not address
 
10The Circuit Court responded to both communications by informing the
jury that it had received all the evidence that it may consider to decide the
case.
 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Collins' claim that the Circuit Court plainly erred in failing to 
sua sponte instruct the jury on the affirmative mitigating defense of extreme mental or emotional disturbance (EMED) with respect to the murder and attempted murder charges. The Circuit Court should decide whether an EMED instruction is appropriate based on the evidence presented during the retrial. See State v. 
Adviento, 132 Hawai
'i 123, 319 P.3d 1131 (2014). We also need 
not address Collins' claim that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing Collins' Motion for New Trial for lack of jurisdiction. 
CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit
 
Court's Amended Judgment to the extent that it entered judgment
 of conviction and sentence on Counts 2 through 6, and we remand
 the case for a new trial on those counts. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, 
On the briefs: 
Dwight C.H. Lum
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
26

 