 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000690 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JEFFREY MICHAEL MCKEE, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 13-1-0132)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jeffrey Michael McKee (McKee)
 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, filed on
 
August 26, 2015, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (circuit court).
1
 
McKee contends that the circuit court erred when it
 
denied his Motion to Withdraw Plea because: (1) McKee's no
 contest plea was not entered knowingly, intelligently, or
 voluntarily; and (2) McKee's credible testimony established that
 changes in circumstance and new information justified the
 withdrawal of the no contest plea.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
1
 The Honorable Dexter Del Rosario presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
resolve McKee's points of errors as follows and we vacate and
 
remand. 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
McKee with Count I: Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 712-1243 
(2014); and Count II: Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia, in 
violation of HRS ยง 329-43.5(a) (2010). 
At a hearing on March 5, 2014, McKee changed his plea
 
to no contest and the circuit court conducted an on-the-record
 colloquy with McKee regarding his change of plea. Throughout the
 colloquy, the circuit court referenced a change of plea form that
 McKee apparently signed before the hearing and after the
 colloquy, however, the change of plea form is not in the record
 and does not appear to have ever been filed with the circuit
 court.
 
After several subsequent motions and hearings, on April
 
8, 2015, McKee filed the Motion to Withdraw Plea.
 
At a hearing on August 26, 2015, the circuit court
 
reviewed the transcripts of the March 5, 2014 change of plea
 hearing but did not reference the change of plea form, and it is
 unclear if the circuit court had the plea form at that time
 because it was never filed. The circuit court orally denied
 McKee's Motion to Withdraw Plea. On August 26, 2015, the circuit
 court filed the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence convicting
 McKee of Count I: Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree
 in violation of HRS ยง 712-1243 and Count II: Unlawful Use of Drug
 Paraphernalia in violation of HRS ยง 329-43.5(a). McKee was
 sentenced to incarceration for five (5) years as to Counts I and
 II, sentence to be served concurrently, and a mandatory minimum
 of one (1) year and eight (8) months.
 
On September 24, 2015, McKee timely filed a Notice of
 
Appeal from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence.
 
With regard to McKee's first point of error, that the
 
circuit court erred when it denied his Motion to Withdraw Plea
 because it was not entered knowingly, intelligently, or
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
voluntarily, the State concedes that the record does not contain
 
the change of plea form and that "[w]ithout the [change of plea]
 form, the colloquy appears inadequate for an appellate court to
 sustain the denial of the motion to withdraw plea.". We agree.
 
When a motion to withdraw a plea is filed prior to the 
imposition of a sentence, as in this case, a "liberal approach is to be taken, and the motion should be granted if the defendant has presented a fair and just reason for his request and the State has not relied upon the guilty plea to its substantial prejudice." State v. Krstoth, 138 Hawai
'i 268, 274, 378 P.3d 
984, 990 (2016) (citation omitted). Further, there are "two fundamental bases of demonstrating 'fair and just reasons' for granting withdrawal of plea: (1) the defendant did not knowingly, intelligently or voluntarily waive his or her rights; or (2) changed circumstances or new information justify withdrawal of the plea." Id. (quoting State v. Gomes, 79 Hawai
'i 32, 37, 897 
P.2d 959, 964 (1995)). 
McKee contends that at the change of plea hearing held
 
on March 5, 2014, his no contest plea was not entered knowingly,
 intelligently, or voluntarily, because the circuit court: failed
 to comply with HRPP Rule 11(c)(1)-(3); and also failed to ensure
 that McKee understood the nature of the rights he was waiving by
 pleading no contest.
 
HRPP Rule 11(c)(1)-(3) provides: 
The court shall not accept a plea of guilty or no contest
without first addressing the defendant personally in open
court and determining that the defendant understands the
following:
(1)
 the nature of the charge to which the plea is offered;
and
 (2)
 the maximum penalty provided by law, and the maximum
sentence of extended term of imprisonment, which may be
imposed for the offense to which the plea is offered; and
(3) that the defendant has the right to plead not guilty, or
to persist in that plea if it has already been made[.] 
In State v. Cornelio, 68 Haw. 644, 727 P.2d 1125 (1986), the
 
supreme court stated, 
[t]his court has stressed that it is incumbent on all trial
judges to strictly conform to the guidelines provided in
HRPP Rule 11. This does not mean that trial judges must
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
resort to a ritualistic litany in determining the
voluntariness of a nolo contendre plea. However, we cannot
emphasize enough that all procedural components of HRPP Rule
11 should actually be complied with by trial judges.
 
Id. at 646, 727 P.2d at 1127.
 
Regarding HRPP Rule 11(c)(1) (nature of the charge),
 
although the record does not contain the change of plea form,
 
which the circuit court referenced during its colloquy with
 McKee, the circuit court properly established that McKee
 understood the nature of the charges against him. The circuit
 court informed McKee of the charges against him: Promoting a
 Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree and Possession of Drug
 Paraphernalia. The circuit court also specifically asked McKee
 if he understood the charges against him, thereby strictly
 conforming with HRPP Rule 11(c)(1), and McKee answered that he
 did. The circuit court also had the State give a brief
 description of what the evidence would show, namely that McKee
 was stopped on suspicion of having stolen a bicycle and during
 the stop, drugs and drug paraphernalia were discovered in McKee's
 backpack. McKee thereafter plead no contest.
 
Regarding HRPP Rule 11(c)(2) (extended term of
 
imprisonment), and (c)(3) (right to persist in a plea of not
 guilty), the circuit court did not specifically address the
 possibility of an extended term sentence or question whether
 McKee understood that he had a right to persist in his plea of
 not guilty. Thus, the circuit court did not strictly conform
 with the guidelines of HRPP Rule 11 in this regard. This was
 harmless with regard to an extended term of imprisonment because
 the State did not request an extended term and McKee was not
 sentenced to an extended term. See Cornelio, 68 Haw. at 646, 727
 
P.2d at 1127 ("[T]he failure to advise [the defendant] of the
 maximum extended sentence was harmless error because the court
 did not impose one."). However, the circuit court erred when it
 did not inform McKee, during the colloquy, that he had a right to
 plead not guilty, or to persist in that plea if it had already
 been made.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Most significantly, however, we hold that the circuit
 
court erred in denying McKee's Motion to Withdraw Plea because
 
the record does not reflect that McKee was properly informed that
 he was giving up certain rights by entering the no contest plea. 
In State v. Solomon, 107 Hawai
'i 117, 111 P.3d 12 
(2005), the supreme court expressed that 
[i]t is well-recognized that a guilty plea "in itself is a
conviction and a simultaneous waiver of several important
constitutional guarantees," namely, the privilege against
compulsory self-incrimination, the right to a trial by jury,
and the right to confront one's accusers, and, thus, the
waiver of these guarantees "is not constitutionally
acceptable unless made voluntarily and with full
understanding of the consequences."
 
Id. at 127, 111 P.3d at 22 (citation and brackets omitted).
 
Further, "[i]n determining the voluntariness of a defendant's

 
proffered guilty plea, the trial court 'should make an
 affirmative showing by an on-the-record colloquy between the
 court and the defendant wherein the defendant is shown to have a
 full understanding of what the plea of guilty connotes and its
 consequences.'" Id. (citation omitted). The supreme court, in
 Solomon, concluded:
 
Although the family court conducted an on-the-record
colloquy with Solomon prior to accepting his plea and
advised him that "you have the right to go to trial in this
case, and by pleading guilty you give up certain rights
 
you'd have if you went to trial," (emphasis added), the
family court did not explain the specific rights Solomon
would "give up" by pleading guilty. Specifically, the family
court did not ascertain whether Solomon understood that by
pleading guilty, he was waiving his privilege against
self-incrimination, the right to a trial by jury, and the
right to confront his accuser. 
Id. at 128, 111 P.3d at 23 (brackets omitted).
 
In this case, the portion of the colloquy between the
 
circuit court and McKee addressing the rights that McKee would be
 
"giving up" by pleading no contest was as follows:
 
THE COURT:  Okay. You understand you have the
right to a trial, no matter how strong the evidence?
THE DEFENDANT: Yeah, I understand.

THE COURT: And you understand that in a trial
you would have certain rights, that are stated on this form
that you signed?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.

 
THE COURT: And did you go over all these rights
 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
with your lawyer?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, I did.
THE COURT: Do you have any questions about any
of these rights?
THE DEFENDANT: No, I do not. 
THE COURT: Now, you understand that by pleading
no contest today there will be no trial, and you're giving
up all of these rights?
THE DEFENDANT: Yeah. I understand.
 
(Emphasis added.) 
Here, the circuit court referred to information set
 
forth in the change of plea form to inform McKee that he was
 
giving up certain rights by pleading no contest. Although it
 appears that McKee was aware of and understood he was giving up
 certain rights that were set out in the change of plea form, it
 is unclear to us what rights were addressed on that form because
 the form is not in the record.
2 Based on this record, we cannot
 
ascertain whether McKee understood that by pleading no contest,
 he was waiving constitutional rights such as his privilege
 against self-incrimination, the right to a trial by jury, and the
 right to confront his accuser. We further note that it appears
 the change of plea form was not considered or referenced by the
 circuit court when it denied McKee's motion to withdraw his no
 contest plea.
 
Thus, the record before us does not establish that 
McKee knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily entered into his plea of no contest. Solomon, 107 Hawai
'i at 127, 111 P.3d at 22. 
On this record, we agree with the State that we cannot affirm the circuit court's denial of McKee's motion to withdraw his no contest plea. 
In light of the above, we need not reach McKee's other
 
point of error challenging the circuit court's determination that
 McKee did not provide credible evidence demonstrating changed 
2
 It appears the change of plea form was never filed. Further,
according to the State, the circuit court's criminal file does not contain an
original or copy of the change of plea form and it is unlikely that McKee's
form can be recreated.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circumstances or new information to justify withdrawal of his no
 
contest plea.
 
Therefore, the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence,
 
filed on August 26, 2015, in the Circuit Court of the First
 Circuit, is vacated. This case is remanded to the circuit court
 for further proceedings consistent with this decision.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 31, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Walter J. Rodby,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge
 Loren J. Thomas,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
7
 