NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NOS. CAAP-11-0000573 and CAAP-11-0000574
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
CAAP-11-0000573
 
STATE OF HAWAII, Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
PATRICK W. DEGUAIR, JR., Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
and
 
ARYSS DAYNE K. KAMAI, Defendant
 ' 
CAAP-11-0000574
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
PATRICK W. DEGUAIR, JR., Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
and
 
ARYSS DAYNE K. KAMAI, Defendant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
  
(CR NO. 08-1-0533)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)

 
In this consolidated appeal, the State of Hawai 'i 
(State) appeals from the Order Granting in Part and Denying in
 
Part Defendant Deguair's Second Motion to Dismiss Indictment
 
entered on July 1, 2011 by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
1
(Circuit Court) ( Second Dismissal Order ). In addition,
 
Defendant-Appellee/Cross-Appellant Patrick W. Deguair, Jr.
 (
Deguair) cross-appeals from the: (1) July 1, 2011 Order
 
1
 The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Granting in Part and Denying in Part, Defendant Patrick Deguair,
 
Jr.'s Motion to Vacate the Conviction on Count 2 and Dismiss
 Count 2 with Prejudice (Order re Motion to Vacate and Dismiss);
 
and (2) the August 26, 2011 Order Denying and Overruling
 
Defendant Patrick Deguair, Jr.'s Objections to the Recall of the
 Jury for Purposes of Polling the Jury (Order re Jury).
 
In its appeal, the State argues that the Circuit Court
 
abused its discretion in dismissing Counts I, III, and IV, and
 challenges the Second Dismissal Order's Findings of Fact (FOFs)
 
18, 24, 25, 26, 28, and 30, as well as its Conclusions of Law
 
(COLs) 4, 5, 6, 7, and 9.
 
Deguair argues on appeal that the Circuit Court erred
 
when it: (1) reconvened the jury after discharging them and
 declaring a mistrial; and (2) refused to allow individual voir
 dire of the jurors regarding outside influences after they were
 discharged. Deguair challenges: (1) the Order re Jury; and (2)
 the Order re Motion to Vacate and Dismiss, specifically FOF 2 and
 COL 18.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced, applicable authorities, and the issues
 raised by the parties, we resolve the parties' points of error as
 follows:
 
On April 9, 2008, Deguair was indicted on the following
 
charges: (1) Murder in the Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 707-701.5 (1993) & 706-656 (1993 &
 
Supp. 2013) (Count I); (2) Kidnapping, in violation of HRS
 
§§ 707-720(1)(d) (Supp. 2013) and/or 707-720(1)(e) (Supp. 2013)
2
 
(Count II); (3) two counts of Carrying or Use of Firearm in the
 
Commission of a Separate Felony, in violation of HRS § 134-21
 
(2011) (Counts III and IV); (4) Place to Keep Pistol or Revolver,
 
in violation of HRS § 134-25 (2011) (Count V); (5) Promoting a
 
2
 Deguair's alleged offense was committed on November 27, 2007.
Although HRS § 707-720 was subsequently amended during the legislative session
of 2008, the changes do not affect the sections of § 707-720 with which
Deguair was charged. 2008 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 147, § 2 at 391.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree, in violation of HRS § 712­
1243 (Supp. 2013) (Count VI); and (6) Unlawful Use of Drug
 
Paraphernalia, in violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a) (2010) (Count
 
VII).
 
At the end of Deguair's first trial, the jury returned
 
verdicts acquitting Deguair on Counts VI and VII, and a mistrial
 
was declared on Counts I through V, without objection, based on
 manifest necessity arising out of a hung jury. The State filed,
 and the Circuit Court granted, a motion for nolle prosequi
 without prejudice as to Count V. The Circuit Court denied
 Deguair's (first) motion to dismiss the indictment as to Counts I
 through IV.
 
A second jury trial was conducted. The jury was again
 
unable to reach a unanimous verdict on Counts I, III, and IV. In
 the first instance, the Circuit Court mistakenly rejected the
 jury's guilty verdict as to Count II, declared a mistrial as to
 Counts I, II, III, and IV due to manifest necessity, and
 discharged the jury. There were no objections to the declaration
 of a mistrial. After realizing its mistake, over Deguair's
 objection, the court recalled the jury eight days later and
 polled each of the jurors as to whether he or she agreed with the
 guilty verdict and interrogatory responses, as well as whether
 they would have given the same answer prior to the jury's
 discharge. They all answered affirmatively, and Deguair was
 adjudged to be guilty of kidnapping as a Class A felony.
 
After the jury was again discharged, Juror 4 called the
 
court to report her suspicions that some jurors had "looked at
 the Internet" and there was a "fear factor" for some of the
 jurors. The Circuit Court reconvened to question the juror, who
 then reported three instances of possible juror misconduct: (1)
 statements during deliberation by the foreperson of the jury that
 there was "documented evidence" that Deguair had threatened four
 people, suggesting that she consulted outside sources of
 information; (2) mention of the name of a "Samoan gang" that may
 have been involved, which Juror 4 claims did not come to light
 during the trial; and (3) the foreperson had conducted her own
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
experiment by putting duct tape on her forearm to see if it left
 
any residue marks, the result of which experiment was reported to
 other members of the jury.
 
The other jurors were subsequently questioned. The
 
foreperson confirmed that she had been concerned about gang
 membership and being a target of retaliation:
 
It's probably because . . . people have told us or
we've seen on TV where . . . if you're the identifiable
person, the foreperson, that maybe there's repercussions
after. And so people were afraid. . . .
. . . you'd get attacked or . . . targeted. So when
 
we started picking our foreperson, one person specifically
said, I absolutely do not, cannot, don't want to be it for
these reasons. And then I even said, Okay, me too. For
 that reason, I don't want to do it. . . . And then we ended
up doing it randomly.
 
Several other jurors corroborated Juror 4's testimony
 
that the foreperson had said that she would not say Deguair was
 
guilty in open court. Several jurors recalled discussions of
 Samoan gangs during deliberation, and some of the jurors'
 testimony included reference to the fear of reprisal should the
 jury find Deguair guilty and fear of being the foreperson. It
 appeared that the topic may have been raised by one of the male
 jurors based on some source of information outside of the trial
 testimony. At least one juror researched Deguair on the internet
 after the jury was dismissed, but before they were called back
 for the polling.
 
Regarding the duct tape experiment, the foreperson
 
testified that, after the first day of deliberations, "I wanted
 to validate the residue part of the evidence that was in the
 picture, how that would happen. So I took tape and I stuck it on
 my forearm and waited ten minutes and then pulled it off, and
 that was it." The foreperson admitted that she brought it up
 with the other jurors. The court asked her if she understood
 that she had been instructed not to conduct experiments. She
 apologized and claimed that she thought she was not permitted to
 do outside "research," which she did not consider her actions to
 be, and/or did not recall that she was specifically prohibited
 from conducting experiments. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The court questioned the other jurors regarding the
 
effect that the foreperson's experiment had on the jury's
 
deliberations. Although the foreperson did not think that the
 experiment impacted the other jurors, at least one juror stated
 that it did impact her vote. A second juror stated that it
 impacted his vote "very little" because "there's too many
 elements concerning how the tape would be, stay on there, even if
 it was only on there for a short period of time, you know." 
Others similarly reported a three to five minute discussion,
 which was not significant to their deliberations. 
After the jury was recalled and polled, Deguair was
 
given time to prepare and file motions. First, Deguair moved to
 dismiss Counts I through IV with prejudice based on the factors
 set forth in State v. Moriwake, 65 Haw. 47, 56-57, 647 P.2d 705,
 712-13 (1982). Additionally, Deguair filed a separate motion to
 vacate the conviction on Count II and dismiss Count II with
 prejudice based on the juror misconduct. After further briefing
 and oral arguments, the Circuit Court granted Deguair's request
 to vacate the kidnapping conviction (Count II), but denied his
 request to dismiss Count II with prejudice pursuant to Moriwake,
 as memorialized in the Order re Motion to Vacate and Dismiss. 
The Circuit Court did, however, grant Deguair's motion to dismiss
 Counts I, III, and IV with prejudice, as set forth in the Second
 Dismissal Order.
 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held: 
A trial court's ruling on a motion to dismiss an
indictment is reviewed for an abuse of discretion. The
 
trial court abuses its discretion when it clearly exceeds
the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of
law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party
litigant. The burden of establishing abuse of discretion is
on appellant, and a strong showing is required to establish
it.
 
State v. Hinton, 120 Hawai 'i 265, 273, 204 P.3d 484, 492 (2009) 
(citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted; 
format altered). Similarly, the "denial of a motion for mistrial is within the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be upset absent a clear abuse of discretion." State v. Lagat, 97 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i 492, 495, 40 P.3d 894, 897 (2002) (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
(1) The State's Challenge to the Second Dismissal
 
Order. The gravamen of the State's argument is that the record
 
of this case does not support the dismissal with prejudice of
 
Counts I, III, and IV, with the State challenging certain factual
 findings in an attempt to establish that the Circuit Court abused
 its discretion in its application of the Moriwake factors. 
In Moriwake, with deference to a trial court's properly 
exercised discretion, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court observed that "in 
most cases, serious consideration [must] be given to dismissing an indictment with prejudice after a second hung jury mistrial." 65 Haw. at 57, 647 P.2d at 713. More importantly, in Moriwake the supreme court established the balancing of interests that a trial court must do when it exercises its power to dismiss an indictment with prejudice over the objections of the State. Id. 
at 56, 647 P.2d at 712-13. The factors necessary to this balancing of the interests of the State and the fundamental fairness to the defendant, with consideration of the interests of the court in the orderly administration of justice, are as follows: 
(1) the severity of the offense charged; (2) the number of
prior mistrials and the circumstances of the jury
deliberation therein, so far as is known; (3) the character
of prior trials in terms of length, complexity and
similarity of evidence presented; (4) the likelihood of any
substantial difference in a subsequent trial, if allowed;
(5) the trial court's own evaluation of relative case
strength; and (6) the professional conduct and diligence of
respective counsel, particularly that of the prosecuting
attorney.
 
Id. at 56-57, 647 P.2d at 712-13 (citation omitted). The supreme 
court later clarified that "[n]othing in Moriwake indicates that all factors must be given equal weight or that certain factors must be given more weight than others." Hinton, 120 Hawai
'i at 
280, 204 P.3d at 499. 
Here, two full, substantially-similar, trials were
 
conducted with the exception of two additional State's witnesses
 in the second trial. We consider the full record of these trials
 and the post-trial proceedings, and the Circuit Court's in-court
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
announcement and explanation of its Moriwake analysis, as well as
 
the entirety of the FOFs and COLs entered by the court in
 conjunction with the Second Dismissal Order. The Circuit Court
 carefully considered and weighed each of the Moriwake factors in
 light of all of the particular circumstances of this case,
 including the juror misconduct in the second trial, and the
 seriousness and potential impact of that misconduct on the
 deliberations of the second hung jury. Notwithstanding the
 State's challenges to certain aspects of the FOFs and COLs, on
 the whole of this record, we cannot conclude that the Circuit
 Court abused its discretion in concluding that the public's
 interest and the defendant's interest in fundamental fairness
 would not be served by conducting a third trial on Counts I, III,
 and IV.
 
(2) Deguair's Contentions. The gravamen of Deguair's
 
appeal is that he should not be subjected to a third trial on
 Count II, the kidnapping charge. Deguair's arguments, however,
 are that: (1) once discharged, the jury could not be recalled;
 (2) the mistrial on Count II was not based on "manifest
 necessity" and therefore retrial would violate double jeopardy;
 (3) Deguair's right to poll the jury upon their returning of the
 guilty verdict on Count II was violated when they were discharged
 and recalled days later; and (4) the Circuit Court should have
 allowed the defense to voir dire the recalled jury concerning
 their exposure to outside influences after their discharge.
 
Assuming, arguendo, that the Circuit Court erred in 
recalling the discharged jury and belatedly accepting the guilty
 verdict on Count II (including any errors related to jury
 polling), presumably the Circuit Court should have allowed the
 erroneous declaration of a mistrial to stand, notwithstanding the
 court's error in initially rejecting the verdict. As implicitly
 acknowledged in Deguair's alternative prayer for relief in this
 appeal, the appropriate proceeding would then have been a hearing
 on a motion to dismiss based on Moriwake. However, that is
 precisely what happened in this case, albeit with the added
 complications and considerations stemming from the juror
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
misconduct, which were addressed in Deguair's separate motion for
 
relief. Deguair's second motion to dismiss the indictment, which
 was filed on April 28, 2011, specifically argued that, applying
 the Moriwake factors to this case, Deguair should not be
 subjected to a third trial on any of the four remaining counts,
 with particularized arguments concerning Count II. Deguair does
 not argue on appeal that the Circuit Court erred in any aspect of
 its Moriwake analysis.
 
Instead, Deguair argues that the dismissal of Count II 
based on the juror misconduct was not based on "manifest
 necessity," and therefore retrial would be barred by double
 jeopardy. This argument is without merit. As Deguair himself
 argued in his motion to vacate the conviction on Count II and
 dismiss it with prejudice, which was also filed on April 28,
 2011, "the improper instances of jury behavior described above
 warrant vacating the kidnapping conviction and granting a new
 trial on the kidnapping count." In essence, Deguair argued that
 it was a manifest necessity to vacate the conviction on Count II,
 which the Circuit Court then did. In the Circuit Court
 proceedings, Deguair further argued in the motion to vacate that,
 "rather than granting a new trial, Count 2 must be dismissed with
 prejudice, based on State v. Moriwake, 65 Haw. 47 (1982)," and he
 incorporated by reference the Moriwake arguments made in his
 second motion to dismiss indictment, which was filed concurrently
 therewith. As stated above, Deguair does not argue on appeal
 that the Circuit Court erred in its Moriwake analysis.
 
For these reasons, we affirm the Circuit Court's Second
 
Dismissal Order and Order re Motion to Vacate and Dismiss. 
Because the Circuit Court vacated the conviction on Count II, we 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
do not address whether the court erred in conjunction with the
 
recall of the jury.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, July 31, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Dwight C.H. Lum
for Defendant-Appellee/
Cross-Appellant Presiding Judge
Donn Fudo Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellant/
Cross-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
9
 