   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-22-0000250 31-JUL-2025 08:27 AM Dkt. 70 SO 
NO. CAAP-22-0000250 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI#I 
LEW AND MARIA De ABRAMS, individuals, THE SACRED EARTH ASSEMBLY,
a domestic nonprofit corporation, Appellants-Appellees, v.
MAUI PLANNING COMMISSION, COUNTY OF MAUI, Appellee-Appellee,
and 
NÂ HÎNANO # O  #Ô PÂNA, a domestic nonprofit corporation,
Applicant for Intervention-Appellant. 
A
PPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 2CCV-21-0000166(2)) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, and Wadsworth and McCullen, JJ.)
 Applicant for Intervention-Appellant Nâ Hînano # O 
#Ôpâna (Nâ Hînano) appeals from the "Order Denying Movant Nâ 
Hînano['s] Motion To Intervene or Alternatively for Leave to File 
Brief of Amicus Curiae" (Order Denying Intervention), entered on 
April 6, 2022, by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit 
(Circuit Court).1/ The Circuit Court denied Nâ Hî nano's motion to 
intervene in a secondary agency appeal filed by Appellants-Appellees Lew Abrams (
Lew) and Maria De Abrams (Maria) on behalf 
of the Sacred Earth Assembly (together, SEA).2/ 
1/ The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided. 
2/ In a declaration filed on July 14, 2025, SEA's counsel stated,
among other things, that Lew passed away on November 13, 2022, and that "Maria
. . . on behalf of Sacred Earth Assembly continues on as the Plaintiff/Appellant in this case."  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
The relevant chronology is as follows. On May 10, 
2021, Appellee-Appellee Maui Planning Commission (MPC) issued its 
findings of fact, conclusions of law, decision and order (MPC 
Order) denying SEA's application for a special permit to operate 
a church, pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 205-6. On 
June 8, 2021, SEA appealed to the Circuit Court from the MPC 
Order. On February 12, 2022, Nâ Hînano filed a motion to intervene in the appeal under Hawai# i
 Rules of Civil Procedure 
Rule 24 or, alternatively, for leave to file an amicus brief (Motion to Intervene). On April 6, 2022, the Circuit Court 
denied the Motion to Intervene. 
On appeal, Nâ Hînano contends that the Circuit Court: 
(1) "failed to consider its jurisdiction in light of HRS § 205-
19"; and (2) erred in denying the Motion to Intervene as of right by incorrectly concluding that the motion was untimely, and that Nâ  H
înano's ability to protect its interests would not be 
impaired or impeded. 
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve Nâ Hî
nano's contentions as follows, and vacate. 
In its first point of error, Nâ Hî nano challenges the 
jurisdiction of the Circuit Court over SEA's agency appeal. 
Nâ 
Hînano argues in part that the Land Use Commission (LUC), rather 
than MPC, "should have held the contested case, and the matter 
appealed to the Hawai# i [S]upreme [C]ourt, not the circuit 
court[,]" under HRS § 205-19. 
We agree in part with Nâ Hînano's argument, i.e., that 
the Circuit Court did not have jurisdiction over SEA's appeal under HRS § 205-19. HRS § 205-19(a) (2017 & Supp. 2019) states, in relevant part: 
Any other law to the contrary notwithstanding, including
chapter 91, any contested case under this chapter shall beappealed from a final decision and order or a preliminaryruling that is of the nature defined by section 91-14(a)upon the record directly to the supreme court for finaldecision. 
(Emphases added.) The supreme court has explained the history of 
2  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
this provision, as follows: 
[I]n 2016 the legislature amended HRS § 91-14(b) to provide
for direct review by the supreme court or the intermediateappellate court when provided by statute. 2016 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 48, § 5 at 77. Now HRS § 91-14(b) provides that"proceedings for review shall be instituted in the circuitcourt except where a statute provides for a direct appeal tothe supreme court or the intermediate appellate court." In the same 2016 Act, the legislature enacted HRS § 205-19,regarding contested cases arising under HRS chapter 205.2016 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 48, § 3 at 76-77. HRS § 205-19provides: "any contested case under this chapter shall beappealed from a final decision and order or a preliminaryruling that is of the nature defined by section 91-14(a)upon the record directly to the supreme court for finaldecision." 
In re Kanahele, 152 Hawaii # 501, 511-12, 526 P.3d 478, 488-89 
(2023) (footnote, ellipsis, and original brackets omitted). 
Here, SEA (through Lew and Maria) applied for a special 
permit under HRS Chapter 205 – specifically, HRS § 205-6.  
 3/ 
3/ HRS § 205-6 (2017 & Supp. 2021), Special Permit, states, in
relevant part: 
(a) Subject to this section, the county planning
commission may permit certain unusual and reasonable useswithin agricultural and rural districts other than those forwhich the district is classified. Any person who desires touse the person's land within an agricultural or ruraldistrict other than for an agricultural or rural use, as thecase may be, may petition the planning commission of thecounty within which the person's land is located forpermission to use the person's land in the mannerdesired. . . . 
(b) The planning commission, upon consultation with
the central coordinating agency, except in counties wherethe planning commission is advisory only in which case thecentral coordinating agency, shall establish by rule orregulation, the time within which the hearing and action onpetition for special permit shall occur. The countyplanning commission shall notify the land use commission andsuch persons and agencies that may have an interest in thesubject matter of the time and place of the hearing. 
(c) The county planning commission may, under such
protective restrictions as may be deemed necessary, permitthe desired use, but only when the use would promote theeffectiveness and objectives of this chapter; provided thata use proposed for designated important agricultural landsshall not conflict with any part of this chapter. A decision in favor of the applicant shall require a majorityvote of the total membership of the county planningcommission. 
(d) Special permits for land the area of which
is greater than fifteen acres or for lands designatedas important agricultural lands shall be subject toapproval by the land use commission. The land use commission may impose additional restrictions as may 
3  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Public hearings were held on the application, and the proceeding 
was determined by MPC to be a contested case. A contested case is "a proceeding in which the legal rights, duties, or privileges of specific parties are required by law to be determined after an opportunity for agency hearing." HRS § 91-1 (Supp. 2017). Here, a hearing on SEA's application was "required by law" under HRS §§ 91-9 and 205-6(b) (quoted supra) and determined the legal rights, duties or privileges of SEA. See Community Ass'ns of Hualalai, Inc. v. Leeward Planning Comm'n, 150 Hawai# i 241, 255, 
500 P.3d 426, 440 (2021) (ruling that a proceeding for a special permit application was a contested case because an agency hearing was required by planning commission rules and statutes, including HRS §§ 91-9 and 205-6(b), and such a hearing would have determined the legal rights, duties, or privileges of specific parties). The MPC Order was a final decision denying the application. 
To appeal from that order, under the plain and 
unambiguous language of HRS § 205-19(a), SEA was required to appeal directly to the supreme court. The Circuit Court thus lacked subject matter jurisdiction over SEA's appeal.
 4/
Lacking jurisdiction over the appeal, the Circuit Court 
be necessary or appropriate in granting the approval,
including the adherence to representations made by theapplicant. 
(e) A copy of the decision, together with the
complete record of the proceeding before the countyplanning commission on all special permit requestsinvolving a land area greater than fifteen acres orfor lands designated as important agricultural lands,shall be transmitted to the land use commission within sixty days after the decision is rendered. 
Within forty-five days after receipt of the
complete record from the county planning commission,the land use commission shall act to approve, approvewith modification, or deny the petition. A denial either by the county planning commission or by theland use commission, or a modification by the land usecommission, as the case may be, of the desired useshall be appealable to the circuit court of thecircuit in which the land is situated and shall be made pursuant to the Hawaii rules of civil procedure. 
4/ Although HRS § 205-6(e) (quoted supra) provides that the denial of
a special permit request by the county planning commission or the LUC isappealable to the circuit court, the provisions of HRS § 205-19(a) applyspecifically to contested cases such as this, requiring appeal directly to thesupreme court. We take judicial notice of the Circuit Court's June 4, 2024"Order Granting [SEA's] Motion to Transfer Case to Hawaii Supreme Court." 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
lacked jurisdiction to enter the Order Denying Intervention. It 
must therefore be vacated on that basis, and we need not reach Nâ Hînano's remaining contentions. 
For the reasons discussed above, the "Order Denying 
Movant Nâ Hînano['s] Motion To Intervene or Alternatively for Leave to File Brief of Amicus Curiae," entered on April 6, 2022, by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit, is vacated. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawai#i, July 31, 2025. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Lance D. Collins, Presiding Judge
Christina Lizzi, and
Bianca Isaki for Applicant for /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Intervention-Appellant. Associate Judge 
Leslie K. Iczkovitz for Appellants-Appellees. /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen
Associate Judge 
5 