NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0000988
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
RYAN DOMINGO, aka RYAN B. DOMINGO, SR., Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-1883)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)

 
Appellant-Defendant Ryan Domingo, aka Ryan B. Domingo,
 
Sr., (Domingo) appeals from a "Judgment of Conviction and
 
Sentence" (Judgment) filed on July 8, 2014, in the Circuit Court
 
1
of the First Circuit  (circuit court).  The Judgment was entered
 
against Domingo after a jury found him guilty as charged for
 Count I, Methamphetamine Trafficking in the First Degree, in
 violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 712-1240.7(1)(a)
 
2
 (2014), and Count II, Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia, in
1
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 
2
 HRS § 712-1240.7(1)(a) provides:
 
§712-1240.7 Methamphetamine trafficking in the first
degree.  (1) A person commits the offense of methamphetamine
trafficking in the first degree if the person knowingly:
 
(a) Possesses one or more preparations, compounds,
mixtures, or substances of an aggregate weight of one
ounce or more containing methamphetamine or any of its
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violation of HRS § 329-43.5(a) (2010).3 Domingo was sentenced to
 
twenty (20) years imprisonment with a mandatory minimum of two
 
(2) years for Count I, and five (5) years of imprisonment for
 Count II, with credit for time served, and the sentences to run
 concurrently. 
Domingo's only point of error is that the circuit court
 
erred in denying his request for a jury instruction on the lesser
 included offense to Count I, Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the
 Third Degree, in violation of HRS § 712-1243 (2014).
4 Domingo
 
raises no challenge to his conviction for Count II and only
 requests a new trial on Count I.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Domingo's
 point of error as follows and vacate the Judgment as to Count I. 
"[W]hen jury instructions or the omission thereof are
 
at issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when read
 
salts, isomers, and salts of isomers[.] 
HRS § 712-1240.7(2) provides that Methamphetamine Trafficking in the First
Degree is a class A felony.
3 HRS § 329-43.5(a) provides:
 
§329-43.5 Prohibited acts related to drug
paraphernalia. (a) It is unlawful for any person to use, or
to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of this chapter. Any person who
violates this section is guilty of a class C felony and upon
conviction may be imprisoned pursuant to section
706-660 . . . . 
4
 HRS § 712-1243 provides:
 
§712-1243 Promoting a dangerous drug in the third
degree. (1) A person commits the offense of promoting a
dangerous drug in the third degree if the person knowingly
possesses any dangerous drug in any amount.
 
(2) Promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree is a
class C felony.
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and considered as a whole, the instructions given are 
prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent or misleading." State v. Flores, 131 Hawai
'i 43, 57-58, 314 P.3d 
120, 134-35 (2013) (citations and quotation marks omitted). "The failure to instruct the jury on a lesser included offense for which the evidence provides a rational basis warrants vacation of the defendant's conviction." Id. at 58, 314 P.3d at 135. First, 
a court must determine if an offense is in fact a lesser included offense. See Id. at 52-53, 314 P.3d 129-30. Second, "jury 
instructions on lesser-included offenses must be given where there is a rational basis in the evidence for a verdict acquitting the defendant of the offense charged and convicting the defendant of the included offense." Id. at 51, 314 P.3d at 
128.
 
Domingo contends that Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the
 
Third Degree is a lesser included offense to Methamphetamine
 Trafficking in the First Degree and that a jury instruction on
 the lesser included offense was required because there was a
 rational basis in the evidence for the jury to have acquitted
 Domingo of the charged Count I and instead convict him of the
 lesser included offense.
 
HRS § 712-1240.7(1)(a) provides:
 
§712-1240.7 Methamphetamine trafficking in the
first degree.  (1) A person commits the offense of
methamphetamine trafficking in the first degree if the
person knowingly:
 
(a) Possesses one or more preparations,
compounds, mixtures, or substances of an
aggregate weight of one ounce or more
containing methamphetamine or any of its
salts, isomers, and salts of isomers[.] 
(Emphasis added.) HRS § 712-1243(1) provides:
 
§712-1243 Promoting a dangerous drug in the
third degree. (1) A person commits the offense of
promoting a dangerous drug in the third degree if the
person knowingly possesses any dangerous drug in any
amount.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
This case arises from the execution of a search warrant
 
on December 15, 2011 at a residence where Domingo was staying. 
In Domingo's bedroom, officers found: (1) a pouch under a
 mattress that contained "[t]hree glass pipes with residue, a
 lighter, a straw scoop, and some baggies[;]" and (2) a blue pouch
 with sixteen (16) Ziploc bags, weighing well over an ounce,
 containing a white crystalline substance and found inside a
 speaker located behind the bedroom door. On appeal, Domingo
 contends that, based on his testimony that he did not know there
 were any drugs in the speaker and that he only knew about the
 drug paraphernalia under his mattress (which included three
 pipes, one of which contained .036 grams of methamphetamine
 
5
residue),  the jury could have reasonably concluded he only
knowingly possessed the residue, and thus could have reasonably
 acquitted him of the trafficking charge and convicted him of the
 lesser included offense. 
We note that this was not the position that Domingo 
took at trial. In arguing for the inclusion of the lesser included jury instruction, Domingo's counsel contended that the jury instruction was required because there was a "conceivable way in which a jury could somehow infer that my client knew there were some kind of drugs in the speaker but not the amount[.]" Nevertheless, the Hawai
'i Supreme Court has held that "trial 
courts are duty bound to instruct juries sua sponte . . . regarding lesser included offenses, having a rational basis in the evidence." State v. Haanio, 94 Hawai
'i 
405, 415, 16 P.3d 246, 256 (citation and quotation marks omitted) overruled on other grounds by, Flores, 131 Hawai
'i 43, 314 P.3d 
5
 Jeanette Ardiente, whom the court qualified as an expert in the area
of drug analysis, testified that, based on HPD's work request instruction to
analyze only one of the three pipes, she tested the residue in one of the
pipes, recorded a weight of .036 grams and concluded the residue was
consistent with methamphetamine. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
120.6 "[I]n our judicial system, the trial courts, not the 
parties, have the duty and ultimate responsibility to insure that 
juries are properly instructed on issues of criminal liability." Flores, 131 Hawai
'i at 56, 314 P.3d at 133 (citations and 
quotation marks omitted). 
Thus, regardless of the parties' arguments at trial, if
 
(1) Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree is a lesser
 included offense to Methamphetamine Trafficking in the First
 Degree, and (2) there was a rational basis in the evidence for a
 jury to acquit Domingo of the trafficking charge but convict him
 of the lesser included offense, the circuit court erred in
 failing to give the jury instruction on the lesser included
 offense.
 
1. Lesser Included Offense. Promoting a Dangerous Drug
 
in the Third Degree is a lesser included offense to
 Methamphetamine Trafficking in the First Degree.
 
HRS § 701-109(4)(a) (2014) provides that one offense is 
included in another if "[i]t is established by proof of the same or less than all the facts required to establish the commission of the offense charged[.]" Methamphetamine Trafficking in the First Degree requires proof that the defendant knowingly "[p]ossesses one or more preparations, compounds, mixtures, or substances of an aggregate weight of one ounce or more containing methamphetamine or any of its salts, isomers, and salts of isomers[.]" HRS § 712-1240.7(1)(a) (emphasis added). Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree requires the Appellee-Plaintiff State of Hawai
'i (State) to prove that the defendant 
6 Haanio was overruled by Flores only to the extent that Haanio held 
that failure to give the lesser included offense jury instruction was harmless
where the jury convicted the defendant of the charged offense or of a greaterincluded offense. Flores, 131 Hawai' i at 57, 314 P.3d at 134. Flores 
reaffirmed the holding of Haanio regarding the trial court's obligation togive instructions on lesser included offenses. Id. at 51-55, 314 P.3d at 128­
32. For instance, Flores cited Haanio favorably for the proposition that
"[t]he trial court's failure to give appropriate included offense instructions
requested by a party constitutes error, as does the trial court's failure to
give an appropriate included offense instruction that has not been requested."
Id. at 55, 314 P.3d at 132.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
knowingly possessed "any dangerous drug in any amount." HRS
 
§ 712-1243(1) (emphasis added). The legislature has defined any
 substance which contains any quantity of methamphetamine,
 including any of its salts, isomers, and salt of isomers as a
 dangerous drug. HRS § 712-1240 (2014); HRS § 329-16(e) (2010). 
Therefore, Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree can be
 proven by the same or less than all the facts required to prove
 Methamphetamine Trafficking in the First Degree and is a lesser
 included offense.
 
2. Rational Basis For The Lesser Included Offense
 
Instruction.  Based on the record in this case, there was a
 
rational basis in the evidence to support an instruction on the
 lesser included offense of Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the
 Third Degree.
 
Domingo's theory of the case at trial was that,
 
although he was guilty of Count II based on the items found under
 the mattress, he was not guilty of Count I because he did not
 knowingly possess the drugs contained in the speaker. The State
 contends that there was no rational basis in the evidence to
 support the lesser included offense instruction because Domingo
 did not dispute the amount of drugs in the speaker, merely his
 knowledge of the drugs. The State contends that the charge for
 Methamphetamine Trafficking in the First Degree was clearly
 exclusively about the methamphetamine found in the speaker,
 whereas the Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia charge had to do
 with the contents found under the mattress. Thus, the State
 contends the two were not related in terms of charging. 
Despite the State's contention, the indictment as to
 
Count I, mirroring the wording of HRS § 712-1240.7(1)(a),
 provides that Domingo "did knowingly possess one or more
 preparations, compounds, mixtures, or substances of an aggregate
 weight of one ounce or more containing methamphetamine or any of
 its salts, isomers, and salts of isomers[.]" Further, the jury
 instruction for Methamphetamine Trafficking in the First Degree
 contained similar language. Neither the indictment nor the jury
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
instructions indicated a differentiation between the
 
methamphetamine found in the speaker and the methamphetamine
 residue found in the pipe. 
Domingo testified that he did not know that the speaker
 
contained methamphetamine because he was just holding the speaker
 for a friend. Officer Bruce Kim testified that the speaker was
 stored behind a door and the blue pouch containing the drugs was
 not visible from the front of the speaker. There is a rational
 basis, given the testimony and Domingo's theory of the case, upon
 which the jury could have acquitted Domingo of knowingly
 possessing the methamphetamine found in the speaker, but
 convicted him of possessing any amount of methamphetamine based
 on his admission of knowingly possessing the pipes, one of which 
contained .036 grams of methamphetamine residue. Thus, the
 circuit court should have given the lesser included offense
 instruction for Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree,
 regardless of the reason given by trial counsel for giving the
 instruction.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Judgment of
 
Conviction and Sentence" filed on July 8, 2014, in the Circuit
 Court of the First Circuit, is vacated as to Count I. This case
 is remanded for a new trial on Count I.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, October 27, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Lars Peterson,

for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Loren J. Thomas,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu, for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
7
 