NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0005130
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
DANA E. VINCENT, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
JACQUELINE CLOUSE, Defendant-Appellant, and
JOHN DOES, 1-20, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 10-1-2336)

 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Jacqueline Clouse (Clouse) appeals
 
from the September 18, 2013 "Order Granting Plaintiff Dana [E.]
 
Vincent's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment as to Liability,
 Filed on January 11, 2013," (Summary Judgment Order) entered in
 
1
the Circuit Court of the First Circuit  (circuit court). This
 
case arises from a motor vehicle accident in which both parties
 deny liability. 
I. BACKGROUND

 
Parties substantially dispute all the facts in this 
case. On April 29, 2008, Plaintiff-Appellee Dana E. Vincent (Vincent) was driving her 1999 Ford Escort vehicle from her 
workplace, a Taco Bell restaurant in Kane
'ohe, Hawai 'i. Vincent 
was exiting the workplace parking lot and attempting to make a 
left turn onto Kamehameha Highway. That section of the highway has two lanes heading north towards Kahuku, two southbound lanes, 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and a "turning lane" (also referred to as the "suicide lane")
 
between the northbound and southbound lanes to allow cars in that
 lane to turn left from either direction. Along both sides of
 Kamehameha Highway signs stating "center lane, [two-way] turn"
 are placed at intervals.
 
The Motor Vehicle Accident Report includes the
 
following description of the accident: "[Clouse] driving in the
 middle lane to make left turn struck by [Vincent] exiting driving
 onto [Kamehameha] Hwy. crossing two lanes of [Kamehameha] Hwy. to
 make left turn. [Vincent] attempting to get onto [Kamehameha]
 Hwy. and go northbound."
 
Vincent said she was attempting to make a left hand
 
turn from the workplace parking lot and two drivers in the
 southbound lanes halted their vehicles and waved her through. 
Clouse said that she had been driving her vehicle, a 2001 Honda
 Civic, down the turning lane at a speed of between five and ten
 miles per hour when she "got hit." Clouse's expert accident
 reconstruction witness, Brad M. Wong (Wong) stated that he
 
believed Clouse was traveling between 10 and 15 miles per hour
 
and Vincent was moving at between 7 to 10 miles per hour. 
Vincent's expert witness, John E. Muse (Muse) said he believed
 
Clouse was moving at between 15 and 20 miles per hour. The speed
 
limit for that part of Kamehameha Highway is 25 miles per hour.
 
Clouse said she drove down the turning lane in order to
 
"turn left at the Benjamin Moore paint store." Clouse said she
 did not know how long she was driving in the turning lane, but
 that it was "the distance from the Shell station to the entrance
 to the Benjamin Moore store."
 
Clouse stated that she entered the turning lane "as
 
soon as I could see the Benjamin Moore store," and she "didn't
 notice that the cars had stopped until I actually was right there
 upon it. I looked to my right and I saw [Vincent] coming out of
 the Taco Bell." Clouse stated that she had seen other cars turn
 into the Benjamin Moore store using the turning lane; as she was
 driving down the turning lane she saw the lane was ending just
 past the entrance to the Benjamin Moore paint store and "I had
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not made a decision at that point whether – what I was going to
 
do." Clouse continued: 
I got hit before I could finally make my decision am I going
to make this turn and go in through the arrow that says
"out," or am I going to stop and wait and merge back into
the other lane. I hadn't made my decision, she made it for
me.
 
Clouse stated she saw Vincent's "car coming quickly
 
towards me and knew I would be hit." Vincent stated her vehicle
 
collided with Clouse's and that she did not see Clouse's vehicle
 until it impacted her own car.
 
On November 1, 2010, Vincent filed a complaint alleging
 
that Clouse's "conduct constitutes negligence, negligence per se,
 gross negligence, and reckless and willful disregard of the
 rights and safety of [Vincent]" and seeking damages for medical
 expenses, "pain and suffering, severe emotional distress and
 mental anguish, the loss of future enjoyment of life, and other
 special and general damages . . . ."
 
On November 29, 2010, Clouse filed her answer to
 
Vincent's complaint and a demand for jury trial. Clouse and
 Vincent conducted discovery, exchanged requests for answers to
 interrogatories, and submitted the matter to arbitration. 
In her first answer to Vincent's interrogatories, dated

 
February 16, 2011, Clouse wrote:
 
I was in the second lane on Kamehameha Highway heading
towards William Henry Road. As I approached the Shell gas
station, I noticed both lanes of traffic were stopped for
the red light. Still in the second lane, I noticed the
Benjamin Moore Paint Store to my left. I decided to check
 out this store.
 
. . . I entered the third turning lane (somewhere between

the Shell station and the Hawaiian Tel Building). As I proceeded
at a speed that was at or less than the speed limit, [Vincent]
entered my lane, striking my vehicle with what appeared to be at
great speed.
 
On July 6, 2011, Clouse deposed Vincent. Vincent said
 
in her deposition that the time it took her to move from the Taco
 
Bell driveway to the third lane was about two and a half minutes
 (a handwritten note amended that time to reflect 30 seconds); she
 saw no traffic in the turning lane when she looked to her left;
 she proceeded through the turning lane; and then collided with
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Clouse's car.
 
On July 8, 2011, Vincent deposed Clouse. In that
 
deposition, Clouse stated that Ishmael Stagner II (Stagner) was
 
at the bus stop at the time of the accident and that he witnessed
 
the accident. Vincent listed Stagner as a non-expert witness,
 who would testify to the facts and circumstances of the incident.
 
By report dated November 14, 2011, Muse submitted his
 
analysis of the April 29, 2008 accident (Muse's Report). Muse's
 
Report was based on the Motor Vehicle Accident Report,
 
photographs of the accident scene and vehicles, depositions and
 answers to interrogatories of various witnesses and parties, and
 a site inspection. Muse's Report referred to the deposition of
 Stagner, who had been driving southbound on Kamehameha Highway in
 the morning. Muse's Report stated, "[a]n unknown vehicle pulled
 out of one of the Taco Bell driveways. The driver in front of
 [Stagner] applied the brakes. [Stagner] had to apply his brakes
 rapidly to avoid impacting the pickup in front of him. He did
 not see the collision, but he heard screeching brakes and a
 bang." Muse's Report stated, "it would have been physically
 impossible for [Clouse] to make the left turn into the [Benjamin
 Moore] paint store driveway." Muse concluded, "[s]ince [Vincent]
 could not have perceived [Clouse's] Honda as a hazard prior to
 accelerating into the center lane, and no vehicles could have
 been legally traversing the center lane at that point, the
 decision of [Vincent] to accelerate into the center lane was
 reasonable."
 
By report dated April 9, 2012 (Wong's Report), Wong
 
submitted an analysis of the April 29, 2008 accident based on the
 Motor Vehicle Accident Report, photographs of the accident scene
 and vehicles, damage estimates, Muse's Report, and a site
 inspection. Wong's Report stated: "[t]he lack of any conclusion
 of speed makes any time/distance analysis opinion regarding the
 intentions of [Clouse] to make the turn into the Benjamin Moore
 driveway speculative and not within reasonable engineering
 certainty." Wong rejected Muse's opinion that Vincent "had no
 obligation to anticipate [Clouse's Honda] improperly driving in
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the center turn lane since it terminated south of the Benjamin
 
Moore driveway" by stating, "[t]he markings within the center
 turn lane actually would indicate to a normal driver that the
 area where the incident occurred is an area where vehicles would
 be traveling to turn left into the Benjamin Moore driveway."
 
On September 11, 2012, Vincent deposed Mark Kikuchi
 
(Kikuchi), from the Department of Transportation Services of the
 
City and County of Honolulu.
 
On September 20, 2012, Vincent filed a motion to add
 
Kikuchi as a critical witness despite the parties' discovery cut­
off date of September 12, 2012. Also on September 20, 2012,
 Vincent deposed Wong. Clouse filed her opposition to Vincent's
 motion to add a critical witness on September 24, 2012, to which
 Clouse appended a copy of Kikuchi's deposition and Muse's Report.
 
On September 25, 2012, Vincent filed her reply to
 
Clouse's opposition to her motion to add a critical witness. 
Vincent's counsel appended a declaration to Vincent's reply, in
 which she declared, "[t]hrough the agreement of counsel for both
 parties, the depositions of [Wong and Muse] . . . will be after
 the discovery deadline, and have yet to be scheduled."
 
On October 8, 2012, the circuit court denied Vincent's
 
motion to add a critical witness.
 
In his deposition taken on December 13, 2012, Wong
 
opined that before entering into or crossing the turning lane,
 
[Vincent] should have confirmed that no other vehicles were
coming from her left that would pose an immediate hazard.
 
. . . .
 
. . . So my opinion is that [Vincent] failed to move forward
enough and go slow enough to be able to confirm that no vehicles
were close enough to constitute an immediate hazard. 
Wong stated the basis of his opinion was that the damage to
 
Vincent's vehicle and the speed was "consistent with [Vincent]
 accelerating from an area before the area of impact and before
 encroaching into the center turn lane[.]" Wong affirmed that
 "the proper use of a two-way turning lane is to enter the lane
 and make the left turn as immediately as possible[.]"
 
Wong's deposition included the following colloquy:
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[Vincent's counsel:] When you chose the two radius
distances of page 2 of your notes, why did you pick 30 and
40 as opposed to any other numbers? 
[Wong:] Because those are the approximate distance
[sic] from, well, the driveway, Taco Bell driveway where the
accident occurred, to the driveway of Benjamin Moore. 
[Vincent's counsel:] 
So you -­
[Wong:] So, ultimately, [Clouse] need to get in here
[the Benjamin Moore paint store driveway], right? So the
 radius is going to be approximately that much. Well,
because she needs to do that, the turn. So the turn radius
 is going to be – well, it can't be more than 40 because,
like you say, if it's more than 40, she's going to go past
it. 
[Vincent's counsel:] So then it is your belief that, had
she started making the turn at the point where you've marked area
of impact and if she was going at either 10 or 15 miles per hour,
she had just enough room to get into the, let's say, incoming
portion of the driveway of the paint store? 
[Wong:] What I'm saying is that, based on the area of the
impact and her speed, is that she could make the turn. And again,
my measurements don't assume two things, which is – well my
calculations assume a constant radius turn at a constant speed.
But the variables that exist are braking as well as a nonconstant
radius turn or cutting the turn more.
 
Wong acknowledged that his calculation did not include
 
reaction time. In answer to whether Wong's opinion was premised
 
on the assumption that Clouse was already making the turn at the
 time of impact, Wong stated: "No, because I think it's, like, 45
 feet. So she has some room. She has some room to proceed and
 react; plus, again, that doesn't include any braking that's going
 to occur and any sort of shortening of the turn itself."
 
On January 11, 2013, Vincent filed a motion for partial
 
summary judgment as to liability (MSJ). Vincent's MSJ was
 
premised on the following arguments: (1) Clouse's use of the two-
way left turn lane was illegal and negligent; and (2) Vincent had
 no reason or duty to anticipate Clouse's illegal conduct or that
 a motor vehicle would be in the position of Clouse's at the point
 of impact. Vincent claimed Clouse had driven about 200 feet,
 "the 
entire length  of the center [two-way] turn lane, without
 
making a turn. She had knowingly passed the two Shell station
 driveways, the bank driveway, and the public storage driveway
 without signaling for a turn or executing a turn." Vincent's
 counsel declared that Clouse had admitted that she never engaged
 
6

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
her left turn signal prior to impact during a court annexed
 
arbitration program hearing.
 
On January 25, 2013, Clouse filed her opposition to
 
Vincent's MSJ. Clouse objected (1) to Vincent's exhibits on the
 basis that they could not be authenticated by Vincent's counsel
 because he was not a custodian of these records and that the
 exhibits lacked foundation; (2) to the submission of excerpts of
 Kikuchi's deposition because the circuit court had denied
 Vincent's attempt to include him as a witness; and (3) to the
 inclusion of Vincent's counsel's declaration, which included
 statements made by Clouse during the arbitration hearing on the
 
2
basis of Hawai 'i Arbitration Rules, Rule 23(c) , which provides:
"[n]o statements or testimony made in the course of the arbitration hearing shall be admissible in evidence for any purpose in the trial de novo." 
Clouse argued that her testimony in which she stated

 
she was driving down the turning lane with the intention to turn
 into the Benjamin Moore paint store raised a genuine issue of
 material fact. She argued that she was "preparing" to make a
 turn and was therefore allowed to be in the turning lane pursuant
 to the Revised Ordinances of the City and County of Honolulu
 (ROH), Section 15-6.7, titled "Traffic lane markings," which
 
provides in relevant part: 
(c)	 When a lane is designated a [two-way] left turn lane
in Schedule XXXII attached to the ordinance codified
 in this section and made a part hereof and by the use
of pavement markings, a vehicle shall not be driven
thereon except when preparing for or making a left
turn from or into a highway. A left turn shall not be
made from any other lane where [two-way] left turn
lanes have been designated. This section shall not
prohibit driving across a [two-way] left turn lane. 
(Emphasis added and asterisk omitted.) Clouse argued that
 
Vincent was not entitled to summary judgment on the issue of
 comparative negligence because Vincent allegedly violated Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291C-64 (2007 Repl.), titled "Vehicle
 
2
 This case was referred to the Court Annexed Arbitration Program
resulting in the parties arbitrator filing a sealed arbitration award on
August 11, 2011.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entering highway from private road or driveway", which provides: 
The driver of a vehicle to enter or cross a highway
(including bicycle lane or bicycle path) from an alley,
building, private road, or driveway or from any public or
private property other than a highway that is adjacent to
the highway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles or
bicycles approaching on the highway (including bicycle lane
or bicycle path) to be entered.
 In her opposition to Vincent's MSJ, Clouse attached
 
transcripts from the December 13, 2012 deposition of Wong, July
 
6, 2011 deposition of Vincent, and the July 8, 2011 deposition of
 Clouse.
 
At its September 3, 2013 hearing, the circuit court
 
orally granted Vincent's MSJ. The circuit court found that no
 dispute existed with respect to the purpose of the turning lane;
 that a person using the turning lane could access the Benjamin
 Moore paint store; that Clouse had not been using a left turn
 signal; that there was "little dispute" as to Clouse's speed at
 the point of impact; and that Vincent had met her burden on the
 issue of liability.
 
On September 18, 2013, the circuit court filed its
 
Summary Judgment Order, which provided that Vincent was entitled
 to summary judgment as to a matter of law as to: 
(1) [Vincent's] claims that [Clouse] was negligent and that
[Clouse's] negligence was the sole proximate cause of the
subject accident; and (2) [Clouse's] claims/defense that
[Vincent] was comparatively negligent and that [Vincent's]
comparative negligence was a proximate cause of the
accident. 
On September 25, 2013, Clouse filed a motion for leave
 
to file an interlocutory appeal. On October 4, 2013, Vincent
 
filed her opposition to Clouse's motion. On October 18, 2013,
 the circuit court granted Clouse's motion for leave to file an
 interlocutory appeal.
 
On November 8, 2013, Clouse filed her notice of appeal
 
from the Summary Judgment Order.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
Summary Judgment
 
The appellate court reviews "the circuit court's grant
 
or denial of summary judgment de novo." Querubin v. Thronas, 107
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i 48, 56, 109 P.3d 689, 697 (2005) (quoting Durette v. 
Aloha Plastic Recycling, Inc., 105 Hawai 'i 490, 501, 100 P.3d 60, 
71 (2004)). 
The Hawai 'i Supreme Court has often articulated that 
summary judgment is appropriate if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on
file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there
is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. A
 fact is material if proof of that fact would have the effect
of establishing or refuting one of the essential elements of
a cause of action or defense asserted by the parties. The
 evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. In other words, we must view all of the
evidence and the inferences drawn therefrom in the light
most favorable to the party opposing the motion.
 
Querubin, 107 Hawai 'i at 56, 109 P.3d at 697 (quoting Durette, 
105 Hawai 'i at 501, 100 P.3d at 71).
 Hawai 'i Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 56(e) 
provides in relevant part:
 
Rule 56. Summary judgment.
 
. . . .
 
(e) Form of affidavits; further testimony; defense
 
required. . . . When a motion for summary judgment is
made . . . , an adverse party may not rest upon the mere
allegations or denials of the adverse party's pleading, but the
adverse party's response, by affidavits or as otherwise provided
in this rule, must set forth specific facts showing that there is
a genuine issue for trial. If the adverse party does not so
respond, summary judgment, if appropriate, shall be entered
against the adverse party.
 
Thus, "[a] party opposing a motion for summary judgment cannot
 
discharge his or her burden by alleging conclusions, 'nor is [the
 party] entitled to a trial on the basis of a hope that [the
 party] can produce some evidence at that time.'" Henderson v.
 
Prof'l Coatings Corp., 72 Haw. 387, 401, 819 P.2d 84, 92 (1991)
 (quoting 10A Charles Alan Wright, Arthur R. Miller & Mary Kay 

Kane, Federal Practice & Procedure: Civil 2d § 2727 (1983)).
III. DISCUSSION

 
Vincent asserts that this court's review of the
 
pleadings, depositions, admissions, and other record evidence
 should be restricted to those that were cited in Clouse's
 memorandum in opposition to Vincent's MSJ. Vincent relies on
 
Munoz v. Yuen , 66 Haw. 603, 605, 670 P.2d 825, 826 (1983), which
 
9

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
held: 
we would be imposing an undue burden on the trial court by
requiring it to examine every deposition, answer to
interrogatory, or admission on file, especially where the
record is voluminous. It is the duty of counsel to
specifically cite those portions of the record that raise or
dispose of genuine issues of material fact.
 
Munoz, however, addressed the issue of "whether depositions on
 
file in the case but not brought to the trial court's attention
 in connection with a motion for summary judgment can be
 considered by the appellate court in determining whether the
 award of summary judgment was proper." Id., 66 Haw. at 604, 670
 
P.2d at 826. The Munoz court examined motions filed in the lower
 court as well as the "transcript of the proceedings below" and
 determined that depositions cited in the appellant's brief were
 not brought to the lower court's attention and therefore would
 not be reviewed on appeal. Id., 66 Haw. at 606, 670 P.2d at 827. 
However, in this case, Clouse brought passages from Wong's
 deposition to the circuit court's attention at the hearing on
 Vincent's MSJ.
 
Clouse contends her use of the turning lane was a
 
disputed issue of fact and therefore the Summary Judgment Order
 was improper. Vincent contends Clouse violated traffic laws and
 was 100% liable for the accident as a matter of law. Vincent
 also contends that Clouse was outside of the turning lane at the
 point of impact, was not lawfully using the highway, and
 therefore Vincent "had no legal duty to assume that a car might
 be illegally obstructing her path in the [two-way] turn lane."
 
Vincent relies on Wong's deposition testimony that
 
Clouse was "outside" of the turning lane at the point of impact. 
Wong's diagram of the vehicles on the highway indicates Clouse's
 car was located at the point where the turning lane tapered off
 and some distance north of the Benjamin Moore paint store at the
 time of impact. Clouse, however, asserted that her vehicle was
 in the turning lane at the time of the collision.
 
Wong also stated that Clouse had approximately another
 
45 feet before reaching the Benjamin Moore paint store driveway
 and "[t]he markings within the center turn lane actually would
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
indicate to a normal driver that the area where the incident
 
occurred is an area where vehicles would be traveling to turn
 left into the Benjamin Moore driveway."
 
Vincent contends Clouse's presence at the end of the 
turning lane violated ROH § 15-6.7(c), which prohibits vehicles from driving in the turning lane "except when preparing for or making a left turn onto a highway[;]" the Hawai
'i Driver's 
Manual, which provides that turning lanes are to be used only for left turns and not for passing; and the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices, which provides that solid double yellow lines at the end of left turn lanes indicate that vehicles should not use that part of the lane for turning. 
Clouse contends she did not violate ROH § 15-6.7(c) or
 
prohibitions against using the turning lane as a passing lane
 because she was preparing to make a left turn into the Benjamin
 Moore paint store. The parties' expert witnesses gave
 conflicting opinions as to whether Clouse could have made the
 left turn into the paint store.
 
As Clouse correctly argues, the lack of dispute as to 
whether Clouse violated a traffic law would not establish her liability for negligence. For summary judgment on Vincent's negligence claim to have been proper, there must not have been a genuine issue of material fact as to the following four elements: "(1) duty; (2) breach of duty; (3) causation; and (4) damages." Weite v. Momohara, 124 Hawai
'i 236, 253, 240 P.3d 899, 916 (App. 
2010) (quoting Cho v. State, 115 Hawai 'i 373, 379 n.11, 168 P.3d 
17, 23 n.11 (2007)). "It is the established rule in this jurisdiction that a driver must exercise a right of way in such a manner as to observe due care to avoid colliding with other persons or vehicles on the highway." Sherry v. Asing, 56 Haw. 
135, 143, 531 P.2d 648, 655 (1975) (citing State v. Arena, 46 Haw. 315, 379 P.2d 594 (1963); Hymer v. Chai, 407 F.2d 136 (9th Cir. 1969). A driver's failure to conform to a law that establishes a standard of conduct to protect other drivers may be considered "evidence of negligence." Michel v. Valdastri, Ltd., 
59 Haw. 53, 55, 575 P.2d 1299, 1301 (1978). 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In addition to evidence of Clouse's allegedly-illegal
 
use of the turning lane, Vincent also submitted Muse's Report and
 
deposition, in which Muse opined that Vincent had no duty to
 anticipate Clouse's presence in the turning lane and that Clouse
 had caused the accident by improperly driving in a two-way left
 turn lane.
 
Clouse submitted Wong's Report, which reviewed Muse's
 
Report and in which Wong offered contrary opinions, including
 that Vincent had failed to confirm that no vehicles were within
 the center turning lane and it was "reasonable to expect vehicles
 to traverse to turn left into driveways along Kamehameha
 Highway." In her opposition to Vincent's MSJ, Clouse argued that
 genuine issues of material fact existed as to Vincent's
 contributory negligence because she was required to "yield the
 right-of-way to all vehicles or bicycles approaching on the
 highway" pursuant to HRS § 291C-64 and failed to confirm that
 there were no approaching vehicles.
 
Vincent asserts that she could not have been
 
contributorily negligent because in Wong's deposition testimony
 he "acknowledged [Vincent] was executing a legal left turn prior
 to the accident" and Wong stated, "[i]f [Clouse's] car was not
 lawfully in the area of impact, [Vincent] would have a reasonable
 basis for assuming that it was safe to proceed with her left turn
 even if she couldn't see all the way up the center lane." 
Vincent's assertion does not accurately reflect Wong's testimony. 
Wong testified that Vincent's attempt to execute a left turn
 would be reasonable if Clouse was not lawfully in the area of
 impact, and he further stated: (1) no statutes prohibited either
 driver from executing their maneuvers, and (2) Vincent had failed
 to confirm that vehicles were in the turning lane prior to
 proceeding to execute a left turn.
 
Genuine issues of material fact exist as to whether
 
Clouse's use of the turning lane constituted an exercise of due
 care. Wong opined that a normal driver would understand that
 they were to use the turning lane to go into the Benjamin Moore
 paint store driveway. Clouse stated that she had seen other cars
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
use that driveway and turn left from the turning lane when going
 
to the Benjamin Moore paint store.
 
Vincent contends "the physical evidence proves that it
 
was impossible [for Clouse to turn into the paint store driveway]
 based on her speed and her position at the moment of impact[,]"
 thus leaving no dispute as to the material fact of whether Clouse
 was lawfully using the turning lane. Wong testified to the
 opposite conclusion, that Clouse could have turned into the
 driveway because it was 45 feet away; Clouse could have slowed
 her vehicle by braking; and Clouse could have narrowed the radius
 of her turn. Even if Clouse could not have succeeded in
 executing her left turn, this would not establish Vincent's lack
 of contributory negligence.
 
Vincent asserts that Clouse did not use a left turn
 
signal. "[I]t would have taken another 1 to 1 1/4 seconds for
 [Clouse] . . . to put on her turn signal and begin
 turning . . . ." Clouse argued to the circuit court, and
 contends on appeal, that Vincent's counsel's declaration that
 Clouse "admitted" to not using a left turn signal during a court
 annexed arbitration hearing was the only basis for finding that
 she did not use a left turn signal and that this basis is
 improper. This alleged-admission would not be admissible at
 trial and the circuit court should not have taken it into
 consideration in its Summary Judgment Order. 
3
, titled "Procedures Hawai'i Arbitration Rules, Rule 23 
3 Hawai'i Arbitration Rules, Rule 23 provides: 
Rule 23. PROCEDURES AT TRIAL DE NOVO. 
(A) The clerk shall seal any arbitration award if a
trial de novo is requested. The jury will not be informed of
the arbitration proceeding, the award, or about any other
aspect of the arbitration proceeding. The sealed arbitration
award shall not be opened until after the verdict is
received and filed in a jury trial, or until after the judge
has rendered a decision in a court trial.
 
(B) All discovery permitted during the course of the
arbitration proceedings shall be admissible in the trial de
novo subject to all applicable rules of civil procedure and
evidence. The court in the trial de novo shall insure that
 any reference to the arbitration proceeding is omitted from
(continued...)
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
at Trial De Novo" provides in part: "(C) No statements or 
testimony made in the course of the arbitration hearing shall be admissible in evidence for any purpose in the trial de novo." The purpose of this rule is to preserve "the interests of party litigants in the confidentiality of information disclosed during an arbitration proceeding" should the "trial court's efforts to promote a settlement prove fruitless and the case proceeds to a jury trial[.]" Kamaunu v. Kaaea, 99 Hawai
'i 503, 507, 57 P.3d 
428, 432 (2002) (holding that the substance of arbitration proceedings could be considered in a settlement conference). 
HRCP Rule 56(e) requires "[s]upporting and opposing
 
affidavits shall be made on personal knowledge, shall set forth
 such facts as would be admissible in evidence[.]" See Munoz, 66
 
Haw. at 605, 670 P.2d at 826 ("It is axiomatic that a motion for
 summary judgment should be decided on the basis of admissible
 evidence.") Because Clouse's alleged-admission that she failed
 to use her left turn signal during the arbitration hearing would
 not be admissible in evidence, the circuit court should not have
 relied upon this admission in its Summary Judgment Order. 
Genuine issues of material fact exist as to whether
 
Vincent had been operating her vehicle with due care when
 executing her turn. Wong's statement that Vincent would have a
 reasonable basis for executing her left turn through three lanes
 of traffic was premised on the assumption that Clouse was "not
 lawfully in the area of impact" and, as discussed, genuine issues
 as to whether Clouse violated her legal duty of due care remain. 
Whether Vincent observed and was justified in concluding she
 could complete her turn without endangering cars in either
 direction also remains a disputed material fact. Vincent
 testified that she did not see Clouse approaching in the turning
 lane. The speed at which Clouse was approaching Vincent's path
 
3(...continued)
any discovery taken therein and sought to be introduced at
the trial de novo.
 
(C) No statements or testimony made in the course of
the arbitration hearing shall be admissible in evidence for
any purpose in the trial de novo.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
is disputed and Wong opined that Vincent should have anticipated
 
the possibility of a vehicle present in the turning lane. These
 are disputes of material facts that raise genuine issues as to
 whether Vincent "was under no obligation to yield" to oncoming
 traffic. The issue of whether Vincent should have yielded the
 right of way to Clouse should be submitted to a trier of fact. 
See Arena, 46 Haw. at 330, 379 P.2d at 603 ("On the evidence, the
 question of whether or not the proximity of the oncoming traffic
 required [the decedent driver] to yield the right of way was
 clearly open for the jury's determination.")
IV. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the September 18,
 
2013 "Order Granting Plaintiff Dana E. Vincent's Motion for
 Partial Summary Judgment as to Liability, filed on January 11,
 2013," entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit and
 remand this case for further proceedings consistent with this
 opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 19, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Jonathan L. Ortiz
 
Wade J. Katano
 Christine S. Prepose-Kamihara(Ortiz & Katano)
for Defendant-Appellant.
 Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Randall L.K.M. Rosenberg

Charles E. McKay
Moana A. Yost
 (Rosenberg & McKay)
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
15
 