NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S  HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-17-0000871 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I  
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee
v. 
JAMES SIUGPIYEMAL, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT 
(CR. NO. 2PC14-1-0774) 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant James Siugpiyemal (
Siugpiyemal) 
appeals from the Judgment Conviction and Sentence (Judgment
) 
entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit (Circuit 
Court)1 on November 14, 2017. Siugpiyemal contends that the 
Circuit Court erred by: 
1. denying his motion for judgment of acquittal; 
2. refusing to admit into evidence a defense asserted 
by the State in a civil action filed by the complaining witness 
(CW); 
3. improperly instructing the jury; and 
4. denying his motion for a new trial. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as well as the 
relevant statutory and case law, we affirm the Judgment for the 
reasons set forth below. 
1 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
I. 
Siugpiyemal was employed by the State of Hawai# i 
Department of Public Safety (DPS) as an Adult Corrections Officer 
in the Maui Community Correctional Center (MCCC) from before 
June, 2014, until October 9, 2014. During that time, CW was an 
MCCC inmate committed to the Director of DPS in the work furlough 
program. 
On October 24, 2014, a grand jury returned a five-count 
indictment charging Siugpiyemal with Sexual Assault in the Second 
Degree and Sexual Assault in the Third Degree. 
The grand jury 
charged that Siugpiyemal sexually assaulted CW on July 31, 2014 
(Count One) and on August 11, 2014 (Counts Two, Three, Four and 
Five). The indictment was filed in the Circuit Court on October 
27, 2014. Siugpiyemal left Maui on October 9, 2014, and was 
returned on November 5, 2016, after having been extradited from 
the Federated States of Micronesia. 
Meanwhile, on June 29, 2016, CW filed a civil lawsuit 
in federal court (the Federal Lawsuit) against DPS, Siugpiyemal, 
and others. On September 13, 2016, DPS filed its answer in the 
Federal Lawsuit. DPS admitted that Siugpiyemal was employed as 
an Adult Corrections Officer assigned to MCCC on the dates upon 
which the sexual assaults allegedly took place but asserted, as 
an affirmative defense, that the alleged assaults were outside of 
the course and scope of Siugpiyemal's employment by DPS. 
Siugpiyemal's criminal jury trial began on July 10, 
2017. CW testified that after Siugpiyemal learned she had a 
Facebook account, "He let me know that I could get into trouble 
for being on Facebook and that there's no social networking and 
that he just kept advising me that that wasn't what I was 
supposed to do is be on Facebook. And then he just started 
having small talk with me and asked me to send him naked photos 
of myself." CW testified: "I was worried that [Siugpiyemal] was 
going to turn me in for social networking and that I would lose 
my furlough." She testified she had sexual contact with 
2 A. Motion for Judgment of Acquittal NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Siugpiyemal on July 31, 2014 and August 11, 2014, at the Maui 
Tropical Plantation. On July 11, 2017, the jury was shown a 
video recording of Siugpiyemal and CW engaged in sex acts on 
August 11, 2014. 
On July 12, 2017, the State rested its case and 
Siugpiyemal moved for judgment of acquittal. Both of his sexual 
contacts with CW took place at the Maui Tropical Plantation, and 
he argued that he was "not on the job working in the Maui 
Community Correctional Center when he engaged in sex acts with 
[CW]." The Circuit Court denied the motion. 
The jury returned its verdict on July 14, 2017. The 
jury found Siugpiyemal not guilty on Count One and Count Two, but 
guilty on Counts Three, Four and Five. Siugpiyemal moved for a 
new trial on Counts 3-5. The Circuit Court conducted an 
evidentiary hearing and entered findings of fact, conclusions of 
law and an order denying the motion. The Judgment was entered on 
November 14, 2017. This appeal followed. 
II. 
Siugpiyemal first argues that the Circuit Court erred 
in denying his motion for judgment of acquittal. The motion was 
based upon the wording of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 707-
731(1)(c)(i) and 707-732(1)(e)(i) (2014), both of which require 
that the defendant be "employed in a state correctional 
facility[.]" Siugpiyemal contended that the plain language of 
the statutes encompassed only sexual assaults that took place 
"in" the correctional facility where the defendant was employed. 
He argued that because his sexual contacts with CW took place at 
the Maui Tropical Plantation when he was off duty and when CW was 
away from MCCC on work furlough, there was no evidence that he 
violated either statute. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court disagreed, stating: 
[I]f the Court looks at the -- at the statute in
question and at the charge here, the conduct that is alleged
is that of subjecting a person to sexual penetration. Theemployment status of the individual is an attendantcircumstance.
2 
. . . . 
And there is no requirement that the person -- the
actor be on duty at the time but, rather, be a person who isemployed in a state correctional facility at the time thathe subjects a person -- an inmate to an act of sexualpenetration in Counts One through Three and an act of sexualcontact in Counts Four and Five. 
So I'm satisfied from the language of the statute and
the charges here that the government has establishedsufficient evidence to establish each -- each of the elements of the offense charged with respect to both conductand attendant circumstances, both as to the defendant aswell as the status of the complaining witness at the time ofthe alleged offenses. 
(footnote added). 
We agree with the Circuit Court. Statutory 
construction is guided by the following rules: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutoryinterpretation is the language of the statute itself.Second, where the statutory language is plain andunambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to its plainand obvious meaning. Third, implicit in the task ofstatutory construction is our foremost obligation toascertain and give effect to the intention of thelegislature, which is to be obtained primarily from thelanguage contained in the statute itself. Fourth, whenthere is doubt, doubleness of meaning, or indistinctivenessor uncertainty of an expression used in a statute, anambiguity exists. And fifth, in construing an ambiguousstatute, the meaning of the ambiguous words may be sought byexamining the context, with which the ambiguous words,phrases, and sentences may be compared, in order toascertain their true meaning. 
2 HRS § 702-205 (2014) provides: 
The elements of an offense are such (1) conduct,
(2) attendant circumstances, and (3) results of conduct, as: 
(a) Are specified by the definition of the offense, and 
(b) Negative a defense (other than a defense based on thestatute of limitations, lack of venue, or lack ofjurisdiction). 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Woodfall, 120 Hawai# i 387, 391, 206 P.3d 841, 845 (2009) 
(citations omitted). In addition: 
The legislative history of a statute remains relevant even
when the language appears clear upon perfunctory review.Were this not the case, a court may be unable to adequatelydiscern the underlying policy which the legislature seeks topromulgate and, thus, would be unable to determine if aliteral construction would produce an absurd or unjustresult, inconsistent with the policies of the statute. 
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Omiya, 142 Hawai# i 439, 452, 420 P.3d 
370, 383 (2018) (citations and quotation marks omitted). 
The criminal statutes at issue are HRS §§ 707-731 and 
707-732. At the time relevant to this appeal, those statutes 
provided, in relevant part: 
§ 707-731 Sexual assault in the second degree . (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the second
degree if: 
. . . . 
(c) The person, while employed: (i) In a state correctional facility; 
(ii) By a private company providing services at
a correctional facility; 
(iii) By a private company providingcommunity-based residential services topersons committed to the director ofpublic safety and having received noticeof this statute; 
(iv) By a private correctional facilityoperating in the State of Hawaii; or 
(v) As a law enforcement officer as defined in 
section [710-1000], 
knowingly subjects to sexual penetration an
imprisoned person, a person confined to adetention facility, a person committed to thedirector of public safety, a person residing ina private correctional facility operating in theState of Hawaii, or a person in custody;provided that . . . this paragraph shall not beconstrued to prohibit practitioners licensedunder chapter 453 [medicine and surgery] or 455[naturopathic medicine] from performing any actwithin their respective practices; and furtherprovided that this paragraph shall not be 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
construed to prohibit a law enforcement officer
from performing a lawful search pursuant to awarrant or exception to the warrant clause[.] 
§ 707-732 Sexual assault in the third degree . (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the thirddegree if: 
. . . . 
(e) The person, while employed: (i) In a state correctional facility; 
(ii) By a private company providing services at
a correctional facility; 
(iii) By a private company providing community-based residential services to personscommitted to the director of public safetyand having received notice of thisstatute; 
(iv) By a private correctional facilityoperating in the State of Hawaii; or 
(v) As a law enforcement officer as defined in 
section [710-1000], 
knowingly subjects to sexual contact an
imprisoned person, a person confined to adetention facility, a person committed to thedirector of public safety, a person residing ina private correctional facility operating in theState of Hawaii, or a person in custody, orcauses the person to have sexual contact withthe actor[.] 
HRS §§ 707-731 and 707-732 took effect on January 1, 
1987. 1986 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 314, § 57 at 617-18, § 80 at 629.
Those statutes originally provided, in relevant part:  
§ 707-731 Sexual assault in the second degree.  (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the second
degree if: 
. . . . 
(c) The person, while employed in a state
correctional facility, knowingly subjects tosexual penetration an imprisoned person. 
§ 707-732 Sexual assault in the third degree.  (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the thirddegree if: 
. . . . 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(d) The person, while employed in a state
correctional facility, knowingly subjects tosexual contact an imprisoned person or causessuch person to have sexual contact with theactor. 
The statutes were amended in 1987 to clarify that they do not 
prohibit "practitioners licensed under chapter 453 [medicine and 
surgery], 455 [naturopathic medicine], or 460 [osteopathy],[ ] 
from performing any act within their respective practices." 1987 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 181, §§ 10 and 11 at 411 (footnote added). 3
Section 707-731 was amended in 1997 to provide, in 
relevant part: 
§ 707-731 Sexual assault in the second degree.  (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the second
degree if: 
. . . . 
(c) The person, while employed in a state
correctional facility[,] or while employed as a
law enforcement officer as defined in section 710-1000(13), knowingly subjects to sexualpenetration an imprisoned person[;], a personconfined to a detention facility, or a person incustody[.] 
1997 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 366, § 1 at 1149 (material repealed is 
bracketed, new language is underscored). Of the amendments, the 
Senate Judiciary Committee reported: 
The purpose of this bill is to extend the existing
prohibition of sexual penetration of a prisoner by a
corrections officer to a general prohibition of sexualpenetration of any arrested or detained person by a publicofficial who is detaining them. 
. . . . 
Your Committee finds that under current law, adult
corrections officers are held to a higher standard of
conduct in relation to their prisoners than police officers.If an imprisoned person is subjected to an act of consensualor nonconsensual sexual penetration by a correctionsofficer, the act constitutes sexual assault in the seconddegree. 
However, if an imprisoned person is subjected to an
act of sexual penetration by a police officer, the 
3 The exceptions for osteopathy were repealed by 2009 Haw. Sess.
Laws Act 11, §§ 73 and 74 at 35-36. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
person did not consent to the penetration. 
Your Committee further finds that existing law
recognizes that a person in custody is in no position toconsent to an act of sexual penetration by those who areincarcerating them. Thus, your Committee believes that thepolicy of preventing coercion by correctional officers forsexual favors from inmates and to prevent inmates from usingsex to extort favors from correctional officers should be extended to all law enforcement officers. 
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 767, in 1997 Senate Journal, at 1195 
(emphasis added). No parallel change was made to § 707-732 but, 
in 2001, the legislature amended § 707-732 to read, in relevant 
part: 
§ 707-732 Sexual assault in the third degree.  (1) A
person commits the offense of sexual assault in the third
degree if: 
. . . . 
[(d)] (e) The person, while employed in a state
correctional facility, knowingly subjects
to sexual contact an imprisoned person or
causes [such] the person to have sexualcontact with the actor[.] 
2001 Haw. Sess. Laws, 2nd Spec. Sess. Act 1, § 2 at 941-42 
(material repealed is bracketed and stricken, new language is 
underscored). 
The 2002 Legislature significantly broadened the scope 
of both statutes to include, in addition to persons employed in 
state correctional facilities and law enforcement officers, 
private companies providing services at a correctional facility 
or community-based residential services to persons committed to 
the director of public safety, and private correctional 
facilities operating in the State of Hawai# i. 2002 Haw. Sess. 
Laws Act 36, §§ 1 and 2 at 106-08. The House Committee on Public Safety and Military Affairs reported: 
Your Committee finds that given the inherent power
imbalance between imprisoned persons and staff at
correctional facilities, there can be no truly consensualsexual contact between such parties. This measure closes a loophole in existing statutes and thereby provides neededprotection to persons under the custody of the state. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 88, in 2002 House Journal, at 1268. The 
House Committee on Judiciary and Hawaiian Affairs reported: 
The purpose of the bill is to prohibit private company
employees at correctional facilities or in other residential
services under the Director of Public Safety from knowinglysubjecting imprisoned persons to sexual contact or sexualpenetration. 
. . . . 
Your Committee finds that inmates are particularly
vulnerable to sexual assaults from employees at correctional
facilities. Private employees associated with the prisonsystem are in the same position of authority as stateemployees over the inmates they supervise. 
Your Committee has amended this bill by declaring that
criminal liability applies to employees of a private companyproviding community-based residential services to personscommitted to the Director of Public Safety only if suchemployees have received notice of the prohibition againstsexual relations with inmates. 
Your Committee has 
authorized this amendment under the assumption that theDepartment of Public Safety intends to require potentialprivate companies to agree to educate their employees on theprohibition against sexual relations with inmates. 
H. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 696, in 2002 House Journal, at 1493. 
The 2004 Legislature expanded the class of persons 
protected by § 707-731 to persons "committed to the director of 
public safety," adding language that had already been added to 
§ 707-732 in 2002. 2004 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 61, § 4 at 303. The 
purpose of the amendment was "to . . . [i]nclude as a victim of 
sexual assault in the second degree, a person committed to the 
director of public safety and knowingly subjected to sexual 
penetration[.]" Conf. Comm. Rep. No. 35-04 on H.B. No. 2254, in 
2004 Senate Journal, at 1016-1017. A person "committed to the 
director of public safety" need not necessarily be confined to a 
state correctional facility. See Turner v. Hawaii Paroling 
Auth., 93 Hawai# i 298, 1 P.3d 768 (App. 2000). It follows that 
the legislature intended to prohibit a person who was employed in a state correctional facility from sexually penetrating a person 
committed to the director of public safety no matter where the 
prohibited contact takes place. The interpretation proposed by 
Siugpiyemal is absurd and contrary to the legislative history. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Siugpiyemal cites State v. Hicks, 113 Hawai# i 60, 148 
P.3d 493 (2006) (assault in 
Hawai# i Youth Correctional Facility) 
and State v. Cardus, 86 Hawai# i 426, 949 P.2d 1047 (App. 1997) 
(encounter in O# ahu Community Correctional Center). Neither case 
stands for the proposition that the location where the prohibited 
conduct took place is an attendant circumstance. The issues in 
Hicks were whether the Hawai# i Youth Correctional Facility is a 
"state correctional facility" (yes, it is) and whether the complaining witness (a "ward") was an "imprisoned person" (yes, 
he was) within the meaning of HRS § 707-732. The issue in Cardus 
was whether the consent of the imprisoned person is a defense to 
a violation of HRS § 707–731 (no, it is not). The legislative 
history of HRS §§ 707-731 and 707-732 confirms that the 
legislature intended for the actor being employed in a state 
correctional facility (among other things) and the victim being a 
person committed to the director of public safety (among other 
things) to be attendant circumstances to the prohibited conduct 
(sexual penetration or contact). Nothing in the legislative 
history suggests an intent to place geographic limitations on the 
prohibition. The legislature intended that the statutes apply to 
precisely the conduct engaged in by Siugpiyemal in this case. 
The Circuit Court correctly denied Siugpiyemal's motion for 
judgment of acquittal. 
B. Evidence from the Federal Action 
Siugpiyemal contends that the Circuit Court erroneously 
refused to admit into evidence a redacted copy of the answer 
filed by DPS in CW's Federal Lawsuit. DPS's answer asserted that 
the sexual assaults allegedly committed by Siugpiyemal were 
outside the course and scope of his employment by DPS. 
Siugpiyemal argues that DPS's federal assertion constituted an 
admission by the State, and that the State is judicially estopped 
from prosecuting him because "if [he] was not acting within the 
course and scope of his employment as [DPS] pled he could not 
have been said to have committed this offense." 
10 C. Jury Instructions NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We need not decide whether DPS's answer to the Federal 
Lawsuit contains an admission as argued by Siugpiyemal. Even if 
DPS's answer could be characterized as an admission, the course 
and scope of employment issue is irrelevant to Siugpiyemal's 
criminal case because course and scope of employment is not an 
attendant circumstance of HRS §§ 707-731 or 707-732. It is the 
status of being "employed in a state correctional facility" that 
is the relevant attendant circumstance. Irrelevant evidence is 
not admissible. Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 402. 
Nor could the answer filed by DPS in the Federal 
Lawsuit be a basis for judicial estoppel. Judicial estoppel is a 
form of equitable estoppel by which a party is precluded from 
subsequently repudiating a theory accepted and acted upon by the 
court. Rosa v. CWJ Contractors, Ltd., 4 Haw. App. 210, 220, 664 
P.2d 745, 752 (1983). Nothing in the record indicates that the 
Circuit Court either accepted or acted upon any assertion made in 
DPS's answer to the Federal Lawsuit. The Circuit Court did not 
err in refusing to admit DPS's answer to the Federal Lawsuit into 
evidence. 
Siugpiyemal's third point of error simply states "Did 
the court properly instruct the jury?" and refers to the appendix 
to his opening brief. The appendix for the third point of error 
contains copies of jury instructions 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 29, and 
30. 
It appears from the record on appeal that instructions 18, 
19, 20, 21, 22 and 30 (the Agreed-Upon Instructions) were given 
by agreement. However, "the lack of a timely objection is of no 
consequence in determining whether instructional error is 
harmful[.]" State v. Nichols, 111 Hawai# i 327, 337 n.6, 141 P.3d 
974, 984 n.6 (2006) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Where instructions were not objected to at trial, if the
appellant overcomes the presumption that the instructionswere correctly stated, the rule is that such erroneous 
11  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
instructions are presumptively harmful and are a ground for
reversal unless it affirmatively appears from the record asa whole that the error was not prejudicial. 
Id. at 334-35, 141 P.3d at 981-82 (emphasis added) (quoting 
State v. Eberly, 107 Hawai# i 239, 250, 112 P.3d 725, 736 (2005)). 
Siugpiyemal's opening brief does not discuss specific 
language in the Agreed-Upon Instructions nor does it cite any 
case law with which the Agreed-Upon Instructions conflict.4 
Rather, Siugpiyemal argues that the Agreed-Upon Instructions "took away the vital role of the jury to determine the facts put 
before them" because he "was acting outside the course and scope 
of his employment, he was not 'in' [MCCC] when the acts occurred 
[and t]here was never any interaction within the facility[.]" 
For the reasons set forth in sections II.A. and B. of this 
opinion, the course and scope of employment is not an attendant 
circumstance of HRS §§ 707-731 or 707-732. Nor is the location 
where the prohibited conduct took place an attendant circumstance 
of HRS §§ 707-731 or 707-732. Siugpiyemal has not overcome the 
presumption that the Agreed-Upon Instructions were correctly 
stated. 
Instruction 29, which was the court's instruction 
number 4 as modified, was objected to by Siugpiyemal when the 
parties were settling jury instructions. The instruction stated: 
The prosecution must prove each of the material
elements of each of the charges in this case beyond a
reasonable doubt. However, 1) that the offenses werecommitted in a correctional facility, or 2) that theoffenses were committed while the Defendant was on duty as acorrectional officer, are not material elements of any ofthe offenses charged in this case. 
For the reasons set forth in sections II.A. and B. of this 
opinion, the instruction was a correct statement of the law and 
the Circuit Court did not err in giving it to the jury. 
4 Siugpiyemal waived his right to submit a reply brief. 
12 D. Motion for New Trial NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Siugpiyemal's final point of error challenges the 
Circuit Court's denial of his motion for new trial.  "The 
granting or denial of a motion for new trial is within the sound 
discretion of the trial court and will not be disturbed absent a 
clear abuse of discretion. It is well-established that an abuse 
of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearly exceeded the 
bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or 
practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." 
State v. Austin, 143 Hawai# i 18, 29, 422 P.3d 18, 29 (2018) 
(internal quotation marks, citations and brackets omitted). 5
Siugpiyemal contends that the State failed to disclose 
Brady material  which would have enabled him to challenge CW's 
credibility. The information at issue concerned two criminal 
cases in which CW had been charged with several counts of theft 
and burglary. CW pleaded no contest in each case pursuant to 
plea agreements. On June 14, 2017 – one month before 
Siugpiyemal's trial began on July 10, 2017 – the court found CW 
guilty and sentenced her to one year in jail in each case. 6
The Circuit Court conducted an all-day evidentiary 
hearing on Siugpiyemal's motion for new trial. The transcript 
totals 165 pages. The Circuit Court entered findings of fact, 
conclusions of law and an order denying the motion. The Circuit 
Court made the following findings of fact: 
17. No plea agreements remained pending between [CW]
and the prosecution in [the two criminal cases at issue]
after June 14, 2017. 
18. On July 10, 2017, [Siugpiyemal], as well as
trial counsel, stipulated to the admissibility of 
5 The Honorable Peter T. Cahill presided over the motion after the
Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza recused himself. 
6 In Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963), the Supreme Court held
that "the suppression by the prosecution of evidence favorable to an accusedupon request violates due process where the evidence is material either toguilt or to punishment, irrespective of the good faith or bad faith of theprosecution." Id. at 87. 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complaining witness' August 11, 2014, video of sexual acts
between [Siugpiyemal] and the complaining witness. 
19. On July 11, 2017, the Court admitted State's
Exhibit S-12, the video and played it before the jury. 
. . . . 
22. The Court finds that based upon the admissible
evidence submitted, including the testimony of Maui County
Prosecutors Mark Simonds and Carson Tani, and Drug CourtAdministrator's [sic] Dean Ishihara, undisclosed documents. . . (collectively, the "Maui Drug Court ProgramCorrespondence") not exculpatory and not material pertainingto the guilt or punishment of [Siugpiyemal]. 
23. The Maui Drug Court Program correspondence did
not tend to negate the guilt of the Defendant Siugpiyemal asto the offenses charged and did not tend to reduce hispunishment for Sexual Assault in the Second Degree andSexual Assault in the Third Degree. 
. . . . 
26. 
Between November 4, 2016 and July 14, 2017 [the
date Siugpiyemal's criminal trial ended], [CW] continued to
serve her indeterminate ten (10) year prison term in Stateof 
Hawai #i v. [CW]. The Hawai #i Paroling Authority revoked
[CW]'s parole status . . . on February 29, 2016, and sheremained revoked throughout the hearing [on Siugpiyemal'smotion for new trial] on August 24, 2017. 
27. The Court finds credible the evidence that [CW]
could not be admitted into the Maui Drug Court Programwithout the agreement of the Department of Public Safety asa Track V case or the 
Hawai #i Paroling Authority in a Track
IV case. 
28. [CW] could not actively participate in the Maui
Drug Court Program because of her housing status at theFederal Detention Center. 
29. [CW] has never been afforded admission into the
Maui Drug Court Program under [her theft and burglarycases]. 
30. Deputy Prosecuting Attorney ("DPA") Mark Simonds
never offered [CW] admission into the Maui Drug CourtProgram in exchange for her testimony in [Siugpiyemal'scriminal case]. 
31. DPA Mark Simonds never promised or entered into
any agreements with [CW] in relation to her [theft andburglary cases]. 
32. The Court finds, however, that based upon the
credible evidence and testimony that the prosecution had aduty to disclose and breached that duty as it pertains tothe conviction in [CW's theft and burglary cases]. 
33. The convictions [of CW] for Theft in the Third
Degree tended to negate the evidence offered by the 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
prosecution at [Siugpiyemal's] trial that [CW] told the
truth and may have reflected on her credibility. 
. . . .7 
34. In [CW's theft and burglary cases], DPA Tani did
not offer [CW] misdemeanors in exchange for her testimony in
[Siugpiyemal's case]. Nor did DPA Tani make any otherpromises other than those reflected in the plea deal. 
35. Based upon the credible evidence, the Defendant
failed to show that he has been prejudiced by theprosecution's breach of its duty to disclose the convictionsof complaining witness in [the theft and burglary cases]filed on June 14, 2017. 
. . . . 
37. Evidence or testimony that [CW] entered into
plea agreements with the prosecution for misdemeanors in
[her theft and burglary cases] would not have created areasonable doubt when considered in light of other evidenceincluding the August 11, 2014, video recording of the sexualacts that did not otherwise exist at the time of the trial in [Siugpiyemal's case]. 
38. The Court finds that no reasonable probability
exists that had the misdemeanor convictions in [CW's theftand burglary cases] been disclosed to the Defendant, theresult of the trial would have been different. 
39. Introduction of impeachment evidence relative to
[CW's] Theft in the Third Degree convictions in [her theftand burglary cases] would not have created a probabilitysufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome of the trial on July 14, 2017 based upon all other evidenceconsidered by the jury as set forth in this record as wellas the agreed upon representation of the State and defense. 
40. The nature of any plea agreement evidence
involving [CW] in [her theft and burglary cases] would nothave changed the result of a later trial. 
41. The defense has failed to show how evidence of 
the plea agreements or convictions in [CW's theft andburglary cases] are material to the issue of JamesSiugpiyemal's guilt or punishment. 
The Circuit Court concluded that the State had a duty to disclose 
CW's theft and burglary cases, and the plea bargain, conviction 
and sentencing, to Siugpiyemal. The Circuit Court then made the 
following conclusion of law: 
11. The Court further concludes as a matter of 
law that the breach of duty does not, however, create
a reasonable probability sufficient to undermine the 
7 There are two paragraph nos. 34 in the FOF&COL. 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
confidence of the outcome. Because the jury heard of
the complaining witness' other convictions includingher current incarceration for ten years and otherevidence such as video recording. 
"[D]ue process requires that the prosecution disclose 
evidence favorable to the accused that, if suppressed, would 
deprive the defendant of a fair trial." Birano v. State, 143 
Hawai# i 163, 181, 426 P.3d 387, 405 (2018) (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
"The duty to disclose evidence that is 
favorable to the accused includes evidence that may be used to 
impeach the government's witnesses by showing bias, self-
interest, or other factors that might undermine the reliability 
of the witness's testimony." Id. at 182, 426 P.3d at 406 (citing 
Giglio v. United States, 405 U.S. 150, 154 (1972)). However, 
"[v]iolation of the constitutional right to confront adverse 
witnesses is subject to the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt 
standard." Id. at 190, 426 P.3d at 414 (citations omitted). The 
State's failure to disclose impeachment evidence warrants a new 
trial only if the evidence is "material." Id. "[E]vidence is 
material if there is a reasonable probability that, had the 
evidence been disclosed to the defense, the result of the 
proceeding would have been different." Id. at 191, 426 P.3d at 
415 (citations and quotation marks omitted). 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its 
discretion when it denied Siugpiyemal's motion for new trial. 
The court's findings of fact were supported by substantial 
evidence including the trial testimony of CW herself. On direct 
examination by the State, CW testified: 
Q. Where are you currently housed? 
A. The Federal Detention Center. 
Q. And before that, where were you housed? 
A. At the Maui Community Correctional Center. 
. . . . 
Q. How long have you been in, I guess, Maui
Community Correctional Center? 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. I've been incarcerated now for 20 months. 
Q. Before that, though, had you been incarcerated
previously? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And when is maybe the earliest you can remember
after your 18th birthday? 
A. I was incarcerated most of my adult life. 
. . . . 
Q. Do you remember -- well, you know, you mentioned
you'd been, I guess, in the system for a while. And have you
lied before? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Have you stolen? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Have you smuggled drugs? 
A. Yes. 
Q. On August 11th, 2014 and July 31st, 2014, what
was your status with the Director of the Department ofPublic Safety? 
A. I was an inmate. 
Q. And at that time, in 2014, what were you
incarcerated for? 
A. Burglary, theft. 
Q. And what was your sentence? 
A. Ten years. 
On cross-examination by Siugpiyemal's defense counsel, CW 
testified: 
Q. In 2014, you were in custody. Correct? 
A. Yes. 
Q. You were sentenced to prison? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. And you were in custody because -- you got a
ten-year sentence, I believe? 
A. Yes. 
Q. Ten years and a mandatory minimum of three
years, four months? 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. You were found guilty of burglary? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. Theft in the First Degree? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. Theft in the Third? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. And unauthorized use of confidential and 
personal information, like credit card info? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. And that's related to something that happened
back in 2010. Correct? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. You went into someone else's house? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. And you were uninvited? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. And you stole electronics and jewelry? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. You got caught when you went down to the pond
[sic] shop to try to exchange it for money. Right? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. And you never got the money? 
A. No, sir. 
Q. And that wasn't the only time you tried to get
money that you didn't earn. Is that correct? 
A. Yes, sir. 
. . . . 
Q. Do you remember getting questioned by the
police about forged checks back in 2007? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And that was involving something that happened
down at the Queen Kaahumanu shopping center. 
Right? 
A. Yes, sir. 
18 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q. And it was like one of those Payday exchange
places? 
A. Yes, I remember what you're talking about. 
Q. Okay, great. All right. 
And so you were involved with this other person, and
her name was Adriann Paleka-Wright? 
A. Yes, sir. 
. . . . 
Q. All right. She had a photo ID, didn't she? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. And that's what you need to cash these checks?
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. And you didn't? 
A. I didn't have, no, sir.
Q. And you wrote out five checks, and you asked her 
to cash it? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. Police questioned you about it? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. You never got the cash from those checks. 
Right? 
A. No, sir. 
Q. And then we get to this incident in 2011, you're
sentenced to prison. 
And then around 2014, you're sent back
here to the jail on Maui for the work furlough program.
Right?  
 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. And, you know, before you got started on the
furlough program, you had conditions of furlough. 
Correct? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And you had to go over that with a counselor? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. You signed off on it? 
A. Yes, sir. 
. . . . 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q. Now, one of the conditions you're saying is no
Facebook? 
A. No social media. 
Q. That's something in writing? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. And that's something you signed off on? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. So that's part of your work furlough contract,
you can't go on social media? 
A. Yes, sir. 
. . . . 
Q. And, again, do you remember being interviewed by
Detective Oran Satterfield about all this again? 
A. Yes. 
. . . . 
Q. In any event, he asked you if you had posted
something on Facebook, and you lied to him? 
A. Yes. 
Q. You lied because you, in fact, did put a picture
of yourself on Facebook? 
A. Yes. 
. . . . 
Q. When you were sentenced to prison, did you feel
that the public needed to be protected from you? 
A. I feel like I deserved to do prison time. 
Q. Do you feel that you were a danger to the
public? 
A. I felt that I needed a time-out because I was 
using drugs and I was a danger to the public. 
Q. You needed a time-out for ten years? 
A. I wouldn't want ten years. 
Q. Right. You said you needed a time-out because
you were using drugs. Right? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And because you were using drugs, you would
steal. 
Right? 
A. Yes, sir. 
20 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q. And you were hurting people because you we're
[sic] using drugs? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. So it wasn't just the drugs, it was all the
other stuff that you would do because of the drugs. Right? 
A. Yes, sir. 
. . . . 
Q. You've smuggled drugs into prison, haven't you? 
A. Yes, sir, I have. 
Q. And you've been high in prison, haven't you? 
A. Yes. 
Q. So this time was going to be different? 
A. What time? 
Q. The time you went to prison when you said you
needed the time-out? 
A. I was clean for that -- my whole prison term. 
Q. Then you get the furlough. Right? 
A. Yes, sir. 
. . . . 
Q. But at some point after the furlough, you
re-used. 
Correct? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. Right. So you had a stint of sobriety, but that
ended when you relapsed? 
A. When I paroled out. After I paroled out. 
Q. I see. So you had the furlough and then you
paroled out and that's when you relapsed and that's why
you're in custody now? 
A. Yes. 
Q. So you haven't been clean this whole time.
Correct? 
A. After I got out after the four years and
everything that happened with these incidences andeverything that was going on -- I'm an addict. I didn't know. I turned to using drugs again. 
Q. Right. You turned to using drugs again. And 
because you turned to using drugs again, you started tomanipulate others for your drugs. Correct? 
21 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A. Yes, sir. 
. . . . 
Q. And, [CW], you would agree that when you were
using drugs, that is an addiction. 
Correct? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And that when you are addicted to drugs, you
will manipulate and use others to get what you want? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And because of that, you've lied? 
A. Yes. 
Q. And because of that, you have tried to persuade
others to get what you want. Right? 
A. Yes, sir. 
. . . . 
Q. And you know how to manipulate? 
A. Yes. 
Q. How long have you been using drugs? 
A. Since I was 12. 
Q. So you have been learning to lie and manipulate
since then? 
A. I've done a lot of things that I'm not proud of.
I've made a lot of poor choices. 
Q. I'm sorry about that. 
And my question is as long as you've been using drugs,
you've been learning these other things too, haven't you?
It leads to those things, doesn't it? 
A. Yes. 
Q. So you have been lying and manipulating since
you were 12? 
I know it's not easy. 
But is that true? 
A. Yes. 
Siugpiyemal's defense counsel conducted extensive cross-
examination to challenge CW's credibility. The jury convicted 
Siugpiyemal on the counts that were substantiated by the 
August 11, 2014 videotape, and found him not guilty on the counts 
that were not. The Circuit Court correctly applied the 
22 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
applicable law to the facts. The Circuit Court's conclusion that 
it was not reasonably probable that, had the Brady material at 
issue been disclosed to the defense, the result of Siugpiyemal's 
trial would have been different, was not an abuse of discretion. 
It was not error for the Circuit Court to deny Siugpiyemal's 
motion for new trial. 
III. 
For the foregoing reasons, the Judgment Conviction and 
Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the Second Circuit on 
November 14, 2017, is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 15, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Richard D. Gronna,
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Presiding Judge
Peter A. Hanano,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,County of Mauifor Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
23 