  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS

 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
---o0o--­
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
UBALDO A. CRUZ, Defendant-Appellant 
NO. CAAP-12-0000477
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 09-1-1724)

 
APRIL 17, 2015
 
FOLEY, PRESIDING JUDGE, FUJISE AND LEONARD, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY FUJISE, J.
 
In this appeal stemming from a criminal prosecution,1
 
we are asked to consider another permutation of Crawford:2
 
Whether the foundation for the admission of business records
 
which may be laid by way of declaration under our rules of
 
evidence must meet the live testimony and cross-examination
 
requirements of the Confrontation Clause.3
 
1
 Judgment was entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
(Circuit Court). The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided over the trial
and entered the Judgment.
 
2
 Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36 (2004).
 
3
 We note that, although Cruz purports to rely on the Confrontation
Clause of both the United States and the Hawai' i Constitutions, he makes no
(continued...) FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Background
 
This case arises out of sexual assaults committed by
 
Defendant-Appellant Ubaldo A. Cruz (Cruz) against his neighbor's
 
daughter (CW) over three days in October, 2009. At the time of
 
these assaults, Cruz was 49 years old and CW was 15 years old. 
The prosecution's theory of the case was based, in part, on
 
Cruz's phone calls to CW on her cellular telephone throughout the
 
three-month period of August, September, and October of 2009. 
To this end, the State filed, on May 10, 2010, a "Declaration of
 
Custodian of Business Records" (Custodian Declaration) created
 
and sworn to by the custodian of records for T-Mobile USA, Cruz's
 
carrier.
 
Cruz moved for an order excluding, among other things,4
 
"Testimonial or documentary evidence relating to T-Mobile
 
5
Telephone records [for a specified telephone number.  ]"  The
 
Circuit Court denied this request, but did not rule on Cruz's

 
argument that the failure to call the custodian of records to
 
3(...continued)
argument that a different analysis or result should obtain under the Hawai' i 
Constitution. We therefore deem the argument waived. 
4
 Cruz's motion also sought exclusion of
 
(b) Testimonial or documentary evidence relating to
"missed calls" and "received calls" from an anonymous number
made to the complaining witness's cellular telephone between
October 23, 2009 and October 29, 2009.
 
(c) Testimonial or documentary evidence relating to
twelve (12) UNDATED voicemail messages found in the
complaining witness's cellular telephone.
 
(d) Testimonial or documentary evidence relating to
videos found in the complaining witnes's [sic] cellular
telephone depicting her singing and/or lip syncing to
certain songs.
 
On the first day of trial, the Circuit Court granted Cruz's motion with regard
to item (b) and denied the motion with regard to items (a) and (c). Cruz
 withdrew his motion as to item (d).
 
5
 Defense counsel later clarified that the telephone number included
in the motion was in error, that his intent was to exclude records for Cruz's
telephone number.
 
2
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
testify at trial was a violation of Cruz's right to confront
 
under Crawford.
 
The following day, the matter was taken up again as the
 
prosecution sought to introduce the records.
 
[PROSECUTOR]:  Your Honor, at this time, the State
will introduce into evidence State's 19, which is a
certified copy of a declaration of custodian of records from
T-Mobile USA, and State's 20, which are business records
from T-Mobile.
 
. . . .

 
[CIRCUIT COURT]:  [Prosecutor], how will you establish
that they are business records other than your statement
that they are business records?
 
[PROSECUTOR]:  
It's in the declaration from T-Mobile
 
that these are business records.
 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: 
And there's a stipulation to admit
the declaration of the custodian of records?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  
No, Your Honor, this was the basis
of our objection previously made in the motion in limine.
 
[PROSECUTOR]:  
And, Your Honor, this is offered
pursuant to Hawaii Rules of Evidence 902, sub (11). [ 6
]  What
 
6
 Hawaii Rules of Evidence (HRE) Rule 902(11) reads:
 
(11)	 Certified records of regularly conducted activity.
The original or a duplicate of a domestic or foreign
record of regularly conducted activity that would be
admissible under rule 803(b)(6), if accompanied by a
written declaration of its custodian or other
 qualified person, certifying that the record was:
 
(A)	 Made at or near the time of the occurrence of
 
the matters set forth by, or from information
transmitted by, a person with knowledge of those
matters;
 
(B)	 Kept in the course of the regularly conducted
activity; and
 
(C)	 Made by the regularly conducted activity as a
regular practice.
 
The declaration shall be signed in a manner that, if
falsely made, would subject the maker to a criminal
penalty under the laws of the state or country where
the declaration is signed. A party intending to offer
a record into evidence under this paragraph shall
provide reasonable notice in advance of trial, or
during trial if the court excuses pretrial notice on
good cause shown, of that intention to all adverse
parties, and shall make the record and declaration
(continued...)
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
it is, it's a declaration of a custodian of records that
allows the State to admit these records in without bringing
the custodian into court.
 
. . . .
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Your Honor, the same basis for my
objection. This is -- first of all, from what the State is 

citing, I don't see anything that covers business records.
And in the contemplation of business records, under the
hearsay rule, what it requires is a custodian of records
that would attest to the fact that these are business
 records subject to cross-examination. Our motion in limine
had not contemplated the fact that there would be a Crawford
violation in this case because we would be denied the
 opportunity to cross-examine this custodian of records
regarding whether or not -­
[CIRCUIT COURT]: How would this be a Crawford

 
violation?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Because we would not be able to
 
confront the custodian of records regarding what these

business records are, how are they relevant in this
particular -­
[CIRCUIT COURT]: Is that the criteria for determining

whether this is Crawford material?
 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Your Honor, in determining whether
or not there's a violation of Crawford, the analysis would

be whether or not the proffered evidence is testimonial in
nature. In this particular case, the declaration of the
custodian of records, because it's a declaration, would be
deemed testimonial in nature, and it would require that that
person be subject to prior cross-examination or
confrontation at least, especially in light of the fact that
the State is trying to proffer evidence of telephone records
which this custodian of records would be testifying to.
 
[PROSECUTOR]: And, Your Honor, business records are
specifically excluded under Crawford.

 
[CIRCUIT COURT]: Okay. Over objections, the court
will permit.

 
The Circuit Court admitted both the Custodian Declaration and
 
Cruz's cell phone records (Phone Records) in evidence.
 
Cruz was found guilty as charged based, in part, on the
 
T-Mobile phone records and brings this timely appeal. We affirm.
 
6(...continued)
available for inspection sufficiently in advance of
their offer into evidence to provide an adverse party
with a fair opportunity to challenge them.
 
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Discussion
 
The sole issue presented in this appeal is whether the 
Circuit Court erred when it admitted the Custodian Declaration 
over Cruz's constitutional objection. Cruz does not argue that 
the averments in the Custodian Declaration were insufficient to 
establish that the phone records were business records under HRE 
803(b)(6). Rather, Cruz argues that the admission of the self-
authenticating Custodian Declaration, was a violation of his 
right to confront T-Mobile's custodian of records. "We answer 
questions of constitutional law by exercising our own independent 
constitutional judgment based on the facts of the case. Thus, we 
review questions of constitutional law under the right/wrong 
standard." State v. Pratt, 127 Hawai 'i 206, 212, 277 P.3d 300, 
306 (2012) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
In Crawford, the United States Supreme Court reaffirmed
 
the criminal defendant's right, under the Confrontation Clause of
 the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution, to
 
confront the witnesses against him or her, holding that the
 
Confrontation Clause
 
applies to "witnesses" against the accused--in other words,
those who "bear testimony." "Testimony," in turn, is
typically a solemn declaration or affirmation made for the
purpose of establishing or proving some fact. . . .
 
Various formulations of this core class of
 
"testimonial" statements exist: "ex parte in-court testimony
or its functional equivalent--that is, material such as
affidavits, custodial examinations, prior testimony that the
defendant was unable to cross-examine, or similar pretrial
statements that declarants would reasonably expect to be
used prosecutorially," "extrajudicial statements ...
contained in formalized testimonial materials, such as
affidavits, depositions, prior testimony, or confessions,"
"statements that were made under circumstances which would
 lead an objective witness reasonably to believe that the
statement would be available for use at a later trial[.]"
 
Id. at 51-52 (citations and brackets omitted). 
In Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts, 557 U.S. 305 (2009),
 
arising out of a prosecution for drug offenses, the Court
 
examined "certificates of analysis" showing the results of the
 
forensic analysis performed on the seized substances. The Court
 
rejected the prosecution's argument that these certificates were
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
business records because, even if regularly produced in the
 
course of their business, the analysts' business was to produce
 
evidence for trial and therefore the certificates were
 
testimonial. 557 U.S. at 321-22. In doing so, the Court
 
pointedly addressed what was only mentioned in passing in
 
Crawford :
 
Respondent also misunderstands the relationship
between the business-and-official-records hearsay exceptions
and the Confrontation Clause. As we stated in  Crawford:
  
"Most of the hearsay exceptions covered statements that by
their nature were not testimonial--for example, business
records or statements in furtherance of a conspiracy." 541
 U.S., at 56, 124 S.Ct. 1354. Business and public records
are generally admissible absent confrontation not because
they qualify under an exception to the hearsay rules, but
because--having been created for the administration of an
entity's affairs and not for the purpose of establishing or
proving some fact at trial--they are not testimonial.
 
557 U.S. at 324. See also State v. Fitzwater , 122 Hawai 'i 354, 
365, 227 P.3d 520, 531 (2010) (applying the Melendez-Diaz
 
analysis to "speed check cards" that documented the test results
 
of police vehicles' speedometers and concluding they could
 
qualify as non-testimonial business records). Pertinent to the
 
issue before us, the Melendez-Diaz court discussed a document
 
akin to the Custodian Certificate:
 
The dissent identifies a single class of evidence
which, though prepared for use at trial, was traditionally
admissible: a clerk's certificate authenticating an
official record--or a copy thereof--for use as evidence.
See 
post, at 2552 – 2553. But a clerk's authority in that
regard was narrowly circumscribed. He was permitted "to
certify to the correctness of a copy of a record kept in his
office," but had "no authority to furnish, as evidence for
the trial of a lawsuit, his interpretation of what the
record contains or shows, or to certify to its substance or
effect." State v. Wilson, 141 La. 404, 409, 75 So. 95, 97
 
(1917). See also State v. Champion, 116 N.C. 987, 21 S.E.
700, 700–701 (1895); 5 J. Wigmore, Evidence § 1678 (3d ed.
1940). The dissent suggests that the fact that this
exception was "'narrowly circumscribed'" makes no
difference. See post, at 2553. To the contrary, it makes
all the difference in the world. It shows that even the
 line of cases establishing the one narrow exception the
dissent has been able to identify simultaneously vindicates
the general rule applicable to the present case. A clerk
 could by affidavit authenticate or provide a copy of an
otherwise admissible record, but could not do what the
analysts did here: create a record for the sole purpose of
providing evidence against a defendant.
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
557 U.S. at 322-23. Consistent with this notion, federal courts
 
have uniformly held that an affidavit that serves to authenticate
 
a business record pursuant to Federal Rules of Evidence Rule 902
 
(11) is non-testimonial and admissible under the Confrontation
 
Clause. U.S. v. Yeley-Davis, 632 F.3d 673, 680 (10th Cir. 2011)
 
("we agree with other circuits who have held that certificates of
 authenticity presented under Rule 902(11) are not testimonial.");
 
U.S. v. Mallory, 709 F. Supp. 2d 451, 454 (E.D. Va. 2010) ("Thus,
 
because it does not attempt to describe or decipher the content
 
of the business record, it is plain, under Melendez–Diaz, that
 
this declaration falls within the authentication exception and
 
therefore does not trigger the confrontation right."); see also,
 
30B Fed. Prac. & Proc. Evid. § 7034.1 at n.7 (2014 ed.)
 
The Custodian Declaration complies with HRE 902(11):

 
I, Dominick Kaserkie, hereby declare and affirm based
on information and belief that the following is true and
accurate to the best of my knowledge:
 
1. I am employed by T-Mobile USA, Inc. in the Law

Enforcement Relations Group.
 
2. My duties include acting as a "custodian of
records" on behalf of T -Mobile USA, Inc.
 
3. I am authorized to represent T-Mobile USA, Inc.,
for purposes of this proceeding.
 
4. T-Mobile USA, Inc. maintains records relating to
T-Mobile USA. Inc. subscribers.
 
5. These records include identifying information
such as the name of the subscriber assigned to a specific
telephone number and call logs for a subscriber's telephone
number documenting both incoming and outgoing calls made by
a T-Mobile USA, Inc. subscriber.
 
6. These records are made and kept in the regular
course of business at T-Mobile USA, Inc.
 
7. These records are generated at or near the time
that a T -Mobile subscriber uses his cellular phone to make
or receive telephone calls.
 
8. These records are generated and maintained by
employees of T-Mobile USA. Inc.
 
9. As part of my job, I have access to, and custody
of, these records.
 
7
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
10. Pursuant to a subpoena, I retrieved true and
accurate copies of T-Mobile subscriber information
associated with MSISDN [Cruz's cell number].
 
11. T-Mobile USA, Inc. subsequently turned over a
copy of these records to the Honolulu Prosecutor's Office on
January 14,2010.
 
12. The records provided to the Honolulu
Prosecutor's Office consist of a true and accurate copy of
the records maintained by T-Mobile USA, Inc. for T-Mobile
subscriber associated with MSISDN: [Cruz's cell number].
 
13. These records are kept in the course of
regularly conducted activity at T-Mobile USA, Inc.; they are
made at or near the time of the acts or events described
 therein; and they are made as part of the regular practice
of T-Mobile USA Inc.
 
I, Dominick Kaserkie, declare under penalty of law
that the foregoing is true and correct to the best of my
knowledge.
 
Cruz does not argue that the Custodian Declaration attests to
 
anything other than the facts necessary to establish the
 
foundation of the T-Mobile records described therein as business
 
records of T-Mobile. Therefore, it was not a violation of the
 
Confrontation Clause to admit the Custodian Declaration into
 
evidence. 
Conclusion

 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the April 11, 2012
 
Judgment of Conviction and Probation Sentence of the Circuit
 
Court of the First Circuit.
 
On the briefs:
 
Phyllis J. Hironaka,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defedant-Appellant.
 
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
8
 