 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR   PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-19-0000725 16-SEP-2024 09:13 AM Dkt. 552 MO 
NO. CAAP-19-0000725  
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
MATTHEW LOPRESTI, JULIA LOPRESTI, ROBERT JOHNSON, REGENA 
JOHNSON, KYLE MCKEE, MARITES MCKEE, EMIL GOCONG, LIZ GOCONG, 
KENNETH TYLER, on Behalf of Themselves and All Others Similarly 
Situated, Plaintiffs-Appellees/Cross-Appellants,  
v.  
HASEKO (HAWAII), INC.; HASEKO (EWA), INC.; HASEKO DEVELOPMENT, 
INC.; HASEKO HOMES, INC.; HASEKO INVESTMENTS, INC.; HASEKO 
REALTY (HAWAII), INC.; HOAKALEI; HOAKALEI CORPORATION; HOAKALEI 
DEVELOPMENT, LLC; HOAKALEI RESIDENTIAL, LLC,  
Defendants-Appellants/Cross-Appellees,  
and  
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-10, Defendants  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST  CIRCUIT  
(CASE NO. 1CC131001995)  
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION  
(By:  Wadsworth, Presiding Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.)  
  Defendants-Appellants/Cross-Appellees Haseko (Hawaii), 
Inc., Haseko (Ewa), Inc., Haseko Development, Inc., Haseko   
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Homes, Inc., Haseko Investments, Inc., Haseko Realty (Hawaii), 
Inc., Hoakalei Corporation, Hoakalei Development, LLC, and 
Hoakalei Residential, LLC  appeal from the Final Judgment 
(Judgment), entered on September 27, 2019, by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit ( circuit court). Haseko also challenges 
the circuit court's January 29, 2018 Findings of Fact  (FOF), 
Conclusions of Law  (COL), and Order Regarding Counts 1 and 9 
(Equitable Trial Court Order ).
  21 
  Plaintiffs-Appellees/Cross-Appellants Matthew 
Lopresti, Julia Lopresti, Robert Johnson, Regena Johnson, Kyle 
McKee, Marites McKee, Emil Gocong, Liz Gocong, and Kenneth Tyler 
(collectively Plaintiffs ) cross-appeal from the Judgment. 
Plaintiffs also challenge the circuit court's:  
(1) October 18, 2016 Order Regarding Plaintiffs' 
Motion for (1) Entry of the Order Granting 
Defendants Haseko (Hawaii), Inc., Haseko (Ewa), 
1 We refer to these nine Haseko entities collectively as Haseko. 
Of these nine entities, as further explained below, the following four were 
found by the jury to have engaged in unfair or deceptive acts or practices 
(UDAP) under Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 480-2: Haseko (Hawaii), Inc., 
Haseko (Ewa), Inc., Haseko Development, Inc., and Haseko Realty (Hawaii), 
Inc. We refer to these four entities collectively as the Haseko Defendants 
or Defendants . 
2 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone (the Equitable Trial Court ) 
presided over Plaintiffs' equitable claims, and entered the Equitable Trial 
Court Order. The Honorable Gary W.B. Chang (the Legal Trial Court ) presided 
over Plaintiffs' legal claims and entered the Judgment, as well as the orders 
referred to below as the Legal Trial Court Order and the Order Denying New 
Legal Trial. 
2   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Inc., Haseko Development, Inc., Haseko Homes, 
Inc., Haseko Investments, Inc., Haseko Realty 
(Hawaii), Inc., Hoakalei Corporation, Hoakalei 
Development, LLC, and Hoakalei Residential, LLC's 
Renewed Motion for Judgment as a Matter of law, 
Filed October 8, 2015 and in the Alternative 
Clarification Regarding the Same; and (2) Entry 
on Class P laintiffs' Motion for New Trial on 
Damages or, in the Alternative , to Reconsider 
Decision Granting Defendants' Motion for Judgment 
as a Matter of Law Filed October 9, 2015, Filed 
September 29, 2016 (Legal Trial Court Order ); 
(2) February 2, 2017 Order Denying "Class Plaintiffs' 
Motion for New Trial on Damages, or in the 
Alternative, to Reconsider Decision Granting 
Defendants' Renewed Motion for Judgment as a 
Matter of Law Filed October 9, 2015 " Filed on 
February 26, 2016 (Order Denying New Legal 
Trial); and 
(3) the Equitable Trial Court Order. 
Haseko raises nine points of error on appeal; 
Plaintiffs raise five points of error on cross -appeal. Upon 
careful review of the record and relevant legal authorities, and 
3   
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the 
issues raised by the parties, we resolve these points of error 
as follows. 
I. Background 
This appeal concerns a large multi -purpose real estate 
project in the ʻEwa District of O ʻahu (the Project), which had 
included, as part of its original master plan, the construction 
of a man -made marina (the Marina). Haseko was the Project's 
developer. After years of representing that the Marina would be 
constructed as the "focal point" and "main benefit" of the 
Project, Haseko, in July 2011, abandoned the Marina as too 
expensive to construct, and decided to const ruct a lagoon 
instead. 
In July 2013, nearly 3,000 Project homeowners filed a 
class action complaint, seeking damages from Haseko for changing 
the master plan of the Project by substituting the Marina for a 
lagoon. Plaintiffs set forth nine claims in their operative 
First Amended Complaint. Two claims were dismissed before 
trial.3 The remaining claims were addressed through bifurcated 
judicial proceedings. 
3 In August 2015, the Legal Trial Court also granted judgment as a 
matter of law "as to all class members that were not the original purchasers 
of homes in Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei [,]" thus limiting the class to the original 
purchasers of property within the Haseko development. 
4   
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Legal Trial Court presided over a nine -week jury 
trial on Plaintiffs' UDAP, Bad Faith, and Negligent 
Misrepresentation claims. In September 2015, the jury returned 
a special verdict in favor of Plaintiffs on the UDAP claim only, 
finding that the Haseko defendants had engaged in UDAP 
violations under HRS § 480-2. The jury awarded Plaintiffs 
$1,300 per home in special damages, and $20 million in punitive 
damages. 
The Legal Trial Court set aside both the jury's 
punitive and special damages awards. With respect to special 
damages, the Legal Trial Court explained that, "the measure of 
damage was inappropriate and was not consistent with applicable 
legal principles that govern the determination of damages in an 
unfair and deceptive claim practice case." 
The Legal Trial Court then recused itself from the 
Plaintiffs' remaining Condominium Property Act ( CPA), Promissory 
Estoppel, Estoppel, and Unjust Enrichment claims. In November 
2015, these claims were reassigned to the Equitable Trial Court, 
pursuant to Hawaiʻi Rules of Civil Procedure ( HRCP) Rule 63. 
In September 2016, the Equitable Trial Court dismissed 
Plaintiffs' estoppel claims. The Equitable Trial Court ruled in 
favor of Plaintiffs on the CPA claim, by granting Plaintiffs the 
right to rescind their purchase agreement with Haseko. The 
5   
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Equitable Trial Court also ruled in favor of Plaintiffs on the 
unjust enrichment claim, awarding a sum of $20 million to be 
divided among Plaintiffs who elected not to rescind. 
The Legal Trial Court entered Judgment, and the 
parties timely appealed. 
II. Standards of Review 
We review questions of law and conclusions of law de 
novo under the right /wrong standard. Hawaiʻi Gov't Emp s. Ass'n, 
AFSCME Local 152 , AFL-CIO v. Lingle , 124 Hawaiʻi 197, 20 2, 
239 P.3d 1, 6 (2010). We review findings of fact for clear 
error. Dan v. State , 76 Hawaiʻi 423, 428, 879 P.2d 528, 533 
(1994). 
We review the application of equity for abuse of 
discretion. In re Est . of Campbell , 106 Hawaiʻi 453, 461, 106 
P.3d 1096, 1104 (2005). 
III. Discussion 
A. Plaintiffs' Damages Remedy for the UDAP Violation 
Following trial, the Legal Trial Court jury found that 
the Haseko Defendants violated the UDAP statute. Pursuant to 
HRS § 480 -2, "[u]nfair methods of competition and unfair or 
deceptive acts or practices in the conduct of any trade or 
commerce are unlawful." To prevail on a UDAP claim, a plaintiff 
consumer must prove "(1) either that the defendant violat ed the 
6   
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
UDAP statute (or that its actions are deemed to violate the UDAP 
statute by another statute), (2) that the consumer was injured 
as a result of the violation, and (3) the amount of damages 
sustained as a result of the UDAP violation." Lima v. Deutsche 
Bank Nat 'l Tr. Co., 149 Hawaiʻi 457, 464 -65, 494 P.3d 1190, 1197 -
98 (2021) (citations omitted). 
  In cases involving fraud or deceit, the measure of 
damages "is usually confined to either the out-of-pocket loss or 
the benefit of the bargain." Zanakis–Pico v. Cutter Dodge, 
Inc., 98 Hawaiʻi 309, 320, 47 P.3d 1222, 1233  (2002)  (cleaned 
up). Under the out-of-pocket rule, "the damages are the 
difference between the actual value of the property received and 
the price paid for the property, along with any special damages 
naturally and proximately caused by the fraud prior to its 
discovery, including expenses incurred in mitigating the 
damages." Lima, 149 Hawai ʻi at 469, 494 P.3d at 1202  (cleaned 
up).   In contrast, the benefit-of-the-bargain rule "allows the 
[recipient of the fraud or deceit] to recover the difference 
between the value of the property received and the value to 
plaintiff that the property would have had if the representation 
had been true." Santiago  v. Tanaka, 137 Hawaiʻ i 137, 159, 366 
P.3d  612, 634 (2016) (quoting B.F. Goodrich Co. v. Mesabi Tire 
Co., 430 N.W.2d 180, 182 (Minn. 1988)).  
7   
 
   Plaintiffs raise five points of error on cross-appeal, 
contending that the Legal Trial Court erred in: (1) instructing 
the jury on the proper measure of damages for a UDAP violation; (2) granting judgment in favor of the Haseko Defendants when instead it should have ordered a new trial on damages; (3) denying Plaintiffs relief based on HRS § 480-12, despite the jury's finding that the Haseko Defendants breached HRS Chapter 
480; (4) refusing "Plaintiffs' Proposed Jury Instruction 21," 
and later finding that Plaintiffs introduced no evidence that they suffered monetary damages; and (5) allowing evidence of a 
subsequent increase in property values, including the testimony 
of Haseko's appraisal expert James Hallstrom ( Hallstrom ).    
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We address each of these points, some of which raise 
overlapping issues, below. 
1. Jury Instructions Regarding the Measure of Damages 
In their first and fourth points of error, Plaintiffs 
contend, respectively, that the Legal Trial Court improperly 
instructed the jury on the measure of special damages and erred 
in refusing "Plaintiffs' Proposed Jury Instruction 21." 
At trial, the Legal Trial Court instructed the jury on 
the measure of damages for a UDAP violation as follows (the UDAP 
damages instructions ): 
If you find that plaintiffs have prevailed against a 
defendant on the claim of unfair or deceptive acts or 
8   
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
practices, you must decide the amount that will reasonably 
and fairly compensate plaintiffs for the actual economic 
loss legally caused by the unfair or deceptive acts or 
practices. 
In determining the amount of special damages, if any, 
to award plaintiffs, you may consider whether plaintiffs 
are entitled to the benefit of the bargain they believed 
they purchased, contracted for, or invested in. The benefit of the bargain is the difference, if any, between 
the value of the personal investment represented to 
plaintiffs, and the value of such personal investment received by plaintiffs. You may award plaintiffs special 
damages only if the value of what was received is less than 
the value  of what was represented.  
In awarding damages, if any, for unfair or deceptive 
acts or practices, you must not include any amount: 
1. For non-economic losses, such as emotional 
distress; or 
2. To punish or make an example of a defendant by 
awarding punitive damages; or 
3. For legal fees or costs of this lawsuit. 
The Legal Trial Court further instructed the jury: "Damages are 
established at the time of the sale, and those damages are not 
later reduced by a subsequent beneficial event."    4
  The jury returned a special verdict in which it found 
that the four Haseko Defendants violated the UDAP statute. The 
jury awarded Plaintiffs $1,300 per home in special damages, and $20 million in punitive damages.
5   
4  Notably, in their closing, Plaintiffs argued to the jury that 
Hallstrom's testimony was "100 percent worthless[,]" because "you have a jury 
instruction that says you measure the damages at the time of sale."  
5  Plaintiffs confirm in their Cross -Appeal Opening Brief that they 
do not challenge the Legal Trial Court's decision to set aside the jury's punitive damages award.  
9   
 
   
   
  
 
 
  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Plaintiffs argue that the UDAP damages instructions 
"failed to properly instruct the [j]ury on how to properly 
determine and calculate damages via the [t]hree [s]tep process 
mandated by Davis [v. Wholesale Motors , Inc., 86 Hawaiʻi 405, 949 
P.2d 1026, (App. 1997)]." In Davis, a plaintiff consumer sued a 
car dealer for damages caused by the dealer's unfair and 
deceptive trade practice in selling a car to him. This court 
decided that under HRS § 480 -13, "the plaintiff should be placed 
in the position he or she would have held had he or she not been 
defrauded [,]" but should not be permitted to reap a benefit 
received from the defendant dealer under the parties' contract. 
Id. at 421, 949 P.2d at 1042 . We thus upheld an award of 
damages to the defendant dealer on its counterclaim – which we 
referred to as a "setoff award" – for the rental value of the 
car and repair costs for damage done to the car while the 
plaintiff possessed it. Id. We further held that any damages 
sustained by the plaintiff should be trebled under HRS § 480 -
13(b)(1) before the award to the defendant was applied. Id. 
Based on Davis, Plaintiffs contend that "the legally 
correct standard for measure of damages in this case should have 
been to take the value reflected in each sales contract, treble 
that number as required by the statute, and then any offset 
applied against the trebled number." Plaintiffs argue that 
10   
 
   
 
 
  Initially, we note that the court's UDAP damages 
instructions essentially track Hawaiʻi Civil Jury Instructions 
(HCJI) 19.6, 19.7, and 19.8, though the order of Instruction 
Nos. 19.7 and 19.8 is reversed. In particular, HCJI Instruction No. 19.8  sets out the benefit-of-the-bargain rule for measuring 
UDAP damages, consistent with the rulings in Ellis, Zanakis-
Pico, and Santiago, supra. This is the measure of damages that 
Plaintiffs appeared to advocate in trial memoranda submitted to 
the Legal Trial Court.  Indeed, on September 1, 2015, Plaintiffs 
filed their own proposed jury instructions based on HCJI 
Instructions 19.6, 19.7, and 19.8, in the same order  as the 6 
 
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
"[t]he value of the residence received . . . may serve as an 
offset to the [damages] to be trebled first per Davis . . . ." 
Plaintiffs appear to challenge the UDAP damages instructions for 
failing to reflect their interpretation of this "three -step 
process." 
6 HCJI Instruction No. 19.8 states: 
DAMAGES – BENEFIT OF THE BARGAIN 
In determining the amount, if any, to award 
plaintiff(s), you may consider whether plaintiff(s) is/are 
entitled to the benefit of the bargain he/she/they believed 
he/she/they purchased, contracted for, or invested in. The 
benefit of the bargain is the difference, if any, between 
the value of the goods, services, or investment represented 
to plaintiff(s), and the value of such goods, services, or 
investment delivered to plaintiff(s). 
(Footnote omitted.) 
11   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court later adopted. Although the court modified certain 
phrases in HCJI Instruction No. 19.8 to fit the facts of the 
case, and added an explanatory sentence, Plaintiffs do not 
challenge any of these minor modifications.7 Rather, they fault 
the court for not giving a Davis-based instruction that they 
themselves did not propose, and which they do not specify on 
appeal. 
At bottom, Plaintiffs fundamentally misread Hawai ʻi 
law, including Davis, on the measure of UDAP damages in cases 
involving fraud or deceit. Plaintiffs were required to prove 
that they sustained damages as a result of Haseko's fraud -based 
UDAP violation. To the extent they relied on the benefit -of-
the-bargain measure, they w ere required to establish the 
difference, if any, between the value of the personal investment 
represented to plaintiffs, i.e., the value of their homes as 
represented with the promised marina, and the value of what they 
received, which was essentially the promise of a home without a 
marina, measured at the time of the purchase/sale. See Ellis, 
7 As to HCJI Instruction No. 19.8, the court replaced the phrase 
"goods, services, or investment" with the phrase "personal investment[,]" and 
replaced the phrase "delivered to plaintiff(s)" with "received by 
plaintiffs[,]" consistent with the facts of the case. The court also added 
the explanatory sentence, "You may award plaintiffs special damages only if 
the value of what was received is less than the value of what was 
represented[,]" which follows as a matter of logic from the benefit -of-the-
bargain measure set out in the preceding sentence. 
12   
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
51 Haw. at 53, 451 P.2d at 820 (measuring fraud damages at the 
time of the transaction). Plaintiffs established the value of 
their homes as represented based on the purchase prices they 
paid. See infra. We address the evidence presented on the 
value of what Plaintiffs received in section 2, below. For 
purposes of the UDAP damages instructions, however, the value of 
what Plaintiffs received, measured at the time of purchase, is 
not a set -off to their b enefit-of-the-bargain damages; it is the 
subtrahend i n the calculation of their damages. Trebling the 
prices paid for the homes without subtracting the value received 
by Plaintiffs would result in an unjust windfall to Plaintiffs 
that finds no support in Davis. 
Plaintiffs also argue that the Legal Trial Court erred 
in refusing "Plaintiffs' Proposed Jury Instruction 21." They do 
not quote the proposed instruction or identify where it is in 
the voluminous record. See Hawaiʻi Rules of Appellate Procedure 
(HRAP) Rule 28(b)(4). Plaintiffs drop a brief footnote to their 
point of error suggesting that the proposed instruction was 
based on the Restatement (Second) of Torts § 549 (Am. L. Inst . 
1965), but do not otherwise present any argument as to how the 
court erred in declining to adopt the proposed instruction. 
Their point is thus deemed waived. See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). In 
any event, the UDAP damages instructions given by the court 
13   
 
   
  
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adequately covered the principles derived from the applicable 
statute and case law.8 On this record, we cannot conclude that 
"when read and considered as a whole, the [UDAP damages] 
instructions given [we re] prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, 
inconsistent, or misleading." Moyle v. Y & Y Hyup Shin, Corp. , 
118 Hawai ʻi 385, 391, 191 P.3d 1062, 1068 (2008) (cleaned up ). 
2. Evidence Supporting Plaintiffs' Damages 
In their second point of error, Plaintiffs contend 
that the Legal Trial Court erred in granting judgment in favor 
of the Haseko Defendants rather than ordering a new trial on 
damages. Relatedly, in their fourth point of error, Plaintiffs 
contend in part that the Legal Trial Court erred in finding that 
Plaintiffs introduced no evidence of their damages. 
On October 28, 2015, the Legal Trial Court set aside 
the jury's damages award, stating with regard to special damages 
that "the court does not know what the jury intended to do by 
8 Plaintiffs' footnote suggests that the proposed instruction 
included an out -of-pocket measure of damages. They do not explain, however, 
why they could not have argued for an award of such damages based on the 
court's jury instruction to "decide the amount that will reasonably and 
fairly compensate plaintiffs for the actual economic loss legally caused by 
the unfair or deceptive acts or practices." Moreover, Plaintiffs do not 
explain how damages based on an out -of-pocket measure would have differed 
from those based on a benefit -of-the-bargain measure under the facts of this 
case. Here, by definition, the price paid for the homes (for purposes of the 
out-of-pocket measure) was the value of the homes as represented (for 
purposes of the benefit -of-the-bargain measure), and the value of what was 
received was the same (for purposes of both measures). 
14   
 
  
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
way of their award, but in looking at how the evidence was 
structured, the only evidence the court really focussed  [sic]  on 
in terms of proof of compensatory damages was this contention 
that the damages should be measured by the cost of constructing the marina."   Ultimately, the Legal Trial Court determined that 
there was insufficient evidence of Plaintiffs' damages to support the jury's verdict. The Legal Trial Court granted the 
Haseko Defendants' motion to set aside the verdict, and entered 
judgment on the UDAP claim in favor of the Haseko Defendants.  9 
  We conclude that the Legal Trial Court erred in 
setting aside the jury verdict and entering judgment in favor of the Haseko Defendants on Plaintiffs' UDAP claim, which was contrary to the jury's ultimate determination that the Haseko 
9 The court elaborated: 
. . . So the court does not conclude that a cost analysis 
would be an appropriate measure of damage. 
The alternative theory, which was actually the 
primary theory of the plaintiff, is that the plaintiff's 
benefit of the bargain damages takes the form of the cost to construct the marina in the case at bar. . . .  
. . . And when the case law talks about benefit of the 
bargain, the law contemplates that the wrongful conduct in 
question affected the value of the property, and if plaintiffs 
suffered a harm, that the value of the property would decrease 
after the wrongful conduct. Therefore, the measure of damage is 
expressed in terms of the difference between the value of the 
property as represented with a marina, minus the value of the 
property that was actually received with lagoon. So it requires 
evidence of the value of  these properties, the plaintiffs' 
properties with a marina minus the value with a lagoon. And 
there was simply no such evidence in the record.  
15   
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Defendants violated the UDAP statute. Plaintiffs presented 
sufficient evidence for the jury to award them UDAP damages 
based on a benefit -of-the-bargain measure. First, Plaintiffs 
presented evidence of the value of their homes as represented 
with the proposed marina based on the purchase prices they paid, 
as reflected in their sales contracts. Second, Plaintiffs 
presented evidence of the value of what they received at or near 
the time of purchase. Specifically, Plaintiffs showed at trial 
that Haseko spe nt approximately $60 million on Marina 
construction from 2008 to 2010.10 Lawrence Chang, Haseko's 
controller, confirmed that this $60 -million expenditure "came 
from homeowners for the marina and the cost was allocated into 
. . . each home [.]" Plaintiffs thus presented evidence 
sufficient to show that revenue from each home sale – 
approximately $20,000 per home ($60 million/3,000 Plaintiffs) – 
was allocated to cover the costs of building the Marina. This 
evidence supported Plaintiffs' argument that they overpaid for 
10 Relatedly, the Equitable Trial Court's later FOFs and COLs were 
based in part o n the court's review of "the trial record of the 2015 jury 
trial[.]" The Haseko Defendants do not dispute the court's finding in FOF 22 
that: "From 2008 to 2010, Haseko spent approximately $60 million on Marina 
construction, dredging and lining the basin with armor stone. These $60 
million in Marina costs were allocate d into every home that was sold. At the 
time the $60 million was spent on Marina construction, from 2008 to 2010, 
Haseko intended to complete the Marina." Unchallenged findings of fact are 
binding on appeal. Okada Trucking Co. v. B d. of Water Supply , 97 Hawaiʻi 450, 
458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002). 
16   
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
their homes by approximately $20,000 per home, i.e., that the 
value of what they received at the time of purchase was $20,000 
less than the purchase price. Plaintiffs were not required to 
prove their UDAP damages with scientific precision; reasonable 
certainty was sufficient. See Lima, 149 Hawaiʻi at 467, 494 P.3d 
at 1200. Although the jury was free to reject all or any part 
of the evidence Plaintiffs presented on their damages – and it 
appears the jury rejected much of it – the evidence was 
sufficient to support a UDAP damages award based on a benefit -
of-the-bargain measure. The Legal Trial Court erred in 
concluding otherwise. 
  In setting aside the jury's damages award, the Legal 
Trial Court also appears to have imposed an incorrect legal 
standard on Plaintiffs. Specifically, the court ruled that 
Plaintiffs had failed to show "the difference between the value of the property as represented with a marina, minus the value of the property that was actually received with lagoon."   (Emphasis 
added.) The proper measure of benefit-of-the-bargain damages, however, was the difference between the value of Plaintiffs' 
homes as represented  with a marina, and the value of what they 
received at the time of the purchase  (which, again, was 
essentially the promise of a house without a marina). See  
Ellis, 51 Haw. at 53, 451 P.2d at 820.  
17   
 
   
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, the Legal Trial Court erred in setting 
aside the jury verdict and entering judgment in favor of the 
Haseko Defendants on Plaintiffs' UDAP claim. 
3. Rescission 
In their third point of error, Plaintiffs contend that 
the Legal Trial Court erred in denying relief to Plaintiffs 
pursuant to HRS § 480 -12, and "simply should have voided the 
sales contracts following HRS [§] 480-12's plain mandate that 
contracts entered into on the basis of UDAP violations are 
simply void." 
  The plain language of HRS § 480-12 states that "[a]ny 
contract or agreement in violation of this chapter is void and 
is not enforceable at  law or in equity." On this basis, "a 
transaction that includes an unfair or deceptive business practice is typically null and subject to rescission." Sakal v. 
Ass'n of Apartment Owners of Hawaiian Monarch, 148 
Hawaiʻi 1, 8 
n.11, 466  P.3d 399, 406 n.11 (2020).  
Here, the record reflects that the Plaintiffs 
contracted with only one of the nine Haseko entities -Hoakalei 
Residential, LLC – when they purchased homes. Neither the Legal 
Trial Court jury, nor the Equitable Trial Court, found that 
Hoakalei Residential, LLC was liable for violating HRS § 480 -12. 
Notably, the Legal Trial Court jury further found, in its 
18   
 
  
   
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
special verdict, that none of the nine Haseko entities acted as 
the alter ego of any other Haseko entity. Plaintiffs have not 
advanced any cognizable legal theory permitting the rescission 
of sales contracts that were entered into with a party that was 
not found liable for a UDAP violation . 
The Legal Trial Court did not err in concluding that 
Plaintiffs are not entitled to elect the rescission of their 
home sales contracts pursuant to HRS § 480 -12. 
4. Evidence of Subsequent Increases in Property Values 
  Plaintiffs contend that the Legal Trial Court erred in 
allowing evidence, including Hallstrom's testimony, regarding "a 
subsequent increase in property values[,]" i.e., subsequent to 
the home sales at issue. Plaintiffs argue that Hallstrom's 
testimony conflicts with Hawai ʻi law that fraud damages are 
measured "at the time of the misrepresentation."   (Emphasis 
omitted.)  11
Initially, we note that Plaintiffs do not quote the 
specific evidence and testimony that they challenge or otherwise 
identify where it is in the voluminous record. See HRAP 
Rule 28(b)(4). In any event, Plaintiffs' broad -brush argument 
11 More precisely, in fraud or deceit cases, damages are measured at 
the time of the transaction. See Ellis, 51 Haw. at 53, 451 P.2d at 820. 
19   
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
challenging Hallstrom's testimony fails to show his testimony 
was inadmissible . 
Hallstrom essentially testified, based on the studies 
he conducted, that property values in the Haseko development did 
not drop when Haseko announced in late 2011 that a lagoon rather 
than a marina would be built. Although this testimony did not 
relate directly to the measure of Plaintiffs' damages at the 
time of their home purchases,12 it was at least relevant to 
whether Plaintiffs were injured as a result of Haseko's alleged 
misrepresentations that a marina would be built, or alleged 
failure to disclose that it would not be built. Relevant 
evidence is "evidence having any tendency to make the existence 
of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the 
action more probable or less probable than it would be without 
the evidence." Hawaii Rules of Evidence Rule 401. Evidence 
that home prices did not drop in the Haseko devel opment when 
Haseko announced that a lagoon rather than a marina would be 
built, tended to show – or at least Haseko was free to argue 
that such evidence tended to show – that the announced switch 
had no effect on the market prices of those homes. Such 
12 Indeed, Plaintiffs argued to the jury in closing that Hallstrom's 
testimony was "100 percent worthless, [because] you have a jury instruction 
that says you measure the damages at the time of the sale." 
20   
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
evidence would, in turn, demonstrate that the prices of those 
homes were not artificially inflated by the false promises of a 
marina, and that Plaintiffs therefore suffered no loss as a 
result of the false promises. Indeed, if prices had dropped (or 
had not kept pace with increasing values o f comparable 
properties) after the announcement, Plaintiffs would have been 
able to present such evidence in support of their argument that 
the false promises caused their loss.13 Because Hallstrom's 
testimony was relevant to an issue "of consequence to the 
determination of the action," i.e., whether Plaintiffs were 
injured as a result of the alleged UDAP violation, the Legal 
Trial Court did not err in admitting the evidence . 
5. Summary 
For the reasons discussed above, the Legal Trial Court 
did not err in instructing the jury on the measure of damages 
for a UDAP violation, in not ordering rescission of Plaintiffs' 
sales contracts based on HRS § 480 -12, and in allowing 
13 In a somewhat related context, class action plaintiffs in 
securities fraud cases frequently point to the price drop of a stock after 
bad corporate news is announced as evidence that the failure to disclose 
relevant facts months or even years earlier, when the facts first became 
known, artificially inflated the price of the stock, and that the eventual 
price drop is evidence of "loss causation," i.e., "that the defendant's 
deceptive conduct caused [the plaintiff investors'] claimed economic loss." 
In re Tesla, Inc. Sec. Litig. , Case No. 18 -cv-04865-EMC, 2022 WL 7374936, at 
*7 (N.D. Cal. Oct. 13, 2022) (quoting Lloyd v. CVB Fin. Corp. , 811 F.3d 1200, 
1209 (9th Cir. 2016), and citing numerous other Ninth Circuit "fraud -on-the 
market" cases). 
21   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hallstrom's testimony. The Legal Trial Court did err in setting 
aside the jury verdict, and entering judgment in favor of the 
Haseko Defendants, on Plaintiffs' UDAP claim. On remand, the 
jury's special damages award of $1,300 per home should be 
reinstated and trebled pursuant to HRS § 480 -13(b)(1) and (3), 
and Plaintiffs should be permitted to seek all additional relief 
available under these provisions. 
B. Plaintiffs' Equitable Remedies 
Haseko raises nine points of error on appeal, which 
fall into two categories. First, Haseko contends that the 
Equitable Trial Court erred in allowing Plaintiffs to rescind 
their sales contracts under the CPA because: (1) the court's 
rescission order was based on an erroneous finding that "[t]his 
lawsuit concerns a marina that was included in the original 
master plan for a 1,100 -acre condominium regime . . . ." ; (2) 
Plaintiffs were bound by their election to seek damages rather 
than rescission; and (3) Plaintiffs' rescission claim was time -
barred pursuant to HRS § 514B -94(b). Second, Haseko contends 
that the Equitable Trial Court erred in awarding $20 million on 
Plaintiffs' unjust enrichment claim because: (1) the award was 
based on the same erroneous finding quoted above; (2) as no 
Plaintiff can rescind, none can claim an unjust enrichment 
award; (3) Plaintiffs had an adequate remedy at law; (4) the 
22   
 
  
 
   
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawaiʻi Legislature did not provide an unjust enrichment remedy 
for a UDAP violation; (5) the evidence did not support the Legal 
Trial Court 's conclusion that any enrichment was unjust; and (6) 
Haseko's decision to switch to a lagoon caused Haseko to incur a 
net loss, and thus did not enrich it. 
1. Rescission Under the CPA 
We conclude that Plaintiffs' claims for rescission 
under the CPA are time -barred because HRS § 514B -94(b), which 
governs claims brought under the CPA, is a statute of repose and 
not a statute of limitations. We thus need not address Haseko's 
remaining contentions challenging the Equitable Trial Court's 
rescission order. 
23   "A statute of repose 'bar[s] any suit that is brought 
after a specified time since the defendant acted (such as by 
designing or manufacturing a product), even if this period ends before the plaintiff has suffered a resulting injury.'" Zyda v. Four Seasons Hotels and  Resorts, 371 F.  Supp. 3d 803, 806 (D. 
Haw. 2019) (quoting Black's Law Dictionary  1546 (9th ed. 2009). 
HRS § 514B-94(b) states, in pertinent part, that "no action 
shall be brought for the recovery of the purchase price after 
two years from the date of the sale[.]" This language definitively specifies the time for bringing a CPA action as 
calculated "from the date of the sale ." We find persuasive the   
 
  
  
  
 
   
      
  
 
  
     
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
District Court for the District of Hawai ʻi's analysis in Zyda 
that the language in HRS § 514B -94(b) is similar, albeit not 
identical, to the language in HRS §§ 657 -5 and 657 -7.3, which 
the Hawaiʻi appellate courts have recognized as statutes of 
repose. Id. at 806-10. 
Here, Plaintiffs filed their complaint on July 17, 
2013, which was more than two years after all of the named class 
action Plaintiffs who owned condominiums within the Project 
purchased their units. Plaintiffs' claim for rescission under 
the CPA is time -barred pursuant to HRS § 514B -94(b). 
2. Unjust Enrichment 
a. Finding of Fact 2 
Haseko contends that FOF 2 erroneously states: "This 
lawsuit concerns a marina that was included in the master plan 
for a 1,100 -acre condominium regime . . . ." Haseko asserts 
that "[t]he project is not a condominium property regime [,]" but 
does not present any discernible argument explaining how FOF 2 
affects, let alone undermines, the Equitable Trial C ourt's 
unjust enrichment award. Th is point is therefore deemed waived. 
See HRAP Rule 28(b)(7). 
b. No Rescission, No Unjust Enrichment 
Haseko contends that "because no homeowner may now 
rescind, no homeowner may claim the unjust enrichment award." 
24   
 
   This argument depends on Haseko's cramped and 
inaccurate reading of the Equitable Trial Court Order. The 
relevant portion states: "[F]or any Class member who does not elect [rescission and]  restitution of the full purchase price 
plus interest as set forth above, i.e. Class members who wish to continue living within the Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei, they are awarded the remedy of unjust enrichment in the amount of their 
pro rata share of $20,000,000." Thus, if a class member cannot 
elect rescission because it is not legally available in these circumstances, nothing in the Order prevents that class member 
or any other class member who wishes to continue living within 
Ocean Pointe/Hoakalei, from sharing in the Equitable Trial Court's unjust enrichment award. Haseko's argument is without 
merit.  
     
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
c. Adequacy of Legal Remedy 
Haseko contends that Plaintiffs were not entitled to 
the equitable remedy of restitution on their unjust enrichment 
claim because they had adequate legal remedies for their breach 
of contract and UDAP claims. 
"As to the question of when an equitable remedy may be 
invoked, this court observes the principle, long -invoked in the 
federal courts, that equity has always acted only when legal 
25   
 
     
  
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
remedies were inadequate." Porter v. Hu , 116 Hawaiʻi 42, 55, 
169 P.3d 994, 1007 (App. 2007) (cleaned up). 
Here, Plaintiffs did not contract with any of the four 
Haseko Defendants found liable for a UDAP violation. The only 
contracts Plaintiffs had were with Ho akalei Residential, LLC. 
Plaintiffs thus had no breach of contract remedy, or contract -
based UDAP remedy, against the Haseko Defendants.14 The 
Equitable Trial Court did not err or otherwise abuse its 
discretion in determining that "[n]o contracts exist between the 
Haseko Defendants and Plaintiffs to bar relief through unjust 
enrichment[,]" and that Plaintiffs' breach of contract remedies 
were inadequate as to the Haseko Defendants. See id. at 56, 169 
P.3d at 1008 ("the circuit court . . . imposed an equitable 
remedy upon determining that the contract remedies available did 
not adequately address Defendants' unjust enrichment (a matter 
within the circuit court's discretion)"). 
Plaintiffs also lacked an adequate tort remedy. In 
Porter, this court ruled: 
Although the jury returned a verdict in [Plaintiffs']  favor 
and awarded tort damages, Plaintiffs contend the jury's 
award was insufficient to adequately compensate their 
losses as a result of Defendants' wrongful conduct. This 
court agrees with Plaintiffs and concludes that the mere 
14 Relatedly, because Plaintiffs did not contract with any of the 
Haseko Defendants, none of those defendants are shielded by the rule that 
when an express contract exists between the parties concerning the same 
subject matter, equitable remedies are not avai lable. Porter, 116 Hawaiʻi at 
54, 169 P.3d at 1006. 
26   
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
availability of some figure of tort damages does not by 
itself preclude an award founded on unjust enrichment. As 
Palmer notes in his treatise on restitution, "[t]he objectives of the two remedies are different, however: in 
the damage action the plaintiff seeks to recover for the 
harm done to him, whereas in the restitution action he 
seeks to recover the gain acquired by the defendant through 
the wrongful act." 1 George E. Palmer, The Law of 
Restitution § 2.1, at 51 (1978). Although the tort and 
unjust enrichment claims are, in a sense, founded on the same wrongful conduct —the deprivation of Plaintiffs' books 
of business by Defendants —the remedies sought are 
sufficiently distinct, in this court's view, to exclude this case from the realm of "double recovery" situations.  
We conclude, in light of the foregoing, the circuit court 
did not abuse its discretion in ruling that no adequate 
remedy at law existed and the equitable remedy of unjust 
enrichment was therefore appropriate. 
Id. (emphases added). 
Similarly, here, the jury returned a verdict in 
Plaintiffs' favor and awarded tort -based UDAP damages, but 
Plaintiffs contend that the jury's award did not provide an 
adequate remedy. Based on the Equitable Trial Court's 
unchallenged FOFs, we agree that the jury's verdict was 
insufficient to adequately compensate Plaintiffs for their 
losses – and the Haseko Defendants' unjust gains – as a result 
of the Defendants' wrongful conduct. The Equitable Trial Court 
determined that Plaintiffs "hav e shown the abs ence of an 
adequate remedy at law[,]" based on the Legal Trial Court's 
decision to set aside the jury's award of damages for "deceptive 
UDAP conduct." However, the court also noted that the jury's 
factual findings of wrongdoing by the Haseko Defendants we re not 
27   
 
   
  
 
     
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
set aside, and recounted the details of that wrongdoing in the 
court's own FOFs, none of which (except for FOFs 2 and 55) the 
Haseko Defendants contest on appeal. The uncontested FOFs 
support the conclusion that the jury's award of $1,300 per home 
did not provide an adequate remedy, where Plaintiffs established 
that the Haseko Defendants were unjustly enriched by their 
wrongful conduct. As in Porter, "[a]lthough the [UDAP] and 
unjust enrichment claims are, in a sense, founded on the same 
wrongful conduct[ ,] . . . the remedies sought are sufficiently 
distinct . . . to exclude this case from the realm of 'double 
recovery' situations." Id.; see also id. at 58-59, 169 P.3d at 
1010-11 ("the damages alleged to have resulted from the tort are 
different in type and character from those arising under the 
equitable principle of unjust enrichment ."). Accordingly, 
Plaintiffs established that they lacked an adequate remedy at 
law, and the equitable remedy of unjust enrichment was therefore 
appropriate. 
d. Equitable Remedies Not Provided by the Legislature 
Haseko contends that the legislature has provided 
several remedies under the UDAP statute, but did not choose to 
allow monetary damages based on unjust enrichment. Haseko 
argues that the Equitable Trial Court therefore "had no 
28   
 
  
  
 
 
     
  
 
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
authority to add equitable remedies not allowed by the 
Legislature." 
Contrary to Haseko 's contention, n othing in the 
statutory language or history of HRS §§ 480 –2 and –13 expresses 
a legislative intent to make statutory remedies exclusive or to 
otherwise preclude an unjust enrichment claim and related remedy 
in appropriate circumstances. Cf. E. Star Inc., S.A. v. Union 
Bldg. Materials Corp. , 6 Haw. App. 125, 142, 712 P.2d 1148, 1159 
(1985) (HRS §§ 480 –2 and –13(a)(1) "do not supersede common law 
fraud claims based on deception in the course of trade and 
commerce"). 
e. Evidence of Unjust Enrichment 
Haseko contends in its last two points of error that 
the switch from marina to lagoon did not enrich Haseko, the 
amount of the $20 million unjust enrichment award was clearly 
erroneous, and any enrichment to Haseko was not unjust. 
We note once again that the Haseko Defendants do not 
contest, except for FOFs 2 and 55, the numerous, detailed FOFs 
underlying the Equitable Trial Court's decision to award $20 
million in restitution on Plaintiff s' unjust enrichment claim. 
Moreover, upon review, the record contains substantial evidence 
supporting FOF 55 and the Equitable Trial Court's mixed 
conclusion of fact and law that the Haseko Defendants were 
29   
 
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unjustly enriched in the amount of $20 million. This finding 
and conclusion is not clearly erroneous, and in the 
circumstances of this case, the Equitable Trial Court did not 
abuse its discretion in awarding that amount in restitution to 
Plaintiffs. 
IV. Conclusion 
For the reasons discussed above, we vacate the 
Judgment, and we affirm in part and vacate in part the Legal 
Trial Court Order , Equitable Trial Court Order, and Order 
Denying New Legal Trial. We remand for further proceedings 
consistent with this memorandum opinion. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, September 16, 2024.  
On the briefs:  /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth  
 Presiding Judge  
Steven K.S. Chung,   
for Defendants-Appellants/  /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen  
Cross-Appellees.  Associate Judge  
  
Terrance M. Revere,  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
P. Kyle Smith,   Associate Judge  
for Plaintiffs-Appellees/   
Cross-Appellants. 
30 