NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000668 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
BERNARD DELRAY SPRAY, Petitioner-Appellee, v.
TERRY L. STEPHENS, Respondent-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 3SS15-1-000140)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant Terry L. Stephens (Stephens)
 
appeals from the "Order Granting Petition for Injunction Against
 
Harassment," filed on August 3, 2015 in the District Court of the
 
1
Third Circuit  (district court).
 
On appeal, Stephens contends (1) a single act of

 
harassment is insufficient to grant an injunction against
 harassment pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 604­
10.5(a)(2) (Supp. 2015), (2) the date of the harassment alleged
 
by Petitioner-Appellee Bernard Delray Spray (Spray) was shown to
 
be incorrect, and (3) the District Court failed to apply the
 
clear and convincing standard of proof to the evidence.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 conclude Stephens' appeal is without merit.
 
HRS § 604-10.5 provides in part:
 
1
 The Honorable Harry P. Freitas presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
§604-10.5 Power to enjoin and temporarily restrain
harassment.  (a) For the purposes of this section:
 
"Course of conduct" means a pattern of conduct
composed of a series of acts over any period of time
evidencing a continuity of purpose.
 
"Harassment" means:
 (1)	 Physical harm, bodily injury, assault, or the
threat of imminent physical harm, bodily injury,
or assault; or
 
(2)	 An intentional or knowing course of conduct
directed at an individual that seriously alarms
or disturbs consistently or continually bothers
the individual, and that serves no legitimate
purpose; provided that such course of conduct
would cause a reasonable person to suffer
emotional distress.
 
. . . .
 
(g)	 . . . .
 If the court finds by clear and convincing
evidence that harassment as defined in paragraph (1)
of that definition exists, it may enjoin for no more
than three years further harassment of the petitioner,
or that harassment as defined in paragraph (2) of that
definition exists, it shall enjoin for no more than
three years further harassment of the petitioner;
provided that this paragraph shall not prohibit the
court from issuing other injunctions against the named
parties even if the time to which the injunction
applies exceeds a total of three years.
 
The district court cited three incidents in support of
 
issuing the injunction against harassment, Stephens told Spray
 
that he was not faster than a bullet, Stephens' neighbor
 threatened Spray at the direction of Stephens, and Stephens told
 Spray's brother that people disappear on the island and Spray was
 not exempt from that. Stephens contention that there was only
 one incident of harassment is incorrect.
 
Three instances of intentional or knowing conduct by
 
Stephens was a "pattern of conduct composed of a series of acts
 over any period of time evidencing a continuity of purpose" which
 constituted a "course of conduct" pursuant to HRS § 604-10.5(a). 
The district court noted that the dates of the incidents were
 inexact according to the testimony but nonetheless believed that
 the harassment occurred around the alleged dates.
 
HRS § 604-10.5 does not require the exact date of the
 
harassment be proven, only that there was clear and convincing
 evidence that harassment occurred. In this case, the harassment
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was an intentional or knowing course of conduct directed at Spray 
that seriously alarmed or disturbed consistently or continually bothered Spray, and served no legitimate purpose; and Stephens' course of conduct would have caused a reasonable person, in this case Spray, to suffer emotional distress. HRS § 604-10.5(a)(2). The district court found by clear and convincing evidence Stephens violated HRS § 604-10.5(a)(2) in harassing Spray. "[T]he credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony are within the province of the trier of fact and, generally, will not be disturbed on appeal." Tamashiro v. 
Control Specialist, Inc., 97 Hawai
'i 86, 92, 34 P.3d 16, 22 
(2001). 
"[C]lear and convincing" evidence may be defined as an
intermediate standard of proof greater than a
preponderance of the evidence, but less than proof
beyond a reasonable doubt required in criminal cases.
It is that degree of proof which will produce in the
mind of the trier of fact a firm belief or conviction
 as to the allegations sought to be established, and
requires the existence of a fact be highly probable.
 
Masaki v. General Motors Corp., 71 Haw. 1, 15, 780 P.2d 566, 574
 
(1989).
 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the "Order Granting Petition
 
for Injunction Against Harassment," filed on August 3, 2015 in the District Court of the Third Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, November 21, 2016. 
On the brief:
 
Terry L. Stephens
Respondent-Appellant pro se. Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge

 
Associate Judge
 
3
 