NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0005534
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
EDMUND M. ABORDO, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY ("DPS"),
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Defendant-Appellee
and
 
CEDRIC AH SING, Plaintiff-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-2116)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellant Edmund M. Abordo (Abordo), pro se, 
appeals from the Judgment entered in favor of Defendant-Appellee 
Department of Public Safety, State of Hawai 'i (DPS). Abordo and 
Cedric Ah Sing (Ah Sing) filed a "Petition for Post-Conviction Relief" (Petition), purportedly pursuant to Hawai
'i Rules of 
Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 (2006). The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court) ruled that the Petition filed by Abordo and Ah Sing did not assert a basis for relief under HRPP Rule 40, and it ordered that the Petition be treated as a civil NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
complaint, as provided by HRPP Rule 40(c)(3).1 The case was 
subsequently removed to the United States District Court for the 
District of Hawai 'i, then transferred to the United States 
District Court for the District of Arizona (Arizona District Court). The Arizona District Court dismissed all federal claims with prejudice for failure to state a claim under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, denied supplemental jurisdiction over the remaining state law claims, and remanded the state law claims to the Circuit Court. 
After the case was remanded, the DPS filed a motion to 
dismiss Abordo's and Ah Sing's complaint, pursuant to Hawai
'i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (HRCP) Rule 12(b)(6) (2000), for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. The Circuit Court granted the DPS's motion to dismiss, and it entered its Judgment on November 19, 2013. 
We construe Abordo's opening brief, which contains
 
arguments that are somewhat difficult to follow, to assert the
 following basic contentions: the Circuit Court erred in: (1)
 converting the Petition into a civil complaint; (2) allowing his
 case to be removed to federal court; (3) denying his request to
 continue the hearing on the DPS's motion to dismiss; and (4)
 granting the DPS's motion to dismiss.
2 We affirm the Circuit
 
1HRPP Rule 40(c)(3) provides in relevant part: 
(3) SEPARATE CAUSE OF ACTION. If a
 
post-conviction petition alleges neither illegality of
judgment nor illegality of post-conviction "custody" or
"restraint" but instead alleges a cause of action based
on a civil rights statute or other separate cause of
action, the court shall treat the pleading as a civil
complaint not governed by this rule. 
2The Honorable Richard K. Perkins entered the order
 
converting the Petition to a civil complaint, and the Honorable
Karen T. Nakasone entered the order granting the DPS's motion to
dismiss.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court's Judgment.3
 
I.
 
We resolve Abordo's contentions on appeal as follows:

 
1. Abordo's Petition did not challenge the validity
 
of his convictions or sentence. To the extent that the Petition
 
raised a claim that Abordo's post-conviction custody or restraint
 was illegal, that claim was rendered moot by Abordo's release
 from custody.
4 Because any claim by Abordo in the Petition that
 
could possibly have been raised pursuant to HRAP Rule 40 is moot,
 we conclude that Abordo is not entitled to relief on his
 contention that the Circuit Court erred in converting the
 Petition into a civil complaint.
 
2. Abordo's contention that the Circuit Court erred
 
in allowing his case to be removed to federal court is without
 merit. Whether the case was properly removed was a decision for
 the federal court, not the Circuit Court. See 28 U.S.C. §§ 1441,
 
1446-1447.
 
3. The Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion in
 
denying Abordo's request to continue the hearing on the DPS's
 motion to dismiss. Abordo did not file a response to the DPS's
 motion to dismiss or request a continuance prior to the hearing. 
Abordo explained this failure by stating that he had been busy
 with work and school. At the hearing, Abordo requested that the
 
3We note that the Notice of Appeal purports to assert an
appeal by both Abordo and Ah Sing. However, Ah Sing did not sign
the notice of appeal, Abordo is not a lawyer, and we conclude
that Abordo cannot represent Ah Sing in this appeal. See Hawaii
 
Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 605-2 and 605-14. Accordingly, Ah Sing
has not appealed from the Circuit Court's Judgment, and we limit
our consideration to an appeal only by Abordo. 
4The DPS represents, and Abordo does not dispute, that
Abordo was released from custody on January 15, 2013, before his
state claims were remanded by the Arizona District Court to
Circuit Court. The record reflects that Abordo appeared in
person at the hearing on the DPS's motion to dismiss held on
October 16, 2013, and told the Circuit Court that he was working
and going to school.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit Court permit him to orally present his opposition to the
 
motion to dismiss, or in the alternative, to continue the hearing
 so that he could file a written opposition. The Circuit Court
 permitted Abordo to orally present his opposition to the motion
 to dismiss. Under these circumstances, we conclude that the
 Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion. 
4. The Circuit Court did not err in granting the 
DPS's motion to dismiss pursuant to HRCP Rule 12(b)(6) for failure to state a claim for relief. "[A] complaint should not be dismissed for failure to state a claim unless it appears beyond doubt that the plaintiff can prove no set of facts in support of his or her claim that would entitle him or her to relief." Kealoha v. Machado, 131 Hawai
'i 62, 74, 315 P.3d 213, 
225 (2013) (block quote format altered; citation omitted). In reviewing a trial court's order dismissing a complaint for failure to state a claim, "the appellate court's consideration is strictly limited to the allegations of the complaint, and the appellate court must deem those allegations to be true." Id. 
(block quote format altered; brackets and citation omitted). The court, however, "is not required to accept conclusory allegations on the legal effect of the event alleged[,]" id. (internal quotation marks and citation omitted), and "[f]actual allegations must be enough to raise a right to relief above the speculative level[.]" Pavsek v. Sandvold, 127 Hawai
'i 390, 403, 279 P.3d 55, 
68 (2012) (block quote format altered; citation omitted). 
Based on our review of the allegations set forth in 
Abordo's Petition, we conclude that the Circuit Court properly granted the DPS's motion to dismiss. Abordo's allegations were largely conclusory, and he failed to allege sufficient facts to support a claim for relief on his state law claims. See 
Kealoha, 131 Hawai
'i at 79, n.26, 315 P.3d at 230 n.26 
(concluding that plaintiffs' broad and conclusory allegations were insufficient to survive a motion to dismiss). 
Abordo's apparent theory was that the DPS violated the
 
Hawaii Public Procurement Code (Procurement Code), HRS Chapter
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
103D, rendering its agreement regarding the incarceration of 
Hawai'i prisoners in Arizona at the Saguaro Correctional Center 
(SCC) illegal, which in turn meant that his custody was illegal and that SCC officials should not be able to exercise authority over him. However, Abordo lacked standing to pursue an action based on a violation of the Procurement Code and his claims that were based on an alleged violation of the Procurement Code failed to state a claim for relief. See HRS §§ 103D-701, -704 (2012); 
District Council 50, of Intern. Union of Painters and Allied Trades v. Saito, 121 Hawai
'i 182, 189-90, 216 P.3d 108, 115-16 
(App. 2009) (concluding that plaintiffs lacked standing to bring an action under the Procurement Code). Abordo also alleged that 
5
SCC guards  retaliated against him for filing law suits and
failed to afford him due process, but did not allege any facts

 
showing a basis for holding the DPS liable for the alleged
 actions of the SCC guards. We conclude that Abordo failed to
 state a valid claim for relief on his state law claims.
 
II.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit
 
Court's Judgment.
 
DATED: February 26, 2016, at Honolulu, Hawai'i.

 
On the briefs:
 
Edmund M. Abordo 
Cedric Ah Sing
Petitioners-Appellants
Pro Se
 Chief Judge

Associate Judge
April LuriaJodie D. Roeca
 (Roeca Luria Hiraoka LLP)
for Respondent-Appellee 
Associate Judge
 
5The record indicates that the SCC guards were employed by
the Corrections Corporation of America.
 
5
 