FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
–––O0O–––
 
SAMENA ALIYA HOLLOWAY, nka SAMENA ALIYA NORDKVIST,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
JOSHUA DAVID HOLLAWAY, Defendant-Appellant
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000816
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 04-1-3511)
 
APRIL 30, 2014
 
FUJISE, PRESIDING JUDGE, LEONARD AND REIFURTH, JJ.
 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY REIFURTH, J.
 
Defendant-Appellant Joshua David Hollaway ("Father")
 
appeals from the Order Re: Plaintiff's Motion for Post-Decree
 
Relief Filed June 6, 2011, ("Custody Modification Order") entered
 on September 12, 2012, in the Family Court of the First Circuit
 
1
("Family Court"),  which modified the original joint custody
arrangement between Father and Samena Aliya Hollaway, nka Samena
 Aliya Nordkvist ("Mother") by giving Mother sole custody
 regarding educational decisions made on behalf of their son
 
1
 The Honorable Paul T. Murakami presided.
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
("Son"). Specifically, Father challenges certain findings of
 
fact ("FOF") and conclusions of law ("COL") in the Family Court's
 Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law filed on November 15,
 2012 ("FOF/COL").
2 We vacate the Custody Modification Order and
 
associated FOF and COL for lack of substantial evidence in
 support of the Family Court's key findings.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Father and Mother (collectively, "Parents") were
 
divorced on December 16, 2004, pursuant to a Divorce Decree. The
 
Divorce Decree established that Parents would share joint legal
 and physical custody of Son. It did not specify how future
 decisions would be made on behalf of Son, or how Parents should
 proceed if they were unable to jointly make such decisions. 
Parents originally enrolled Son in Palisades Elementary
 
School ("Palisades") which he attended from kindergarten through
 sixth grade. If not enrolled in a private school, Son would
 normally next attend Highlands Intermediate School ("Highlands").
 
Mother, however, preferred to enroll Son in a private
 
school, eventually focusing on Kamehameha Schools ("Kamehameha").
 Father, an atheist, objected to Son's enrollment in any non­secular school, and to Kamehameha in particular, contending that
 it is a Christian school. The school's purported religious
 aspect does not form a basis for Mother's preference. Father
 also objected to Kamehameha on grounds that it maintains a
 "racially selective admissions policy," preferring those of
 Hawaiian ancestry.
 
Parents found themselves at an impasse. Mother filed
 
her Motion and Affidavit for Post-Decree Relief, in which she
 sought an order directing Father to cooperate with her efforts to
 enroll Son at Kamehameha. 
2
 FOF and COL filed after the notice of appeal has been filed are
eligible for review on appeal. See Mark v. Mark, 9 Haw. App. 184, 193, 828
P.2d 1291, 1296 (1992) (post notice of appeal FOF and COL "bolster the earlier
written orders and decrees of the court for purposes of withstanding appellate
review"); see also Inoue v. Inoue, 118 Hawai' i 86, 92–94, 185 P.3d 834, 840–42
(App. 2008) (ruling on the merits of challenges to FOF and COL issued after
the notice of appeal). 
2
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
On September 20, 2011, at the hearing on Mother's
 
motion, the parties presented the following testimony relevant to
 
the merits of each school option.3
 
DIRECT EXAMINATION [of Mother]
 
Q [by Mother's counsel] What's your experience with
[Kamehameha]?
 
A [M]y brother attended [Kamehameha]. And he
 
would always talk about the resources they had, the field
trips that he went on, the college prep that he received. 
. . . .
 
A Kamehameha I think is one of the best schools on
 
this island. There is a cultural relationship to our
family. [Son] is Hawaiian. He's also a very intelligent
child who I think would benefit from the resources at
 Kamehameha. 
. . . .
 
Q Okay. What about the academics? I mean, going
to right now, is [Son] being challenged at Palisades right
now or how is he handling the work?
 
A I don't feel that he is being challenged. He
 
has skipped a grade. . . . [H]e often complains to me that
he has to do work that's harder than the other kids, it's
not fair. 
They have a reading program at school where he has to
read either a bigger book or a harder book than the other
kids because he is so advanced.
 
I don't really feel that he's being challenged. He
 
just flies through his homework and I would . . . like for
it to be a little bit challenging for him.
 
Q Okay. And you feel that Kamehameha would be
some possible advan -­
A Yes. 
Q -- advantage to him in that department? 
A Yes. I feel that the curriculum there is 
at a higher standard.
 
. . . .
 
CROSS EXAMINATION [of Mother]
 
. . . .
 
3
 Son testified at the beginning of the hearing. He stated, "I kind
of don't care what school I go to, but I just prefer to stay with my friends."
It appears that most of his friends would remain in public schools, while his
best friend may attend Kamehameha.
 
3
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q [by Father's counsel] . . . I think you had
indicated that in your view [Kamehameha's] curriculum would
be superior to the curriculum of the school he's attending
now? 
A That's correct. 
Q What do you base that on? What is 
[Kamehameha's] curriculum?
 
A I base it on friends and family that has went
there and a comparison to the math level that my brother was
in while he was there and he's younger than me. It was much
 higher and accelerated than the level of math that I was in.
And I'm . . . not a poor student. I was considered above
 average in my class in GPA.
 
. . . .
 
A . . . They also have an extensive band.  [Son's]
very interested in music. And he likes computers. To put
together like little movies and slide show. They have a
program over there for that. I just thought that would be
interesting for him.
 
Q Have you ever heard of the Pearl City High
School marching band?
 
A I was in that.
 
Q Have you heard of the Mililani High School
marching band?
 
A Yes.
 Q Those schools also have large bands[,] correct?
 A Yes.
 Q All right. I wanna ask you though, if you can
be a little more specific about -- is your opinion about the
relative curriculums of [Kamehameha] and some public school
based solely on the fact that your brother, you perceived
him to have harder math than you? Is that the data base
 that you're relying on?
 
A No, not the only -- not the only thing.
 
. . . . 
Q Tell me any facts that you're aware of on which
you base your opinion that [Kamehameha] has a superior
curriculum?
 
A Okay. I base the fact that every year they have
colleges that go in, big -- you know, reputable colleges
like MIT. They go in there and prep the kids to either apply
for these or recruit them to apply for their colleges. They
. . . win a lot of awards. Their band is great. Their -­they have math, um -- a math achievement -- I mean, those
are the things that I base it on.
 
Q Okay. Would you agree with me that your son
would excel at any school? That he has the -­
A Yes, I believe he's -­
4
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Q -- intellectual horse power?
 
A Yeah, I believe he's very smart, yes.
 . . . . 
DIRECT EXAMINATION [of Father]
 
Q [by Father's counsel] . . . What is your perception
as to why [Son] would like to be at Highlands Intermediate?
 
A . . . [Highlands has] a strong robotics program
. . . that has made the national finals the last two years.
 
Q Okay. Has your son participated in robotics and
been successful in robotics competitions at Palisades?
 
A Yeah, they're a championship team. They're one
of the top teams.
 
. . . . 
Q What kinds of things does your son learn in
robotics that might help him or give him new interest as he
goes through high school and into life?
 
A They . . . learn a lot of mathematics. They
also learn how to solve problems logically. They learn
planning and team work.
 
And every one of the competitions also has a -- beside
the actual robotics course that they have to run, they have
a research and presentation, like sort of a problem solving
thing where they take the issue of the day, a timely issue,
and they put together a –- a solution for it, they write an
essay, they make a display, and they present it to judges
without any adult supervision.
 
That's the . . . actual component that his team is the
strongest at.
 
. . . .
 
Q . . . .
 What is your opinion as to the curriculum or the
amount of challenge and education that your son can get in
the public school system?
 
A Um –- I work in a public school and I think that
. . . when you're teaching, which is what I do, . . . you
know, I'm still learning and I think everybody's always
still learning when you're teaching.
 
But there's no magic system and . . . Kamehameha's
staff and faculty, they don't know a better system of
teaching. They don't have a better series of books, they
don't have a better method.
 
They teach the same way that the rest of us do and
they learned it in the same way the rest of us do. . . .
 
. . . .
 
. . . [Y]ou know, there may be some perceived benefits
at Kamehameha, but . . . I personally don't see any evidence
that the actual academic instruction is better. . . .
 
5
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
. . . . 
EXAMINATION [of Father]
 
BY THE COURT:
 
Q . . . .
 
. . . In your mind what constitutes a need for private
school?
 
A [Articulating religion and undesirable
influences at another school as reasons.] 
And a lot send their kids to private school because
they think they might need a certain classroom sizes [sic]
or special instruction or certain activities that they don’t
have access to at public school.
 
So far we haven't identified any of those things. My
son's happy with his programs he has. . . . 
. . . .
 
I think that's sort of the implication in this whole
mess is that somehow by not going to a private school he's
going to be disserviced in some way, and I think that's a
ridiculous implication.
 
. . . .
 
Q By extrapolation then, would I be correct in
concluding that in [Son's] case you don't perceive a need
for private school?
 
A I don't perceive a need for private school, no. 
And I . . . don't say that there aren't perceived
benefits to someone else, and we might debate about the
quality of those benefits.
 
She might think that they have a better curriculum. I
 
might say otherwise. I don't necessarily think that there is
a measurable difference there.
 
But what I do see and there are very strong negative
aspects to me about -- things that oppose my core values.
And -- and without something that at least pretends to
somehow provide some benefit to balance out that offense to
my core values as a parent, well then, . . . is this vague
and non-specific benefit of [Kamehameha] that powerful that
it should dismiss my . . . actual beliefs?
 
It -- maybe to say there's no need for private school,
I -- I wouldn't want that to sound like I'm saying there's
no benefit of it, or that there's no difference. I don't
 think that that's true, that there's no difference. But I
 don't perceive that there are benefits that outweigh my
objections.
 
Both parents submitted exhibits that were stipulated
 
into evidence. Mother's exhibits included information pertaining
 
to Kamehameha's admissions policies, excerpts from Kamehameha's
 2011-2012 Student & Parent Handbook, and an excerpt from its
 
6
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2011-2012 Catalog of Courses pertaining to Grades 7–8. These
 
provided some insight into opportunities available at Kamehameha,
 such as which electives would be offered and Kamehameha's
 team-oriented approach. Father's exhibits included information
 pertaining to Son's performance at Palisades. Neither party's
 exhibits provided any insight into opportunities that would, or
 would not, be available to Son at Highlands or any other public
 intermediate school.
 
Father also provided testimony and exhibits regarding
 
Kamehameha's religious affiliation and practices, including a
 Christian Education course and chapel service, and its
 "racial[ly] exclusive policy" that limits enrollment to those of
 Hawaiian ancestry. 
On September 29, 2011, the Family Court issued an oral
 
ruling, granting custody to Mother to make educational decisions
 for Son. At the end of that hearing, the court stated: "Because
 the opportunities available to a child, any child, in a private
 school setting, they've got the resources where a lot of public
 schools don't. That's a sad fact, but a fact it is."
 
On September 12, 2012, the Family Court issued the
 
Custody Modification Order, reflecting its earlier oral ruling.
 On November 15, 2012, after Father filed his Notice of Appeal,
 the Family Court issued the FOF/COL, in which it stated:
 
FINDINGS OF FACT
 
. . . .
 
7. A private school may give [Son] options[] that
public school may not.
 
8. In weighing between the two parties, Mother is
the party who would more likely offer more opportunities and
options for [Son's] education.
 
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
 
1. . . . Modification of custody orders issued in
divorce is provided for under Haw. Rev. Stat. section 580­11.
 
2. Based upon the best interests of the children
standard, the parties shall continue to share legal custody
of the child, with exception however, as to educational
decisions, wherein Plaintiff/Mother is awarded the primary
authority to make such decisions.
 
3. Mother's authority regarding educational
decisions shall include the ability to have the parties'
 
7
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
child apply and enroll in private school, as well as the
choice of private school.
 
Father timely appealed and filed his opening brief. 
Mother filed no answering brief.4
 
II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
Father contends that the Family Court erred by (1)
 
"awarding Mother sole and primary authority to make educational
 
decisions for [Son], including enrolling him in a private school
 of her choosing"; (2) "authorizing Mother to enroll [Son] in a
 religious and racially exclusive private school over Father's
 objections where both parents had joint legal custody of [Son],
 and continued public school enrollment was not detrimental to
 [Son]"; and (3) issuing FOF 7 and 8 and COL 1, 2, and 3. 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
"We answer questions of constitutional law by
exercising our own independent judgment based on the facts
of the case. Thus, we review questions of constitutional law
under the right/wrong standard." State v. Fields, 115
Hawai'i 503, 511, 168 P.3d 955, 963 (2007) (internal
quotation marks, citation, and ellipsis omitted).
 
"A trial court's FOFs are subject to the clearly
erroneous standard of review." Ueoka v. Szymanski, 107
Hawai'i 386, 393, 114 P.3d 892, 899 (2005) (citations
omitted). 
An FOF is clearly erroneous when, despite
evidence to support the finding, the appellate court
is left with the definite and firm conviction in
 reviewing the entire evidence that a mistake has been
committed. An FOF is also clearly erroneous when the
record lacks substantial evidence to support the
finding. We have defined substantial evidence as
 credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and
probative value to enable a person of reasonable
caution to support a conclusion.
 
Bremer v. Weeks, 104 Hawai' i 43, 51, 85 P.3d 150, 158 (2004)
(quoting Beneficial Hawai' i, Inc. v. Kida, 96 Hawai' i 289,
305, 30 P.3d 895, 911 (2001)). 
The appellate court reviews the trial court's
COLs de novo. A COL is not binding upon an appellate
court and is freely reviewable for its correctness.
Moreover, a COL that is supported by the trial court's
FOFs and that reflects an application of the correct
rule of law will not be overturned.
 
4
 The record does not reflect where Son is currently enrolled in
school.
 
8
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Bhakta v. County of Maui, 109 Hawai' i 198, 208, 124 P.3d
943, 953 (2005) (internal quotation marks, citations, and
brackets in original omitted). 
Generally, the family court possesses wide
discretion in making its decisions and those decisions
will not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse
 of discretion. Thus, we will not disturb the family
court's decisions on appeal unless the family court
disregarded rules or principles of law or practice to
the substantial detriment of a party litigant and its
decision clearly exceeded the bounds of reason.
 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai' i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360
(2006) (quoting In re Doe, 95 Hawai' i 183, 189–90, 20 P.3d
616, 622–23 (2001)). 
Doe v. Doe, 120 Hawai 'i 149, 165, 202 P.3d 610, 626 (App. 2009) 
(brackets omitted). 
IV.	 DISCUSSION
 
A.	 While the Family Court did not make a finding that
there had been a material change in circumstances to
justify modification of custody, the parents' impasse
sufficed.
 
In arguing that COL 1 is incorrect, Father contends 
that the Family Court abused it discretion in modifying the 
parties' existing joint legal custody order and improperly granted a change in custody because it did not first find that there had been a material change in circumstances to warrant modification of the original divorce decree. He notes that this court has previously held that "[t]o obtain the family court's change of a custody order, the movant 'must show a material change of circumstances since the previous custody order, and must show that such a change of custody is in the best interest of the child.'" Egger v. Egger, 112 Hawai
'i 312, 318, 145 P.3d 
855, 861 (App. 2006) (quoting Nadeau v. Nadeau, 10 Haw. App. 111, 121, 861 P.2d 754, 759 (1993)). This court, however, has not applied this threshold requirement in a joint custody context where the court is asked to intervene regarding only a specific aspect of custody. 
The Family Court specified Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
("HRS") §§ 571-46 and 580-11 as the basis of its authority to
 modify the custody order. HRS § 580-11 states that "[t]he court
 may revise and amend the orders [issued during the pendency of
 
9
   
  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
any action for divorce] from time to time." H AW. REV. STAT.
 
§ 580-11 (2006). HRS § 571-46(6) provides that "[a]ny custody
 
award shall be subject to modification or change whenever the
 best interests of the child require or justify the modification
 or change[.]" H
AW. REV. STAT. § 571-46(6) (Supp. 2013). In
 
addition, because this case involves the modification of an order
 awarding joint custody of a child, we note that HRS § 571-46.1(c)
 specifies that "[a]ny order for joint custody may be modified or
 terminated upon the petition of one or both parents or on the
 court's own motion if it is shown that the best interests of the
 child require modification or termination of the order." H
AW.
 
REV. STAT. § 571-46.1(c) (2006).
 
While the statutory language above grants family courts
 
the jurisdiction to modify a joint custody order, our case law
 requires that the party seeking modification must first make a
 threshold showing of material change in circumstances.
5 In
 
Nadeau, for instance, we held that a threshold showing of
 material change in circumstances applied to custody and
 visitation modification orders, citing HRS § 571-46 and cases
 concerning child and spousal support. 10 Haw. App. at 121, 861
 P.2d at 759. Since this court has applied that requirement to
 HRS § 571-46, it would be inconsistent to not apply it to its
 sister statute, HRS § 571-46.1. Whether a substantial and
 material change has been presented is reviewed under the
 right/wrong standard. Davis v. Davis, 3 Haw. App. 501, 506, 653
 
P.2d 1167, 1171 (1982). 
Other jurisdictions have recognized their courts'
 
authority to resolve a deadlock between joint custodial parents
 regarding important matters such as choice of school. In Morgan
 v. Morgan, for example, an Alabama appellate court cited several
 other jurisdictions in recognizing that "[a]lthough no Alabama
 case has heretofore declared that a circuit court may resolve a
 
5
 Such a policy reflects the importance of the family courts' focus
on the best interests of the child in evaluating proposed custodial
modifications, including modifications to educational decision-making. The
 prior custody order, founded as it must be on the child's best interests, and
including, among others, the implicit component factors of stability and
security, should not be overturned lightly.
 
10
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
schooling dispute among divorced parents sharing joint legal
 
custody of a child, other states have uniformly recognized that a
 court invested with jurisdiction over custody issues may do so." 
See 964 So. 2d 24, 31 (Ala. Civ. App. 2007). It went on to hold
 that "a court with subject-matter jurisdiction over custody
 issues has the inherent authority to resolve any educational
 dispute between divorced custodial parents who have equal
 constitutional rights concerning the education of their child." 
Id. Nevertheless, it proceeded to consider whether the parent
 
seeking a change in custody had demonstrated a material change in
 circumstances, concluding that because, in part, "the parents
 [were] no longer able to agree on the child's education[,]" the
 court was authorized to modify custody. Id. at 34. In a
 
Virginia case addressing an analogous issue, see Grzyb v. Grzyb,
 79 Va. Cir. 93 (2009), that court stated that it "ha[d] no
 difficulty finding that a material change in circumstances exist
 [sic] in that the parties have reached a complete impasse on
 whether to give the child routine immunizations[.]" Id. at *1.
 
We find the aforementioned rationale persuasive and
 
recognize that where joint custodial parents are deadlocked
 regarding an important decision implicating their child's future
 or welfare, such an impasse qualifies as a material change in
 circumstances sufficient to warrant the Family Court's
 consideration of a change in the custody order's terms with
 respect to the deadlocked matter. This assumes, of course, that
 a means of resolving such impasses is not addressed in the
 divorce decree; where not so addressed, the implicit assumption
 is that parents will be capable of reaching mutual decisions
 regarding their child.
6 As to this issue in this case, that does
 
6
 We note that in cases where joint custodial parents reach an
impasse in decision-making regarding their child, a number of preliminary
alternatives are available, such as mediation, the Kids First program,
parenting counseling, and development of a parenting plan. The family courts
should consider these options first, as the process might lead both to a
better-informed resolution of the immediate issue as well as a means for the
 parents to develop the co-parenting skills that will best serve the child.
 
HRS § 571-46.5(a), for example, provides that "[f]or every action
that includes a contested custody of children, both parties or both parents
shall develop either a mutually agreed-upon general parenting plan or separate
individually-desired parenting plan, and file the plan at the outset of the
 
11
   
  
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not appear possible. Moreover, to not recognize this as a
 
changed circumstance (or to not recognize it as an exception to
 this court's material-change-in-circumstances doctrine) would
 prevent the family court from stepping in to act in the best
 interests of the child where it is both specifically authorized
 by statute to do so and potentially of great import for the
 child's well-being. Therefore, the Family Court did not abuse
 its discretion in issuing the Custody Modification Order, nor did
 it err by implicitly concluding that the parties' impasse with
 regard to the schooling of their son presented it with a material
 change in circumstances. In sum, the court did not err in
 entering COL 1.
 
B.	 The record lacks substantial evidence to support the
Family Court's finding that Kamehameha offered Son
better options than public school. 
Father contends that there is no substantial evidence
 
in the record to support the Family Court's findings that "[a]
 
private school may give [Son] options[] that public school may
 not" and that "Mother is the party who would more likely offer
 more opportunities and options for [Son's] education." We agree
 that the record lacks such evidence and, therefore, vacate the
 Custody Modification Order and the FOF/COL, both in part.
 
While Mother presented some evidence regarding options
 
and opportunities at Kamehameha, the only evidence she presented
 regarding such options and opportunities relative to Highlands,
 or public school generally, consisted of her unsubstantiated
 opinion. She opined that Kamehameha's curriculum, relative to
 that of Palisades, or perhaps public school generally, "is at a
 
action. H AW. REV. STAT. § 571-46.5(a) (2006). If the parties cannot agree on
a parenting plan, HRS § 571-46.5(d) authorizes the court to: "(1) Order the
parties to participate in alternative dispute resolution and in counseling
with a person with professional experience in child custody or parenting
issues, or with other appropriate education, unless there is a finding of
family violence; and (2) Develop and file a detailed parenting plan when
requested by either of the parties or parents." H
AW. REV. STAT. § 571-46.5(d).
 
Where necessary, the family court may appoint a guardian ad litem
as authorized by HRS § 571-46(a)(8), which provides that "[t]he court may
appoint a guardian ad litem to represent the interests of the child" in any
proceeding "where there is at issue a dispute as to the custody of a minor
child[.]" H
AW. REV. STAT. § 571-46(a)(8) (Supp. 2013).
 
12
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
higher standard." Her observation that Son was not being
 
challenged at Palisades was contradictory and did not explain how
 Son would be more challenged at Kamehameha than at Highlands. 
On cross-examination, Mother's explanation for
 
believing that Kamehameha had a superior curriculum consisted of,
 in part, a vague reference to "friends and family" and anecdotal
 information regarding her brother's math aptitude relative to
 hers. The rest of her explanation emphasized Kamehameha's
 college recruiting, band, and math performance, but without any
 evidence indicating that these aspects were superior to those of
 any other schools, nor of Highlands in particular. 
In sum, self-serving, vague, and unsubstantiated 
opinion evidence of a school's relative merits and anecdotal evidence of two students' relative performance in one academic subject is not substantial evidence on which a court may properly find that one school is superior, or in some way better suited for a particular student, than another. Cf. Korsak v. Haw. 
Permanente Med. Grp., 94 Hawai
'i 297, 308, 12 P.3d 1238, 1249 
(2000) ("[G]eneralized medical opinions do not constitute substantial evidence." (citing Akamine v. Haw. Packing & Crating Co., 53 Haw. 406, 410, 495 P.2d 1164, 1167-68 (1972))); Seyler v. Seyler, 201 S.W.3d 57, 65 (Mo. Ct. App. 2006) (reversing where "Husband presented no evidence that attendance at the high school division of the Catholic School met an educational need of Child based on Child's attendance at the elementary division"). The Family Court assumed, without evidentiary support as to the specific schools in question, that private schools necessarily provide "superior" education to public schools. Consequently, we conclude that FOF 7 and FOF 8 lack substantial evidence in support and, thus, are clearly erroneous. Because FOF 7 and FOF 8 form the basis for the conclusions reflected in COL 2 and COL 3, those conclusions are incorrect.
7 
7
 Our ruling does not mean that FOF 7 and FOF 8 could not be
supported by substantial evidence, only that in this case, to this point, the
record reflects no such evidence.
 
13
   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
C.	 The Family Court did not violate Father's
constitutional parenting rights by making its decision
based on Son's best interests.
 
Father contends that the Family Court erred by denying
 
him his rights to raise his child with respect to religious
 
beliefs and other principles. He argues that these rights are
 constitutionally-protected and that it was an abuse of discretion
 to disregard these rights absent any evidence showing that
 Kamehameha offered some benefit to Son that might properly offset
 any derogation of his rights. 
Parents have a federal and state constitutionally-
protected liberty interest in "the right . . . to direct the upbringing of their children." Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57, 
65 (2000); see In re Doe, 99 Hawai
'i 522, 533, 57 P.3d 447, 458 
(2002) ("We affirm, independent of the federal constitution, that parents have a substantive liberty interest in the care, custody, and control of their children protected by the due process clause of article 1, section 5 of the Hawai
'i Constitution."). There 
is, however, no infringement on such rights when a court, properly interposed between two parents, each equally vested with such rights, resolves an impasse between them regarding the exercise of those rights. See, e.g., Morgan, 964 So. 2d at 31 
(recognizing that under Alabama law, a court may apply the best-interests standard in a custody dispute between parents having joint custody without implicating the Fourteenth Amendment due process rights of either parent); Jordan v. Rea, 212 P.3d 919, 927 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2009) (noting that both parents have a constitutionally guaranteed right to participate in the education of their children). 
In resolving such an impasse, a family court is
 
statutorily-required to base its determination on the best
 interests of the child. H
AW. REV. STAT. § 571-46 (Supp. 2013)
 
("Custody should be awarded to either parent or to both parents
 according to the best interests of the child[.]"); Fujikane v.
 Fujikane, 61 Haw. 352, 354, 604 P.2d 43, 45 (1979) ("The critical
 question to be resolved in any custody proceeding is what action
 
14
  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
will be in the best interests of the child." (citing Turoff v.
 
Turoff, 56 Haw. 51, 55, 527 P.2d 1275, 1278 (1974))). 
Thus, Father's argument that his constitutional rights
 
were violated by the the Family Court's decision is without
 merit. Cf. Jordan, 212 P.3d at 927 (applying the best interests
 
of the child standard despite father's constitutional objections
 to a private school on religious grounds).
 
D.	 The Family Court erred in failing to consider Father's
objections to the religious instruction and admission
policies when it considered the best interests of the
child.
 
Father further challenges the Family Court's decision
 
on the basis that he had objections to the religious training
 
provided by Kamehameha and its "racially exclusionary" admission
 policy. At the hearing, he expressed concerns about the
 Kamehameha Middle School syllabus, which includes religious
 education. He also articulated his objection to the Kamehameha
 admissions policy, which, according to its website, "is to give
 preference to applicants of Hawaiian ancestry to the extent
 permitted by law[,]" as being "in opposition to my core values." 
Contrary to Father's contention, these considerations 
do not override Mother's preferences, because as noted, both Father and Mother have a constitutionally-protected liberty interest in the care, custody, and control of son. In re Doe, 99 
Hawai
'i at 533, 57 P.3d at 458. However, setting aside any 
evaluation of the merits of Father's concerns, the Family Court erred in altogether failing to address those objections as part of its consideration of Son's best interests. 
HRS § 571-46(b) sets forth a non-exclusive list of
 
factors that the Family Court may consider when determining what
 constitutes the best interests of the child in the context of
 custody awards, including modification of custody awards. H
AW.
 
REV. STAT. §§ 571-46(a)(6), § 571-46(b). These factors include 
"(3) The overall quality of the parent-child relationship;" "(7)
 The emotional needs of the child;" "(9) The educational needs of
 the child;" and "(11) Each parent's actions demonstrating that
 they allow the child to maintain family connections through
 
15
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
family events and activities[.]" Id. Although not specifically
 
enumerated in the list at HRS § 571-46(b), Father's objection to
 
the proposed school's religious curriculum and preferential
 admissions policies is a consideration that would be consistent
 with those articulated in HRS § 571-46(b), and thus should have
 been weighed by the Family Court alongside the quality of
 education offered by the school, etc.
8
 
Other jurisdictions have taken into consideration a
 
parent's religious and cultural preferences, where applicable, as
 part of making educational determinations based on the best
 interests of the child. In re Kurowski, 20 A.3d 306, 320-21
 
(N.H. 2011) ("When applying the best interests standard to decide
 a parenting rights and responsibilities matter, the trial court
 may consider a parent's religious training of his or her child
 solely in relation to the welfare of the child."); Jordan, 212
 P.3d at 929 ("[T]he court must consider whether it is in the best
 interests of the children to continue attending the private
 religious school or transfer to another school."); see also
 Karetny v. Karetny, 283 A.D.2d 250, 251 (N.Y. App. Div. 2001)
 (affirming the lower court's findings that "the longer school day
 at yeshiva is a source of stress for the child," and therefore
 adherence to stipulation to educate child at Orthodox Jewish
 yeshiva is not in child's best interests.); In re Marriage of
 Shore, 734 N.E.2d 395, 403 (Ohio Ct. App. 1999) (holding that
 there was "competent, credible evidence upon which the trial
 court could base its decision" that the child's best interests
 were served by a religious education, despite objections by
 child's father). In sum, as part of its best interests of the
 child assessment, the Family Court should have considered
 Father's objection to Kamehameha's religious curriculum and
 admissions policy.
 
8
 As noted, "the family court possesses wide discretion in making
its decisions and those decisions will not be set aside unless there is a
 
manifest abuse of discretion." Fisher, 111 Hawaii at 46, 137 P.3d at 360. In
 
this case, the issue is not that the Family Court improperly weighed the
factors, but rather that by focusing exclusively on the fact that Kamehameha
is a private school, it failed to consider Father's objections altogether.
 
16
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
V. CONCLUSION
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate (1) that portion
 
of the Family Court's Order Re: Plaintiff's Motion for Post-
Decree Relief Filed June 6, 2011, entered on September 12, 2012,
 pertaining to educational decisions and expenses, and (2) FOF 7,
 FOF 8, COL 2, and COL 3 in the Findings of Fact and Conclusions
 of Law, filed November 15, 2012. We remand the case to the
 Family Court for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
9
 
On the brief:
 
Steven J. Kim
 
for Defendant-Appellant
 
9
 Given the passage of time since the entrance of the Family Court's
Order, the Family Court may need to conduct a new hearing to take into
consideration any changed circumstances.
 
17
 