NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-10-0000160
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MELANIE MOLINA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-CR. NO. 10-1-1102)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Melanie Molina (Molina) appeals the
 
October 21, 2010 Judgment entered by the Family Court of the
 
First Circuit (family court)1
 convicting her of Harassment of her
five-year-old son, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 § 711-1106(1)(a) (Supp. 2011).
 
On appeal, Molina contends that the family court erred
 
in convicting her where (1) insufficient evidence existed of the
 
requisite state of mind, (2) insufficient evidence existed to
 
negative the parental discipline defense, and, (3) insufficient
 
evidence existed that Molina's use of force resulted in bleeding
 
in the nose and facial area.
 
Based on a careful review of the points on appeal, the
 
arguments made, the record, and the applicable authority, we
 
resolve Molina's contentions as follows.
 
1
 The Honorable Gale L.F. Ching presided.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Harassment under HRS § 711-1106(1)(a) states:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of harassment if, with
intent to harass, annoy, or alarm any other person, that
person:
 
(a) Strikes, shoves, kicks, or otherwise touches
another person in an offensive manner or subjects the other
person to offensive physical contact[.]
 
Evidence reflects that Child was five years old; Molina
 
was frustrated with having her five children with her that day;
 
Child was not obeying Molina; Molina observed the Child crouch
 
down in anticipation of being hit; Molina admitted in her
 
statement to police that she "slapped her child once" and in
 
testimony confirmed that she "hit him only on the back and the
 
butt, buttocks with a backhand"; Child's nose bled and Child was
 
crying, with redness of his face and blood visible on Child's
 
face, shirt, and forehead. Where the family court did not find
 
2
Mother's version credible, as was its province,  under these
circumstances, sufficient evidence existed to infer Molina's 
"intent to harass, annoy, or alarm" Child. State v. Stocker
, 90 
Hawai'i 85, 92, 976 P.2d 399, 406 (1999) (recognizing 
"substantial evidence that, after becoming angry and 'yelling' at 
Shane, Stocker slapped him in the face" and, based thereon, 
holding "that the family court could reasonably have inferred 
that Stocker intended his conduct to 'annoy' or 'alarm' Shane"). 
The parental discipline defense arises from HRS § 703­
309 (1993), which states in pertinent part, as follows:
 
§ 703-309. Use of force by persons with special
responsibility for care, discipline, or safety of others.
The use of force upon or toward the person of another is
justifiable under the following circumstances:
 
(1)	 The actor is the parent or guardian or other
person similarly responsible for the general
care and supervision of a minor, or a person
acting at the request of the parent, guardian,
or other responsible person, and:
 
2
 State v. Kikuta, 125 Hawai' i 78, 89, 253 P.3d 639, 650 (2011) (the
"assessment of the credibility of the witnesses and weighing of the evidence"in an evidentiary dispute to determine "liability under HRS § 703-309(1)(a)""is not within the province of an appellate court, but a function of the factfinder at trial"). 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(a)	 The force is employed with due regard for
the age and size of the minor and is
reasonably related to the purpose of
safeguarding or promoting the welfare of
the minor, including the prevention or
punishment of the minor's misconduct; and
 
(b)	 The force used is not designed to cause or
known to create a risk of causing
substantial bodily injury, disfigurement,
extreme pain or mental distress, or
neurological damage.
 
In State v. Crouser, 81 Hawai' i 5, 10-11, 911 P.2d 725, 
730-31 (1996) (footnote omitted), the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
articulated the requirements for the parental discipline defense.
 
To invoke the defense of justification under HRS
§ 703-309,[] Crouser was required to make a showing that the
record contained evidence supporting the following elements:
(1) he was a parent, guardian, or other person as described
in HRS § 703-309(1); (2) he used force against a minor for
whose care and supervision he was responsible; (3) his use
of force was with due regard to the age and size of the
recipient and reasonably related to the purpose of
safeguarding or promoting the welfare of the minor,
including the prevention or punishment of misconduct; and
(4) the force used was not designed to cause, or known to
create a risk of causing, substantial bodily injury,
disfigurement, extreme pain or mental distress, or
neurological damage. See State v. Kaimimoku, 9 Haw. App.
345, 349-50, 841 P.2d 1076, 1079 (1992). In turn, the
prosecution had the burden of disproving beyond a reasonable
doubt the justification evidence that was adduced, or
proving beyond a reasonable doubt facts negativing the
justification defense. Id. at 350, 841 P.2d at 1079. Because
the requirements of HRS § 703-309(1) are set out in the
conjunctive, rather than the disjunctive, the prosecution
needed only to disprove one element beyond a reasonable
doubt to defeat the justification defense.
 
In State v. Matavale, 115 Hawai' i 149, 164–65, 166 P.3d 
322, 337–38 (2007) (citations omitted) the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
further clarified the use of force in the parental discipline
 
defense.
 
[T]he legislature, in creating the parental [discipline]
defense law, recognized the right of parents to discipline
their children; that right, however, is not absolute. In
 other words, parents may be justified in physically
disciplining their children, but such discipline must be
with due regard as to the amount of force utilized and must
be directed to promote the welfare of the child. The force
 used must (1) reasonably be proportional to the misconduct
being punished and (2) reasonably be believed necessary to
protect the welfare of the recipient. The means used to
effect the discipline must also be reasonable. In
determining whether force is reasonable, the fact finder
must consider the child's age, the child's stature, and the
 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
nature of the injuries inflicted, i.e., whether the force
 
used was designed to cause or known to create a risk of
causing substantial bodily injury, disfigurement, extreme
pain or mental distress, or neurological damage given the
child's age and size. These required factors are obviously
general in nature and, by their very terms, place a large
amount of discretion with the courts to determine whether
 the actions of a parent fall within the parameters of
parental discipline, as set forth in HRS § 703–309(1).
Clearly, there is no bright line that dictates what, under
all circumstances, is unreasonable or excessive corporal
punishment. Rather, the permissible degree of force will
 
vary according to the child's physique and age, the
misconduct of the child, the nature of the discipline, and
all the surrounding circumstances. It necessarily follows
that the question of reasonableness or excessiveness of
physical punishment given a child by a parent is determined
on a case-by-case basis and is dependent upon the particular
circumstances of the case.
 
Matavale, 115 Hawai' i at 164-65, 166 P.3d at 337-38. 
The proponent of the defense has "the initial burden of 
production with respect to the facts necessary to put the 
parental discipline defense at issue" and that burden is 
satisfied if "some evidence was adduced, 'no matter how weak, 
inconclusive, or unsatisfactory' it might be" relevant to the 
parental discipline elements. Stocker, 90 Hawai' i at 95, 976 
P.2d at 409 (citations omitted). Once the burden is met, "the burden then shift[s] to the prosecution to disprove the defense 
beyond a reasonable doubt." Stocker, 90 Hawai' i at 95, 976 P.2d 
at 409 (1999). 
Because the question of whether the force employed was
reasonably related to the welfare of the minor involves the
trial court's evaluation of mixed questions of law and fact,
the trial court's conclusion on this issue, insofar as it is
dependent upon the facts and circumstances of the case, is
reviewed on appeal under the clearly erroneous standard.
However, to the extent the conclusion is premised on the
court's interpretation of the applicable statute, the
conclusion is freely reviewable on appeal.
 
State v. Tanielu, 82 Hawai' i 373, 380-81, 922 P.2d 986, 993-94 
(App. 1996) (citations omitted). 
In the instant case, Molina appears to have met her
 
initial burden of production with some evidence as to each the
 
elements of the parental discipline defense--Molina being the
 
parent of Child is uncontested; Molina asserts she used force
 
against Child because Child hit younger brother three times and
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
that she told him to stop three times, but he did not stop;
 
Molina testified that she hit Child on the back and buttocks; and
 
Molina's assertion that she only hit Child on the back and
 
buttocks would constitute some evidence that her action was not
 
designed or known to risk causing the injuries stated in the
 
statute. Thus, the burden shifted to the State to negate the 
defense. 
Giving due deference to the family court's credibility 
3
determination,  evidence existed that Child was five years old; that Molina struck Child after Child slapped his younger brother; 
that after Molina struck Child, redness to the Child's face, as 
well as bleeding from the nose occurred, and blood was visible on 
Child's face, forehead and shirt; and that Child was crying, 
which continued for about five minutes, and Child "appeared very 
shy and afraid." The family court implicitly determined, through 
its credibility finding, that Molina struck Child's face, 
resulting in the bleeding. Where the family court also 
explicitly considered Matavale, it can be inferred that the 
family court concluded that Molina's actions was not reasonably 
proportional to the misconduct being punished or reasonably 
believed necessary to protect Child's welfare, and such 
conclusion is not wrong. See Stocker, 90 Hawai' i at 94-95, 976 
P.2d at 408-09 (declining to overrule State v. Crouser, 81 Hawai'i at 12, 911 P.2d at 732, that "to be 'reasonably related' 
to the purpose of punishing misconduct, use of force must be both reasonably proportional to the misconduct being punished and 
reasonably believed necessary to protect the welfare of the 
recipient"). Accordingly, sufficient evidence existed for the 
family court to conclude that the use of force sufficient to 
cause bleeding from the nose of the five-year-old Child was not 
reasonably proportional to the misconduct being punished or 
reasonably believed to be necessary to protect the welfare of the 
recipient. Matavale, 115 Hawai' i at 164, 166 P.3d at 337. 
3
 Kikuta, 125 Hawai' i at 89, 253 P.3d at 650. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Finally, the same evidence coupled with Molina's
 
statement to the police that she "only slapped her child once,"
 
is also sufficient for the family court to infer that Molina's
 
striking of Child caused the bleeding in the nose and facial
 
area. 
Therefore, the October 21, 2010 Judgment entered by the 
Family Court of the First Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, March 7, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Iokona A. Baker,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellant. 
Chief Judge
 
Anne K. Clarkin,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
6
 