  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
CAAP-11-0000398
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
SC, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
IC, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-D NO. 10-1-6354)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, C.J., and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
This appeal concerns a proceeding for divorce between 
Defendant-Appellant IC (Wife) and Plaintiff-Appellee SC (Husband)
 
that involved issues of custody over the parties' child (Child).1
 
Wife appeals from the "Divorce Decree" entered on April 11, 2011,
 in the Family Court of the First Circuit (Family Court). The
 Divorce Decree was based on the "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
 Law, Decision and Order" (Decision and Order) filed by the Family
 Court on March 3, 2011, after the conclusion of the parties'
 divorce trial. 
On appeal, Wife contends that the Family Court abused
 
its discretion in: (1) awarding Husband sole physical and legal
 custody over Child; (2) imposing conditions on Wife's visitation
 rights; (3) sanctioning Wife by precluding her from submitting
 
1
 The Family Court ordered that the divorce proceedings be designated
and treated as confidential.
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
exhibits or calling witnesses other than herself at trial; (4) 
admitting certain of Husband's exhibits at trial; (5) awarding
 Husband $57,333.33 in attorney's fees and costs; and (6) failing
 to award spousal support to Wife.
2 We vacate the Family Court's
 
award of attorney's fees and costs to Husband, and we remand the
 case for redetermination and clarification of the Family Court's
 ruling on attorney's fees and costs. In all other respects, we
 affirm the decisions of the Family Court that Wife challenges on
 appeal.
 
I.
 A.
 
Husband and Wife were married in September 2009. 
Child was born in 2010. The parties have lived separately since
 February 2010, and their marriage lasted only six months before
 they separated.
 
In April 2010, while Husband was on the mainland for
 
military training, Wife filed a "Petition for an Order for
 Protection" (Wife's Petition) and obtained a Temporary
 Restraining Order (TRO) against Husband on behalf of herself and
 Child in FC-DA 10-1-0716. In Wife's Petition, Wife alleged that
 Husband had made threats and committed acts of violence against
 her.
 
On May 13, 2010, Wife was involuntarily committed at
 
Kâhi Môhala after the staff at Tripler Army Medical Center
 (Tripler), where she had taken Child for treatment, observed
 signs that Wife may be suffering from a psychological condition
 or disorder. Because of Wife's TRO against Husband in FC-DA 10­1-0716, he could not take custody of Child, and Child was placed
 in the temporary foster custody of the Department of Human
 Services (DHS). In light of Wife's mental health issues and the
 claims she had made against Husband in Wife's Petition, the DHS
 
2
 The Honorable Paul T. Murakami imposed the sanction challenged by Wife
in her point of error (3). The Honorable Frances Q.F. Wong issued the other
rulings challenged by Wife on appeal. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
initiated an FC-S case, FC-S 10-00070, to investigate Child's
 
safety, and the Family Court appointed a guardian ad litem (GAL)
 for Child.
 
Husband denied the allegations in Wife's Petition and
 
filed a motion to modify the TRO so that it would not include
 Child. At a May 25, 2010, hearing on Wife's Petition, the
 parties agreed to the entry of a fifty-year Order for Protection
 in favor of Wife (Wife's Order for Protection), with no findings
 of abuse. Wife's Order for Protection prohibited Husband from
 contacting or coming within 100 feet of Wife, and it also
 prohibited Wife from "soliciting or aiding" Husband in violating
 the protection order. Wife's Order for Protection did not
 include Child as a covered person.
 
Shortly after the issuance of Wife's Order for 
Protection, Wife allegedly began contacting Husband in violation of Wife's Order for Protection and allegedly harassed Husband's friends, family, and co-workers. Husband filed his own Petition for an Order for Protection (Husband's Petition) against Wife in FC-DA 10-1-6378. After a June 29, 2010, hearing, the Family Court granted Husband's Petition and issued a three-year Order for Protection (Husband's Order for Protection), with a finding of abuse by Wife. Wife was subsequently arrested for Order-for-Protection violations, and the State of Hawai' i initiated 
criminal proceedings against her in FC-CR 10-1-1666 and FC-CR 10­1-001930. 
In the meantime, the DHS, after conducting an
 
investigation into Husband's and Wife's ability to care for
 Child, issued a "Safe Family Home Report" in FC-S 10-00070. The
 DHS determined that Wife's allegations against Husband were
 either unfounded or distortions of events, found no safety
 concerns related to Husband, and recommended Child's
 reunification with Husband pursuant to continued family
 supervision. The DHS had continued concerns regarding Wife's
 mental health and found that reunification with Wife would
 present a threat of neglect to Child. The Family Court approved
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the DHS's plan for reunification of Child with Husband, and Wife
 
was granted supervised visitation.
 
Based on concerns raised by the DHS, including concerns
 
arising from Wife's conduct during supervised visitations, the
 Family Court issued an order in FC-S 10-00070 on October 26,
 2010, that suspended Wife's visitation with Child "until DHS and
 GAL have a written report by an approved mental health
 professional that [Wife] has shown stability and made some
 progress in resolving her mental health issues."
 
B.
 
On June 3, 2010, Husband filed a Complaint for Divorce
 
in this case (FC-D 10-1-6354). While the divorce case was being
 litigated, there were ongoing proceedings in the FC-S case and
 other cases involving Husband and Wife. The following events
 occurred in the divorce case:
 
The Family Court entered an order granting Husband
 
temporary legal and physical custody of Child. Wife was granted
 supervised visitation consistent with DHS's recommendations in
 FC-S 10-00070. Husband filed a Motion to Set and a hearing on
 the motion was held on September 29, 2010. At this hearing, the
 Family Court set trial for the week of February 7, 2011, and a
 calendar call for January 27, 2011. The Family Court informed
 Wife that she was required to attend the January 27, 2011,
 calendar call because she was appearing pro se and that she would
 need to bring three sets of any exhibits she intended to
 introduce at trial. Wife failed to appear at the calendar call
 and failed to submit any exhibits. The Family Court defaulted
 Wife for purposes of the calendar call and prohibited her from
 introducing exhibits and calling witnesses, other than herself,
 at trial.
 
The Family Court held a half-day divorce trial on
 
February 7, 2011. Wife was represented by recently retained
 counsel. The Family Court took judicial notice of all related
 cases, including FC-S 10-00070, the parties' protection order
 cases, and the criminal cases against Wife for protection order
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violations. After trial, the Family Court issued its Decision
 
and Order and the Divorce Decree. The Divorce Decree, among
 other things, granted Husband sole legal and physical custody of
 Child; suspended Wife's visitation, subject to conditions imposed
 in FC-S 10-00070, and made Wife's further visitation subject to
 the Family Court's decisions in the FC-S case; ordered Wife to
 pay child support; ordered Wife to pay two-thirds of Husband's
 total attorney's fees and costs of $86,000.00 or $57,333.33; and
 did not award any spousal support to either party. Wife timely
 appealed from the Divorce Decree on May 10, 2011.
 
II.
 
We resolve the arguments raised by Wife on appeal as
 
follows:
 
A.
 
Wife contends that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion in awarding Husband sole physical and legal custody
 over Child in the Divorce Decree. In particular, Wife challenges
 the Family Court's Conclusion of Law (COL) 3 of the Decision and
 Order, which states: "3. Pursuant to [Hawaii Revised Statutes
 (HRS)] § 580-47, the credible testimony of the witnesses at
 trial, and the other court proceedings judicially noticed, it is
 in the best interests of [Child] to award [Husband] . . . sole
 legal custody and sole physical custody of Child."
 
In making decisions regarding child custody and 
visitation, the paramount consideration of the Family Court must be the best interest of the child. Doe v. Doe, 98 Hawai' i 144, 
155-56, 44 P.3d 1085, 1096-97 (2002); see also In re Doe, 52 Haw. 448, 453, 478 P.2d 844, 847 (1970). "[The] family court possesses wide discretion in making its decisions and those decisions will not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion." Doe, 98 Hawai' i at 154, 44 P.3d at 1095 
(citations omitted). 
Wife does not challenge the Family Court's Findings of
 
Fact (FsOF) relating to her inability to properly care for Child
 and her lack of credibility. "Findings of fact . . . that are
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not challenged on appeal are binding on the appellate court."
 
Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply, 97 Hawai'i 450, 458,
 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002); Poe v. Hawaii Labor Relations Bd., 97
 Hawai'i 528, 536, 40 P.3d 930, 938 (2002). Based on the Family 
Court's unchallenged FsOF, the deference an appellate court gives
 to the trial court's assessment of the credibility of witnesses
 and the weight of the evidence, see Inoue v. Inoue, 118 Hawai' i 
86, 101, 185 P.3d 834, 849 (App. 2008), and a review of the
 record, we conclude that the Family Court did not abuse its
 discretion in awarding Husband sole physical and legal custody
 over Child. There was substantial evidence to support the Family
 Court's decision.
 
B.
 
With respect to visitation, the Divorce Decree
 
provided:
 
5. VISITATION.  Pursuant to the Orders Concerning
Child Protective Act in FC-S 10-00070, filed October 26,
2010, [Wife's] supervised visitation with [Child] is
suspended until such time that the Department of Human
Services ("DHS") and the assigned Guardian Ad Litem ("GAL")
receive a written report from an approved mental health
professional confirming that [Wife] has shown stability and
made legitimate progress in resolving her mental health
issues. Further visitation for [Wife] with [Child] shall be
determined by the Family Court in FC-S 10-00070 based on the
best interests of [Child]. [Wife] shall pay any and all
necessary expenses in connection with any future visitation
for her with [Child]. [Wife] shall have a continuing duty
to ensure that the visitation orders of this case accurately
reflect the visitation orders in the FC-S case.
 
Wife argues that the Family Court abused its discretion in
 
"prohibiting [her] from visiting [C]hild absent certain
 conditions." In particular, Wife challenges the Family Court's
 COL 4, which states: 
4. It is also in the best interests of [Child] that
[Wife's] visitation with [Child] be determined by the Court
in FC-S 10-00070 and that, pending further order of the
Court in that case, [Wife's] supervised visitation with
[Child] remain suspended pursuant to Judge Kuriyama's
standing order in that case. [Wife] has a continuing duty
to ensure that the visitation orders of this case accurately
reflect the visitation orders in the FC-S case.
 
Given the substantial evidence in the record of Wife's
 
mental health issues, we conclude that the Family Court did not
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
abuse its discretion in conditioning Wife's visitation on
 
verification from an approved mental health professional that
 Wife's mental health has stabilized and that she has made
 progress in resolving her mental health issues. The Family
 Court's decision was based on its assessment of the credibility
 of witnesses and the weight of the evidence, to which we owe
 significant deference, and was supported by unchallenged FsOF.
 
After the Divorce Decree was entered, the Family Court
 
apparently closed FC-S 10-00070. Because the Divorce Decree
 conditioned Wife's visitation on orders and determinations by the
 Family Court in FC-S 10-00070, the closure of the FC-S case would
 have created a quandary with respect to Wife's ability to obtain
 visitation. However, the record reflects that shortly after the
 notice of appeal was filed, the Family Court approved and filed a
 stipulation by the parties which amended the visitation provision
 of the Divorce Decree to replace it with the following language:
 
[Wife's] supervised visits with [Child] are suspended
pending the Court's receipt of a written report from an
approved mental health professional stating that [Wife] has
shown stability and made some progress in resolving her
mental health issues, and further order of the Court[.]
 
This stipulated amendment cured any problem caused by the Divorce
 
Decree's conditioning or linking Wife's visitation to decisions
 in the FC-S case.
 
The record contains a minute order which reflects that
 
on May 16, 2011, the Family Court orally expressed its concern
 about the possible closure of the FC-S case and orally issued a
 supplementary order stating that:
 
In the event that FC-S 10-00070 is closed, [Wife]
shall be [sic] supervised visitation with [Child] through
PACT [(Parents and Children Together)]. Both parents shall
share the cost of that expense. [Husband] shall register
with PACT within 2 weeks of the termination of the FC-S
 case. All other orders shall remain in full force and
 effect. 
The record reflects, however, than when Husband objected to the
 
minute order and requested a hearing on his objection, the Family
 Court responded that Wife's notice of appeal divested the Family
 Court of jurisdiction over the action and that "no further action
 
7
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
can be taken on this case until the appeal has been completed."3
 
Wife also submitted for filing a proposed written supplemental
 
order to reflect the minute order issued by the Family Court. 
The record does not indicate whether the proposed written
 supplemental order was filed. 
We note that the Family Court retains jurisdiction to
 
resolve disputes over child custody after a notice of appeal is
 filed. HRS § 571-46 (Supp. 2008) provides in relevant part:
 
In actions for divorce . . . where there is at issue a
 
dispute as to the custody of a minor child, the court,
during the pendency of the action, at the final hearing, or
any time during the minority of the child, may make an order
for the custody of the minor child as may seem necessary or
proper. . . .
 
. . . .
 
(6)	 Any custody award shall be subject to
modification or change whenever the best
interests of the child require or justify the
modification or change and, wherever
practicable, the same person who made the
original order shall hear the motion or petition
for modification of the prior award[.] 
(Emphases added.) Thus, the Family Court retained jurisdiction
 
to address and resolve custody issues regarding Child arising
 after the filing of the notice of appeal in this case.
 
C.
 
Wife argues that the Family Court abused its discretion
 
in prohibiting her from submitting exhibits or calling witnesses
 other than herself at trial, as a sanction for her failure to
 appear at the calendar call. Wife does not dispute that she
 failed to appear at the calendar call and failed to submit
 exhibits in violation of the Family Court's specific
 requirements. Wife does not provide the names of the witnesses
 she would have called or the details of, or the basis for, their
 testimony. Wife also does not provide the nature and substance
 of any exhibits she would have sought to introduce at trial. 
3
 The Honorable R. Mark Browning responded to Husband's request for a
hearing.
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Under these circumstances, Wife has not met her burden of showing
 
that the Family Court abused its discretion and that she is
 entitled to any relief on her claim of error. 
D.
 Wife argues that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion in admitting certain exhibits at trial that were not
 properly authenticated. The challenged exhibits consisted of 
alleged Facebook postings by Wife, Wife's text messages to
 Husband, and Husband's cell phone statements. Husband
 represented, without contradiction by Wife, that the Facebook
 postings had been admitted in the FC-S case and the text messages
 and cell phone statements had been admitted in the contested
 hearing in Husband's Petition against Wife for an order for
 protection. When questioned by the Family Court, Wife's counsel
 responded that Wife had posted things on Facebook but was unsure
 about the postings reflected in Husband's exhibits.
 
The challenged exhibits were offered on the issues of 
whether Wife had violated the Family Court's confidentiality order and requirements by posting information online concerning the FC-S case and related proceedings through Facebook, whether Wife had violated the Orders for Protection, and Wife's mental fitness. We conclude that any error in the Family Court's admission of the challenged exhibits was harmless and did not affect Wife's substantial rights. See Hawai' i Family Court Rules 
Rule 61 (2000); see also In re Doe, 79 Hawai' i 265, 278, 900 P.2d 
1332, 1345 (App. 1995). The challenged exhibits were either cumulative of other evidence properly before the Family Court or, to the extent not cumulative, had no material or substantial effect on the Family Court's decision. 
E.
 
Wife contends that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion in awarding Husband $57,333.33 in attorney's fees and
 costs. As explained below, we vacate the Family Court's award of
 attorney's fees and costs, and we remand the case for further
 proceedings.
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
1.
 
Prior to the divorce trial, Husband filed a "Trial
 
Memorandum" in which he asserted that Wife had filed numerous
 
frivolous pleadings in "her TRO case, in the FC-S case, and in
 this divorce case." Husband requested that Wife be required to
 pay for "[Husband's] attorney's fees and costs incurred in this
 case and any related cases." (Emphasis added.) Husband made
 this request pursuant to HRS § 580-47(a) (2006), which provides
 in relevant part that "[u]pon granting a divorce, . . . the court
 may make any further orders as shall appear just and equitable 
. . . (4) allocating, as between the parties, the responsibility
 for the payment of . . . the attorney's fees, costs, and expenses
 incurred by each party by reason of the divorce." 
At trial, Husband testified that he owed "86,000 plus"
 
in attorney's fees to his current counsel. In his written
 closing argument, Husband (1) referred to actions taken by Wife
 in the divorce case, the FC-S case, the parties' protection order
 cases, and other disputes; (2) argued that, as he testified at
 trial, "he has incurred approximately $86,000.00 in attorney's
 fees and costs attempting to respond to and defend against
 [Wife's] frivolous motions and subpoenas"; and (3) repeated his
 request that Wife be required to pay for the attorney's fees and
 costs Husband incurred in "this divorce case and the related
 cases[.]"
 
In its Decision and Order, the Family Court found in
 
FOF 25:
 
25. During the course of the proceedings in this
case and the related cases, [Wife] filed unsupported and
irrelevant subpoenas and motions that resulted in
significant additional costly and unnecessary litigation in
this case. [Wife's] actions and litigation in this case
needlessly increased the time and expenses of these
proceedings to the detriment of both parties and [Child].
Her litigious behavior prevented [Husband] from being
reasonably able to proceed pro se and, in fact, generated
attorneys' fees and costs necessary to effectively respond
to [Wife's] actions. [Wife's] various defenses and
arguments presented at trial were specious and unsupported
by the evidence and record of this case. 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Family Court concluded and ordered that Wife shall pay two-
thirds of the $86,000 in attorney's fees and costs incurred by
 Husband. This order was incorporated into the Divorce Decree,
 which provided that "[Wife] shall pay two-thirds (2/3), or
 ($57,333.33) of the total attorney's fees and costs incurred in
 this matter by [Husband] as of the date of trial (total
 attorney's fees and costs of $86,000.00)."
 
2.
 
In support of his request for attorney's fees and
 
costs, Husband did not submit an affidavit or declaration from
 his attorneys, billing statements, or any other documentation
 that showed the nature of the work performed or the time spent in
 generating the $86,000 in attorney's fees that Husband testified
 he incurred. It appears that Husband's request for attorney's
 fees and costs was only based on his testimony that he owed
 "86,000 plus" in attorney's fees and his asset and debt
 statement, which listed a total for attorney's fees owed. We
 conclude that the record does not contain sufficient information
 or documentation in support of Husband's request for attorney's
 fees and costs to enable this court to evaluate whether the
 Family Court's award of attorney's fees and costs was reasonable. 
In this regard, we note, for example, that Husband's request for
 attorney's fees and costs not only sought fees and costs incurred
 in his divorce case, but amounts incurred in related cases. In
 its award of attorney's fees and costs, the Family Court did not
 specify, inter alia, whether it believed the award of attorney's
 fees and costs incurred by Husband in cases besides his divorce
 case was proper, and we cannot tell whether the Family Court's
 award of attorney's fees and costs included amounts incurred in
 cases besides Husband's divorce case.
 
Given these circumstances, we vacate the Family Court's 
award of $57,333.33 in attorney's fees and costs to Husband, and we remand the case for a redetermination and clarification of the Family Court's ruling on attorney's fees and costs. See Price v. 
AIG Hawai' i Ins. Co., 107 Hawai' i 106, 113, 111 P.3d 1, 8 (2005) 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(vacating the trial court's award of attorney's fees, because the 
record was insufficient to permit effective appellate review of whether the trial court had abused its discretion, and remanding for redetermination of the award); First Hawaiian Bank v. Timothy, 96 Hawai' i 348, 364-65, 31 P.3d 205, 221-22 (App. 2001) 
(vacating the trial court's award of attorney's fees, where information supporting the attorney's fees request was inadequate to permit effective appellate review, and remanding for submission of support for the attorney's fees request and for redetermination of the attorney's fees award). On remand, the parties shall be entitled to submit additional evidence in support of and in opposition to Husband's request for attorney's fees and costs. In rendering its decision on Husband's request for attorney's fees and costs, the Family Court shall specify and explain the basis for any award and how it was calculated, including whether the Family Court is awarding any attorney's fees and costs incurred in cases besides Husband's divorce case and the justification for any such award. See HRS § 580-47(a) 
("[T]he court shall take into consideration: the respective merits of the parties, the relative abilities of the parties, the condition in which each party will be left by the divorce, the burdens imposed upon either party for the benefit of the children of the parties, and all other circumstances of the case.") 
F.
 
Wife contends that the Family Court abused its
 
discretion in failing to award her any spousal support. We
 disagree. The parties' marriage lasted only six months before
 they were separated. At the time of the divorce, Wife was
 twenty-six years old and Husband was thirty-one years old; both
 parties had years of future earning potential and were capable of
 earning a living; and Husband had sole custody of Child. Based
 on the record and considering the factors set forth in HRS § 580­47(a), we cannot say that the Family Court abused its discretion
 in awarding no spousal support to either party.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the portion of the
 
Divorce Decree that awarded attorney's fees and costs to Husband,
 
and we remand the case for redetermination and clarification of
 the Family Court's ruling on attorney's fees and costs and for
 further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition
 Order. In all other respects, we affirm the Divorce Decree, as
 amended. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, August 16, 2012. 
On the briefs:
 
Shawn A. Luiz
 
for Defendant-Appellant
 
Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Associate Judge
 
13
 