NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000536
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
DUSTIN K. PIHANA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT

 
(CR. NO. 13-1-1067)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)

 
Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai 'i (State) charged 
Defendant-Appellant Dustin K. Pihana (Pihana) by superseding 
indictment with five counts of sexual assault. The complaining witness (CW) was thirteen years old and Pihana was twenty-two years old at the time of the alleged offenses. The CW was the cousin of Pihana's girlfriend. 
The State charged Pihana with sexually assaulting the
 
CW as follows: (1) first-degree sexual assault by inserting his
 finger into the CW's anal opening (Count 1); (2) attempted first-
degree sexual assault by attempting to insert his finger into the
 CW's genital opening (Count 2); third-degree sexual assault by
 placing his hand on the CW's breast (Count 3); third-degree
 sexual assault by placing his hand on the CW's genitalia (Count 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
4); and third-degree sexual assault by placing the CW's hand on
 
his penis (Count 5).1
 
The jury found Pihana guilty of Counts 1, 3, 4, and 5.2
 
3
The Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court)  sentenced
Pihana to concurrent terms of twenty years of imprisonment on

 
Count 1 and five years of imprisonment on Counts 3, 4, and 5. 
On appeal, Pihana contends that: (1) the charge in

 
Count 1 for first-degree sexual assault was defective because it
 charged him with subjecting the CW to sexual penetration, instead
 of charging him with engaging in sexual penetration with the CW;
 and (2) the Circuit Court's jury instructions on Count 1 were
 erroneous for the same reason. We affirm.
 
BACKGROUND
 
I.
 
The alleged sexual assaults occurred while the CW, who
 
lived on a neighbor island, was visiting her cousin (Cousin) on
 Oahu. Cousin was Pihana's girlfriend and lived with Pihana. 
The CW had caught the flu, so Cousin wanted to keep an
 
eye on her. The CW went to sleep in the same bed as Pihana and
 Cousin in their bedroom. Pihana slept between Cousin and the CW.
 The CW was not worried about sleeping with Pihana and Cousin
 because she viewed Pihana as a fatherly figure and he had always
 been nice to her.
 
The next morning, Cousin woke up early to go exercise
 
in the unit upstairs. The CW heard Cousin tell Pihana to move
 over so that the CW would "have more space." The CW knew that
 Pihana was awake because she heard him talking to Cousin. 
The CW testified that after Cousin left the unit and
 
the CW heard the door close, Pihana whispered the CW's first name
 
1Each count alleged that the CW was "less than fourteen years old" at
the time of the charged offense.
 
2After the State rested its case-in-chief, the trial court granted
Pihana's motion for judgment of acquittal as to Count 2. 
3The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.
 
2
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
into her ear and said "come, let's cuddle." Pihana wrapped his
 
arms around the CW and began touching her breast and kissing her
 back. Pihana put his leg on top of the CW's legs and kept
 rubbing her breast underneath her shirt with his hands. Pihana
 then put his hand inside the CW's pants and started to rub the
 inner part of her vagina. Pihana touched the CW's "butt" and
 inserted his finger inside her anus, and "[i]t hurt." Pihana
 tried to put his finger inside the CW's vagina, but the CW was
 struggling and kicking to prevent him from doing so "because it
 was sore." The CW was "moving around" and "tried to fight [her]
 way so that it wouldn't go inside." Pihana grabbed the CW's hand
 
and made her put it on his penis over his jeans. Pihana's penis
 
"was hard[.]"
 
Eventually, Pihana took his legs off of the CW's legs,
 
and the CW was able to get up. The CW went into the bathroom,
 then ran out of the unit and reported the incident to Cousin and
 other family members, who were in the upstairs unit. The CW, who
 was shaking and crying uncontrollably, told Cousin that "[Pihana]
 violated me." 
Dr. David Paperny, who examined the CW, testified that
 
the CW had abrasions or scratches in the anal area and the
 genital area that were consistent with her explanation of what
 had happened to her. 
II.
 
Cousin was called as a witness for the defense. Cousin
 
testified that she was twenty years old and had been Pihana's
 girlfriend for about a year at the time of the incident. Cousin
 stated that when she slept with Pihana, Pihana would frequently
 caress her, sometimes penetrating her anus and vagina, but would
 have his eyes closed and later say he did not remember anything
 about it, leading Cousin to believe that he was not aware of what
 he was doing. 
Pihana testified that Cousin frequently told him about
 
instances where they had engaged in sexual activity at night that
 he did not remember. Pihana said he was tired on the night that
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Cousin asked if it was okay for the CW to sleep with them on
 
their bed. Pihana testified that he had no recollection of
 touching the CW. 
DISCUSSION
 
On appeal, Pihana only challenges his first-degree
 
sexual assault conviction on Count 1. Pihana contends that the
 use of the phrase "subjects to" instead of "engages in . . .
 with" in Count 1 of the superseding indictment and in the
 description of the material elements for Count 1 in the jury
 instructions requires that his conviction on Count 1 be vacated. 
We disagree.
 
I.
 
Pihana was charged in Count 1 with first-degree sexual
 
assault, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707­730(1)(b). To understand Pihana's argument, it is necessary to
 review the amendment made to HRS § 707-730(1)(b) in 2001. Prior
 to the 2001 amendment, HRS § 707-730(1)(b) provided, in relevant
 part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault in the
first degree if:
 
. . .
 
(b)	 The person knowingly subjects to sexual penetration
another person who is less than fourteen years old[.]
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
In 2001, HRS § 707-730(1)(b) was amended to replace the
 
phrase "subjects to" with "engages in . . . with" so that after
 
the 2001 amendment, which is the statute's current form, HRS 
§ 707-730(1)(b) provides:
 
(1) A person commits the offense of sexual assault in
the first degree if:
 
. . .
 
(b)	 The person knowingly engages in sexual penetration
with another person who is less than fourteen years
old[.]
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Although the current, post-2001-amendment version of
 
HRS § 707-730(1)(b) was applicable to the first-degree sexual
 
assault offense charged against Pihana in Count 1, Pihana was
 charged in the language of the pre-2001-amendment version of the
 statute. Pihana was charged in Count 1, in relevant part, as follows: 
On or about the 27th day of December, 2012, in the
City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawaii, DUSTIN K.
PIHANA, also known as Kela, did knowingly subject to sexualpenetration, [the CW], who was less than fourteen years old,by inserting his finger into her anal opening, therebycommitting the offense of Sexual Assault in the FirstDegree, in violation of Section 707-730(1)(b) of the HawaiiRevised Statutes. 
(Emphasis added.)
 
Consistent with the language of Count 1, the material
 
elements portion of the jury instructions on Count 1 used the
 
phrase "subjected [the CW] to." By agreement of the parties, the
 jury was instructed on Count 1 as follows:
 
In Count 1 of the indictment, the defendant, Dustin K.
Pihana, also known as Kela, is charged with the offense of
sexual assault in the first degree.
 
A person commits the offense of sexual assault in the
first degree if he knowingly engages in sexual penetration
with a minor who is less than 14 years old.
 
There are two material elements of the offense of
 
sexual assault in the first degree, each of which the
prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
 
These two elements are:
 
1. That on or about the 27th day of December, 2012,
in the City and County of Honolulu, State of Hawai' i, the
defendant knowingly subjected [the CW] to sexual penetration
by inserting his finger into her anal opening; and 
2. That at that time, [the CW] was less than 14 years
old.
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
II.
 
Pihana argues that because Count 1 charged him in the
 
language of the pre-2001-amendment version of HRS § 707­
730(1)(b), rather than the language of the current version of HRS
 § 707-730(1)(b) applicable to his alleged offense, the State did
 
5
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not charge him with a "cognizable" offense. In other words, he
 
contends that because Count 1 alleges that "he did knowingly
 subject [the CW] to sexual penetration," instead of alleging that
 "he did knowingly engage in sexual penetration with the CW," the
 State failed to charge him with a cognizable crime. Pihana
 therefore asserts that the Circuit Court did not have
 jurisdiction to hear or determine the charge set forth in Count
 1. He also asserts that Count 1 was defective for omitting the
 essential element that he "engaged in" sexual penetration with
 the CW. We conclude that Pihana's arguments are without merit. 
In the context of this case -- a defendant's alleged 
first-degree sexual assault of a minor under fourteen years old incapable of providing valid consent -- there is no material difference between the allegation that Pihana subjected the CW to sexual penetration and the allegation that Pihana engaged in sexual penetration with the CW. As a minor under fourteen years old, the CW was incapable of validly consenting to sexual penetration by Pihana. See State v. Cardus, 86 Hawai
'i 426, 436, 
949 P.2d 1047, 1057 (App. 1997) (concluding that consent by a person under fourteen years old is ineffective and not a defense to a charge of sexual penetration); HRS § 702-235(2) (2014) ("[C]onsent does not constitute a defense if . . . [i]t is given by a person who by reason of youth . . . is manifestly unable . . . to make a reasonable judgment as to the nature or harmfulness of the conduct alleged[.]") Because the CW could not validly consent to sexual penetration, Pihana's act of engaging in sexual penetration with the CW would necessarily constitute subjecting the CW to sexual penetration.
4 
4We note that in construing sexual assault provisions where the victim
is incapable of validly consenting, this court has rejected a narrow reading
of the phrase "subject to" that would require the use of force and excludevoluntary participation. Instead, we broadly construed the phrase "subjectto" as including "'to expose to something: [i.e.:] subject to infection; tocause to experience something;' American Heritage College Dictionary 1352 (3d
ed. 1993), and 'to lay open or expose to the incidence, occurrence, or
infliction of, render liable to, something[;] to lay open, expose
(physically)[,]' Oxford English Dictionary Vol. XVII 31 (2d ed. 1989)."Cardus, 86 Hawai' i at 437, 949 P.2d at 1058 (brackets in original). 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Moreover, if anything, the phrase "did knowingly
 
subject to sexual penetration" is more restrictive than and
 
describes conduct fully encompassed by the phrase "did knowingly
 engage in sexual penetration with." Therefore, by alleging in
 Count 1 that Pihana "did knowingly subject [the CW] to sexual
 penetration," the State alleged conduct that clearly fell within
 the conduct prohibited by the applicable version of HRS § 707­730(1)(b), which prohibits "knowingly engag[ing] in sexual
 penetration with another person who is less than fourteen years
 old[.]" Accordingly, we conclude that Count 1 charged Pihana
 with a cognizable offense, did not omit an essential element, and
 provided Pihana with fair notice of the accusation against him. 
We reject Pihana's claims that the Circuit Court lacked
 jurisdiction to hear or determine Count 1 and that the charge in
 Count 1 was defective for omitting an essential element.
5
 
III.
 
Pihana contends that the jury instruction on the
 
material elements for Count 1 was defective because it used the
 phrase "subjected . . . to" rather than "engaged in . . . with." 
Consistent with the language of Count 1, the jury was instructed
 that it had to find beyond a reasonable doubt that "[Pihana]
 knowingly subjected [the CW] to sexual penetration by inserting
 his finger into her anal opening." 
We reject Pihana's argument regarding the Count 1 jury
 
instruction for the same reasons we rejected his argument
 regarding the charge in Count 1. As previously noted, in the
 context of this case, there is no material difference between a
 finding that Pihana subjected the CW to sexual penetration and a
 
5Of course, we do not encourage or condone the practice of charging a
defendant based on the language of an outdated statute. The State's charging
in the language of the pre-2001-amendment version of HRS § 707-730(1)(b)
created issues in this case that could have been avoided if the State had
 charged in the language of the current version of HRS § 707-730(1)(b), the
version of the statute applicable to Pihana's alleged offense. However, as we
have explained, under the circumstances of this case, the State's use of the
language of the outdated statute in charging Pihana with first-degree sexual
assault did not render the charge defective. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
finding that Pihana engaged in sexual penetration with the CW. 
Thus, the instruction on Count 1 adequately instructed the jury on the requirements for conviction and was not "'prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading.'" State v. 
Metcalfe, 129 Hawai
'i 206, 230, 297 P.3d 1062, 1086 (2013) 
(citation omitted) ("[T]he trial court is not required to instruct the jury in the exact words of the applicable statute but to present the jury with an understandable instruction that aids the jury in applying that law to the facts of the case." (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)). 
Furthermore, if anything, establishing that "[Pihana] 
knowingly subjected [the CW] to sexual penetration" applies to more limited circumstances and is more difficult for the State to prove than establishing that "Pihana knowingly engaged in sexual penetration with the CW." Since the act of engaging in sexual penetration is arguably broader and would encompass the act of subjecting someone to sexual penetration, requiring the jury to find that "[Pihana] knowingly subjected [the CW] to sexual penetration" served to benefit Pihana. The law is clear that a criminal defendant cannot complain of an instruction, even if erroneous, that benefitted the defendant. State v. Nupeiset, 90 
Hawai
'i 175, 185, 977 P.2d 183, 193 (App. 1999). 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Circuit Court's 
Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 16, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Scott Stuart Brower 
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge 
Brian R. Vincent Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCity and County of Honolulufor Plaintiff-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
8

 