NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000642
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
WILFRED P. KIN CHOY, SR., Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 11-1-0035(3))
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Wilfred P. Kin Choy, Sr. (Kin Choy)
 
appeals from the June 28, 2011 Judgment entered by the Circuit
 
Court of the Second Circuit (circuit court),1
 convicting him of
one count of Assault in the Second Degree in violation of Hawaii
 Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-711 (1)(d) (Supp. 2012).
2
 
Kin Choy raises three points on appeal. He argues that
 
(1) the circuit court erred in denying (a) his motion in limine
 
to exclude the obscenity and racial slur he allegedly uttered to
 
1
 The Honorable Joseph E. Cardoza presided.
 
2
 HRS § 707-711(1)(d) currently provides, as it did at the time of
the offense,
 
(1) A person commits the offense of assault in the second
degree if:
 
. . . .
 
(d)	 The person intentionally or knowingly causes
bodily injury to another with a dangerous
instrument[.]
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Complainant and failed to issue a limiting instruction; and
 
(b) his motion to exclude the alleged spontaneous statements he
 
made to Officer Daniel Devine (Officer Devine); and (2) that the
 
evidence was insufficient to support his conviction.
 
After a careful review of the issues raised, the
 
arguments made by the parties, the applicable authority, and the
 
record, we resolve Kin Choy's points on appeal as follows:
 
(1)(a) The circuit court was correct in denying
 
Kin Choy's motion in limine based on its determination that the
 
evidence was highly relevant to the issue of Kin Choy's intent as
 
it provided a motive for his actions in what otherwise appeared
 
as a random, unprovoked attack. See, e.g., King v. State, 29
 
S.W.3d 556, 565 (Tex. Crim. App. 2000) ("[E]xtensive evidence of
 appellant's hatred for African-Americans, including his graphic
 
tattoos and drawings, is evidence that appellant had a motive to
 
kill [complainant] because of his race.") Given the highly
 
probative nature of the evidence, the circuit court did not abuse
 
its discretion when it determined that the probative value was
 
not substantially outweighed by its prejudicial effect. See,
 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence, Rule 403; Kaeo v. Davis, 68 Haw. 447,
 454, 719 P.2d 387, 392 (1986) (Whether relevant evidence is
 
admissible under Rule 403 is a determination well-suited to a
 
trial court's exercise of discretion because it requires a "cost­
benefit calculus" and a "delicate balance between probative value
 
and prejudicial effect.") (citation and internal quotation marks
 
omitted).
 
Moreover, the circuit court informed counsel that its
 
ruling was preliminary, subject to further presentation by
 
counsel at trial. Kin Choy did not subsequently renew his
 
objection or present additional arguments or evidence at trial.
 
While no specific limiting instruction was given, none
 
was requested. The circuit court did instruct the jury that it
 
"must not be influenced by pity for the defendant or by passion
 
or prejudice against the defendant."
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1)(b) The circuit court was correct when it refused
 
to suppress Kin Choy's statements to Officer Devine. Kin Choy
 
contends that the statements he made to Officer Devine took place
 
during a custodial interrogation and that he was not advised of
 
his Fifth Amendment rights prior to being questioned. Officer
 
Devine testified that he did not ask Kin Choy any questions
 
before Kin Choy made his statements. Kin Choy argues that
 
because he was in custody and Officer Devine approached him under
 
circumstances that Kin Choy would have understood he was the
 
focus of the investigation, Officer Devine's words and actions
 
were reasonably likely to cause Kin Choy to give a response. 
Kin Choy has failed to establish that his statements were the
 
product of interrogation by the officer. State v. Paahana, 66
 
Haw. 499, 502, 666 P.2d 592, 595 (1983). ("[I]f defendant's
 statements were made independently of any custodial
 
interrogation, prior Miranda warnings need not be given and
 
defendant's statements are admissible at trial.")
 
(2) There was sufficient, substantial evidence 
presented at trial. The Complainant testified that he was 
sharply hit on the back of the head, causing him "a lot of pain" 
and knocking him to the ground. Upon getting up, he saw Kin Choy 
standing over him, holding a wooden pole, and screaming 
obscenities at him. Complainant testified that as a result, he 
suffered a swelling on his head that was still present, to a 
lesser degree, at trial. Officer Brianna Stice testified that, 
on the date of the incident, she observed a lump on Complainant's 
head, about a dime in circumference and a half-inch high. "When 
taken as a whole, legitimate and reasonable inferences drawn from 
the evidence supported the jury's unanimous verdict." State v. 
Griffin, 126 Hawai' i 40, 58, 266. P.3d 448, 466 (App. 2011) 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(citing State v. Eastman, 81 Hawai' i 131, 135, 913 P.2d 57, 61 
(1996)).
 
Therefore, the June 28, 2011 Judgment entered by the
 
Circuit Court of the Second Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 22, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Davelynn M. Tengan,
for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
Associate Judge
 Richard K. Minatoya,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Maui,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
4
 