NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000572
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
TREMAINE M.K.K. LUI-DYBALL, Plaintiff-Appellant, v.
HAWAIIAN HOMES COMMISSION, Defendant-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-1031)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION

 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Tremaine M.K.K. Lui-Dyball (Lui-
Dyball) appeals from the Circuit Court of the First Circuit's
 
(Circuit Court's) May 8, 2012 Final Judgment (Judgment) and
 
challenges the Circuit Court's April 17, 2012 Order Affirming the
 
Hawaiian Homes Commission's (the Commission's) Rulings on
 
Objections and Order Denying Reconsideration and Affirming
 
February 14, 2011 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and
 
1
Decision and Order Filed April 25, 2011 (Order).  This secondary
 
appeal arises from the Commission's decision to cancel Lui­
Dyball's lease to a residential homestead lot based on a
 purported lease violation. For the reasons set forth herein, we
 reverse the cancellation of Lui-Dyball's lease.
 
1
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
A. Relevant Facts
 On June 2, 1973, Lui-Dyball succeeded to an interest in
 
Department of Hawaiian Homelands (DHHL) Residential Lot Lease No.
 
3913 (the Lease) for a homestead property at 41-1010 Kalanianaole
 
Highway, Waimanalo, Hawai
'i 96795 (the Property). The fourth 
paragraph (Paragraph 4) of the "terms, covenants and conditions"
 section of the Lease document states, in relevant part:
 
The Homesteader will, at his own expense, at all
times, . . . keep the demised premises and all improvements
thereon in a strictly clean, sanitary and orderly condition;
and will observe, perform and comply with all laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations of the health or other
governmental authorities, including the rules and
regulations of the Commission, applicable to the use and
occupation of said demised premises as may from time to time
be issued, enacted or promulgated; and will allow the
Commission and its agents at all reasonable times free
access to the demised premises for the purpose of examining
the same and determining whether the covenants herein and
elsewhere in this lease contained are being fully observed
and performed.
 
The sixth paragraph of the "terms, covenants and
 
conditions" section of the Lease document states, in relevant
 
part:
 
This lease is upon the continuing condition that if
the Homesteader shall . . . fail in any other respect
faithfully to observe or perform any condition or covenant
in this lease contained and on his part to be observed or
performed, or fail to observe or perform the conditions and
obligations imposed upon said Homesteader by the terms of
the Act to which this lease has been made expressly subject,
the Commission may declare the interest of the Homesteader
in the lands demised hereunder and all improvements thereon
to be forfeited and this lease in respect thereto cancelled,
and shall thereupon order said lands to be vacated within a
reasonable time.
 
On July 14, 2006, officers from the Honolulu Police
 
Department (HPD) conducted a "raid" at the Property and arrested
 
Lui-Dyball's son Jerald Lee (Jerald) for "stolen property and
 
drug paraphernalia." Lui-Dyball was out of town at the time. 
On September 27, 2007, Officer John Peiper (Peiper) of
 
DHHL's Enforcement Unit visited the Property in response to two
 
anonymous complaints. While on the Property, Peiper informed
 Lui-Dyball that there had been complaints of drinking and drug
 use on the Property; Lui-Dyball denied that any drug use was
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
occurring. Peiper issued to Lui-Dyball a written Notice of Lease
 
Violation, stating:
 
THIS NOTICE IS TO INFORM YOU that you are in violation of
your lease agreement for lot 5, TMK: 4-1-021-026 the
property located at the following address: 41-1010 KALANI
HWY.
 
The violation/s are: ILLEGAL SLEEPING QUARTER, 8x40'
TRAILER, 15'x15' METAL SIDING AND BLUE TARP TENT, 12'x12'
TENT, LOCATED REAR OF MAIN STRUCTURE (HOME)
 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are to take corrective
action and do the following: REMOVING THE TWO TENTS AS
LIVING QUARTERS, REMAIN [sic] FROM USING TRAILER AS SLEEPING
QUARTERS
 
This corrective action must be completed by: DEC. 27, 2007,
12:00 P.M.
 
FURTHER NOTICE IS GIVEN: that should you fail to correct the
discrepancies within the time frame recorded above, you may
be subject to an Administrative Review to have your lease
cancelled.
 
On December 17, 2008, HPD officers executed a narcotics
 
search warrant for the Property, a trailer on the Property, and
 
the person of Jerald's then-girlfriend Bobbie Jo Friel (Friel). 
HPD officers arrested Friel and five other individuals on the
 
Property for "Promoting a Dangerous Drug in the Third Degree,
 Drug Paraphernalia." The items confiscated during the search
 included plastic bags, a cut straw, glass pipes, and two gram
 scales containing residue resembling crystal methamphetamine. 
Lui-Dyball was not present at the Property during the incident. 
B. Procedural History
 
At the Commission's June 23, 2009 regular meeting, the
 
Commission received a request for a contested case hearing
 regarding Lui-Dyball's alleged lease violation. 
On August 6, 2009, Lui-Dyball sent a letter to Micah
 
Kane, Chairman of DHHL, which stated, in relevant part:
 
My son, Jerald, was living out of his car (by his choice)
after his divorce. I was out of town when a raid was
 conducted at my Waimanalo home by HPD. Jerald was arrested
 on July 14, 2006 of stolen property and drug paraphernalia.
He has done his time in prison and is now in treatment at
Ho'omau Keola in Makaha. He says he has truly learned his
lesson and never wants to go backwards.
Because of his arrest, the ownership of my home at 41­
1010 Kalanianaole Hwy is now in jeopardy. I am awaiting a
 
3

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hearing from the DHHL enforcement office. I've [sic]
haven't received any paperwork or any formal charges. I'd
 like to know what's going on. Can you please help me? 
A September 4, 2009 letter from the Commission
 
responded to Lui-Dyball's August 6, 2009 letter, stating that a
 
DHHL Enforcement Officer was "currently reviewing police reports
 from the latest raid at [Lui-Dyball's] homestead address in
 December 2008, and upon completion [would] be notifying [her] in
 writing of further action, which may include a contested case
 hearing for lease violations." 
An August 2, 2010 letter from the Commission informed
 
Lui-Dyball that a contested case hearing before a Commission
 Hearings Officer had been scheduled for August 25, 2010. 
Attached to the letter were a "Notice of Hearing," a "Statement
 of Questions Presented," and a "Preliminary Statement of Alleged
 Facts." The questions presented in the Statement of Questions
 Presented were:
 
1. Are you in violation of paragraph 4 of lease no. 3913?
 
2. If you are found to be in violation of your department
of Hawaiian Homes Commission Residence Lot Lease No. 3913 and the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended toyour lease violation, should the Commission declare LeaseNo. 3913 
TO BE CANCELED  and your interest in Residential Lot
No. 5 situated at Waimanalo, Oahu, Hawai' i and all 
improvements thereon to be forfeited in accordance withSections 210 and 216, as applicable, of the Hawaiian HomesCommission Act, 1920 as amended? 
The Preliminary Statement of Alleged Facts stated the
 
following:
 
LEASE VIOLATION: VIOLATION OF HAWAIIAN HOMES COMMISSION
 RESIDENCE LOT LEASE NO. 3913
 
1. Paragraph 4 of Hawaiian Homes Commission Residence
Lot Lease No. 3913 states, "The Homesteader will, at his own
expense, at all times, well and substantially repair,
maintain, amend and keep all buildings and improvements now
or hereafter erected or constructed on the demised premises
with all necessary reparations and amendments whatsoever;
and will keep the demised premises and all improvements
thereon in a strictly clean, sanitary and orderly condition;
and will observe, perform and comply with all laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations of the health or other
governmental authorities, including the rules and
regulations of the Commission, applicable to the use and
occupation of said demised premises as may from time to time
be issued, enacted or promulgated; and will allow the
Commission and its agents at all reasonable times free
access to the demised premises for the purpose of examining
 
4

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the same and determining whether the covenants herein and
elsewhere in this lease contained are being fully observed
and performed."
 
(Italics omitted.)
 
On August 25, 2010, Lui-Dyball attended a contested
 
case hearing before Hearings Officer Richard L. Hoke (Hoke). 
Lui-Dyball orally waived her right to an attorney at this
 
hearing. During the hearing, Lui-Dyball testified to the
 following: (1) Friel did not "live" on the Property in December
 2008 and "ha[d] her own address in Kaneohe"; (2) Friel had
 visited Jerald "[m]any times" at the Property; (3) Lui-Dyball was
 aware that Friel had a drug problem in December 2008; (4) Lui-
Dyball did not know two of the other five people who were
 arrested during the December 17, 2008 raid, and the three people
 Lui-Dyball did recognize did not live on the Property at the
 time; (5) Lui-Dyball was aware that Jerald had been arrested on
 the Property on July 14, 2006 for possession of stolen property
 and drug paraphernalia; and (6) Peiper informed Lui-Dyball during
 his visit on September 27, 2007 that there had been complaints of
 drug use on the Property, but Lui-Dyball had told Peiper that
 there was no drug use occurring.
 
On October 22, 2010, Hoke issued the Hearings Officer's
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Recommended Order. 
Conclusion of Law (COL) 6 stated:
 
6. Lessee violated Residence Lot Lease No. 3913 for failure
 
to observe and comply with all laws of the State of Hawaii
while occupying her homestead lot, particular[ly] the drug
and paraphernalia laws of the State of Hawaii.
 
COL 10 stated:
 
10. Lessee had constructive possession of the drugs and
contraband recovered from on her property inasmuch that
Peiper had informed her prior to the warranted search that
drug activities were occurring on her property.
Furthermore, Lessee was aware that her son, Jerald and his
girlfriend, Friel, had drug problems and often frequented
Lessee's property.
 
COL 11 stated that "DHHL is entitled to cancel Lessee's
 
lease and to forfeit Lessee's rights therein." The Recommended
 
Order recommended that the Commission grant DHHL's request to do
 so. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On January 24, 2011, the Commission held a hearing,
 
which Lui-Dyball attended, represented by counsel. 
On February 14, 2011, the Commission entered its
 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Decision and Order
 
(Decision and Order). Findings of Fact (FOFs) 2, 4, 5, and 6
 
stated:
 
2. The Respondent/Lessee filed a written Respondent's
Statement in Support of Retaining the Lease for Hearing on
January 24, 2011 with the Commission on January 24, 2011.
 
. . .
 
4. The Respondent/Lessee knew or should have known
that illegal activities were occurring on the homestead lot
demised under her lease.
 
5. While she asserts that she does not permit illegal
activities to be conducted on her lot, the Respondent/Lessee
has not taken steps to prevent such occurrences from
happening.
 
6. It is unlikely that Respondent/Lessee will be able
to prevent illegal activities from occurring on the
homestead lot in the future.
 
On February 28, 2011, Lui-Dyball filed a Petition for
 
Reconsideration of Commission's Decision and Order filed on
 
February 14, 2011. The petition challenged the Commission's FOFs
 2, 4, 5, and 6. Specifically, Lui-Dyball challenged FOF 4 and
 the Hearings Officer's Conclusion of Law 10 regarding
 "constructive possession." She argued that "the mere fact that
 Officer Peiper 'had informed' [Lui-Dyball] 'that drug activities
 were occurring on her property' does not establish that [Lui-
Dyball] had any knowledge of illegal activity." Objecting to
 FOFs 5 and 6, Lui-Dyball highlighted her efforts to prevent any
 future illegal activity on the Property. 
The Commission held a reconsideration hearing on March
 
21, 2011. During the hearing, Lui-Dyball offered to present two
 witnesses who would testify on Lui-Dyball's behalf that she was
 not aware of the illegal activity occurring on the Property. The
 Commissioners declined to hear testimony of the witnesses.
 
On April 25, 2011, the Commission entered its Rulings
 
on Objections and Order Denying Reconsideration and Affirming 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
February 14, 2011 Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and
 
Decision and Order (Rulings).  Rulings on Objections 3 and 4
 
stated: 
3. The Commission did not base its decision to cancel 
the Respondent/Lessee's lease on the hearing officer's COL
10 (Statement, page 3, para. 2 and Petition, pages 2,3). As such, the Commission finds the Respondent/Lessee's objectionto the hearing officer's COL 10 without merit. Nonetheless,the Respondent/Lessee's reliance on §701-114, Hawai' i 
Revised Statutes ("HRS"), is erroneous in that §701-114,HRS, relates to the burden of proof in criminal matters.This contested case hearing is brought pursuant to Chapter91, HRS. Section 91-10, HRS, establishes that the burden ofproof in matters such as this is "by a preponderance of theevidence," (" . . . The degree or quantum of proof shall bea preponderance of the evidence." §91-10(5), HRS), not"beyond a reasonable doubt." 
4. The Commission did not, and does not now, find
that the Respondent/Lessee condones drug use on her lot
(Statement, page 4, para 3). The Commission does find,
however, based upon the credible evidence, that the
Respondent/Lessee has not taken satisfactory steps to
prevent illegal activities from occurring on the premises
demised under Lease No. 3913 and finds it unlikely that she
will prevent such activity in the future.
 
FOF 9 stated: "There were illegal drugs found on the
 
premises demised under Lease No. 3913 on or about December 2008." 
On May 23, 2011, Lui-Dyball appealed to the Circuit
Court. In her opening brief to the Circuit Court, Lui-Dyball
 
argued that the Commission had "adopted a 'zero' tolerance policy
 on drugs[,]" and that 

 
[i]nstead of going through all the rigmarole of adopting
rules on the matter, the Commission has instead opted to
implement its policy by identifying Homesteaders in
violation of that policy and canceling their leases through
contested case hearings.
 
Lui-Dyball also argued that: (1) she was denied due
 
process of law because the Commission failed to provide proper
 
notice regarding the contested case hearing; (2) the Commission
 was arbitrary in cancelling the Lease "when the DHHL never
 alleged that she herself failed to comply with any law of the
 State or any rule promulgated by the Commission, but rather found
 that she violated the Commission's 'zero tolerance' policy by
 failing to adequately police her property so that others would
 not have drug paraphernalia there in her absence[;]" and (3)
 Hoke's COL 10 was clearly erroneous. 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In its answering brief to the Circuit Court, the
 
Commission argued: (1) "[d]espite her arguments to the contrary,
 
there is ample evidence in the record that Lui-Dyball was aware
 of prior drug activity on the [Property]."; (2) Lui-Dyball had a
 duty to control the actions of those she allowed on the Property;
 (3) the Commission's practices regarding drug use on Hawaiian
 Homelands were an exercise of its adjudicatory powers, not a
 "policy" requiring formal rulemaking; (4) Lui-Dyball waived her
 objection to the Commission's purported "policy" when she failed
 to raise any objections at the contested case hearing, the
 Commission hearing, or the Commission hearing on reconsideration;
 (5) Lui-Dyball waived her procedural due process claim by failing
 to raise any objections at the contested case hearing, the
 Commission hearing, or the Commission hearing on reconsideration;
 and (6) DHHL's failure to issue a detailed complaint constituted
 harmless error, not a due process violation.
 
In reply, Lui-Dyball: (1) argued that she did not 
violate Paragraph 4 of the Lease; (2) distinguished the Commission from the Hawai
'i Public Housing Authority, to which 
the Commission analogized itself in its answering brief, in that the Hawai
'i Public Housing Authority "has rules that allow the 
eviction of the tenant when household members or guests use drugson the premises[;]" and (3) argued that "it appears that [the Commission] and the Attorney General serve grossly insufficient notice by design."  
The Circuit Court affirmed the Commission's April 25,
 
2011 Rulings, entering the Order on April 17, 2012 and the
 Judgment on May 8, 2012. Lui-Dyball timely filed a Notice of
 Appeal on June 7, 2012.
 II.	 POINTS OF ERROR
 
Lui-Dyball raises fourteen points of error on appeal:
 (1) The Hearings Officer's COL 10 is wrong and clearly
 
erroneous;
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(2) HRS § 91-10 (2012) was violated when Akana
 
misstated Peiper's written documentation of Peiper's September
 
27, 2007 visit to the Property during the Commission's hearing on
 reconsideration;
 
(3) The Commission's FOF 4 is clearly erroneous;
 (4) The Commission's FOF 5 is clearly erroneous;
 (5) The Commission's FOF 6 is not a factual finding,
 
but rather speculation about future events;
 
(6) The Commission's FOF 9 on reconsideration is
 
clearly erroneous;
 
(7) The Commission acted arbitrarily, without
 
jurisdiction, and in violation of due process when it approved a
 contested case hearing without a signed complaint containing a
 short and simple statement of the facts as required by HAR § 10­5-31;
 
(8) The Notice of Hearing served on Lui-Dyball failed
 
to allege the facts that she would be confronted with at the
 contested case hearing as required by HRS § 91-9(b)(4) in
 violation of due process;
 
(9) The Commission acted arbitrarily when it cancelled
 
Lui-Dyball's lease;
 
(10) The Circuit Court erred when it held that
 
"Paragraph 4 of [Lui-Dyball's] lease requires not only [Lui-
Dyball], but also those that she allows on her premises, to
 comply with all laws enacted by governmental authorities.";
 
(11) The Commission violated the Hawaii Administrative
 
Procedures Act, HRS Chapter 91, by cancelling Lui-Dyball's lease
 based on policies that are not formalized into administrative
 rules;
 
(12) The hearing on reconsideration was unfair,
 
violative of HRS §§ 91-9(c) (2012) and 91-10(c), and contrary to
 due process of law because while Lui-Dyball and Akana were
 allowed to testify, Lui-Dyball's witnesses, who would have
 rebutted Akana's testimony, were not;
 
(13) The Commission violated HRS § 91-9(g) when it
 
considered matters beyond the record (prior hearing decisions). 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lui-Dyball was unable to obtain those prior hearing decisions
 
even though HRS § 92F-12(a)(2) requires that they be "available
 for public inspection and duplication during regular business
 hours"; and
 
(14) The Circuit Court erred in affirming the
 
Commission's Rulings.
 III. 
APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
The review of a circuit court's decision upon its
review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal. Haw.
 
Teamsters & Allied Workers, Local 966 v. Dep't of Labor &
Indus. Relations, 110 Hawai' i 259, 265, 132 P.3d 368, 374
(2006). In a secondary appeal, "'Hawaii appellate courts
apply the same standard of review as that applied upon
primary review by the circuit court.'" AlohaCare v. Ito,
 126 Hawai' i 326, 341, 271 P.3d 621, 636 (2012) (quoting
Kaiser Found. Health Plan, Inc. v. Dep't of Labor & Indus.
Relations, 70 Haw. 72, 80, 762 P.2d 796, 800–01 (1988)).
The applicable standard of review for administrative appeals
is set forth in HRS § 91–14(g) (1993), which provides:
Upon review of the record the court may affirm the

decision of the agency or remand the case with
instructions for further proceedings; or it may
reverse or modify the decision and order if the
substantial rights of the petitioners may have been
prejudiced because the administrative findings,
conclusions, decisions, or orders are:
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or
(4) Affected by other error of law; or
(5) Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or

(6) Arbitrary, capricious, or characterized byabuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted
exercise of discretion.
 
See also AlohaCare, 126 Hawaii at 341, 271 P.3d at 636(applying HRS § 91–14(g) when evaluating a petition seekinga declaratory ruling under HAR § 16–201–48). "[U]nder HRS §91–14(g), conclusions of law are reviewable undersubsections (1), (2), and (4); questions regardingprocedural defects under subsection (3); findings of factunder subsection (5); and an agency's exercise of discretionunder subsection (6)." Del Monte Fresh Produce (Haw.), Inc.v. Int'l Longshore & Warehouse Union, Local 142, 112 Hawai' i 
489, 499, 146 P.3d 1066, 1076 (2006) (alterations inoriginal) (quoting In re Hawaiian Elec. Co., 81 Hawai' i 
459, 465, 918 P.2d 561, 567 (1996)). '
Dist. Council 50, of Int'l Union of Painters and Allied Trades v.
 
Lopez, 129 Hawai 'i 281, 286-87, 298 P.3d 1045, 1050-51 (2013) 
(footnotes omitted).
 
Pursuant to HRS § 91–14(g)(5), administrative findings
of fact are reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard,
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
which requires [the appellate] court to sustain its findings
unless the court is left with a firm and definite conviction
 that a mistake has been made. Administrative conclusions of
 law, however, are reviewed under the de novo standard
inasmuch as they are not binding on an appellate court.
Where both mixed questions of fact and law are presented,
deference will be given to the agency's expertise and
experience in the particular field and the court should not
substitute its own judgment for that of the agency. To be
 granted deference, however, the agency's decision must be
consistent with the legislative purpose.
 
AlohaCare v. Ito, 126 Hawai 'i 326, 341, 271 P.3d 621, 636 (2012) 
(block quotation format altered) (citing Peroutka v. Cronin, 117 
Hawai'i 323, 326, 179 P.3d 1050, 1053 (2008)). "Questions of 
statutory interpretation are questions of law reviewable de novo." Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). 
IV. DISCUSSION
 
Lui-Dyball argues in her ninth point of error that the 
Commission acted arbitrarily when it cancelled the Lease. For the reasons that follow, we hold that Hearings Officer's COL 6 stating that Lui-Dyball had violated the Lease and COL 11 stating that DHHL was entitled to cancel the Lease, both of which the Commission adopted and incorporated by reference in its Decision and Order, were wrong. Thus, the Commission acted arbitrarily and abused its discretion when it cancelled the Lease. See Dist. 
Council 50, 129 Hawai
'i at 286-87, 298 P.3d at 1050-51. 
Lui-Dyball argues in her tenth point of error that
 
"[t]he Circuit Court erred when it held that 'Paragraph 4 of
 [Lui-Dyball's] lease requires not only [Lui-Dyball], but also
 those that she allows on her premises, to comply with all laws
 enacted by governmental authorities.'" We hold that the Circuit
 Court's finding was "[c]learly erroneous in view of the reliable,
 probative, and substantial evidence on the whole record" and that
 the Circuit Court's decision to affirm the Commission's
 cancellation of the Lease in reliance on this finding was wrong. 
Id. at 286-87, 298 P.3d at 1050-51. 
To support its argument that Lui-Dyball was in
 
violation of Paragraph 4 of the Lease, the Commission relies on
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Spence v. Gormley2
, 439 N.E.2d 741 (Mass. 1982),  a consolidated
case in which two tenants were evicted from Boston public housing
 
after their sons participated in racially-motivated firebombings,
 and Williams v. Haw. Hous. Auth., 5 Haw. App. 325, 690 P.2d 285
 (1984), in which tenants were evicted from Hawai
'i public housing 
following several violent incidents involving their sons. The
 instant case is distinguishable from Spence and Williams because
 the language of the leases in both of those cases provided that
 permitting third party guests or household members to engage in
 prohibited conduct while on the premises constituted a violation
 of the lease that could result in cancellation. 
The lease in 
Spence
 
identif[ied] ten permissible grounds for termination of the
tenancy by the BHA, three of which bear upon the present
cases. "This lease may be terminated by the [BHA] . . . for
no reason other than . . . 2. Reasonable likelihood of
 serious repeated interference with the rights of other
tenants. . . . 5. Creation or maintenance of a serious
 threat to the health or safety of other tenants. . . . 10.
In the event of a violation by the Tenant of any of the
terms, conditions or covenants of this lease." In addition,
the lease specifies "tenant obligations," including an
agreement to "[l]ive in a peaceful way, respecting the
rights of his neighbors to privacy and quiet."
 
Spence, 439 N.E.2d at 744. The tenants argued "that their leases
 
[did] not authorize termination on the basis of acts by anyone
 
other than the tenants named in the lease." Id. at 743. 
However, the court interpreted the lease terms to permit
 termination as a result of prohibited conduct by household
 members other than the named tenant:
 
The more important question is whether the termination
provisions cover conduct by household members other than the
named tenant who has signed the lease. We believe they do.
The language of the termination provisions speaks only of
the facts that justify eviction—a threat to health and
safety or a likelihood of interference with rights. This
 wording suggests that if these problems arise from the
tenancy, eviction is warranted, whether the wrongdoer is the
tenant or a member of her household. Moreover, an
interpretation of the lease to cover the conduct of all
household members is consistent with the manifest purpose of
the termination provisions, to promote safety and order in
 
2
 Holding limited on other grounds by Boston Hous. Auth. v. Garcia,
 
871 N.E.2d 1073 (Mass. 2007) (noting that the "special circumstances" defense
set forth in Spence was preempted by Dep't of Hous. & Urban Dev. v. Rucker,
535 U.S. 125, 122 S. Ct. 1230 (2002)).
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the housing projects. . . .
We stated in Spence v. Reeder , ––– Mass. –––, ––– –
–––, Mass. Adv. Sh. (1981) 229, 252–253, 416 N.E.2d 914,
that at least when a tenant knows or has reason to know of a
 household member's violent tendencies, "[t]he notion that
interference with or threats to the rights of other tenants
justifying eviction can only come from a signatory of the
lease (or his or her minor children) is itself illogical.
Surely, a public housing authority cannot be left helpless
to rectify a serious threat to the safety of other tenants
simply because the signatory of the lease happens not to be
the source of the threat." Although we were concerned in
Spence, not with construction of a lease, but with general
questions of fairness, our comments there are relevant to
the likely intent of parties seeking to provide rationally
for a means to curtail rampant violence in the housing
projects.
 
Id. at 744 (footnote omitted).
 
The Intermediate Court of Appeals (ICA) cited the
 
reasoning of the Spence court with approval in Williams. 
Williams, 5 Haw. App. at 333-34, 690 P.2d at 291-92. In that
 
case, the relevant lease provided:
 
9. TENANT'S OBLIGATIONS: Tenant shall, at all times during
the term of this Rental Agreement perform the following
obligations:
 
. . . 
(b) Not permit any person to occupy the dwelling unit other
than the persons listed on the application of Tenant,
without first obtaining Management's prior written consent;
 
. . .
 (n) Conduct himself and cause other persons who are on the
premises with his consent to conduct themselves in a manner
 which will not disturb his neighbors' peaceful enjoyment of
their accommodations and will be conducive to maintaining
the project in a decent, safe, and sanitary condition;
 
Id. at 326, 690 P.2d at 287 (emphasis added). The ICA held:
 
Appellants were evicted not on account of the
incidents per se, but because they failed to control the
actions of their sons as evidenced by the long list of
complaints, including the last two altercations.
. . .
 
Appellants focus on the fact that the stabbing was
unanticipated and argue therefore that they should not be
evicted for their son's act because they were not afforded
an opportunity to rectify it. The argument completely
misses the point.
It is not the stabbing itself that is the basis of the
eviction. Appellants were bound by paragraph 9(n) to
control the actions of the family members living with them.
They had been warned of their obligation and the agency's
authority to evict. The last incident was only the
proverbial straw on the camel's back.
 
13

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Id. at 332-33, 690 P.2d at 290-91.3
 
In contrast, Lui-Dyball's Lease referred only to the
 
"Homesteader" and contained no language stating that permitting
 
third parties to violate the law on the Property constituted a
 violation of the Lease. The only basis the Commission cited for
 cancelling Lui-Dyball's lease was that she violated Paragraph 4. 
The Commission did not find that Lui-Dyball was involved in the
 alleged drug use or that she otherwise failed to "observe,
 perform and comply with all laws, ordinances, rules and
 regulations[.]" Thus, there were no grounds for cancelling the
 Lease, and the Commission acted arbitrarily in doing so.
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court's finding that Lui-
Dyball violated Paragraph 4 was clearly erroneous, and thus the
 Circuit Court's Order and Judgment, which affirmed the
 Commission's April 25, 2011 Rulings based on that finding, must
 be reversed. In light of this holding, we need not reach Lui­Dyball's remaining points of error on appeal.
 
3
 The ICA also affirmed a Third Circuit Court's decision and order
 
upholding the Commission's cancellation of a similar homestead lease in Rivera
v. State, Dep't. Of Hawaiian Home Lands, No. CAAP–11–0000480, 2012 WL 3555486
(Haw. App. Aug. 16, 2012) (SDO). In that case, the Commission cancelled the
lease after the lessee's husband was caught selling drugs on the property for
a third time. Id. SDO at *1. The ICA held that although Rivera herself did
not engage in illegal activity, she had nonetheless violated the lease
provisions, and thus cancellation was proper. Id. SDO at *2.
 
Rivera is distinguishable from the instant case. The lease in
 
Rivera, in addition to requiring the lessee to "comply with all of the
requirements of all municipal, state and federal authorities and observe all
municipal ordinances and state and federal statutes pertaining to said
premises[,]" also prohibited the lessee from "permit[ting] to be committed any
. . . unlawful use of the demised premises." Id. SDO at *1. Rejecting
Rivera's argument that the Commission failed to prove that she herself was
involved in or had any actual knowledge of the criminal activity, the ICA held
that the circuit court did not err in concluding that the lease was properly
cancelled on the basis that Rivera knew or should have known that her husband
 was engaging in the illegal activity on the property. Id. SDO at *2.
 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
V.	 CONCLUSION
 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court's Order and Judgment,
 
and the Commission's April 25, 2011 Rulings, are reversed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, May 29, 2015. 
On the briefs: 
Carl Foytik
for Plaintiff-Appellant Chief Judge 
Diane K. Taira S. Kalani Bush Matthew S. Dvonch Deputy Attorneys Generalfor Defendant-Appellee Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
15
 