NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NOS. CAAP-16-0000207 AND CAAP-15-0000891 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
MARLENE TIM SING, individually and as Next Friend to her
daughter, Makalika Tim Sing, a minor, and as Personal
Representative for the Estate of DALE KANANI TIM SING, Deceased;
DALE CORDERO, KALE TIM SING, and LOKELANI TIM SING,
Plaintiffs-Appellants, 
v. 
KONRAD K. MOSSMAN, HUIHUI LAVON KANAHELE-MOSSMAN, 
Defendants/Cross-Claim Plaintiffs/Cross-Claim
Defendants/Appellees,
and 
COUNTY OF 
HAWAI# I, Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/
Cross-Claim Plaintiff/Appellee,
and 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE NONPROFIT CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, inclusive,
Defendants 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-0297) 
AND 
KASSY ASTRANDE, individually and as Guardian Ad Litem of 
MCKENZIE TIM SING, a minor, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v. 
KONRAD K. MOSSMAN, HUIHUI LAVON KANAHELE-MOSSMAN, 
Defendants/Cross-Claim Plaintiffs/Cross-Claim
Defendants/Appellees,
and 
COUNTY OF HAWAI
#I, Defendant/Cross-Claim Defendant/
Cross-Claim Plaintiff/Appellee,
and NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; DOE NONPROFIT CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES 1-10, inclusive,
Defendants 
(CIVIL NO. 05-1-0413) 
APPEALS FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT 
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.) 
These appeals arise out of two consolidated personal 
injury lawsuits.  Plaintiffs-Appellants Marlene Tim Sing, 
individually, as next friend to her daughter Makalika Tim Sing, a minor, and as personal representative for the Estate of Dale Kanani Tim Sing, deceased, Dale Cordero, Kale Tim Sing, and Lokelani Tim Sing (Tim Sing Plaintiffs
), appeal from Judgments 
entered on October 19, 2015 and March 4, 2016,  by the Circuit 
Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court).   21
On appeal, the Tim Sing Plaintiffs contend the Circuit 
Court erred by: (1) granting motions to enforce settlement agreements filed by Defendants-Appellees Konrad K. Mossman (Konrad Mossman) and Huihui Lavon Kanahele-Mossman (Kanahele-
Mossman) (collectively the Mossmans  ), and Defendant-Appellee 
County of Hawai# i (County); and (2) deciding the allocation of 
1  The Circuit Court filed an order on March 4, 2016, purporting to
grant the Mossmans' motions for reconsideration of the October 19, 2015
judgment, and purportedly vacating the October 19, 2015 judgment.  The March 4, 2016 judgment was then entered.  However, the March 4, 2016 order wasentered more than ninety days after the Mossmans' had filed their October 29,2015 motions for reconsideration.  Thus, the motions for reconsideration weredeemed denied by operation of Hawaii Rules of Appellate Procedure ( HRAP ) Rule 
4(a)(3).  In this case, therefore, it appears that the operative judgment isthe October 19, 2015 judgment.  Although the October 19, 2015 judgment isoddly worded and perhaps inconsistent with parts of the record, it purports todismiss some, but not all, of the claims in the underlying cases, and itcontains the necessary language for a judgment under Rule 54(b) of the Hawai #i 
Rules of Civil Procedure. 
2  The Honorable Glenn S. Hara presided. 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the settlement proceeds over the objections of the Tim Sing 
Plaintiffs and without a jury determination on the matter.   
For the reasons discussed below, we vacate and remand. 
I.  Background 
In the late hours of August 4, 2005 or the early 
morning hours of August 5, 2005, Konrad Mossman or Kanahele-Mossman was allegedly driving the Mossmans' pickup truck on Kahaopea Road in the County of Hawai# i when the pickup truck 
struck Dale Kanani Tim Sing (
Dale Tim Sing).  Dale Tim Sing was 
pronounced dead on the morning of August 5, 2005. 
Marlene Tim Sing and Dale Cordero are the parents of 
Dale Tim Sing, and the rest of the Tim Sing Plaintiffs are the siblings of Dale Tim Sing.  Plaintiff Kassy Astrande (Astrande
) 
was Dale Tim Sing's girlfriend, with whom he had a child, McKenzie Tim Sing (McKenzie).
A.  Lawsuits 
Two personal injury lawsuits arose from Dale Tim Sing's 
death: (1) a lawsuit filed by the Tim Sing Plaintiffs in Civil No. 05-1-0297; and (2) a lawsuit filed by Astrande, individually and as Guardian Ad Litem of McKenzie (collectively the Astrande 
Plaintiffs) in Civil No. 05-1-0413. 
On June 5, 2006, the Circuit Court consolidated the two 
cases. 
On June 27, 2008, the Tim Sing Plaintiffs filed a 
second amended complaint against the Mossmans, the County, and 
the Edith K. Kanaka# ole Foundation (the Foundation), asserting 
(1) wrongful death; (2) negligent infliction of emotional distress; and (3) spoliation.  The Mossmans, the County, and the  
Foundation filed answers and asserted cross-claims against each other. 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On July 2, 2008, the Astrande Plaintiffs filed a second 
amended complaint for negligence against the Mossmans, the 
County, and the Foundation. 
B.  Settlement 
On February 7, 2011, the Circuit Court entered an order 
ruling that the County had settled all claims "between Plaintiffs and the County" in good faith. 
On March 2, 2011, counsel for the Tim Sing Plaintiffs 
filed a Motion to Withdraw as Counsel for Dale Cordero. 
On April 4, 2011, the Circuit Court entered an order 
ruling that the Mossmans had settled all claims with the Tim Sing Plaintiffs and the Astrande Plaintiffs in good faith. 
On April 15, 2011, the Circuit Court held a hearing on 
the Motion to Withdraw as Counsel for Dale Cordero, filed by the Tim Sing Plaintiffs' counsel.  On April 18, 2011, counsel for the Tim Sing Plaintiffs also filed a Motion to Withdraw as Counsel as to the remaining Tim Sing Plaintiffs.  On May 25, 2011, the Circuit Court held another hearing.  During the two hearings, the Tim Sing Plaintiffs argued that they had not authorized their counsel to settle any of the claims against the Mossmans or the County and that they did not agree to the settlements. 
On August 26, 2011, the County filed a motion to 
enforce its settlement agreement with the Tim Sing Plaintiffs.  On August 31, 2011, the Mossmans filed motions to enforce their settlement agreement with the Tim Sing Plaintiffs. 
On August 31, 2011, the Tim Sing Plaintiffs filed a 
motion to, inter alia, set aside both of the settlement agreements, contending they had never given any authority to their prior counsel to settle their claims against the Mossmans or the County. 
On October 7, 2011, the Circuit Court held a hearing at 
which it heard arguments regarding, inter alia, the County and the Mossmans' motions to enforce the settlements, respectively, 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and the Tim Sing Plaintiffs' motion to set aside the settlements. 
In deciding these motions, the Circuit Court relied on the parties' written submissions and various declarations and exhibits.  No evidentiary hearing was held (i.e., there was no witness testimony in court). 
Subsequently, the Circuit Court granted the County and 
the Mossmans' motions to enforce the settlement agreements, respectively, and denied the Tim Sing Plaintiffs' motion to set aside the settlement agreements. 
After multiple entries of prior judgments, attempts to 
appeal, and dismissals for lack of appellate jurisdiction, the October 19, 2015 and March 4, 2016 judgments were entered.  These appeals followed, and CAAP-15-0000891 and CAAP-16-0000207 were consolidated. 
II. Standards of Review 
A.  Enforcement of a Settlement Agreement 
"A trial court's determination regarding the 
enforceability of a settlement agreement is a conclusion of law reviewable de novo
.  Whether the parties in fact entered into an 
agreement is essentially a question of fact."  Assocs. Fin. Servs. Co. of Hawai# i, Inc. v. Mijo, 87 Hawai# i 19, 28, 950 P.2d 
1219, 1228 (1998) (citations omitted). 
A motion to enforce a disputed settlement agreement is
treated as a motion for summary judgment.  Miller v. Manuel,9 Haw. App. 56, 64, 828 P.2d 286, 292 (1991), cert. denied,72 Haw. 618, 841 P.2d 1075 (1992).  A motion for summaryjudgment should not be granted where there is a factualquestion as to the existence, validity, and terms of thealleged settlement agreement, and where such a disputeexists, a trial or an evidentiary hearing to resolve the
dispute is required.  Id. at 64-65, 828 P.2d at 292. 
  
Gilmartin v. Abastillas, 10 Haw. App. 283, 296, 869 P.2d 1346, 
1352 (1994). 
[S]ummary judgment standards appl[y] to a hearing on a
motion to enforce a settlement agreement.  Therefore, amotion to enforce a settlement agreement may not be decidedsummarily if there is any question of fact as to whether amutual, valid, and enforceable settlement agreement existsbetween the parties.  If there is a question of fact as tothe existence of a mutual, valid, and enforceable settlementagreement, an evidentiary hearing must be held. 
Moran v. Guerreiro, 97 Hawai# i 354, 371, 37 P.3d 603, 620 (App. 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
2001) (citing Miller v. Manuel, 9 Haw. App. at 64, 828 P.2d at 
292). 
B.  Allocation of Settlement Proceeds Without a Jury 
"We answer questions of constitutional law by 
exercising our own independent constitutional judgment based on the facts of the case.  Thus, we review questions of constitutional law under the right/wrong standard."  State v. Hanapi, 89 Hawai# i 177, 182, 970 P.2d 485, 490 (1998) (citation 
omitted). 
III.  Discussion 
A.  Enforcement of Settlement Agreements 
In ruling to enforce the settlement agreements and 
denying the Tim Sing Plaintiffs' motion to set aside the settlements, the Circuit Court applied the summary judgment standard, determined that there were no genuine issues of material fact, and held that counsel for the Tim Sing Plaintiffs had apparent authority to enter the settlements and that the Tim Sing Plaintiffs ratified the settlements. 
The Tim Sing Plaintiffs contend that the Circuit Court 
erred because there were genuine issues of material fact given the declarations submitted to the court.  They further contend that they did not ratify the settlements, that Hawai# i courts 
have not adopted apparent authority in these circumstances, and even if apparent authority could be applied, the elements were not met in this case. 
It is undisputed that counsel for the Tim Sing 
Plaintiffs did not have written authority to enter into the settlement agreements. 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 605-7 (2016) provides: 
HRS § 605-7  Control of action; power to settle .  The 
practitioners licensed by the supreme court shall have
control to judgment and execution, of all suits and defensesconfided to them; provided that no practitioner shall havepower to compromise, arbitrate, or settle such mattersconfided to the practitioner, unless upon special authorityin writing from the practitioner's client. 
(Emphasis added). 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has held that pursuant to HRS 
§ 605-7, the express written consent of the client is typically 
required in settlement proceedings.  Hawai# i Hous. Auth. v. 
Uyehara, 77 Hawai# i 144, 150, 883 P.2d 65, 71 (1994); see also 
Cook v. Sur. Life Ins. Co., 79 Hawai
#i 403, 410, 903 P.2d 708, 
715 (App. 1995) (holding that "ordinarily, an attorney must have the written authority of the client to settle in order to settle a matter on behalf of a client.").
3 
In this case, the Circuit Court applied two exceptions 
to the HRS § 605-7 requirement that an attorney have written consent to settle matters on behalf of a client -- apparent authority and ratification.  Apparent authority in the context of an attorney settling litigation claims has not been adopted in Hawai# i.  It was discussed in Cook, where this court stated: 
"[a]ssuming arguendo, that apparent authority is an exception to the special written authority requirement, we do not find it applicable here."  79 Hawai# i at 410, 903 P.2d at 715 (noting 
also that in Nelson v. Boone, 78 
Hawai# i 76, 890 P.2d 313 (1995), 
"issue raised but not decided").   Apparent authority is not 
currently recognized in Hawai# i as an exception to the written 
authority requirement in HRS § 605-7.  As stated in Cook: 4
[t]he requirement that actual authority to settle be
memorialized in writing is highly protective of a client'sinterests, shielding the client from an attorney'sunauthorized representations.  A statute, such as HRS § 605-7, is plainly intended to restrict such authority, to removeall doubt from its exercise, and to establish that aclient's direction, in this area, is paramount.  Certainly,the statute clearly establishes a "bright line" rule readilyunderstood by the client, conveniently administered by theattorney, and easily applied by the court. . . .HRS § 605-7 is plain and straightforward.  Generally, in theabsence of "special authority in writing" from clients tosettle, an attorney has no authority to settle. 
79 Hawai# i at 412, 903 P.2d at 717. 
3  Case law provides that "an attorney cannot have implied authority to 
settle."  Cook, 79 Hawai #i at 410, 903 P.2d at 715 (citing Uyehara, 77 Hawai #i 
at 150, 883 P.2d at 71). 
4  In Nelson, the Hawai #i Supreme Court stated that an attorney who had
entered an agreement to sell property on behalf of clients "had actual orapparent authority[.]"  78 Hawai #i at 82, 890 P.2d at 319.  Nelson did not 
involve an attorney settling litigation claims, and it did not address whetherapparent authority was an exception to HRS § 605-7. 
7  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On the other hand, ratification as an exception to the 
written authority requirement in HRS § 605-7 is well-settled. 
"The unauthorized act of an agent, if ratified, is as binding upon the principal as an original express grant of authority." Uyehara, 77 Hawai# i at 150, 883 P.2d at 71 (brackets omitted); 
McKeague v. Freitas, 40 Haw. 108, 113 (1953).  "Therefore, a settlement will be treated as binding even in the absence of the express written consent of the client where the client ratifies the settlement."  Cook, 79 Hawai# i at 411, 903 P.2d at 716 
(emphasis added).  In that regard, 
[t]he ratification may be express or it may be implied from
circumstances; whether or not the circumstances warrant theimplication of ratification must of course depend upon thefacts of each particular case.  Any failure on the part ofthe client to object to an unauthorized act within areasonable time after becoming aware of it will beconstructed as a ratification of it. 
Id. (quoting Scott v. Pilipo, 25 Haw. 386, 390 (1920)). 
The Hawai# i Supreme Court has held a settlement valid, 
even in the absence of written authorization, where the client 
ratified the settlement.  Uyehara, 77 Hawai# i at 150-51, 883 P.2d 
at 71-72. 
Here, as noted, it is undisputed that the Tim Sing 
Plaintiffs did not give their counsel written authority to enter into the settlement agreements on their behalf.  Moreover, based on our 
de novo review,5 we disagree with the Circuit Court's 
ruling that there are no genuine issues of material fact. Rather, in light of the multiple and conflicting declarations and exhibits, including among others, the declarations of Dale Cordero, Marlene Tim Sing, the other Tim Sing Plaintiffs, Michael Green, and Ricky Damerville, we conclude there are genuine issues of material fact as to whether the Tim Sing Plaintiffs ratified the settlement agreements. 
5  Given the applicable summary judgment standard for purposes of
reviewing the Circuit Court's rulings on the motions to enforce or set aside
the settlements, and because the Circuit Court did not hold an evidentiary
hearing, we review the record de novo  and are not bound by the "findings" of 
the Circuit Court. 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The County submitted forms entitled "Medicare, 
Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 Required Information" 
applicable to individual Tim Sing Plaintiffs and which contain handwritten information for them, as well as a W-9 tax identification form filled out by counsel for the Tim Sing Plaintiffs.  The County contends these forms show the Tim Sing Plaintiffs' acknowledgment and ratification of the settlement with the County.  Although these documents might be evidence of knowledge and ratification by the Tim Sing Plaintiffs regarding the settlement with the County, there is nothing expressly stated in these documents as to the settlement.  The declarations by the Tim Sing Plaintiffs disavow that they agreed to any alleged settlement. 
The Mossmans, in turn, contend that the Tim Sing 
Plaintiffs ratified their settlement with the Mossmans, especially given conversations and meetings that Dale Cordero and Marlene Tim Sing had with Ricky Damerville, who was criminally prosecuting Konrad Mossman for the incident resulting in Dale Tim Sing's death.  Damerville's declaration indicates, among other things, that: in December of 2010, he met with Dale Cordero and Marlene Tim Sing and was advised that they had settled their civil case, that they could not tell him the details because of a confidentiality clause, but that Konrad Mossman would be personally responsible for part of the settlement; Damerville later confirmed with the Tim Sing Plaintiffs' counsel that a settlement was reached in the civil case, because the willingness of a criminal defendant to pay restitution was an important factor in resolving the criminal case; after confirming the civil case was settled, Damerville transmitted a plea offer in the criminal case in January 2011, Konrad Mossman changed his plea pursuant to the offer, and sentencing in the criminal case was scheduled for February 23, 2011; in preparation for the sentencing hearing, Damerville met with Dale Cordero and Marlene 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Tim Sing in January 2011, at which point he was informed they 
could not say anything at the sentencing hearing due to the settlement agreement; in February 2011, Damerville met twice with Dale Cordero and Marlene Tim Sing and was informed by Dale Cordero that he was firing his counsel and wanted to speak at the sentencing hearing; and that Dale Cordero never said that his counsel had settled the civil case without his knowledge or consent. 
In response, a declaration by Dale Cordero directly 
contests the declaration by Damerville on multiple fronts. Cordero reiterates that he never agreed to any settlements entered by his former counsel.  He also attests, among other things, that: 
6.  The statements in Ricky Damerville's declaration
and in other statements that I knew of the details of the 
settlement agreement and that I knew that the details of thesettlement agreement were confidential on or about December29, 2010 are false.  I did not know of such a settlement agreement, nor of the confidentiality clause as asserted byMr. Damerville when we met in his office. 
Similarly, Marlene Tim Sing submitted a declaration that directly 
contests Damerville's declaration, particularly that she knew the details of any settlement agreement. 
Regarding the disputed facts pertaining to 
ratification, 
summary judgment standards appl[y] to a hearing on a motion
to enforce a settlement agreement.  Therefore, a motion toenforce a settlement agreement may not be decided summarilyif there is any question of fact as to whether a mutual,valid, and enforceable settlement agreement exists betweenthe parties.  If there is a question of fact as to theexistence of a mutual, valid, and enforceable settlementagreement, an evidentiary hearing must be held. 
Moran, 97 Hawai# i at 371, 37 P.3d at 620 (emphasis added), 
(citing Miller, 9 Haw. App. at 64, 828 P.2d at 291-92). 
Accordingly, we remand for an evidentiary hearing 
regarding whether the Tim Sing Plaintiffs ratified the settlement 
agreements and are therefore bound by them. 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
B.  Allocation of Settlement Proceeds Without a Jury 
The Tim Sing Plaintiffs assert that the Circuit Court 
erred when it decided and allocated the settlement proceeds among 
the plaintiffs, over the objections of the Tim Sing Plaintiffs, and without a jury determination on the matter.  Specifically, the Tim Sing Plaintiffs argue that they had a right to a jury trial under the Hawai# i State Constitution, under HRS § 635-13 
(2016), and under 
Hawai# i Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 38(a), 
and that they did not waive that right. 
Kanahele-Mossman asserts that, under the terms of the 
settlement agreement, the parties agreed that if the Tim Sing Plaintiffs and Astrande could not agree on the division of the settlement proceeds, the parties would authorize the Circuit Court to make the determination.  In the record, the declaration of Kanahele-Mossman's counsel, Thomas Yeh, indicates the same. The declaration of Michael Green states in relevant part: "I specifically remember Mr. Cordero asking me how the total sum of the partial settlement would be divided.  After my explanation he told me it was alright."  Further, Damerville's declaration indicates that from his meetings with Dale Cordero and Marlene Tim Sing, he recalled that there was a dispute in the civil suit about how the settlement proceeds would be disbursed among the plaintiffs, that the circuit court would make that decision, and that Dale Cordero and Marlene Tim Sing did not expect to receive anything from the settlement.  It therefore appears that the question of allocation of the settlement proceeds between and among the plaintiffs must also be addressed as part of the remand on the settlement agreement; that is, whether there was an agreement ratified by the Tim Sing Plaintiffs regarding the allocation of the settlement funds.  We thus do not reach the question raised by the Tim Sing Plaintiffs as to whether they were entitled to a jury decision on that issue.  
IV. Conclusion 
For the above reasons, we vacate the judgments entered 
on October 19, 2015 and March 4, 2016, by the Circuit Court of 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Third Circuit.  We remand for further proceedings consistent 
with this Memorandum Opinion. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 31, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Richard Naiwieha Wurdeman,
for Plaintiffs-Appellants. Chief Judge 
J. Patrick Gallagher,Leah M. Reyes, (Gallagher Kane Amai) for Defendant-Appellee,Konrad K. Mossman. Associate Judge 
Thomas L.H. Yeh, Michael W. Moore, (Law Offices of Yeh & Moore, LLLC)      and Jill D. Raznov, (Of Counsel)for Defendant-Appellee,Huihui Lavon Kanahele-Mossman. 
Associate Judge 
Andrew S. Iwashita,        and Nelson H. Kinoshita, for Plaintiff-Appellees, 
Kassy Astrande, individuallyand as Guardian Ad Litem of McKenzie Tim Sing, a minor. 
Douglas H. Knowlton, for Defendant-Appellee,County of 
Hawai# i. 
12 