NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-17-0000010
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, AS TRUSTEE FOR
ADJUSTABLE RATE MORTGAGE TRUST 2005-2, ADJUSTABLE RATE
MORTGAGE-BACKED PASS-THROUGH CERTIFICATES, SERIES 2005-2,
Plaintiff-Appellee, v. THE ESTATE OF STUART D. EDWARDS,
aka Stuart Denzil Edwards; KELLY EDWARDS, aka Kelly Anne
Edwards, INDIVIDUALLY, AND AS TRUSTEE OF THE
EDWARDS FAMILY TRUST U/D/T DATED SEPTEMBER 19, 1996,
Defendants-Appellants, and DOES 1-20, inclusive, Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-031K)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Acting Chief Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Kelly Edwards, aka Kelly Anne
Edwards, Individually and as Trustee of the Edwards Family Trust
U/D/T Dated September 19, 1996 (Edwards ), appeals pro se from the
Judgment entered by the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit, Kona
Division ( Circuit Court), on December 8, 2016, in favor of
Plaintiff-Appellee U.S. Bank National Association ( U.S. Bank ), as
Trustee for Adjustable Rate Mortgage Trust 2005-2, Adjustable
Rate Mortgage-Backed Pass-Through Certificates, Series 2005-2
(ARMT 2005-2/Certificates Series 2005-2), and against allNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
defendants.1  Edwards also challenges the Circuit Court's
December 8, 2016 entry of an order granting summary judgment and
an interlocutory decree of foreclosure ( Foreclosure Decree) in
favor of U.S. Bank.
Edwards raises three points of error, arguing that the
Circuit Court erred by:  (1) granting U.S. Bank's September 26,
2016 Motion for Summary Judgment and for Interlocutory Decree of
Foreclosure (Motion for Summary Judgment ); (2) entering Findings
of Fact 1, 3, 6-11, 13-18, and 20 in the Foreclosure Decree; and
(3) entering Conclusions of Law 1-6 in the Foreclosure Decree. 
Upon careful review of the record on appeal2 and the
briefs submitted by the parties, and having given due
consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Edwards's
points of error as follows:
Edwards argues, inter alia , that U.S. Bank failed to
establish that it had standing to bring this foreclosure action
and relies in part on the Hawai #i Supreme Court's decision in
Bank of Am., N.A. v. Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai# i 361, 390 P.3d 1248
(2017).  In Reyes–Toledo, the supreme court held a foreclosing
plaintiff must establish standing or entitlement to enforce the
subject note at the time the action was commenced.  139 Hawai #i
at 367–71, 390 P.3d at 1254–58.  The supreme court stated, inter
1The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided.
2We have not considered various documents and factual assertions
referenced in the parties' briefs that are not part of the record on appeal. 
See Koga Eng'g & Constr., Inc. v. State, 122 Hawai #i 60, 80, 222 P.3d 979, 999
(2010) (review of the granting or denying of a motion for summary judgment is
limited "to an examination of the materials before the [trial] court at the
time the rulings were made"). 
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
alia, that a foreclosing plaintiff must typically "prove the
existence of an agreement, the terms of the agreement, a default
by the mortgagor under the terms of the agreement, and giving of
the cancellation notice."  Id.  at 367, 390 P.3d at 1254 (citing
Bank of Honolulu, N.A. v. Anderson , 3 Haw. App. 545, 551, 654
P.2d 1370, 1375 (1982)).  Furthermore, "[a] foreclosing plaintiff
must also prove its entitlement to enforce the note and
mortgage."  Id.  (citations omitted).  The supreme court also
stated, "[a] foreclosing plaintiff's burden to prove entitlement
to enforce the note overlaps with the requirements of standing in
foreclosure actions as 'standing is concerned with whether the
parties have the right to bring suit.'"  Id. (internal brackets
omitted) (quoting Mottl v. Miyahira , 95 Hawai #i 381, 388, 23 P.3d
716, 723 (2001)).  In concluding that the foreclosing bank failed
to satisfy its burden as the movant for summary judgment, the
court reasoned, "[a]lthough Bank of America produced evidence
that it possessed the blank-indorsed Note at the time it sought
summary judgment, a material question of fact exists as to
whether Bank of America possessed the Note, or was otherwise a
holder, at the time it brought the foreclosure action."  Id.  at
370, 390 P.3d at 1257. 
In U.S. Bank, N.A. v. Mattos, 140 Hawai #i 26, 29, 398
P.3d 615, 618 (2017), summary judgment was also granted in favor
of the foreclosing bank, U.S. Bank.  On appeal, the supreme court
addressed whether relevant loan documents had been properly
admitted through the declaration of an individual named Richard
Work (Work ), as records of regularly conducted activity under
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Hawai#i Rules of Evidence ( HRE) Rule 803(b)(6).  Id.  at 28,
30–33, 398 P.3d at 617, 619–622.  In his declaration, Work
attested, inter alia , that he was a "Contract Management
Coordinator" of OCWEN Loan Servicing, LLC (Ocwen), the "servicer"
for U.S. Bank on the subject loan.  Id. at 30–31, 398 P.3d at
619–20.  Because Work did not attest that he was the custodian of
records for either U.S. Bank or Ocwen, the supreme court noted
that "the documents attached to his declaration are admissible
under the HRE 803(b)(6) hearsay exception only if he is a
'qualified witness' with respect to those documents."  Id. at 32,
398 P.3d at 621.  The supreme court applied its analysis in State
v. Fitzwater, 122 Hawai# i 354, 365–66, 227 P.3d 520, 531–32
(2010) and ruled as follows:
To the extent the ICA ruled that Work's declaration
established him as a "qualified witness" with respect to
Ocwen's records, we agree. To the extent the ICA opinion
concluded that Work met the requirements to be a "qualified
witness" with respect to U.S. Bank's records, however, we
disagree. Fitzwater addresses situations in which one
business receives documents created by another business and
includes them in its own records. Work's declaration does
not indicate that U.S. Bank's Records were received by Ocwen
and incorporated into the Ocwen Records. Work's declaration
also does not establish that Work is familiar with the
record-keeping system of U.S. Bank. Rather, Work merely
states that he has access to and is familiar with U.S.
Bank's records. Thus Work's declaration does not satisfy
foundational requirements to make him a "qualified witness"
for U.S. Bank's records pursuant to 
Fitzwater.
Mattos, 140 Hawai #i at 32–33, 398 P.3d at 621–22.
In light of its prior ruling in Reyes–Toledo , the
supreme court in Mattos  further held that:
[s]ince [an] allonge was apparently used to specifically
indorse the note to U.S. Bank, admissible evidence was
needed to demonstrate that U.S. Bank was in possession of
the note and allonge at the time of the filing of this
foreclosure complaint for U.S. Bank to be entitled to
summary judgment.
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Id. at 33, 398 P.3d at 622.  The supreme court noted that Work's
declaration did not attest that U.S. Bank possessed the original
note and allonge when the foreclosure complaint was filed.  Id. 
The supreme court thus ruled that "Work's declaration failed to
meet U.S. Bank's burden of establishing facts necessary for a
grant of summary judgment."  Id. 
In Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. v. Behrendt, SCAP-16-0000645,
2018 WL 1325153 at *2 (Mar. 15, 2018) (designated for
publication), another judicial foreclosure case, summary judgment
was granted in favor of the foreclosing bank, Wells Fargo.  Wells
Fargo had attached a copy of the subject note to its unverified
complaint together with an allonge indorsing the note in blank. 
Id.  The supreme court reviewed the admissibility of these
documents under HRE Rule 803(b)(6) through a similar declaration
as in Mattos3 attached to Wells Fargo's motion for summary
judgment.  Id.  This declaration was made by Vanessa Lewis
(Lewis), who was also a "contract management coordinator" for
Ocwen, Wells Fargo's loan-service provider.  Id.  Because Lewis
did not attest that she was the custodian of records for either
Wells Fargo or Ocwen, the supreme court again observed that the
documents attached to her declaration were admissible under HRE
Rule 803(b)(6) only if her declaration demonstrated that she was
a "qualified witness."  Id. at *7 (citing Mattos, 140 Hawai #i at
32, 398 P.3d at 621).  The supreme court stated the rule
3 The Behrendt court observed that the Lewis and Work declarations
were "nearly identical."  Behrendt, 2018 WL 1325153 at *7.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
regarding necessary qualifications to admit incorporated records
under Mattos and Fitzwater  as follows:
The court in Mattos held that a witness may be
qualified to provide the testimony required by HRE Rule
803(b)(6) even if the witness is not employed by the
business that created the document or lacks direct, personal
knowledge of how the document was created. "There is no
requirement that the records have been prepared by the
entity that has custody of them, as long as they were
created in the regular course of some entity's business."
The witness, however, must have enough familiarity with the
record-keeping system of the business that created the
record to explain how the record was generated in the
ordinary course of business.
Records received from another business and
incorporated into the receiving business' records may in
some circumstances be regarded as "created" by the receiving
business. Incorporated records are admissible under HRE Rule
803(b)(6) when a custodian or qualified witness testifies
that the documents were incorporated and kept in the normal
course of business, that the incorporating business
typically relies upon the accuracy of the contents of the
documents, and the circumstances otherwise indicate the
trustworthiness of the document.
Behrendt, 2018 WL 1325153 at *7-8 (citations omitted) (citing and
quoting Mattos , 140 Hawai #i at 32, 398 P.3d at 621).  
In holding that Lewis was not a "qualified witness"
under its decision in Mattos, the Behrendt court stated:
Here, as in Mattos, the Lewis Declaration does not
establish that the loan documents were received by Ocwen and
then incorporated into Ocwen's records. In addition,
although Lewis averred that Ocwen's records relating to the
loan were made and maintained in the regular course of
Ocwen's business, Lewis asserted only that she had "access
to and [was] familiar" with Wells Fargo's records and
documents relating to this case. The Lewis Declaration does
not establish that Lewis was familiar with Wells Fargo's
record-keeping system. It also makes no assertions as to
Lewis's familiarity with the record-keeping systems of
Funding Group or Option One, which first created the Note
and allonges. Thus, the Lewis Declaration satisfies the
foundational requirements to make Lewis a qualified witness
only with respect to Ocwen's 
original records about the loan
and not any records of Wells Fargo or the loan documents
themselves.
The Lewis Declaration also refers only to the Note and
not the allonges that Wells Fargo asserts were used to
endorse the Note in blank. As noted, the Lewis Declaration
does not establish that Lewis was a qualified witness, and
thus she could not have satisfied the requirements of HRE
Rule 803(b)(6) with respect to the allonges. But, as with
the declaration in Mattos , the Lewis Declaration did not
attempt to admit the allonges under the business records
exception.  Thus, even if the Note fell within the bounds of
HRE Rule 803(b)(6), the allonges endorsing it in blank did
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
not because the declaration did not provide the requisite
foundation. This is to say that the documents purporting to
allow Wells Fargo to enforce the Note were not admissible
under the business record exception. Since the documents
were not admissible as asserted, Wells Fargo did not meet
its burden of establishing facts necessary for a grant of
summary judgment.
Id. at *8 (citations omitted) (citing Mattos , 140 Hawai #i at
32-33, 398 P.3d at 621-22). 
In the instant case, U.S. Bank filed a Complaint for
Declaratory Relief and Judicial Foreclosure of Mortgage on
January 30, 2015 (Complaint).  The Complaint alleged that on
December 10, 2004, Stuart D. Edwards executed a promissory note
in favor of Resource Mortgage Banking, Ltd. for $1,000,000.00
(Note), secured by a mortgage on real property recorded on
December 20, 2004, in the Bureau of Conveyances, and executed by
Stuart D. Edwards and Kelly Edwards (Mortgage ).  U.S. Bank
alleged that it was the owner of the Mortgage by virtue of a
September 23, 2008 assignment of mortgage, that the Estate of
Stuart D. Edwards was in default, that U.S. Bank "is the current
holder of the Note . . . by virtue of the blank indorsement of
the Note," and that U.S. Bank "is in possession of the blank
indorsed Note."  Attached to the Complaint was, inter alia, the
Note containing an undated indorsement stamp on the fifth and
final page apparently executed by a representative of Resource
Mortgage Banking, Ltd., indorsing the Note in blank.4   As
4This indorsement stamp on the Note reads: 
WITHOUT RECOURSE
PAY TO THE ORDER OF
_________________
[Signature]      
RESOURCE MORTGAGE BANKING, LTD.
Michael Covino, President
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Edwards points out, the Complaint was not supported by a
declaration at the time of filing. 
U.S. Bank maintains that it established that it was the
holder of the original, indorsed-in-blank Note and asserts that
its evidence was "compliant with Mattos [.]"  In support of that
contention, U.S. Bank relies on the following:  (1) the Note
indorsed-in-blank attached as an exhibit to the Complaint; (2) a
declaration dated July 27, 2016, by Ashley Dellinger ( Dellinger ),
an employee of Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. (Wells Fargo ), the
"authorized servicing agent and attorney in fact" for U.S. Bank,
which was attached in support of an August 5, 2016 motion by U.S.
Bank; (3) a declaration dated September 21, 2016, by Jeremiah
Herberg ( Herberg), an employee of Wells Fargo, which was attached
to the Motion for Summary Judgment; and (4) a declaration dated
September 26, 2016, by U.S. Bank's counsel, David B. Rosen
(Rosen), which was also attached to the Motion for Summary
Judgment.5 
However, there is no admissible evidence in the record,
including the documents and declarations relied upon by U.S. Bank
on appeal, showing that U.S. Bank was the holder of the Note
indorsed-in-blank at the initiation of the suit.  Like the
declarants in Mattos and Behrendt, Dellinger, Herberg, and Rosen
did not purport to be the custodian of record for U.S. Bank.  See
Mattos, 140 Hawai# i at 32, 398 P.3d at 621; Behrendt, 2018 WL
5Therein Rosen attested, "I am the attorney of record for Plaintiff
PENNYMAC CORP. ('Plaintiff'), in the above-captioned matter."  This reference
to "Pennymac Corp." appears to be an error, as the caption of the declaration
lists the Plaintiff as U.S. Bank as Trustee for ARMT 2005-2/Certificate Series
2005-2.
8NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1325153 at *7.  Nor do these declarations lay adequate foundation
to establish the declarants as "qualified witnesses" under HRE
Rule 803(b)(6) as to U.S. Bank's records under Mattos, as
explained below.  
Specifically, Dellinger, Herberg, and Rosen did not
indicate that they had any personal knowledge of U.S. Bank's
record-keeping system.  Like in Mattos and Behrendt, both
Dellinger and Herberg attested that they were "familiar with" and
"regularly access business records maintained by Wells Fargo,"
but do not establish any familiarity with the record-keeping
system of U.S. Bank.  See Behrendt  2018 WL 1325153 at *8. 
Indeed, both Dellinger and Herberg indicated that their knowledge
regarding who possessed the Note was "[p]ursuant to my review of
Wells Fargo's system of record[.]"  Although Herberg's
declaration provided some detail about his knowledge of "the
computer system used by Wells Fargo to make these records,"
again, his statements pertain to the record-keeping system of
Wells Fargo, not U.S. Bank.6  Rosen's declaration makes no
mention of familiarity with or knowledge of any record-keeping
systems.  
Nor did Dellinger or Herberg, or Rosen establish that
their respective employers incorporated U.S. Bank's records into
their own under Mattos.  Dellinger and Rosen did not attest that
Wells Fargo received U.S. Bank's records and incorporated them in
6The Herberg declaration states in pertinent part, "I have received
training on, understand the codes used in, and have knowledge of how
information is entered, generated, and maintained on the computer system used
by Wells Fargo to make these records[.]"
9NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the ordinary course of business.  Although the Herberg
declaration contains several statements about receiving and
incorporating "prior records of the Loan" into Wells Fargo's
business records from "prior lender(s) and/or servicer(s),"
Herberg does not specify that the Note indorsed-in-blank was one
of these "prior records of the Loan received from the Prior
Lenders/Servicers."7  We must view the evidence in the light most
favorable to the non-moving party.  See Lales v. Wholesale Motors
Co., 133 Hawai# i 332, 343, 328 P.3d 341, 352 (2014). 
Accordingly, we conclude that Herberg's declaration lacks
adequate foundation to establish that the Note indorsed-in-blank
was a "[r]ecord received from another business and incorporated"
into Wells Fargo's records.  Behrendt , 2018 WL 1325153 at *8
(citing Mattos, 140 Hawai #i at 32, 398 P.3d at 621). 
We also conclude that U.S. Bank did not establish that
Dellinger, Herberg, or Rosen were "qualified witnesses" under HRE
7Specifically, the Herberg declaration states in pertinent part,
 
I have received training on, understand the process
of, and have knowledge of Wells Fargo's practice of
acquiring loans from other financial institutions and how
these loans are transferred into Wells Fargo's system of
record.  The information regarding the Loan transferred to
Wells Fargo from the Prior Lender/Servicers has been
validated in many ways, including . . . going through a due
diligence phase, testing, reviewing reports/data, and
obtaining the hard copy documents.  It is Wells Fargo's
regular business practice, after these phases are complete,
to receive records from prior servicers and integrate these
records into Wells Fargo's business records at the time of
acquisition.  Once integrated, Wells Fargo maintains and
relies on these business records in the ordinary course of
its mortgage loan servicing business.  Based on these
standard processes, Wells Fargo has confirmed that prior
records for the Loan received from the Prior
Lenders/Servicers are accurate and have been incorporated
into Wells Fargo's business records for the Loan.
  
Herberg does not define "prior records for the Loan," but later states,
"A true and accurate copy of the Promissory Note as it is imaged in Wells
Fargo's system of record is attached hereto as Exhibit B."
10NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Rule 803(b)(6) to admit U.S. Bank's records, including the Note
indorsed-in-blank, which was attached to the Complaint.  See
Mattos, 140 Hawai# i at 32-33, 398 P.3d at 621-22.  We note that
even if Dellinger, Herberg, or Rosen had attested that U.S. Bank
was in possession of the original Note indorsed-in-blank at the
time the Complaint was filed (which they did not),8 such a
statement would not be admissible for lack of foundation.  See
Id.  ("Even if Work's declaration had stated that U.S. Bank
records contain the original note, this statement would not be
admissible because, as noted, Work's declaration is insufficient
to render him a 'qualified witness' as to U.S. Bank's records.") 
As U.S. Bank raises no other arguments about the
admissibility of its evidence, we conclude that U.S. Bank did not
satisfy its burden to produce admissible evidence demonstrating
that U.S. Bank was entitled to enforce the subject note at the
time this action was commenced.9  Viewing the facts and
inferences in the light most favorable to Edwards, we conclude
that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether U.S.
8The Dellinger declaration states, "[p]ursuant to review of Wells
Fargo Bank, N.A.'s system of record, U.S. Bank . . . is in possession of the
Promissory Note and the Promissory Note is indorsed, in blank."  (Emphasis
added).  The Herberg declaration states, "[p]ursuant to my review of Wells
Fargo's system of record, the original Promissory Note was sent to Plaintiff's
counsel.  As a result Plaintiff's counsel is in possession of the original
Promissory Note on behalf of Plaintiff.  The Promissory Note is endorsed in
blank."  (Emphasis added).  The Rosen declaration states, "In my role as
counsel for Plaintiff . . . I am in possession of the original adjustable rate
note[.]"  (Emphasis added).  All of these declarations were made at least 1.5
years after the filing of the Complaint and contain no statements about the
possessor of the Note indorsed in blank on January 30, 2015. 
9U.S. Bank does not rely on the attorney affirmation submitted with
its Complaint, filed on January 30, 2015.  In any event, it appears that the
Hawaii Supreme Court in Behrendt implicitly did not give any evidentiary merit
to an attorney affirmation in the record in that case.  See Wilmington Savings
Fund Soc. v. Rohan, No. CAAP-17-0000433, 2018 WL _______ (Haw. App. April 23,
2018) (Ginoza J., concurring).
11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Bank was entitled to enforce the subject note at the time this
foreclosure action was commenced.  Therefore, the Circuit Court
erred in granting U.S. Bank's Motion for Summary Judgment.  See
Reyes-Toledo, 139 Hawai# i at 370-71, 390 P.3d at 1257-58. 
Accordingly, we need not reach the other issues and arguments
raised by Edwards in this appeal. 
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Circuit
Court's December 8, 2016 Judgment and Foreclosure Decree and
remand this case for further proceedings.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, April 24, 2018.
On the briefs:
Kelly Anne Edwards,
Defendant-Appellant, Pro Se.Acting Chief Judge
David B. Rosen,
David E. McAllister,
Justin S. Moyer,
Christina C. Macleod,
(Aldridge Pite, LLP),
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
Associate Judge
12