NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-16-0000669
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
IN THE MATTER OF THE ESTATE
OF CARY THORNTON, Deceased,
and
JAMES HALL, Petitioner-Appellant, v.
RANDALL YEE, Special Administrator, and
THE BANK OF AMERICA, N.A., Respondents-Appellees
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(P. NO. 13-1-0360)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Nakamura, Chief Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Petitioner-Appellant James Hall (Hall ) appeals from the
Judgment on the Order Denying [Hall's] Motion to Remove Special
Administrator and to Surcharge Him for Damages to the Estate
(Judgment), which was entered on September 9, 2016, by the
Circuit Court of the First Circuit ( Probate Court).1  Hall also
challenges the Probate Court's August 4, 2016 Order Denying
[Hall's] Motion to Remove Special Administrator and to Surcharge
Him for Damages to the Estate ( Order Denying Removal ).
1The Honorable Derrick H.M. Chan presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
On appeal, Hall argues that the Probate Court erred by
denying his request to remove Respondent-Appellee Randall Yee
(Yee or Special Administrator) as the Special Administrator of
the Estate of Cary Thornton, deceased, on the grounds that (1)
the Probate Court lacked jurisdiction to proceed and (2) the
Special Administrator lacked statutory authority to proceed and
therefore should have been removed.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Hall's points of error as follows:
Hall's contention that the Probate Court "lacked
jurisdiction to proceed" appears to assert that Hall's due
process rights were violated, rather than to challenge the
Probate Court's jurisdiction over the proceedings below.  
The subject proceedings were initiated upon a Petition
for Appointment of Special Administrator ( Petition for
Appointment), which was filed by Bank of America, N.A. (BofA ). 
The Petition for Appointment sought the appointment of a special
administrator specifically "to take any actions on behalf of the
Estate concerning the subject property,2 by receiving service of
process and representing the Estate in a mortgage foreclosure
action by allowing said Special Administrator to be substituted
for the Decedent and to hold any proceeds payable to the
Decedent's Estate pending further instruction from the Court."
2The subject property is a Hawaii Kai home that was owned by the
decedent and is the subject of a foreclosure action by BofA.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
[DKT. 10 at 13-14] It appears that the Petition for Appointment
and the proceedings related thereto were properly before the 
Probate Court pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) §§ 560:1-
302 (2006) & 560:3-614 (2006).  Hall makes no cogent argument to
the contrary and we conclude that his "jurisdiction" argument is
without merit.
The gravamen of Hall's appeal is that Yee was appointed
as Special Administrator without proper notice to all interested
persons, most particularly Hall.  Hall further argues that,
because he was not given proper notice and an opportunity to be
heard on the Petition for Appointment, Yee's appointment was
flawed and the Probate Court erred in refusing to remove Yee upon
Hall's filing of [Hall's] Motion to Remove Special Administrator
and to Surcharge Him for Damages to the Estate (Motion to
Remove).
HRS § 560:1-401 governs notice in probate and estate
matters and states the following:
§ 560:1-401  Notice; method and time of giving.   (a) 
If notice of a hearing on any petition is required and
except for specific notice requirements as otherwise
provided, the petitioner shall cause notice of the time and
place of hearing of any petition to be given to any
interested person  or the person's attorney if the person has
appeared by attorney or requested that notice be sent to the
person's attorney, or, in the case of a minor or an
incapacitated person, the minor's or incapacitated person's
parent or guardian, as appropriate.  Notice shall be given:
     (1) By mailing a copy thereof at least fourteen days
before the time set for the hearing by
certified, registered, or ordinary first class
mail addressed to the person being notified at
the post office address given in the person's
demand for notice, if any, or at the person's
office or place of residence, if known;
(2)  By delivering a copy thereof to the person
being notified personally at least
fourteen days before the time set for the
hearing; or
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
(3) If the address or identity of any person is not
known and cannot be ascertained with reasonable
diligence, by publishing at least once a week
for three consecutive weeks, a copy thereof in a
newspaper having general circulation in the
judicial circuit where the hearing is to be
held, the last publication of which is to be at
least ten days before the time set for the
hearing.
(b) The court for good cause shown may provide for a
different method or time of giving notice for any hearing.
(c) Proof of the giving of notice shall be made on
or before the hearing and filed in the proceeding.
(Emphasis added).
In its June 4, 2013 Petition for Appointment, BofA
identified the "known or ascertainable" heirs and devisees as
Wayne E. Thornton and Shirley Coombs, described as the decedent's
mother and father, and Hall, whose relationship/interest was
described as "Grantee of Power [of] Attorney."  A hearing on the
Petition for Appointment was initially set for October 3, 2013. 
No proof of the giving of notice, pursuant to § 560:1-401(a) &
(c), was filed on or before the October 3, 2013.  It appears from
the Probate Court's minutes, however, that counsel for BofA
appeared at the October 3, 2013 hearing and requested a 60-day
continuance and leave to give notice by publication.  Although no
written order was entered, and there is no transcript of the
October 3, 2013 hearing in the record on appeal, it appears that
BofA's requests were granted and the hearing was continued to
December 12, 2013.
On December 4, 2013, an Affidavit of Publication was
filed by Julie Clark, a clerk, duly authorized by Oahu
Publications, Inc., who averred to the publication on November
14, 21, and 28, 2013, of a notice of BofA's Petition for
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Appointment.  A copy of the notice, which includes the date, time
and place of the December 12, 2013 hearing, was attached to the
Affidavit of Publication.  It appears that the Affidavit of
Publication satisfies the technical requirements for service by
publication set forth in HRS § 560:1-401(a)(3) and Hall does not
contend otherwise.3
There is no transcript in the record on appeal, but it
appears from the Probate Court's minutes of the December 12, 2013
hearing and the written order entered on January 4, 2014, that
the Probate Court orally granted BofA's Petition for Appointment,
subject to removal and refiling of certain documents under seal,
and Yee was appointed to serve as Special Administrator.  On
February 11, 2014, Yee filed an Acceptance of Appointment and on
February 18, 2014, Letters of Special Administration were filed.
Hall argues that he is an "interested person," entitled
to service under HRS § 560:1-401(a), and the record is devoid of
any proof that reasonable attempts were made to serve him by mail
or in person.  See HRS § 560:1-401(a)(3) (permitting service by
publication, "[i]f the address or identity of any person is not
known and cannot be ascertained with reasonable diligence").
In response, BofA contends that Hall does not qualify
as an "interested person" pursuant to HRS § 560:1-201 and,
therefore, notice to Hall was not required and Hall lacks
3To be clear, the timing and method of the publication was proper. 
This is not intended to comment on the basis for the Probate Court's
authorization of service by publication.  Cf. Hustace v. Kapuni, 6 Haw. App.
241, 718 P.2d 1109 (1986) (service by publication may be authorized only upon
averment of facts showing that due diligence was exercised to locate the
defendant).  However, there is no transcript of the October 3, 2013 hearing,
or other record of the proffer and/or arguments made for service by
publication, and we decline to presume error.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
standing to contest the appointment of the Special Administrator. 
HRS § 560:1-201 provides, in relevant part:
"Interested person" includes heirs, devisees,
children, spouses or reciprocal beneficiaries, creditors,
beneficiaries, and any others having a property right in or
claim against a trust estate or the estate of a decedent,
ward, or protected person. It also includes persons having
priority for appointment as personal representative, and
other fiduciaries representing interested persons. The
meaning as it relates to particular persons may vary from
time to time and must be determined according to the
particular purposes of, and matter involved in, any
proceeding.
Hall filed a declaration in support of his Petition to
Remove.  In his January 19, 2016 declaration, Hall avers,
relevant to his purported interest in the Estate:
2.  The Defendant decedent Cary Coombs Thornton was a
neighbor of mine in Hawaii Kai and a very close friend.
3.  Unfortunately he was estranged from his children,
Daughter Tara Shook and Son Jared Thornton, and in ill
health on July 31, 2012 took his own life.
4.  Upon his death, the coroner had given Tara a
sealed package from Cary, which Tara opened in my presence,
which included Cary’s Will and a note from Cary referencing
his inclusion of me in his Will regarding his Hawaii Kai
home.
. . . .
10. All of Cary’s personal assets having been taken
away by Tara and Jared and [ex-wife] Pauline and no one
protecting the house, I moved in with three of my daughters
to protect the house since Cary had told me he wanted me to
have the house, and I subsequently invested nearly $100,000
of my own money to maintain the property.
In addition, Hall claims that BofA's reference to him
in the Petition for Appointment evidences his interest.  BofA
contends that Hall has no familial relationship to the decedent
and that he has submitted no evidence establishing an
identifiable right or interest in the property that is the
subject of the Special Administrator proceedings.4  Yee contends
4Yee also notes that any claim that Hall may have to be a creditor
of the Estate would appear to be barred by the statute of limitations in HRS
§ 560:3-803.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
that, even assuming that Hall was an interested person entitled
to notice prior to the filing of the Petition for Appointment,
the Probate Code does not mandate his removal.
A special administrator can be removed for cause upon a
petition by a person who has an interest in the estate.  See HRS
§§ 560:3-618 (2006) & 560:3-611 (2006).  Hall has no familial
relationship to the decedent, Cary Thornton.  Hall's otherwise
unsupported statement is that three-and-one-half years earlier,
he saw a note, purportedly from the decedent, that purportedly
referenced the decedent's inclusion of Hall in his will.  Hall
provides no authority for the proposition that this constitutes
sufficient evidence of an interest in the decedent's estate and
we find none.  Nor can we conclude that Hall's unauthorized
occupation of the subject property after the decedent's death,
and his unsupported representation that he "subsequently invested
nearly $100,000" to "maintain" the property, provides grounds for
declaring that he has an interest in the decedent's estate. 
Consequently, we conclude that Hall did not establish that he was
an interested person and that he had standing to seek the removal
of Yee as Special Administrator.  See In re Estate of Marcos , 88
Hawai#i 148, 157-58, 963 P.2d 1124, 1133-34 (1998).
Even assuming that Hall had standing to seek removal of
the Special Administrator, the Probate Court did not err in
concluding that Hall failed to show good cause for Yee's removal. 
There is no evidence whatsoever that Yee had grounds to oppose
the foreclosure of the subject property.  The generalized
accusations by Hall's counsel about the "pernicious and dishonest
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
practice" of "foreclosing mortgagees," counsel's unsupported
statements that there were defenses to the foreclosure, and the
mere fact that Yee has served as a special administrator in many
cases over a number of years, do not support Hall's assertion
that Yee has mismanaged the Estate's interest in the subject
property or otherwise failed to perform his duties.  See  HRS
§ 560:3-611(b).
Finally, even if Hall should have been provided with
notice by personal service or mail prior to Yee's appointment as
Special Administrator, we conclude that such error was harmless
under the circumstances of this case.  See, e.g., Bank of Hawaii
v. Shinn, 120 Hawai #i 1, 3, 200 P.3d 370, 372 (2008).
For these reasons, the Probate Court's September 9,
2016 Judgment is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, October 31, 2017.
On the briefs:
Gary Victor Dubin,
Frederick J. Arensmeyer,
(Dubin Law Offices),
for Petitioner-Appellant
James Hall.Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Thomas E. Bush,
(Thomas Bush Law Office, LLLC),
for Respondent-Appellee
Randall Yee, Special
 Administrator.Associate Judge
Zachary K. Kondo,
Charles R. Prather,
David E. McAllister,
Justin S. Moyer,
Christina C. Macleod,
(Aldridge Pite, LLP),
for Respondent-Appellee
The Bank of America, N.A.
8