
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000505
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
PATRICIO AQUINO, also known as ROGER AQUINO, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
 
(CR. NO. 12-1-0211)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
 
(By: Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Patricio Aquino also known as Roger
 
Aquino (Aquino) appeals from the January 28, 2014 judgment of
 
conviction and sentence of the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 (Circuit Court),
1 convicting Aquino of Attempted Murder in the
 
Second Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 §§ 705-500 and 707-701.5 (2014). 
On appeal, Aquino alleges the Circuit Court erred in
(1) failing to conduct a proper colloquy to ensure Aquino's
 
 
waiver of a jury trial was knowing, intelligent, and voluntary;
 
 
(2) finding Aquino did not lack legal capacity when he committed
 
 
the offense; (3) rejecting Aquino's non-self-induced-intoxication
 
 
defense, and (4) finding Aquino had the requisite intent to
 
 
commit Attempted Murder in the Second Degree.
 
 
 
After a careful review of the points raised, arguments
 
made by the parties, the applicable authority, and the record, we
 resolve Aquino's issues on appeal as follows and affirm.
 
1
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 





 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
1. Aquino argues on appeal that the Circuit Court 
failed to conduct a proper colloquy regarding his waiver of a jury trial during the March 21, 2013 hearing; Aquino contends the Circuit Court's failure to conduct a proper colloquy is plain error, and that his rights under the Fifth, Sixth, and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution and Article I, Sections 5, 8, and 14 of the Hawai
'i State Constitution were 
violated. 
Aquino's waiver of his right to a jury trial was taken
 
by the Circuit Court on March 21, 2013. Aquino is a native of
 the Philippines and speaks English as a second language. An
 Ilocano interpreter was provided during his waiver. While it
 appears that Aquino had at least a rudimentary command of spoken
 English, the Circuit Court urged Aquino to use the interpreter's
 services.
 
In addition to the oral colloquy, Aquino provided the
 
Circuit Court with his written waiver. The Circuit Court also
 entered into a colloquy with Aquino to ensure that Aquino had
 discussed the waiver with his counsel and understood the content
 of the written waiver. The Circuit Court also questioned Aquino
 at length to determine whether he understood the difference
 between a jury trial and a judge trial and Aquino responded that
 he understood and emphasized the effect a waiver to a jury trial
 would have on him. Although Aquino argues that the Ilocano
 interpreter was not used and the colloquy showed Aquino was
 confused, our review of the record leads to the conclusion
 Aquino's assertions are not well-founded.
 
Aquino points to the letters he sent to the Circuit
 
Court after verdict was rendered, asserting that they show he
 believed his charge would be reduced to an assault if he agreed
 to a "judge trial" and that despite the lengthy colloquy with the
 Circuit Court, that he nevertheless believed he would receive a
 trial by jury.
2 First, the two assertions are contradictory; if
 
2
 In his motion for withdrawal of counsel, Aquino's trial attorney
alleged that, after Aquino sent his November 7, 2013 letter to the Circuit
Court, counsel met with Aquino to discuss his concerns as stated in the
letter. Although Aquino seemed to be satisfied with his legal representation
after their meeting, Aquino's second, December 29, 2013 letter was sent to the
(continued...)
 
2
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 




 

 






 

 
 





 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
he believed he would receive a reduction of the charge in
 
exchange for his waiver, he could not also reasonably believe he
 would receive a jury trial after he waived that right.
 
Second, the Circuit Court clearly stated that it was
 
making "no promises" regarding the reduction in charge even if it
 was to decide the case itself. Again, the record does not
 support Aquino's argument.
 
Third, Aquino's repeated assertion during the colloquy
 
with the Circuit Court that he wanted a "judge trial" is simply
 inconsistent with his subsequent claim he did not understand what
 a judge trial was and his professed belief that he was,
 nevertheless, going to receive a jury trial. 
Reviewing the totality of the circumstances, taking 
into account his background, experience, education, and conduct, we cannot conclude Aquino's challenge to the validity of his waiver is supported by the record. State v. Friedman, 93 Hawai
'i 
63, 70, 996 P.2d 268, 275 (2000) (taking into account "the defendant's background, experience, and conduct" as part of the totality of the circumstances). 
2. Aquino challenges the Circuit Court's determination
 
that Aquino had substantial capacity to appreciate the
 wrongfulness of his conduct and was able to conform his conduct
 the requirements of the law. Specifically, Aquino challenges the
 
3
Circuit Court's findings of fact 152, 153, 154, and 155  and

 
2(...continued)
 
Circuit Court, again alleging, as characterized by counsel, ineffective

assistance of counsel, because according to Aquino, counsel had told him he
would only receive a five-year sentence if he waived a jury trial. Counsel
 disputed Aquino's claim that counsel had misinformed Aquino.
 
The Circuit Court orally granted trial counsel's motion to
withdraw, that was heard at the same hearing and immediately prior to
sentencing. The Circuit Court made its order effective after sentencing.
Please note that appellate counsel was appointed three days later, on January
31, 2014, but no motion for new trial was filed and Aquino does not claim he
was afforded ineffective assistance of trial counsel on appeal.
 
3
 The challenged findings of fact state as follows:
 
152. This Court finds the testimony of the Defendant
with respect to his claimed inability to appreciate the
wrongfulness of his conduct and/or to conform his conduct to
the requirements of the law to be less than credible.
(continued...)
 
3
 




 





 




 

 

 





 

 



 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conclusions of law 1, 8, and 9.4 As all the challenged findings
 
 
are dependent on the Circuit Court's credibility determinations,
 
 
we decline to second-guess these decisions that are within the
 
 
province of the trial court. Porter v. Hu, 116 Hawai 'i 42, 59­
60, 169 P.3d 994, 1011-12 (App. 2007).
 
 
"[W]e review a trial court's conclusions of law de
 
 
novo, under the right/wrong standard of review." State v. Loo,
 
 
94 Hawai 'i 207, 209, 10 P.3d 728, 730 (2000). In conclusion 1, 
the Circuit Court rendered its ultimate conclusion that Aquino
 
 
committed Attempted Murder in the Second Degree. As Aquino makes
 
 
no argument in support of his challenge to this conclusion apart
 
 
3(...continued)
153. This Court finds the testimony, reports and
opinions of the State's experts, namely Drs. Cunningham and
Tisza, to be credible and persuasive as to the Defendant's
penal responsibility in this case.
 
154. Based upon the foregoing factors considered by
the Court in evaluating expert testimony, the Court gives
significantly more weight to the testimony of both
Drs. Cunningham and Tisza than that of the defense expert
Dr. Wagner.
 
155. With all due respect to the defense expert,
namely, Dr. Wagner, the Court finds his testimony and
opinions with respect to penal responsibility to be largely
unpersuasive.
 
4 The challenged conclusions of law read as follows:
 
1. The State proved beyond a reasonable doubt that:
 
On or about the 2nd day of February, 2012, in 

the City and County of Honolulu, State of 

Hawaii, PATRICIO AQUINO, also known as Roger 

Aquino, did intentionally engage in conduct 

which is a substantial step in a course of 

conduct intended or known to cause the death of 
 
 
[complaining witness (CW)], thereby committing 

the offense of Attempted Murder in the Second 

Degree, in violation of Sections 705-500, 

707-701.5 and 706-656 of the Hawaii Revised 
 
 
Statutes. 
 
 
. . . . 

8. The Defendant failed to prove, by a preponderance
of the evidence, that he lacked the substantial capacity
either to appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct or to
conform his conduct to the requirements of law. See HRS
 
§ 704-400.
 
9. As such, this Court finds and concludes that the
Defendant has failed to meet his burden of affirmatively
proving the insanity defense.
 
4
 
 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
from his challenge to conclusions 8 and 9, we deem any separate 
argument waived and review conclusion 1 in conjunction with conclusions 8 and 9. Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
Rule 28(b)(7). In conclusions 8 and 9, the Circuit Court decided that Aquino failed to carry his burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence, that he lacked the substantial capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of the law. 
The law is clear that Aquino had the burden as stated 
by the Circuit Court. Aquino, asserting the affirmative defense of lack of penal responsibility due to a mental disease, disorder or defect, "ha[d] the burden of going forward with the evidence to prove facts constituting the defense and of proving such facts by a preponderance of the evidence." State v. Uyesugi, 100 
Hawai
'i 442, 456, 60 P.3d 843, 857 (2002) (citation and internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
Our review of the evidence presented, as well as the
 
uncontested findings of fact, supports the Circuit Court's
 conclusion that Aquino did not carry his burden of proving he did
 not appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct or lacked the
 ability to conform his conduct to the requirements of the law. 
HRS § 704-400 (2014).
 
As conceded by Aquino at trial, most of the facts in
 
this case were not in dispute. Without provocation, Aquino
 attacked CW from behind and stabbed CW multiple times causing,
 among other wounds, deep lacerations to the left shoulder and
 stomach areas. During the attack, Aquino told CW that he would
 kill CW.
 
In explanation of his actions, Aquino testified that he
 
heard voices that told him to kill CW because if he did not, CW
 would kill him; that CW would remove Aquino's two eyes and place
 them at the back of Aquino's head; and that CW looked at him in a
 menacing manner. Aquino also testified that the voices told him
 to kill himself, kill his dog, and to stab CW in the back, on the
 
5
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 


 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5
right side,  all of which he did not do.  Dr. Tisza pointed to
 
these facts, amongst others, in reaching her conclusion that

 
Aquino could control his behavior. Dr. Tisza also concluded
 Aquino's fleeing the scene of the crime was evidence that Aquino
 appreciated the wrongfulness of his actions.
 
Based on the evidence presented, the Circuit Court's

 
determination that Aquino failed to prove his lack of capacity
 defense by a preponderance of the evidence was not wrong.
 
3. Aquino argues that his methamphetamine use was not
 
self-induced because under the definition of self-induced
 intoxication, he must or should have known that such intoxication
 would result in the effects he experienced.
6 Aquino maintains
 
that the psychotic effects resulting from his methamphetamine
 abuse lasted longer than the "normal period of intoxication" and
 that this "was different from the acute short-term effects of
 methamphetamine." Aquino challenges the Circuit Court's findings
 147 and 148, and conclusions of law 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 19, and
 20.
 
5 There was some confusion in Aquino's testimony regarding where the
 
voices told him to stab CW. However, it is clear that CW's injury was to his
 
back, left shoulder area and Aquino testified that he chose to stab CW where
 
he did "to contravene the voice."
 
 
6 HRS § 702-230(5) (2014) provides:
 
"Intoxication" means a disturbance of mental or
 
 
physical capacities resulting from the introduction of
 
substances into the body. 
 
"Pathological intoxication" means intoxication grossly
excessive in degree, given the amount of the intoxicant, to
which the defendant does not know the defendant is
 susceptible and which results from a physical abnormality of
the defendant.
 
"Self-induced intoxication" means intoxication caused
 
 
by substances which the defendant knowingly introduces into
 
the defendant's body, the tendency of which to cause
 
intoxication the defendant knows or ought to know, unless 

the defendant introduces them pursuant to medical advice or 

under such circumstances as would afford a defense to a 
 
 
charge of a penal offense. 
 
 
6
 
 

 




 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In findings 147 and 148, the Circuit Court found:
 
147. This Court finds the Defendant's reports of
command auditory hallucinations and his claimed inability to
know right from wrong or to control his behavior were the
product of voluntary self-induced methamphetamine use.
 
148. This Court finds the Defendant's symptoms were
not attributed to any other independent mental disease or
disorder.
 
Aquino contends these findings are in error because "there was no
 
evidence that Aquino knew of the negative effects from long term
 use [of methamphetamine] before the incident[,]" and therefore
 Aquino would "not be aware of how hazardous methamphetamine was
 to his mental health."
 
As a factual matter, there was evidence from which the
 
Circuit Court could infer that Aquino's ingestion of
 methamphetamine was with the knowledge the drug caused
 hallucinations. Aquino told both Drs. Cunningham and Tisza
 during their respective interviews that he knew smoking "batu"
 caused the voices. He also told the doctors that he experienced
 hallucinations about a week prior to the stabbing and continued
 to ingest methamphetamine up until the day before. With regard
 to finding 148, all three experts testified that Aquino had no
 pre-existing mental illness and that the methamphetamine use
 caused the psychosis he suffered from at the time of the offense. 
Thus, these findings are not clearly erroneous.
 
We review conclusions of law on appeal de novo, under 
the right/wrong standard. Loo, 94 Hawai
'i at 209, 10 P.3d at 
730. Conclusion 10 is merely a restatement of subsections within
 
HRS § 702-230. It is a correct statement of the law. For the
 same reason, we find the Circuit Court was correct in conclusion
 12, restating HRS § 702-230(3). 
In conclusion 11, the Circuit Court concluded Aquino's
 
voluntary and knowing ingestion of methamphetamine did not
 constitute non-self-induced intoxication under HRS § 702-230(5). 
Aquino testified he used methamphetamine on a daily basis prior
 to the incident. Dr. Wagner testified that Aquino told him he
 had been hearing voices for a week prior to the stabbing. 
Dr. Tisza testified that Aquino admitted that he suffered
 auditory hallucinations when he used methamphetamine. Clearly,
 
7
   
 

 

 

 


 


 

 

 

 



 
 

 

 

 

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Aquino was aware of methamphetamine's intoxicating effect,
 sufficient to establish self-induced intoxication pursuant to HRS
 § 702-230. Therefore, the Circuit Court was correct in
 conclusion 11.
 
In conclusion 13, the Circuit Court concluded that 
self-induced intoxication is not the kind of physical or mental disease, disorder or defect included in HRS § 704-400. Given the legislature's intent in excluding self-induced intoxication as a defense to an offense, State v. Young, 93 Hawai
'i 224, 232, 999 
P.2d 230, 238 (2000), the Circuit Court's conclusion is not wrong. 
Based on the above analysis and evidence in the record, 
conclusion 14, rejecting Aquino's claim that his mental disorder
 was the product of non-self-induced intoxication, is not wrong. 
Similarly, the Circuit Court's conclusions 19 and 20,
 
ruling that Aquino is criminally responsible for stabbing CW and
 that the prosecution proved all the elements of the crime of
 Attempted Murder in the Second Degree proved beyond a reasonable
 doubt, are not wrong. 
4. Aquino maintains the Circuit Court erred in 
finding he had the requisite intent that his conduct would or could cause CW's death. Aquino argues on appeal that the Circuit Court erred in finding he had the requisite intent, because he testified that he "did not want to kill [CW] because he was his friend." "[I]t is not necessary for the prosecution to introduce direct evidence of a defendant's state of mind in order to prove that the defendant acted intentionally[.]" State v. Eastman, 81 
Hawai
'i 131, 140-41, 913 P.2d 57, 66-67 (1996).
 There was substantial evidence of Aquino's intent. 
CW testified that, during Aquino's attack, Aquino told him Aquino
 was going to kill CW. In addition, witnesses testified to Aquino
 stabbing CW multiple times, in the shoulder and stomach, causing
 heavy bleeding. Aquino himself admitted at trial that he
 intended to kill CW, because "if I no kill him, he going to kill
 
8
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 




 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
me." Aquino also confirmed he stabbed CW more than once
 
"[b]ecause he told me he's going to kill me."
 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the January 28, 2014
 
judgment of conviction and sentence of the Circuit Court of the
 First Circuit.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, August 16, 2016. 
On the briefs:
 
Dwight C.H. Lum,

for Defendant-Appellant.
 
Presiding Judge
 
 
Associate Judge
 
 
Associate Judge
 
 Stephen K. Tsushima,

Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
9
 