 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000543
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ADRIAN-JOHN C. BRINGAS, also known as
ADRIANJOHN BRINGAS, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 16-1-0617)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Chan, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Adrian-John C. Bringas, also known 
as AdrianJohn Bringas (Bringas), appeals from the Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) entered on June 21, 2017, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court), against him and in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee the State of Hawai' i 
(State).
1 
On April 19, 2016, Bringas was indicted by a grand jury
 
and charged with (1) one count of Murder in the Second Degree, in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 707-701.5 (2014)
 
1
 The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(Murder Second),2 in the death of minor WS (WS), and (2) one
 
count of Assault in the Second Degree, in violation of HRS § 707­
711(1)(a) (2014)3 and/or HRS § 707-711(1)(b) and/or HRS § 707­
711(1)(d) (Assault Second), in relation to complaining witness
 
minor CS (CS), WS's brother. After a jury trial, Bringas was
 found guilty of Murder Second and acquitted of the assault
 
charge.
 I.	 BACKGROUND
 A.	 Pretrial
 Although particular facts were disputed, it is clear
 
that on April 12, 2016, around 10:00 p.m., Bringas had an
 altercation or altercations with WS and CS. Bringas stabbed WS
 in the chest, causing perforation to his left lung, heart, aorta,
 and pulmonary artery resulting in major blood loss. WS was
 pronounced dead at Queen's Medical Center at 10:35 p.m. CS, in a
 confrontation with Bringas immediately following the stabbing of
 
2	 HRS § 707-701.5 provides, in relevant part:
 § 707-701.5 Murder in the second degree.  (1) Except
as provided in section 707-701, a person commits the offense
of murder in the second degree if the person intentionally
or knowingly causes the death of another person.
 
3 At the time Bringas waws indicted, HRS § 707-711(1) (amended
effective July 11, 2016)
provides, in relevant part:
 
§ 707-711 Assault in the second degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the second degree if:
(a) 	The person intentionally or knowingly
causes substantial bodily injury to
another;
(b) 	The person recklessly causes serious or
substantial bodily injury to another;
. . . .
 (d) 	The person intentionally or knowingly causes
bodily injury to another with a dangerous
instrument[.]
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
WS, suffered a stab wound to his leg. Bringas claimed he was
 
acting in self-defense. 
On April 19, 2016, Bringas was charged with Murder
 
Second for intentionally or knowingly causing the death of WS.
 Bringas was also charged with Assault Second for intentionally,
 knowingly, or recklessly causing substantial bodily injury to CS
 with a dangerous instrument. 
On January 12, 2017, Bringas filed a Notice of Intent
 
to Use Evidence (Notice of Intent) in which he stated that he
 
intended to use evidence as to the alleged gang membership of WS,
 
CS, and witnesses RK and Prescott. 
On January 30, 2017, the State filed State of Hawaii's
 
Motion in Limine (Motion in Limine), seeking to preclude from use
 
at trial "any testimonial or documentary evidence of 'specific
 
instances of aggressive conduct' of any prosecution witness,
 including any references to Gang related activities and/or gang
 membership." It also sought exclusion of prior bad acts,
 specific instances of untruthfulness, and the prior criminal
 record of any prosecution witness. 
On February 2, 2017, the Circuit Court held a hearing
 
regarding, inter alia, the Notice of Intent and the Motion in
 Limine. Bringas submitted three photographs to the court, which
 he sought to use as evidence of the gang affiliation of the
 witnesses. The court asked for an offer of proof regarding the
 photographs. Bringas argued that the photographs showed the
 State's witnesses making gang signs, and that their gang
 affiliation was relevant to his argument that he was merely in
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the wrong place at the wrong time and acted in self-defense. He
 
argued that a gang's propensity to protect its "turf" was
 relevant to his theory of the case that he was attacked without
 provocation while he was "minding his own business." He also
 argued that the witnesses blamed Bringas for having stabbed WS
 and attacked Bringas out of revenge for having stabbed one of
 their gang members. The Circuit Court asked if Bringas was a
 member of a rival gang, noting that it had reviewed 
State v. 
 
Renon, 73 Haw. 23, 828 P.2d 1266 (1992), which in the Circuit
 Court's reading, stood for the rule that "when gang affiliation
 evidence comes in before the trier of fact, it's to explain the
 dynamics between two rival gangs that might not otherwise be
 known to or part of the common knowledge for the trier of fact." 
Bringas submitted that he was not in a rival gang, but that being
 in a rival gang was not the only prerequisite for gang members to
 attack someone who was in the wrong place at the wrong time. 
The Circuit Court ruled that evidence would not be
 
allowed in a trial, stating: 
After listening to your arguments and considering
Rules 401, 402, 403, of the Hawaii Rules of Evidence, the
Court will respectfully preclude the evidence of any gang
membership on part of the State's witnesses.
As we discussed during the hearing of this notice, any
probative value to the establishing or to the analysis of
any self-defense that may be applicable to Mr. Bringas is
truly incremental because even without this particular
evidence, given Mr. Veary's offer of proof as to what the
witnesses would testify in his case, the self-defense
instruction would appear to be applicable irrespective of
whether or not any of the State's witnesses were gang
members, so the probative value is truly minimally
incremental. 
The prejudice, however, is extreme because the mere
connotation that a person is affiliated or a member of a
gang is truly negative and adverse to that particular
witness, and here, there is no, no reason or no value and no
gateway for this propensity evidence for the State's
witnesses, and even if there was, again, some minimal
probative value, the prejudice to these witnesses that they
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
are affiliated with a gang or gang members is so negative,
meaning the prejudicial value is so great in light of the
minimal probative value of such evidence that Rule 403
really does preclude it, and as I've considered State vs.
Renon, again, the only gang case here in the state of
Hawaii, it's not the kind of situation that we have here. 
We note here that the exclusion of the gang-related
 
evidence was not included as a basis for relief in Bringas's
 
post-trial Motion for New Trial. However, in the hearing on that
 motion, the Court further explained its previous ruling, stating:
 
And just so we're clear, I think when that decision
was made, we assumed, the Court assumed that it was,in fact, gang activity that was depicted. But thebasis of excluding the photographs was whether or notit could relate to any relevant issue at trial. Andthe Court found that without some kind of experttestimony or some kind of testimony linking gangactivity to whatever issue might be relevant at trial,that it was going to be prohibited under Rule 403 ofthe Hawai 'i Rules of Evidence. 
B.	 Trial
 
Elaine Prescott (Prescott), a friend of WS, testified
 
as to the events leading to the altercation between Bringas and
 WS. Prescott testified that she was hanging out the evening of
 the altercation with WS and CS at Kuhio Park Terrace where CS and
 WS's grandfather lived. Also with them were minor RK (RK) and
 
minor WK (WK). Prescott was with RK, WK, and CS in a stairwell
 of Kuhio Park Terrace when she decided to walk to the store for
 
cigarettes. WS had previously left the group to park a car. On
 the way to the store Prescott observed WS behind a trash dumpster
 speaking with Bringas, whom she did not know. 
Prescott testified that she saw Bringas and WS speaking
 
and approached them; she saw that WS was smoking marijuana and
 asked to smoke with them. RK, Prescott's boyfriend, approached
 and saw Prescott and asked what she was doing; he could not see
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
WS and Bringas due to the angle from where he was standing. She
 
told him to go away, and he started to return to the stairwell. 
While speaking with RK, Prescott overheard Bringas asking WS if
 he "wanted to buy a dime." WS said no because he did not have
 any money. When Prescott turned back to WS and Bringas after
 speaking with RK, WS and Bringas were already fighting. 
Initially, WS and Bringas were not using weapons but only shoving
 and punching. WS and Bringas ended up against a wall next to the
 trash can, at which time Prescott observed that Bringas reached
 into his backpack and retrieved something shiny. Prescott told
 WS to run, which he did. Bringas chased WS, caught him, and
 stabbed him. WS tried to get away from Bringas, but Bringas
 grabbed a hold of his shirt, and WS fell down by a truck. 
According to Prescott, Bringas yelled, "Wooooo, I like this, I
 like this, I want some more." 
RK testified that he heard the commotion of the fight
 
and returned to where he had spoken with Prescott. He observed
 WS and Bringas punching each other but he did not see a weapon. 
Prescott said to RK, "Baby, go get him, that's the guy." RK saw
 the fight move into the road and heard Bringas say, "Oh, he likes
 this, he wants some more." RK engaged Bringas and they began to
 fight; then RK saw that Bringas had a shiny object in his hand. 
RK ran away because he felt his life was threatened.
 
CS testified that he heard the commotion caused by the
 
altercation and heard Prescott screaming, so he left the
 stairwell and ran through the parking lot towards the screaming. 
CS heard a girl say, "Oh that's the guy, that's the guy," and he
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
saw Bringas walking with his backpack. CS grabbed Bringas's
 
backpack, and then they began to fight. CS saw something in
 Bringas's hand. During the fight, Bringas stabbed CS in his
 right hip. CS then fled. CS's stab-wound was not life-
threatening. 
Bringas also testified at trial. Bringas testified
 
that he had stopped at Kuhio Park Terrace because his bike chain
 had come off his bike. He pulled out his knife to fix the chain,
 and, as he was finishing up, WS approached him. Bringas stated
 that WS inquired about what was happening and offered Bringas a
 hit of the marijuana he was smoking. Bringas testified it was WS
 who offered to sell him some drugs, which Bringas declined. WS
 began asking questions about who Bringas was, which made Bringas
 feel uncomfortable. Bringas placed his knife in his waistband
 because he felt the situation was uncomfortable. It was at this
 point that Prescott appeared and smoked a joint with them. 
According to Bringas, WS and Prescott started to walk away and
 Bringas went to throw some trash in the dumpster. Out of
 nowhere, Bringas was hit, saw a blinding white flash, and fell to
 the ground. Bringas jumped up and attempted to run away; he
 rolled his ankle, fell to the ground, and then someone was on top
 of him and a struggle ensued.
 
Bringas claimed that he did not pull out his knife
 
until he got out into the street and he encountered two males
 coming toward him. He claimed that the two men had something in
 their hands. Bringas claimed Prescott at this time was spilling
 the contents of his backpack on the ground, and he concluded he
 
7
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was being robbed. Bringas testified at this point he was hit
 
again and saw another white flash; he cannot remember who hit him
 or with what. He testified he was still getting beaten up and he
 was flailing with his knife in his hand in an effort to get away. 
Bringas claimed he was not aware that he had stabbed anyone and
 eventually the attack stopped and he ran away. Bringas claimed
 he was pursued and a man with something in his hand hit him in
 the back of the head. He was tackled to the ground and beaten up
 again, and again Bringas used the knife to get away. At this
 point, Bringas disposed of the knife because he did not want to
 scare a truck that was approaching, which allowed him to get in
 and drove him to a nearby gas station. 
Three additional witnesses unconnected to the
 
altercation also testified at trial. Pitson Kafoto (Kafoto)
 
testified that he was returning home on the night of the incident
 
in his truck with his wife and daughters when he observed
 Prescott on the ground with WS's head in her lap. He also
 observed two men fighting with one man swinging an object at the
 other who defended himself with a backpack. Minor RP (RP),
 
Kafoto's fifteen-year-old daughter, also testified. RP and her
 
mother were in the cab of Kafoto's truck when they came upon the
 altercation. She recalled seeing a Polynesian-looking man
 attacking Bringas and at some point in the altercation a second
 man also joined in the fight. RP recalled somebody telling the
 two men to "stop 'cause he's had enough." 
Minor R (Minor R), sixteen years old at trial,
 
testified that he had known WS since he was eight years old. He
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
was walking back home the night of the altercation when he saw CS
 
and Bringas fighting. After Bringas took off, Minor R ran after
 him but did not catch him. When he returned, he found CS holding
 a white pipe. 
Two police officers responding to calls about a
 
stabbing on Ahonui Street were separately flagged down en route
 at a nearby gas station. Officer Scott Matsumura (Officer
 
Matsumura) testified that he found Bringas, who appeared to be
 bleeding from lacerations to the side and back of his head. 
Bringas struck Officer Matsumura as unhappy to see him and
 uncooperative. Officer Nicholas Schlapak (Officer Schlapak) also
 
testified that Bringas told him that he had been robbed and he
 
had acted in self-defense.
 
The jury returned a verdict of guilty on Count I,
 
Murder in the Second Degree, but also answered a special
 interrogatory on the verdict form which, according to the jury's
 instructions, was only to be answered if the jury found Bringas
 guilty of the lesser included offense of Assault in the Third
 Degree. On Count II, the jury returned a verdict of not guilty,
 but again answered a special interrogatory that was only to be
 answered if it had found Bringas guilty of Assault in the Third
 Degree. The Court, the State, and defense counsel became aware
 of the discrepancy and discussed what should occur. At first, it
 was agreed that the jury would be called back on a subsequent day
 to clear up the discrepancy. The jury was called in and informed
 that it would need to come back. However, after going off the
 record for a period of the time, the court went back on the
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record and announced that it was going to reverse its previous
 
order and the jury would not be called back. After the jury was
 excused, Bringas's counsel was asked if he wanted to place
 anything on the record and he responded that he had no objections
 to discharging the jury.
 
C. Post-Trial
 Bringas filed a Motion for New Trial pursuant to 
Hawai'i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 33. Bringas argued 
that a new trial was "in the interest of justice" because the jury's unnecessary response to the special interrogatory question made it appear that the jury verdict was "so manifestly against the weight of the evidence as to indicate bias, prejudice, passion, or misunderstanding of the charge of the court on the part of the jury." The Circuit Court denied the motion based on its determination that the verdict was not against the weight of the evidence. 
Bringas was sentenced to an indeterminate term of life
 
imprisonment with the possibility of parole on Count I. Bringas
 now appeals.
 II. POINTS OF ERROR
 
On appeal, Bringas raises two points of error,
 
contending that the Circuit Court erred when it: (1) failed to
 resolve the jury's inconsistent verdicts, chose which part of the
 verdict forms to read and omit, and then failed to grant the
 Motion for New Trial; and (2) precluded Bringas from introducing
 evidence that Bringas claimed would show that WS and CS were gang
 members and precluded cross-examination of certain State
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
witnesses regarding their gang affiliations to support Bringas's
 
claim that WS and CS were the initial aggressors.
 III. APPLICABLE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
 
The Circuit Court's decision on a motion for a new 
trial is reviewed for abuse of discretion. See State v. Bailey, 
126 Hawai' i 383, 398, 271 P.3d 1142, 1157 (2012). "The trial 
court abuses its discretion when it clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." State v. 
Furutani, 76 Hawai' i 172, 179, 873 P.2d 51, 58 (1994) (citations 
and quotations omitted). 
[D]ifferent standards of review must be applied to
trial court decisions regarding the admissibility of
evidence, depending on the requirements of the particular
rule of evidence at issue. When application of a particular
evidentiary rule can yield only one correct result, the
proper standard for appellate review is the right/wrong
standard.
 
State v. Martinez, 101 Hawai' i 332, 339, 68 P.3d 606, 613 (2003) 
(quoting Kealoha v. Cty. of Hawaii, 74 Haw. 308, 319, 844 P.2d 
670, 676 (1993)). "Where the evidentiary ruling at issue concerns admissibility based upon relevance, under [Hawai' i Rules 
of Evidence (HRE)] Rules 401 and 402, the proper standard of 
appellate review is the right/wrong standard." Id. (citing State 
v. Toro, 77 Hawai' i 340, 347, 884 P.2d 403, 410 (Haw. App. 1994). 
However, evidentiary decisions made under HRE Rule 403, which 
require a judgment call, are reviewed for abuse of discretion. See State v. Staley, 91 Hawai' i 275, 281, 982 P.2d 904, 910 
(1999). "HRE [Rule] 404 represents a particularized application of the principle of HRE 403 (see Commentary to HRE 404), and we will employ the same abuse of discretion standard of review." 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Richie, 88 Hawai' i 19, 37, 960 P.2d 1227, 1245 (1998) 
(citation omitted). 
Where evidence is improperly excluded, the judgment of 
the trial court must be reversed unless it can affirmatively be 
said that the exclusion was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See State v. Nofoa, 135 Hawai' i 220, 229, 349 P.3d 327, 336 
(2015). IV. DISCUSSION
 A. The Verdict Forms
 Bringas argues on appeal that the Circuit Court "erred
 
in failing to resolve the jury's inconsistent verdicts prior to
 having them read in open court, erred in choosing which part of
 the verdict forms to read and which to omit, and abused its
 discretion in denying the Motion for New Trial." 
The jury was given two one-page verdict forms, one form
 
for each count. After deliberations were completed, each form
 was marked, dated, and signed by the Foreperson. 
As to Count I, the upper part of the form included six
 
options, which included not guilty, guilty as charged of Murder
 Second, and four included offenses of Manslaughter, Assault in
 the First Degree, Assault in the Second Degree, and Assault in
 the Third Degree. The line indicating a finding that Bringas was
 "guilty as charged of the offense of Murder in the Second Degree"
 was marked, with none of the other options marked. Directly
 below, the lower part of the form included a special
 interrogatory, which stated: "Did the prosecution prove beyond a
 reasonable doubt that the fight or scuffle was not entered into
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
by mutual consent? (Your answer to this question must be
 
unanimous.)" Below the question, the form included answer
 options of yes or no. "No" was marked.
4
 
In the jury instructions, the jury was instructed that
 
"if and only if you find the defendant not guilty of Murder in
 the Second Degree, or you are unable to reach a unanimous verdict
 as to this offense, then you must consider whether the defendant
 is guilty or not guilty of the included offense of Manslaughter."
 The jury was similarly instructed, in sequence, to consider each
 of the lesser offenses "if and only if" they found Bringas not
 guilty or could not reach a verdict on the greater offense. With
 respect to the final included offense, the instructions stated:
5
 
In Count I of the Indictment, if you find that
the prosecution has proven the offense of Assault in
the Third Degree beyond a reasonable doubt, then you
must also consider whether the fight or scuffle was
entered into by mutual consent, whether expressly or
by conduct.
You must determine whether the prosecution has
proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the fight or
scuffle was not entered into by mutual consent. This
 determination must be unanimous and is to be indicated
 by answering "yes" or "no" on a special interrogatory
that will be provided to you.
 
Thus, the record is clear that the jury did not follow
 
the Circuit Court's instruction to answer the special
 
interrogatory question only if it did not reach a verdict on a
 greater offense. 
4
 As to Count II, the upper part of the form included three options,
which included not guilty, guilty as charged, and an included offense. The
 
line indicating a finding that Bringas was "not guilty" was marked, with none
of the other options marked. Directly below, the lower part of the form
included the same special interrogatory as for Count I, which stated: "Did
 the prosecution prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the fight or scuffle was
not entered into by mutual consent? (Your answer to this question must be
unanimous.)" Below the question, the form included answer options of yes or
no. "Yes" was marked.
 
5
 The jury instructions as to Count II were similarly constructed.
 
13
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Bringas filed a motion for new trial based on HRS
 
§ 635-56 (2016) and HRPP Rule 33. HRS § 635-56 provides:
 
§ 635-56 Grounds for new trial.  In any civil case or
in any criminal case wherein a verdict of guilty has been
rendered, the court may set aside the verdict when it
appears to be so manifestly against the weight of the
evidence as to indicate  bias, prejudice, passion, or
misunderstanding of the charge of the court on the part of
the jury ; or the court may in any civil or criminal case
grant a new trial for any legal cause.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
HRPP Rule 33 states:
 
Rule 33. NEW TRIAL.
 
The court on motion of a defendant may grant a new
trial to the defendant if required in the interest of
justice.  If trial was by the court without a jury, the
court on motion of a defendant for a new trial may vacate
the judgment if entered, take additional testimony and
direct the entry of a new judgment. A motion for a new
 trial shall be made within 10 days after verdict or finding
of guilty or within such further time as the court may fix
during the 10-day period. The finding of guilty may be
entered in writing or orally on the record.
 
(Emphasis added).
 
Bringas argues that a new trial should have been
 
granted "in the interest of justice" as the verdicts clearly
 
reflected a "misunderstanding of the charge of the court on the
 part of the jury." Bringas relies principally on the Hawai' i 
Supreme Court's decision in Carr v. Strode, which holds: 
A conflict in the jury's answers to questions in a
special verdict will warrant a new trial only if thoseanswers are irreconcilably inconsistent, and theverdict will not be disturbed if the answers can be reconciled under any theory. [Craft v. Peebles, 78Hawai'i 287, 307, 893 P.2d 138, 158 (1995)] (quotation
marks and citations omitted). The theory, however,must be supported by the trial court's instructions tothe jury. See Toner v. Lederle Laboratories, 828 F.2d
510, 512 (9th Cir. 1987) ("When faced with a claimthat verdicts are inconsistent, the court must searchfor a reasonable way to read the verdicts asexpressing a coherent view of the case, and mustexhaust this effort before it is free to dismiss the jury's verdict and remand the case for a new trial.The consistency of the jury verdicts must beconsidered in light of the judge's instructions to the 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
jury." (citations omitted)), cert. denied , 485 U.S.
942, 108 S.Ct. 1122, 99 L.Ed.2d 282 (1988). 
Carr v. Strode, 79 Hawai' i 475, 489, 904 P.2d 489, 503 (1995). 
In Carr, the trial court had (conditionally) granted a
 
new trial because of alleged "irreconcilable differences" in the
 
jury's answers to two special interrogatories. Id. In this
 
case, however, Bringas has not argued or explained how the jury's
 finding that he was guilty as charged of the offense of Murder
 Second is irreconcilably inconsistent with a finding the jury's
 negative response to the question: "Did the prosecution prove
 beyond a reasonable doubt that the fight or scuffle was not
 entered into by mutual consent?" Instead, Bringas relies solely
 on fact that the jury answered the special interrogatory when it
 did not need to, and was instructed not to, reach the question. 
Based on that ground, Bringas points to the "misunderstanding of
 the charge" language in HRS § 635-56; Bringas does so
 disregarding the entirety of that statutory concept, which is
 that the court may set aside the verdict when it appears to be so
 manifestly against the weight of the evidence that it indicates a
 misunderstanding the court's instructions to the jury. 
The Circuit Court, on the other hand, grounded its
 
decision to deny Bringas's request for a new trial in its
 assessment of the weight of the evidence, stating, in relevant
 part:
 
The Court finds that factually the defendant,
Adrian-John Bringas in this case, did cause the death of
[WS] with a single puncture wound to the decedent's chest.
The mechanism of death is really not disputed and has not
been disputed in this case.
 
Two, the true issue at trial was whether defendant was
justified in that act under Hawai 'i Revised Statutes Section 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
703-304. That is the section allowing the use of force for
self-protection, otherwise known as self-defense.
 
Three, the evidence presented required the jury in
this case to determine credibility on the issue of
self-defense. 
And, four, the jury, charged with the duty to
determine credibility, found that based on credible evidence
defendant was not justified in the use of deadly force.
And, accordingly, the jury's verdict is not against the
weight of evidence presented in this case.
 
On appeal, Bringas does not challenge the Circuit
 
Court's assessment of the weight of the evidence, which we
 
conclude is supported by the record on appeal. Instead, it
 appears that Bringas asks this court to conclude that the mere
 answering of the question, contrary to the jury instructions, is
 sufficient legal cause that "in the interest of justice" it was
 an abuse of discretion to deny a new trial. We decline to reach
 that conclusion in this case.
 
First, we note that the issue of "mutual affray" was 
relevant only insofar as it constitutes "a mitigating defense" to Assault in the Third Degree and lessens the severity of the offense from a misdemeanor to a petty misdemeanor. See HRS 
§ 707-712 (2014);
6 State v. Kikuta, 125 Hawai' i 78, 96, 253 P.3d 
639, 657 (2011) ("mutual affray is a mitigating defense that reduces the offense of Assault in the Third Degree to a petty 
6	 HRS § 707-712 states: 
§ 707-712 Assault in the third degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of assault in the third degree if the
person:
(a)	 Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly
causes bodily injury to another person; or
(b)	 Negligently causes bodily injury to another
person with a dangerous instrument.
(2) Assault in the third degree is a
misdemeanor unless committed in a fight or scuffle
entered into by mutual consent, in which case it is a
petty misdemeanor.
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
misdemeanor"). To prove "mutual affray," the defendant must
 
prove that the "fight or scuffle" was entered into by "mutual
 consent." Id. at 96-97, 253 P.3d at 656-57. The jury's answer
 
to the special interrogatory indicated only that the State failed
 to prove that the fight was not entered into by mutual consent. 
Where one uses deadly force claiming self-defense, the applicable
 defense is that set out by HRS § 703-304 (2014)
7  (use of force in
 
self-protection). Even if the jury had believed that the fight
 was initiated by mutual consent, which was not in fact the
 State's or Bringas's theory of the case argued at trial, using
 deadly force in self-defense required Bringas to prove that
 
7	 HRS § 703-304 states, in relevant part:
 
§ 703-304 Use of force in self-protection.  (1)
Subject to the provisions of this section and of section
703-308, the use of force upon or toward another person is
justifiable when the actor believes that such force is
immediately necessary for the purpose of protecting himself
against the use of unlawful force by the other person on the
present occasion.
(2) The use of deadly force is justifiable under
this section if the actor believes that deadly force is
necessary to protect himself against death, serious bodily
injury, kidnapping, rape, or forcible sodomy.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in subsections (4)
and (5) of this section, a person employing protective force
may estimate the necessity thereof under the circumstances
as he believes them to be when the force is used without
 retreating, surrendering possession, doing any other act
which he has no legal duty to do, or abstaining from any
lawful action.
 
. . . .
 
(5) The use of deadly force is not justifiable under
this section if:
 
(a)	 The actor, with the intent of causing death or
serious bodily injury, provoked the use of force
against himself in the same encounter; or
(b)	 The actor knows that he can avoid the necessity
of using such force with complete safety by
retreating or by surrendering possession of a
thing to a person asserting a claim of right
thereto or by complying with a demand that he
abstain from any action which he has no duty to
take[.]
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
deadly force was necessary to protect himself against death or
 
serious bodily injury. HRS § 703-304(2). The jury was properly
 instructed with respect to self-defense. The jury, having been
 properly instructed with respect to Bringas's burden of proving
 self-defense, found him guilty of Murder Second. We conclude
 that the superfluous answering of the special interrogatory did
 not undermine or cast any doubt upon the jury's verdict, much
 less create an irreconcilable inconsistency with the jury's
 verdict that Bringas was guilty of Murder Second. See Briones v.
 
State, 74 Haw. 442, 457-59, 848 P.2d 966, 974-75 (1993) (noting
 that the guilty verdicts were inconsistent because they could
 only have been based on inconsistent and irreconcilable factual
 findings).
 
In addition, we conclude that, under the circumstances
 
of this case, the unnecessary answering of the special
 interrogatory does not create an inconsistent verdict, rather it
 is surplusage that can be disregarded. See, e.g., White v.
 
Grinfas, 809 F.2d 1157, 1161 (5th Cir. 1987) ("To effectuate best
 the intent of the jury, we hold that if the district court has
 correctly found that the jury's answer to a question that was
 supposed to terminate further inquiry is clear and disposes of
 the legal issues, on review we must ignore the jury's necessarily
 conflicting answers to any other questions. The subsequent
 questions are by definition irrelevant in these circumstances,
 and cannot be used to impeach the jury's clear verdict."); Carr
 
v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 312 F.3d 667, 674 (5th Cir. 2002)
 ("district court does not abuse its discretion in reconciling
 
18
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
verdicts containing answers to interrogatories that the jury was
 
instructed not to answer, when it either disregards the
 superfluous answers in their entirety, or resubmits the
 interrogatories to the jury"); Floyd v. Laws, 929 F.2d 1390,
 
1397 (9th Cir. 1991) (recognizing and applying principle that
 "special findings issued in violation of the trial court's
 express instructions do not constitute legitimate or viable
 findings of fact. The trial court must therefore dismiss them as
 surplusage, as a matter of law.").
 
Bringas also argues that the Circuit Court erred in not 
allowing him to conduct an in-court examination of the jurors to determine whether the verdict was subject to challenge, citing the Hawai' i Rules of Professional Conduct (HRPC). HRPC Rule 
3.5(e) states, in relevant part: 
A lawyer shall not:
(4) after dismissal of the jury in a case with which
the lawyer is connected, communicate with a juror regarding
the trial except that:
(ii) upon leave of the court for good cause
shown, a lawyer who believes there are grounds for
legal challenge to a verdict may conduct an in-court
examination of jurors or former jurors to determine
whether the verdict is subject to challenge.
 
HRPC Rule 3.5(e)(4)(ii). The HRPC are irrelevant to the issues
 
presented here. HRPC Rule 3.5(e) governs the professional
 conduct of lawyers regarding communications with jurors and does
 not provide the substantive basis to the relief requested. More
 importantly, in this case, we have concluded that the issue of
 "mutual affray" is irrelevant to the charge and verdict
 concerning the offense of Murder Second. Therefore, we conclude
 that good cause was not shown to recall and examine the jurors in
 this case.
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
For these reasons, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 
did not err or abuse its discretion in denying the Motion for New
 
Trial. 
B. The Preclusion of Evidence Related to Gang Activity
 Bringas argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
precluding the introduction of photos purportedly indicating that
 WS and CS were gang members, as well as erred in precluding
 cross-examination of certain State witnesses about their alleged
 gang affiliations to support Bringas's claim that WS and CS were
 the initial aggressors in their confrontations with Bringas.
 
HRE Rule 404 generally prohibits evidence of a person's
 
character or a trait of a person's character for the purpose of
 proving action in conformity therewith on a particular occasion.
8
  
8	 HRE Rule 404 states:
 
Rule 404 Character evidence not admissible to prove
conduct; exceptions; other crimes  (a) Character evidence
generally. Evidence of a person's character or a trait of a
person's character is not admissible for the purpose of proving
action in conformity therewith on a particular occasion, except:
(1)	 Character of accused. Evidence of a pertinent
trait of character of an accused offered by an
accused, or by the prosecution to rebut the
same;
(2)	 Character of victim. Evidence of a pertinent
trait of character of the victim of the crime
 offered by an accused, or by the prosecution to
rebut the same, or evidence of a character trait
of peacefulness of the victim offered by the
prosecution in a homicide case to rebut evidence
that the victim was the first aggressor;
(3)	 Character of witness. Evidence of the character
 of a witness, as provided in rules 607, 608,
609, and 609.1.
(b) Other crimes, wrongs, or acts. Evidence
 
of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove
the character of a person in order to show action in
conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible where
such evidence is probative of another fact that is of
consequence to the determination of the action, such as
proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan,
knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of mistake
or accident. In criminal cases, the proponent of evidence
to be offered under this subsection shall provide reasonable
(continued...)
 
20
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
However, HRE Rule 404(a)(2) allows "[e]vidence of a pertinent
 
trait of character of the victim of the crime offered by an
 accused[.]" The use of evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts
 is further limited as follows:
 
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not
admissible to prove the character of a person in order to
show action in conformity therewith. It may, however, be
admissible where such evidence is probative of another fact
that is of consequence to the determination of the action,
such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation,
plan, knowledge, identity, modus operandi, or absence of
mistake or accident. In criminal cases, the proponent of
evidence to be offered under this subsection shall provide
reasonable notice in advance of trial, or during trial if
the court excuses pretrial notice on good cause shown, of
the date, location, and general nature of any such evidence
it intends to introduce at trial.
 
HRE Rule 404(b).
 
This court has explained that under Rule 404, where
 
there is an actual factual issue as to who was the initial
 
aggressor in a violent confrontation, the victim or the
 defendant, "the defendant may introduce evidence of the other
 person's violent or aggressive character." State v. Adam, 97
 
Hawai'i 413, 418, 38 P.3d 581, 586 (App. 2001); see also State 
v. Lui, 61 Haw. 328, 329-30 603 P.2d 151, 154 (1979) (holding
 that prior to the adoption of the Hawai' i Rules of Evidence, the 
trial court did not abuse its discretion in excluding evidence of
 victim's record of criminal violence because the facts were clear
 that the defendant, and not the victim, had been the aggressor. 
In other words, evidence of the victim's record of criminal
 violence was not pertinent to any dispute of material fact in the
 
8(...continued)
notice in advance of trial, or during trial if the court
excuses pretrial notice on good cause shown, of the date,
location, and general nature of any such evidence it intends
to introduce at trial.
 
21
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
case). In Adam, we analyzed the Hawai' i Supreme Court's decision 
regarding the same topic in State v. Basque, 66 Haw. 510, 666 
P.2d 599 (1983), and explained that in the Basque case, 
the Hawai 'i Supreme Court reversed the trial court's denial
of Basque's request to introduce a homicide victim's record
of criminal violence. There was a struggle between Basqueand the victim for Basque's gun and the evidence presentedwas unclear and conflicting as to who was the aggressor.The State's version was that Basque shot the gun and woundedthe victim and then, in a struggle for the gun, another shotkilled the victim. Basque's version was that Basque and thevictim grabbed for the gun at the same time and, during thestruggle, both shots were fired. In other words, evidence ofthe victim's record of criminal violence was pertinent tothe question of whether Basque was trying to prevent thevictim from using the gun to harm Basque. 
Id. at 417, 38 P.3d at 585. In Basque, notwithstanding the
 
general prohibition of HRE Rule 404(b), the Hawai' i Supreme Court 
stated, in relevant part, as follows:
 
In Lui, however, we treated general character evidence and
specific prior acts (including those reflected in the
victim's criminal record) the same for purposes of
corroborating a defendant's self-defense claim as to who was
the aggressor. A growing number of other courts are in
accord. As Dean Wigmore has stated: [T]here is no
substantial reason against evidencing the character (of a
deceased victim) by particular instances of violent or
quarrelsome conduct. Such instances may be very significant;
their number can be controlled by the trial court's
discretion; and the prohibitory considerations applicable to
an accused's character have here little or no force.
 
Basque, 66 Haw. at 514, 666 P.2d at 602 (citations, internal
 
quotation marks and emphasis omitted).
 
The State admits, and we agree, that there was
 
sufficient evidence presented through Bringas's testimony to
 create a factual dispute as to who was the initial aggressor in
 Bringas's confrontation with WS and CS. Therefore, pursuant to
 HRE 404(a)(2), Bringas could present evidence regarding WS and
 CS's alleged violent or aggressive characters. See Adam, 97
 
Hawai'i at 418, 38 P.3d at 586. 
22
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Nevertheless, the evidence that Bringas sought to offer
 
to prove WS and CS's alleged violent or aggressive characters
 
must still be relevant to be admissible. See HRE Rules 4019 and
 
402.10 Furthermore, even if evidence is admissible under HRE
 
Rules 401, 402, 404(a) and/or Rule 404(b), it remains subject to
 the HRE Rule 403
11 balancing test. See State v. Hilario, 139
 
Hawai'i 546, 557, 394 P.3d 776, 787 (App. 2017) (stating that 
evidence offered under HRE Rule 404(b) is still subject to
 balance test of HRE Rule 403); Renon, 73 Haw. at 38, 828 P.2d at
 1273 (same); see also State v. Pacheco, No. CAAP-12-0000960, 2014
 WL 1392905 at *5 (Haw. App. April 10, 2014) (mem. op.) (stating
 that evidence offered under Rule 404(a)(1) must still be reviewed
 with respect to HRE Rule 403); State v. McDonnell, 141 Hawai' i 
280, 293, 409 P.3d 684, 697 (2017) (even if expert testimony is
 
9 HRE Rule 401 states:
 
Rule 401. Definition of "relevant evidence" . 
"Relevant evidence" means evidence having any tendency
to make the existence of any fact that is of
consequence to the determination of the action more
probable or less probable than it would be without the
evidence.
 
10 HRE Rule 402 states:
 
Rule 402 Relevant evidence generally admissible;
irrelevant evidence inadmissible . All relevant evidence is
 
admissible, except as otherwise provided by the
Constitutions of the United States and the State of Hawaii,
by statute, by these rules, or by other rules adopted by the
supreme court. Evidence which is not relevant is not
admissible.
 
11
 HRE Rule 403 states:
 
Rule 403 Exclusion of relevant evidence on grounds of
prejudice, confusion, or waste of time . Although relevant,
evidence may be excluded if its probative value is
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice,
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless
presentation of cumulative evidence.
 
23
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
relevant and admissible under HRE Rules 401, 401, and 407, it may
 
still be excluded under HRE Rule 403); Lui, 61 Haw. at 331, 603
 
P.2d at 154 (prior to adoption of the HRE, character evidence of
 deceased must still be evaluated with reference to balancing
 principle now contained in HRE Rule 403). 
HRE Rule 403 provides that relevant evidence "may be
 
excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by
 the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or
 misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste
 of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence." In
 weighing the probative value of the evidence against the possible
 prejudicial effect, we consider
 
the strength of the evidence as to the commission of the
other crime, the similarities between the crimes, the
interval of time that has elapsed between the crimes, the
need for the evidence, the efficacy of alternative proof,
and the degree to which the evidence probably will rouse the
jury to overmastering hostility.
 
Hilario, 139 Hawai' i at 557, 394 P.3d at 787 (quoting State v. 
Behrendt, 124 Hawai' i 90, 106, 237 P.3d 1156, 1172 (2010) 
(citation omitted)). 
Bringas sought to introduce a photo that he alleges
 
demonstrates that WS and CS were in a gang, in addition to asking
 
questions of other State's witnesses regarding WS and CS's
 alleged gang history. He argued that this evidence would explain
 why Bringas was attacked by WS without provocation because gangs
 often do such things to protect their turf. At the hearing on
 the Motion in Limine, the Circuit Court observed that Bringas's
 theory relied on speculation and would likely require expert
 testimony, which Bringas did not intend to provide. The Circuit
 
24
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Court ruled that any probative value of the evidence of alleged
 
gang membership would be at best incremental to Bringas's self-
defense claim whereas the prejudice would be extreme. The
 Circuit Court precluded any evidence regarding gang membership of
 WS, CS, and the State's witnesses.
 
First, we conclude that the Circuit Court did not err
 
in concluding that the probative value of the evidence Bringas
 sought to admit to prove WS and CS were involved in gang activity
 was very slight. The evidence fell more neatly within HRE Rule
 404(b) rather than HRE Rule 404(a)(2) as membership in a gang is
 not direct evidence of a "pertinent trait of character," e.g.,
 aggressive and violent behavior. Rather, membership in a gang is
 an act from which Bringas seeks to create an inference of motive
 for WS's alleged initiation of their confrontation. We agree
 that membership in a gang could be particularly relevant if there
 was a history of gang violence between the defendant and a victim
 that explains the motive for an act of violence connected
 thereto. See, e.g., Renon, 73 Haw. at 30-39, 828 P.2d at 1270-74
 
(evidence of shooting that occurred 24 hours before charged
 conduct was relevant to show defendants were knowing participants
 in an uncharged conspiracy to kill rival gang members). In this
 case, however, the connection between WS and CS's alleged gang
 membership and their confrontations with Bringas is much more
 tenuous. There was no allegation of a previous history between
 Bringas and WS or anyone else involved in the confrontation; they
 did not know each other. There was no evidence that Bringas was
 in a rival gang or that their alleged gang had any particular
 
25
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
hostility towards anyone, including Bringas. There is no
 
evidence that WS's actions, as alleged by Bringas, had any
 relation whatsoever to his alleged membership in a gang. Rather,
 Bringas argues that WS's alleged gang membership, in and of
 itself, explains why WS attacked him without provocation because
 gangs have a general desire to control its turf. 
In light of the rather attenuated probity of the 
evidence Bringas sought to admit at trial, the Circuit Court properly considered it in light of HRE Rule 403, which permits the Circuit Court to exclude relevant evidence if, inter alia, "its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice." HRE Rule 403. Again, we remain mindful that "'the delicate balance between probative value and prejudicial effect,' . . . 'lies largely within the discretion of the trial court.'" State v. Maluia, 107 Hawai' i 20, 32, 108 P.3d 974, 986 
(2005) (quoting State v. Iaukea, 56 Haw. 343, 349, 537 P.2d 724, 729 (1975)). 
The Circuit Court found that the prejudicial effect of
 
admitting the evidence of alleged gang affiliation would be
 "extreme" and propensity evidence that carries "truly negative"
 connotations. In weighing the probative value of the sought
 evidence against the prejudicial effect, the Circuit Court
 concluded that the evidence should be precluded from trial. We
 
conclude that the Circuit Court did not abuse its discretion as
 
the probative value of the evidence was slight and the potential
 prejudicial effective was extreme.
 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Regarding the preclusion of questioning regarding
 
alleged gang membership of the State's witnesses, Bringas fails
 
to argue or even cite to the applicable Rules of Evidence
 applicable to the examination of witnesses. See, e.g., HRE Rules
 
608
12	 and 609.1.13 It does not appear that Bringas makes any
 
distinction on appeal between the gang evidence as sought to be
 admitted against the deceased victim, WS, and CS, and the State's
 other witnesses. Regardless, assuming arguendo that the evidence
 of gang membership could have been admitted to impeach the
 State's witnesses or provide evidence of bias, interest, or
 motive under the applicable rules, we conclude for the reasons
 
12	 HRE Rule 608 states, in relevant part:
 
Rule 608 Evidence of character and conduct of witness.
 
(a) Opinion and reputation evidence of character. The
credibility of a witness may be attacked or supported by
evidence in the form of opinion or reputation, but subject
to these limitations:
 
(1)	 The evidence may refer only to character for
truthfulness or untruthfulness, and
(2)	 Evidence of truthful character is admissible
 only after the character of the witness for
truthfulness has been attacked by opinion or
reputation evidence or otherwise.
(b) Specific instances of conduct. Specific
instances of the conduct of a witness, for the purpose of
attacking the witness' credibility, if probative of
untruthfulness, may be inquired into on cross-examination
of the witness and, in the discretion of the court, may be
proved by extrinsic evidence. When a witness testifies to
the character of another witness under subsection (a),
relevant specific instances of the other witness' conduct
may be inquired into on cross-examination but may not be
proved by extrinsic evidence.
 
13	 HRE Rule 609.1 states:
 
Rule 609.1 Evidence of bias, interest, or motive .
 
(a) General rule. The credibility of a witness may be
attacked by evidence of bias, interest, or motive.
 
(b) Extrinsic evidence of bias, interest,
motive. Extrinsic evidence of a witness' bias, interest,
or motive is not admissible unless, on cross-examination,
the matter is brought to the attention of the witness and
the witness is afforded an opportunity to explain or deny
the matter.
 
27
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stated above that the Circuit Court's ruling that the extreme
 
prejudicial effect of such evidence would have outweighed the
 probative value under HRE Rule 403 is equally applicable. The
 Circuit Court's exclusion of the evidence was not an abuse of
 discretion.
 V.	 CONCLUSION
 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's June 21, 2017
 
Judgment is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, October 11, 2018. 
On the briefs: Phyllis J. Hironaka,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Sonja P. McCullen,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
28
 