  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000604
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
DAYNE HENRY ALEKA GONSALVES,
a.k.a. Dayne Aleka Nakaahiki Kane Kanokaoli;
Poikauahi Apioalani, Defendant-Appellee
(Cr. Nos. 08-1-0036 and 08-1-0037)
 
and
 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
ROBERT PAUOLE PA, Defendant-Appellee
(Cr. Nos. 08-1-0271 and 08-1-0270)
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellee Dayne Gonsalves (Gonsalves) was
 
charged by Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai' i (State) with 
several criminal offenses, including impersonating a law
 
enforcement officer in the second degree (Impersonating an
 Officer), in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 710­1016.7 (1993).
1 As part of its evidence on the Impersonating an
 
1
 HRS § 710-1016.7 provides, in relevant part: 
Impersonating a law enforcement officer in the second
degree. (1) A person commits the offense of impersonating a law
(continued...)
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Officer charge, the State planned to introduce a badge it had
 
seized from Gonsalves. However, prior to trial, the Circuit
 
2
Court of the Fifth Circuit (Circuit Court)  issued an order
requiring the State to return the badge to Gonsalves. The State
 appeals from that order. 
As explained below, we vacate the
 
Circuit Court's order requiring the return of the badge. 
I.
 
Gonsalves was charged in District Court Case No. 5P107­
1720 with: (1) obstructing, in violation of HRS § 711-1105(5)(1)
 (1993 & Supp. 2012); (2) simple trespass, in violation of HRS 
§ 708-815 (1993); (3) obstructing government operations, in
 violation of HRS § 710-1010 (Supp. 2012); and (4) disorderly
 conduct, as a petty misdemeanor, in violation of HRS § 711­1101(1)(a) (Supp. 2012).
 
An arrest warrant for these charges was issued for 
Gonsalves. Gonsalves allegedly told officers of the Kaua
'i 
Police Department (KPD) involved in executing the warrant that he was a Federal Marshall. Gonsalves also presented the officers with a badge with the words "HAWAII FEDERAL MARSHALL," the number 1, and "The Polynesian Kingdom of Atooi" printed on it. The KPD seized the badge as evidence. Gonsalves was subsequently charged with Impersonating an Officer based on his use of this badge in District Court Case No. 5P107-1967. 
Gonsalves demanded a jury trial in both cases, and the
 
cases were committed to the Circuit Court for jury trial as
 
1(...continued)
enforcement officer in the second degree if, with intent to
deceive, the person pretends to be a law enforcement officer.
 
HRS § 710-1000(13) (1993) defines the term "[l]aw enforcement officer" to
mean:
 
any public servant, whether employed by the State or subdivisions
thereof or by the United States, vested by law with a duty to
maintain public order or, to make arrests for offenses or to
enforce the criminal laws, whether that duty extends to all
offenses or is limited to a specific class of offenses[.] 
2
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 
2
   
  
 
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Criminal Nos. 08-1-36 and 08-1-37. On January 20, 2009, Criminal 
Nos. 08-1-36 and 08-1-37 were consolidated by stipulation of the 
parties.3 After numerous continuances, the parties entered into 
plea negotiations.  Gonsalves's counsel and the Deputy 
Prosecuting Attorney (DPA) discussed the terms of a plea in which 
Gonsalves would plead no contest to the obstructing charge and be sentenced to a fine, with the State dismissing all other counts. The DPA, however, asserted that any plea agreement would be subject to approval of the Kaua' i Prosecuting Attorney. 
Subsequently, the State tendered a written plea offer to Gonsalves that contained the terms that had been discussed, but included an additional term which required Gonsalves to forfeit "all badges seized" to the KPD. Gonsalves refused to agree to 
this additional term. 
On May 2, 2011, Gonsalves filed a "Motion to Strike
 
Illegal Condition in Plea Offer and Then Enforce Plea Offer"
 
(Motion to Enforce). In the Motion to Enforce, Gonsalves
 
asserted that as a law enforcement officer in the Kingdom of
 
Atooi, he had the right to possess a badge identifying himself as
 a Federal Marshall in the Kingdom of Atooi. Gonsalves requested
 that the Circuit Court strike the provision of the State's plea
 offer requiring him to surrender his badge as illegal, and then
 to "enforce the plea agreement between the parties." 
The State opposed the Motion to Enforce. The State
 
asserted that its plea offer included the condition that
 Gonsalves "forfeit the badge that is evidence in this case." The
 State argued that because Gonsalves rejected this condition,
 there was no meeting of the minds regarding the plea offer and no
 plea agreement to enforce. The State argued that Gonsalves could
 not "pick and choose" which conditions of a plea offer he wanted
 to accept and then bind the State to only those conditions. 
3
 Criminal Nos. 08-1-270 and 08-1-271, which contained charges against
Robert Pauole Pa, were also consolidated with Criminal Nos. 08-1-36 and 08-1­
37. 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Circuit Court held a hearing on Gonsalves's Motion
 
to Enforce on July 13, 2011, and filed a written "Order Granting
 
in Part, and Denying in Part, [Gonsalves's Motion to Enforce]"
 (Order Regarding Motion to Enforce) on August 4, 2011. The
 Circuit Court made the following findings in its Order Regarding
 Motion to Enforce:
 
1. The Court finds that there was "no meeting of the
minds" between the parties in this case, and no acceptance
of the State's April 25, 2011, written Plea Offer, therefore
there was no plea agreement;
 
2. The Court finds that condition 4 of the State's April
25, 2011, written Plea Offer that states, "[t]he Defendant
 
agrees to forfeit all "badges" seized to the police
 
department", is illegal and against public policy.
 
(Emphasis and brackets in original.) Based on these findings,
 
the Circuit Court granted in part and denied in part Gonsalves's
 Motion to Enforce. The Circuit Court further ordered that "the
 State shall return to the Defendant Dayne Gonsalves, prior to
 trial, the 'HAWAII FEDERAL MARSHALL 1; The Polynesian Kingdom of
 Atooi' badge." (Emphasis in orginal.) 
The State filed a motion for reconsideration of the 
Circuit Court's decision.
4 The State described the circumstances 
surrounding Gonsalves's Impersonating an Officer charge as follows: Gonsalves told KPD officers that he had "just returned from the 'White House'" and had been sworn in as a "Hawai' i 
Federal Marshal[]" with the same arrest powers as KPD officers. While KPD officers were executing an arrest warrant on prior charges, Gonsalves again told the KPD officers that he was a "'Federal Marshall'" with authority that "superseded" that of the KPD, and Gonsalves opened a wallet and displayed "a very authentic appearing law enforcement badge that, in shape and size," was "very similar" to the badge being used by KPD officers. The State described the badge as follows: 
4
 The State filed its motion for reconsideration after the Circuit Court
 
issued its oral ruling at the July 13, 2011, hearing, but before the Circuit
Court memorialized its ruling in the August 4, 2011, Order Regarding Motion to
Enforce. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
The badge displayed by [Gonsalves] appears to be
chrome finish, with black lettering, has a Bald Eagle (the
symbol of the United States of America) with open wings on
the top, and reads in large bold letters, "HAWAII FEDERAL MARSHALL", with the number "1" on the bottom. In the 
interior of the badge (between the words "Federal" and"Marshall"[)], in very small lettering, it also states,
["]The Polynesian Kingdom of Atooi" wrapped around what
appears to be the coat of arms of the Kindgom of Hawai' [i],
(which, at a glance, is similar in appearance to the seal ofthe State of Hawai' i). 
(Emphasis in original.)
 
The State argued that the badge was part of the State's
 
proof on the Impersonating an Officer charge and was "material
 
evidence for trial." The State requested that the Circuit Court
 reconsider its ruling which required the State to immediately
 return the badge. 
The Circuit Court held a hearing on the State's motion
 
for reconsideration on August 9, 2011, and denied the motion for
 reconsideration. The Circuit Court, however, stayed its order
 requiring return of the badge pending a pre-trial conference set
 for August 17, 2011. In the meantime, the State filed a notice
 of appeal from the Circuit Court's order requiring the return of
 the badge pursuant to HRS § 641-13(7) (Supp. 2012), which stays
 an order for the return of property pending appeal. 
II.
 
On appeal, the State argues that the Circuit Court
 
erred in ordering the pre-trial return of the badge seized from
 Gonsalves, which the State planned to use as evidence at trial. 
The State notes that Gonsalves did not request the return of the
 badge in his Motion to Enforce and thus the Circuit Court acted
 sua sponte in ordering the return of the badge. The State also
 asserts that the Circuit Court failed to consider the State's
 interest in retaining the badge as evidence for the upcoming
 trial. We conclude that the Circuit Court erred in ordering the
 pre-trial return of the badge.
 
At the time the Circuit Court ordered the pre-trial 
return of the badge, Hawai' i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 
41(e) (1999) provided: 
5
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(e) A person aggrieved by an unlawful search and
seizure may move the court having jurisdiction to try the
offense for the return of the property, or to suppress for
use as evidence anything so obtained, or both. The judge
shall receive evidence on any issue of fact necessary to the
decision of the motion. If the motion is granted the
property shall be restored unless otherwise subject to
lawful detention and it shall not be admissible in evidence
 at any hearing or trial.
 
(Emphasis added.) Gonsalves did not contend that the State
 
obtained his badge as the result of an unlawful search or
 seizure. Therefore, HRPP Rule 41(e) did not provide a basis for
 the Circuit Court's decision. 
Prior to its amendment in 1989, the parallel Federal
 
Rules of Criminal Procedure (FRCP) Rule 41(e), like HRPP Rule
 41(e), had been limited to persons "aggrieved by an unlawful
 search and seizure." However, despite this limitation in the
 pre-1989 version of FRCP Rule 41(e), federal courts recognized
 that even property lawfully searched for and seized should be
 returned to its owner once the government no longer has a need to
 use it as evidence. See Advisory Comments Notes on FRCP Rule 41
 
(regarding the 1989 amendment to FRCP 41(e)). Similarly, in
 State v. Brighter, 1 Haw. App. 248, 252, 617 P.2d 1226, 1229
 (1980), this court recognized that "a defendant has a right to
 property lawfully seized where the government no longer has
 reason for its retention." 
In 1989, FRCP Rule 41(e) was amended to explicitly
 
authorize persons whose property had been lawfully obtained to
 move for the return of their property. FRCP Rule 41(e), as
 amended, permitted persons "aggrieved by an unlawful search and
 seizure of property or by the deprivation of property" to move
 for the property's return. (Emphasis added.) The Advisory
 Committee Notes regarding the 1989 amendment to FRCP Rule 41(e)
 state as follows: 
No standard is set forth in the rule to govern the
determination of whether property should be returned to a
person aggrieved either by an unlawful seizure or by
deprivation of the property. The fourth amendment protects
people from unreasonable seizures as well as unreasonable
searches, United States v. Place, 462 U.S. 696, 701 (1983),
 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and reasonableness under all of the circumstances must be
 
the test when a person seeks to obtain the return of
property. If the United States has a need for the property
in an investigation or prosecution, its retention of the
property generally is reasonable. But, if the United
States' legitimate interests can be satisfied even if the
property is returned, continued retention of the property
would become unreasonable.
 
In 2011, the Hawai' i Supreme Court amended HRPP Rule 
41(e), effective January 1, 2012, to incorporate the 1989 
amendment to FRCP Rule 41(e), thereby permitting persons "aggrieved . . . by the deprivation of property" to move for its return.
5 Although not applicable at the time of the Circuit 
Court's decision, the 2012 amendment to HRPP Rule 41(e) is consistent with this court's decision in Brighter. We conclude that the 2012 amendment to HRPP Rule 41(e), the Advisory Committee Notes to the 1989 amendment to FRCP Rule 41(e), and the decisions construing the 1989 amendment to FRCP Rule 41(e) (which was subsequently redesignated as FRCP Rule 41(g)) are instructive. 
Consistent with the Advisory Committee Notes to the
 
1989 amendment to FRCP Rule 41(e), we conclude that a trial
 court's decision on whether to order the return of lawfully
 obtained property must ultimately turn on the reasonableness of
 the request. As a general rule, the prosecution's retention of
 property is reasonable, and a defendant's motion for return of
 property should be denied, as long as the prosecution's "need for
 the property as evidence continues." United States v. Van 
5
 HRPP Rule 41(e) was amended effective January 1, 2012 to provide as
follows:
 
A person aggrieved by an unlawful search and seizure of
property or by the deprivation of property may move the court
having jurisdiction to try the offense for the return of the
property. The judge shall receive evidence on any issue of fact
necessary to the decision of the motion. If the motion is
 granted, the property shall be returned unless otherwise subject
to lawful detention, but the judge may impose reasonable
conditions to protect access to the property and its use in later
proceedings.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Cauwenberghe, 934 F.2d 1048, 1061 (9th Cir. 1991) (citing, United
 
States v. Van Cauwenberghe, 827 F.2d 424, 433 (9th Cir. 1987). 
As set forth in the Advisory Committee Notes to the 1989
 amendment to FRCP Rule 41(e), "[i]f the [government] has a need
 for the property in an investigation or prosecution, its
 retention of the property generally is reasonable." However, "if
 the [goverment's] legitimate interests can be satisfied even if
 the property is returned, continued retention of the property
 would become unreasonable." 
In this case, Gonsalves did not move to suppress the
 
badge, and the Circuit Court did not find that the badge had been
 unlawfully searched for or seized. The State asserts that it 
needs the badge as evidence and plans to introduce the badge at
 trial to prove the charge against Gonsalves for Impersonating an
 Officer. The State's description of the badge and the record
 supports the State's claim that the badge constitutes relevant
 and probative evidence of the Impersonating an Officer charge and
 that the State has a continuing need to retain the badge as
 evidence for trial. However, in ordering the State to return the
 badge before trial, the Circuit Court did not address the State's
 asserted need for the badge as evidence. The Circuit Court also
 did not address whether State's legitimate interests could be
 satisfied if the property were returned. Instead, the Circuit
 Court sua sponte ordered the return of the badge before trial. 
Under these circumstances, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 erred in ordering the pre-trial return of the badge to Gonsalves.
 
III.
 
We vacate the Circuit Court's order requiring the State
 
to return the "'HAWAII FEDERAL MARSHALL 1; The Polynesian Kingdom
 of Atooi'" badge to Gonsalves prior to trial, which was set forth 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
in the Order Regarding Motion to Enforce.6 We remand the case
 
for further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, January 25, 2013. 
On the briefs:
 
Tracy Murakami 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Kauai
for Plaintiff-Appellant
 Chief Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Daniel G. Hempey
(Hempey & Meyers LLP)
for Defendant-Appellee
DAYNE GONSALVES 
6
 Because the State's appeal is pursuant to HRS § 641-13(7), which only
authorized the State to appeal from the Circuit Court's pre-trial order for
the return of property, we do not address the other aspects of the Circuit
Court's Order Regarding Motion to Enforce. 
9
 