NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0001092 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KENNETH S.G.A. LEE, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
ROUTH CRABTREE OLSEN, P.S.;
DEREK W.C. WONG, Defendants-Appellees,
and
 
DOE DEFENDANTS 1-50, Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-0511)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
 
This appeal arises from the non-judicial foreclosure 
sale of residential property (Property) located on the Island of 
Hawai'i. Defendants-Appellees Routh Crabtree Olsen, P.S. and 
Derek W.C. Wong (collectively, Attorney Defendants) provided legal services to the mortgagee, Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., in conducting a non-judicial foreclosure sale of the Property. Plaintiff-Appellant Kenneth S.G.A. Lee (Lee) was the mortgagor with respect to the Property that was sold. 
Following the sale of the Property, Lee filed a
 
Complaint against the Attorney Defendants. The Complaint alleged
 that in conducting the non-judicial foreclosure sale, the
 Attorney Defendants violated the power of sale clause of the
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
subject mortgage and provisions of then-existing non-judicial
 
foreclosure statutes, particularly Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS)
 § 667-5 (Supp. 2008) and HRS § 667-7 (Supp. 2008).
1/ The
 
Complaint further alleged that the Attorney Defendants were
 
1/ At the time relevant to the non-judicial foreclosure of the Property,
HRS § 667-5 (Supp. 2008) provided in pertinent part and HRS § 667-7 (Supp.
2008) provided as follows:
 
§667-5 Foreclosure under power of sale; notice; affidavit
after sale.  (a) When a power of sale is contained in a mortgage,
and where the mortgagee, the mortgagee's successor in interest, or
any person authorized by the power to act in the premises, desires
to foreclose under power of sale upon breach of a condition of the
mortgage, the mortgagee, successor, or person shall be represented
by an attorney who is licensed to practice law in the State and is
physically located in the State. The attorney shall:
 
(1)	 Give notice of the mortgagee's, successor's, or
person's intention to foreclose the mortgage and of
the sale of the mortgaged property, by publication of
the notice once in each of three successive weeks
 (three publications), the last publication to be not
less than fourteen days before the day of sale, in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the county
in which the mortgaged property lies; and 
(2)	 Give any notices and do all acts as are authorized or
required by the power contained in the mortgage.
 
. . . .
 
(d) Any sale, of which notice has been given as aforesaid,
may be postponed from time to time by public announcement made by
the mortgagee or by some person acting on the mortgagee's behalf.
. . . The mortgagee within thirty days after selling the property
in pursuance of the power, shall file a copy of the notice of sale
and the mortgagee's affidavit, setting forth the mortgagee's acts
in the premises fully and particularly, in the bureau of
conveyances. 
§667-7 Notice, contents; affidavit.  (a) The notice of
intention of foreclosure shall contain:
 
(1)	 A description of the mortgaged property; and
 
(2)	 A statement of the time and place proposed for the
sale thereof at any time after the expiration of four
weeks from the date when first advertised.
 
(b) The affidavit described under section 667-5 may
lawfully be made by any person duly authorized to act for the
mortgagee, and in such capacity conducting the foreclosure.
 
HRS §§ 667-5 and 667-7 were repealed by the Hawai' i Legislature
effective June 28, 2012. See 2012 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 182, §§ 50, 53, 69 at 
684, 689. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
liable for unfair or deceptive acts or practices (UDAP) under HRS
 
§ 480-2 (2008).2/
 
The Attorney Defendants filed a motion to dismiss the
 
Complaint (Motion to Dismiss). The Circuit Court of the Third
 
3/
Circuit (Circuit Court)  granted the Attorney Defendants' Motion
to Dismiss without prejudice to Lee filing a motion to amend the
 Complaint. Subsequently, the Circuit Court denied Lee's Motion
 for Leave to File a First Amended Complaint, and it dismissed the
 Complaint with prejudice. On August 21, 2014, the Circuit Court
 filed a Final Judgment in favor of the Attorney Defendants.
 
I.

 
Lee appeals from the Final Judgment. On appeal, Lee 
contends that the Circuit Court erred in granting the Attorney Defendants' Motion to Dismiss. In particular, Lee argues that the Circuit Court erred in dismissing his Complaint because he sufficiently alleged causes of action against the Attorney Defendants for UDAP pursuant to HRS chapter 480 and for wrongful foreclosure based on their violation of HRS §§ 667-5 (Supp. 2008) and 667-7 (Supp. 2008). The Hawai
'i Supreme Court's recent 
decision in Hungate v. Law Office of David B. Rosen, 139 Hawai 'i 
394, 391 P.3d 1 (2017), controls our decision in this case. Based on Hungate, we conclude that the Circuit Court properly dismissed Lee's Complaint, and we affirm the Circuit Court's Final Judgment.
4/  
2/ HRS § 480-2 provides in pertinent part: "[u]nfair methods of
competition and unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the conduct of any
trade or commerce are unlawful."
 
3/ The Honorable Greg K. Nakamura presided.
 
4/ In his points of error, Lee also contends that the Circuit Court
erred in denying his Motion for Leave to File a First Amended Complaint.
However, he does not separately argue (or raise independent arguments to
support) this point of error and apparently relies on the same arguments he
raises in challenging the Circuit Court's dismissal of his Complaint. Our
 decision on Lee's challenge to the dismissal of his Complaint therefore also
resolves his challenge to the denial of his Motion for Leave to File a First
Amended Complaint. Because we conclude that the Circuit Court properly
dismissed Lee's Complaint, we necessarily reject Lee's claim that the Circuit
Court erred in denying his Motion for Leave to File a First Amended Complaint. 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
II.
 
In Hungate, the plaintiff, Hungate, alleged that the 
mortgagee bank's attorney, Rosen and his law office 
(collectively, Rosen), had wrongfully conducted a non-judicial foreclosure. Hungate, 139 Hawai
'i at 400, 391 P.3d at 7. 
Similar to this case, Hungate alleged that Rosen improperly publicized, postponed, and conducted the non-judicial foreclosure sale, in violation of HRS §§ 667-5 (Supp. 2008) and 667-7 (Supp. 2008) and the subject mortgage's power of sale clause, and that Rosen was liable for UDAP, in violation of HRS § 480-2. Id. 
The supreme court in Hungatge addressed the question of
 
"whether the requirements of former HRS § 667-5 and former HRS 
§ 667-7 impose duties that may be enforced against the attorney
 of a foreclosing mortgagee under a private right of action." Id.
 
at 405, 391 P.3d at 12. The supreme court answered this question
 in the negative and held that these statues did not create a
 cause of action against attorneys who failed to follow the
 statutes' requirements. Id. at 406-07, 391 P.3d at 13-14. The
 
supreme court concluded: "Regarding the allegations against
 Rosen, we conclude that Hungate does not have a cause of action
 against Rosen for violating statutory requirements under HRS
 chapter 667, or for his failure to adhere to the requirements of
 the mortgage's power of sale clause." Id. at 402, 391 P.3d at 9.
 
With respect to Hungate's UDAP claim against Rosen
 
under HRS § 480-2, the supreme court held that Hungate did not
 have a cause of action against Rosen under HRS § 480-2 and that
 Hungate's UDAP claim against Rosen was properly dismissed. Id.
 
at 402, 413, 391 P.3d at 9, 20.
5/ In support of this holding,
 
the supreme court emphasized the unique role played by an
 attorney in representing a client. The supreme court stated,
 "[T]he role of an attorney involves representing a client's
 
5/ The supreme court noted that Hungate had also alleged an unfair
methods of competition claim under HRS § 480-2 in his complaint and first
amended complaint, but did not dispute the dismissal of that claim in hisappeal. Hungate, 139 Hawai' i at 409 n.20, 391 P.3d at 16 n.20. Similarly, in
this case, Lee alleged an unfair methods of competition claim in hisComplaint, but does not dispute the dismissal of this claim on appeal. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interests against those of an opposing party within an adversary
 
system. Attorneys bear a duty to zealously represent clients
 'within the bounds of the law.'" Id. at 413, 391 P.3d at 20
 
(citations omitted). The supreme court further stated:
 
In other settings, we have declined to recognize a duty in
favor of a plaintiff adversely affected by an attorney'sperformance of legal services on behalf of the opposingparty. In Boning, we noted that "creation of a duty infavor of an adversary of the attorney's client would createan unacceptable conflict of interest. Not only would theadversary's interests interfere with the client's interests,the attorney's justifiable concern with being sued fornegligence would detrimentally interfere with the attorney-client relationship." Boning, 114 Hawai' i at 220, 159 P.3d
at 832. 
Permitting a party to sue his or her opponent's attorney for
UDAP under HRS § 480-2 in foreclosure actions presents asimilar issue in that an attorney's concern with being suedby a party opponent could compromise his or herrepresentation of the client. In a UDAP action, an attorneywould be especially vulnerable to suit because, for example,under HRS § 480-2 "actual deception need not be shown; thecapacity to deceive is sufficient." Keka, 94 Hawai' i at 
228, 11 P.3d at 16 (emphasis added) (citations omitted).Accordingly, a plaintiff would need only to allege thatopposing counsel has breached the statutory duty under HRS§ 480-2 "not to engage in unfair or deceptive acts orpractices in the conduct of any trade or commerce . . . in away that caused private damages[] in order to state a claimunder" HRS chapter 480. Compton, 761 F.3d at 1056. Given 
that UDAP lacks a more rigorous or precise state of mindrequirement, "even a carefully rendered opinion could, ifincorrect, have the capacity to deceive." Short v. 
Demopolis, 103 Wash.2d 52, 691 P.2d 163, 172 (1984)(Pearson, J., concurring). The attorney would therefore"have to insure the correctness of his [or her] opinions andstrategies," rendering it "virtually impossible for anattorney to effectively perform the traditional role oflegal counselor." Id. 
Id. (brackets and ellipsis points in original).
 
The supreme court concluded:
 
Similar to the negligence issue in Boning, in foreclosure
actions an attorney's justifiable concern with being sued by
the opposing party for UDAP could compromise the attorney's
ability to zealously represent his or her client.
Consequently, based on the allegations against Rosen, we
decline to recognize a UDAP claim against him by Hungate
under HRS § 480-2 in the instant foreclosure action.
 
Id. (footnote omitted).
 
Therefore, in Hungate, the supreme court declined to
recognize causes of action against the foreclosing mortgagee's
 
attorney for violating HRS § 667-5 (Supp. 2008) or HRS § 667-7
 

 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(Supp. 2008), for violating the subject mortgage's power of sale
 
clause, or for UDAP under HRS § 480-2.
 
Based on Hungate, we conclude that the Circuit Court
 
properly granted the Attorney Defendants' Motion to Dismiss in
 this case.
 
III.
 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Circuit
 
Court's Final Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 22, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
James J. Bickerton 
(Bickerton Dang)and John Francis Perkin Brandee J.K. Faria (Perkin & Faria)and Raymond C. ChoVan-Alan H. Shima (Affinity Law Group)for Plaintiff-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge 
Patricia J. McHenry
Christopher T. GoodinMichi Momose (Cades Schutte)for Defendants-Appellees. 
6
 