 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS  AND P ACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000054 16-APR-2026 08:11 AM Dkt. 33 SO 
NO. CAAP-24-0000054 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
LEANDRO LARA BICALHO, Petitioner-Appellant, 
v. 
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR OF THE COURTS, 
Respondent-Appellee. 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
HONOLULU DIVISION 
(CASE NO. 1DAA-23-00008) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and McCullen, JJ.) 
Petitioner-Appellant Leandro Lara 
Bicalho appeals from 
the District Court of the First Circuit's December 29, 2023 
"Decision and Order Affirming Administrative Revocation and 
Dismissing Appeal" and Judgment.  1
On appeal, Bicalho contends the district court was 
wrong in determining that the denial of his request to issue a 
subpoena was harmless. 
1 The Honorable Bryant G.F.Y. Zane presided.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve this 
appeal as discussed below, and affirm. 
In January 2023, Bicalho was arrested for Operating a 
Vehicle Under the Influence of an Intoxicant (
OVUII). Honolulu 
Police Department (HPD) Sergeant Jared Spiker (Sgt. Spiker) and 
HPD Officer Alvin Koike (Officer Koike) observed Bicalho 
driving, and HPD Officer C. Oallesma (Officer Oallesma) 
conducted the field sobriety test. 
Six days later, the Administrative Driver's License 
Revocation Office (ADLRO) revoked Bicalho's license. Bicalho 
requested a hearing. 
The hearing was initially scheduled for February 2023, 
but was continued several times at Bicalho's request. During that time, the Hearings Officer granted subpoenas for, among 
other things, (1) the officers' body-worn camera footage of the 
arrest and (2) Sgt. Spiker's disciplinary record "and other 
records showing his dishonesty and untruthfulness." 
By the June 2023 hearing, the Hearings Officer 
received the records related to Sgt. Spiker but the case was continued so Bicalho could request the video footage mentioned 
in State v. Su
, 147 Hawaiʻi 272, 465 P.3d 719 (2020).  To that 
end, Bicalho requested to subpoena "Steven Alm, the Honolulu 
2   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
   
 
 Prosecuting Attorney or custodian of potential discovery, for 
the 'video of the incident at the ALA MOANA HOTEL discussed in 
[Su] from State v. Thomas relating to [Sgt.] Spiker [(
Thomas 
Video)] which video has been previously provided to OVUII 
defense attorneys in cases for arrests by Spiker.'" 
The Hearings Officer denied Bicalho's request to issue 
a subpoena for the Thomas Video. However, the Hearings Officer 
"took administrative notice of [Su], specifically that 'the 
still photograph of the [Thomas Video] show[s] that, contrary to 
Officer Spiker's police report and trial testimony, Thomas did 
not have his fists clenched and was not throwing punches.'" 
(Third brackets in original.) 
During the September 2023 hearing, Bicalho argued that 
he could not properly question Sgt. Spiker without the Thomas Video. The Hearings Officer affirmed the ADLRO's revocation of 
Bicalho's license.
2 
Bicalho petitioned the district court for judicial 
review. The district court affirmed the revocation of Bicalho's 
license. 
The district court ruled that the Thomas Video was 
relevant and the request for a subpoena was properly made and 
2 The Hearings Officer affirmed the ADLRO's revocation in part, 
amending the decision by deleting the finding that Bicalho refused to submit 
to a breath or blood test and by reducing the revocation period to one year, 
ending on February 19, 2024. Refusing the breath or blood test is not an issue in this appeal. 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 not deficient and, thus, the Hearings Officer erred by denying 
the request. However, the district court further ruled that the 
Hearings Officer's error was harmless because, "[c]onsidering 
the facts and circumstances of which Officer Koike was aware at the time from his own observations and from the information 
provided to him, there existed probable cause to believe 
[Bicalho] had committed OVUII"; "[a]t the time of arrest, there 
was more than a mere suspicion that [Bicalho] had committed 
OVUII"; and "by the close of evidence there was proof by a 
preponderance of the evidence in that it was more likely than 
not that" Bicalho had committed OVUII. 
Assuming, 
arguendo, the Hearings Officer erred in 
denying Bicalho's request to issue a subpoena for the Thomas Video, the district court was correct in determining the error 
was harmless. 
When considering whether error is harmless, the 
question is whether "there is a reasonable possibility that the 
error might have contributed" to the revocation of Bicalho's 
license. See, e.g., State v. Sylva
, 153 Hawaiʻi 447, 458, 541 
P.3d 1210, 1221 (2023) (emphasis omitted). Under Hawaiʻ i Revised 
Statutes (HRS) § 291E-38(e) (2020), the administrative 
revocation shall be affirmed only if (1) reasonable suspicion 
existed to stop the vehicle, (2) probable cause existed to 
4   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
    
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 believe the driver was OVUII, and (3) there was a preponderance 
of the evidence showing the driver was OVUII.3 
Here, Bicalho argues he needed the Thomas Video to 
properly impeach Sgt. Spiker. Thus, we look at whether there was a reasonable possibility that the failure to impeach 
Sgt. Spiker might have contributed to the revocation of 
Bicalho's license. See, e.g., Sylva, 153 Hawaiʻ i at 458, 541 
P.3d at 1221. To do this, we disregard the evidence based on 
Sgt. Spiker's observations and determine whether the evidence 
based on Officers Koike's and Oallesma's observations supported 
the Hearings Officer's decision. 
Officer Koike observed Bicalho driving at 3:00 in the 
morning with no headlights on. Officer Koike then saw Bicalho 
"cross over a single solid white line" from lane 2 to lane 1 and 
"immediately cross back into lane 2 unsafely, cutting off the police blue and white vehicle." 
Based on Officer Koike's 
3 HRS § 291E-38(e), "Administrative hearing; procedure; decision," 
provides in relevant part: 
(e) The director shall affirm the administrative 
revocation only if the director determines that: 
(1) There existed reasonable suspicion to stop the 
vehicle . . . .; 
(2) There existed probable cause to believe that the respondent operated the vehicle while under 
the influence of an intoxicant; and 
(3) The evidence proves by a preponderance that: 
(A) The respondent operated the vehicle while 
under the influence of an intoxicant[.] 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 observations, there was reasonable suspicion to stop Bicalho. 
State v. Alvarez, 138 Hawaiʻ i 173, 182, 378 P.3d 889, 898 (2016) 
("To justify an investigative stop, . . . the police officer 
must be able to point to specific and articulable facts which, 
taken together with rational inferences from those facts, 
reasonably warrant that intrusion."); State v. Kaleohano, 99 
Hawaiʻi 370, 378, 56 P.3d 138, 146 (2002) (explaining that 
initial stop was appropriate where defendant was swerving and 
crossing double center line). 
When Officer Koike approached Bicalho, Officer Koike 
"immediately detected a strong odor of alcoholic type beverage emanating from [Bicalho's] breath" and observed his "eyes to 
[be] watery and glassy" and his "speech to be slurred." 
Similarly, Officer Oallesma "observed a strong odor of alcohol 
on [Bicalho's] breath and his eyes appeared red, watery, and 
glassy." Officer Oallesma also observed that Bicalho "had a 
hard time maintaining his balance." Bicalho told Officer 
Oallesma "he had two to three beers." 
Officer Oallesma conducted the field sobriety test. 
As to the Horizontal Gaze Nystagmus Test, Bicalho "exhibited six out of a possible six clues." 
As to the Walk and Turn Test, 
Bicalho "exhibited a total of five clues out of a possible eight." And as to the One Leg Stand Test, Bicalho "exhibited a 
total of three clues out of a possible four." Based on Officer 
6
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 Koike's and Officer Oallesma's observations, there was probable 
cause to believe Bicalho committed OVUII. State v. Ontai, 84 
Hawaiʻi 56, 63, 929 P.2d 69, 76 (1996) ("Probable cause is 
established by 'a state of facts as would lead a person of 
ordinary caution or prudence to believe and conscientiously 
entertain a strong suspicion of guilt of the accused.'" (quoting 
State v. Chung, 75 Haw. 398, 409-10, 862 P.2d 1063, 1070 
(1993)). 
After disregarding Sgt. Spiker's observations, the 
totality of Officer Koike's and Officer Oallesma's observations nonetheless showed it was more probable than not that Bicalho operated his vehicle while under the influence of an intoxicant. 
Coyle v. Compton
, 85 Hawaiʻi 197, 202, 940 P.2d 404, 409 
(App. 1997) ("Preponderance of the evidence is defined as 'proof 
which leads the jury to find that the existence of the contested fact is more probable than its nonexistence.'"); 
State v. 
Mitchell
, 94 Hawaiʻi 388, 399, 15 P.3d 314, 325 (App. 2000) ("The 
testimonies of the police officers painted a classic portrait of 
intoxication. [The defendant]'s breath was redolent of alcohol. 
His speech was slurred. His eyes were red, bloodshot and 
watery. . . . He had difficulty walking. He was swaying and 
unsteady on his feet; indeed, he had difficulty standing and 
instead leaned against his vehicle."). 
7   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
 
 Thus, the district court was correct in holding that 
the Hearings Officer's error (if any) was harmless. Cf.
Oyadomari v. Admin. Dir. of Cts.
, 123 Hawaiʻ i 312, 234 P.3d 694, 
No. 29918, 2010 WL 2904672, at *3 (App. July 26, 2010) (mem. 
op.) (applying harmless error to hearings officer's denial of a 
request to issue a subpoena). 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the district court's 
December 29, 2023 "Decision and Order Affirming Administrative 
Revocation and Dismissing Appeal" and Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, April 16, 2026. 
On the briefs: 
 
Earle A. Partington, 
for Petitioner-Appellant. 
 
Randall S. Nishiyama, 
Kodai S. Okano, 
Alyssa-Marie Yukiko Kau, Deputy Attorneys General, 
for Respondent-Appellee. /s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
Presiding Judge 
 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka Associate Judge 
 
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen Associate Judge 
8 