NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000494
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI#I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
AUSTIN H. ROSA, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 5CPC-17-0000201)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Austin H. Rosa ( Rosa) appeals from
the May 17, 2018 Judgment of Conviction and Sentence ( Judgment)
entered against him in the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit
(Circuit Court ).  1
On February 7, 2018, Rosa pled guilty to one count of
Resisting an Order to Stop a Motor Vehicle in the First Degree
(Resisting Order to Stop First ) in violation of Hawaii Revised
1The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Statutes ( HRS) ยง 710-1026.9(1) (Supp. 2018).   Rosa was sentenced
to a five-year term of imprisonment.2
In his Opening Brief, Rosa raises a single point of
error, contending that his constitutional right to a speedy trial
was violated because the trial court failed to colloquy Rosa to
determine whether he was intelligently, knowingly, and
voluntarily waiving his right to a speedy trial by agreeing to
the withdrawal of his attorney and the continuance of his trial
date.  
We note that, although Rosa has been represented by
counsel throughout this appellate proceeding, two weeks after the
filing of the Opening Brief, Rosa (personally) filed a
handwritten document entitled Supplemental Amended Opening Brief 
2HRS ยง 710-1026.9 provides:
ยง 710-1026.9  Resisting an order to stop a motor
vehicle in the first degree.  (1)  A person commits the
offense of resisting an order to stop a motor vehicle in the
first degree if the person:
(a)  Intentionally fails to obey a direction of a law
enforcement officer, acting under color of the
law enforcement officer's official authority, to
stop the person's motor vehicle; and
(b)  
While intentionally fleeing from or attempting
to elude a law enforcement officer:
(i)  Operates the person's motor vehicle in
reckless disregard of the safety of other
persons; or
(ii)  Operates the person's motor vehicle in
reckless disregard of the risk that the
speed of the person's vehicle exceeds:
(A)  The applicable state or county speed
limit by thirty miles per hour or
more; or
(B)  Eighty miles per hour or more,
irrespective of the applicable state
or county speed limit.
For purposes of this section, "the applicable state or
county speed limit" shall have the same meaning as in
section 291C-105.
(2)  Resisting an order to stop a motor vehicle in the
first degree is a class C felony.
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
of Defendant-Appellant ( Supplemental Brief), in which he sought
to raise additional points of error, as well as to supplement
arguments made in what Rosa refers to as the "Rosa Flores brief." 
Rosa Flores, Esq. is Rosa's appellate counsel in this case.  No
motion has been filed for withdrawal and/or substitution of
counsel, for leave to proceed as a self-represented party, or to
allow the filing of a supplemental brief.  The filing of the
Supplemental Brief was not authorized under the Hawai #i Rules of
Appellate Procedure.  Under these circumstances, this court will
not address the merits of additional arguments stated in the
Supplemental Brief.  Our ruling on the Supplemental Brief is
without prejudice to Rosa raising these arguments in a petition
for post-conviction relief, which may be filed pursuant to Rule
40 of the Hawai#i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP ).  These
arguments shall not be considered waived pursuant to HRPP Rule
40(a)(3).
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Rosa's point of error as follows:
Rosa contends that the Circuit Court should have
engaged in a colloquy with him to ensure that "he was aware that
he was relinquishing a fundamental right to a speedy trial"
before the court granted the Motion to Withdraw as Counsel, to
Have Substitute Counsel Appointed, and to Continue Trial Date
(Motion to Withdraw) filed by Rosa's attorney, Deputy Public 
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Defender Sam Jajich ( DPD Jasich ) on November 7, 2017.  In his
Declaration, DPD Jasich averred, inter alia , that he had
withdrawn from representing Rosa in another case based on
irreconcilable differences and that, based on their history, DPD
Jajich was unable to effectively represent Rosa and his office
was likewise unable to represent Rosa. 
The Motion to Withdraw was heard at the trial
call/hearing held on November 13, 2017.  At the hearing, DPD
Jajich discussed with the court, among other things:
[W]hen we discussed the matter at pretrial conference,
I think I told your Honor the situation that I had discussed
continuing this trial date with Mr. Rosa.  He indicated to
me at that time that he wanted to continue it, but this
morning he told me that he wanted to assert his right to
speedy trial, so I just wanted to bring those two matters to
your attention. 
THE COURT:  Okay.  And trial was set for today. 
MR. JAJICH:
  Yes that's correct. 
THE COURT:  Okay. So, Mr. Rosa, Mr. Jajich has filed a
motion to withdraw as your counsel.  Are you in favor of
that or against that?
THE DEFENDANT:  In favor of that. 
THE COURT:  Okay. And is the State taking any
position? 
[THE PROSECUTOR]:  No, your Honor. 
THE COURT:  All right.  Then the Court is granting
that motion. 
Mr. Rosa, today was set as your jury trial.  With Mr.
Jajich withdrawing as your attorney, we're obviously not
going to trial today so the trial will have to be continued
and this is to afford your new attorney an opportunity to
get brought up to speed and to discuss with you any trial
strategies.
As the hearing continued, Rosa was somewhat equivocal
about newly-appointed counsel, who also represented Rosa in
another matter, with Rosa saying that he might hire private
counsel in both matters, as well as saying that he was hoping the 
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
court might appoint someone else.  After informing Rosa that he
did not get to select appointed counsel, the court informed Rosa
that the trial would be continued to April 9, 2018.  Rosa then
inquired:
THE DEFENDANT:  Is that still a speedy trial, though? 
THE COURT:  That is the next available date. 
THE DEFENDANT:  That's not within six months, though. 
THE COURT:  Well, the way this works, Mr. Rosa, is the
State has six months to take you to trial from the time that
you're formally charged.  You're correct about that.  But
there are exclusions to that time.  One of the exclusions is
when you change your attorney.  That's not the prosecutor's
fault if it doesn't work out with an attorney and you got to
get another attorney.  So it keeps getting pushed back. 
Okay. 
THE DEFENDANT:  Okay. 
THE COURT:  All right.  Anything further?  
THE DEFENDANT:  No.  
THE COURT:  Okay. 
Thereafter, at a February 7, 2018 change of plea
hearing, as part of a global plea, Rosa pled guilty to Resisting
Order to Stop First.  During the plea hearing, the Circuit Court
conducted a change of plea colloquy, including asking Rosa
whether he understood that by pleading guilty, he was giving up
the "constitutional right to a speedy and public trial by a jury
or a judge?"  Rosa responded, "Yes, your Honor."  The court later
asked Rosa whether he understood that, by entering a guilty plea,
he would not have an opportunity to exercise the rights that the
court just went over with him, and Rosa responded, "yes."  Rosa
further stated that he had no questions on the rights that he 
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
would be giving up and that he had had an opportunity to discuss
his case with counsel, had received advice from counsel, and that
he was satisfied with his counsel's advice.
A guilty plea waives a defendant's constitutional right
to a speedy trial.  State v. McCoy, 51 Haw. 34, 35, 449 P.2d 127,
128-29 (1968) (citation omitted); see also Garcia v. State, Nos.
CAAP-16-0000062 and CAAP-16-0000097 (consol.), 2019 WL 76937, *2
(Haw. App. Jan. 2, 2019) (SDO).  At no time has Rosa sought to
set aside his guilty plea or argued that there is a basis for
doing so.  Here, as discussed above, the record indicates that
Rosa understood that he was giving up his constitutional right to
a speedy and public trial when he entered his plea.  "Generally,
a guilty plea made voluntarily and intelligently precludes a
defendant from later asserting any nonjurisdictional claims,
including constitutional challenges to the pretrial proceedings." 
State v. Domingo, 82 Hawai #i 265, 267, 921 P.2d 1166, 1168 (1996)
(internal quotation marks, brackets and bracketed text omitted)
(citing State v. Morin, 71 Haw. 159, 162, 785 P.2d 1316, 1318
(1990)).  Therefore, we conclude that Rosa waived his
constitutional right to a speedy trial when he pled guilty in
this case.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Accordingly, the Circuit Court's May 17, 2018 Judgment
is affirmed.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai #i, November 27, 2019.
On the briefs:
Rosa Flores,
(Greg Ryan and Associates),
for Defendant-Appellant,
(Austin H. Rosa,
Defendant-Appellant, pro se,
filing Supplemental Amended
  Opening Brief).Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Tracy Murakami,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
County of Kauai,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Associate Judge
7