 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
    
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I  REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals 
CAAP-22-0000639 
20-JUN-2025 
07:54 AM 
Dkt. 81 SO 
NO.  CAAP-22-0000639
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS  
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I  
STATE OF HAWAI‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
KHAMTAY K. MOUNSENA, Defendant-Appellant  
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT  COURT OF THE FIRST  CIRCUIT  
HONOLULU  DIVISION  
(CASE NO. 1DCC-22-0002426)  
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION  ORDER  
(By: Hiraoka, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendant-Appellant Khamtay K. Mounsena (Mounsena) 
appeals from the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order 
(Judgment), filed on October 20, 2022 in the District Court of 
the First Circuit (district court).1 
On March 17, 2022, the State of Hawaiʻi (State) filed a 
Complaint charging Mounsena with the offense of Assault in the 
Third Degree in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 707-712(1)(a) (2014). Following a bench trial, the district 
1 The Honorable Michael A. Marr presided.   
 
 
 
     
  
 
    
 
 
   
  
   
 
  
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
court found Mounsena guilty of the charged offense, and 
sentenced Mounsena to one week in jail. This appeal followed. 
Mounsena raises two points of error on appeal, 
contending that: (1) "[t]he district court abused its discretion 
in sentencing Mounsena to jail"; and (2) "[t]he district court's 
ultimate Tachibana colloquy was defective." 
Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration 
to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we resolve Mounsena's points of error as follows: 
(1) Mounsena first contends that the district court 
abused its discretion by sentencing Mounsena to one week in jail 
on the grounds that: (1) "[Mounsena] was a male who injured a 
female," and "a message needed to be sent to the [Laotian] 
community that such conduct will be punished"; (2) "the 
[district] court erroneously found that . . . despite [the 
Complaining Witness' (CW)] conduct, there was 'absolutely no 
provocation,'" and "Mounsena . . . saw [the CW's] injuries but 
did not help her"; and (3) "Mounsena's exercise of his right to 
trial took three days (i.e., wasted the court's time)." 
Pursuant to HRS § 706-606 (2014), a trial court 
considers  the following factors in imposing a criminal 
sentence:  
(1)  The nature and circumstances of the offense  and the 
history and characteristics of the defendant;  
2   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2) The need for the sentence imposed: 
(a) To reflect the seriousness of the offense, to 
promote respect for law, and to provide just 
punishment for the offense; 
(b) To afford adequate deterrence to criminal 
conduct; 
(c) To protect the public from further crimes of 
the defendant; and 
(d) To provide the defendant with needed 
educational or vocational training, medical 
care, or other correctional treatment in the 
most effective manner; 
(3) The kinds of sentences available; and 
(4) The need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities 
among defendants with similar records who have been 
found guilty of similar conduct. 
(Emphasis added.) 
A sentencing court has broad discretion in its 
consideration of the above factors, and in imposing a sentence. 
"The weight to be given the factors set forth in HRS §  706-606 
in imposing a sentence is a matter generally left to the 
discretion of the sentencing court, taking into consideration 
the circumstances of each case." State v. Sandoval, 149 Hawai‘i 
221, 232,  487 P.3d 308, 319 (2021) (cleaned up). We review the 
district court's sentencing decision for abuse of discretion. 
See  State v. Barnes, 145 Hawai‘i 213, 217, 450 P.3d 743, 747 
(2019) ("In general, the applicable standard of review in 
sentencing matters  is whether the [sentencing] court committed a 
plain and manifest abuse of discretion in its decision.") 
(cleaned up).  
3   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
At the sentencing hearing, the district court engaged 
in the following exchange with Mounsena: 
THE COURT:  . . .  Sir, on the one hand, going in your 
favor, you don't have a record and you're 55.  
Going against you is the crime of assault against a 
woman. And in my view, she didn't do anything to provoke 
you. And she's a lot smaller than you. I guess I mean 
she's only about 110 pounds. Maybe not even that.  
 How much do you weigh, sir?  
[MOUNSENA]: 180. 
THE COURT: That's going to be one reason why you put 
your hand on her, even with a little bit of force, it's 
going to result in her maybe falling.  
The worst thing that I have -- that -- rather, the 
worst thing that came out of the evidence was the fact that 
you saw her injuries, but you said she got what she 
deserved.  Would you like to say anything regarding that?  
[MOUNSENA]: No, nothing. I just want to say 
something, apologize for her for the accident. 
THE COURT: See, with that -- with that type of 
mentality, thinking that you can put your hand on 
somebody's shoulder, force -- force them to fall, cause 
severe injury, and then say the person got what they 
deserved, indicates that you might be a danger to society. 
You gotta remember this is a small female that's about 110 
pounds.  And you said you're 180?  
The Court doesn't believe that jail would be 
inappropriate. The Court is --  has considered the fact 
that he's never been to jail before. The Court doesn't 
want [Mounsena] to think that he can go around and -- and 
push people, so to speak, or touch them, in his words, and 
have them injure themselves and then think that they got 
what they deserved without a consequence after a three-day 
trial.  
If the Court doesn't impose jail, he's going to think 
that there's no serious consequence for injuring another 
person if he thinks -- if they get what he -- they deserve.  
The only thing she did to provoke him was to get into 
an argument with his girlfriend. That's not a reason to -- 
to cause injury like that. If she was a little bit too 
loud, drinking and swearing, that type of conduct exhibited 
by [Mounsena]  is not reason to assault either. There's 
absolutely no provocation.   He could have reasonably talked 
to her if he wanted to. But that's evidently something 
that did not satisfy him. He did talk to her a little bit, 
I believe. At least that's what he wanted to do.  But he 
ended up pushing her instead.  
So the Court's going to order jail one week given 
that he doesn't have a record. If he had a record, it 
would be a lot longer than that. But the Court believes 
4   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
    
  
    
  
 
   
 
    
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that jail is appropriate. It needs to -- there needs to be 
a deterrence. And there has to be a message to the 
community that you can't go around and push somebody, 
particularly if a person is a female and a lot smaller than 
you and you are a male, and then believe that they got what 
they deserved. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The trial transcript reflects that the district court 
considered, inter alia, the "nature and circumstances" of the 
offense and Mounsena's "history and characteristics," as well as 
the needs to "protect the public," promote "respect for law," 
provide a "just punishment," and ensure "adequate deterrence." 
The record provides no support for Mounsena's contention that he 
was sentenced to one week in jail based on his or the CW's 
gender, or because of his race. The district court brought up 
gender solely in the context of emphasizing the heightened risk 
of harm posed by the 180-pound Mounsena "pushing" the much 
smaller 110-pound CW. The district court did not reference 
Mounsena's race. The district court identified the need to send 
"a message to the community"; in doing so, the district court 
did not specifically identify a need to send that message to the 
Laotian community. From a plain reading of the transcript, it 
appears that the district court determined that "pushing" 
another person — thereby causing injury to that person — is a 
serious criminal offense, and that jail time was necessary to 
send a deterrent message to Mounsena and "the community" at 
large. 
5   
 
 
 
   
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The district court explained that it imposed a  
sentence of  one  week in jail, in part, because Mounsena had 
pushed the CW without provocation, and had expressed at trial 
that the CW "got what she deserved."   The district court noted  
that  "[t]he only thing [the CW] did to provoke [Mounsena] was to 
get into an argument with his girlfriend," and  that the CW being 
"a little bit too loud, drinking and swearing" did not justify 
Mounsena's violent response.   The record reflects that the 
district court balanced the seriousness of the offense with the 
mitigating factor that Mounsena has no criminal record. The 
district court explained to Mounsena that "[i]f he had a 
record," the sentence imposed "would be a lot  longer than"  one 
week.    
On this record, we determine that the district court 
did not abuse its discretion in imposing a sentence of one week 
in jail, consistent with its consideration of the sentencing 
factors set forth in HRS § 706-606. 
(2) Mounsena next  contends that the district court's 
ultimate Tachibana  colloquy  was defective because Mounsena's 
election to testify was not "knowing, voluntary, and 
intelligent."   We review the sufficiency of a Tachibana  colloquy 
under the right/wrong standard, looking at "the totality of the 
facts and circumstances"  of the case. State v. Celestine, 
142  Hawai‘i 165, 169,  171, 415 P.3d 907, 911,  913 (2018).  
6   
 
 
 
  
   
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
A defendant in a criminal case has a fundamental right 
to testify, or not to testify, in their own defense. To protect 
this right, a trial court is required, inter alia, to engage the 
defendant in an on-the-record "ultimate colloquy" — i.e., "a 
verbal exchange between the judge and the defendant in which the 
judge ascertains the defendant's understanding of the 
proceedings and of the defendant's rights" to testify or not to 
testify. Id. at 170, 415 P.3d at 912 (cleaned up). "As part of 
this inquiry, the trial court elicits responses as to whether 
the defendant intends to not testify, whether anyone is forcing 
the defendant not to testify, and whether the decision to not 
testify is the defendant's." Id. at 170-71, 415 P.3d at 912-13 
(citation omitted). 
Here, Mounsena elected to testify. The Hawai‘i Supreme 
Court has instructed "that trial courts are required to engage 
in an on-the-record colloquy with a defendant when the defendant 
chooses to testify to ensure that a waiver of the right not to 
testify is knowing, intelligent, and voluntary." State v. 
Torres, 144 Hawaiʻi 282, 294-95, 439 P.3d 234, 246-47 (2019). 
"The implication of such a requirement merely requires the trial 
court to give the Tachibana colloquy to a defendant whether or 
not the defendant elects to testify." Id. at 295, 439 P.3d at 
247. 
7   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The record reflects that the district court engaged in 
an extensive colloquy with  Mounsena  that was interspersed with 
two  recesses:  
THE COURT:  . . .  Mr. Mounsena, do you understand -- 
firstof all, [defense counsel], you discussed your -- Mr. 
-- with Mr. Mounsena his Tachibana  rights; correct?  
 [DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Yes, Your Honor.  
 THE COURT:  Okay.   
 
 [MOUNSENA]:  Yes, Your Honor.  
 THE COURT:  Sir, I asked you these questions or 
really similar questions on the hearing on the first day of 
this trial. I'm going to ask you the same, if not similar, 
questions now.  
Do you understand that you have a right to testify 
and nobody can tell you you cannot testify? 
[MOUNSENA]: Yes, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: You understand that includes your own 
attorney, [defense counsel]? 
THE INTERPRETER: I'm sorry. Can you please speak 
louder? 
THE COURT: Yeah. Do you understand that includes 
your own attorney, [defense counsel]? 
[MOUNSENA]: Yes, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: So what would happen if you wanted to 
testify but [defense counsel] told you you could not 
testify? Would you get to testify or do you have to listen 
to [defense counsel]? 
[MOUNSENA]: Okay. No. Nothing. Nothing. 
THE COURT: That wasn't my question. 
Oh, okay. What we're going to do -- I want the 
record to be clear that you're not telling him the answer. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Oh, no, no, no. Sorry. 
THE COURT: And you just did essentially. And so 
what we're going to do is we're going to take just a five-
minute recess. I'm going to give you time to talk to him 
about his Tachibana rights again because maybe it was --
you know, second time around the first day of the --
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I can talk to him if you want. 
8   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
    
 
    
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Okay. Yeah. We'll take a five -minute 
recess and then I'll start from the beginning again. Okay? 
Thank you. 
(A recess was taken.) 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Thank you, Judge. 
THE COURT: Thank you. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: We're ready for the colloquy. 
THE COURT: And [defense counsel], the reason why 
it's important that the words come from Mr. Mounsena and 
not you is because there's a Supreme Court case that 
reversed a judge where the judge didn't -- or counsel 
answered for the defendant. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Yes, Your Honor. I understand. 
Thank you. 
THE COURT: Yeah. Okay. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Thank you for the time to talk. 
THE COURT: Thank you. 
So Mr. Mounsena, I'm going to start over again. All 
right? You understand that you have the right to testify? 
Nobody can tell you you cannot testify, including your 
attorney? 
[MOUNSENA]: Yes, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Okay. So what would happen if you wanted 
to testify but your attorney didn't want you to testify? 
Would you have to listen to your attorney, or would you get 
to testify? 
[MOUNSENA]: I have the right to testify on my own. 
THE COURT: Okay. That wasn't my question. But 
would you have to -- to listen to your attorney, or would 
you get to testify? 
[MOUNSENA]: Yes. I don't have to listen to my 
attorney. But then -- yeah. I have to -- I have to 
testify on my own. 
THE COURT: That's right. Now, do you understand 
that if you elect to testify, the prosecutor can ask you 
questions? 
[MOUNSENA]: Okay. 
THE COURT: Okay. Do you understand? 
9   
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[MOUNSENA]: I understand. 
THE COURT: Okay. Do you also understand that you 
have the right not to testify? 
[MOUNSENA]: I understand. Yes. 
THE COURT: Okay. Do you understand if you exercise 
the right not to testify, the Court cannot infer from your 
decision anything negative whatsoever? 
[MOUNSENA]: Yes. Yes, Your Honor . 
THE COURT: Okay. Do you understand in both 
situations, the right to testify and the right not to 
testify, the burden of proof is on the State to prove 
beyond a reasonable doubt that you're guilty? 
[MOUNSENA]: Can you please repeat, Your Honor? 
THE COURT: Okay. Now that you know what your right 
to testify and your right not to testify is, do you 
understand in both situations the burden of proof --
[MOUNSENA]: So what's the difference between the 
right and with no right? What's the difference between the 
two? 
THE COURT: I just explained it to you. Would you 
like to speak to your attorney about it again? 
[MOUNSENA]: (Indiscernible). 
THE COURT: We'll take a five -minute recess again. 
[Defense counsel], please talk to your client. 
(A recess was taken.) 
THE COURT: Thank you, [defense counsel]. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Thank you, Your Honor. Yes, 
we're ready. 
THE COURT: Okay. So Mr. Mounsena, I'm going to ask 
you the questions again. We'll start all over. All right? 
Okay. Do you understand that you have a right to testify, 
nobody can tell you you cannot testify, including your own 
attorney? 
[MOUNSENA]: Yes. Understood, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Okay. So if you wanted to testify, 
[defense counsel] told you you cannot testify, will you get 
to testify or would you have to listen to [defense 
counsel]? 
10   
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
     
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[MOUNSENA]: Yes, Your Honor. Understood. 
THE COURT: Yeah. But that wasn't my question, sir. 
My question was -- please listen carefully. If you wanted 
to testify and [defense counsel] told you you could not 
testify, would you get to testify or would you have to 
listen to [defense counsel]? 
[MOUNSENA]: Okay. I have to listen to her because 
she's my witness, but I want to testify on my own as well. 
THE COURT: No. You don't have to listen to [defense 
counsel]. That's vague and ambiguous. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: He got confused with [ a witness] 
and [defense counsel]. I think that's why he got confused. 
THE COURT: That's fine. Okay. I --
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: [A witness] is the witness that's 
why. So I think he got confused with the two names. 
THE COURT: Okay. I'll ask you again. Did -- if you 
wanted to testify, but [defense counsel] told you you 
couldn't testify, would you get to testify -- would you get 
to testify or would you have to listen to [defense 
counsel]? [Defense counsel] is your attorney. 
THE INTERPRETER: Oh, [defense counsel]? Okay. 
[Defense counsel] and [a witness]. The name is so close to 
each other. 
THE COURT: Yeah. 
[MOUNSENA]: Okay. I understand that I have the 
right to testify on my own --
THE COURT: Okay. 
[MOUNSENA]: -- without listening to her. 
THE COURT: That's right. Now, do you understand 
that if you elect to testify, the State can ask you 
questions? 
[MOUNSENA]: Okay. Yes, Your Honor. Okay. 
THE COURT: You also understand that you have the 
right not to testify? 
[MOUNSENA]: Okay. I have the right to testify. No. 
I want to testify. 
THE COURT: Okay. But --
[MOUNSENA]: Who told me that I don't have the right 
and stop me from testifying? 
11   
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: I'm sorry. What did you say? 
[MOUNSENA]: Okay. I want to testify. 
THE COURT: Okay. That's fine. But I -- I want you 
to -- we're not done with my questioning. Okay? Please 
interpret. 
THE INTERPRETER: Okay. 
[MOUNSENA]: Yes, Your Honor. Okay. 
THE COURT: Okay. Do you understand that you have 
the right not to testify? 
[MOUNSENA]: I don't understand your question. 
THE COURT: Do you understand -- do you understand 
that -- I'll say it again. Maybe you didn't hear me. Do 
you understand that you have the right not to testify? In 
other words, you don't have to say anything during this 
trial. 
[MOUNSENA]: Why do you see [sic] that I have the 
right? 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Can you also interpret the next 
thing that he said? 
THE INTERPRETER: I'm so sorry. Can you please 
repeat that, Your Honor? The last part? 
THE COURT: In other words, you have -- you have the 
right not to testify. And that's kind of like saying you 
don't have to say anything. You understand that? 
[MOUNSENA]: Yes. Understood, sir. 
THE COURT: Okay. Now, do you understand that if you 
elect not to testify, the Court cannot hold your decision 
against you in any way whatsoever? 
[MOUNSENA]: Understood. 
THE COURT: Okay. Do you understand that in both 
situations -- the right to testify and the right not to 
testify -- you have -- the burden of proof is on the State 
to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that you're guilty? 
[MOUNSENA]: Yes. Yes, Your Honor. 
THE COURT: Okay. Now, have you made a decision as 
to what you want to do to exercise your right to testify or 
your right not to testify? 
[MOUNSENA]: I want to testify. 
12   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
   
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
THE COURT: Okay. Please take the stand and be sworn 
in. 
(Emphasis added.)  
As reflected in the above colloquy, the district court 
ascertained  that  Mounsena understood  that he had the  right  to 
testify or  not  testify, that he had this right regardless  of his 
counsel's advice, that his decision could not be held against 
him in any way, that the prosecutor could cross-examine him  if 
he chose to testify, and that, irrespective of his decision to 
testify or not testify, the State had the burden of proving his 
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.  
Mounsena contends that his language barrier, which 
required the assistance of an interpreter, constituted a 
"salient fact" that affected Mounsena's "knowing, intelligent, 
and voluntary" waiver of his right not to testify. 
The presence of a "salient fact" underscores the 
importance of the court's colloquy as a procedural 
safeguard that protects a defendant's right to testify or 
to not testify. "Salient facts," such as mental illness or 
language barriers, require that a court effectively engage 
the defendant in a dialogue that will effectuate the 
rationale behind the colloquy and the on-the-record waiver 
requirements as set forth in Tachibana. 
State v. Han, 130 Hawai‘i 83, 92, 306 P.3d 128, 137 (2013) 
(cleaned up). The record reflects that the district court made 
considerable efforts to "effectively engage" Mounsena, such that 
language was not a barrier to Mounsena's understanding of his 
13   
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
rights, and so as to "effectuate the rationale behind the 
colloquy and the on-the-record waiver requirements." 
On this record, we conclude that the district court 
conducted a proper Tachibana colloquy, and that the district 
court was not wrong in finding that Mounsena knowingly, 
intelligently, and voluntarily exercised his right to testify 
and waived his right not to testify. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the Judgment. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, June 20,  2025. 
On the briefs:  /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka  
 Presiding Judge  
Phyllis J. Hironaka,   
Deputy Public Defender,  /s/ Karen T. Nakasone  
for Defendant-Appellant.  Associate Judge  
  
Loren J. Thomas,  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,  Associate Judge  
City and County of Honolulu,   
for Plaintiff-Appellee.  
14 