NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-14-0000588
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
DEREK ROBERT LEEK, Petitioner-Appellee, v.
DANIELLE ALINE FURTADO, Respondent-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-P NO. 12-1-6214)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Fujise, JJ.)
 
Respondent-Appellant Danielle Aline Furtado (Furtado)
 
appeals from the "Order Denying In Part the Motion To/For: Relief
 
After Judgment or Order and Declaration," entered March 13, 2014
 in the Family Court of the First Circuit
1
 (family court).
 
On appeal, Furtado contends the family court erred in
 
denying her January 24, 2014 "Motion for Relief After Judgment Or
 Order And Declaration" (Motion for Relief), requesting the family
 
court suspend Petitioner-Appellee Derek Robert Leek's (Leek)
 
visits with Furtado and Leek's child (Child) until he obtained a
 
suitable residence.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
Furtado and Leek have one child together, Child, born
 
in 2012. 
On September 20, 2013, Furtado filed a petition for an
 
order of protection against Leek, and the family court issued a
 
temporary restraining order (TRO) prohibiting Leek from having
 
contact with Furtado and Child.
 
On September 25, 2013, following a trial that took
 
place on June 4 and 5, 2013, the family court entered a "Judgment
 
1
 The Honorable Matthew J. Viola presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Paternity and Order"2
 (Visitation Order) regarding custody,
 
visitation, and child support. The family court awarded Furtado:
 
(1) sole legal custody of the Child, with specified exceptions,
 and (2) sole physical custody of the Child, subject to Leek's
 visitation rights. Specifically, the Visitation Order indicated
 that "[u]ntil Child is 6 years old, Child will visit [Leek] in
 the total calendar months of June, August, and December[.]" The
 Visitation Order also found that Leek had perpetrated domestic
 violence against Furtado.
 
Leek's primary employment is with the United States
 
Department of Defense, but he uses a warehouse in the back of the
 Pearl City Industrial Park (
warehouse residence) to live and
 
operate his side business. For approximately two weeks in
 November 2013, notwithstanding the outstanding TRO, which had not
 yet been served on Leek, Furtado and Child stayed with Leek at
 his warehouse residence. Furtado claims that she and the Child
 only stayed at the warehouse residence in the evenings to sleep.
 On November 27, 2013, Leek asked Furtado to leave his residence.
 
On December 18, 2013, the family court held a hearing
 
on Furtado's TRO against Leek, and dissolved the TRO due to
 insufficient evidence. Following the dissolution of the TRO,
 Leek had a visitation with the Child until December 31, 2013,
 with some of that visitation taking place in his warehouse
 residence.
 
On January 24, 2014, Furtado filed her Motion for
 
Relief. In her motion, Furtado asserted that she "should be
 awarded sole legal and sole [p]hysical custody of the minor child
 of the parties; without any visitation to [Leek] until and unless
 he has a suitable environment to visit his daughter in."
 Furtado's Motion for Relief indicated that the family court
 should modify Leek's Visitation Order because he was "living in
 an unsafe warehouse."
 
On March 13, 2014, the family court held a hearing on
 
Furtado's Motion for Relief. Both parties testified at the
 hearing. At the outset of the hearing, Furtado "clarified that
 she was not seeking a change in the [family] court's prior legal
 
2
 The Honorable Judge Frances Q.F. Wong presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and physical custody orders, but that she was only seeking a
 
modification of the [Visitation Order]. Specifically, [Furtado]
 requested a court order suspending [Leek's] visits with the Child
until he obtained a suitable residence for the visits to take
 place in. Alternatively, [Furtado] requested that if [Leek] did
 not have a suitable residence[,] that his visits occur in
 California, where he has family, or that he have supervised
 visits."
  
On March 13, 2014, the family court filed its "Order
 
Denying In Part Motion To/For: Relief After Judgment or Order and
 Declaration" that provided:
 
The Motion for Relief After Judgment or Order and
Declaration (unfiled 1/16/14), by [Furtado] is denied
insofar as there is no prohibition regarding [Leek's]
visitation with [Child]. The existing visitation schedule
shall remain in effect; however, the prior September 25,
2013 order is clarified as follows: [Leek's] monthly visits
commence at 8:00 a.m. on the first day of the month and end
at 8:00 a.m. on the last day of the month.
 
On March 20, 2014, Furtado filed a notice of appeal.
 
On April 15, 2014, the family court filed its written
 
"Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law" (FOFs/COLs). In the
 
FOFs/COLs the family court found:
 
9. [Leek] lives in a warehouse in the back of the
Pearl City Industrial Park located at 96-1354 Waihona
Street, Pearl City. The warehouse is located in an area
 that is zoned for commercial use. [Leek] credibly testified
that the owner of the warehouse is aware of and consents to
 [Leek] using the warehouse as his residence. 
10. [Leek's] primary employment is with the United
States Department of Defense, but he uses the warehouse
space to operate his side business.
 
11. The warehouse consists of a 1,800 square foot
bottom floor and an approximately 1,100 square foot
mezzanine level, which [Leek] is refurbishing. The
 mezzanine level includes an approximately 850 square foot
enclosed, air-conditioned space, where [Leek] lives. [Leek]
credibly testified that this space includes a 12 foot by 24
foot enclosed bedroom and a bathroom. The bedroom has a dead
 bolt lock, which is keyed on both sides.
 
12. The Child stayed with [Leek] at his warehouse
residence during part of December 2013, and [Leek] plans to
have the Child stay with him there during the month-long
visitations that he was awarded per the court's September
25, 2013 order.
  
13. [Furtado] testified that she believed that
[Leek's] warehouse residence was an unsuitable and unsafe
place for the Child to stay during [Leek's] visitation
periods. [Furtado] identified a number of concerns about the
condition, contents, and location of [Leek's] residence,
 
3
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
including: power tools, ladders, saws, and chemicals that
were within the reach of the Child; a forklift that [Leek]
allowed the Child to play on; the bottom floor consisted of
polished concrete; the flooring and stairway had exposed
nails and the stairway had splintered wood and lacked a
railing; an unfenced-off drainage ditch outside the
warehouse; and other businesses adjoined [Leek's] warehouse
space, including a stonecutting business that created a
large amount of dust. Many of the conditions that concerned
[Furtado] are depicted in [her] photos taken at the end of
November 2013. 
14. [Leek] credibly testified that a number of the
concerns raised by [Furtado] have been addressed. For
instance, he has disposed of some of the items that were
outside of the warehouse. He has finished dry-walling and
painting the 850 square foot living area in the mezzanine.
The plywood subflooring remains, but he intends to finish
installing hardwood flooring within the next couple of
weeks. The neighboring stonecutting business has moved out.
 
15. [Leek] also credibly testified that when the Child
visits, he suspends all projects he is working on, puts away
the items the Child can get into, and fills up the empty
space with toys, where he and the Child play.
 
. . . .
 
21. [Leek's] residence is not an unsuitable place for
visitation with the Child.
 
22. [Furtado] failed to prove by a preponderance of
the evidence that the suspension of [Leek's] visitation with
the Child was in the Child's best interest.
 
(Emphasis added.)
  
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
The family court's FOFs are reviewed on appeal under
the "clearly erroneous" standard. A FOF is clearly erroneous
when (1) the record lacks substantial evidence to support
the finding, or (2) despite substantial evidence in support
of the finding, the appellate court is nonetheless left with
a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.
 "Substantial evidence" is credible evidence which is of
 sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of
reasonable caution to support a conclusion.
 
On the other hand, the family court's COLs are
reviewed on appeal de novo, under the right/wrong
standard. COLs, consequently, are []not binding upon
an appellate court and are freely reviewable for their
correctness
 
. . . . 
Moreover, the family court is given much leeway in its
examination of the reports concerning a child's care,
custody, and welfare, and its conclusions in this
regard, if supported by the record and not clearly
erroneous, must stand on appeal.
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Fisher v. Fisher, 111 Hawai 'i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) 
(quoting In re Doe, 95 Hawai 'i 183, 190, 20 P.3d 616, 623 
(2001)). 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. Findings of Fact (FOFs)
 
On appeal, Furtado challenges FOFs 9, 10, 12, 14, 15,
 
21, 22.
 
1. 	FOF 9
 
FOF 9 provides:
 
9. [Leek] lives in a warehouse in the back of the
Pearl City Industrial Park located at 96-1354 Waihona
Street, Pearl City. The warehouse is located in an area
 that is zoned for commercial use. [Leek] credibly testified
that the owner of the warehouse is aware of and consents to
 [Leek] using the warehouse as his residence.
 
Furtado contends that this FOF is erroneous because 
"the area is zoned for Industrial use, not commercial use and 
zero copy of any lease allowing a family dwelling at this industrial warehouse was presented by [Leek]." A review of the record, however, reveals that during the March 13, 2014 hearing, both Furtado and Leek testified that Leek's warehouse was located in a "commercial zone." The family court found Leek's testimony credible and the record includes no evidence rebutting his testimony. "[I]t is well-settled that an appellate court will not pass upon issues dependent upon the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence; this is the province of the trier of fact." Inoue v. Inoue, 118 Hawai
'i 86, 101, 185 P.3d 834, 849 
(App. 2008) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Furtado also has not shown that the distinction between industrial use and commercial use was material to the family court's decision. FOF 9 is not clearly erroneous. 
2. FOF 10
 
FOF 10 provides "[Leek's] primary employment is with
 
the United States Department of Defense, but he uses the
 warehouse space to operate his side business." Furtado contends
 that this FOF is erroneous because "[Leek] uses the warehouse as
 his residence, not just to operate a business."
 
The family court found in several of its FOFs that Leek
 
lived in the warehouse and, in its FOFs/COLs, repeatedly referred
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to the warehouse as Leek's "warehouse residence." Given that the 
family court found that Leek resides in the warehouse, it was not necessary for the court to reiterate that fact in FOF 10. See 
Rezentes v. Rezentes, 88 Hawai
'i 200, 203, 965 P.2d 133, 136 
(App. 1998) ("The trial judge is required to only make brief, definite, pertinent findings and conclusions upon the contested matters; there is no necessity for over-elaboration of detail or particularization of facts." (quoting Doe v. Roe, 5 Haw. App. 558, 565-66, 705 P.2d 535, 542 (1985))). FOF 10 is not clearly erroneous. 
3. FOF 12
 
FOF 12 provides "The Child stayed with [Leek] at his
 
warehouse residence during part of December 2013, and [Leek]
 plans to have the Child stay with him there during the month-long
 visitations that he was awarded per the court's September 25,
 2013 order."
 
Furtado contends that this FOF is erroneous because
 
"[t]here is insufficient evidence to support this Finding."
 However, Furtado testified during the hearing that the Child was
 with Leek in his warehouse for part of December 2013, but was not
 in the warehouse for Christmas because Leek went to California to
 visit his family. In addition, the family court's unchallenged
 FOF 20 indicates that "[f]ollowing the dissolution of the TRO,
 [Leek] had visitation with the Child until December 31, 2013. At
 least some of this visitation took place in his warehouse
 residence." FOF 12 is not clearly erroneous.
 
4. 	FOF 14
 
FOF 14 provides:
 
14. [Leek] credibly testified that a number of the
concerns raised by [Furtado] have been addressed. For
 
instance, he disposed of some of the items that were outside
of the warehouse. He has finished dry-walling and painting
the 850 square foot living area in the mezzanine. The
 plywood subflooring remains, but he intends to finish
installing hardwood flooring within the next couple of
weeks. The neighboring stonecutting business has moved out.
 
Furtado argues that FOF 14 is erroneous because it
 
"implies that [Leek] has made the warehouse safe for his
 
daughter, but this is contradicted by [Leek's] own testimony and
 his utter lack of photographic exhibits." In support of her
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
arguments, Furtado contends that "[Leek] admits he has plans on
 
transforming his warehouse into a wonderful place for his
 daughter, but he agrees that this has not yet happened[.]"
 
The family court's FOF 14 does not state that Leek 
completed all of the intended renovations prior to the hearing, but that he had addressed "a number of the concerns raised" by Furtado. (Emphasis added.) At the hearing on Furtado's Motion for Relief, Leek testified that he removed "[a] lot of the stuff that was in the yard," put up drywall and painted the living area, and had plans to put hardwood on top of the plywood floor. Furthermore, Leek testified that the stonecutters, who worked next door to his warehouse residence, were no longer there. We decline to second-guess the family court's determination that Leek's testimony was credible. See Inoue, 118 Hawai
'i at 101, 
185 P.3d at 849. FOF 14 is not clearly erroneous. 
5. FOF 15
 
FOF 15 provides "[Leek] also credibly testified that
 
when the Child visits, he suspends all projects he is working on,
 puts away the items the Child can get into, and fills up the
 empty space with toys, where he and the Child play."
 
Furtado contends that this FOF is erroneous because
 
"[t]here is insufficient evidence to support this finding."
 Furtado contends that FOF 15 "impl[ies] that the child has spent
 time alone with [Leek] at the warehouse, but the evidence
 presented to the court does not support these findings."
 
Leek testified that when the Child visits he puts his 
projects away and fills the space in his warehouse residence with toys. The family court found Leek's testimony credible. We will not second-guess the family court's credibility determination. See Inoue, 118 Hawai
'i at 101, 185 P.3d at 849. FOF 15 is not 
clearly erroneous. 
6. FOF 21 and 22
 
FOF 21 provides "[Leek's] residence is not an
 
unsuitable place for visitation with the Child." FOF 22 provides
 "[Furtado] failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence
 that the suspension of [Leek's] visitation with Child was in the
 Child's best interest."
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Furtado challenges both FOFs and contends
 
that "[t]he biggest error the [family] court committed was to
 
find that [Leek's] residence is not an unsuitable place for
 visitation with the Child."
 
Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 571-46(a)(7) (Supp.
 
2014) provides:
 
§571-46 Criteria and procedure in awarding custody and
visitation; best interest of the child. (a) . . . .
 
(7)	 Reasonable visitation rights shall be awarded to
parents, grandparents, siblings, and any person
interested in the welfare of the child in the
 discretion of the court, unless it is shown that
rights of visitation are detrimental to the best
interests of the child[.]
 
"Under HRS § 571-46, the sole issue in a custody determination is
 
the child's best interests, which is an issue of ultimate fact." 
Fisher, 111 Hawai
'i at 47, 137 P.3d at 361; See also Maeda v. 
Maeda, 8 Haw. App. 139, 143, 794 P.2d 268, 270 (1990).
 
Furtado believes Leek's warehouse residence is
 
unsuitable and unsafe for the Child because of a number of
 conditions or concerns, including 
power tools, ladders, saws, and chemicals that were within
the reach of the Child; a forklift that [Leek] allowed the
Child to play on; the bottom floor consisted of polish
concrete; the flooring and stairway had exposed nails and
the stairway had splintered wood and lacked a railing; an
unfenced-off drainage ditch outside the warehouse; and other
businesses adjoined [sic] [Leek's] warehouse space,
including a stonecutting business that created a large
amount of dust.
 
The family court found Leek's testimony that a number of the
 
concerns raised by Furtado had been addressed before the March
 13, 2014 hearing commenced to be credible. For example, the
 family court found Leek's testimony that he "disposed of some of
 the items that were outside of the warehouse[;]" that he
 "finished dry-walling and painting" the living space; that the
 "neighboring stonecutting business ha[d] moved out[;] and that he
 "suspends all projects he is working on" and "puts away the items
 the Child can get into" when the Child visits, all to be
 credible.
 
Although Furtado presented evidence as to the state of
 
the warehouse residence when she was last there in November 2013,
 she admitted at the March 13, 2014 hearing that she did not have
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
personal knowledge as to the current state of the residence.
 
Given that the family court found Leek's testimony credible and
 given that Furtado failed to present evidence rebutting Leek's
 testimony, the family court's FOF 21 and FOF 22 were not clearly
erroneous. 
 
B. History of Family Violence
 
Furtado seeks to modify her Visitation Order so as to
 
limit Leek's visitation with Child to an "actual residence,"
 claiming that, pursuant to HRS § 571-46(a)(9),
3
 there is a
presumption against Leek's visitation rights with the Child due
 to his history of violence. Furtado contends that, because of
 Leek's history of violence against her, the family court was
 required to "consider as the primary factor the safety and well­being of the child and the parent who is the victim of family
 
3
 HRS § 571-46(a)(9) provides:
 
§571-46 Criteria and procedure in awarding custody and
visitation; best interest of the child. (a) . . . . 
(9)	 In every proceeding where there is at issue a
dispute as to the custody of a child, a
determination by the court that family violence
has been committed by a parent raises a
rebuttable presumption that it is detrimental to
the child and not in the best interest of the
 child to be placed in sole custody, joint legal
custody, or joint physical custody with the
perpetrator of family violence. In addition to
 other factors that a court shall consider in a
 proceeding in which the custody of a child or
visitation by a parent is at issue, and in which
the court has made a finding of family violence
by a parent:
 
(A)	 The court shall consider as the primary
factor the safety and well-being of the
child and of the parent who is the victim
of family violence;
 
(B)	 The court shall consider the perpetrator's
history of causing physical harm, bodily
injury, or assault or causing reasonable
fear of physical harm, bodily injury, or
assault to another person; and
 
(C)	 If a parent is absent or relocates because
of an act of family violence by the other
parent, the absence or relocation shall
not be a factor that weighs against the
parent in determining custody or
visitation[.]
 
(Emphasis added.)
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
violence." Furtado appears to argue that her "inability to
 
protect her child from the dangers associated with living in an
 unsafe warehouse in an industrial complex is causing her to feel
 terrified[,]" which is disruptive to her and, thus, not in the
 best interest of the Child under HRS § 571-46(a)(9).
 
The family court found in its Visitation Order that
 
Leek had perpetrated domestic violence against Furtado in the
 past, but still determined that it was in the best interest of
 the Child to visit with Leek for the months of June, August, and
 December, until she turns six years old. Furtado did not appeal
 the Visitation Order, but instead, sought to modify it through
 her Motion for Relief.
 
This court has held "[t]hat a person seeking a change 
of custody must show a material change of circumstances since the previous custody order, and must show that such a change of custody is in the best interest of the child." Nadeau v. Nadeau, 
10 Haw. App. 111, 121, 861 P.2d 754, 759 (1993); See In re Guardianship of Doe, 93 Hawai
'i 374, 388, 4 P.3d 508, 522 (App. 
2000) ("A person seeking a change in visitation must show a material change in circumstances since the previous visitation order."). Furtado does not allege instances of family violence occurred after the court filed its Visitation Order so as to warrant modifying the family court's original Visitation Order. See Nadeau, 10 Haw. App. at 121, 861 P.2d at 759. C. Legality of Living Arrangement
 
Furtado contends the family court erred in its
 
FOFs/COLs because the court "never made any Conclusions as to the
 legality of [Leek] living in an I-1 zoned area."
 
Furtado argues that Leek's living arrangement is
 
illegal and that the illegal nature of Leek's living arrangement
 creates an unsafe environment for the Child. Furtado failed to
 raise this argument below and cites to facts not found within the
 record to support her argument on appeal. A review of the record
 indicates that Furtado's arguments during the hearing focused on
 specific concerns about the location and condition of Leek's
 warehouse residence, not on the alleged illegality of Leek's
 living arrangement. Furtado waived her argument regarding the
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
legality of Leek's living arrangement by failing to raise that
 
argument before the family court.
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Therefore, the "Order Denying in Part the Motion
 
To/For: Relief After Judgment or Order and Declaration," entered
 March 13, 2014 in the Family Court of the First Circuit is
 affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 5, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Michael A. Glenn
 
for Respondent-Appellant.
 
Chief Judge
Thomas D. Farrell
 J. Alberto Montalbano
 (Farrell & Associates)
for Petitioner-Appellee.
 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
11
 