     NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-18-0000548 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v. 
KEVIN LORA, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CRIMINAL NO. 1CPC-17-0000561) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Kevin Lora (Lora) appeals from the 
Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment), entered against 
him and in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee State of Hawai# i (State) 
on June 12, 2018, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (circuit court).
1 The Judgment was entered pursuant to a jury 
verdict finding Lora guilty of one count of sexual assault in the first degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 707-730(1)(a) (2014), and one count of sexual assault in the 
third degree, in violation of HRS § 707-732(1)(f) (2014). 
On appeal, Lora asserts five points of error, 
contending that: (1) the circuit court erred in refusing to 
sentence Lora as a "young adult defendant" under HRS § 706-667 
(2014); (2) the circuit court erred by allowing the State to 
1 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
adduce victim impact testimony from the complaining witness (CW); 
(3) the circuit court erred by allowing the State to adduce 
testimony about the content of a security video recording that 
was not admitted into evidence; (4) the State committed 
prosecutorial misconduct; and (5)
 cumulative error warrants a new 
trial. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to the arguments they advance and the issues they raise, as well as 
the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Lora's appeal as 
follows. 
(1) Lora argues that the circuit court failed to 
consider Lora's case on an individualized basis when it declined 
to sentence him as a "young adult defendant" primarily based on 
whether or not Lora was violent. 
While "[a] sentencing court must consider all 
sentencing options [and] the trial court would be well advised to
state clearly on the record that the alternative sentencing 
options were considered[,]" State v. Hussein, 122 Hawai# i 495, 
500–01, 229 P.3d 313, 318–19 (2010) (citations, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted), "[t]he authority of a 
trial court to select and determine the severity of a penalty is 
normally undisturbed on review in the absence of an apparent 
abuse of discretion or unless applicable statutory or 
constitutional commands have not been observed." State v. Davia,
87 
Hawai# i 249, 253, 953 P.2d 1347, 1351 (1998) (citations and 
internal quotation marks omitted). "Generally, to constitute an abuse it must appear that the court clearly exceeded the bounds 
of reason or disregarded rules or principles of law or practice 
to the substantial detriment of a party litigant." Keawe v. 
State, 79 Hawai# i 281, 284, 901 P.2d 481, 484 (1995) (citations 
and internal quotation marks omitted).  
 
2       
            
           
          
          
       
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Under HRS § 706-667, a sentencing judge is given the 
discretion to impose special terms of imprisonment for a "young 
adult defendant."2 HRS § 706-667(3) provides: 
A young adult defendant convicted of a felony, in lieu of
any other sentence of imprisonment authorized by thischapter, may be sentenced to a special indeterminate term ofimprisonment if the court is of the opinion that suchspecial term is adequate for the young adult defendant'scorrection and rehabilitation and will not jeopardize theprotection of the public. When ordering a specialindeterminate term of imprisonment, the court shall imposethe maximum length of imprisonment, which shall be eightyears for a class A felony, five years for a class B felony,and four years for a class C felony. The minimum length ofimprisonment shall be set by the Hawaii paroling authorityin accordance with section 706-669. During this specialindeterminate term, the young adult shall be incarceratedseparately from career criminals, when practicable. 
At the time of the offenses for which Lora was convicted, Lora 
was less than twenty-two years old with no criminal history. 
Lora was therefore eligible for sentencing as a young adult 
defendant. The circuit court, however, was not required to treat 
Lora as a young adult defendant. The circuit court had the 
discretion to impose a special indeterminate term of imprisonment 
if it was "of the opinion that such special term is adequate for 
the young adult defendant's correction and rehabilitation and 
will not jeopardize the protection of the public." HRS § 706-
667(3). 
The circuit court recognized that Lora met the 
technical requirements to be considered a young adult defendant 
but expressly stated that it did not believe that a special term 
was appropriate in Lora's situation. The circuit court 
explained: 
But I divide the world into basically two camps. I 
sentence people every single week. That's probably the most 
2 A "young adult defendant" is defined as 
a person convicted of a crime who, at the time of the offense,
is less than twenty-two years of age and who has not beenpreviously convicted of a felony as an adult or adjudicated asa juvenile for an offense that would have constituted a felonyhad the young adult defendant been an adult. 
HRS § 706-667(1). 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
important decision that judges make. And I separate the
world in two: Those people that are violent, and thosepeople that aren't.
And in this particular instance, while [defense
counsel] has done his best and everybody who cares about youhas tried to have the Court focus in on your good qualities-- and you have them. But when people are watching, it iseasy to do the right thing. But when you don't think peopleare watching, people do things that no one would expect themto do. 
And in this particular case, that is exactly what
the Court thinks you did. It may not typify how you'velived the rest of your life.
But in an instant, you chose to get out there, trying
to meet some girls, trying to get some action, or whateveryou want to call it, and you preyed upon this woman. And you treated her like a piece of garbage, and you left herthere on the beach to try to pull together the pieces. And unfortunately, that has blown back on you. 
The circuit court cited the nature of the offense, describing it 
as "a violent, horrific act on [Lora's] part" where Lora 
"violated [CW] in every horrible way a woman probably could 
experience." The circuit court also cited the impact that the 
incident had on CW. The circuit court's division of offenses 
into "two camps" based on the use of violence reflects the 
circuit court's consideration of the "protection of the public," 
as required in HRS § 706-667(3). It was within the circuit 
court's discretion to opine, based on the specifics of this case, 
that a specialized term was inadequate for Lora's correction and 
rehabilitation. On this record, we cannot conclude that the 
circuit court abused its discretion in declining to sentence Lora 
as a young adult defendant. 
(2) Lora argues that the circuit court erred in 
allowing CW to testify about how she felt during the post-assault 
examination and the regrets she had regarding the night of the 
incident. Specifically, Lora challenges the admission of the 
following testimony from CW discussing her experience during the 
post-assault examination: 
Um, the process of a rape collection kit is very
dehumanizing. Um, after experiencing the trauma that I had
just gone through, I had to stand on a mat and carefullyremove all of the clothing that I had on, and I could seeall the sand falling onto this mat.
And I had to stand naked in exam room lighting, just
completely naked, while someone took pictures of me. I was 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
given a gown and a sheet, and I waited for the doctor to
arrive. 
He explained to me in probably the most compassionate
way that he can that a lot of this will be violating, and heapologized upfront for the process.
There were, like, a lot of swabs that were taken from
parts of my body where I know that his saliva had been.
There was a vaginal exam, and it's not the kind like
you go to the doctor and have one done. It's, like, a verylong time with a man looking at me and taking high defpictures of my most personal areas. It was horrible. 
. . . . I was there until 10:00 the next morning. I had to 
receive prophylactic injections in case that the defendanthad diseases. 
I took a pregnancy test. I was given oral anti-virals
to make sure that I didn't contract hepatitis or HIV, and sofor every morning and every night for the next 30 days, Itook a pill that made me extremely sick. 
It's better than 
getting hepatitis, I guess. 
Lora also challenges the admission of CW's response to the 
State's questioning about what CW wishes she did differently on 
the night of the incident: 
I have spent two years thinking and pondering of what
could have happened differently that night for me, and when
I first started, my regrets were, I reget [sic] wearing askirt. I reget [sic] shaking his hand. I reget [sic] notbeing able to feel fear and act on it in a way that wouldprotect me. 
At trial, Lora objected to CW's testimony in both of these 
instances on relevancy grounds. The circuit court overruled 
Lora's objections in both instances. 
On appeal, Lora reasserts that this testimony was 
irrelevant and also argues for the first time that the testimony 
amounted to victim impact statements that were unduly prejudicial
and thus should not have been admitted during the guilt phase of 
the trial.  
"Where the evidentiary ruling at issue concerns 
admissibility based upon relevance, under [Hawai# i Rules of 
Evidence (HRE) Rules 401 and 402 (1993)], the proper standard of appellate review is the right/wrong standard." Tabieros v. Clark 
Equip. Co., 85 Hawai
#i 336, 350–51, 944 P.2d 1279, 1293–94 (1997) 
(brackets omitted) (quoting State v. Arceo, 84 Hawai# i 1, 11, 928 
P.2d 843, 853 (1996)). Lora's relevance objection did not 
preserve his claim on appeal that CW's testimony, even if 
5 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
relevant, constituted victim impact testimony and caused undue 
prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misled the jury, in 
violation of HRE Rule 403 (2016). See State v. Moses, 102 
Hawai# i 449, 456, 77 P.3d 940, 947 (2003) ("As a general rule, if 
a party does not raise an argument at trial, that argument will be deemed to have been waived on appeal[.]"). To the extent Lora 
claims that CW's testimony constituted victim impact testimony 
and violated HRE Rule 403, we review this issue for plain error. 
See 
Hawai# i Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 52(b). 
Lora argues that CW's testimony in both instances had 
no bearing on any facts of consequence and were thus irrelevant. 
The only facts of consequence, Lora asserts, were the elements of 
Lora's charged offenses. Lora contends that HRE Rule 403 was 
violated because CW's testimony in these instances "tacitly 
prompt[ed] the jury to hold someone
 accountable for the 
dehumanization of [CW], and confuse[d] and misle[d] the jury 
. . . into believing that the post-offense impact that a crime 
had on the complainant is something they may legitimately 
consider when deciding upon the defendant's guilt." 
The State responds that CW's testimony regarding how 
she felt during the post-assault examination was relevant to the 
issue of whether she was able to accurately provide a medical 
history to the examining doctor. The State appears to concede 
that CW's testimony regarding her regrets on the night of the 
incident was irrelevant. The State argues, however, that any 
error in allowing this testimony about CW's regrets was harmless. 
We first address CW's testimony about how she felt 
during the post-assault examination. Although this testimony did 
not provide any direct evidence as to the elements of the charged 
offenses, it was relevant evidence for the jury to consider in 
assessing CW's credibility. Throughout trial, defense counsel 
elicited testimony from various witnesses regarding the number of 
drinks that CW reported that she drank on the night of the 
incident. Defense counsel specifically pointed out to the jury 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the inconsistencies between the number of drinks that CW reported 
to the doctor at the post-assault examination, to HPD officers, 
and to the grand jury, as part of his larger argument during 
closing arguments that CW lied about the assault. CW's emotional 
state during the post-assault examination provided a possible 
explanation for the inconsistencies and thus was relevant for the 
State to support CW's credibility and undermine defense counsel's 
portrayal of CW as a liar. CW's testimony about her experience 
during the post-assault examination also provided relevant 
evidence for the jury to infer possible reasons for a person to 
voluntarily undergo the examination. The circuit court did not 
err in overruling Lora's relevance objection to this testimony. 
In absence of an objection at trial to CW's testimony 
regarding the post-assault examination on HRE Rule 403 grounds, 
we are faced with determining whether it was plain error for the 
circuit court not to have intervened and sua sponte conduct an 
HRE Rule 403 balancing analysis. We cannot say that CW's 
testimony was so inflammatory as to require the circuit court to 
sua sponte conduct an HRE Rule 403 analysis and to rule that the 
danger of unfair prejudice outweighed the testimony's probative 
value. Accordingly, the circuit court did not err when it 
allowed CW to testify about the post-assault examination. 
Regarding CW's testimony about her regrets of the night 
of the incident, we conclude that it was irrelevant as CW's 
regrets in hindsight did not make it more or less probable that 
Lora sexually assaulted CW nor did it weigh on any other facts of 
consequence. See HRE Rule 401. The circuit court therefore 
erred in allowing the testimony over Lora's relevance objection. 
Having concluded that the admission of this testimony 
regarding CW's regrets was in error, we must determine whether the erroneous admission of this testimony was harmless. In 
making this determination, 
[e]rror is not to be viewed in isolation and considered
purely in the abstract. It must be examined in light of theentire proceedings and given the effect to which the whole 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record shows it is entitled. In that context, the real
question becomes whether there is a reasonable possibilitythat error might have contributed to conviction. If there is such a reasonable possibility in a criminal case, thenthe error is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, and thejudgment of conviction on which it may have been based mustbe set aside. 
State v. McCrory, 104 Hawai# i 203, 210, 87 P.3d 275, 282 (2004) 
(emphases omitted) (quoting State v. Gano, 92 Hawai
#i 161, 176, 
988 P.2d 1153, 1168 (1999)). 
CW's statements regarding her regrets were brief and 
constituted only a small portion of her entire testimony and of 
the overall trial. The remainder of CW's testimony provided 
substantial evidence against Lora. Additionally, CW's testimony 
about her regrets did not become a feature of the trial and 
neither the State nor defense counsel emphasized it or further 
referred to it in closing arguments. 
On this record, we cannot 
conclude that there was a reasonable possibility that the admission of CW's testimony regarding her regrets on the night of 
the incident might have contributed to Lora's conviction. We 
therefore conclude that any potential prejudicial effect of this 
testimony was inconsequential and that the circuit court's error 
in allowing this testimony was harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt. 
(3) Lora argues that, where there was conflicting 
testimony regarding the contents of a security video recording 
that was not in evidence, the probative value of the testimony 
was outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice of not having 
the actual recording in evidence, in violation of HRE Rule 403. 
The State called two witnesses from the Honolulu Police 
Department (HPD), Officer Tricenn Rivera and Detective David 
Yamamoto, who testified as to the contents of a video recording 
from a surveillance camera of a hotel in proximity to where the 
8            
              
            
               
         
       
            
             
             
          
             
           NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
incident occurred. The video recording was never recovered by 
police and thus could not be admitted into evidence.3 
Officer Rivera described the security footage as 
depicting a man and woman walking towards the beach, engaged in 
conversation. After a few minutes, the male appears "sprinting" 
up the street by himself. After another few minutes, the woman 
emerges and appears to "flag[] down a passerbyer [sic]." Officer 
Rivera testified that he was able to identify CW as the woman on 
the security footage based on her clothing and physical features. 
Officer Rivera also testified that the clothing and build of the 
male in the video matched CW's description of her assailant. 
Detective Yamamoto testified that the video recording 
that he saw depicted two people but that there were "no real 
identifying features." When asked whether he recalled seeing an 
individual sprinting from the scene, Detective Yamamoto 
responded, "That was not on the video[.]" 
Lora did not raise any objections to Officer Rivera's 
or Detective Yamamoto's testimony regarding the surveillance 
video recordings. Accordingly, we review this contention on 
appeal for plain error. See HRPP Rule 52(b). 
We fail to see how the admission of both of these 
witnesses' testimonies results in undue prejudice to Lora. In 
the absence of the actual video recording, their testimonies were 
the best evidence of the surveillance video's contents. HRE Rule 
1004 (2016). Disputed evidence is not meritless simply because 
it is disputed. To the extent that these conflicting testimonies 
3 Officer Rivera testified that when he went to the hotel to review 
the surveillance footage on the day of the incident, he was unable to receive a
copy of the video recording because the hotel representative who had authority torelease the footage was not in at the time. Officer Rivera testified that it was another individual's responsibility to follow up on recovering the surveillancerecording. 
Detective Yamamoto testified that he remembered watching the
surveillance video recording but did not remember when or where he watched thevideo. Based upon his memory of having seen the video, Detective Yamamoto hadbelieved that the video was taken into evidence. Upon learning that the videorecording was not received in evidence, Detective Yamamoto attempted to obtainthe surveillance footage from hotel security on July 6, 2017. At that point,Detective Yamamoto was unable to recover the video recording from hotel security. 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
create an issue of fact, that issue is in the province of the 
jury to assess the credibility of the witnesses and weigh the 
evidence. State v. Kikuta, 125 Hawai# i 78, 89, 253 P.3d 639, 650 
(2011). 
We therefore conclude that the circuit court did not 
plainly err in allowing Officer Rivera and Detective Yamamoto to testify as to the surveillance video recordings. 
(4) Lora argues that the deputy prosecuting attorney 
(DPA) committed prosecutorial misconduct during her opening 
statement, closing argument, and rebuttal argument. In 
determining whether the alleged prosecutorial misconduct rises to 
the level of reversible error, we consider three factors: (1) the 
nature of the alleged misconduct; (2) the promptness or lack of a 
curative instruction; and (3) the strength or weakness of the 
evidence against the defendant. 
State v. Austin, 143 Hawai# i  18, 
40, 422 P.3d 18, 40 (2018) (citing State v. Clark, 83 Hawai
#i 
289, 304, 926 P.2d 194, 209 (1996)). Because Lora did not object 
to the DPA's alleged misconduct at trial, we must determine 
whether the alleged misconduct constituted plain error that 
affected Lora's substantial rights. Id. (citing State v. 
Wakisaka, 102 Hawai# i 504, 513, 78 P.3d 317, 326 (2003)). We 
thus conduct a two-step analysis: 
First, we determine whether the prosecutor's actions
constituted misconduct. If we conclude that the prosecutor's actions were improper, we analyze whether theaction affected the defendant's substantial rights, suchthat the circuit court plainly erred by not intervening andtaking remedial action. 
Id. (internal citations omitted). 
Opening Statement 
"An opening statement merely provides an opportunity 
for counsel to advise an[d] outline for the jury, the facts and questions in the matter before them." State v. Sanchez, 82 
Hawai
#i 517, 528, 923 P.2d 934, 945 (App. 1996) (quoting State v. 
Simpson, 64 Haw. 363, 369, 641 P.2d 320, 324 (1982)). 
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Accordingly, an attorney's opening statement "is not an occasion 
for argument." Id. (citation omitted). 
Ordinarily, "the scope and extent of the opening
statement is left to the sound discretion of the trial 
judge." However, the trial court should "exclude irrelevantfacts and stop argument if it occurs." The State should only refer in the opening statement to evidence that it has"a genuine good-faith belief" will be produced at trial. 
Id. (internal citations omitted). 
The first challenged portion of the DPA's opening 
statement proceeded as follows: 
Sun, sand and fun. That's what [CW] expected when she
came to Honolulu in May 2016. Instead, her trip to Hawaiiended up being her worst nightmare, a blur of visits to thepolice station and hospital.
But how did [CW]'s trip take such a complete turn?
During this trial, you will learn about what happened andwhat led up to May 15th, 2016, and what led up to [CW]leaving Oahu with an unexpected and horrific set of memoriesburned into her brain. 
In May 2016, [CW] was going on a girls' trip. Her 
fiance Kenny and her three kids would not be coming along.It would be a time for her to relax and enjoy time with hersister Heather, as well as her friend Haley.
And for the first few days, the women went
sightseeing, visited different beaches around the islands.They even challenged themselves to hiking up Koko Head. And on May 14, 2016, the women were sore from the hike andwanted to do something relaxing.
And after snorkeling for most of the day at Electric
Beach, [CW] and the two other women decided to walk aroundthe Waikiki strip that evening, little shopping, getsomething to eat.
They first went to Top of Waikiki. Unfortunately,
they found themselves a little under-dressed for thatlocation, and all three women eventually found themselves atPlaybar, a small nightclub of sorts on the Waikiki strip.
But one by one that night, the numbers dwindled.
Heather, [CW]'s sister left first. 
She went back to the 
hotel room sometime around 11:30 p.m. that night.
Around 1:30 a.m. Haley decides to leave Playbar as
well, and it became just [CW] at Playbar hanging out withsome people that she had just met and was having fun with.
And while [CW] was hanging out with her new friends at
Playbar, Haley was walking the couple blocks from Playbarback to their hotel, and that's the Aqua Pacific Monarchhotel, and during that walk, Haley was approached by a malewho introduced himself to her as Dominick. 
And the small talk lasted throughout that walk, until
Haley got back to the hotel room, and that small talk wentwell enough that Haley ended giving Dominick her phonenumber. 
Haley went up to her room, thought about it, and she
felt she wasn't actually that tired, and persuaded byDominick to come back down, meet him in the lobby, go forwalk down on the beach. 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Things continued to click between the male, Dominick,
and Haley. Haley ends up kissing Dominick on the moonlight
night on Waikiki beach, but when Dominick tried to go beyondjust kissing, Haley put the brakes on. She asked him to stop, and after a little push back from Dominick, Dominickrespects her decision and ends up walking her back to herhotel. 
Haley returns to her hotel room and falls asleep.
Now, when it's around 2:30 a.m. on May 15, 2016, [CW] isready to leave Playbar, and she's ready to walk back to herhotel as well, where her sister and Haley are waiting.
And so she's making that couple-blocks walk down Kuhio
Avenue, and when she reaches the vicinity of the hotel, shewas also approached by a stranger, a male who introducedhimself to her as Dominick, and after Dominick rapid firesquestions with her, making that same small talk, Dominickinsists to [CW] that they were also going to go for a walkon the beach. 
Now, throughout this trip, [CW] had been enjoying the
friendliness and courtesy of people of Hawaii, and she was atourist in vacation mode. Her guard was down, and sheallowed herself to walk with this male down the street. 
But [CW] immediately regretted this decision, as the
male's demeanor changed and took a threatening turn.
His tone and demeanor became aggressive, and he took
physical hold of [CW] as they walked down the street. [CW],confused, kind of in shock about what was happening and howthis encounter was turning out.
They now end up at the beach. [CW] and the male end
up standing on a ledge of a seawall. 
[CW] was left between
the ocean in front of her and the male behind her. 
Now she's exhausted from her evening, exhausted from
the hike the day before. She was drinking, somewhatintoxicated. [CW] was not confident in her ability at thatmoment to run away, to run away in the sand, nevertheless,and the male sees this opportunity and pushed [CW] down onto that wall. 
The male grabbed [CW]'s hand and forced her hand to
touch his penis over his clothes, but that was just thebeginning, as the male used physical force to hold [CW] downwhile he penetrated her vagina with her [sic] penis, allwhile [CW] was crying and begging the defendant to stop,telling him, she did not want this. 
Lora also challenges the following remarks in the DPA's 
opening statement: 
Defendant had been rejected that night, and when he
was rejected by Haley earlier, it made him desperate. His failed attempt with Haley fueled his frustration with [CW]that night.
There was no time for romance. He was going to get
what he wanted by any means. There was no time for permission, and physical force, if needed, so be it, andthat's how [CW]'s trip took a complete 180, because thedefendant didn't care about consent. 
Lora first asserts that "the prosecutor provided a 
lengthy, argumentative narration of the crimes, presenting them 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
as established, historical fact, rather than as what the evidence 
would show or what she expected to prove." Lora contends that 
this presentation "bolstered [CW's] credibility and vouched for 
the veracity of her story about what occurred." 
In the beginning of the DPA's opening statement, the 
DPA remarked to the jury, "During this trial, you will learn 
about what happened and what led up to [the incident on] 
May 15th, 2016[.]" The subsequent narrative of the incident, and 
the events leading up to it, did not constitute improper 
argument, as it was comprised of facts and evidence that the 
State intended to adduce at trial, namely though CW's testimony. 
Furthermore, we do not find that these remarks bolstered and 
vouched for CW's testimony. 
On the other hand, we conclude that the DPA's remarks 
that Lora was "rejected" and "desperate," that "[h]is failed 
attempt with Haley fueled his frustration" with CW, and that Lora 
"was going to get what he wanted by any means" and "didn't care 
about consent" constituted argument that was improper in an 
opening statement. We thus must determine whether these remarks 
affected Lora's substantial rights so as to amount to plain 
error. 
Before opening statements began, the circuit court 
instructed the jury that "[w]hat the attorneys say during this 
phase is not evidence" and that the purpose of opening statement 
is to "share with [the jury] about what the evidence they believe 
will show." The circuit court also reiterated during its general 
instructions to the jury before closing arguments: "Statements or 
arguments made by lawyers are not evidence. You should consider 
their arguments to you, but you are not bound by their memory or 
interpretation of the evidence." 
As to the strength or weakness of the evidence against 
Lora, we recognize that this is not a case where the evidence of 
guilt was overwhelming. Cf. State v. Veikoso, 126 Hawai
#i 267, 
282, 270 P.3d 997, 1012 (2011) (concluding that there was 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
overwhelming and compelling evidence of defendant's guilt such 
that errors in admitting an expert's testimony may be deemed 
harmless); State v. Uyesugi, 100 Hawai# i 442, 461, 60 P.3d 843, 
862 (2002) (concluding that any error in admitting the testimony of a murder victim's family members was harmless because other 
evidence of the defendant's guilt was overwhelming); State v. 
Toyomura, 80 Hawai# i 8, 27, 904 P.2d 893, 912 (1995) ("Where 
there is a wealth of overwhelming and compelling evidence tending to show the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, errors in 
the admission or exclusion of evidence are deemed harmless." 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting State v. Nakamura, 65 
Haw. 74, 80, 648 P.2d 183, 187 (1982))). Nonetheless, upon a 
review of the totality of the evidentiary records, we do not 
believe the evidence against Lora was so weak as to weigh in 
favor of finding the DPA's improper remarks prejudicially 
harmful. 
In light of the jury instructions and the general 
presumption that juries follow the court's instructions, State v. 
Klinge, 92 Hawai# i 577, 592, 994 P.2d 509, 524 (2000), we 
conclude that the DPA's argumentative remarks in opening statement were harmless beyond a reasonable doubt and did not 
affect Lora's substantial rights so as to amount to plain error. 
Lora further asserts that the DPA's opening statement 
amounted to an expression of the DPA's personal belief that CW's 
story was true and credible and is in that way similar to State 
v. Marsh, 68 Haw. 659, 728 P.2d 1301 (1986). 
The prosecutor in 
Marsh repeatedly used the personal pronoun "I" in stating her personal opinion and expressed on at least nine occasions her 
belief that defense witnesses had lied. Id. at 660, 728 P.2d at 
1302. The Hawai# i Supreme Court held that, because the "pivotal 
issue was the credibility of the witnesses[,]" the prosecutor's remarks constituted misconduct that amounted to plain error, 
"[i]n light of the inconclusive evidence against Marsh, the 
particularly egregious misconduct of the prosecutor in presenting 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
her personal views on the dispositive issues, and the lack of a 
prompt jury instruction specifically directed to the prosecutor's 
closing remarks[.]" Id. 
Here, we find no language in the DPA's opening 
statement indicating that the DPA was expressing her personal 
opinions that CW's testimony was true and credible. The DPA's 
remarks do not fall within the type of "particularly egregious" 
conduct rejected in Marsh, id. at 661, 728 P.2d at 1303, and thus 
were not improper expressions of personal opinion. 
We conclude that although a portion of the DPA's 
opening statement was improper argument, the remarks were 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt and did not affect Lora's 
substantial rights. Therefore, the circuit court did not plainly 
err by not intervening and taking corrective action during the 
DPA's opening statement. 
Closing Arguments During closing arguments, 
a prosecutor is permitted to draw reasonable inferences from
the evidence and wide latitude is allowed in discussing theevidence. It is also within the bounds of legitimateargument for prosecutors to state, discuss, and comment onthe evidence as well as to draw all reasonable inferences from the evidence. In other words, closing argument affordsthe prosecution (as well as the defense) the opportunity topersuade the jury that its theory of the case is valid,based upon the evidence adduced and all reasonableinferences that can be drawn therefrom. 
State v. Rogan, 91 Hawai# i 405, 412–13, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238–39 
(1999) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
Lora asserts that the DPA expressed her personal 
opinion and appealed to facts that were not in evidence when she 
made the following remarks: 
• Regarding CW's testimony, stating that "[y]ou cannot
fake that kind of deep sobbing, the kind where you canbarely breathe, at times, the kind that it feels likeit doesn't stop." 
• CW was "reliving that sexual assault" while shetestified and then, during cross-examination, was"attacked for all the decisions" she had made. 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
• CW engaged in "self-blame" while she testified. 
• CW's conduct on the night of the incident was "out of
character for her[.]" 
• CW had gone "through all of her memories for the [last]two years[.]" 
• The beach was empty at the time of the incident and"[i]f there were additional witnesses on the beach,they wouldn't want to get wrangled into talking topolice officers or having to come to court." 
• It would take "near miracles from the police" to findwitnesses based on general descriptions because "thisis Waikiki. People are moving in and out of this areaconstantly as tourists, transients, what have you." 
• The unavailability of the surveillance video recordingdid not "really matter in the end because thesurveillance video wouldn't have exonerated the defendant, wouldn't have changed anything." 
First, we find no language in any of these remarks 
indicating that the DPA was expressing her personal opinion. 
Further, upon review of the record, we conclude that these 
statements by the DPA throughout closing arguments were based on 
reasonable inferences permissibly drawn from the evidence adduced 
at trial. Clark, 83 Hawai# i at 304, 926 P.2d at 209. Thus, 
these remarks did not constitute misconduct and we need not reach plain error. 
Lora also asserts that the DPA improperly bolstered and 
vouched for CW's testimony when the DPA remarked: "At each stage 
in this proceeding, [CW] complied with what was being asked of 
her." Lora argues that this remark "bolstered [CW] by urging the 
jury to conclude that [CW] was generally compliant, while tacitly 
implying she was all the more easily duped by Lora into going 
with him." Lora mischaracterizes the DPA's remark and ignores 
the context in which it was made. Prior to making this remark, 
the DPA pointed out to the jury that "the instructions tell you 
to consider whether any inconsistencies are of importance or 
unimportant detail, and many of the so-called inconsistencies 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that defense counsel tried to elicit from [CW] are of minute 
importance or understandable within the context." Viewed in 
context, it appears that the DPA's remark about CW's compliance 
was to provide a reason or explanation for the alleged 
inconsistencies in the statements CW made during the 
investigation and then during the judicial proceedings. The DPA 
argued that CW was simply "answer[ing] questions being asked of 
her, no further details." The DPA's arguments regarding CW's 
credibility were based on reasonable inferences permissibly drawn 
from the evidence adduced at trial. Clark, 83 Hawai# i at 304, 
926 P.2d at 209. 
Therefore, these remarks did not constitute 
misconduct and we need not reach plain error. 
Lora also asserts that the DPA improperly focused the 
jury on CW's victim impact testimony, which effectively asked the 
jury to place themselves in CW's position. We do not agree that 
the DPA's summary narrative of CW's testimony amounted to asking 
the jury to place themselves in CW's position. 
Viewed in 
context, it appears that the DPA reiterated CW's testimony with the purpose of arguing that CW was a credible witness because she 
was able to recall specific details about the incident. Such 
remarks do not constitute misconduct and we need not address 
plain error. 
Lora also asserts that the DPA improperly remarked that 
CW had "no interest in the outcome of this case." Lora argues 
that this was improper because "[a] purported victim certainly 
has an interest in seeing her claimed attacker convicted and her 
claim vindicated[.]" However, Lora does not cite to any 
authority in support of his claim that the DPA's argument was 
improper, and we find none. 
It is widely recognized that a witness's self-interest 
is a relevant factor to consider in assessing the witness's 
credibility. See HRE Rule 609.1 (2016) ("The credibility of a 
witness may be attacked by evidence of bias, interest, or 
motive."); see also State v. Estrada, 69 Haw. 204, 220, 738 P.2d 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
812, 823 (1987) ("Bias, interest, or motive is always 
relevant[.]"). Furthermore, the circuit court instructed the 
jury: "In evaluating the weight and credibility of a witness's 
testimony, you may consider . . . the witness's interest, if any, 
in the result of this case[.]" The DPA's remark arose in the 
context of the larger argument that the jury should find that CW 
was a credible witness based on the various factors relevant to 
the jury's assessment of credibility. Thus, the DPA's remark was 
within the latitude given to prosecutors to infer and argue, 
based on the evidence presented at trial, that CW was credible. 
Lora further asserts that the DPA improperly commented 
on Lora's decision not to testify. 
The DPA remarked: "Only [CW] 
and the defendant know what happened between them. What happened in those moments, a frenzied struggle and ultimately the 
violation of [CW]'s body." Lora argues that this remark was 
comparable to the prosecutor's remark in Wakisaka, which the 
Hawai# i Supreme Court found to be an improper comment on the 
defendant's failure to testify. 
102 Hawai# i at 516, 78 P.3d at 
329. 
In Wakisaka, the prosecutor remarked during closing 
arguments: "Who was alone with [CW]? 
[The defendant] was alone 
with her. He was there. He would know. If he doesn't tell us, we can only look to [CW] and see what her body tells us." Id. at 
515-16, 78 P.3d at 328-29. The supreme court held that the 
prosecutor's remark was improper because it "remind[ed] the jury 
that [the defendant] did not testify" and "impl[ied] that [the 
defendant] had information he was withholding from the jury[.]" 
Id. at 516, 78 P.3d at 329. 
Lora argues that the DPA's remark that "[o]nly [CW] and 
the defendant know what happened between them" similarly invited 
the jury to note that Lora had information about the incident but 
declined to testify. Upon review of the record, it appears that 
the DPA made this comment in the context of arguing that CW's 
testimony was credible and that, if believed, CW's testimony by 
18        
               
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
itself can be sufficient to prove a fact. In this context, the 
DPA's remarks did not involve language that was "manifestly 
intended or was of such a character that the jury would naturally 
and necessarily take it to be a comment on the failure of the 
accused to testify." State v. Valdivia, 95 Hawai# i 465, 482, 24 
P.3d 661, 678 (2001) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting State v. Padilla, 57 Haw. 150, 158, 552 P.2d 357, 363 (1976)). 
Rebuttal Arguments Regarding the DPA's rebuttal arguments, Lora asserts 
that the DPA expressed her personal opinion and bolstered CW's credibility by emphasizing CW's impact testimony. The DPA 
remarked: 
She still went through that sexual assault exam. She still 
endured having to take medication for weeks. She still endured having to fly to Hawaii twice, take time out of herlife to sit there, relive her assault and be attacked forevery decision that she made and action that she did ordidn't do. She went through all of that with absolutelynothing to gain. 
The DPA also remarked that CW's "gut, emotional reaction to every 
single officer that saw her thereafter, that that emotional 
reaction that lasted hours through the exam" was not concocted 
and CW would "have to be the best actress in the world" to fake 
such a reaction. 
We find no indication that the DPA was expressing her 
personal opinion when she made these remarks. 
It appears that 
the DPA was responding to defense counsel's assertion during Lora's closing argument that CW lied about the assault.  The 
DPA's remarks were thus within the wide latitude prosecutors have in rebuttal to respond to defense counsel's arguments attacking 
CW's credibility raised in closing argument. See Austin, 143 
Hawai# i at 47, 422 P.3d at 47. Therefore, these remarks did not 
constitute misconduct and we need not reach plain error. 4
4 During closing argument, defense counsel's overarching argument was:
"[CW's] story that she was sexually assaulted by [Lora] is a lie. It's just a 
plain and simple lie." 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Lora also contends that the DPA expressed her personal 
opinion that bolstered CW's credibility and disparaged defense 
counsel when the DPA remarked that, "[j]ust like [CW] said, 
clearly [defense counsel] has never experienced trauma." Upon 
our review of the record, it appears that the DPA's comment was 
most likely in reference to exchanges made between defense 
counsel and CW during cross-examination and recross-examination. 
The first exchange arose when defense counsel cross-examined CW 
regarding an allegation she made during direct examination 
testimony that CW had not previously mentioned at any of the 
interviews with law enforcement or at the grand jury proceeding: 
Q. But you did not tell Detective Yamamoto that Kevin
Lora said, Let's give this bum a show, or Dominick said,
Let's give this bum a show. Never mentioned that to him? 
A. I'd like to explain. I don't know.
Q. Sure, sure, absolutely.
A. The interview with Detective Yamamoto was 15 
hours, like you've said in this testimony, after anincredible amount of trauma. The details that I provided tohim were the best that I could give him at that time.
Medically, details from trauma will continue to come
back to you hours, days, months, after you experiencesomething that I went through with your client, sir. 
CW similarly commented on her perception that defense counsel had 
never experienced terror, during defense counsel's recross-
examination: 
Q. Okay. If you were frozen, how did you move?
A. Your question to me let's [sic] me know that
you've never been terrified in your life.
Q. Okay.
A. Absolutely terrified, to the point where you can
think 100 million different ways to move, to get out, to
scream, to help, and it's paralyzing.
Q. Okay.
A. So when I'm frozen, I say that I'm frozen. Of 
course, there's movement. I'm saying that as a statement ofshock, statement of being unable to do what I'm telling mybody to do. 
Again, we find no indication that the DPA was expressing her 
personal opinion when she made the remark regarding defense 
counsel not having experienced trauma, nor do we find that the 
remark improperly bolstered CW's testimony. We also conclude 
that the remark could not be interpreted as an attack on the 
integrity of defense counsel and is not of a disparaging nature. 
20 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
See Klinge, 92 Hawai# i at 595, 994 P.2d at 527. Rather, we 
conclude that the DPA's remark was properly within the wide 
latitude prosecutors have in rebuttal closing to respond to 
defense counsel's arguments attacking CW's credibility raised in 
closing argument. See Austin, 143 Hawai
#i at 47, 422 P.3d at 47. 
Accordingly, we need not address plain error. 
(5) Lora argues that the cumulative effect of the 
alleged errors discussed supra warrants a new trial. 
Although we 
have concluded that the circuit court erred in certain instances, after reviewing the record as a whole, we conclude that each 
error was insubstantial and thus we need not address their 
alleged cumulative effect. See State v. Samuel, 74 Haw. 141, 
159, 838 P.2d 1374, 1383 (1992) (declining to address the 
cumulative effect of errors where each alleged error was 
individually insubstantial). 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence, entered on June 12, 2018, in the Circuit 
Court of the First Circuit. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai# i, August 30, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Emmanuel v. Tipon,
(Bileck & Tipon),for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
21 