NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0001639
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
BRIAN L. STANTON, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Respondent-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(SPP. NO. 11-1-0044 (CR. NO. 08-1-1801))

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)

 
Petitioner-Appellant Brian L. Stanton (Stanton) appeals
 
from the "Amended Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order
 
Denying Petition to Vacate, Set Aside, or Correct Judgment or to
 Release Petitioner from Custody" (Amended Order Denying
 Petition), which was filed in the Circuit Court of the First
 
1
Circuit (Circuit Court)  on May 23, 2013.  We affirm.
 
I.

 
In his underlying criminal case, Stanton was convicted
 
of attempted first-degree sexual assault of the Complainant, who
 was a prostitute. Stanton was sentenced to an indeterminate
 twenty-year term of imprisonment. Stanton filed a direct appeal
 of his conviction and sentence. This court affirmed Stanton's
 conviction and sentence, State v. Stanton, No. 29971, 2010 WL
 
1The Honorable Randal K.O. Lee presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
5146281 (Hawai 'i App. Dec. 20, 2010) (SDO), and the Hawai 'i 
Supreme Court rejected Stanton's application for writ of 
certiorari. State v. Stanton, No. SCWC–29971, 2011 WL 2132310 
(Hawai 'i May 26, 2011). 
On August 8, 2011, Stanton filed a petition for post-
conviction relief pursuant to Hawai 'i Rules of Penal Procedure 
(HRPP) Rule 40 (2006) ("Petition), which is at issue in this appeal. The Petition asserted claims, including claims of ineffective assistance of trial counsel. On April 13, 2011, the Circuit Court denied the Petition (First Order Denying Petition). In the First Order Denying Petition, the Circuit Court did not rule on the merits of Stanton's claims of ineffective assistance of trial counsel, but instead denied these claims on the ground that Stanton had waived them by not previously raising them. 
Stanton appealed from the Circuit Court's First Order 
Denying Petition. In that appeal, we vacated in part and affirmed in part the Circuit Court's First Order Denying Petition. We held that the Circuit Court erred in denying Stanton's claims of ineffective assistance of trial counsel based on the ground of waiver. Stanton v. State, No. CAAP-12-0000468, 
2013 WL 764782, *2-3 (Hawai
'i App. Feb. 28, 2013). We remanded 
the case so that the Circuit Court could determine on the merits Stanton's claims that his trial counsel provided ineffective assistance by: 
(1) failing to object to portions of Detective Sato's
testimony regarding prostitution practices as improper
opinion testimony; (2) failing to rebut the Complainant's
testimony by referring to trial and other evidence that was
inconsistent with Complainant's version of the sexual
assault and her injuries; and (3) failing to introduce
evidence of Complainant's prior bad acts that would have
cast doubt on her credibility.
 
Id. at *4.
 
II.
 
On remand, the Circuit Court considered the merits of
 
these claims. Based upon its review of the record, the Circuit
 
Court ruled that Stanton had failed to state a colorable claim of
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
ineffective assistance of trial counsel and denied Stanton's
 
remanded claims without a hearing. The Circuit Court issued its
 Amended Order Denying Petition, which contained extensive
 findings of fact and conclusions of law in support of its
 decision.
 
The Circuit Court concluded that Stanton's claims of
 
ineffective assistance of trial counsel did not raise a colorable
 claim for the following reasons:
 
1. With respect to the failure to object to Detective
 
Sato's opinion testimony, the Circuit Court concluded that: (a)
 an objection by trial counsel would have been futile because the
 prosecution had laid a proper foundation for Detective Sato's
 opinion testimony; and (b) there was a strategic basis for trial
 counsel's failure to object because Detective Sato's opinion
 testimony potentially benefitted the defense.
 
2. With respect to the failure to rebut the
 
Complainant's testimony with evidence that was inconsistent with
 her version of the sexual assault and her injuries, the Circuit
 Court concluded that Stanton's claim was speculative and that he
 failed to demonstrate that there was any evidence in existence
 and available to rebut the Complainant's testimony, that his
 trial counsel was aware of any such evidence, or that the failure
 to use any such evidence substantially impaired a meritorious
 defense.
 
3. With respect to the failure to introduce the
 
Complainant's prior bad acts that would have cast doubt on her
 credibility, the Circuit Court concluded that Stanton failed to
 show that any such prior bad acts existed or would have been
 admissible at trial.
 
III.
 
On appeal, Stanton argues that the Circuit Court erred
 
in denying his remanded claims of ineffective assistance of trial
 counsel without a hearing. We conclude that Stanton's appeal is
 without merit.
 
3
  
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
To prevail on a claim of ineffective assistance of 
counsel, a defendant bears the burden of establishing: "1) that 
there were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial impairment of a potentially meritorious defense." State v. 
Richie, 88 Hawai
'i 19, 39, 960 P.2d 1227, 1247 (1998) (block 
quote format and citation omitted). 
An HRPP Rule 40 petition may be denied without a
 
hearing if the petition fails to present a colorable claim. Dan
 
v. State, 76 Haw. 423, 427, 879 P.2d 528, 532 (1994). 
To establish a colorable claim, the allegations of the
petition must show that if taken as true the facts alleged
would change the verdict, however, a petitioner's
conclusions need not be regarded as true. Where examination
 of the record of the trial court proceedings indicates that
the petitioner's allegations show no colorable claim, it is
not error to deny the petition without a hearing.
 
Id. (block quote format and citation omitted). 
Stanton fails to provide any persuasive argument to
 
support his contention that the Circuit Court erred in denying
 
his claims of ineffective assistance of trial counsel without a
 hearing. We conclude that Stanton did not present colorable
 claims of ineffective assistance of trial counsel and that the
 Circuit Court did not err in denying his claims without a
 hearing. Accordingly, we affirm the Amended Order Denying
 Petition.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 27, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Brian L. Stanton

 
Petitioner-Appellant Pro Se Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 Loren J. Thomas

 
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu for Respondent-Appellee
 
4
 