NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-16-0000450
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
SHANELLE N. CATEIL, Plaintiff-Appellee,
and
 
PAZ R. CATEIL, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
 
HAWAII PACIFIC UNIVERSITY, Defendant-Appellee,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS 1-10;
DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10; and DOE ENTITIES 1-10,
Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 15-1-0582)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Ginoza, Chief Judge, Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Paz Cateil (Cateil) appeals from 
the "Amended Judgment," filed on May 27, 2016, the "Order 
Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendant Hawai' i Pacific 
University's Motion for Partial Dismissal of Plaintiffs' Complaint (Filed May 12, 2015)," filed on August 26, 2015, which granted summary judgment in favor of Defendant-Appellee Hawai' i 
Pacific University (HPU), and the "Amended Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Plaintiff Paz Cateil's Motion for Reconsideration of Order on Defendant's Motion for Partial Dismissal, or, in the Alternative for Rule 54(b) Certification," filed on December 30, 2015, in the Circuit Court of the First      NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Circuit (circuit court).1
 
On appeal, Cateil contends that the circuit court 
committed reversible error when it: (1) treated HPU's motion to 
dismiss as a motion for summary judgment; (2) granted summary judgment in favor of HPU despite HPU's failure to meet its initial burden of production; and (3) granted summary judgment before granting Cateil's request for a continuance to conduct discovery pursuant to Rule 56(f) of the Hawai' i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP). 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we vacate and remand
 for further proceedings.
 
(1) Cateil asserts that the circuit court improperly
 
treated HPU's motion to dismiss as a motion for summary judgment.
 We disagree. HRCP Rule 12(b) provides in relevant part:
 
If, on a motion asserting the defense . . . to dismiss for
failure of the pleading to state a claim upon which relief
can be granted, matters outside the pleading are presented
to and not excluded by the court, the motion shall be
treated as one for summary judgment and disposed of as
provided in Rule 56, and all parties shall be given
reasonable opportunity to present all material made
pertinent to such a motion by Rule 56.
 
Pursuant to HRCP Rule 12(b), the Hawai' i Supreme Court has 
repeatedly held that a motion seeking dismissal of a complaint 
"transform[s] into a [HRCP] Rule 56 motion for summary judgment when the circuit court considers matters outside the pleadings." Buscher v. Boning, 114 Hawai' i 202, 212, 159 P.3d 814, 824 
(2007); Wong v. Cayetano, 111 Hawai' i 462, 476, 143 P.3d 1, 15 
(2006); see also Gamino v. Greenwell, 2 Haw. App. 59, 62, 625 P.2d 1055, 1058 (1981) (Where "matters outside the pleading [a]re presented to and not excluded by the court, the [HRCP Rule 12(b)(6)] motion . . . automatically convert[s] into a [HRCP Rule 56] motion."). 
1
 The Honorable Karen T. Nakasone presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In the instant case, the circuit court clearly
 
articulated that because it was considering a declaration of
 
Cateil, a "matter[] outside the pleading being presented," it was
 treating HPU's motion to dismiss as a motion for summary
 judgment. We find it particularly noteworthy that at the hearing
 on HPU's motion for partial dismissal of Cateil's complaint, HPU
 argued that because Cateil had submitted declarations in
 opposition to the motion to dismiss, "the proper standard is the
 Rule 56 summary judgment motion standard" and "the Court should
 now treat [the motion to dismiss] as a motion for summary
 judgment." Accordingly, the circuit court did not err in
 treating HPU's motion to dismiss as a motion for summary
 judgment.
 
(2) Cateil further argues that the circuit court erred
 
in granting summary judgment in favor of HPU despite HPU's
 failure to meet its initial burden of production. Because HPU's
 motion to dismiss transformed into a motion for summary judgment,
 HPU accordingly was required to meet the requirements for a
 summary judgment movant.
 
[A] summary judgment movant may satisfy his or her initial
burden of production by either (1) presenting evidence
negating an element of the non-movant's claim, or (2)
demonstrating that the nonmovant will be unable to carry his
or her burden of proof at trial. Where the movant attempts
to meet his or her burden through the latter means, he or
she must show not only that the non-movant has not placed
proof in the record, but also that the movant will be unable
to offer proof at trial. Accordingly, in general, a summary
judgment movant cannot merely point to the non-moving
party's lack of evidence to support its initial burden of
production if discovery has not concluded.
 
Ralston v. Yim, 129 Hawai' i 46, 60–61, 292 P.3d 1276, 1290–91 
(2013) (citations omitted). 
Applying these principles to the instant case, HPU did
 
not satisfy its initial burden of production as a summary
 
judgment movant. HPU had the option of either putting forth
 affirmative evidence, or showing that Cateil could not carry her
 burden of proof at trial. HPU did neither. Instead, HPU "merely
 point[ed] to the non-moving party's [(Cateil's)] lack of evidence
 to support [her] initial burden of production," id., for
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
instance, by arguing that Cateil failed to allege that there was
 
a valid, enforceable contract between HPU and Cateil and thus
 failed to establish that HPU owed her a legal duty.
 
Accordingly, the circuit court erred in granting HPU's
 
motion. Because HPU failed to meet its initial burden of
 production, we need not reach the issue of whether the circuit
 court erred by granting summary judgment before granting Cateil's
 request for a continuance to conduct discovery pursuant to HRCP
 Rule 56(f).
 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the circuit court's 
"Amended Judgment," filed on May 27, 2016, the "Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Defendant Hawai' i Pacific University's 
Motion for Partial Dismissal of Plaintiffs' Complaint (Filed May 12, 2015)," filed on August 26, 2015, and the "Amended Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Plaintiff Paz Cateil's Motion for Reconsideration of Order on Defendant's Motion for Partial Dismissal, or, in the Alternative for Rule 54(b) Certification," filed on December 30, 2015, and remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this Summary Disposition Order. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 29, 2018. 
On the briefs:
 
Wayne M. Sakai,
Michiro Iwanaga,and Max J. Kimura,
(Sakai Iwanaga Sutton
Law Group),
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
April Luria,
and Jodie D. Roeca,
(Roeca Luria Shin)
for Defendant-Appellee.
 Chief Judge
 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
4
 