NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000593
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KONA'S BEST NATURAL COFFEE LLC,
a Hawai 'i limited liability company,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellant/Cross-Appellee,
v.
 
MOUNTAIN THUNDER COFFEE PLANTATION INT'L, INC.,
a Hawai 'i corporation, TRENT BATEMAN and LISA BATEMAN,
Defendants/Counterclaimants/Appellees/Cross-Appellants,
and
 
NATURESCAPE HOLDINGS GROUP INT'L, INC.,
Defendant/Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-10, JANE DOES 1-10, DOE PARTNERSHIPS 1-10,
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50, DOE ENTITIES 1-50,
Defendants.
 
MOUNTAIN THUNDER COFFEE PLANTATION INT'L INC.,
a Hawai 'i corporation, TRENT BATEMAN; LISA BATEMAN,
Third-Party Plaintiffs/Appellees/
Cross-Appellees,
vs.
 
MICHAEL ROBERTS and BRENT HIGHT,
Third-Party Defendants/Appellants/Cross-Appellees,
and
 
MARIN ARTUKOVICH, KOA COFFEE COMPANY, LLC;
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10;
DOE CORPORATIONS 1-50; DOE ENTITIES 1-50,
Third-Party Defendants.
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 08-1-098K (Kona))
    NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth, J.,
with Ginoza, J., concurring separately)
 
INTRODUCTION
 
I.
 
This appeal arises out of the breakdown and eventual
 
termination of negotiations two between Kona coffee businesses
 
regarding a potential asset purchase agreement. Kona's Best
 Natural Coffee LLC (Kona's Best) was involved in negotiations
 with Mountain Thunder Coffee Plantation Int'l, Inc. (Mountain
 Thunder) to purchase the assets of Mountain Thunder. Michael
 Roberts (Roberts) held an ownership interest in Kona's Best and
 Brent Hight (Hight) was the general manager of Kona's Best. 
Trent Bateman (Trent) and Lisa Bateman (Lisa) (collectively, the
 Batemans) were the owners of Mountain Thunder. After the
 negotiations regarding the asset purchase were terminated,
 Mountain Thunder transferred assets to Naturescape Holdings Group
 Int'l Inc. (Naturescape), a company owned by the Batemans'
 daughter, Brooke Decker (Brooke). 
Kona's Best filed a First Amended Complaint against
 
Mountain Thunder, Trent, Lisa, and Naturescape. Mountain
 Thunder, Trent, and Lisa (collectively, the Mountain Thunder
 Defendants) filed a First Amended Counterclaim against Kona's
 Best and a First Amended Third-Party Complaint against Roberts
 and Hight.
1 The parties' claims were resolved through decisions
 
rendered by a jury, decisions on equitable claims rendered by the
 Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (Circuit Court), and rulings
 by the Circuit Court.
2
 
Kona's Best, Roberts, and Hight (collectively, the
 
Kona's Best Appellants) filed an appeal from the Circuit Court's
 
1/ The Mountain Thunder Defendants' original Third-Party Complaint named
Marin Artukovich (Artukovich) and Koa Coffee Company, LLC (Koa Coffee) as
third-party defendants along with Roberts and Hight. However, the claims
against Artukovich and Koa Coffee were dismissed and are not at issue in this
appeal.
 
2/ The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
First Amended Final Judgment (Amended Judgment). On appeal,
 
Kona's Best argues that the Circuit Court erred by denying Kona's
 Best's motion for judgment as a matter of law on the Mountain
 Thunder Defendants' claims for (1) tortious interference with
 prospective business advantage and (2) breach of contract. 
Roberts and Hight argue that the Circuit Court erred by failing
 to award Roberts and Hight attorney's fees and costs for their
 successful defense of the Mountain Thunder Defendants' First
 Amended Third-Party Complaint. 
In their cross-appeal, the Mountain Thunder Defendants
 
raise numerous points of error and argue that the Circuit Court
 erred in: (1) instructing the jury on their unfair competition
 claim; (2) dismissing their claims for (a) unfair competition;
 (b) misappropriation of trade secrets; (c) promissory estoppel -­financing; (d) fraudulent misrepresentation; (e) promissory
 estoppel -- nonpayment; (f) unjust enrichment; (g) defamation;
 and (h) intentional infliction of emotional distress; (3)
 admitting analysis prepared by Kona's Best's accountant, Steven
 Kaufman, and expert testimony based on this analysis; and (4)
 failing to apply the net judgment rule in entering its Amended
 Judgment. 
In its cross-appeal, Naturescape contends that the
 
Circuit Court erred in: (1) denying Naturescape's motion for
 separate trials; and (2) entering judgment against Naturescape on
 Kona's Best's fraudulent transfer claim.
 
II.
 
The posture of this appeal has been complicated by
 
bankruptcy proceedings filed against Mountain Thunder and
 Naturescape. After receiving notice from the Kona's Best
 Appellants that involuntary bankruptcy petitions under Chapter 11
 of the Bankruptcy Code had been filed against Mountain Thunder
 and Naturescape, this court directed the parties to this appeal 
to provide information regarding the status of the bankruptcy
 proceedings; the effect of the filing of the bankruptcy petitions
 on this appeal, including whether further proceedings in this
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4appeal are stayed; and whether steps are being taken in the
bankruptcy proceeding to lift any applicable stay.  We also
requested that Elizabeth A. Kane (Kane), Trustee for the estates
of Mountain Thunder and Naturescape in the bankruptcy proceedings
(Trustee Kane), provide similar information as well as whether
Trustee Kane planned to intervene or assert an interest in this
appeal.  
After receiving and considering the responses from the
parties and Trustee Kane, this court issued an "Order Regarding
Bankruptcy Stay" (Order) on March 7, 2017.  In the Order, we
stated:
11 U.S.C. § 362 stays the "commencement or
continuation . . . of a judicial . . . proceeding against
the [bankruptcy] debtor . . . ."  11 U.S.C. § 362(a)(1). 
The automatic stay provided by 11 U.S.C. § 362 is applicable
to judicial proceedings at both the trial and appellate
levels.  Shah v. Glendale Fed. Bank, 52 Cal. Rptr.2d 417,
420 (Cal. Ct. App. 1996).  Although all claims against the
debtor are stayed, the stay does not apply to claims
initiated by the debtor, whose "successful prosecution would
inure to the benefit of the bankruptcy estate."  Parker v.
Bain
, 68 F.3d 1131, 1138 (9th Cir. 1995) (internal quotation
marks omitted).  Moreover,
Within a single case, some actions may be stayed,
others not.  Multiple claim and multiple party
litigation must be disaggregated so that particular
claims, counterclaims, crossclaims and third-party
claims are treated independently when determining
which of their respective proceedings are subject to
the bankruptcy stay.
Maritime Elec. Co. v. United Jersey Bank, 959 F.2d 1194,
1203–06 (3d Cir. 1991).  "[W]hether an action is 'against
the debtor' within the meaning of section 362(a)(1) is
determined by the debtor's status at the inception of the
action; regardless whether the debtor is the appellant or
the respondent."  Shah, 52 Cal. Rptr.2d at 420.
In Chang v. Buffington, 125 Hawai# i 186, 192, 256 P.3d
694, 700 (2011), the Hawai
#i Supreme Court stated: "It is
well established that the automatic stay is limited to
proceedings against debtors and does not apply to
non-bankrupt codefendants."  The supreme court held in Chang
that the stay was limited to proceedings against the debtor
and did not apply to "the other non-bankrupt parties." 
Chang, 125 Hawai# i at 192, 236 P.3d at 700.
In the Order, we ruled that: (1) the portions of this
appeal which arise from the First Amended Complaint brought by
Kona's Best against Mountain Thunder and Naturescape are stayed, NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
but the portions of the appeal which arise from Kona's Best's
 
First Amended Complaint against the Batemans are not stayed; (2)
 the portions of the appeal which arise from the First Amended
 Counterclaim brought by the Mountain Thunder Defendants against
 Kona's Best and the First Amended Third-Party Complaint brought
 by the Mountain Thunder Defendants against Roberts and Hight are
 not stayed; and (3) and Robert's and Hight's appeal which seeks
 to overturn the Circuit Court's denial of their request for
 attorney's fees and costs against the Mountain Thunder Defendants
 is stayed.
3
 
Pursuant to the Order, we will decide in this
 
Memorandum Opinion: (1) Kona's Best's appeal, which seeks to
 overturn the judgment entered in favor of the Mountain Thunder
 Defendants on the Mountain Thunder Defendants' claims for (a)
 tortious interference with prospective business advantage and (b)
 breach of contract that were raised in the First Amended
 Counterclaim; (2) the portions of the Mountain Thunder
 Defendants' cross-appeal that seek to overturn the judgment
 entered in favor of Kona's Best on claims raised in the Mountain
 Thunder Defendants' First Amended Counterclaim and the judgment
 entered in favor of Roberts and Hight on claims raised in the
 First Amended Third-Party Complaint; and (3) the portions of the
 cross-appeal by the Batemans that seek to overturn the judgment
 entered in favor of Kona's Best and against the Batemans on
 claims raised in Kona's Best's First Amended Complaint and the
 award of attorney's fees in favor of Kona's Best and against the
 Batemans. We will not decide: (1) Roberts' and Hight's appeal,
 which challenges the Circuit Court's denial of their request for
 attorney's fees and costs against the Mountain Thunder
 Defendants; (2) Naturescape's cross-appeal, which seeks to
 
3/ Since the filing of the Order, Trustee Kane has not moved to
intervene or substitute as a party in this appeal. In addition, we have not
received notice of any action taken in the Bankruptcy Court to enlarge or
reduce the scope of the stay applicable to this appeal as set forth in our
Order.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
overturn the judgment entered in favor of Kona's Best and against
 
Naturescape on Kona's Best's First Amended Complaint; and (3) the
 portions of the cross-appeal by Mountain Thunder that seek to
 overturn the judgment entered in favor of Kona's Best and against
 Mountain Thunder on claims raised in Kona's Best's First Amended
 Complaint and the award of attorney's fees in favor of Kona's
 Best and against Mountain Thunder.
 
III.
 
As explained in greater detail below, with respect to
 
Kona's Best's appeal, we conclude that: (1) the Circuit Court
 erred in denying Kona's Best's motion for judgment as a matter of
 law on the Mountain Thunder Defendants' claim for tortious
 interference with prospective business advantage; and (2) the
 Circuit Court did not err in denying Kona's Best motion for
 judgment as a matter of law on the Mountain Thunder Defendants'
 claims for breach of contract. With respect to the Mountain
 Thunder Defendants' cross-appeal, we affirm the Circuit Court on
 all claims of error challenging: (1) the entry of judgment in
 favor of Kona's Best on claims raised in the Mountain Thunder
 Defendants' First Amended Counterclaim; (2) the entry of judgment
 in favor of Roberts and Hight on claims raised in the First
 Amended Third-Party Complaint; (3) the entry of judgment in favor
 of Kona's Best and against the Batemans on claims raised in
 Kona's Best's First Amended Complaint; and (4) the award of
 attorney's fees in favor of Kona's Best and against the Batemans. 
BACKGROUND
 
This case involves Kona's Best, which was a relative
 
newcomer to the Kona coffee industry, and Mountain Thunder, which
 was an established Kona coffee business. 
I.
 
The Kona coffee season starts in July or August and 
ends in February or March of the following year. Coffee is grown on numerous farms across the Kona coast on Island of Hawai
'i. 
During the coffee season, coffee beans are harvested, processed, and roasted for consumption. 
6
  
 
  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The process of coffee production occurs in several
 
stages. First, the fruit of the coffee plant, also known as the
 
coffee cherry, is picked. This coffee cherry is then wet-milled
 to remove the pulp from the coffee bean, and the beans are dried. 
At this point, the coffee is referred to as "parchment" because
 of the paper-like husk on the outside of the bean. The parchment
 
coffee is then dry-milled to remove the husk, and after the dry-
milling, the coffee is known as green coffee or green beans. The
 
final step in the process is the roasting of the coffee. Some
 
coffee producers sell the green beans to processors who roast and
 distribute the coffee, while others roast and distribute the
 coffee beans themselves.
 
II.
 
At the time relevant to this case, Mountain Thunder was
 
a family owned and operated business. Lisa and Trent Bateman,
 who were the sole officers and shareholders of Mountain Thunder,
 began doing business in the Kona coffee industry in the late
 1990's and gradually built the business over the years. The
 
Batemans' children also assisted in the operation of Mountain
 
Thunder. 
Although Mountain Thunder grew, processed, and roasted
 
some of its own coffee, its primary business between 2002 and
 2007 consisted of purchasing and processing coffee cherry to
 green coffee for Hawaii Coffee Company (Hawaii Coffee). Under
 
this arrangement, Hawaii Coffee would advance Mountain Thunder
 
funds to purchase coffee cherry and then pay Mountain Thunder a
 fee to process it to green coffee. By 2007, Mountain Thunder had
 become interested in expanding its operations so that it could
 roast and sell more of its own coffee, but this required
 obtaining additional financing to purchase coffee cherry and
 acquire equipment to increase its capacity.
 
Roberts had an ownership interest in a real estate
 
investment company called Sandstone Ventures, LLC (Sandstone),
 and Hight was a project manager for Sandstone. In 2006, Roberts,
 
through Sandstone, purchased a residence and coffee farm near
 
7
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Mountain Thunder's facilities in Kaloko, Hawai 'i. At that time, 
neither Roberts nor Hight had experience in the coffee business. 
Roberts, however, was interested in having Sandstone become involved in the Kona coffee industry, and on or about September 27, 2006, Roberts registered "Kona's Best Natural Coffee LLC" as a Hawai
'i domestic limited liability company whose stated purpose 
was harvesting, roasting, and marketing coffee. 
III.
 
In the fall of 2006, Roberts' property manager hired
 
Mountain Thunder to pick the coffee cherry on Roberts' farm. 
This arrangement eventually resulted in Roberts and Hight
 becoming acquainted with the Batemans. In March 2007, the
 Batemans entered into preliminary discussions with Roberts and
 Hight about possible financing for the expansion of Mountain
 Thunder's operations. On March 12, 2007, Trent sent an email to
 
Hight, which was forwarded to Roberts, in which Trent expressed
 
his desire to obtain new financing to replace the $2 million
 Mountain Thunder had been receiving pursuant to its arrangement
 with Hawaii Coffee, so that Mountain Thunder could roast more
 coffee for itself and dramatically expand its roasted coffee
 sales. Roberts responded that he was interested in getting
 together to meet and see if they "could put something together
 that would be beneficial to both parties." 
In March 2007, the Batemans, Roberts, Hight, and Jim
 
Smittkamp (Smittkamp), Roberts' attorney, met on the grounds of
 the Mountain Thunder coffee plantation. The parties discussed
 Mountain Thunder's business, its plans and hopes for the future,
 and possible means for Sandstone to assist with these plans. 
The parties dispute whether a confidentiality agreement
 
was signed before these discussions. According to the Batemans,
 a confidentiality agreement was signed at the March 2007 meeting
 before the Batemans disclosed any information regarding their
 operations and future business plans.  At trial, the Batemans
 
introduced a copy of an unsigned and undated confidentiality
 
agreement, which they testified was the same as the agreement
 
8
   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Trent and Roberts had signed before the Batemans' disclosure of
 
their operations and future plans. This confidentiality
 agreement provided, in relevant part:
 
In consideration of the Disclosing Party's disclosure
to it of the Information, the Interested Party agrees that
it will keep the Information confidential and that, without
the prior written consent of the Disclosing Party, the
Information will not be disclosed by the Interested Party or
by its officers, directors, partners, employees, affiliates,
agents or representatives (collectively, "Representatives"),
and will not be used by the Interested Party or its
Representatives other than in connection with the
Transaction.
 
The "Information" covered by the confidentiality agreement was 
information that was "non-public, confidential or proprietary in
 nature" and did not include information that "is or becomes"
 available publicly or through third-party sources. The
 confidentiality agreement also provided that "[t]he rights and
 obligations of the parties hereunder shall terminate one (1) year
 from the date hereof."
 
The Kona's Best Appellants deny that this
 
confidentiality agreement was ever signed. Roberts testified
 that he believed a confidentiality agreement prepared by
 Smittkamp was offered to Trent at the March 2007 meeting, but
 that the agreement "[n]ever got signed." Hight stated that he
 did not recall a confidentiality document being signed at the
 time of the March 2007 meeting.
 
At the March 2007 meeting, Hight and Roberts requested
 
that the Batemans provide Mountain Thunder's financial
 information and to create a "wish list" of things Mountain
 Thunder needed to realize its goals. The Batemans provided their
 
wish list on April 9, 2007, which included $1 million to buy
 
coffee and additional amounts to purchase equipment and expand
 their facilities. The Batemans also discussed the possibility of
 
increasing Mountain Thunder's supply of coffee by merging with
 
Koa Coffee Plantation (Koa Coffee), which was owned by Marin
 Artukovich (Artukovich). Koa Coffee was a competitor of Mountain
 Thunder, with both having similar operations, but the Batemans
 
9
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
had a friendly relationship with Artukovich, and they had helped
 
each other in the past.
 
After the March 2007 meeting, the parties continued to
 
discuss a potential deal. At trial, the Batemans testified that
 Roberts stated during their early discussions that he wanted to
 "make [the Batemans'] dreams come true."  Over time, the parties'
 
discussions shifted from Sandstone providing financing to
 
Mountain Thunder, to Sandstone investing in Mountain Thunder, and
 then to Sandstone acquiring Mountain Thunder's assets through
 Kona's Best.
4
 
In April 2007, Trent provided Hight with contact
 
information for Artukovich. Roberts invited the Batemans to
 Denver, Sandstone's headquarters, to continue their discussions. 
In early May 2007, the Batemans met with Roberts, Hight, and
 other Sandstone advisors in Colorado. The Batemans also provided
 
James Hackstaff, an attorney for Sandstone, with a statement
 
detailing Mountain Thunder's business and the Batemans'
 experience in the Kona coffee market, which was recorded by a
 court reporter. At the Colorado meetings, Sandstone agreed to
 loan Mountain Thunder and the Batemans $100,000 for working
 capital, which was reflected in a promissory note signed by the
 Batemans.
5 Sandstone also authorized Hight to purchase up to
 
$500,000.00 worth of coffee equipment for use by Mountain
 
Thunder. 
After the Colorado meetings, the Batemans and Hight
 
attended the Specialty Coffee Association of America conference
 in California. 
At the conference, Hight purchased several pieces
 
of equipment which could be used to expand Mountain Thunder's
 operations. During the conference, Hight and Trent met with
 Artukovich, the owner of Koa Coffee, and they discussed the
 
4/ Sandstone held a 47% ownership interest in Kona's Best.
 
5/ After making the first payment under the promissory note, Mountain
Thunder and the Batemans defaulted on the note and made no further payments.
Sandstone assigned the promissory note to Kona's Best. 
10
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
possible purchase by Sandstone of both Mountain Thunder and Koa
 
Coffee. Artukovich was looking to sell Koa Coffee, and he wanted
 the sale to be completed quickly, because he was planning to
 purchase a winery in California. 
IV.
 
At some point, Sandstone apparently decided to use
 
Kona's Best as its corporate vehicle for entering the Kona coffee
 market.
6 In May 2007, while the discussions concerning the
 
purchase by Kona's Best of Mountain Thunder's assets were
 ongoing, Kona's Best began funding Mountain Thunder's purchase of
 coffee cherry. Kona's Best agreed to provide funds for the
 actual cost of the coffee cherry and to pay Mountain Thunder a
 fee for processing the coffee cherry. Because coffee cherry
 purchases were now being funded by Kona's Best, Mountain Thunder
 ceased its prior relationship with Hawaii Coffee. According to
 
Jim Wayman (Wayman), the President of Hawaii Coffee, Mountain
 
Thunder did not inform Hawaii Coffee that it had stopped
 purchasing cherry coffee on Hawaii Coffee's behalf, and Wayman
 only learned of this development when he called Trent during the
 2007-2008 coffee season to ask why Mountain Thunder had not
 submitted any invoices for coffee cherry purchases.
 
On June 14, 2007, in furtherance of their negotiations,
 
Kona's Best issued a letter of intent (June LOI) notifying
 Mountain Thunder of its intent to purchase Mountain Thunder's
 assets. The June LOI was non-binding in that it did not obligate
 
either side to enter into an asset purchase agreement. The June
 
LOI also provided that upon execution of the June LOI, Kona's
 Best would have access to Mountain Thuder's business records. It
 also contained a confidentiality provision, which stated, in
 relevant part: 
5. Use and Confidentiality. All of the information,
records, books and data to which Purchaser and/or its
representatives are given access as set forth above will be
used by Purchaser solely for the purpose of analyzing the
 
6/ For simplicity, our references hereinafter to "Kona's Best" will
include actions taken by Sandstone, unless otherwise indicated. 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Business and the Assets and will be treated on a
 
confidential basis.
 
Trent made changes to the June LOI, such as increasing the
 
purchase price from $3 million to $3.5 million. Kona's Best did
 not acknowledge acceptance of these changes. The June LOI also
 provided that its provisions would be null and void if it was not
 accepted by the Batemans on or before June 22, 2007. Trent
 testified that he signed the June LOI by this deadline, but he
 did not date the June LOI, and it was not returned to Kona's Best
 until July 12, 2007.
 
On July 27, 2007, Kona's Best entered into an agreement
 
to purchase the assets of Koa Coffee, and the asset purchase
 closed on August 20, 2007.
7 As part of this asset purchase
 
agreement, Artukovich agreed to remain as a consultant for Kona's
 Best and to train Hight, who assumed the role of general manager
 for Kona's Best, in the operation of the business. 
On August 28, 2007, Kona's Best issued another letter
 
of intent (August LOI) regarding its intent to purchase the
 assets of Mountain Thunder. The August LOI contained provisions
 similar to the June LOI, including the same confidentiality
 provision, but reduced the purchase price to $2.495 million and
 had an acceptance deadline of August 31, 2008. The Batemans
 timely signed and accepted the August LOI. 
V.
 
Kona's Best and Mountain Thunder were unable to reach a
 
final agreement and never executed an asset purchase agreement. 
The potential deal fell apart and negotiations broke down toward
 the end of November 2007. 
The termination of negotiations left several
 
outstanding issues between the parties. The $100,000 promissory
 note executed by the Batemans had not been paid. Equipment
 
7/ Kona's Best began operating Koa Coffee after the asset purchase and
did much of its business under this name. For the sake of simplicity, we will
refer to both Kona's Best and Koa Coffee as "Kona's Best," except where
discussing Koa Coffee specifically.
 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
purchased by Kona's Best in contemplation of its purchase of
 
Mountain Thunder's assets had been installed at the Mountain
 Thunder facilities and was being used by Mountain Thunder. 
Kona's Best requested that Mountain Thunder return all of the
 coffee Mountain Thunder had purchased on behalf of Kona's Best,
 including parchment coffee which Mountain Thunder had not yet
 dry-milled into green coffee. Disputes arose in reconciling
 which coffee in Mountain Thunder's possession belonged to Kona's
 Best and which belonged to Mountain Thunder and in determining
 how much Kona's Best owed to Mountain Thunder for the services
 provided by Mountain Thunder. 
VI.
 
After losing Kona's Best's business, Trent contacted
 
Wayman of Hawaii Coffee about re-establishing their prior
 purchase and processing agreement. Wayman agreed to reinstate
 their agreement until the end of the 2007-2008 season, as
 Mountain Thunder's earlier, unexpected termination of their
 agreement had left Hawaii Coffee with a supply shortfall. 
After the end of the 2007-2008 season, Trent again
 
contacted Wayman seeking to continue Mountain Thunder's purchase
 and processing agreement with Hawaii Coffee for the 2008-2009
 season. By this time, Kona's Best had filed the lawsuit in this
 case against the Mountain Thunder Defendants. Wayman was
 hesitant to continue his relationship with the Mountain Thunder
 Defendants because of their actions during the prior season when
 they stopped purchasing and processing coffee for Hawaii Coffee
 in favor of Kona's Best with very little notice. Wayman was also
 reluctant because of the pending lawsuit, fearing that he may not
 be able to recover the funds advanced to Mountain Thunder and
 that the coffee purchased by Mountain Thunder on Hawaii Coffee's
 behalf may become entangled in the litigation. The Batemans
 attempted to assuage Wayman's concerns by informing him that
 Mountain Thunder's assets were protected because the assets had
 been transferred to an offshore entity and were thus beyond the 
13
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
reach of any judgment entered against Mountain Thunder in the
 
lawsuit.
 
Kona's Best, with Artukovich's assistance, also entered
 
into negotiations with Wayman to purchase and process coffee for
 Hawaii Coffee during this time. Artukovich testified that he was
 instructed by Roberts to tell Wayman that Kona's Best would not
 sign an agreement if Hawaii Coffee continued to do business with
 Mountain Thunder. Wayman, however, testified that Artukovich
 simply cautioned him that "if you're going to do business with
 Trent, I'd just watch my back." 
Wayman did not view Artukovich's comments as meaning
 
that Hawaii Coffee's agreement with Kona's Best was conditioned
 on Hawaii Coffee not doing business with Mountain Thunder. The
 written agreement between Kona's Best and Mountain Thunder that
 was signed in July 2008 was non-exclusive and did not include a
 condition preventing Hawaii Coffee from doing business with
 Mountain Thunder. Wayman testified that he decided not to do
 business with Mountain Thunder, not because of any condition
 imposed by Kona's Best, but because of his concerns (1) about
 Mountain Thunder's reliability in light of its abrupt termination
 of their agreement during the prior season; (2) that the pending
 litigation and a possible judgment against Mountain Thunder could
 tie up coffee that Mountain Thunder purchased on Hawaii Coffee's
 behalf; and (3) that Mountain Thunder's movement of its assets
 offshore would make it difficult for Hawaii Coffee to collect
 from Mountain Thunder.
 
PROCEDURAL HISTORY
 
I.
 
On April 7, 2008, Kona's Best filed a Complaint against
 
the Mountain Thunder Defendants. The Mountain Thunder Defendants
 filed a Counterclaim against Kona's Best and a Third-Party
 Complaint against Roberts and Hight. 
On July 1, 2008, several months after the filing of
 
Kona's Best's Complaint, the Batemans transferred substantially
 all of Mountain Thunder's assets to Naturescape. The Batemans'
 
14
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
daughter, Brooke, was the sole officer and director of
 
Naturescape and its ownership structure involved Cook Islands
 entities. The stated purchase price for the asset transfer was
 $200,000, with Naturescape leasing back the assets to Mountain
 Thunder for $1,000 per month. Mountain Thunder continued to use
 the assets in its business operations. Authorization for the
 transfer of assets was not reflected in the corporate minutes of
 either Mountain Thunder or Naturescape, and the sale and
 leaseback arrangement was not well documented.
 
In October 2008, several months after the transfer of
 
assets to Naturescape, the Batemans denied in answers to Kona's
 Best's interrogatories that they had any knowledge or information
 regarding their "involvement with" Naturescape. Mountain
 Thunder, in its October 2008 answers to Kona's Best's
 interrogatories, denied any knowledge or information regarding
 the transfer or payment by Mountain Thunder of funds to
 Naturescape. In a February 2010 deposition, Lisa denied having
 knowledge of details concerning Emerald Island Trust, an entity
 in the chain of ownership of Naturescape, such as who set up the
 trust, what the trust does, and who the current trustees are. 
However, in a subsequent March 6, 2010, deposition, Lisa
 testified that she was familiar with Naturescape and its
 ownership structure; that Naturescape was her daughter's company;
 and that Mountain Thunder had sold its equipment to Naturescape
 in "mid 2008" for $200,000 and then entered into a "verbal lease"
 with Naturescape to lease back the equipment for $1,000 per
 month.
 
II.
 
After learning of the connection between the Mountain
 
Thunder Defendants and Naturescape, Kona's Best, on March 29,
 2010, filed a Motion to Amend Complaint and to Continue Trial.
 
The Circuit Court granted the motion, concluding that the
 
Mountain Thunder Defendants "obfuscated [Kona's Best's] ability
 to discern their relationship with Naturescape[.]"
 
15
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In April 2010, Kona's Best filed its First Amended
 
Complaint, which added a count for fraudulent transfer of assets
 
by Mountain Thunder and brought Naturescape into the litigation.8
 
The First Amended Complaint alleged the following causes of
 action:
 
(1) COUNT I Breach of Contract -- alleging that
the Mountain Thunder Defendants breached their
 
contract with Kona's Best relating to the purchase
and processing of coffee cherry on behalf of
Kona's Best by failing to deliver all the coffee
purchased to Kona's Best; 
(2) COUNT II Conversion -- alleging that the
Mountain Thunder Defendants converted some of
 
Kona's Best's coffee by placing some of the coffee
they purchased on Kona's Best's behalf into the
Mountain Thunder Defendants' own roasting program; 
(3) COUNT III Breach of Note -- alleging that the
Mountain Thunder Defendants breached the $100,000
promissory note in favor of Sandstone, which was
endorsed to Kona's Best, by failing to make
payments due on the note;
 
(4) COUNT IV Conversion -- alleging that the
Mountain Thunder Defendants converted the
 
equipment and machinery purchased by Kona's Best
and delivered to Mountain Thunder by refusing to
relinquish possession to Kona's Best after Kona's
Best demanded possession of the equipment and
machinery in December 2007;
 
(5) COUNT V Loss of Use Damages -- alleging that
Kona's Best suffered damages as a direct result of
the Mountain Thunder Defendants' refusal to turn
 over possession of the equipment and machinery
purchased by Kona's Best; 
(6) COUNT VI Intentional/Negligent
Misrepresentation -- alleging that the MountainThunder Defendants misrepresented to Kona's Best
that they were licensed by the State of Hawai
'i as 
brokers of Kona coffee and that Kona's Best reasonably relied upon this misrepresentation toits detriment; 
8/ Except for the new fraudulent transfer count against Naturescape, the
First Amended Complaint contained the same causes of action as the original
Complaint. 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(7) COUNT VII Breach of Fiduciary Duty -- alleging
that the Mountain Thunder Defendants owed Kona's
 
Best fiduciary duties as Kona's Best's "broker"
and that the Mountain Thunder Defendants breached
 those duties by failing to make payment to Kona's
Best of money they collected for the sale of
Kona's Best's coffee; 
(8) COUNT VIII Breach of Contract -- alleging that
the Mountain Thunder Defendants agreed to sell
Kona's Best's coffee to third parties on Kona's
Best's behalf but breached this agreement by
selling the coffee and collecting payment on the
sales, but failing to make payment to Kona's Best
for said coffee;
 
(9) COUNT IX Conversion of Funds -- alleging that
the Mountain Thunder Defendants converted funds
 
belonging to Kona's Best by failing to make
payment to Kona's Best for Kona's Best's coffee
they sold to third parties;
 
(10) COUNT X Immediate Possession of Personal
 
Property -- alleging that Kona's Best is entitled
to immediate possession of equipment, machinery,

coffee inventory, and funds owned by Kona's Best
that are still in the possession of the Mountain
Thunder Defendants; 
(11) COUNT XI Breach of Duty 
-- alleging that the
Mountain Thunder Defendants breached their duty to
deal fairly and in good faith with Kona's Best; 
(12) COUNT XII Alter Ego -- alleging that Mountain
Thunder is the alter ego of the Batemans; and 
(13) COUNT XIII Fraudulent Transfer -- alleging
that during the pendency of this action, Mountain
Thunder fraudulently transferred "the majority
and/or substantially all of its assets to
Naturescape." 
The Mountain Thunder Defendants filed a First Amended
 
Counterclaim against Kona's Best and a First Amended Third-Party
 
Complaint against Roberts and Hight, which essentially alleged
 the same causes of action against all of the Kona's Best
 Appellants. The First Amended Counterclaim and First Amended
 Third-Party Complaint alleged the following causes of action:
 
17
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) COUNT I Breach of Contract -- Nonpayment for
Coffee Beans and Coffee Services
 -- alleging that
Kona's Best, Roberts, and Hight breached and owe
outstanding amounts on their contract with the
Mountain Thunder Defendants for the purchase and
sale of coffee beans and coffee related services;
 
(2) Count II Promissory Estoppel -- Nonpayment for
Coffee Beans and Coffee Services -- alleging that

Kona's Best, Roberts, and Hight should be estopped
from denying their promise to pay the Mountain
Thunder Defendants for coffee beans and coffee
 related services, which the Mountain Thunder
Defendants relied upon to their detriment;
 
(3) COUNT III Breach of Contract -- Termination of
 
Purchase -- alleging that Kona's Best, Roberts,
and Hight breached their promises and agreement to
purchase Mountain Thunder's assets; 
(4) COUNT IV Breach of Duty to Negotiate in Good
Faith -- alleging that Kona's Best, Roberts, and
Hight breached their duty to negotiate in good
faith with respect to the purchase of Mountain
Thunder's assets;
 
(5) COUNT V Promissory Estoppel-- Financing  -­
alleging that Kona's Best, Roberts, and Hight
should be estopped from denying promises to
financially invest in Mountain Thunder and to help
Mountain Thunder expand and grow its roasting
program, which the Mountain Thunder Defendants
relied upon to their detriment;
 
(6) COUNT VI Breach of Contract -- Confidentiality
-- alleging that Kona's Best, Roberts, and Hight
breached the terms of the confidentiality
provision set forth in the June LOI and August LOI
and used confidential information and trade
 secrets disclosed by the Mountain Thunder
Defendants; 
(7) COUNT VII Trade Secret Violation -- alleging
that Kona's Best, Roberts, and Hight
misappropriated the Mountain Thunder Defendants'
trade secrets, including the customer list, coffee
bean roasting methods, and other proprietary
information;
 
(8) COUNT VIII Tortious Interference of Contract 
 
-- alleging that Kona's Best, Roberts, and Hight
induced business customers and associates of 
18
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Mountain Thunder to breach their contracts with
 
Mountain Thunder; 
(9) COUNT IX Tortious Interference of Prospective
Contractual Relations -- alleging that Kona's
Best, Roberts, and Hight interfered with Mountain
Thunder's prospective contractual agreements with
vendors and buyers of coffee;
 
(10) COUNT X Defamation -- alleging that Kona's
Best, Roberts, and Hight disparaged and made false
defamatory statements about the Mountain Thunder
Defendants;
 
(11) COUNT XI Intentional Infliction of Emotional
 
Distress -- alleging that the actions of Kona's
Best, Roberts, and Hight have caused the Batemans

to suffer extreme emotional distress; 
(12) COUNT XII Unjust Enrichment -- alleging that

Kona's Best, Roberts, and Hight unjustly obtained
the Mountain Thunder Defendants' business
 knowledge, trade secrets, and coffee; 
(13) COUNT XIII Fraud -- alleging that Kona's
Best, Roberts, and Hight fraudulently induced the
Mountain Thunder Defendants to reveal their trade
 secrets and confidential business information and
 then wrongfully used such information to compete
against Mountain Thunder;
 
(14) COUNT XIV Misrepresentation -- alleging that
Kona's Best, Roberts, and Hight used
misrepresentations to mislead the Mountain Thunder
Defendants into revealing their trade secrets and
confidential business information and then
 wrongfully used such information to compete
against Mountain Thunder; 
(15) COUNT XV Unfair Competition -- alleging that
Kona's Best, Roberts, and Hight used unfair
business practices to unfairly compete with the
Mountain Thunder Defendants and other Kona coffee
 mills, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes
(HRS) §§ 480-2, 480-13, 481-1, and 481-3;
 
(16) COUNT XVI Attempt to Monopolize -- alleging
that Kona's Best, Roberts, and Hight attempted to
monopolize the Kona coffee trade in violation of
HRS § 480-9;
 
19
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
9/ Other than the finding of non-liability on Counts III, IV, and V of
Kona's Best's First Amended Complaint, it is unclear what specific relief the
Mountain Thunder Defendants were seeking under Count XIX. 
20(17) COUNT XVII Vicarious Liability -- Alter Ego 
-- alleging that Kona's Best is the alter ego of
Roberts and vice versa and that Roberts is
vicariously liable for the actions of Kona's Best
and Hight; 
(18) COUNT XVIII Injunctive Relief -- alleging
that the Mountain Thunder Defendants are entitled
to injunctive relief to prevent future violations
by Kona's Best, Roberts, and Hight with respect to
confidential information obtained from the
Mountain Thunder Defendants; and 
(19) COUNT XIX Liability on Kona's Best
Complaint  -- alleging that the Mountain
Thunder Defendants are not liable to Kona's
Best on Counts III, IV, and V of Kona's
Best's First Amended Complaint.9
III.
Prior to trial, the Circuit Court granted summary
judgment in favor of the Kona's Best Appellants on the Mountain
Thunder Defendants' claims in Counts XI and Count XVI of the
First Amended Counterclaim and First Amended Third-Party
Complaint.  Kona's Best voluntarily dismissed Counts V, VII, X,
and XI of the First Amended Complaint, and the Mountain Thunder
Defendants voluntarily dismissed Count IV of the First Amended
Counterclaim and First Amended Third-Party Complaint.
The case proceeded to trial on Counts I, II, III, IV,
VI, VIII, and IX of the First Amended Complaint and Counts I,
III, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XIII, XIV, XV of the First Amended
Counterclaim and First Amended Third-Party Complaint.  The
equitable claims set forth in Kona's Best's First Amended
Complaint, Counts XII and XIII, and the Mountain Thunder
Defendants' First Amended Counterclaim and First Amended Third-
Party Complaint, Counts II, V, XII, XVII, and XVIII, were
reserved for determination by the Circuit Court after trial.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
10/ Although Count IX is labeled "Tortious Interference of Prospective
Contractual Relations" in the First Amended Counterclaim and the First Amended
Third-Party Complaint, the claim asserted in Count IX was referred to at trial
and is referred to by the parties on appeal as "tortious interference with
prospective business advantage."  The jury was also instructed on the elements
for tortious interference with prospective business advantage.  We will
analyze and refer to the claim in Count IX as a claim for tortious
interference with prospective business advantage.   
21After the parties presented their cases in chief, the
Circuit Court granted judgment as a matter of law in favor of the
Kona's Best Appellants on Counts VII (Trade Secret Violation) and
Count X (Defamation) of the First Amended Counterclaim and First
Amended Third-Party Complaint.  By agreement of the parties, the
following counts were grouped together for purposes of the
special verdict form: (1) Counts I, III, and VIII of the First
Amended Complaint (Kona's Best's Breach of Contract Claims); (2)
Counts II, IV, and IX of the First Amended Complaint (Kona's
Best's Conversion Claims); and (3) 
Hight on claims raised in the First Amended Third-Party Complaint
Counts I, III, and VI of the First Amended Counterclaim and First
Amended Third-Party Complaint (Mountain Thunder Defendants'
Breach of Contract Claims). 
The jury returned the following special verdict.  The
jury found that the Mountain Thunder Defendants were liable to
Kona's Best on Kona's Best's Breach of Contract Claims and Kona's
Best's Conversion Claims.  The jury awarded damages totaling
$167,741.35 for Kona's Best's Breach of Contract Claims and
$77,274.75 for Kona's Best's Conversion Claims.  These damages
were apportioned so that 50 percent was owed by Mountain Thunder
and 25 percent was each owed by Trent and Lisa.  The jury found
that the Mountain Thunder Defendants were not liable on Count VI
(Intentional/Negligent Misrepresentation). 
With respect to the claims brought by the Mountain
Thunder Defendants, the jury found that Kona's Best was liable on
the Mountain Thunder Defendants' Breach of Contract Claims, their
claim for tortious interference with prospective business
advantage (Count IX),10 and their claim for unfair competition
(Count XV) under the First Amended Counterclaim.  The juryNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Claims (First Amended
Complaint)
Breach of Contract (Counts
I, III, and VIII) 
Conversion (Counts II, IV,
and IX)
Negligent Misrepresentation
(Count VI)
Fraud (Count VI)
Claims (First Amended
Counterclaim and First
Amended Third-Party
Complaint)
Breach of Contract (Counts
I, III, and VI)
Negligent Misrepresentation
(Count XIV) 
Tortious Interference with
Contract (Count VIII)
Tortious Interference with
Prospective Business (Count
IX)
Unfair Competition (Count
XV)
Fraud (Count XIII)Mountain Thunder
$83,870.68
$38,637.37
Not liable
Not liable 
Kona's Best
$154,000
Not liable
Not liable
$198,347 
$1
Not liableTrent Bateman Lisa Bateman
$41,935.34
$19,318.69
Not liable
Not liable
Roberts
Not liable
Not liable
Not liable
Not liable
Not liable
Not liable$41,935.34
$19,318.69
Not liable
Not liable
Hight
Not liable
Not liable
Not liable
Not liable
Not liable
Not liable
11/ The special verdict apparently separated Kona's Best's claim in Count
VI of the First Amended Complaint for Intentional/Negligent Misrepresentation
into "Negligent Misrepresentation" and "Fraud."    
22awarded damages against Kona's Best in the amount of $154,000 for
the Mountain Thunder Defendants' Breach of Contract Claims,
$198,347 for their claim for tortious interference with
prospective business advantage, and $1 for their claim for unfair
competition.  The jury found that Kona's Best was not liable on
Counts VIII (Tortious Interference with Contract), XIII (Fraud),
and XIV (Misrepresentation) of the First Amended Counterclaim. 
The jury also found that Roberts and Hight were not liable under
the First Amended Third-Party Complaint for any of the claims
submitted to the jury.
The jury's special verdict is summarized as follows:11NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
23Based on the evidence introduced at trial, the Circuit
Court decided the equitable claims asserted by the parties and 
entered its "Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order
Regarding Equitable Claims on Counts II, V, XII, XVII and XVIII
of the [First Amended] Counterclaim and [First Amended] Third
Party Complaint; and Counts XII and XIII of the First Amended
Complaint" (Order Regarding Equitable Claims).  The Circuit Court
granted judgment in favor of Kona's Best on its claims that
Mountain Thunder is the alter ego of Trent and Lisa (Count XII)
and that Mountain Thunder's transfer of its assets to Naturescape
was a fraudulent conveyance (Count XIII).  The Circuit Court also
granted judgment in favor of Kona's Best, Roberts, and Hight and
against the Mountain Thunder Defendants on all the equitable
claims asserted in the First Amended Counterclaim and First
Amended Third-Party Complaint. 
IV.
After the jury's special verdict was entered, the
parties filed motions challenging the jury's special verdict. 
The Circuit Court denied the Mountain Thunder Defendants' renewed
motion for judgment as a matter of law with respect to Kona's
Best's Conversion Claims, their request for remittitur regarding
damages awarded against the Batemans on Kona's Best's Conversion
Claims, and their request for additur with regard to the $1
awarded by the jury on their unfair competition claim.  The
Circuit Court granted a portion of Kona's Best's renewed motion
for judgment as a matter of law, granting judgment in Kona's
Best's favor on the Mountain Thunder Defendants' unfair
competition claim and vacating the jury's $1 award on that claim. 
The Circuit Court denied Kona's Best's renewed motion for
judgment as a matter of law on the Mountain Thunder Defendants'
claim for tortious interference with prospective business
advantage and the Mountain Thunder Defendants' Breach of Contract
Claims, and the Circuit Court also denied Kona's Best's
alternative request for a new trial on these claims.  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Mountain Thunder Defendants and the Kona's Best
 
Appellants filed motions for attorney's fees and costs.  The
 
Circuit Court awarded Kona's Best $3,435.34 in attorney's fees,
 
but denied Roberts and Hight an award of any attorney's fees. 
The Circuit Court entered its Amended Judgment on June 15, 2012,
 and this appeal followed. 
DISCUSSION
 
I. Kona's Best's Appeal
 
We first address the points of error raised by Kona's
 
Best in its appeal.
12
 
A.
 
Kona's Best contends that the Circuit Court erred in
 
denying its renewed post-verdict motion for judgment as a matter
 of law on the Mountain Thunder Defendants' claim for tortious
 interference with prospective business advantage. 
Courts apply the same standard in ruling on a renewed
 
motion for judgment as a matter of law and a motion for judgment
 as a matter of law. See Board of Directors of Ass'n of Apartment
 
Owners of Regency Tower Condominium Project v. Regency Tower
 Venture, 2 Haw. App. 506, 514, 635 P.2d 244, 250 (1981). 
A motion for judgment as a matter of law may be granted only
when after disregarding conflicting evidence, giving to the
non-moving party's evidence all the value to which it is
legally entitled, and indulging every legitimate inference
which may be drawn from the evidence in the non-moving
party's favor, it can be said that there is no evidence to
support a jury verdict in his or her favor.
 
Ray v. Kapiolani Medical Specialists, 125 Hawai 'i 253, 261, 259 
P.3d 569, 577 (2011) (internal quotation marks, citation, and 
brackets omitted). We review a trial court's decision on a motion for judgment as a matter of law de novo. Id. 
12/ As previously noted, in light of the involuntary bankruptcy petition
filed against Mountain Thunder, Roberts' and Hight's appeal, which challenges
the Circuit Court's denial of their request for attorney's fees and costs
against the Mountain Thunder Defendants, is stayed, and we will not decide
Roberts' and Hight's claim on appeal that the Circuit Court erred in denying
their request for attorney's fees and costs. 
24
        NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Kona's Best argues that the Circuit Court erred in
 
denying its motion for judgment as a matter of law on the
 
Mountain Thunder Defendants' claim for tortious interference with
 prospective business advantage because: (1) Kona's Best was
 
13
protected by the "competitor's privilege,"  and (2) the Mountain
Thunder Defendants failed to prove causation and damages. We
 conclude that the Circuit Court erred in denying Kona's Best's
 motion for judgment as a matter of law on this claim.
 
1.

 
To establish a claim for tortious interference with
 
prospective business advantage against Kona's Best, the Mountain
 Thunder Defendants were required to prove the following elements:
 
(1) the existence of a valid business relationship or a
prospective advantage or expectancy sufficiently definite,
specific, and capable of acceptance in the sense that there
is a reasonable probability of it maturing into a future
economic benefit to the [Mountain Thunder Defendants]; (2)
knowledge of the relationship, advantage, or expectancy by
[Kona's Best]; (3) a purposeful intent to interfere with the
relationship, advantage, or expectancy; (4) legal causation
between the act of interference and the impairment of the
relationship, advantage, or expectancy; and (5) actual
damages.
 
Kahala Royal Corp. v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stiffel , 113
 
Hawai'i 251, 267 n.18, 151 P.3d 732, 748 n.18 (2007) (block quote 
format altered and citation omitted).
 
Kona's Best argues that its conduct was protected by
 
the competitor's privilege. In discussing the closely related
 
13/ We note that Kona's Best argued the competitor's privilege in its
renewed post-verdict motion for judgment as a matter of law, but not in itsoriginal motion for judgment as a matter of law. Although, "generally, arenewed motion for judgment as a matter of law cannot assert a ground that wasnot included in the original motion[,]" Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn &
Stifel, 117 Hawai' i 92, 117, 176 P.3d 91, 116 (2008), this restriction is
subject to waiver if the non-moving party fails to object to the renewedmotion on this basis in the trial court. Wallace v. McGlothan, 606 F.3d 410,
419 (7th Cir. 2010); Guides, Ltd. v. Yarmouth Grp. Prop. Mgmt., Inc., 295 F.3d1065, 1076 n.3 (10th Cir. 2002) (citing cases); Davis v. Davis, 405 Fed. Appx.279, 283 (10th Cir. 2010). In the Circuit Court, the Mountain ThunderDefendants did not raise an objection to Kona's Best's renewed post-verdictmotion based on Kona's Best's failure to argue the competitor's privilege inits original motion. We conclude that the Mountain Thunder Defendants have waived this objection by failing to raise it in the Circuit Court. Id. 
25
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
tort of intentional interference with prospective contractual 
relations, this court recognized the privileges set forth in sections 768 through 773 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts, which includes the competitor's privilege. Kutcher v. Zimmerman, 
87 Hawai
'i 394, 408, 957 P.2d 1076, 1090 (App. 1998) ("We believe 
that the 'privileges' set forth in sections 768 through 773 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts are a suitable starting point to guide defendants as to what defenses they may assert against the tort. Thus, in our view, sections 768 through 773 can be raised as matters of defense to the tort in a way similar to that originally conceived under the first Restatement of Torts.") 
The competitor's privilege is derived from the
 
Restatement (Second) of Torts (Restatement) § 768 (1979), which
 provides, in relevant part, as follows:
 
(1) One who intentionally causes a third person not to enter
into a prospective contractual relation with another who is
his competitor or not to continue an existing contract
terminable at will does not interfere improperly with the
other's relation if
 
(a) the relation concerns a matter involved in the
competition between the actor and the other and
 
(b) the actor does not employ wrongful means and
 (c) his action does not create or continue an unlawful
restraint of trade and 
(d) his purpose is at least in part to advance his
interest in competing with the other. 
(Emphasis added.) 
The competitor's privilege balances the need for 
competition in a free market against the need to protect a 
business against wrongful interference and is consistent with the purpose of the tort of interference with prospective business advantage. As noted by the Hawai
'i Supreme Court: 
The primary objective of the tort of interference with
prospective business advantage or opportunity is the
protection of legitimate and identifiable business
expectancies. Weighing against social and individual
interests in protection of business expectancies and efforts
to acquire property are the interests in legitimate business
competition. That is, much of the common law is premised on
 
26
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
the theory that competitors should have an opportunity to
compete for business until such time as it is cemented by
contract or agreement. Public and individual interests in
 free competition become particularly acute where a
[litigant] anticipates, but is not yet assured, that a
contractual or firm business relationship will materialize.
Where the [litigant's] contractual relations are merely
contemplated or potential, the public interest is best
served by allowing any competitor the opportunity to divert
those prospects to itself, so long as the means used are not
themselves improper. Any contrary rule may tend to
establish and perpetuate trade monopolies. 
Robert's Hawaii School Bus, Inc. v. Laupahoehoe Transp. Co., 91 
Hawai'i 224, 258, 982 P.2d 853, 887 (1999) (block quote format 
altered, citation and ellipsis points omitted; some emphasis added). 
2.
 
The Mountain Thunder Defendants argue that Kona's Best 
was not protected by the competitor's privilege because it "acted in bad faith in obtaining Hawaii Coffee Company as its client." They assert that Kona's Best only learned of Hawai
'i Coffee from 
the Batemans after entering into confidentiality agreements with the Batemans; that Kona's Best used the information provided by the Batemans; that Kona's Best directed Artukovich to tell Wayman that Kona's Best would not agree to purchase and process coffee for Hawaii Coffee if Hawaii Coffee did business with Mountain Thunder; and that Hawaii Coffee ceased doing business with Mountain Thunder after entering into a purchase and processing agreement with Kona's Best. 
We conclude that Kona's Best was protected by the
 
competitor's privilege in that Kona's Best's alleged actions in
 interfering with Mountain Thunder's prospective business
 advantage with Hawaii Coffee did not constitute improper
 interference through the employment of wrongful means. The
 Mountain Thunder Defendants' most significant claim is that
 Kona's Best induced Hawaii Coffee to stop doing business with
 Mountain Thunder by making this a condition of Kona's Best's
 agreement to purchase and process coffee for Hawaii Coffee. 
However, under the competitor's privilege, "[the actor] may
 
27
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
refuse to deal with the third persons in the business in which he
 
competes with the competitor if they deal with the competitor." 
Restatement § 768 at ctm. e. Such action, by itself, does not
 constitute improper interference. See id; Restatement § 767 cmt.
 
c. (concluding that a business may justifiably induce another not
 to deal with a competitor by non-predatory means).
14
 
We also reject the Mountain Thunder Defendants' 
contention that Kona's Best employed improper means because it only learned of Hawaii Coffee and obtained other information through breaches of its confidentiality agreements with the Batemans. We note that the initial confidentiality agreement which the Batemans' allege that Trent signed at a March 2007 meeting only protected information provided by the Batemans that was "non-public, confidential or proprietary in nature," and the parties' obligations under the agreement terminated in one year. Hawaii Coffee was one of the largest buyers and sellers of Kona coffee in Hawai
'i. Thus, information about Hawaii Coffee's 
existence and its position in the Hawai 'i market was public 
information. Moreover, Kona's Best did not enter into its agreement with Hawaii Coffee to purchase and process coffee until July 23, 2008, which was more than a year after the alleged March 2007 confidentiality agreement, and Kona's Best was aware of Hawaii Coffee and details concerning its relationship with Mountain Thunder before the June LOI and the August LOI were signed. Accordingly, Kona's Best's agreement with Hawaii Coffee 
14/ As explained in A–Mark Coin Co. v. General Mills, Inc. , 195 Cal.
Rptr. 859 (1983):
 
"In short, it is no tort to beat a business rival to prospective

customers. Thus, in the absence of prohibition by statute,
illegitimate means, or some other unlawful element, a defendant
seeking to increase his own business may cut rates or prices,
allow discounts or rebates, enter into secret negotiations behind
the plaintiff's back, refuse to deal with him or threaten to
discharge employees who do, or even refuse to deal with third
parties unless they cease dealing with the plaintiff, all without
incurring liability."
 
A–Mark Coin Co., 195 Cal. Rptr. at 867 (emphasis added) (quoting Prosser, The
Law of Torts § 130 (4th ed. 1971).
 
28
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
was not the product of breaches of any confidentiality agreements
 
with the Batemans.
 
We also conclude that there was insufficient evidence
 
to show that the alleged interference by Kona's Best caused the
 termination of Mountain Thunder's prospective business
 relationship with Hawaii Coffee. Indeed, Wayman, the President
 of Hawaii Coffee, testified that he was not asked by Kona's Best
 to refrain from doing business with Mountain Thunder. Instead,
 Wayman testified that he was cautioned by Artukovich to "watch
 his back" if he was going to do business with Trent, which Wayman
 viewed as a warning regarding Trent's trustworthiness and not as
 a refusal by Kona's Best to contract with Hawaii Coffee if Hawaii
 Coffee did business with Mountain Thunder. Wayman testified that
 his decision not to do business with Mountain Thunder had nothing
 to do with any inducement by Kona's Best, but rather was based on
 his concerns about Mountain Thunder's reliability, in light of
 its unilateral termination, without warning, of their coffee
 purchasing and processing arrangement during the 2007-2008 coffee
 season; the pending litigation against Mountain Thunder, which
 created risks that coffee purchased by Mountain Thunder on Hawaii
 Coffee's behalf could be rendered unavailable; and questions
 about Mountain Thunder's solvency and the collectability of
 amounts owned by Mountain Thunder as a result of its movement of
 its assets offshore. Moreover, given their relative positions in
 the market, it seems doubtful that Kona's Best had the economic
 power to impose exclusivity conditions on Hawaii Coffee. We
 conclude that the Mountain Thunder Defendants failed to show that
 any alleged improper interference by Kona's Best caused the
 termination of Mountain Thunder's relationship with Hawaii Coffee
 and consequential damages.
15
 
15/ We note that Thomas Loudat, the expert called by the Mountain Thunder
Defendants on the damages Mountain Thunder sustained as a result of the Kona's
Best Appellants' alleged tortious interference, testified that he was not
asked to determine a causal link between the alleged actions of the Kona's
Best Appellants and the damages he computed.
 
29
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
B.
 
Kona's Best contends that the Circuit Court erred in
 
denying its motion for judgment as a matter of law on the
 
Mountain Thunder Defendants' Breach of Contract Claims. We
 disagree.
 
The Mountain Thunder Defendants presented evidence that
 
while the negotiations for Kona's Best to purchase Mountain
 Thunder's assets were ongoing, the parties entered into an oral
 agreement to have Mountain Thunder purchase coffee and process it
 to green coffee for Kona's Best. According to the Batemans, when
 negotiations broke down, Kona's Best demanded that Mountain
 Thunder immediately return all the coffee it had purchased for
 Kona's Best. The Batemans presented evidence that Kona's Best
 owed Mountain Thunder money for agreed upon services. The
 Batemans testified that included in the amounts owed was an
 administrative fee of $.50 per pound on the 308,000 pounds of
 coffee that Mountain Thunder delivered to Kona's Best. They also
 testified that in the confusion resulting from Kona's Best's
 demand that Mountain Thunder immediately return all the coffee it
 had purchased for Kona's Best, Mountain Thunder over-shipped to
 Kona's Best approximately 52,000 pounds of coffee that Mountain
 Thunder had obtained independent of Kona's Best, and that Kona's
 Best owed Mountain Thunder about $468,000 for the over-shipped
 coffee. The jury awarded the Mountain Thunder Defendants
 $154,000 in damages on their Breach of Contract Claims against
 Kona's Best, strongly indicating that the jury based its damages
 award on the evidence regarding the administrative fee and not
 the over-shipped coffee.
 
Kona's Best argues that the jury's $154,000 damages
 
award on the Mountain Thunder Defendants' Breach of Contract
 Claims should be vacated because the Mountain Thunder Defendants'
 over-shipment theory of damages was not alleged in the pleadings
 and had not been disclosed in discovery. However, it is apparent
 that the jury's damages award was not based on the over-shipment
 theory. We therefore conclude that any impropriety in presenting
 
30
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the over-shipment theory at trial does not warrant overturning
 
the jury's breach of contract damages award. 
We are not persuaded by Kona's Best's contention that
 
it was unfairly surprised by the Batemans' testimony regarding
 the administrative fee. The Mountain Thunder Defendants' First
 Amended Counterclaim sought damages for breach of contract that
 included amounts owed by Kona's Best for Mountain Thunder's
 services; the Mountain Thunder Defendants introduced invoices at
 trial reflecting the $.50 administrative fee; and Kona's Best did
 not object to the Batemans' testimony regarding the
 administrative fee at trial or the Mountain Thunder Defendants'
 closing argument seeking recovery of the administrative fee as
 part of their damages. We conclude that Kona's Best's claim of
 unfair surprise regarding the administrative fee is without
 merit.
 
We also reject Kona's Best's claim that the jury's
 
breach of contract award was illegal and void under HRS 145-2
 (2011) because Mountain Thunder did not have a commissioned
 merchant license. Mountain Thunder had licences to act as a
 dealer and a processor under HRS 145-2, but not as a commissioned
 merchant. The Mountain Thunder Defendants presented evidence
 that Kona's Best owed them money for agreed upon services to
 purchase and process coffee, and that the amounts owed included
 an administrative fee. We conclude that Kona's Best has not
 shown that HRS § 145-2 precluded or rendered void the jury's
 breach of contract damages award in this case.
 
II. The Mountain Thunder Defendants' Cross-Appeal
 
The Mountain Thunder Defendants raise numerous points
 
of error in their cross-appeal. As explained below, we affirm
 the Circuit Court on all claims of error challenging: (1) the
 entry of judgment in favor of Kona's Best on claims raised in the
 Mountain Thunder Defendants' First Amended Counterclaim; (2) the
 entry of judgment in favor of Roberts and Hight on claims raised
 in the First Amended Third-Party Complaint; (3) the entry of
 judgment in favor of Kona's Best and against the Batemans on
 
31
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
claims raised in Kona's Best's First Amended Complaint; and (4)
 
the award of attorney's fees in favor of Kona's Best and against
 the Batemans.
16
 
A. Unfair Competition Claim
 
The Mountain Thunder Defendants alleged unfair
 
competition under HRS Chapters 480 and 481 against Kona's Best in
 the First Amended Counterclaim and against Roberts and Hight in
 the First Amended Third-Party Complaint.
17 The jury found Kona's
 
Best liable for unfair competition, but only awarded $1 in
 damages; the jury found Roberts and Hight not liable for unfair
 competition. The Circuit Court subsequently granted Kona's
 Best's motion for judgment as a matter of law on the unfair
 competition claim. On appeal, the Mountain Thunder Defendants
 argue that the Circuit Court erred in granting Kona's Best's
 motion for judgment as a matter of law on their unfair
 competition claim and in instructing the jury on that claim. We
 disagree.
 
1.
 
The Mountain Thunder Defendants alleged that the Kona's
 
Best Appellants violated HRS § 480-2 (2008), which authorizes
 claims for (1) unfair or deceptive acts or practices and (2)
 unfair methods of competition, and they sought damages pursuant
 to HRS § 480-13 (2008). A claim for unfair or deceptive acts or
 practices can only be brought by "a consumer, the attorney
 
16/ In light of the involuntary bankruptcy petition filed against
Mountain Thunder, the portions of the cross-appeal by Mountain Thunder that
seek to overturn the judgment entered in favor of Kona's Best and against
Mountain Thunder on claims raised in Kona's Best's First Amended Complaint and
the award of attorney's fees in favor of Kona's Best and against Mountain
Thunder are stayed, and we will not decide these portions of Mountain
Thunder's cross-appeal.
 
17/ As previously noted, the Mountain Thunder Defendants essentially
alleged the same causes against Kona's Best in their First Amended
Counterclaim that they alleged against Roberts and Hight in their First
Amended Third-Party Complaint. Unless otherwise indicated, our reference to
the Mountain Thunder Defendants' claims in Sections II.A through II.G, infra,
refer to their claims against Kona's Best, Roberts, and Hight. The jury and
the Circuit Court resolved all claims asserted by the Mountain Thunder
Defendants against Roberts and Hight in the First Amended Third-Party
Complaint in favor of Roberts and Hight. 
32
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
general or the director of the office of consumer protection[.]" 
HRS § 480-2(d). The Mountain Thunder Defendants did not qualify
 
18
as consumers as defined by HRS § 480-1 (2008),  and they werenot the attorney general or the director of the office of consumer protection. Therefore, the Circuit Court properly granted judgment as a matter of law on the unfair or deceptive acts or practices claim. See Joy A. McElroy, M.D., Inc. v. Maryl 
Group, Inc., 107 Hawai
'i 423, 435-36, 114 P.3d 929, 941-42 (App. 
2005) (concluding that the purpose of the unfair or deceptive acts or practices provision is to protect individual consumers rather than businesses). 
To prevail on a claim for unfair methods of 
competition, the claimant must prove what is referred to as "antitrust injury." Robert's Hawaii, 91 Hawai
'i at 254 n.31, 982 
P.2d at 883 n.31. 
"Plaintiffs must prove an injury of the type the antitrust
laws were intended to prevent, one that flows from that
which makes defendants' acts unlawful. The injury should
reflect the anticompetitive effect either of the violation
or of anticompetitve acts made possible by the violation." 
Id. (citation, brackets, and ellipses points omitted). As such, 
the plaintiff must allege and show that the defendant's conduct "will negatively affect competition in order to recover on an unfair methods of competition claim." See Davis v. Four Seasons 
Hotel Ltd., 122 Hawai
'i 423, 437-38, 228 P.3d 303, 317-18 (2010). 
"[E]ven where a plaintiff alleges a per se violation of the antitrust laws, the plaintiff must still allege and prove antitrust injury by alleging the nature of the competition in order to ensure that the injury results from a competition-reducing aspect of the defendant's behavior." Id. at 445, 228 
P.3d at 325. 
18/ HRS § 480-1 defines a "consumer" as "a natural person who, primarily
for personal, family, or household purposes, purchases, attempts to purchase,
or is solicited to purchase goods or services or who commits money, property,
or services in a personal investment."
 
33
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
Here, the Mountain Thunder Defendants did not
 
sufficiently allege an antitrust injury in their pleadings; they
 
alleged injuries to Mountain Thunder, but did not sufficiently
 allege injury to competition in the relevant market. 
See id. at
 
445-46 228 P.3d at 325-26. In addition, the Mountain Thunder
 Defendants did not prove antitrust injury at trial. The Mountain
 Thunder Defendants' experts only discussed the potential harm of
 the alleged unfair methods of competition to Mountain Thunder's
 own business, and not their effect on competition in the market. 
The Circuit Court therefore properly granted judgment as a matter
 of law on the unfair methods of competition claim. 
2.

 
The Mountain Thunder Defendants contend that they
 
showed a violation of HRS § 481-3 (2008), which prohibits any
 person or association doing business in the State to sell or
 offer for sale any product at less than cost "with the intent to
 destroy competition." Although evidence was presented at trial
 that Kona's Best sold a small portion of its coffee inventory
 below cost, there was undisputed evidence that Kona's Best had
 attempted to sell this inventory at a profit, or at a break-even
 price, and only resorted to selling below cost because the aging
 of the coffee was diminishing its value. We conclude that the
 Circuit Court properly granted judgment as a matter of law on the
 Mountain Thunder Defendants' HRS § 481-3 claim.
 
3.
 
The Mountain Thunder Defendants argue that the Circuit 
Court erred in instructing the jury on unfair competition. Based on our conclusion that the Circuit Court properly granted judgment as a matter of law on the Mountain Thunder Defendants' unfair competition claim, any error in instructing the jury on this claim was harmless. In any event, the Circuit Court's instruction was based on standards set forth in Hawai
'i 
precedents and was a correct statement of the law. See Hawaii 
Medical Ass'n v. Hawaii Medical Service Ass'n, Inc., 113 Hawai 'i 
77, 113-14, 148 P.3d 1179, 1215-16 (2006); Roberts Hawaii, 91 
34
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Hawai'i at 255 n.34, 982 P.2d at 884 n.34. The Circuit Court's 
failure to give the additional instructions requested by the 
Mountain Thunder Defendants did not render the instructions given "prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading." 
Nelson v. Univ. of Hawai 'i, 97 Hawai 'i 376, 386, 38 
P.3d 95, 105 (2001). 
B. Misappropriation of Trade Secrets

 
The Mountain Thunder Defendants contend that the
 
Circuit Court erred in granting judgment as a matter of law on
 their misappropriation of trade secrets claim. We disagree. 
A trade secret is defined under HRS Chapter 482B as
 
information, including a formula, pattern, compilation,
program device, method, technique, or process that:
 
(1)	 Derives independent economic value, actual or
potential, from not being generally known to,
and not being readily ascertainable by proper
means by, other persons who can obtain economic
value from its disclosure or use; and 
(2)	 Is the subject of efforts that are reasonable
under the circumstances to maintain its secrecy.
 
HRS § 482B-2 (2008). 
The Mountain Thunder Defendants contend that the Kona's
 
Best Appellants misappropriated their trade secrets through
 
breaches of the confidentiality agreements. They emphasize that
 the Kona's Best Appellants had no experience in the Kona coffee
 business before meeting the Batemans. However, Kona's Best
 purchased Koa Coffee and hired its owner, Artukovich, an
 experienced coffee producer who was described as Trent Bateman's
 mentor, as a consultant to help run Kona's Best. The Mountain
 Thunder Defendants did not present specific evidence of the
 information they claimed constituted trade secrets or why such
 information qualified as trade secrets. Their general claims
 that the Kona's Best Appellants obtained information about
 Mountain Thunder's business operations was insufficient to prove
 that the Kona's Best Appellants had misappropriated trade
 secrets. 
35
   
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
C. Promissory Estoppel
 
The Mountain Thunder Defendants brought two claims for
 
promissory estoppel based on allegations regarding the Kona's
 
Best Appellants': (1) promise to provide financing to Mountain
 Thunder (Promissory Estoppel -- Financing); and (2) promise to
 pay for Mountain Thunder's services in purchasing and processing
 coffee for Kona's Best (Promissory Estoppel -- Nonpayment). In
 
its Order Regarding Equitable Claims, the Circuit Court granted
 
judgment on both promissory estoppel claims in favor of the
 Kona's Best Appellants. The Mountain Thunder Defendants argue
 
that the Circuit Court's erred in doing so. We disagree. 
"The relief granted by a court in equity is 
discretionary and will not be overturned on review unless the 
circuit court abused its discretion by issuing a decision that clearly exceeds the bounds of reason or disregards rules or principles of law or practice to the substantial detriment of the appellant." Aickin v. Ocean View Invs. Co., 84 Hawai
'i 447, 453, 
935 P.2d 992, 998 (1997) (internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets omitted). 
1.
 
With respect to the Mountain Thunder Defendants' 
Promissory Estoppel -- Financing claim, the Circuit Court found
 and concluded as follows:
 
11.	 No evidence was presented at trial to suggest that
[Kona's Best] promised to provide general financing.
 
12.	 Likewise, no evidence was presented at trial regarding
a specific amount of financing, repayment terms, or
collateral.
 
13. 	A promise to provide financing is impermissibly
indefinite. Any reliance by [the Mountain Thunder]
Defendants on such a vague promise would be
unreasonable and unjustified. 
14. 	No evidence was presented at trial regarding the
specifics of other opportunities that [the Mountain
Thunder] Defendants supposedly relinquished due to
promises by [Kona's Best]. The alleged loss claimed
under Count V is therefore speculative and
incalculable. 
36
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
15.	 Based on the foregoing, judgment is entered in favor
of [the Kona's Best Appellants] on Count V.
 
(Citations omitted.)
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court's findings were
 
supported by substantial evidence and that it did not err in
 
entering judgment in favor of the Kona's Best Appellants on the
 Promissory Estoppel -- Financing claim.  See Allied Vista, Inc.
 v. Holt, 987 S.W.2d 138, 142 (Tex. Ct. App. 1999) (concluding
 that the reliance on a promise must be reasonable or justified);
 West Indies Network-I, LLC v. Nortel Networks, (CALA) Inc., 243
 Fed. Appx. 482, 485 (11th Cir. 2007) (upholding determination
 that the alleged commitment to secure equity financing "was too
 indefinite and uncertain to support promissory estoppel"). 
2.
 
With respect to the Mountain Thunder Defendants' 
Promissory Estoppel -- Nonpayment claim, the Circuit Court granted judgment against the Mountain Thunder Defendants because it concluded that they had an adequate remedy at law based on their Breach of Contract Claims. We agree with the Circuit Court's conclusion that the Mountain Thunder Defendants had an adequate remedy at law and affirm its decision on the Promissory Estoppel -- Nonpayment claim. See Bd. of Dirs. of Ass'n of 
Apartment Owners of Regency Tower Condo. Project v. Regency Tower Venture, 2 Haw. App. 506, 513, 635 P.2d 244, 249 (1981) ("'The necessary prerequisite to the right to maintain a suit for . . . equitable remedies is . . . the absence of an adequate remedy at law.'" (citation omitted)); Porter v. Hu, 116 Hawai
'i 42, 55, 169 
P.3d 994, 1007 (App. 2007). 
D. Fraud
 
In its special verdict, the jury found in favor of the
 
Kona's Best Appellants on the Mountain Thunder Defendants' fraud
 claim. On appeal, the Mountain Thunder Defendants contend that
 the Circuit Court erred in relying on the jury's verdict and
 dismissing this claim. 
37
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Mountain Thunder Defendants contend that Roberts
 
falsely represented he would make the Batemans' dreams of
 
breaking into the mainland coffee market come true and thereby
 fraudulently induced the Batemans to divulge Mountain Thunder's
 trade secrets and other confidential information, which Kona's
 Best then used to compete against Mountain Thunder. We conclude
 that there was substantial evidence to support the jury's verdict
 rejecting the Mountain Thunder Defendants' fraud claim. Pursuant
 to the jury's verdict, the Circuit Court properly entered
 judgment against the Mountain Thunder Defendants on this claim.
 
E. Unjust Enrichment
 
The Mountain Thunder Defendants contend that the
 
Circuit Court erred in granting judgment in favor of the Kona's
 Best Appellants on the Mountain Thunder Defendants' unjust
 enrichment claim. We disagree. 
In its Order Regarding Equitable Claims, the Circuit
 
Court found and concluded as follows:
 
18.	 To prevail on a claim for unjust enrichment, a party
must prove that he/she/it conferred a benefit upon the
opposing party and that the retention of that benefit
would be unjust.
 
19. 	Like promissory estoppel, unjust enrichment is an
equitable claim. Equitable relief is not available to
a party that has an adequate remedy at law. 
20.	 To the extent that Count XII is based on misuse of
 confidential proprietary information or trade secrets,
it is preempted by Hawaii Revised Statutes Chapter
482B.
 
21. 	To the extent that Count XII is based on breach of
 confidentiality agreements or agreements relating to
coffee, [the Mountain Thunder] Defendants have
adequate contractual remedies at law. 
22. 	Moreover, [the Mountain Thunder] Defendants never
established that they provided [Kona's Best] with
confidential information, or the value of this
supposed benefit.
 
23. 	No competent evidence was presented at trial which
indicates that [Kona's Best] was provided with coffee
it did not pay for.
 
38
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
24. Based on the foregoing, judgment is entered in favor
of [the Kona's Best Appellants] on Count XII.
 
(Citations omitted.)
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court's findings were
 
supported by substantial evidence and that it did not err in
 
entering judgment in favor of the Kona's Best Appellants on the
 unjust enrichment claim.
 
F. Defamation
 
The Mountain Thunder Defendant contend that the Circuit 
Court erred in dismissing their defamation claim. The Mountain Thunder Defendants identify two statements they apparently claim were defamatory: (1) Artukovich's purported statement that Kona's Best would not deal with Hawaii Coffee if Hawaii Coffee did business with Mountain Thunder; and (2) Hight's alleged statement to a Kona's Best employee that Kona's Best would put Trent out of business if Trent did not agree to the terms offered for the asset purchase. Assuming these statements were made, they were not defamatory. See Gold v. Harrison, 88 Hawai
'i 94, 100-01, 962 
P.2d 353, 359-60 (1998); Restatement (Second) of Torts § 559 (1997). Accordingly, the Circuit Court did not err in dismissing the defamation claim. 
G. Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress
 
The Mountain Thunder Defendants contend that the
 
Circuit Court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of the
 Kona's Best Appellants on the Mountain Thunder Defendants' claim
 for intentional infliction of emotional distress. We disagree. 
To establish a claim of intentional infliction of 
emotional distress, a plaintiff must prove that the conduct allegedly causing the harm was "outrageous." Hac v. Univ. of 
Hawai
'i, 102 Hawai 'i 92, 95, 73 P.3d 46, 49 (2003). The standard 
for outrageous conduct is high: 
Liability has been found only where the conduct has been so
outrageous in character, and so extreme in degree, as to go
beyond all bounds of decency, and to be regarded as
atrocious, and utterly intolerable in a civilized community. 
Dunlea v. Dappen, 83 Hawai 'i 28, 38, 924 P.2d 196, 206 (1996) 
39
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(quoting Restatement (Second) of Torts § 46 cmt. d (1965)). 
Here, even viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to
 the Mountain Thunder Defendants, the alleged conduct, as a matter
 of law, did not rise to the level of outrageous conduct. 
Accordingly, the Circuit Court properly granted summary judgment
 on the claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress.
 
H. Expert Evidence 
After negotiations over the purchase of Mountain
 
Thunder's assets were terminated, Steven Kaufman, Kona's Best's
 accountant, performed an accounting in an attempt to trace the
 coffee purchased by Mountain Thunder for Kona's Best and to
 determine how much was owed to Kona's Best. Kaufman reconciled
 the purchases and move slips provided by the Mountain Thunder
 Defendants with the inventories held at Mountain Thunder and
 created a report (Kaufman Report) explaining the outcome of his
 reconciliation efforts. Kaufman determined that Mountain Thunder
 
had sold roasted and green coffee out Kona's Best's inventory and
 
that Mountain Thunder owed Kona's Best a substantial amount of
 money. 
During trial, Kona's Best's expert witness, Daniel 
Bowen (Bowen), presented his expert opinion which relied on information in the Kaufman Report. Kaufman did not testify. On appeal, the Batemans claim that the Circuit Court erred in allowing Bowen to testify and allowing Kona's Best to, in effect, introduce the Kaufman Report through Bowen. However, the transcript of Bowen's trial testimony was not included in the record on appeal. The Batemans have the duty to provide this court with an adequate record regarding their claims on cross-appeal and the burden of establishing that the Circuit Court erred. See Hawai
'i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 10 (2012) 
and Rule 11 (2010). Without a transcript of Bowen's trial testimony, we cannot say that the Circuit Court erred. 
The Batemans also argue that the Circuit Court erred in
 
permitting Kona's Best to name Bowen and Mark Hunsaker (Hunsaker) 
40
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
as experts after the trial had been continued. We disagree. The
 
Circuit Court continued the trial to permit Kona's Best to amend
 its complaint to add a claim for fraudulent transfer of assets. 
The trial continuance also extended the deadline for naming
 expert witnesses, and Bowen and Hunsaker were named as experts
 within the extended deadline. We conclude that there was no
 error in the Circuit Court's permitting Bowen and Hunsaker to be
 named as experts.
 
I. Net Judgment Rule
 
The Batemans argue that the Circuit Court erred in not 
applying the net judgment rule. Contrary to the Batemans' contention, Shanghai Investment Co. v. Alteka Co., 92 Hawai
'i 
482, 993 P.2d 516 (2000), does not require the use of the net judgment rule to determine the prevailing party. We reject the Batemans' argument regarding the net judgment rule.
19 
CONCLUSION
 
Based on the foregoing, we reverse the Amended Judgment
 
to the extent that it entered judgment in favor of the Mountain
 Thunder Defendants and against Kona's Best on Count IX of the 
Mountain Thunder Defendants' First Amended Counterclaim for
 tortious interference with prospective business advantage; we
 affirm the Amended Judgment with respect to its entry of judgment
 on all other Counts asserted by the Mountain Thunder Defendants
 in their First Amended Counterclaim and its entry of judgment on
 all Counts asserted by the Mountain Thunder Defendants in their
 First Amended Third-Party Complaint; we affirm the Amended
 Judgment with respect to its entry of judgment as between Kona's
 Best and the Batemans on Counts asserted by Kona's Best in its
 First Amended Complaint; and we affirm the Amended Judgment to 
19/ In light of the involuntary bankruptcy petition filed against
Naturescape, Naturescape's cross-appeal, which seeks to overturn the judgment
entered in favor of Kona's Best and against Naturescape on Kona's Best's First
Amended Complaint, is stayed, and we will not decide Naturescape's cross-
appeal.
 
41
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the extent that it awarded attorney's fees to Kona's Best and
 
against the Batemans. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, August 2, 2017. 
On the briefs:
 
Joseph Fagundes, III
(AAL, ALC)George W. Playdon, Jr.
Kelvin H. Kaneshiro
 (O'Connor Playdon & Guben LLP)
for Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/
Appellant/Cross-Appellee and
Third-Party Defendants/Appellants/
Cross-Appellees
  Chief Judge
 Associate Judge
Grant K. Kidani
 (Kidani Law Center)
for Defendants/Counterclaimants/
Appellees/Cross-Appellants and
Third-Party Plaintiffs/Appellees/
Cross-Appellees
 
42
 