NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
NO. CAAP-23-0000090 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘ I 
  
IN THE MATTER OF THE 
DOUGLAS KUI TUNG HO TRUST DATED  
JANUARY 3, 2014, AS AMENDED AND RESTATED 
 
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CTR-22-0000152) 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Leonard, Presiding Judge, Wadsworth and Guidry, JJ.) 
 
Respondents/Petitioners-Appellants Douglas Ho 
Foundation and Russell K.L. Leu (Leu) (collectively, Appellants) 
appeal from the "Order Granting Petition for Instructions" 
(Probate Order), and "Judgment Pursuant to Order Granting 
Petition for Instructions" (Judgment), both filed on January 27, 
2023 by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (probate court).1 
This matter arises from the Petition for Instructions 
filed by Petitioner/Respondent-Appellee Central Pacific Bank 
 
1  The Honorable R. Mark Browning presided. Electronically Filed
Intermediate Court of Appeals
CAAP-23-0000090
15-DEC-2025
10:49 AM
Dkt. 65 SO
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
2 (CPB), as Successor Trustee of the Douglas Kui Tung Ho Trust 
(Trust).  The Trust, which was originally executed on January 3, 
2014, was amended in 2018, 2021, and 2022.2  CPB's Petition for 
Instructions asked the probate court to determine whether Respondent-Appellee Douglas K.T. Ho Charitable Foundation, or 
the Douglas Ho Foundation, is the residuary beneficiary of the 
Trust.
3 
Appellants raise six points of error on appeal, 
contending that the probate court erred in: (1) granting CPB's Petition for Instructions, and awarding attorneys' fees to CPB 
and the Douglas K.T. Ho Charitable Foundation; (2) "not 
considering [the 2021 Amended Trust] which designated the 
Douglas K.T. Ho Foundation as the sole residuary beneficiary of 
 
2  We refer to the June 8 , 2018 "First Amendment to and Restatement 
of Trust Agreement of Douglas Kui Tung Ho" as the 2018 Amended Trust, and the 
August 6, 2021 "Second Amended and Restated Trust Agreement of Douglas Kui 
Tung Ho" as the 2021 Amended Trust.   
 
We refer to the January 5, 2022 "First Amendment to Second 
Amended and Restated Trust Agreement of Douglas Kui Tung Ho," and the January 
11, 2022 "Second Amendment to Second Amended and Restated Trust Agreement of 
Douglas Kui Tung Ho," collectively as the 2022 Amended Trust.  Both of the 
January 2022 trust instruments were signed by Leu, as Douglas Kui Tung Ho's 
(Ho) attorney- in-fact.  The January 5, 2022 trust instrument appointed CPB 
and Leu as successor Trustee to administer the Trust's estate, and the January 11, 2022 trust instrument designated the Douglas Ho Foundation as the 
residuary beneficiary. 
 
3  The 2018 Amended Trust named the "Douglas K.T. Ho Charitable 
Foundation" as the residuary beneficiary, the 2021 Amended Trust named the 
"Douglas K.T. Ho Foundation" as the residuary beneficiary, and the 2022 
Amended Trust named the "Douglas Ho Foundation" as the residuary beneficiary.   
 
The Douglas K.T. Ho Foundation does not exist.  The declaration 
of James H.Q. Lee represents that Ho had expressed an intent to establish the 
Douglas K.T. Ho Foundation, but that he did not have the capacity to sign the 
necessary legal documents due to an illness.  
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
3 the Trust"; (3) "considering the [2018 Amended Trust] even 
though it was superseded in its entirety by the [2022 Amended 
Trust]"; (4) failing "to comply with the standard mandated in 
[In re Elaine Emma Short Revocable Living Tr. Agreement Dated 
July 17, 1984, 147 Hawaiʻ i 456, 465, 465 P.3d 903, 912 (2020)] by 
failing to support its order with specific findings of fact and 
conclusions of law"; (5) "finding that there was 'clear and 
convincing evidence'" that Ho intended to name the Douglas K.T. 
Ho Charitable Foundation as the residuary beneficiary of the 
Trust; and (6) "not holding an evidentiary hearing," and not 
"deem[ing] this as a contested matter." 
Upon careful review of the record, briefs, and 
relevant legal authorities, and having given due consideration to the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, 
we resolve Appellants' points of error as follows
4: 
(1) Appellants contend that the probate court "failed 
to consider the [2021 Amended Trust]."  (Formatting altered.)   
Article 4, Paragraph A of the 2018 Amended Trust 
reserved Ho's right, as settlor, to amend the Trust "by an 
instrument signed by him and delivered to the Trustee."  The 
2021 Amended Trust was executed by Ho pursuant to that Trust 
provision.   
 
4  We consolidate and address Appellants' points of error out of 
order.   
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
4 The 2022 Amended Trust was executed by Leu.  The 
record reflects that neither the 2021 Amended Trust, nor Leu's 
power of attorney, expressly authorized Leu to amend and restate 
the Trust.  See Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 554D-602(e) 
(Supp. 2022) (providing that an agent acting for a settlor under a power of attorney may amend a trust "only to the extent 
expressly authorized by the terms of the trust and the power [of 
attorney]"); HRS § 551E-31(a)(1) (2018) (providing that an agent acting under a power of attorney may only amend an inter vivos 
trust "if the power of attorney expressly grants the agent the authority and exercise of the authority is not otherwise 
prohibited by another agreement or instrument").   
The record reflects that the 2021 Amended Trust was 
the last validly executed amendment and restatement of the 
Trust.  The 2018 Amended Trust was superseded by the 2021 
Amended Trust; the 2021 Amended Trust was not superseded by the 
2022 Amended Trust.  We conclude that the probate court, which determined the 2021 Amended Trust to be the operative trust 
instrument, did not fail to "consider" the 2021 Amended Trust. 
(2) Appellants contend that the probate court erred in 
finding "'clear and convincing evidence' that [Ho] intended to 
name the [Douglas K.T. Ho Charitable Foundation] as residuary 
beneficiary of the Trust," and by "failing to support its order NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
5 with specific findings of fact and conclusions of law."  
(Formatting altered.)   
In section (1), supra, we concluded that the probate 
court did not err in determining the 2021 Amended Trust to be 
the operative trust instrument.  The 2021 Amended Trust named 
the Douglas K.T. Ho Foundation, a non-existent entity, as the 
residuary beneficiary.  This presented an ambiguity concerning 
the identity of the residuary beneficiary.  See In re Est. of 
Bletsch, 130 N.W.2d 275, 276 (Wis. 1964) (determining that 
"[t]he designated beneficiary in the instant case is non-existent; this gave rise to a latent ambiguity").  In addressing 
this ambiguity, the probate court determined that it was Ho's 
intent to make the Douglas K.T. Ho Charitable Foundation -- the 
entity named as residuary beneficiary in the 2018 Amended Trust 
-- the residuary beneficiary of the 2021 Amended Trust. 
It is not clear how the probate court came to this 
determination.  The probate court did not make any findings, or otherwise identify the evidence it relied upon, in determining 
Ho's intent, and we are therefore unable to meaningfully review 
the Judgment.  "[W]hen a trial court has failed to issue 
findings of fact and the appellate court is unable to discern 
the factual basis of the lower court's ruling . . . the case 
should be remanded to permit the lower court or agency to make NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
6 the requisite findings."  In re Elaine Emma Short, 147 Hawaiʻ i at 
466, 465 P.3d at 913 (citations omitted).   
We therefore vacate the Judgment, and remand this 
matter to the probate court with instructions that it should 
make appropriate findings, based on the record evidence, 
regarding its determination of which entity Ho intended to be 
the residuary beneficiary of the Trust.  Because we vacate the 
Judgment on the merits, we also vacate the probate court's order 
awarding attorneys' fees and costs, without prejudice to the 
ability of any party to make an appropriate and timely request 
for attorneys' fees and costs on remand.   
(3) Appellants contend that the probate court erred by 
not holding an evidentiary hearing, or deeming this a contested 
matter under Hawaiʻ i Probate Rules (HPR) Rules 19 and 20,5 "given 
that the facts in this case were highly disputed."   
HPR Rule 3(a) provides that, in probate proceedings, 
 
There shall be a petition and a response or objection.  For 
purposes of these rules, an application in an informal proceeding is a petition, unless the context of the rule 
indicates otherwise.  Persons may file a joinder, response, 
or objection to a petition or to a master's, guardian ad 
litem's, or Kokua Kanawai's report.  Persons may file a 
memorandum in support of their pleadings.  . . .  No other 
pleading shall be allowed, provided that if a contested 
matter is referred to the regular civil calendar pursuant 
to [HPR] Rule 20, then the Hawaiʻ i Rules of Civil Procedure 
shall apply with respect to the referred petition. 
 
 
5  HPR Rule 19 defines "contested matter," and HPR Rule 20 provides 
for the "Disposition of Contested Matters" by instructing, in relevant part, 
that "[t]he [probate] court by written order may retain a contested matter on 
the regular probate calendar or may assign the contested matter to the civil 
trials calendar of the circuit court."  (Formatting altered.)   
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
7 (Emphasis added.)  HPR Rule 19 defines a contested matter as 
"any one in which an objection has been filed."  Thus, in order 
for a probate proceeding to be treated as a "contested matter," 
a party to the proceeding must file an objection under HPR Rule 
19.  Here, no party filed an "objection," and the Appellants did 
not expressly request that the proceeding be treated as a 
contested matter. 
It appears, nevertheless, that Appellants' November 
22, 2022 "(1) Response to Petition for Instructions, Filed September 29, 2022; and (2) Petition to Approve Amendment to 
Trust, or in the Alternative, to Reform and Modify the Trust," 
implicitly "object[ed]" by requesting that the probate court 
dismiss CPB's Petition for Instructions, or "issue an order 
modifying the [2022 Amended] Trust naming the Douglas Ho Foundation which was incorporated on January 11, 2022 as the 
sole residuary beneficiary."  To the extent Appellants' response 
could be construed as an objection, we instruct the probate court, on remand, to consider whether the case should be treated 
as a contested matter.  See In re Elaine Emma Short, 147 Hawaiʻ i 
at 467, 465 P.3d at 914 ("Determining contested facts is for the 
trial courts, not courts of appeal.") (citation omitted).   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
8 For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the Probate Order 
and Judgment, and remand for further proceedings consistent with 
this summary disposition order.6 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i, December 15, 2025. 
On the briefs: Sofia Hirosane McGuire, 
for Respondents/Petitioners-Appellants. 
 
Rhonda L. Griswold,  
for Petitioner/Respondent-Appellee. 
 
Derek R. Kobayashi, for Respondent-Appellee.  
 /s/ Katherine G. Leonard 
Presiding Judge 
 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth Associate Judge  
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry Associate Judge
 
 
    
 
6  Pursuant to Hawaiʻ i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 34(c), 
Appellants' October 9, 2025 Motion for Retention of Oral Argument is denied. 
