NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-18-0000381
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI #I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
DAWN NAEOLE, Defendant-Appellee
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 16-1-1997)
MEMORANDUM OPINION
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Chan and Hiraoka, JJ.)
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai#i (State) appeals
from the Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, and Order
Denying in Part, and Granting in Part, Defendant's Motion to
Suppress Evidence ( Order) entered by the Circuit Court of the
First Circuit ( Circuit Court)1 on April 5, 2018.  For the reason s
explained below, we vacate the Order and remand this case for
further proceedings.
I.
At 6:12 a.m. on Friday, September 4, 2015, officers of
the Honolulu Police Department (HPD ) executed a search warrant at
the residence of Defendant-Appellee Dawn Naeole ( Naeole) and
recovered physical evidence.  On December 27, 2016, Naeole was
charged by a five-count grand jury indictment with Promoting a
Dangerous Drug (methamphetamine) in the First Degree, Promoting a
Harmful Drug (Tramadol and Lorazepam) in the Second Degree (two
1The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
counts), Promoting a Detrimental Drug (marijuana) in the Third
Degree, and Unlawful Use of Drug Paraphernalia.
On June 28, 2017, Naeole filed a motion to suppress all
evidence seized pursuant to the search warrant.  She argued,
among other things, that HPD's execution of the search warrant
violated Hawaii Revised Statutes ( HRS) § 803-37  and article I,
section 7 of the 2
Hawai#i Constitution  because HPD officers
forcibly entered her residence without affording her a reasonable
time to respond to the demand for entry.  The Circuit Court
conducted evidentiary hearings on January 16, 2018, and March 6,
2018.  At the conclusion of the second hearing the Circuit Court
announced its decision to grant the motion, stating: "I cannot
say that under the facts here that that is a reasonable amount of
time to allow the occupants to respond."  The Order was entered
on April 5, 2018.  This appeal followed.3
II.
The State challenges the Circuit Court's conclusions of
law (COL) nos. 21, 24, and 25.  The Circuit Court concluded:
21. In the present case, the "knock and
announce" procedure employed by the Honolulu Police
Department violated [Naeole]'s rights from [sic]
unreasonable search and seizure under Article [sic] 1,
Section [sic] 7 of the Hawaii [Hawai #i] State
Constitution because the Honolulu Police Department
failed to afford [Naeole] a reasonable amount of time
2HRS § 803-37 (2014) provides, in relevant part:
The officer charged with the warrant, if a house,
store, or other building is designated as the place to be
searched, may enter it without demanding permission if the
officer finds it open. If the doors are shut the officer
must declare the officer's office and the officer's
business, and demand entrance. If the doors, gates, or other
bars to the entrance are not immediately opened, the officer
may break them. When entered, the officer may demand that
any other part of the house, or any closet, or other closed
place in which the officer has reason to believe the
property is concealed, may be opened for the officer's
inspection, and if refused the officer may break them.
3Haw. Const. art. I, § 7 states, in relevant part:
The right of the people to be secure in their persons,
houses, papers and effects against unreasonable searches,
seizures and invasions of privacy shall not be violated[.]
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
to respond to their demand for entry to serve [the
search warrant] and, accordingly grants Defendant's
Motion to Suppress on this ground only.
. . . .
24. Further, there was no evidence that the
occupants were aware of the police presence and were taking
steps to destroy any evidence, that would [have] justified
breaching the door based on exigent circumstances.
25. A violation of [Naeole]'s right from [sic] an
unreasonable search and seizure under Article [sic] 1,
Section [sic] 7 of the Hawaii [Hawai #i] State Constitution
in the execution of [the search warrant] renders the entry
illegal and requires suppression of all evidence seized.
Questions of constitutional law are reviewed under the
right/wrong standard based on the facts of the case.  State v.
Tetu, 139 Hawai #i 207, 214, 386 P.3d 844, 851 (2016) (citations
omitted).
The State has not challenged any of the Circuit Court's
findings of fact (FOF ), which establish that the search warrant
was executed at approximately 6:12 a.m. on September 4, 2015. 
The Circuit Court found:
9. . . . Zachary Zachariah Wentling (hereafter
"Wentling") was called by [Naeole] and testified to the
following:
a.That he and his family lives [sic] . . . right
next door to [Naeole]'s residence[;]
b.That on the morning of September 4, 2015 at
about 0612 hours, he was at his residence when he heard dogs
barking;
c.That he looked out of the front door, and
observed officers of the Honolulu Police Department opening
[Naeole's] front yard gate[;]
d.That he quickly went back into his residence and
to his room to grab his cellular phone to video record the
event which took no more than a minute;
e.That when he returned to the front door, he
observed the officers banging the door down and announcing
their presence; and[ ]
f.That his video recording of the event that was
admitted into evidence was a true and correct copy of the
video he had recorded.
(name correction in original).
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
The Circuit Court also found:
10. . . . HPD Officer Stephen Roe was called by the
State and testified to the following:
. . . .
c.That on September 4, 2017 2015, he was a member
of an eight-person entry team tasked with the execution of
[the search warrant];
d.That he conducted the knock and announce
procedure by verbally stating in [a] clear and loud voice,
"Police, we have a search warrant, open the door now";
e.That he did the knock-and-announce procedure
four times; [and]
f.Demonstrating exactly what he did on the morning
of September 4, 2015, he conducted the knock and announce
procedure for a sum total of about twenty-five (25) seconds,
with no discernable pause between each of the four knock-
and-announce procedures[.]
. . . .
11. . . . [Naeole] testified to the following:
a.That she was awake in her residence and in the
hallway some twenty-five (25) feet away from the front door;
and[ ]
b.That she heard loud banging and before she could
get to the door, the officers were already inside the
residence.
(year correction in original).
The State contends that twenty-five seconds from the
start of the first knock until the forced entry was a reasonable
time span, citing State v. Diaz, 100 Hawai #i 210, 58 P.3d 1257
(2002) for the proposition that waiting fifteen seconds before
effecting a forcible entry was a reasonable time.  Diaz is
distinguishable on its facts.  In Diaz, police executed a search
warrant at a video store at 6:45 p.m., while the store was open
to the public.  The police entered the store unannounced, and
went to a locked interior office door.  An officer knocked three
times, stating "police department, search warrant."  After
waiting fifteen seconds, the door was kicked in.  Diaz was
inside, holding an envelope containing drugs.  The supreme court
stated that "expecting the occupant of the interior office to be
alert and responsive during business hours is reasonable." 
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Id. at 221, 58 P.3d at 1268.  Under those facts, the supreme
court held that fifteen seconds was a reasonable time to wait
before forcibly entering the interior office.  Id.
In State v. Garcia, 77 Hawai #i 461, 887 P.2d 671 (App.
1995), the police executed a search warrant at Garcia's apartment
at 7:07 p.m.  An officer knocked on the front door and announced,
"Police, search warrant."  Id. at 464, 887 P.2d at 674.  The
officer "could hear voices inside the apartment, which he
believed to be persons inside talking, or voices from a
television set.  No one responded to his knock and announce." 
Id. (alterations omitted).  After approximately ten seconds, the
police forcibly entered the apartment.  We held that "under HRS §
803–37, occupants of the premises to be searched must be given a
reasonable time to respond to the police's demand for entry to
serve a search warrant."  Id. at 468, 887 P.2d at 678.  What
constitutes "a reasonable period of time to respond to a knock
and announcement must be determined by the circumstances of each
case."  Id. (citations omitted).  Under the circumstances in
Garcia we held: "Whatever portion, if any, of the ten seconds
that the police allowed to elapse before they broke through two
doors was clearly insufficient to afford the occupants a
reasonable opportunity to open the doors."  Id. at 469, 887 P.2d
at 679.  We distinguished State v. Davenport, 55 Haw. 90, 516
P.2d 65 (1973), in which the police waited for thirty seconds and
forcibly entered the defendant's residence after an "officer
heard sounds of 'running' within" the residence, and State v.
Lloyd, 61 Haw. 505, 606 P.2d 913 (1980), in which the knock and
announcement was "immediately followed by a scurrying about
within the house and then a crashing sound toward the rear of the
building[,]" as presenting exigent circumstances justifying the
forced entry.  Garcia, 77 Hawai#i at 469, 887 P.2d at 679
(original brackets and internal quotation marks omitted).
In State v. Monay, 85 Hawai #i 282, 943 P.2d 908 (1997),
the police executed a search warrant at Monay's apartment at
11:05 a.m.  An officer knocked on the door and announced "police,
search warrant."  The officer heard no suspicious sound or
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
movement inside the apartment.  Within two seconds of the
announcement, the officer opened the unlocked door and entered
the apartment.  The supreme court held that under those facts,
"two seconds was patently unreasonable because no exigent
circumstances existed."  Id. at 284, 943 P.2d at 910.  In order
to establish exigent circumstances justifying a forced entry,
"the prosecution must show that 'the occupants of the suspected
locale [were] aware of the police presence and [were] taking
steps which the police realistically fear[ed] may lead to the
destruction of evidence.'"  Id. at 284-85, 943 P.2d at 910-11
(quoting Davenport, 55 Haw. at 99, 516 P.2d at 72) (alterations
in original) (additional citation omitted).
The Hawai#i case law is clear that the amount of time
between the police announcing their presence and a forced entry —
be it two, ten, fifteen, twenty-five, or thirty seconds — is only
one of the factors to be considered in a case like this.  What
constitutes "a reasonable period of time to respond to a knock
and announcement must be determined by the circumstances of each
case."  Garcia, 77 Hawai#i at 468, 887 P.2d at 678 (citation
omitted).  In this case, although the search warrant was executed
at 6:12 a.m., it was a Friday.   Naeole testified she was awake
and in her hallway, on her way to the bathroom.  The house in
which she was living was relatively small, as shown in State's
exhibits 2 and 3.  Even before HPD knocked on her front door and
demanded entry, her next-door neighbor's dogs began barking when
the officers were trying to open the gate on the chain link fence
surrounding Naeole's yard.  Enough time had passed to allow
Wentling (Naeole's next-door neighbor) to go from his room to his
front door, go outside, see the police, hear the police
"wrestling with [Naeole's] front gate," go back to his room on
the other side of his house to get his cell phone, go back to his
front door, and begin recording the scene on his phone.  Officer
Roe testified that he knocked on Naeole's front door and4
4We take judicial notice that September 4, 2015 was a Friday. 
Hawaii Rules of Evidence ( HRE) Rule 201 (2016).
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
announced HPD's presence four times.  He received no response the
first two times.  After the third time:
A. I heard a female voice in the residence.  I
couldn't tell what she was saying, but it seemed like she
was directed -- or talking to us.
Q. But you were unable to make out the words?
A. No, I wasn't.
Q. What happened after initiating that third knock-
and-announce and then hearing that female voice?  What did
you do?
A. I initiated another one, a fourth knock-and-
announce, which is usually not -- we usually don't.  The
breaching team will usually actually make entry after the
third if there's no response.  But we were trying to give
her an opportunity, the female voice, to come to the door
and open the door.
Q. Did you receive a response from within the
residence after the fourth procedure?
A. No, sir.
. . . .
Q. And after that fourth procedure, did the entry
team breach the front door?
A. Yes, sir.
Under the circumstances of this case, we hold that Naeole was
afforded a reasonable amount of time to respond to HPD's demand
for entry to serve the search warrant.  The Circuit Court should
have denied Naeole's motion to suppress evidence.
[REMAINDER OF PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
7NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
III.
Based upon the foregoing, the Findings of Fact and
Conclusions of Law, and Order Denying in Part, and Granting in
Part, Defendant's Motion to Suppress Evidence, entered by the
Circuit Court of the First Circuit on April 5, 2018, is vacated
and this case is remanded to the Circuit Court for further
proceedings.
DATED: Honolulu,  Hawai#i, May 10, 2019.       
On the briefs:
Brian R. Vincent,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Phyllis J. Hironaka,
Deputy Public Defender,
for Defendant-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
8