NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-11-0000332
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
MR. NARCISO H. YU, JR., Plaintiff-Appellant, v. MR. JEFF
DERDEVANIS, Defendant-Appellee; MR. RADOLPO PACLIB,
MR. JENSEN H. FUJIWARA, and MR. DARREN MONDEN, Defendants;
and REYNOLD MASATOSHI HIRAZUMI, Intervenor-Defendant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 11-1-0061)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Fujise and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff-Appellant Narciso H. Yu, Jr. (Yu) appeals,
 
pro se, from a April 27, 2011 Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
(Circuit Court) "Final Judgment as Between Plaintiff and
 Defendant Derdevanis" granting Defendant-Appellee Jeff
 Derdevanis's (Derdevanis) Motion for Summary Judgment (MSJ).
1
 
On appeal, Yu maintains that the Circuit Court lacked
 
jurisdiction, the MSJ hearing was procedurally deficient, the
 Circuit Court erred in granting Derdevanis's MSJ, the Circuit
 Court erred in other rulings, and cumulative errors require
 reversal.
 
After reviewing the issues raised and arguments made by
 
the parties, the record on appeal, and the applicable legal
 authority, we resolve Yu's issues as follows and affirm.
 
Yu argues that the Circuit Court lacked jurisdiction to
 
decide the MSJ because no return of service for his complaint was
 
1
 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
filed with the District Court. Yu appears to argue that because
 
he failed to file a return of service, this case was not placed
 on the District Court's calendar, and therefore Derdevanis "could
 not proceed" with the case. However, Yu cites no authority for
 this proposition and we know of none. Moreover, it appears that
 Derdevanis was served with the complaint as he did not challenge
 service and filed counterclaims in District Court. Yu's argument
 that the District Court, and therefore the Circuit Court had no
 jurisdiction is without merit.
2
 
Yu argues that the MSJ proceeding was procedurally
 
3
deficient because: (1) the other defendants  did not appear at
the MSJ hearing, (2) Derdevanis did not appear at an answer
 calendar proceeding, and (3) Derdevanis committed fraud to place
 his MSJ hearing on the Circuit Court's calendar. We conclude
 Yu's arguments are without merit. Yu fails to provide any
 authority for his position that the other defendants were
 required to attend Derdevanis's MSJ hearing, or that Derdevanis
 was required to personally appear at any "hearing to answer" the
 complaint and does not specify what fraud he claims Derdevanis
 employed to bring the case before the Circuit Court.
 
Derdevanis was entitled to summary judgment as he 
showed that Yu could not establish "all essential elements on which []he bears the burden of proof at trial." Thomas v. 
Kidani
, 126 Hawai 'i 125, 130, 267 P.3d 1230, 1235 (2011). 
Reviewing the entire record and viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Yu, Costa v. Able Distribs., Inc., 3 Haw. App. 486, 488, 653 P.2d 101, 104 (1982), we conclude that Yu failed to respond to Derdevanis's properly presented motion by presenting 
2
 As Yu makes the same arguments in support of his claim the Circuit
Court erred in granting Derdevanis's motion to dismiss counterclaims, we need
not consider the point further.
 
3
 Radolpo Paclib, Jensen H. Fujiwara and Darren Monden were also
named as defendants but did not join in Derdevanis's motion for summary
judgment and are not parties to this appeal. Similarly, Intervenor-Defendant
Reynold Masatoshi Hirazumi (Hirazumi) did not join in the motion nor is he
party to this appeal.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
specific evidence showing the existence of genuine issues of
 
material fact.
 
Derdevanis presented his own declaration and that of
 
the property co-owner, Hirazumi, establishing that he rented the
 apartment from, and paid the rents due for August and September
 2010, the period alleged in Yu's complaint, to Hirazumi, who was
 responsible for renovations to the property and had collected
 rents. Derdevanis also declared that he was never told to pay
 the rent to anyone else, and when Hirazumi, prior to August 2010,
 introduced Yu as a co-owner with Hirazumi, Yu did not disagree
 with the representation, nor did he ever ask Derdevanis to pay
 rent to him.
 
Yu failed to present any admissible evidence to
 
controvert Derdevanis's evidence, and mere allegations that
 Derdevanis's evidence is not credible, without more, is
 insufficient to create a genuine issue of material fact. Costa,
 
3 Haw. App. at 489, 653 P.2d at 104 ("[W]e are inclined to follow
 those cases which hold that a party opposing the motion for
 summary judgment must be able to point to some facts which refute
 the proof of the movant in some material portion and not merely 
recite the incantation, 'Credibility,' and have a trial on the
 hope that a jury may disbelieve factually uncontested proof.")
 (some internal quotation marks omitted).
4
 
Therefore, the April 27, 2011 Judgment entered by the
 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, June 5, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Chief Judge
Narciso H. Yu, Jr.,
Plaintiff-Appellant, pro se.
 
Associate Judge

 
Charles S. Lotsof,

for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge
 
4
 As we conclude Yu's arguments are without merit, we need not
consider whether their cumulative effect warrants relief.
 
3
 