NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000759
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
GJ WILLIANDER, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 14-1-1212)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.,
with Nakamura, C.J. dissenting)
 
Defendant-Appellant GJ Williander (Williander) appeals
 
from a September 22, 2015 Judgment of Conviction and Probation

 
Sentence entered by the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
(Circuit Court).1 After a jury trial, the Circuit Court
 
convicted Williander of Robbery in the Second Degree, a violation
 of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 708-841(1)(a) (2014).
2 
 
Williander was sentenced to a four-year term of probation with,
 inter alia, the special condition that he serve a thirty-day term
 of imprisonment on ten (10) consecutive weekends.
 
1 The Honorable Rom A. Trader presided.
 
2
 HRS ยง 708-841 provides, in pertinent part,
Robbery in the second degree. (1) A person commits
the offense of robbery in the second degree if, in the
course of committing theft or non-consensual taking of
a motor vehicle:
 (a)	 The person uses force against the person
of anyone present with the intent to
overcome that person's physical resistance
or physical power of resistance[.]
 
. . . .
 
(2) Robbery in the second degree is a class B
felony.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On appeal, Williander maintains the Circuit Court erred
 
in denying his Motion to Continue Trial, Motions for Mistrial,
 
and Motions for a New Trial all premised on the basis of Honolulu
 Police Department Officer Darren Sunada's (Officer Sunada)
 unavailability to testify in violation of Williander's
 constitutional right to compulsory process, to present a complete
 defense, and to a fair trial and due process.
 
After reviewing the issues raised and the arguments
 
made by the parties, the record on appeal, and the relevant legal
 authority, we resolve Williander's appeal as follows and affirm.
 
In reviewing whether the moving party was entitled to a 
continuance based on the unavailability of a witness, the following factors must be shown by the moving party: (1) due diligence has been exercised to obtain the attendance of the witness; (2) substantial favorable evidence would be tendered by the witness; (3) the witness is available and willing to testify; and (4) the denial of the continuance would materially prejudice the defendant. State v. Lee, 9 Haw. App. 600, 604, 856 P.2d 
1279, 1282 (1993) (citation omitted; cited favorably in State v. Villiarimo, 132 Hawai
'i 209, 218, 320 P.3d 874, 883 (2014)). 
Here, the Circuit Court found, and the State does not
 
dispute, that as to factors (1) and (3), Williander exercised due
 diligence to obtain the attendance of the witness and that
 Officer Sunada was unavailable for the July 13, 2015 trial; the
 State represented that Officer Sunada was likely to return to
 light duty and be available to testify sometime in September.
 
As to whether the witness would be able to tender
 
"substantial favorable evidence," the following excerpt from
 Officer Sunada's police report was considered by the Circuit
 Court, presumably as an offer of proof:
 
Upon arriving at Kalauokalani [W]ay and Kapiolani Blvd
at about 2228 hours, I observed a shirtless local male
wearing camouflaged designed shorts to be rounding the
N/W corner of the above intersection and making his
way north bound on Kalauokalani [W]ay. I observed the
 male, later identified as GJ WILLIANDER, to have curly
black hair and to be about 5-9" [sic] tall. Upon
making the above observations, I immediately stopped
and exited my blue and white police car and identified
myself to WILLIANDER as a police officer and informed
him that he was being detained as a suspect in a
robbery case. I then instructed WILLIANDER to place
his hands behind his back. WILLIANDER complied by
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
placing his hands behind his back while dropping to
his knees and flopping to the ground on his stomach
under his own power. While on the ground, WILLIANDER
was handcuffed with his hands behind his back without
 incident and was repositioned into the seated
position. 
SUSPECT DEMEANOR: 
While with WILLIANDER, I was able to smell a strong
odor resembling an alcoholic type beverage to be
coming from his person. WILLIANDER was slurring his
words and rambling unintelligible verbiage. WILLIANDER
was also unsteady on his feet while walking.
 
Williander argues that Officer Sunada's testimony would
 
have negated evidence that Williander acted with an intentional
 
state of mind and also "provides context, [and] an explanation
 and impeachment evidence regarding Matsui,[
3] Aihara and Ragudo's
 
testimony." We disagree.
 
As represented in his police report, Officer Sunada's
 
testimony would not contradict Aihara or Ragudo's testimony. 
Neither Aihara nor Ragudo testified regarding Williander's
 intoxicated state, or lack thereof. Thus Williander's testimony
 regarding his own intoxication was uncontradicted.
 
Aihara could not understand anything that Williander
 
said to him. Ragudo did not testify that Williander did not slur
 his words, only that when Williander shouted, Ragudo could hear
 what Williander said. Indeed, Ragudo testified that Williander's
 speech was at first "garbled." Conversely, Officer Sunada was
 not present during the offense and could not directly contradict
 Aihara and Ragudo's version of those events. Moreover, there is
 no indication Officer Sunada heard Williander's speech when
 shouting. Thus, Officer Sunada's testimony could not have
 impeached Aihara or Ragudo's testimony.
 
To the extent that Williander sought Officer Sunada's
 
testimony to corroborate Williander's testimony that he was
 intoxicated at the time of the offense, Williander's testimony
 was uncontradicted on that point. In any event, evidence of his
 
3
 Williander represented before the Circuit Court that "Officer
Sunada is not impeaching [Matsui] at all for us." On appeal, Williander
argues that coupled with Officer Sunada's testimony, Matsui's testimony would
be "substantially favorable" because it would be "consistent with Williander
acting recklessly as opposed to intentionally." We address evidence of
 
intoxication relative to proof of state of mind infra.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
self-induced intoxication was not admissible to negative his
 
state of mind. HRS ยง 702-230(2) (2014). 
Thus, we conclude that Officer Sunada's testimony was
 
not "substantial favorable evidence" for Williander.
 
We conclude that Williander has failed to show the
 
fourth factor--whether the denial of the continuance would cause
 material prejudice to him--weighs in his favor. Williander's
 contention that "Officer Sunada's testimony was critical because
 he was the only witness who had personal knowledge of the state
 and extent of [his] intoxication" and Officer Sunada's "testimony
 would have provided Williander with his only legal defense,
 specifically that he did not act intentionally with respect to
 his actions and conduct" is without merit. As we have stated,
 HRS ยง 702-230(2) prevents the use of self-induced intoxication to
 negate the requisite state of mind. Therefore, the denial of the
 continuance did not materially prejudice Williander. 
We conclude the Circuit Court did not abuse its
 
discretion in denying Williander a fifth continuance of trial. 
State v. Altergott, 57 Haw. 492, 508, 559 P.2d 728, 739 (1977).
 
In light of our conclusions that the testimony was not 
admissible to disprove the requisite intent and at best was sought for the purposes of impeachment we reject Williander's arguments that the Circuit Court abused its discretion when it denied his motions for a mistrial or new trial. State v. Lagat, 
97 Hawai
'i 492, 495, 40 P.3d 894, 897 (2002); State v. Yamada, 
108 Hawai 'i 474, 478, 122 P.3d 254, 258 (2005). 
Based on the foregoing, the September 22, 2015 Judgment
 
of Conviction and Probation Sentence entered by the Circuit Court
 of the First Circuit is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, June 21, 2017. 
On the briefs: 
Taryn R. Tomasa,
Deputy Public Defender,for Defendant-Appellant. 
Associate Judge 
Donn Fudo,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
Associate Judge 
4

 