  
 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-24-0000394 28-APR-2026 08:31 AM Dkt. 51 OP 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF 
HAWAI#I 
---o0o---
GENE ARTHUR LEARY, JR., IN HIS CAPACITY AS TRUSTEE
OF THE EDWARD J. SAX FAMILY PROTECTION TRUST 
DATED NOVEMBER 20, 2018, Claimant-Appellee,
v. 
ROBERT'S HAWAII, INC., Respondent-Appellant 
NO. CAAP-24-0000394 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CSP-23-0001192) 
APRIL 28, 2026 
NAKASONE, CHIEF JUDGE, HIRAOKA AND GUIDRY, JJ. 
OPINION OF THE COURT BY HIRAOKA, J. 
Gene Arthur Leary, Jr., Trustee of The Edward J. Sax 
Family Protection Trust, filed a special proceeding to compel 
Robert's Hawaii
, Inc. to arbitrate a dispute over the price 
Robert's Hawaii had to pay to buy Trust's interest in Teuila 
Hawaii LLC. The Circuit Court of the First Circuit granted 
Trust's motion to compel arbitration.1 Robert's Hawaii appeals. 
1 The Honorable Karin L. Holma presided.  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
It contends the arbitration provision in the contract that 
created Trust's option to sell was ambiguous and unenforceable. 
We hold that the arbitration provision, contained in a 
contract jointly drafted by parties of equal sophistication and bargaining power, was not ambiguous, and was enforceable. We affirm the Final Judgment
 entered on May 24, 2024. We also 
affirm the August 29, 2024 Order Granting in Part Claimant's Motion for Fees and Costs. 
I. BACKGROUND 
Teuila Hawaii Inc. owned and operated Chief's Luau, a 
lû#au show in Kapolei, O# ahu. Trust owned half of the 
corporation's stock. Robert's Hawaii agreed to buy some of Trust's interest if the corporation was first converted to a limited liability company. They signed the Membership Interest Purchase Agreement. The Purchase Agreement's effective date was 
December 26, 2019. Teuila Hawaii Inc. was converted to a limited 
liability company on January 2, 2020. LLC's Operating Agreement 
had an effective date of January 7, 2020.
2 
The Purchase Agreement gave Trust the option to sell, 
and obligated Robert's Hawaii to buy, Trust's remaining interest 
in what would become LLC, and included a formula to determine the price. The parties call it the Option.  Trust exercised the 
Option in December 2022. The parties disagreed on the price. 
Trust demanded arbitration. By letter dated December 6, 2023, Robert's Hawaii declined to arbitrate. 
2 A limited liability company's operating agreement serves "to
regulate the affairs of the company and the conduct of its business, and to
govern relations among the members, managers, and company." Hawaii Revised 
Statutes § 428 -103(a) (2004). 
2   FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Trust sued Robert's Hawaii to compel arbitration. The 
Circuit Court granted Trust's motion to compel arbitration, 
denied Robert's Hawaii's motion to stay enforcement of its order pending disposition of this appeal, and awarded Trust attorney fees and costs. The Final Judgment was entered on May 24, 2024. This appeal followed. 
II. POINTS OF ERROR 
Robert's Hawaii challenges the orders: (1) granting 
Trust's motion to compel arbitration; (2) denying Robert's Hawaii's motion to stay enforcement of the arbitration order; and (3) awarding Trust attorney fees and costs. 
III. STANDARDS OF REVIEW 
A. Order Compelling Arbitration 
We review an order compelling arbitration de novo, 
examining the evidence considered by the trial court and applying the standard for a motion for summary judgment.
3 Yamamoto v. 
Chee, 146 Hawai# i 527, 533, 463 P.3d 1184, 1190 (2020). 
Summary judgment is appropriate when the moving party 
shows, by admissible evidence, that the material facts are uncontroverted and it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Nozawa v. Operating Engineers Local Union No. 3, 142 Hawai# i 331, 
342, 418 P.3d 1187, 1198 (2018). 
B. Motion to Stay 
We review a trial court's denial of a motion to stay 
enforcement of a judgment pending appeal for abuse of discretion. 
3 We disregard the parties' representations and arguments about
facts that don't appear in the record on appeal. 
3  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
See Kelepolo v. Fernandez, 148 Hawai# i 182, 187, 468 P.3d 196, 
201 (2020) (court has discretion to set amount of supersedeas 
bond or alternative security sufficient to protect rights of appellee). 
C. Attorney Fees and Costs 
We review an order granting or denying attorney fees 
and costs for abuse of discretion. Deutsche Bank Nat'l Tr. Co. v. Kozma, 140 
Hawai#i 494, 497, 403 P.3d 271, 274 (2017). 
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. The Circuit Court correctly granted Trust's
motion to compel arbitration. 
A court deciding a motion to compel arbitration answers 
two questions: (1) is there an arbitration agreement between the 
parties; and (2) if so, is the subject matter of the dispute arbitrable under the agreement. Fireman's Fund Ins. Co. v. AIG 
Haw. Ins. Co., 109 Hawai# i 343, 349, 126 P.3d 386, 392 (2006). 
1. The Purchase Agreement's arbitration
provision is unambiguous andenforceable. 
To be valid and enforceable, an arbitration agreement 
must: (1) be in writing; (2) be unambiguous about the intent to 
submit disputes or controversies to arbitration; and (3) have bilateral consideration.
4 Douglass v. Pflueger Haw., Inc., 110 
Hawai#i 520, 531, 135 P.3d 129, 140 (2006). The construction of, 
and legal effect given to, an arbitration agreement is a question of law. Yamamoto, 146 Hawai# i at 533, 463 P.3d at 1190. 
4 Robert's Hawaii does not contend there was no bilateral 
consideration. 
4 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Purchase Agreement contained this arbitration 
provision: 
14.3 Arbitration. All disputes under this Agreement
which cannot be resolved by the parties shall be settled by
arbitration in the State of Hawaii, before a singlearbitrator in accordance with Chapter 658A of the HawaiiRevised Statutes and the Arbitration Rules, Procedures andProtocols of Dispute Prevention & Resolution, Inc. (" DPR").
Arbitration may be commenced at any time by any party heretoby giving written notice to each other party to a disputethat such dispute has been referred to arbitration. The arbitrator shall be selected by the joint agreement of theparties, but if they do not so agree within twenty (20) daysafter the date of the notice referred to above, theselection shall be made by the executive in charge of DPR.Any award rendered by the arbitrator shall be conclusive andbinding upon the parties hereto. This provision for
arbitration shall be specifically enforceable by the partiesand the decision of the arbitrator in accordance herewith shall be final and binding and there shall be no right ofappeal therefrom, except as otherwise provided in HRSChapter 658A. The arbitrator shall award to the prevailingparty its costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred inconnection with such arbitration. 
(Bold italics added.) 
Robert's Hawaii contends the arbitration provision is 
made ambiguous by other provisions of the Purchase Agreement. 
Whether an arbitration agreement is ambiguous is a question of law. 
Yamamoto, 146 Hawai# i at 533, 463 P.3d at 1190. We 
construe the Purchase Agreement as a whole, and determine its meaning "from the entire context and not from any particular word, phrase, or clause." 
Haw. Med. Ass'n v. Haw. Med. Serv. 
Ass'n, 113 Hawai# i 77, 92, 148 P.3d 1179, 1194 (2006). 
Robert's Hawaii argues that sections 14.2, 14.4, and 
16.7 of the Purchase Agreement make the section 14.3 arbitration provision ambiguous. 
They provide: 
14. DEFAULT. . . . . 14.2 Remedies for Breach Following First Tranche
Closing. If after the First Tranche Closing, Seller or 
5 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Buyer fails to perform any of its remaining obligations,
including obligations with respect to the purchase and saleof the Second Tranche, and obligation [sic] remaining afterthe Second Tranche Closing, then the other Party mayexercise any remedies available to it at law or in equity,
in any order it deems appropriate in its sole and absolutediscretion , including, but not limited to, seeking specific
performance or damages. 
14.3 Arbitration. . . . 
14.4 Costs of Enforcement. In the event either Party
brings any suit  or other proceeding with respect to the
subject matter or enforcement of this Agreement, theprevailing party (as determined by the court, agency orother authority before which such suit or proceeding iscommenced) shall, in addition to such other relief as may beawarded, be entitled to recover reasonable attorneys' fees,expenses and costs of investigation as actually incurred(including, without limitation, reasonable attorneys' fees,expenses and costs of investigation incurred in appellateproceedings, costs incurred in establishing the right toindemnification, or in any action or participation in, or inconnection with, any case or proceeding under the BankruptcyCode, 11 United States Code Sections 101 et seq. or anysuccessor statutes). 
. . . . 16. MISCELLANEOUS. . . . . 16.7 Applicable Laws; Severability; Venue. This 
Agreement shall be governed by and shall be construed in
accordance with the laws of the State of Hawaii. If anyprovision of this Agreement is held to be invalid orunenforceable, the validity and enforceability of the otherprovisions of this Agreement will remain unaffected. The parties agree that the venue for the enforcement of this 
Agreement shall be in the Circuit Court of the First Circuitof the State of Hawaii or the United States District Court for the District of Hawaii . This Agreement shall be
construed in accordance with and governed by the laws of theState of Hawaii. 
(Bold italics added.) 
Robert's Hawaii relies on Luke v. Gentry Realty, Ltd., 
105 Hawai#i 241, 96 P.3d 261 (2004), and Narayan v. Ritz-Carlton 
Development Co., 135 Hawai# i 327, 350 P.3d 995 (2015) 
(Narayan I), vacated, 577 U.S. 1056, 136 S. Ct. 800, 193 
L. Ed. 2d 701 (2016), aff'd on remand, 140 Hawai# i 343, 400 P.3d 
544 (2017) (Narayan II). The cases are distinguishable. 
6 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In Luke, subdivision homeowners sued the subdivision 
developer and others. The homeowners had signed the developer's 
sales agreement. Under paragraph G, if the developer defaulted, the buyer "may pursue any remedies available at law or in equity[.]" 105 Hawai# i at 244, 96 P.3d at 264. But three pages 
later, paragraph K contained a mandatory mediation and arbitration provision. Id. at 249, 96 P.3d at 269. 
The defendants moved to dismiss or compel arbitration 
under the sales agreement. The circuit court stayed the lawsuit and compelled arbitration. The plaintiffs appealed. The supreme court, reading paragraphs G and K together, stated that "the scope of the binding arbitration provision is unclear." Id. at 249, 96 P.3d at 269. The court held: 
A reasonable buyer entering into this contract would not
know whether she or he maintained the right to judicialredress or whether she or he had agreed to arbitrate anypotential dispute. Therefore, an ambiguity exists in theplain language of the contract. 
This ambiguity must be resolved in favor of the
Plaintiffs. This court has affirmed the general rule that,in interpreting contracts, ambiguous terms are construed
against the party who drafted the contract . Resolving this
ambiguity in favor of the Plaintiffs, we cannot say that thePlaintiffs agreed to submit the claims made in thislitigation to arbitration; therefore, we hold that thecircuit court erred in staying the judicial proceedingspending arbitration. 
Id. (emphasis added) (citations omitted). 
In the Narayan cases, condominium homeowners signed 
purchase agreements that incorporated by reference the 
condominium declaration, which contained an arbitration clause. Narayan II
, 140 Hawai#i at 346-47, 400 P.3d at 547-48. After the 
United States Supreme Court vacated 
Narayan I
, the Hawai#i 
Supreme Court held the arbitration clause was "unconscionable 
7  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
under common law contract principles." Id. at 357, 400 P.3d at 
558. The supreme court stated that 
unconscionability so pervades the arbitration clause that it
is unenforceable. As a starting point, the arbitrationclause is part of an adhesion contract  whose terms were 
unilaterally determined  by the stronger contracting party,
and are ambiguous when read together with the othercontrolling documents. 
Id. at 356, 400 P.3d at 557 (emphasis added). 
In Narayan I the supreme court stated: 
Not only was the declaration drafted by a party withsuperior bargaining strength, it was recorded in the bureauof conveyances prior to the execution of the purchaseagreements. The Homeowners had no choice but to conform to the terms of the declaration as recorded if they wanted topurchase a Ritz–Carlton condominium on Maui. Thus, the 
declaration is "adhesive" — in the sense that it was drafted or otherwise proffered by the stronger of the contractingparties "on a take this or nothing basis." 
135 Hawai#i at 336–37, 350 P.3d at 1004–05 (emphasis added) 
(cleaned up). 
Here, Robert's Hawaii's president Roy 
Pfund explained: 
The parties jointly drafted an agreement for Robert's[Hawaii] to purchase [Trust]'s interest in [Teuila Hawaii].Finalizing the agreement between the parties involvedextensive negotiations and the exchange of over ten draftsand took over nine months. Both parties had input into thedrafting of the [Purchase Agreement] and neither party wasthe drafter of the [Purchase Agreement]. 
"When the contract has been negotiated between two 
parties of equal sophistication and equal bargaining power, the 
rule of interpreting ambiguities against the drafter has been held inapplicable." Amfac, Inc. v. Waikiki Beachcomber Inv. Co., 74 Haw. 85, 110 n.5, 839 P.2d 10, 25 n.5 (1992). In such a case: 
Where the language of a contract is susceptible of two
constructions, one of which makes it fair, customary andsuch as prudent men would naturally execute, while the othermakes it inequitable, unusual, or such as reasonable men 
8  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
would not likely enter into, the interpretation which makes
a fair, rational and probable contract must be preferred. 
Id. at 110, 839 P.2d at 25 (quotation marks omitted). 
The Purchase Agreement provisions cited by Robert's 
Hawaii can easily be reconciled with the arbitration provision. 
If either party breached after the First Tranche Closing, the non-breaching party could pursue any remedy, in any order it deemed appropriate. If it demanded arbitration and the other party declined, the former could sue to compel arbitration, provided the lawsuit is venued in Hawai# i.  If it waived the 
arbitration provision and sued, the action had to be venued in Hawai#i. 
The defendant could then move to compel arbitration or, 
if it too preferred to litigate, could also waive the arbitration provision. See Fireman's Fund, 109 Hawai# i at 354, 126 P.3d at 
397 (noting that a party may waive an agreement to arbitrate by taking action "completely inconsistent with any reliance thereon"). We hold that the Purchase Agreement's arbitration provision is unambiguous and enforceable. 
2. LLC's Operating Agreement does not apply
to the dispute over pricing of Trust'sinterest in LLC. 
Robert's Hawaii also argues that sections 11.7 and 11.8 
of LLC's Operating Agreement make the Purchase Agreement's 
arbitration provision ambiguous. [OB @ 20]  The Operating 
Agreement does not contain an arbitration provision. Rather, it mandates mediation before litigation: 
9 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
SECTION 11. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
. . . . 
11.7 Governing Law; Jurisdiction . 
This Agreement
shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the laws 
of the State of Hawaii. Each Member, by execution of thisAgreement, consents and submits to jurisdiction over theMember by, and venue in, the courts of the State of Hawaiiin and for Honolulu, Hawaii, regarding any legal actionarising from, or otherwise related to, this Agreement. 
11.8 Dispute. In the event of a dispute,
controversy, or disagreement (the " Disputes ") between or
among any of the Manager, Company, and the Members, or theirAffiliates (the " Parties"), and the Parties are unable to
resolve the Disputes after a good faith effort to do so, theconcerned parties agree to attempt a resolution of alloutstanding Disputes through mediation pursuant to the rulesof a recognized neutral professional mediation service inHawaii, such as Dispute Prevention Resolution, Inc. or theAmerican Arbitration Association, prior to commencement ofany litigation in a court of competent jurisdiction. The cost of such mediation, including the mediator's fees, shallbe split equally between the parties. If mediation is not successful in resolving the Disputes, then the Parties arefree to proceed with any legal recourse or remediesavailable to them in a court of law. The parties herebyagree to waive any and all rights to a trial by jury. 
An unexecuted form of operating agreement was attached 
to the Purchase Agreement. Unlike the homeowner purchase 
agreement in the Narayan cases, which incorporated the condominium declaration by reference, the Purchase Agreement did not incorporate the Operating Agreement. Instead, the form of the document was attached to show what Robert's Hawaii had to approve in writing as one of the conditions for converting Teuila Hawaii from a corporation to a limited liability company. 
LLC's members were to be Robert's Hawaii, Trust, and 
Folosielu Avea.  Pfund was to be LLC's manager. The Operating 
Agreement states: "The Members and Manager desire to operate 
[LLC] in accordance with the terms of this [Operating] Agreement and [Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 428]."  Thus, if 
Robert's Hawaii, Trust, Avea, or Pfund had a dispute over the 
10 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conduct of LLC's business, or their relationships as the LLC's 
members or manager, that dispute need not be arbitrated. 
Robert's Hawaii points to the Purchase Agreement's non-
contravention section, which provides: 
4.6 Non-Contravention. [Trust] warrants that except
for the matters addressed in Section 6 (with respect to
conversion of the Company to a limited liability company)neither [Trust] nor Company is required to give any noticeto, make any filing with, or obtain any authorization,consent or approval of any government or governmental agencyor any other person in order to consummate any of thetransactions contemplated in this Agreement, except for suchnotices, filings, authorizations, consents or approvals, theabsence of which would not have a material adverse effect on the Company. Neither the execution and delivery of thisAgreement nor the consummation by [Trust] of thetransactions contemplated herein will contravene, conflictwith, result in violation or breach of, or constitute adefault under: (a) the Articles of Incorporation, Bylaws, orOperating Agreement of the Company; (b) any statute,regulation, ordinance, regulation, rule, code, injunction,judgment, order, or decree of any government, governmentalagency or court to which [Trust] is subject; (c) anyagreement, contract, lease or license, or other legallybinding arrangements, whether written or oral, to which[Trust] is a party, except the violation, breach or defaultwould not have a material adverse effect on the Company; or(d)result in the imposition or creation of any encumbrance
upon the [interest Trust is selling to Robert's Hawaii]. 
Robert's Hawaii argues Trust's representation that its 
execution of the Purchase Agreement "will [not] contravene, 
conflict with, result in violation or breach of, or constitute a default under . . . the . . . Operating Agreement" creates an inconsistency, because the dispute over the Option is subject to arbitration under the Purchase Agreement, but not under the Operating Agreement. The argument is not persuasive because the Option didn't arise under the Operating Agreement; it involves the Purchase Agreement only. 
The Purchase Agreement provided: 
11 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
13. OPTION TO SELL [TRUST]'S REMAINING INTEREST. 
13.1 Acknowledgments. The Parties acknowledge that
as of the Effective Date, (a) [Trust] owns fifty percent
(50%) of the stock of the Company; (b) immediately followingthe conversion of the Company to a limited liabilitycompany, [Trust] will own a fifty percent (50%) MembershipInterest, represented by 500 Membership Units, in theCompany; and (c) [Trust] has agreed to sell a forty percent(40%) Membership Interest, represented by 400 MembershipUnits, in the Company to [Robert's Hawaii], in two tranches,as set forth in Sections 2 and 11, leaving [Trust] with aten percent (10%) Membership Interest, represented by 100Membership Units, in the Company that is not subject to anobligation to sell to [Robert's Hawaii] (the " Option
Interest "). 
13.2 Option to Sell. [Robert's Hawaii] hereby grants
to [Trust], effective upon the First Tranche Closing, theoption and right (the " Option to Sell ") to require [Robert's
Hawaii] at any time during the five (5) year periodcommencing on the First Tranche Closing Date to purchase theOption Interest for a purchase price equal to (i) tenpercent (10%) of the amount equal to the Company's EBITDA[
5]
for the then most recently completed fiscal year (the " Last 
Fiscal"), as determined in accordance with Section 13.3,
multiplied by 4.0, from which product shall be subtractedthe amount of Company Long-Term Debt. [Trust] shallexercise the Option to Sell by delivering written noticethereof to [Robert's Hawaii]. 
13.3 Determination of EBITDA. For purposes of this
Section 13.3, EBITDA shall be determined as set forth inSection 2.3[
6] except that references to "FY2018" shall be
understood to be to "Last Fiscal;" and (b) the Last FiscalEBITDA shall not be subject to the cap of Two MillionDollars ($2,000,000.00) set forth in Section 2.3(a). 
Trust exercised the Option on December 14, 2022. 
Robert's Hawaii responded on May 10, 2023: 
5 EBITDA is an acronym for LLC's "earnings before interest, taxes,
depreciation and amortization[.]" 
6 As relevant here, section 2.3 of the Purchase Agreement provided: 
If the Parties are unable to reach agreement on the [Last
Fiscal] EBITDA within ten (10) calendar days following[Robert's Hawaii]'s receipt of the [Trust]'s ProposedEBITDA, the determination of the Company's [Last Fiscal]EBITDA shall be submitted to N&K CPAs, Inc. or such othercertified public accountant acceptable to both parties (the"Referee"), who shall decide which of the [Robert's
Hawaii]'s Proposed EBITDA and the [Trust]'s Proposed EBITDAis the more correct; and that which is determined by theReferee to be the more correct figure shall be the [LastFiscal] EBITDA used[.] 
12 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Please note the following adjustments that were made to the
calculated EBITDA for 2021, the most recent completed fiscalbased on your letter dated December 14, 2022: 
2021 EBITDA - $5,632,121 10% share based on 4 times multiple $2,252,848 Our calculation to determine the purchase amount of your 10%
remaining interest includes adjustments to reduce your
payment by the cost of our legal fees and settlement with
Hawaii Discount and John Fredella totaling $818,809. This cost is directly related to your agreement with HD and Johnthat ended up being more than the 30 day month to monthagreement that was represented to us at the time of purchaseand your ownership and control of the domain name and othersocial media accounts. The second adjustment is related todistribution already paid in 2022  of $900.000 [sic]. These 
distributions represent a prepayment on the future cash that
we are purchasing . 
(Emphasis added.) 
Trust replied that Robert's Hawaii improperly excluded 
income from EBITDA and adjusted its payment obligation in ways 
not allowed under the Purchase Agreement, and calculated the price to be $3,421,056. 
Robert's Hawaii did not respond. Trust demanded that 
the EBITDA dispute be resolved by a certified public accountant under the Purchase Agreement section 2.3's baseball arbitration provision.  Trust specified: 
7
The determination of the applicable Last Fiscal EBITDA is
the only issue to be submitted to the Referee. Any effortby Robert's [Hawaii] to apply discounts or adjustments tothe purchase price to be paid under the Option (whetherbased on legal fees and settlement amounts paid,distributions paid, or otherwise) is not before the Referee,and shall be determined in arbitration pursuant to Section14.3 of the [Purchase Agreement]. 
7 Baseball arbitration , so named for its use to set Major League
Baseball player salaries, is a type of binding dispute resolution where eachparty submits a proposed figure to an arbitrator. The arbitrator must choose one of the two figures, and cannot modify the amount. This approachencourages both sides to be reasonable; if one party submits an outrageousnumber, the arbitrator is more likely to choose the other party's morereasonable submission. See Tex. Med. Ass'n v. U.S. Dep't of Health & Hum.
Servs., 110 F.4th 762, 768 n.8 (5th Cir. 2024) (citing Jeff Monhait, Baseball Arbitration: An ADR Success, 4 Harv. J. Sports & Ent. L. 105, 133 (2013)). 
13 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Trust filed a Demand for Arbitration with Dispute 
Prevention & Resolution, Inc. on November 21, 2023. It alleged: 
11. Based on [LLC]'s 2021 financial statements,
which were prepared by Robert's [Hawaii's] own accountants,
the purchase price under the Option equals $3,421,056. 
. . . . 
28. As a result of Robert's [Hawaii's] breach of the
[Purchase Agreement], the calculation of EBITDA inaccordance with the Option, including the question as towhether 2021 grant income is to be included as income incalculating EBITDA, must be determined by the Referee, andthe impropriety of Robert's [Hawaii's] attempt to applyadditional "adjustments" to reduce the purchase price mustbe determined in this arbitration proceeding. 
By letter dated December 6, 2023, Robert's Hawaii 
declined to arbitrate. By letter dated December 21, 2023, it 
agreed "to participate in Mediation and the Referee Process without any waiver of legal or substantive rights or arguments[.]" 
Trust filed the proceeding below on December 22, 2023. 
Its motion to compel arbitration stated: 
A dispute has arisen under the [Purchase Agreement] in
relation to [Trust]'s option to sell, and Robert's
[Hawaii's] obligation to purchase, [Trust]'s ten percent(10%) membership interest in [LLC] in accordance with theterms of the [Purchase Agreement]. . . . [Trust]respectfully requests that the Court issue an ordercompelling Robert's [Hawaii] to participate in bindingarbitration as to all issues set forth in the Demand for 
Arbitration . 
(Emphasis added.) 
The Demand for Arbitration was an exhibit to Trust's 
motion. It alleged that Robert's Hawaii breached the Purchase 
Agreement by failing to pay the Option price to Trust "in accordance with the terms of the" Purchase Agreement. Count I 
14 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
made a claim for breach-of-contract damages. Count II requested 
a declaration that: 
a. [Trust] timely and effectively exercised the Option; 
b. Robert's [Hawaii] is obligated to purchase the Option
Interest from [Trust] at a "purchase price equal to(i) [sic] ten percent (10%) of the amount equal to theCompany's EBITDA for the then most recently completedfiscal year (the " Last Fiscal "), as determined in
accordance with Section 13.3, multiplied by 4.0, fromwhich product shall be subtracted the amount ofCompany Long-Term Debt"; 
c. The determination of the "Last Fiscal EBITDA,"including the question of whether SVOG[ ] proceeds are
properly included as income, shall be submitted to theReferee for determination, and such determinationshall be binding on [Trust] and Robert's [Hawaii]; 
8
d. [Trust] is not liable for amounts incurred by [LLC] orRobert's [Hawaii] in the HD Litigation,[ ] and the HD
Litigation does not provide grounds for Robert's[Hawaii] to reduce or avoid its obligation to pay thepurchase price as required under the Option; 9
e. Until the Option Closing occurs, there has been notransfer of [Trust]'s membership interest, [Trust]remains a member of [LLC], and [Trust] is entitled todistributions as a member. As such, the purchaseprice for the Option Interest shall not be reducedbased on 2022 distributions paid to [Trust]; and 
f. The purchase price that Robert's [Hawaii] is obligatedto pay [Trust] for the Option Interest is the amountdetermined by the Referee, with no reductions or otheradjustments to be applied. 
The disputes Trust sought to arbitrate arose under the 
Purchase Agreement, which created the Option and prescribed how 
the price was to be calculated. None arose under the Operating Agreement, which pertained to the conduct of LLC's business and Trust's and Robert's Hawaii's relationship as LLC's members — not as optionor and optionee under the Purchase Agreement. 
8 SVOG is an acronym for a "Shuttered Venue Operators Grant," paid
to businesses affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and associated government
restrictions. 
9 HD Litigation refers to a lawsuit involving Hawaii Discount and
John Fredella referred to in Robert's Hawaii's May 10, 2023 calculation of theOption price. 
15 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Robert's Hawaii argues that LLC's SVOG proceeds, HD 
Litigation expenses, and 2022 distributions to Trust involved the 
conduct of LLC's business. But the amounts, propriety, and reasonableness of the income, expenses, and distributions were not being disputed; the issue for arbitration was whether Robert's Hawaii could use them to reduce LLC's 2021 EBITDA or the price it must pay for Trust's remaining interest in LLC. 
On this record, we conclude that nothing in the 
Operating Agreement made the Purchase Agreement's arbitration agreement ambiguous. We hold that the subject matter of Trust's Demand for Arbitration was arbitrable under the Purchase Agreement. The Circuit Court did not err by granting Trust's motion to compel arbitration. 
B. Robert's Hawaii's appeal from the order
denying its motion to stay is moot. 
Robert's Hawaii's appeal from the order denying its 
motion to stay the arbitration pending appeal is moot because we 
are affirming the order granting Trust's motion to compel arbitration. 
C. The Circuit Court did not abuse its 
discretion by awarding attorney fees toTrust. 
Trust claimed $69,810.97 in attorney fees. The Circuit 
Court reduced the hourly rate of one of Trust's attorneys from 
$700 to $550, and declined to award fees for time entries that were "purely clerical in nature[.]" The court awarded $68,666.46 in fees. Robert's Hawaii contends the court erred by awarding 
16  FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
any attorney fees. Robert's Hawaii alternatively contends the 
court abused its discretion by not further reducing the fee award. 
1. Trust was entitled to recover attorney
fees. 
HRS § 607-14 (2016) authorizes an award of attorney 
fees "in all actions on a . . . contract in writing that provides 
for an attorney's fee, . . . to be paid by the losing party[.]" The Purchase Agreement's section 14.4 (quoted above) provides that "the prevailing party" in a suit to enforce the Purchase Agreement is entitled to recover reasonable attorney fees and expenses. 
Robert's Hawaii argues that Trust hasn't yet prevailed, 
because "the issue of arbitrability was merely a procedural threshold issue untethered to the core dispute." Trust was entitled to attorney fees because the procedural issue — whether 
Robert's Hawaii had to arbitrate the dispute over the Option price — was not tethered to the price dispute. This is not a case like Kozma
, where our vacation of a mortgagee's summary 
judgment simply put the mortgagor "back in the place he started . . . without addressing a disputed main issue." 140 
Hawai#i at 
499, 403 P.3d at 276 (quotation marks omitted). 
Here, Robert's Hawaii disagreed that it had to 
arbitrate the Option price dispute. 
That disagreement was "a 
matter wholly separate from the merits" of what the Option price should be. Ass'n of Owners of Kukui Plaza v. Swinerton & Walberg 
Co., 68 Haw. 98, 106, 705 P.2d 28, 34 (1985) (cleaned up). When 
17 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the Circuit Court granted Trust's motion to compel arbitration, 
it enforced the Purchase Agreement's arbitration provision. Trust prevailed on the main and only issue presented by the special proceeding. Trust was entitled to an award of reasonable attorney fees and costs under section 14.4 of the Purchase Agreement and HRS § 607-14. 
2. The Circuit Court acted within its 
discretion by not further reducing theamount of the fee claim. 
Robert's Hawaii contends the Circuit Court abused its 
discretion by awarding excessive attorney fees. Trust's fee 
request was calculated "using the lodestar method, in which the number of hours reasonably expended are multiplied by a reasonable hourly rate." Gurrobat v. HTH Corp.
, 135 Hawai#i 128, 
138, 346 P.3d 197, 207 (2015). "The lodestar approach is strongly presumed to yield a reasonable fee." 
Id. "[T]he party 
requesting a lodestar adjustment must show that the unmodified lodestar would lead to an unreasonable fee." Id.
 at 139, 346 
P.3d at 208. Robert's Hawaii does not challenge Trust's attorneys' hourly rates. 
Robert's Hawaii argues that "three partner-level 
attorneys" and "an associate" attorney spent "patently excessive amounts of time" "in connection with a discrete special proceeding"; the "Circuit Court should have disregarded or discounted duplicate or triplicate billing entries"; and the "Circuit Court should have disregarded or discounted block billed entries." According to Robert's Hawaii, the issue "is whether 
18 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
such a process reasonably required four different attorneys, 
including three partner-level attorneys,[10] to complete that 
work and whether 213.1 hours of cumulative time on a 'four-corners' analysis of contractual documents was reasonable and necessary." 
Trust responds by citing cases for the proposition that 
"[w]here there are complex issues, spending more than 200 hours on a motion is reasonable." Trust explains that its motion to compel arbitration had to respond to the legal authority cited in Robert's Hawaii's December 6, 2023, letter declining to arbitrate. Trust argues: "The fact that Robert's abandoned its own argument after reading the Motion demonstrates that the time that [Trust]'s counsel put into the Motion was well-spent. But [Trust] still had to address Robert's new arguments[.]" 
The Circuit Court concluded "that given all the facts 
and circumstances, the time spent for the work accomplished was reasonable. Among other things, the issues in the case were complex, there were numerous issues that were analyzed and evaluated, and the analysis, documents and arguments presented to the court were in-depth." That conclusion is supported by the record. The dispute over arbitrability was hard-fought, and both sides had competent, experienced counsel. 
Robert's Hawaii argues Trust should not have been 
awarded fees "pertaining to issues first raised in the Trust's Reply." The argument lacks merit because Robert's Hawaii's 
10 We note that Robert's Hawaii was also represented by three
partner-level attorneys in the circuit court proceeding. 
19 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
opposition raised new arguments, and it was reasonable for Trust 
to respond. Rule 7(b), Rules of the Circuit Courts of the State of Hawai# i. 
Robert's Hawaii argues that six time entries were 
block-billed and should have been disregarded or discounted. "Block billing" is a time-keeping method where a lawyer enters the total daily time spent working on a case instead of itemizing the time expended on specific tasks. 
Gurrobat, 135 Hawai# i at 
135, 346 P.3d at 204. 
"Block billing may also be defined as the 
practice of lumping multiple tasks into a single time entry." Id. 
Neither current Hawai #i law nor the recent practice of
American courts suggest that block billing is categorically
unacceptable, or that block billing should normally resultin denial of the block billed entries. 
If anything, it
appears generally accepted that block billing should not automatically lead to the rejection of block billed entries. 
. . . . 
In addition, block billing can only occur where
multiple tasks are lumped together into a single billing
entry. 
In order to determine if multiple tasks are actually
being claimed in a single block, a certain degree of common-sense is required; the mere inclusion of the word "and" in abilling entry is certainly not determinative. For example,"reviewing and drafting" a document, "reviewing andrevising" a document, "drafting and finalizing" a document,and other such descriptions all involve the single task of"working on" a document. Similarly, tasks such as draftinga document and making a follow-up telephone call related tothe same document can be viewed as part of the single taskof working on the document. Billing descriptions thatmerely detail the types of activities that make up a singlegeneral task will not normally support a block billingobjection, provided the court can determine thereasonableness of the hours expended on the general task. 
Id. at 135-36, 346 P.3d at 204-05 (citations and footnote 
omitted). 
20 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Five of the six entries challenged by Robert's Hawaii 
describe activities making up a single general task. The Circuit 
Court acted within its discretion by not disregarding the entries or discounting the fees. 
One entry, by Andrew J. 
Lautenbach, was for "final 
review and edits to motion to compel arbitration, and assist with filing (1.5 [hours])." (Emphasis added.) Robert's Hawaii argued to the Circuit Court that the second clause of the entry "appears to be ministerial in nature" and should be disallowed. 
Had the motion to compel been conventionally filed, see 
Hawai#i Electronic Filing and Service Rules (HEFSR) Rule 1, the 
time spent by an attorney to take the document to the circuit court clerk for filing would not be recoverable. 
Cf. Haw.
Ventures, LLC v. Otaka, Inc., 116 Hawai# i 465, 479, 173 P.3d 
1122, 1136 (2007) (noting that "messenger fees for the routine task of delivering [a party]'s documents to court[ ] is categorically outside the concept of 'costs.'" (quoting Kikuchi v. Brown, 110 Hawai# i 204, 212, 130 P.3d 1069, 1077 (App. 
2006))). Here, Lautenbach was the JEFS User, see HEFSR Rule 1, who signed and had to electronically file the motion to compel, see HEFSR Rules 2.2, and 5.1. 
A person employed by an attorney "may register as a 
JEFS user in his or her own name to electronically file documents on behalf of the employer." HEFSR Rule 4.1(b). 
But "[t]he 
employer shall be responsible for the actions and documents electronically filed by the assistant or staff member." Id. 
Even if Lautenbach's nonlawyer employee was the JEFS User who 
21 FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
electronically filed the motion to compel, Lautenbach was still 
obligated to "make reasonable efforts to ensure that the person's conduct is compatible with the professional obligations of the lawyer[.]" Hawai#i Rules of Professional Conduct Rule 5.3(b) 
(Responsibilities Regarding Nonlawyer Assistants). Under these circumstances, the Circuit Court acted within its discretion by not discounting Lautenbach's fees. 
V.
 CONCLUSION 
The arbitration provision in the Purchase Agreement, a 
contract jointly drafted by parties of equal sophistication and equal bargaining power, was unambiguous and enforceable. The Circuit Court did not err by granting Trust's motion to compel arbitration, nor did it abuse its discretion by awarding attorney fees to Trust. 
The May 24, 2024 Final Judgment and August 29, 
2024 Order Granting in Part Claimant's Motion for Fees and Costs are affirmed. 
On the briefs: 
Joachim P. Cox, 
Abigail M. Holden,Brian W. Tilker, for Respondent-Appellant Robert's Hawaii, Inc. 
Andrew V. Beaman, 
Trevor A. Brown,Andrew J. Lautenbach,for Claimant-AppelleeGene Arthur Leary, Jr.,in his capacity as Trustee. /s/ Karen T. NakasoneChief Judge
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry
Associate Judge
22 