 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I   REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-21-0000489 30-SEP-2024 10:34 AM Dkt. 103 SO 
NO. CAAP-21-0000489  
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS   
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI‘I 
  
STATE OF HAWAI‘I, Plaintiff-Appellee,  
v.  
PUNOHU N. KEKAUALUA, Defendant-Appellant  
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT  
LĪHU‘E DIVISION  
(CASE NO. 5DCW-20-0000852)  
 
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Wadsworth, Presiding Judge, Nakasone and Guidry, JJ.)  
Defendant -Appellant Punohu N. Kekaualua (Kekaualua ) 
appeals from the Judgment and Notice of Entry of Judgment 
(Judgment ) entered by the District Court of the Fifth Circuit 
(district court ) on August 12, 2021 . 1 
1 The Honorable Sara Silverman presided.   
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On August 19, 2020, the State of Hawaiʻi (State) 
charged Kekaualua with one count of Criminal Trespass in the 
Second Degree, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 708-814(1)(a). The complaint read: 
On or about the 2nd day of July, 2020, in the County 
of Kauaʻi, State of Hawai ʻi, PUNOHU NE LIMU KEKAUALUA did 
knowingly enter or remain unlawfully in or upon premises 
that were enclosed in a manner designed to exclude 
intruders or were fenced, thereby committing the offense of 
Criminal Trespass in the Second Degree, in violation of 
Hawaiʻi Revised Statutes Section 708 -814(1)(a).  
"Premises" means any building and any real property . 
This matter proceeded to a bench trial on August 12, 
2021, at which Kekaualua appeared self -represented.2 The 
district court found Kekaualua guilty of criminal trespass in 
the second degree, sentencing him to a $100 fine , $30 crime 
victim fee and one day in jail, with credit for time served. 
This appeal followed. 
On appeal, Kekaualua raises five points of error, 
contending that : (1) the district court erred in denying his 
motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction; (2) the district 
court erred in denying his request for pretrial discovery; (3) 
the district court erred by failing to find that his violation 
was a de minimis violation; (4) the district court lacked 
subject matter jurisdiction "given that the charging document 
failed . . . to adequately notify [Kekaualua] of the charges 
2 Kekaualua is represented by attorney Kai Lawrence on appeal. 
2   
 
 
    
 
 
   
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
against him"; and ( 5) there was insufficient evidence to support 
the district court's guilty verdict. Upon careful review of the 
record and relevant legal authorities, we resolve Kekaualua's 
points of error as follows. 
(1) Kekaualua contends that the district court erred 
in denying his motion to dismiss the charging document because 
the charging document was "based upon a lack of jurisdiction 
given the illegal overthrow of the Hawaiian nation by the United 
States[.]" Kekaualua's contention lacks merit. 
In State v. Kaulia, 128 Hawaiʻi 479, 291 P.3d 377  
(2013), the Hawai ʻi Supreme Court rejected the argument that 
Kekaualua makes here. The Kaulia  court held that, pursuant to 
HRS  § 701-106 (1993),  "the State's criminal jurisdiction 
encompasses all areas within the territorial boundaries of the 
State of 3
Hawaiʻi."  Id.  at 487, 291 P.3d at 385 (cleaned up).   
Therefore, "[i]ndividuals claiming to be citizens of the Kingdom  
[of Hawaiʻ i]  and not of the State are not exempt from application 
of the State's laws." Id.   We conclude, pursuant to Kaulia, 
that the district court had jurisdiction over the State's 
complaint against Kekaualua.  
(2) Kekaualua contends that the district court erred 
in denying his oral request for pretrial discovery. He contends 
3 Currently codified in HRS § 706 -106 (2014). 
3   
 
 
  
  
 
  
   
  
 
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that, at a May 2021 pre -trial hearing, he "sought disclosure by 
the prosecution of any treaty showing the United State's [sic] 
lawful presence in Hawaii," and "of any documents showing 
ownership of the parcel of land in question." The district 
court declined to order the prosecution to produce th e requested 
documents , instructing Kekaualua that "if you want to file 
motions to compel the State to do something, you can[.]" 
"The scope of discovery is reviewed for an abuse of 
discretion." State v. Estrada , 69 Haw. 204, 216, 738 P.2d 812, 
821 (1987). Hawaiʻi Rules of Penal Procedure ( HRPP) Rule 16 
governs discovery. 
Disclosure in criminal cases is governed by HRPP Rule 16, 
which limits discovery "to cases in which the defendant is 
charged with a felony," HRPP Rule 16(a), except as provided 
in HRPP Rule 16(d). . . . HRPP Rule 16(d) provides that, 
upon a showing of materiality and if the request is 
reasonable, the court in its discretion may require 
disclosure as provided for in this Rule 16 in cases other 
than those in which the defendant is charged with a felony, 
but not in cases involving violations. 
Thus, discovery in a misdemeanor case may be permitted by 
the trial judge upon a showing of materiality and if the 
request is reasonable, but only to the extent authorized by 
HRPP Rule 1 6 for felony cases. 
State v. Lo, 116 Hawaiʻi 23,  26,  169 P.3d 975, 978 (2007) 
(cleaned up).   HRPP Rule 16(b)(2) governs the disclosure of 
matters not within the prosecution's possession, as was the case 
here. The rule states,   
Upon written request of defense counsel and specific 
designation by defense counsel of material or information 
which would be discoverable if in the possession or control 
of the prosecutor and which is in the possession or control 
of other governmental personnel, the prosecutor shall use 
4   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
diligent good faith efforts to cause such material or 
information to be made available to defense counsel; and if 
the prosecutor's efforts are unsuccessful the court shall 
issue suitable subpoenas or orders to cause such material 
or information to be made available to defense counsel. 
(Emphasis added). 
The record reflects that Kekaualua did not make a 
written request of the State to provide any of the documents 
that he was seeking. We conclude, given Kekaualua's 
noncompliance with HRPP Rule 16, that the district court did not 
abuse its discretion by not ordering the State to produce the 
discovery that Kekaualua sought. 
(3) Kekaualua contends that the charging document is 
insufficient because it did not include the statutory definition 
of "enter or remain unlawfully,"  and therefore failed to 
adequately provide notice of the charge as required by  State v. 
Wheeler, 121 Hawai ʻi 383, 219 P.3d 1170 (2009), and State v. 
Nesmith, 127 Hawai ʻi 48, 276 P.3d 617 (2012).  4
"Whether a charge sets forth all the essential 
elements of a charged offense is a question of law, which we 
review under the de novo, or right/wrong standard." Wheeler, 
121 Hawaiʻi at 390, 219 P.3d at 1177 (cleaned up).  Where, as 
here, Kekaualua challenges the sufficiency of the charging 
4 HRS § 708 -800 (2014) defines "enter or remain unlawfully " as 
follows, and in pertinent part , 
"Enter or remain unlawfully" means to enter or remain in or 
upon premises when the person is not licensed, invited, or 
otherwise privileged to do so. 
5   
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
document for the first time on appeal, we adhere to the 
Motta/Wells rule to apply a more liberal standard of review. 
Pursuant to the Motta/Wells rule, 
[C]harges challenged for the first time on appeal are presumed 
valid. Accordingly, we will only vacate a defendant's conviction 
under this standard if the defendant can show: (1) that the 
charge cannot reasonably be construed to allege a crime; or (2) 
that the defendant was prejudiced. 
State v. Kauhane , 145 Hawaiʻi 362, 367, 452 P.3d 359, 370 (2019) 
(cleaned up). 
Here, unlike in Wheeler  and Nesmith, the ordinary and 
commonly understood definition of "enter or remain unlawfully" 
reflects and comports with its statutory definition. "Where a 
statute sets forth with reasonable clarity all essential 
elements of the crime intended to be punished, and fully defines 
the offense in unmistakable terms readily comprehensible to 
persons of common understanding, a charge drawn in the language 
of the statute will be sufficient." Id.  at 367, 452 P.3d at 370 
(cleaned up).  
We conclude that Kekaualua has not shown that the 
charge against him cannot reasonably be construed to allege a 
crime, or that he was prejudiced.  
(4) Kekaualua contends that the district court erred 
by not construing his several oral motions "seeking dismissal of 
the complaint, or acquittal, following presentation of 
evidence [,]" as "motions to dismiss the charge as de minim us 
6   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[sic][.]" "The dismissal of a prosecution for a de minimis  
infraction is not a defense. The authority to dismiss a 
prosecution as de minimis  rests in the sound discretion of the 
trial court." State v. Rapozo, 123 Hawaiʻi 329, 336, 235 P.3d 
325, 332 (2010) (cleaned up).    
In Rapozo, the Hawaiʻi Supreme Court explained 
that, 
HRS § 702 -236[5] provides that "the court may dismiss a 
prosecution if, having regard to the nature of the conduct 
alleged and the nature of the attendant circumstances, it 
finds that the defendant's conduct" constituted a de 
minimis infraction. Thus, we require that all of the 
relevant attendant circumstances be considered by the trial 
court. 
 . . . . 
The defendant has the burden of bringing the relevant 
attendant circumstances before the court for its 
consideration. 
 . . . . 
5 HRS § 702 -236 (2014) states, in its entirety, 
§702-236 De minimis infractions. (1) The court may 
dismiss a prosecution  if, having regard to the nature of 
the conduct alleged and the nature of the attendant 
circumstances, it finds that the defendant's conduct:  
(a) Was within a customary license or tolerance, 
which was not expressly refused by the person 
whose interest was infringed and which is not 
inconsistent with the purpose of the law 
defining the offense; 
(b) Did not actually cause or threaten the harm or 
evil sought to be prevented by the law defining 
the offense or did so only to an extent too 
trivial to warrant the condemnation of 
conviction; or 
(c) Presents such other extenuations that it cannot 
reasonably be regarded as envisaged by the 
legislature in forbidding the offense. 
(2) The court shall not dismiss a prosecution under 
subsection (1)(c) of this section without filing a written 
statement of its reasons. 
7   
 
 
  
 
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
    
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In addition to requiring consideration of all the relevant 
attendant circumstances, HRS § 702 -236 further requires 
consideration of "the harm or evil sought to be prevented 
by the law defining the offense." As with all efforts to 
determine legislative int ent, that inquiry relies primarily 
on the plain language of the statute. 
Rapozo, at 337-38, 235 P.3d at 33 3-34 (cleaned up). 
Criminal trespass in the second degree is intended to 
prevent people from unlawfully entering upon premises . 
Kekaualua failed to carry his burden of establishing that his 
conduct was a de minimis infraction of HRS § 708 -814(1)(a) 
within the meaning of HRS § 702 -236. Realtor Julie Black 
(Black) testified at trial that Kekaualua's truck was blocking 
the driveway ; when she asked him to move the truck, he refused, 
causing her to call the police and have his truck towed. Black 
further testified that approximately three times, Kekaualua, 
"[taunted] the police officer to arrest him, like putting his 
foot over [the premises] and then bringing it back, putting it 
over and bringing it back." When asked "were there any previous 
incidents where Mr. Kekaualua was advised that he was not 
allowed on the property[,]" Black responded, "[m]any." 
We conclude that the district court did not abuse its 
discretion by not dismissing the case as de minimis . 
(5) Kekaualua contends that there was insufficient 
evidence introduced to support the district court's guilty 
verdict. He contends that there "was no evidence presented 
showing the requisite mens rea necessary to sustain the 
8   
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
conviction" because of his alleged mistake of fact,6 i.e., that 
"he legitimately believed that he and his family, as konohiki 
receiving the land in question during the [] Great Mahele, were 
the rightful title holders to said land. " He further contends 
that the "fence line in question was a necessary element of the 
charge that was never proven [,]" specifically that there was not 
"any evidence presented showing a survey or plot map marking out 
the boundaries" of the premises . 
"The test on appeal is not whether guilt is 
established beyond a reasonable doubt, but whether there was 
substantial evidence to support the conclusion of the trier of 
fact." State v. Richie , 88 Hawaiʻi 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241 
(1998) (citations omitted) . "Substantial evidence as to every 
material element of the offense charged is credible evidence 
which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a 
6 The defense of mistake of fact is codified in HRS § 702 -218 
(2014), which states, 
§702-218 Ignorance or mistake as a defense.   In any 
prosecution for an offense, it is a defense that the 
accused engaged in the prohibited conduct under ignorance or mistake of fact if:  
(1) The ignorance or mistake negatives the state of 
mind required to establish an element of the 
offense; or 
(2) The law defining the offense or a law related 
thereto provides that the state of mind 
established by such ignorance or mistake 
constitutes a defense. 
9   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." State v. 
Foster, 128 Hawaiʻi 18, 25, 282 P.3d 560, 567 (2012).   
In order to sustain a conviction of criminal trespass 
in the second degree, the prosecution was required to prove that 
Kekaualua: (1) did knowingly enter or remain unlawfully; (2) in 
or upon premises that were enclosed in a manner designed to 
exclude intruders or were fenced.  
Black  testified at trial that she observed Kekaualua 
cross over into the fenced area of the property, and when asked 
if she observed him on the property on the day in question, she 
specified that she "observed his foot on the property, yes."  
During his own testimony, Kekaualua testified that he 
was physically on the property, admitting, "[y]es, I did go back 
on the property[.]"   The following testimony was also presented  
on cross-examination:  
Q [State]. Isn't it true that you did enter the 
property after --  
 
A [Kekaualua]. Absolutely.  
 
Q. And you were told that you could not be there?  
 
A. Absolutely.   
 . . . . 
Q. But you were told that you could not be on the 
property and you remained? 
A. Yes. 
10   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI‘I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
We conclude that there is sufficient evidence in 
the record to support Kekaualua's conviction of criminal 
trespass in the second degree. 
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the district 
court's Judgment . 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, September 30 , 2024. 
On the briefs:  
 /s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth  
Kai Lawrence,  Presiding Judge  
for Defendant-Appellant.   
 /s/ Karen T. Nakasone  
Tracy Murakami,  Associate Judge  
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,   
County of Kaua ‘i,  /s/ Kimberly T. Guidry  
for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge  
11 