   
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-19-0000814 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
MYISHA LEE ARMITAGE, Defendant-Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 1CPC-17-0000342) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By: Leonard, Presiding Judge, Hiraoka and Wadsworth, JJ.) 
Defendant-Appellant Myisha Lee Armitage (Armitage) 
appeals from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence, entered on 
November 1, 2019, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit Court).   Following a jury trial, Armitage was convicted 
of Accidents Involving Death or Serious Bodily Injury, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (
HRS) § 291C-12 (Supp. 
2015)  (Count 1), and Negligent Homicide in the First Degree, in 
violation of HRS §§ 707-702.5(1)(a) and/or 707-702.5(1)(b) 2/1/
1/ The Honorable Paul B.K. Wong presided. 
2/ At the time of the alleged offense, HRS § 291C-12 provided, in
relevant part: 
Accidents involving death or serious bodily injury. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident
resulting in serious bodily injury to or death of any personshall immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of theaccident or as close thereto as possible but shall thenforthwith return to and in every event shall remain at thescene of the accident until the driver has fulfilled the requirements of section 291C-14.  Every such stop shall bemade without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.  
  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
(2014)3/ (Count 2). 
On appeal, Armitage contends that:  (1) the indictment 
as to Count 1 was insufficient because it failed to specify that 
Armitage did not stop as close as possible to the accident scene and "forthwith return" to the scene "without obstructing traffic more than is necessary," HRS § 291C-12; (2) the jury instructions for Count 1 were prejudicially insufficient, erroneous, and misleading because they did not contain all of the elements of the charged offense; (3) there was insufficient evidence to sustain the conviction as to Count 1; (4) the indictment as to Count 2 was insufficient because it did not include the definition of "under the influence" and thus failed to state an offense; and (5) the Circuit Court erred in not suppressing the result of Armitage's blood alcohol test where the police failed to obtain a warrant to draw Armitage's blood. 
After reviewing the record on appeal and the relevant 
legal authorities, and giving due consideration to the issues raised and the arguments advanced by the parties, we resolve Armitage's contentions as follows: 
(1)  Armitage argues that the Hawai# i Supreme Court's 
decision in State v. Baker, 146 Hawai# i 299, 463 P.3d 956 (2020), 
is dispositive of her contention that the indictment was insufficient as to Count 1. 
In Baker, the supreme court considered the sufficiency 
of a charge brought against a driver for failure to stop at the scene of an accident involving vehicle damage, in violation of HRS § 291C-13.  At that time, HRS § 291C-13 (Supp. 2008) stated, in relevant part: 
3/ HRS § 707-702.5 states, in relevant part: 
Negligent homicide in the first degree.  (1) A person
commits the offense of negligent homicide in the first
degree if that person causes the death of: 
(a) Another person by the operation of a vehicle ina negligent manner while under the influence ofdrugs or alcohol; or 
(b) A vulnerable user by the operation of a vehiclein a negligent manner. 
2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   Accidents involving damage to vehicle or property.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting
only in damage to a vehicle or other property that is drivenor attended by any person shall immediately stop suchvehicle at the scene of the accident or as close thereto as possible, but shall forthwith return to, and in every eventshall remain at, the scene of the accident until the driverhas fulfilled the requirements of section 291C-14.  Everysuch stop shall be made without obstructing traffic morethan is necessary. . . . 
See Baker, 146 Hawai# i at 302 n.1, 463 P.3d 959 n.1.  
The supreme court construed this language to mean that 
"[a] driver . . . . does not violate the statute by not stopping 
at the scene, by not stopping as close as 'possible' to the scene, or not returning to the scene of the accident, if doing so would prevent a traffic hazard that would otherwise result."  Id. at 307, 463 P.3d at 964.  Therefore, the court concluded: 
The requirement that the stop was made without obstructing
traffic more than is necessary is thus a requisite aspect ofproof of the offense when the driver stops at, or forthwithreturns to, a location that the State contends is not asclose as "possible" to the accident scene.  
Accordingly, when a defendant stops in close proximity
of the accident scene and provides the requisiteinformation, the State, in order to show a violation of thestatute, is required to prove the following: (1) thedefendant failed to stop at a location that was as close tothe scene of the accident as possible, or to forthwithreturn thereto, and (2) the failure did not result from thedefendant avoiding an unnecessary obstruction of traffic. 
Id. 
In Baker, the defendant challenged the sufficiency of 
the failure-to-stop charge for the first time on appeal.  Id. at 
308, 463 P.3d at 965.  The supreme court thus applied the liberal construction standard in reviewing the charge.  Id. (citing State v. Motta, 66 Haw. 89, 90, 657 P.2d 1019, 1019-20 (1983); State v. Wells, 78 Hawai# i 373, 381, 894 P.2d 70, 78 (1995)).  The court 
nevertheless ruled: 
The State in this case did not specify in the complaint that
[the defendant] did not stop either at the accident scene orstop at the location closest to the accident scene andforthwith return thereto without obstructing traffic morethan is necessary. The State's omission of this statutoryqualification did not provide [the defendant] with fairnotice of the elements of the offense charged. In fact, thecharge did not include any reference to the language"without obstructing traffic more than is necessary" orinclude language similar to it.  The failure to include the statutory language resulted in this element of the charge 
3   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
having a common meaning that differed from the express
statutory requirements, and thus neither the complaint northe oral charge can be reasonably construed to charge anoffense.  Accordingly, the deficient charge deprived Bakerof the right to due process.  As a result, the State failedto state an offense, and the conviction based upon it cannotbe sustained. 
Baker, 146 Hawai# i at 308, 463 P.3d at 965 (citations omitted).  
Here, Armitage was charged in Count 1 with failing to 
stop at the scene of an accident involving death or serious 
bodily injury, in violation of HRS § 291C-12.  The operative provisions of HRS § 291C-13 substantially mirror those of HRS § 291C-12.  In particular, both statutes require a driver who is involved in an accident that causes a specified harm to immediately stop at the scene of the accident or stop "as close thereto as possible" and "forthwith return" to the scene.  HRS § 291C-12; HRS § 291C-13; see Baker, 146 Hawai# i at 306, 463 P.3d 
at 963.  Both statutes also require that "[e]very such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary."  HRS § 291C-12; HRS § 291C-13.  However, the charge against Armitage, like its counterpart in Baker, failed to specify that Armitage did not stop at the accident scene or stop at the location closest to the accident scene and forthwith return thereto without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.  Under Baker, the failure to include the statutory language "without obstructing traffic more than is necessary," or similar language, rendered Count 1 deficient and deprived Armitage of the right to due process.  See Baker, 146 Hawai# i at 308, 463 P.3d at 965. 
The State contends that because Baker was decided after 
Armitage's trial, the Baker ruling "should be given purely prospective effect" and should not be applied in this case. However, the supreme court in Baker did not indicate that its ruling on the sufficiency of the charge should be given strictly prospective effect; rather, the court applied its ruling to the case before it, concluding that the State failed to state an offense and vacating the defendant's conviction under HRS § 291C-13.
4/  See id. at 308, 310, 463 P.3d at 965, 967.  The disposition 
4/ The court further concluded that the evidence was insufficient to 
convict Baker under HRS § 291C-13, and thus remanded the case to the district
court with instructions to enter a judgment of acquittal.  See Baker, 146 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
of Baker thus indicates that the court's ruling on the 
sufficiency of the charge was not intended to apply "purely prospectively."  Cf. State v. Jones, 148 Hawai# i 152, 174-76, 468 
P.3d 166, 188-90 (2020) (applying a holding prospectively and not to the case at bar); State v. Torres, 144 Hawai# i 282, 292-95, 
439 P.3d 234, 244-47 (2019) (same); State v. Jess, 117 Hawai# i 
381, 404, 184 P.3d 133, 156 (same).  At least as to the present case, which is on direct appellate review, we conclude that the Baker ruling – i.e., that the failure-to-stop charge was deficient for omitting the statutory language "without obstructing traffic more than is necessary," or similar language – applies.  For the reasons discussed above, the Judgment as to Count 1 must be vacated. 
(2) Given that we vacate as to Count 1 based on 
Armitage's first point of error, we do not reach her second point of error. 
(3) In her third point of error, Armitage contends 
there was insufficient evidence to support her conviction as to Count 1. 
Sufficient evidence to support a conviction "requires 
substantial evidence as to every material element of the offense charged."  State v. Grace, 107 Hawai# i 133, 139, 111 P.3d 28, 34 
(App. 2005) (quoting State v. Ferrer, 95 Hawai# i 409, 422, 23 
P.3d 744, 757 (App. 2001)).  Substantial evidence is "credible evidence which is of sufficient quality and probative value to enable a person of reasonable caution to support a conclusion." Id. (quoting Ferrer, 95 Hawai# i at 422, 23 P.3d at 757).  The 
evidence must be "viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution and in full recognition of the province of the trier of fact," who must "determine credibility, weigh the evidence, and draw justifiable inferences of fact."  Id. (quoting Ferrer, 95 Hawai# i at 422, 23 P.3d at 757). 
In order to convict Armitage for a violation of HRS 
§ 291C-12, the State was required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that:  (1) Armitage was driving a vehicle that was involved 
Hawai #i at 310, 463 P.3d at 967. 
5   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
in an accident resulting in serious bodily injury to or death of 
another person; and (2) Armitage did not (a) immediately stop at the scene or stop as close thereto as possible and forthwith return to the scene without obstructing traffic more than is necessary; or (b) give the information required by HRS § 291C-14
 
to any person injured in the accident and any police officer at the scene, and render to any person injured in the accident 5/
reasonable assistance.  See HRS § 291C-12; HRS § 291C-14; see also Baker
, 146 Hawai# i at 309, 463 P.3d at 966 (stating the 
elements to prove a violation of HRS § 291C-13).  In the event that any person injured was not in condition to receive the required information, and no police officer was present, the State was required to prove that Armitage did not forthwith report the accident to the nearest police officer and provide the required information after fulfilling other statutory requirements insofar as possible.  See HRS § 291C-14(b); see also Baker, 146 Hawai# i at 309, 463 P.3d at 966.  The State was also 
required to prove that Armitage committed each element of the 
5/ At the time of the alleged offense, HRS § 291C-14 (Supp. 2015)
provided, in relevant part: 
(a) The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident
resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to
any vehicle or other property which is driven or attended byany person shall give the driver's name, address, and theregistration number of the vehicle the driver is driving,and shall upon request and if available exhibit the driver'slicense or permit to drive to any person injured in theaccident or to the driver or occupant of or person attendingany vehicle or other property damaged in the accident andshall give such information and upon request exhibit suchlicense or permit to any police officer at the scene of theaccident or who is investigating the accident and shallrender to any person injured in the accident reasonableassistance, including the carrying, or the making ofarrangements for the carrying, of the person to a physician,surgeon, or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if itis apparent that such treatment is necessary, or if suchcarrying is requested by the injured person . . . . 
(b) In the event that none of the persons specified is
in condition to receive the information to which theyotherwise would be entitled under subsection (a), and nopolice officer is present, the driver of any vehicleinvolved in the accident after fulfilling all otherrequirements of section 291C-12, 291C-12.5, or 291C-12.6,and subsection (a) of this subsection, insofar as possibleon the driver's part to be performed, shall forthwith reportthe accident to the nearest police officer and submitthereto the information specified in subsection (a). 
6 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
offense intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly.  See HRS 
§§ 291C-12, 701-114, 702-204. 
Armitage argues there was insufficient evidence to 
convict her on Count 1 because she satisfied the requirements of HRS § 291C-14 by providing her driver's license and other information requested by the police officers who responded to Armitage's location following the accident.  In making this argument, however, Armitage ignores the substantial evidence indicating that she did not give the information required by HRS § 291C-14 to any police officer at the scene of the accident, but, rather, continued to drive for nearly a mile after hitting Kaulana Werner (Kaulana) and only stopped when her vehicle 
stalled.  Armitage also ignores the related substantial evidence 
that she did not immediately stop at the accident scene or stop as close thereto as possible and forthwith return to the scene without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
At trial, Honolulu Police Department (HPD) Sergeant 
Philip White (Sgt. White) testified to the following:  At 8:35 
p.m. the evening of the incident, Sgt. White responded to a 
dispatch call for a pedestrian motor vehicle collision in the area of Pohakunui Avenue and Farrington Highway.  As Sgt. White passed the Kahe Power Plant, he noticed individuals jumping up and down and waving their arms, directing his attention to a BMW sedan that he later determined was driven by Armitage, and an SUV that he later determined was driven by Joshua Wakinekona (Wakinekona), on the makai shoulder of the eastbound side of 
Farrington Highway.  Sgt. White first observed Armitage standing 
outside of her vehicle, and she indicated that she was the driver.  
Sgt. White's testimony continued as follows: 
Q. [DPA:] What . . ., if anything, happened next? 
A. [Sgt. White:] I asked her what happened. Q. And what did she say? A. She said, really excited, "I don't know. I don’t
know. I hit something. I don't know." 
Q. What did you do at that point? A. I asked her for her name. 
7 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Q. Okay. And she replied, she responded to you? 
A. She provided me with her first and last name. 
Sgt. White next asked Armitage for her driver's license 
and vehicle documents, which Armitage provided.  After this 
exchange, Sgt. White examined Armitage's vehicle, observed extensive damage to it, and determined that it was involved in the pedestrian motor vehicle collision.  The location of 
Armitage's vehicle was approximately eight tenths of a mile east 
(i.e., toward town) from the scene of the collision.  According to Sgt. White, who travels on Farrington Highway every day as he goes to work, "there are numerous places to turn off" between the scene of the collision and where Armitage's vehicle was located. 
Edward Werner (Edward), Kaulana's father, similarly 
testified that there were multiple places to turn off between the scene of the accident and where Armitage's car stopped. Specifically, Edward testified that there was no guard rail near the scene of the accident and there were "a lot of places" "to pull your car over."  According to Edward, "You can just turn right on the side and pull onto that . . . grassy area."  Edward also testified that a car could turn onto Piliokahi Street, a cross street "right there as well."  Edward further testified that a car, traveling townbound along Farrington Highway, could turn into Black Rock Beach, which is located "about twenty houses down" from the scene of the accident.  Edward testified that he was familiar with the area in question because he has "driven that roadway . . . [a]ll my life."  
Waikinekoa testified in part as follows:  On the 
evening of the incident, Waikinekoa and Armitage met in the parking lot across from the O'Reilly store and agreed to drive out to Tracks Beach Park.  Wakinekona drove his Suburban SUV, and Armitage followed behind him in her own car.  Wakinekona turned left onto Farrington Highway going toward town, driving "pretty quick," with Armitage behind him.  At some point after going over the hill near Tracks Beach, Wakinekona did not see Armitage's headlights behind him any longer, so he "pulled off the road before the guard rail and [he] just sat there looking in [his] mirror," then saw "the projection of [Armitage's] lights . . . 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
coming up towards the top of the hill."  Wakinekoa saw the lights 
flicker on and off, and "figured she stalled or blow holes and the car shut off, so [he] turned on [his] amber lights and . . . reversed back towards her."  Armitage's car had stalled. Wakinekoa went to Armitage's car and asked, "what happened" and saw that her airbag had been deployed.  Armitage responded, "I don't know."  Wakinekoa shined a light on Armitage's vehicle and saw extensive damage, before Armitage said, "we need to get out of here."  Wakinekoa described the following exchange with Armitage: 
Q. [by DPA] Who told you "we need to get out of 
here"? 
A. [Armitage.] 
Q. She said -- she said that to you? A. Yes. Q. Okay.  What did you do then? A. I said -- I said no.  I said, "I going -- I'll pull 
your car off the road."  And I was going to go back and go
see if something fell off the car or what happened.  And she said, "No, you gotta get me outta here."  And I asked, I said, "What happened?"  She goes, "I don't know.  Something jumped in the front of my car." 
Upon review of the record, we conclude there was 
substantial evidence that Armitage drove a vehicle that was 
involved in an accident resulting in the death of another person, and Armitage did not immediately stop at the scene or stop as close thereto as possible and forthwith return to the scene without obstructing traffic more than was necessary.  We further conclude there was substantial evidence that Armitage did not give the information required by HRS § 291C-14 to any police officer at the accident scene.  Accordingly, on this record, the evidence was sufficient to support Armitage's conviction on Count 1. 
(4)  A person commits the offense of negligent homicide 
in the first degree if, inter alia, the person causes the death of another person by operating a vehicle in a negligent manner "while under the influence of drugs or alcohol[.]"  HRS § 707-702.5(1)(a). 
Armitage contends that the indictment as to Count 2 was 
9   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
insufficient because it did not include the definition of "under 
the influence" and thus failed to state an offense.6/  The State 
agrees that the common understanding of the phrase "under the influence" "does not necessarily comport with the statutory definition" stated in HRS § 291E-1,
7/ but argues that Armitage's 
challenge to the indictment must fail because she had actual notice of the definition prior to objecting to the sufficiency of the charge at issue. 
In State v. Mita, 124 Hawai# i 385, 245 P.3d 458 (2010),
the supreme court stated: 
6/ Count 2 of the indictment stated: 
COUNT 2: On or about April 24, 2016, in the City and
County of Honolulu, State of Hawai #i, MYISHA LEE ARMITAGE
did cause the death of Kaulana Werner by the operation of a
vehicle in a negligent manner while under the influence of
drugs or alcohol, and/or MYISHA LEE ARMITAGE did cause the
death of Kaulana Werner, who was a vulnerable user, to wit,
a person legally within a street or public highway, by the
operation of a vehicle in a negligent manner, thereby
committing the offense of Negligent Homicide in the First
Degree, in violation of Section 707-702.5(1)(a) and/or
7/   HRS § 291E-1 (Supp. 2015) states: Section 707-702.5(1)(b) of the Hawai #i Revised Statutes. In 
accordance with Section 264-1(a) of the Hawai #i  Revised 
Statutes, "public highway" means all roads, alleys, streets,  
ways, lanes, bikeways, bridges, and all other real property  
highway related interests in the State, opened, laid out,  
subdivided, consolidated, and acquired and built by the  
government.  In accordance with Section 291C-1 of the 
Hawai #i Revised Statutes, "street" means the entire width 
between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when  
any part thereof is open to the use of the public for  
purpose of vehicular travel. 
"Under the influence" means that a person: 
(1) Is under the influence of alcohol in an amount
sufficient to impair the person's normal mental
faculties or ability to care for the person and guardagainst casualty;
(2) Is under the influence of any drug that impairs theperson's ability to operate the vehicle in a carefuland prudent manner;
(3) Has .08 or more grams of alcohol per two hundred tenliters of the person's breath; or
(4) Has .08 or more grams of alcohol per one hundredmilliliters or cubic centimeters of the person'sblood.
10 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Article I, section 14 of the Hawai #i Constitution 
provides that "[i]n all criminal prosecutions, the accused
shall enjoy the right . . . to be informed of the nature andcause of the accusation[.]"  . . . "[T]he sufficiency of thecharging instrument is measured, inter alia, by 'whether itcontains the elements of the offense intended to be charged,and sufficiently apprises the defendant of what he [or she]must be prepared to meet[.]'"  . . . The relevant inquiry,therefore, is whether or not the charge provided the accusedwith fair notice of the essential elements. 
Id. at 390, 245 P.3d at 463 (brackets in original) (quoting and 
citing State v. Wheeler, 121 Hawai# i 383, 391, 395, 219 P.3d 
1170, 1178, 1182 (2009)).  
We agree that the common understanding of the phrase 
"under the influence" does not necessarily comport with the statutory definition.  However, in determining the sufficiency of a charge, "the appellate court can consider other information in addition to the charge that may have been provided to the defendant during the course of the case up until the time defendant objected to the sufficiency of the charges against him [or her]."  Wheeler, 121 Hawai# i at 396, 219 P.3d at 1183; see 
State v. Treat, 67 Haw. 119, 120, 680 P.2d 250, 251 (1984) ("We think that in determining whether the accused's right to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation against him has been violated, we must look to all of the information supplied to him by the State to the point where the court passes upon the contention that his right has been violated." (quoting State v. Robins, 66 Haw. 312, 317, 660 P.2d 39, 42–43 (1983))); see also State v. Salvas, No. CAAP-18-0000160, 2021 WL 1232051, at *11-12 (Haw. App. Mar. 31, 2021) (Mem.) (where the defendant first challenged the sufficiency of the charges toward the end of trial, after the State rested its case, this court considered information provided to the defendant before and during trial, prior to the challenge). 
Here, Armitage first raised a challenge to Count 2 of 
the indictment during trial, at the close of evidence, in a motion for judgment of acquittal.  However, on July 24, 2019, nearly a month before trial began, the State filed its proposed jury instructions, which included the statutory definition of "under the influence," as set forth in HRS § 291E-1.  These proposed instructions gave Armitage ample notice of precisely 
11   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
"what . . . she must be prepared to meet" at trial regarding the 
definition at issue.8/  Mita, 124 Hawai# i at 390, 245 P.3d at 463 
(quoting Wheeler, 121 Hawai
#i at 391, 219 P.3d at 1178) (brackets 
omitted); cf. State v. Israel, 78 Haw. 66, 72, 890 P.2d 303, 309 (1995) (ruling that the record was insufficient to show that the defendant had actual knowledge of the charge where, inter alia, "there have been no opening statements or jury instructions that could constitute objective indicia of [the defendant's] knowledge of the underlying felony that the State was alleging that he committed").  During trial, but prior to Armitage's motion for judgment of acquittal, the Circuit Court and the parties discussed the definition of "under the influence" that would be provided to the jury, and the Circuit Court informed the parties of the precise definition that would be given to the jury.  
On this record, we conclude that Armitage was fully 
informed of the nature and cause of the accusation against her for negligent homicide in the first degree, including the statutory definition of "under the influence," before she brought her motion for judgment of acquittal.  We further conclude that the information provided by the State to Armitage prior to trial sufficiently apprised her of the charge she must be prepared to meet.  Examined in this context, the charge was sufficient. 
(5) Armitage contends that the Circuit Court should 
have suppressed the result of her blood alcohol concentration test because it was the result of a warrantless blood draw on the night of the incident, in violation of her constitutional rights. She argues that the Circuit Court erred in ruling that the blood draw was constitutionally permissible based on exigent circumstances.   
In State v. Hewitt
, 149 Hawai# i 71, 72, 481 P.3d 713, 
714 (App. 2021), cert. granted, No. SCWC-16-0000460, 2021 WL 2775190 (Haw. July 2, 2021), this court held that the district court erred in denying the defendant's motion to suppress her 
8/ Armitage's motion to suppress statements and evidence, filed on
January 5, 2018, a year and a half before trial, also indicates that she was
aware that her alleged blood alcohol content was part of the State's case. Her motion stated in part:  "In the instant case, the State will likely arguethat the police had probable cause to believe that the person has committed aDUI or other offense where a blood sample would evidence the offense . . . ." 
12 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
blood test result because the State did not develop the record to 
justify her warrantless blood draw.  There, the defendant was in a hospital emergency room being questioned by a police officer as a potential assault victim when the officer received information about a damaged abandoned truck that contained the defendant's state identification card.  Id. at 73, 481 P.3d at 715. Suspecting that the defendant was under the influence of an intoxicant, the officer returned to the emergency room and asked the defendant whether she was the driver of the truck.  Id.Following the defendant's response, the officer placed her under arrest for operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII) and told her a blood draw would be conducted. 
Id.  The blood draw was performed pursuant to HRS § 291E-21(a) 
(2007), which authorizes a law enforcement officer to obtain a sample of blood "from the operator of any vehicle involved in a collision resulting in injury to . . . any person, as evidence that the operator was under the influence of an intoxicant."  Id. at 76, 481 P.3d at 718. 
On appeal, the defendant argued that the district court 
should have suppressed evidence of her blood alcohol content because it was the result of a warrantless search and seizure in violation of her constitutional rights.  Id. In analyzing the 
defendant's argument, this court stated: 
A warrantless [blood alcohol concentration] test
. . . pursuant to HRS § 291E–21 . . . does not offend
the Hawai #i Constitution "so long as (1) the police
have probable cause to believe that the person hascommitted a DUI offense and that the blood sample will
evidence that offense, (2) exigent circumstances are 
present , and (3) the sample is obtained in a
reasonable manner." 
State v. Won, 137 Hawai #i 330, 344 n.26, 372 P.3d 1065, 1079
n.26 (2015) (emphasis added) (quoting State v. Entrekin, 98
Hawai #i 221, 232, 47 P.3d 336, 347 (2002)). 
In Entrekin, the Hawai #i Supreme Court . . . held: 
The exigent circumstances exception is present whenthe demands of the occasion reasonably call for animmediate police response.  More specifically, itincludes situations presenting an immediate threatenedremoval or destruction of evidence.  However, theburden, of course, is upon the government to prove thejustification, and whether the requisite conditionsexists [sic] is to be measured from the totality ofthe circumstances.  And in seeking to meet this 
13 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
burden, the police must be able to point to specific
and articulable facts from which it may be determinedthat the action they took was necessitated by theexigencies of the situation. 
. . . . 
. . . [E]xigent circumstances were clearly 
present .  It is undisputed that the percentage of
alcohol in the blood begins to diminish shortly afterdrinking stops, as the body functions to eliminate itfrom the system.  [T]he arrested person'sblood-alcohol level by its very nature dissipates andis forever lost as time passes, and any alcoholingested by the arrested person is digested and itseffects on the body pass[.] 
Id.
 at 232-33, 47 P.3d at 347-48 (cleaned up) (emphasis
added). 
Id. at 76-77, 481 P.3d at 718-19. 
However, in Hewitt, this court also recognized: 
[I]n Missouri v. McNeely, 569 U.S. 141, 133 S. Ct. 1552, 185L. Ed. 2d 696 (2013) (decided after Entrekin), the UnitedStates Supreme Court held "that in drunk-drivinginvestigations, the natural dissipation of alcohol in thebloodstream does not constitute an exigency in every casesufficient to justify conducting a blood test without awarrant."  Id. at 165, 133 S. Ct. 1552.  The Supreme Court reasoned: 
It is true that as a result of the human body'snatural metabolic processes, the alcohol level in aperson's blood begins to dissipate once the alcohol isfully absorbed and continues to decline until thealcohol is eliminated. . . .  Regardless of the exactelimination rate, it is sufficient for our purposes tonote that because an individual's alcohol level gradually declines soon after [the person] stopsdrinking, a significant delay in testing willnegatively affect the probative value of theresults. . . . 
But it does not follow that we should depart from
careful case-by-case assessment of exigency and adoptthe categorical rule proposed by the State and itsamici.  In those drunk-driving investigations wherepolice officers can reasonably obtain a warrant beforea blood sample can be drawn without significantlyundermining the efficacy of the search, the FourthAmendment mandates that they do so.  We do not doubt that some circumstances will make obtaining a warrantimpractical such that the dissipation of alcohol fromthe bloodstream will support an exigency justifying aproperly conducted warrantless blood test.  That,however, is a reason to decide each case on its facts,as we did in Schmerber[ v. California, 384 U.S. 757(1966)], not to accept the "considerableovergeneralization" that a per se rule would reflect. 
The context of blood testing is different in critical
respects from other destruction-of-evidence cases inwhich the police are truly confronted with a "'now ornever'" situation.  In contrast to, for example,circumstances in which the suspect has control over 
14 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
   easily disposable evidence, [blood alcohol
concentration] evidence from a drunk-driving suspectnaturally dissipates over time in a gradual andrelatively predictable manner. . . . 
The State's proposed per se rule also fails to account
for advances in the 47 years since Schmerber wasdecided that allow for the more expeditious processingof warrant applications, particularly in contexts likedrunk-driving investigations where the evidenceoffered to establish probable cause is simple.  The Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure were amended in 1977 to permit federal magistrate judges to issue awarrant based on sworn testimony communicated bytelephone. . . .  States have also innovated.  Well over a majority of States allow police officers orprosecutors to apply for search warrants remotelythrough various means, including telephonic or radiocommunication, electronic communication such ase-mail, and video conferencing. 
Id. at 152-54, 133 S. Ct. 1552 (cleaned up) (citing, amongother states' court rules, [HRPP] Rule 41(h)–(i) (2013)). 
Id. at 77-78, 481 P.3d at 719-20 (footnote omitted); see also 
State v. Niceloti-Velazquez, 139 Hawai# i 203, 205, 386 P.3d 487, 
489 (App. 2016) (citing McNeely and ruling that "the record does not support a finding that, given the totality of the circumstances, the police officers could not have reasonably obtained a search warrant before drawing Velazquez's blood sample"). 
With this legal framework in mind, we ruled in Hewitt 
that the State failed to adequately develop the record to demonstrate the existence of exigent circumstances that would have justified the arresting officer's requesting a warrantless blood draw from the defendant.  Id. at 79, 481 P.3d at 721.  We reasoned that under the totality of the circumstances, it would not have been unreasonable for a judge to require more information before issuing a warrant for a blood draw.  Id. We 
also noted there was no evidence that any police officer attempted to contact a judge to obtain a warrant before requesting the blood draw.  Id.
Similarly, here, the State failed to adequately develop 
the record to demonstrate the existence of exigent circumstances to justify the arresting officer's requesting a warrantless blood draw from Armitage.  Following a suppression hearing, the Circuit Court found, and it is undisputed, that:  (1) Sgt. White was dispatched to the accident scene on April 24, 2016, at 8:40 p.m.; 
15 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
. . . . 
  (2) Sgt. White, who was the first officer to interact with 
Armitage, determined that she was the operator of the vehicle involved in the accident and a suspect in the case; and (3) Sgt White observed that Armitage showed indicia of intoxication. There was no evidence that any police officer involved in the investigation sought a search warrant to draw Armitage's blood. 
The Circuit Court made the following findings of fact 
(FOFs) and conclusions of law (COLs) in ruling that exigent 
circumstances justified the warrantless blood draw from Armitage: 
[FOF 44].  A [HPD] investigator would take 2-3 hours
to prepare a search warrant.  The draft search warrant is 
normally reviewed by a Deputy Prosecuting Attorney ("DeputyProsecutor") from the City and County of Honolulu Departmentof the Prosecuting Attorney, and could take an additional1-1.5 hours.  If the draft search warrant is approved by theDeputy Prosecutor, the HPD Investigator then contacts theon-call District Court Judge on Oahu for a review andapproval of the search warrant, a process that takesadditional time.  HPD does not have any other procedure toobtain a search warrant. 
[FOF 45].  [HRPP] Rule 41 allows telephonic warrants.
9/ 
9/ HRPP Rule 41 provides, in relevant part: 
Rule 41. SEARCH AND SEIZURE. 
. . . . (c) Issuance and contents.  A warrant shall issue only
on an affidavit or affidavits sworn to before the judge and
establishing the grounds for issuing the warrant. . . . 
. . . . 
(h) Warrant issuance on oral statements. In lieu of 
the written affidavit required under section (c) of this
rule, a sworn oral statement, in person or by telephone, maybe received by the judge, which statement shall be recordedand transcribed, and such sworn oral statement shall bedeemed to be an affidavit for the purposes of this rule.Alternatively to receipt by the judge of the sworn oralstatement, such statement may be recorded by a courtreporter who shall transcribe the same and certify thetranscription. In either case, the recording and thetranscribed statement shall be filed with the clerk. 
(i) Duplicate warrants on oral authorization. The 
judge may orally authorize a police officer to sign thesignature of the judge on a duplicate original warrant,which shall be deemed to be a valid search warrant for the purposes of this rule. The judge shall enter on the face ofthe original warrant the exact time of issuance and shallsign and file the original warrant and, upon its return, theduplicate original warrant with the clerk. 
16 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
 [COL 26].  It is undisputed that "the percentage of
alcohol in the blood begins to diminish shortly after
drinking stops, as the body functions to eliminate it fromthe system."  Entrekin, 98 Hawai #i at 233 (citing Schmerber
v. California, 384 U.S. 757, 770 (1966)). 
[COL 27].  In this case, the inability to obtain a
search warrant within 2 hours, coupled with dissipation ofblood alcohol, and the time it took to investigate the caseand determine that Defendant was a suspect, collectivelycreated an exigency of unrecoverable evidence. . . . 
(Footnote added.) 
Armitage does not challenge any of the Circuit Court's 
FOFs by number.  However, she disputes the Circuit Court's 
conclusion that "HPD's desire to [follow] their own procedures, ignoring HRPP Rule 41's allowance of telephonic warrants," combined with other factors to create an exigency.  We construe this contention as challenging FOF 44 in substance.  Armitage also challenges COL 27, which actually presents mixed findings of fact and a conclusion of law. 
In FOF 44, the Circuit Court found that HPD's normal 
procedure to apply for a search warrant takes three to four and a half hours, plus additional time for review and approval by a judge.  In COL 27, the court further concluded that "[i]n this case, [there was an] inability to obtain a search warrant within two hours[,]" which is a finding of fact.  The record lacks substantial evidence to support either of these findings, which appear to be based on the testimony of HPD Corporal Richard Simifranca (Cpl. Simifranca), who assisted in the investigation 
of the collision and who secured a search warrant for Armitage's 
vehicle.  During the suppression hearing, Cpl. Simifranca was asked how long it takes him to prepare a search warrant.  He responded:  "Oh, I would say it takes me, because I'm not –- I've only done it like I think twice before, it takes me probably about –- anywhere from two to three hours."  Cpl. Simifranca further testified that the time it takes him to meet with the assigned deputy prosecutor is "about another hour and a half[.]"  He based his testimony on the example of seeking a search warrant for an automobile, which he conceded would be stored in a secure HPD warehouse.  Cpl. Simifranca testified that he had never sought a search warrant that had "a time of the essence factor" 
17 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
and he "really d[id]n't know how to do that kind of a search 
warrant [involving any kind of spoilage or time sensitivity], because [he] just never had experience doing one[.]"  We conclude this testimony is not "of sufficient quality and probative value" to support the above-identified findings in FOF 44 and COL 27. Estate of Klink ex rel. Klink v. State, 113 Hawai# i 332, 351, 152 
P.3d 504, 523 (2007).  Hence, COL 27 is clearly erroneous.  See id. 
Further, the court acknowledged in FOF 45 that HRPP 
Rule 41 allows for telephonic warrants, but also found in FOF 44 that HPD does not have any procedure in place, other than its normal procedure, to obtain a warrant, i.e., it does not (or did not at the time of the suppression hearing) have a procedure in place to obtain telephonic warrants under HRPP Rule 41.  The court explicitly made this distinction during the suppression hearing, as follows: 
THE COURT:  Rule 41 of the Hawai #i Rules of Penal 
Procedure has never been exercised and put into practice in
the First District. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  And I think we know why, at this 
point.  I don't think HPD knows how to use it, or know thatit exists, according to the testimony we have. 
THE COURT: But there are no telephonic warrants in the
First District.  And there is no procedure for telephonic warrants. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]:  Well, I think there is.  It's laid 
out in Rule 41(h). 
THE COURT:  The rule provides for it. 
[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Right. THE COURT:  But the actual working of it is not in
practice, and not in play. . . . 
The basis for the Circuit Court's finding in FOF 44 — 
that "HPD does not have any other procedure to obtain a search 
warrant" — is not clear from the record.  During the suppression hearing, Cpl. Simifranca testified simply that he "[did not] know of any other way to get a search warrant other than the way that [he] just described . . . ."  The DPA later stated:  "It is my understanding, as what the court has indicated, that there was no telephonic procedures in place [to obtain a warrant] at the time 
18   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
of this incident.  But defense counsel is not willing to 
stipulate to that."  On this record, the evidence is not "of sufficient quality and probative value" to support the Circuit Court's finding that "HPD does not have any other procedure to obtain a search warrant."  Klink, 113 Hawai# i at 351, 152 P.3d at 
523. Moreover, even if HPD had no procedure in place to obtain a telephonic warrant at the time of the suppression hearing, that fact would not support the Circuit Court's finding in COL 27 that "[i]n this case, [there was an] inability to obtain a search warrant within two hours."
10/ (Emphasis added.)  HRPP Rule 41 
plainly authorized telephonic warrants, and nothing in the record supports a conclusion that HPD was unable to implement a procedure to make use of that rule for time-sensitive matters. For these additional reasons, we conclude that COL 27 is clearly erroneous. 
We reject the State's two-fold argument that Armitage 
failed to properly challenge the Circuit Court's ruling that exigent circumstances justified the warrantless blood draw. First, the State argues that Armitage failed to include in the appellate record one of the transcripts of the four-day hearing on her motion to suppress, specifically the August 13, 2018 hearing transcript.  However, this transcript, which Armitage timely ordered, was made part of the record after briefing concluded, and it supports our analysis of the exigency issue.  Second, the State agues that Armitage did not properly challenge the findings of fact underlying the Circuit Court's legal conclusion that exigent circumstances justified the warrantless blood draw.  This argument lacks merit for the reasons previously stated; Armitage challenged FOF 44 in substance, and also challenged COL 27, which presented mixed issues of fact and law. 
10/ There is also no basis for the Circuit Court's seeming imposition
of a two-hour time limit on obtaining a search warrant to draw blood from a
suspect in these circumstances.  Cf. HRS § 291E-3(b) (in any criminalprosecution for OVUII, the amount of alcohol found in the defendant's blood orbreath within three hours after the time of the alleged violation as shown bychemical analysis of the defendant's blood is competent evidence concerningwhether the defendant was under the influence of an intoxicant at the time of the alleged violation); id. § 291E-3(d) (nothing in § 291E-3 limits theintroduction of relevant evidence of a person's alcohol concentration obtainedmore than three hours after an alleged OVUII violation). 
19 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
 Accordingly, the record does not support the conclusion 
that given the totality of the circumstances, the investigating 
police officers could not reasonably have obtained a search warrant before drawing Armitage's blood.  Because the prosecution failed to adequately develop the record to demonstrate that the police officers were justified to act without a warrant, the Circuit Court clearly erred in ruling that exigent circumstances existed to justify the warrantless draw of Armitage's blood. 
Once it has been determined that evidence was 
erroneously admitted, the appellate court must consider whether the erroneous admission was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Matsumoto, 145 Hawai# i 313, 327, 452 P.3d 310, 324 
(2019) (citing State v. McCrory, 104 Hawai# i 203, 210, 87 P.3d 
275, 282 (2004)); see State v. Apo, 82 Haw. 394, 403, 922 P.2d 1007, 1016 (App. 1996) ("The admission of illegally obtained evidence in a criminal trial following the erroneous denial of a motion to suppress is subject to the harmless error rule."). "The erroneous admission of evidence is not harmless when there is a reasonable possibility that the error might have contributed to the conviction."  State v. Baker, 147 Hawai# i 413, 435, 465 
P.3d 860, 882 (2020) (citing McCrory, 104 Hawai# i at 210, 87 P.3d 
at 282).  "If such a reasonable possibility exists, then the error is not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt and the judgment of conviction on which it may have been based must be set aside." Id. (citing McCrory, 104 Hawai# i at 210, 87 P.3d at 282). 
Here the jury was instructed that the offense of 
Negligent Homicide in the First Degree can be committed in either of two ways: 
As to the first alternative, a person commits the
offense of Negligent Homicide in the First Degree (Under the
Influence) if she causes the death of another person by theoperation of a vehicle in a negligent manner while under theinfluence of alcohol. 
. . . . 
As to the second alternative, a person commits the
offense of Negligent Homicide in the First Degree
(Vulnerable User) if she causes the death of a vulnerableuser by the operation of a vehicle in a negligent manner. 
With respect to the first alternative, the jury was instructed: 
20 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
"Under the influence" means that a person: 
1. Is under the influence of alcohol in an amount 
sufficient to impair the person's normal mental faculties or
ability to care for the person and guard against casualty[(first definition) ]; or 
2. Has .08 or more grams of alcohol per 100
milliliters or cubic centimeters of the person's blood[(second definition )]. 
Thus, the jury was instructed that one of the ways it 
could convict Armitage of Negligent Homicide in the First Degree 
was if the prosecution proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Armitage caused the death of Kaulana by operating a vehicle in a negligent manner while Armitage had .08 or more grams of alcohol per 100 cubic centimeters of her blood.  The erroneously admitted result of Armitage's blood alcohol test was that on the night of the incident when her blood was drawn, she had .13 grams of alcohol per 100 cubic centimeters of whole blood.  
Under these circumstances, where the jury was 
instructed that "under the influence" meant, inter alia, a blood-alcohol concentration of .08 or higher, and the erroneously admitted result of Armitage's blood alcohol test by itself satisfied that definition, we cannot conclude there was no reasonable possibility that the error might have contributed to Armitage's conviction.  Accordingly, the error was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, and the conviction for Negligent Homicide in the First Degree must be set aside.  See Baker,147 Hawai# i at 435, 465 P.3d at 882. 
We further conclude that without considering evidence 
of Armitage's blood alcohol test result, there was sufficient evidence to convict her of Negligent Homicide in the First Degree under the first alternative (Under the Influence), based on the first definition of "under the influence," i.e., "under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair the person's normal mental faculties or ability to care for the person and guard against casualty."  HRS § 291E-1(1).  First, the State presented substantial evidence at trial that Armitage caused the death of Kaulana by driving the subject vehicle in a negligent manner.  Specifically, Wakinekona testified that on the 
21  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
night of the incident, he drove ahead of Armitage on Farrington 
Highway while she followed behind; they both were "weaving through traffic"; and they both were "driving fast and going in between cars."  Another witness testified that the two vehicles "flew by him," as he drove his own vehicle at 40 miles per hour. The State also presented evidence that near the area of Kalaniana# ole Beach Park, Armitage's vehicle hit Kaulana, whose 
body landed 198 feet from the area of impact; the posted speed limit in the area of the collision was 35 miles per hour; the speed of the impact was 60 miles per hour or faster; t  here were 
no skid marks, scuff marks, yaw marks, or tire marks at the scene of the collision, indicating "there was no reaction" by the driver; Armitage's vehicle was extensively damaged by the impact, consistent with having hit Kaulana; and Kaulana "was killed crossing Farrington Highway by a vehicle traveling at a high rate of speed." 
Second, the State presented substantial evidence at 
trial that Armitage caused Kaulana's death while under the influence of alcohol in an amount sufficient to impair her normal mental faculties or ability to care for herself and guard against casualty.  Specifically, the State presented evidence that on the night of the incident, Armitage had two mai tais during dinner and a shot of liquor after dinner; she collided with Kaulana while driving her vehicle at a high rate of speed; when police responded to Armitage's location, she had "a very strong odor of alcohol" and "red, glassy eyes," and "throughout the entire time, she was having a hard time maintaining balance"; Armitage performed poorly on the standardized field sobriety tests that were administered to her; and, after her arrest, Armitage stated to the arresting officer that "she's not going to lie, she had eight beers[.]"
11/ Accordingly, on this record, even without 
considering evidence of Armitage's blood alcohol test result, the evidence was sufficient to support Armitage's conviction for Negligent Homicide in the First Degree. 
11/ Following the suppression hearing, the Circuit Court concluded
that this statement and others "were not in response to any actions of the
[HPD], i.e, were spontaneous, not the products of interrogation, and thereforeadmissible."  Armitage does not challenge this COL on appeal. 
22 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
 Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Judgment of 
Conviction and Sentence, entered on November 1, 2019, in the 
Circuit Court of the First Circuit, is vacated, and this case is remanded to the Circuit Court for a new trial. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i
 , October 22, 2021. 
On the briefs: 
/s/ Katherine G. Leonard
Presiding Judge 
/s/ Keith K. Hiraoka
Associate Judge 
/s/ Clyde J. Wadsworth
Associate Judge Andrew T. Park for Defendant-Appellant. 
Chad M. Kumagai,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City & County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. 
23 