 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER  
Electronically Filed 
Intermediate Court of Appeals CAAP-23-0000492 09-DEC-2025 07:54 AM Dkt. 53 SO 
NO. CAAP-23-0000492 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
AUSTIN ROSA, Plaintiff-Appellant, 
v. 
KAUAʻI POLICE DEPARTMENT, OFFICE OF THE PROSECUTING ATTORNEY, 
COUNTY OF KAUAʻ I, STATE OF 
HAWAIʻI, 
Defendants-Appellees. 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT 
(CASE NO. 5CCV-22-0000023) 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER  
(By: Nakasone, Chief Judge, McCullen and Guidry, JJ.) 
Self-represented Plaintiff-Appellant Austin Rosa  
appeals from the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit's 
July 24, 2023 order denying his motion for recusal and Hawai‘ i 
Rules of Civil Procedure (
HRCP) Rule 60 relief (Order Denying 
Relief from Judgment).  On appeal, Rosa contends the circuit 
court erred because he presented newly discovered evidence and 
it "committed judicial misconduct."  1
1 The Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano presided.  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
  
 Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve this appeal as discussed below and affirm. 
In May 2018, Rosa pled guilty to resisting an order to 
stop a motor vehicle (Resisting Order to Stop Case)
2 as part of a 
global plea agreement resolving charged offenses in other cases. During sentencing, Rosa stated, "I was scared and that's why I ran, but I shouldn't have ran. I should have just stayed and all this wouldn't have happened, but I did knowingly commit the crime of resisting to stop a motor vehicle." 
The circuit court attempted to sentence Rosa to 
probation, but Rosa refused, stating he would "rather just take my open five today." After continuing the sentencing hearing so Rosa could consult his attorney, the circuit court entered a judgment of conviction and sentenced Rosa to five years' imprisonment. 
In May 2021, Rosa (self-represented) filed a Hawai‘ i 
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP) Rule 40 Petition. In September 2021, Rosa (represented by counsel) supplemented his Petition with an additional claim for relief, arguing he did not voluntarily waive his right to a jury trial because the circuit 
2 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided in the Resisting Order 
to Stop Case. 
2  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
 
 
   
   
  
 
  
 court failed to "advise him of certain aspects of his right to a 
jury trial." The circuit court granted Rosa's Petition, and Rosa's guilty plea was withdrawn and stricken. The State then moved to dismiss the charge with prejudice, which the circuit 
court granted. 
In April 2022, Rosa filed the underlying complaint 
against Defendants-Appellees Kaua‘ i Police Department (KPD), 
Office of the Prosecuting Attorney, and County of Kaua‘ i 
(collectively, Appellees), raising six "grounds" for relief and 
seeking five million dollars in damages, all premised on Rosa's 
claim of actual innocence in the Resisting Order to Stop Case.
3 
Appellees moved for summary judgment, at which point 
Rosa filed requests with the circuit court to subpoena two of 
his previous attorneys and release KPD dashboard camera video (the Video) of his arrest in the Resisting Order to Stop Case that he contended proved his innocence. The circuit court denied his requests, and Rosa responded to Appellees' summary judgment motion. 
Following a hearing, the circuit court granted summary 
judgment. Rosa filed a motion for reconsideration, which the circuit court denied. 
3 Rosa alleged the following six " grounds" :  (1) civil rights 
violations; (2) retaliation; (3) torts including (a) false imprisonment and
(b) intentional infliction of emotional distress; (4) reputational harm; 
(5) violations of the Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendments to the
United States Constitution; and (6) malicious prosecution. 
3  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
  In May 2023, Rosa (through newly retained counsel) 
filed a "Motion 1) for Recusal and 2) for HRPP [sic HRCP] 
Rule 60 Relief" (
Motion for Relief from Judgment). (Formatting 
altered.) Rosa argued the Honorable Randal G.B. Valenciano 
should recuse himself, because he created an "appearance of 
partiality against Rosa" by denying Rosa's requests to subpoena previous attorneys and release the Video. Rosa further argued 
the Video and a letter from 
Kaua‘i County's Motor Vehicle 
Registration Officer (the Letter) constituted newly discovered 
evidence warranting relief from judgment. 
At the hearing on Rosa's Motion for Relief from 
Judgment, Judge Valenciano first orally declined to recuse himself. 
The circuit court then explained it could not "find 
that the [V]ideo was newly discovered evidence," because, as 
Rosa's counsel acknowledged, Rosa "was aware of . . . the 
existence of [the Video] back in 2017." Rosa was thus "aware of 
the evidence at a very early stage of the criminal case, not the civil case," even though he "never had possession of" the Video. The circuit court did not expressly address the issue of the Letter, but nonetheless orally denied Rosa's Motion for Relief from Judgment. 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 The circuit court entered its written order denying 
Rosa's Motion for Relief from Judgment on July 24, 2023, and 
this appeal followed. 
(1) Rosa contends the circuit court abused its 
discretion when it denied his Motion for Relief from Judgment based upon newly discovered evidence.
4 Specifically, Rosa points 
to the Video and the Letter. 
Under HRCP Rule 60(b)(2), courts "may relieve a party 
. . . from a final judgment, order, or proceeding for . . . newly discovered evidence which by due diligence could not have been discovered in time to move for a new trial under Rule 59(b)." 
A party seeking relief due to newly discovered 
evidence must therefore demonstrate the evidence is (1) previously undiscovered despite having exercised due diligence; (2) admissible and credible; and (3) material and controlling such that it will probably change the outcome. 
Ditto v. McCurdy, 103 Hawai‘ i 153, 162, 80 P.3d 974, 983 (2003). 
But evidence known to defendants or their "counsel before or at 
trial does not constitute newly discovered evidence justifying new trial." State v. McNulty, 60 Haw. 259, 268, 588 P.2d 438, 
4 Rosa does not present any argument on appeal regarding excusable 
neglect. See Hawai‘i Rules of Appellate Procedure 
Rule 28(b)(4) ("Points not
presented in accordance with this section will be disregarded. "). 
5  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   445 (1978), overruled on other grounds by, State v. Eberly, 107 
Hawai‘i 239, 112 P.3d 725 (2005). 
(a)  Regarding the Video, Rosa argues the Video is 
newly discovered evidence. He explains that he exercised due 
diligence by first contacting KPD after Appellees moved for summary judgment and then "petition[ing] the [circuit] court for assistance in obtaining the [Video]." 
Rosa, however, testified he first saw the Video when a 
previous attorney in his criminal case "came to visit [him] in 
[Kaua‘i Community Correctional Center (KCCC)]. He showed [Rosa] 
to [sic] it on his phone." 
The record indicates Rosa was 
incarcerated at KCCC in 2017. As such, Rosa knew of the footage 
roughly five years before filing his civil complaint and, thus, it is not newly discovered evidence under HRCP Rule 60(b)(2). See id.
(b)  As for the Letter, Rosa argues that it shows he 
was not the owner of the vehicle in the Video.  
But, whether Rosa was or was not the registered owner 
of the vehicle in the Video is not "of such a material and controlling nature as will probably change the outcome" of the Resisting Order to Stop Case, because being the vehicle's "registered owner" is not an element of the offense of Resisting an Order to Stop a Motor Vehicle in the First Degree under 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Hawai‘i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 710-1026.9 (Supp. 2016).  See 
Ditto, 103 5
Hawai‘i at 162, 80 P.3d at 983.  
Thus, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion 
by denying Rosa's Motion for Relief from Judgment based on newly 
discovered evidence. 
(2)  Rosa next contends the circuit court's denial of 
his Motion for Relief from Judgment "proves that the circuit [court] err[ed] and acted with extreme [negligence]." He argues 
5 HRS § 710-1026.9 provides: 
(1) A person commits the offense of resisting an
order to stop a motor vehicle in the first degree if the 
person: 
(a) Intentionally fails to obey a direction of a lawenforcement officer, acting under color of the
law enforcement officer's official authority, to 
stop the person's motor vehicle; and 
(b) While intentionally fleeing from or attemptingto elude a law enforcement officer: 
(i) Operates the person's motor vehicle in
reckless disregard of the safety of other persons; or 
(ii) Operates the person's motor vehicle in reckless disregard of the risk that thespeed of the person's vehicle exceeds: 
(A) The applicable state or county speed
limit by thirty miles per hour or 
more; or 
(B) Eighty miles per hour or more, irrespective of the applicable state
or county speed limit. 
For purposes of this section, "the applicable state or
county speed limit" shall have the same meaning as in section 291C- 105. 
(2) Resisting an order to stop a motor vehicle in 
the first degree is a class C felony. 
7  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   that "Judge Valenciano err[ed] and committed judicial 
misconduct" by denying his request to present an alibi witness at the summary judgment hearing, "which prove[s] even more prejudice directed towards Mr. Rosa." In Rosa's view, "the 
circuit court has taken every opportunity to unfairly 
disadvantage [his] case." We thus construe this argument as challenging Judge Valenciano's exercise of discretion in declining to recuse himself. 
HRS § 601-7(b) (2016) "sets forth the appropriate 
procedure for seeking disqualification because of personal 
bias." State v. Ross, 89 Hawai‘ i 371, 377, 974 P.2d 11, 17 
(1998). 
The movant must "timely file an affidavit stating the 
facts and reasons for the belief that bias or prejudice exists." Id. (citation modified). Hawai‘i courts "have long recognized, 
however, that petitioners may not predicate their claims of 
disqualifying bias on adverse rulings, even if the rulings are erroneous. Id. at 378, 974 P.2d at 18. 
Rosa neglected to file the required affidavit. 
But 
even if he had, Rosa impermissibly predicates his allegations of bias upon the circuit court's adverse rulings, namely its denial of Rosa's requests to subpoena former counsel, obtain the Video, and present an alibi witness at the summary judgment hearing. 
8
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
   
 See id. Thus, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion 
when it declined Rosa's request to recuse. 
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court's 
July 24, 2023 Order Denying Relief from Judgment. 
DATED: 
Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, December 9, 2025. 
On the briefs:  Austin Rosa, 
Self-represented Plaintiff-
Appellant. 
 
Mark L. Bradbury, 
Deputy County Attorney, 
County of Kaua‘ i,  
for Defendants-Appellees. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone 
Chief Judge  
/s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge 
 
/s/ Kimberly T. Guidry Associate Judge  
9 