NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-12-0000995
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
BIG ISLAND TOYOTA, INC., a Hawai 'i corporation;
DAVID S. DE LUZ, SR. ENTERPRISES, INC.,
a Hawai 'i corporation; and DAVID S. DE LUZ, SR.,
Plaintiffs/Counterclaim-Defendants/Appellees,
v. 
VICTOR D. TREVINO, JR., Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/
Third-Party Plaintiff/Appellant 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 06-1-373)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Fujise and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Pro se Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/Third-Party
 
Plaintiff/Appellant Victor D. Trevino, Jr. (Trevino) appeals from
 
1
the: (1) October 9, 2012 Final Judgment  entered in favor of
Plaintiffs/Counterclaim-Defendants/Appellees Big Island Toyota,
 
2
Inc., David S. De Luz, Sr. Enterprises, Inc. (DSDE)  and David S.
De Luz, Sr. (De Luz) (collectively, Toyota Plaintiffs); and (2)
 August 2, 2012 "Order Denying Defendant Victor D. Trevino, Jr.'s
Motion For Reconsideration Of Order Denying Defendant Victor D.
 Trevino's Motion For Recusal And/Or Disqualification Of Judge
 Glenn S. Hara Filed Under Seal On January 17, 2012, Filed March
  
3
22, 2012, Filed April 2, 2012"  (Order Denying Reconsideration)
1
 The Honorable Glenn S. Hara (Judge Hara) presided. 
2
 David S. De Luz, Sr. Enterprises, Inc. is the parent company of Big
Island Toyota, Inc.
3
 The Honorable Elizabeth A. Strance (Judge Strance) presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
both entered in the Circuit Court of the Third Circuit (circuit
 
court).
 
On appeal, Trevino contends Judge Strance erred by
 
failing to recuse Judge Hara. Trevino also contends Judge Hara
 erred by: 
(1) failing to disqualify himself,
 (2) limiting a witness' testimony about consultation
 
with Judge Hara when the judge was a practicing attorney,
 
(3) not granting Trevino's request to change venue,
 (4) allowing non-expert hearsay opinion testimony to be
 
heard by the jury on issues of damages,
 
(5) allowing issues of breach of fiduciary duty,
 
conversion, negligence/gross negligence, breach of contract, and
 punitive damages to be submitted to the jury without sufficient
 evidence,
 
(6) sending a special verdict form with duplicative
 
damage awards to the jury, and
 
(7) admitting prejudicial hearsay evidence on issues of
 
damages.
 
I. BACKGROUND
 
On December 29, 2006, Toyota Plaintiffs filed their
 
First Amended Complaint against Trevino and other parties. The
 Toyota Plaintiffs alleged a variety of misconduct by Trevino,
 including that he abused his positions of authority with DSDE for
 his own benefit. On December 8, 2008, Toyota Plaintiffs filed a
 Revised Second Amended Complaint alleging: Count I Breach of
 Fiduciary Duty, Count II Civil Conspiracy, Count III
 Fraud/Fraudulent Conveyance, Count IV Conversion, Count V
 Misappropriation of Trade Secrets, Count VI Interference With
 Business Relations, Count VII Professional Malpractice, Count
 VIII Injunctive Relief, Count IX Negligence, and Count X Breach
 of Contract. On January 4, 2012, the parties stipulated to a
 dismissal of Counts III (Fraud/Fraudulent Conveyance), V
 (Misappropriation of Trade Secrets), VI (Interference With
 Business Relations), and VII (Professional Malpractice).
 
On January 10, 2012, after opening statements at trial,
 
Judge Hara held a conference with the parties to disclose his
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
relationship with Ivan Nakano (Nakano). Nakano was Trevino's 
"boss" in 2003. Judge Hara stated that Nakano was a high school classmate, they saw each other at high school reunions, and Nakano was on a board that organizes these reunions. Nakano had been dismissed from Hilo Toyota in 2003 and subsequently asked Judge Hara, who was then a practicing attorney, to review the written severance agreement. Trevino's counsel, Kris A. LaGuire (LaGuire), then made an oral motion for recusal of Judge Hara. LaGuire stated that he may call Nakano as a witness, referred to Toyota Plaintiffs' exhibit number 309A (a memo from Trevino concerning Nakano's termination package), and cited the Hawai
'i 
Code of Judicial Conduct (HCJC) in support of his motion to have Judge Hara recused based on his alleged personal bias or prejudice or knowledge of facts that were in dispute in the proceedings. Toyota Plaintiffs' counsel countered that Nakano's role in the present litigation was so limited that there would be no danger of prejudice to Trevino if Judge Hara heard the case. 
On January 17, 2012, Trevino filed a written "Motion
 
for Recusal and/or Disqualification of Judge Hara" (Motion for
 Recusal).
 
On January 20, 2012, Judge Strance held a hearing on
 
Trevino's Motion for Recusal. LaGuire specified that the Motion
 for Recusal was based on a claim that Judge Hara had personal
 knowledge of the facts that were in dispute in the proceeding, or
 alternatively, that he had a personal bias or prejudice against
 Trevino. HCJC Rule 2.11(a)(1). LaGuire stated that Trevino had
 negotiated Nakano's "contentious" termination package, and that
 Nakano "believed that he was being treated poorly and unfairly"
 and had consulted with Judge Hara, then a practicing attorney. 
Under these circumstances, LaGuire contended it would be
 reasonable to assume that Nakano would have told Judge Hara, in
 his capacity as Nakano's attorney, facts that relate to claims in
 dispute in the instant case. LaGuire stated:
 
Victor Trevino came in eight, ten months ago. You know,
[Nakano] may well have the same opinion that other De Luz
people are saying, that [Trevino] was basically his
henchman; that if [De Luz] wanted someone fired, he would
send Victor Trevino out. [Nakano] might have dumped all
kinds of nasty allegations against Mr. Trevino.
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Toyota Plaintiffs' counsel pointed out that Nakano left
 
Toyota in 2003 and "[a]ll of the shenanigans that we're accusing
 
[Trevino] of committing arose around 2004," and the jury will be
 asked to decide facts concerning those 2004 acts, not facts
 concerning Nakano's severance agreement. Judge Strance denied
 Trevino's motion stating "there is an absence of specified facts
 in dispute or a factual knowledge base on the part of Judge Hara
 that would raise the specter of bias." Judge Strance further
 instructed the parties that they should identify specific facts
 and make them known to Judge Hara so that he can undertake a
 self-assessment of his impartiality.
 
On February 8, 2012, before Nakano was scheduled to
 
testify at trial, Judge Hara stated for the record that he had
 discussed in his chambers his intention to place a limitation on
 the examination of Nakano, noting that he had disclosed
 previously to the parties' current and past counsel that Nakano
 is his high school classmate, and that he had consulted with
 Nakano about his termination from Hilo Toyota. Judge Hara
 indicated that his initial disclosure of this relationship
 occurred "years" ago at the early stages of litigation and
 involved Toyota Plaintiffs' present counsel, Paul M. Saito
 (Saito) and Trevino's previous counsel, Nadine Ando (Ando) and
 James Bickerton (Bickerton). Noting that LaGuire had made an
 oral motion to recuse at the beginning of trial in January 2012,
 Judge Hara stated that he denied the motion because the request
 for the recusal was delayed.
 
Judge Hara then specified that limits on the scope of
 
the examination of Nakano "would apply to anything with respect
 to his consultation with me after his termination" excepting the
 fact that Nakano did consult with counsel. But "what was
 discussed, and who he consulted should not be inquired into." 
Judge Hara further stated "I think the [circuit c]ourt's saying
 the . . . defendant has waived its rights to ask for a
 disqualification, and this limitation is necessitated
 to . . . effectuate the waiver." LaGuire objected because he had
 not been aware of Judge Hara's relationship with Nakano and made
 an oral motion to renew his motion to disqualify Judge Hara. The
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
circuit court denied LaGuire's oral motion.
 
Later that day on February 8, 2012, Nakano testified at
 
trial. Nakano testified that Hilo Toyota Inc. hired him in 1971,
 
after which he served as an office manager, business manager,
 controller, general manager, and vice-president of DSDE. Nakano
 considered himself De Luz's "right-hand man" until he left the
 company.
 
Nakano testified that he met Trevino in the early part
 
of 2003 through De Luz. He had discussed with De Luz Trevino's
 credentials as an attorney and a certified public accountant
 (CPA), and took part in hiring Trevino for DSDE. After Trevino
 was hired, Nakano learned Trevino was not a CPA. However, Nakano
 believed he (Nakano) was "on [his] way out" because De Luz began
 to treat him in a rough manner and Nakano in fact left the
 company six months later on January 1, 2004. Prior to leaving,
 De Luz accused Nakano of "ripping off the company." Nakano
 testified De Luz was getting the wrong information from Trevino. 
Nakano learned that De Luz believed Nakano was stealing from the
 company. The following exchange occurred upon LaGuire's redirect
 examination of Nakano:
 
[LaGuire]: Ok. Did you speak with that [sic] attorney
when you went to consult about you leaving the, uh, company
about the influence Victor Trevino had over Mr. De Luz?
 
[Toyota Plaintiffs' Counsel]: Objection, Your Honor.
Beyond the scope and it's attorney/client privilege.
 
[Circuit] Court: Well, [sic] beyond the scope.
Sustained.
 
Nakano testified that he negotiated the terms of his
 
resignation with Trevino and DSDE's new accountant until about
 
April or May 2004. These terms included a four-page noncompete
 letter, stating that Nakano would not engage in any duties he had
 with DSDE within a radius of a hundred miles. Nakano stated he
 spoke to an attorney regarding the noncompete clause, refused to
 sign it, and went to work for Kamaaina Motors.
 
On February 17, 2012, the jury returned their verdict
 
awarding Toyota Plaintiffs $448,414 for Count I Breach of
 Fiduciary Duty, $20,000 for Count IV Conversion, $112,425 for
 Count IX Negligence/Gross Negligence, $193,250 for Count X Breach
 of Contract, and $626,942 for Punitive Damages against Trevino. 
5
  
    a. Judge Hara's finding of "waiver" on Trevino's
former counsel's failure to move for recusal or
 
disqualification nor his limitation of Trevino's counsel's
scope of examination of [Nakano] are "new evidence" required
to enable this [circuit] court to reconsider its prior
decision.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
On October 9, 2012, the circuit court entered Final Judgment
 
reflecting these amounts and also awarded Toyota Plaintiffs
 attorneys' fees in the amount of $160,416 and costs in the amount
 of $32,098.52.
 
On April 2, 2012, Trevino filed a "Motion for
 
Reconsideration of the Order Denying His Motion for Recusal And/
 or Disqualification of Judge Hara" (Motion for Reconsideration).
 Trevino stated that on February 6, 2012, Judge Hara held a
 chambers conference with the parties' counsel and disclosed that
 he would limit Nakano's testimony and that he had raised the
 recusal and/or disqualification issue with Trevino's previous
 attorneys, Bickerton and Ando. LaGuire filed a declaration
 stating, on February 8, 2012, he spoke to Ando and Bickerton who
 advised him that they did not recall being informed of the
 relationship between Judge Hara and Nakano and had reviewed their
 case file and found no record of any such disclosure by Judge
 Hara. According to LaGuire, Ando and Bickerton refused to sign
 declarations regarding this issue due to their ongoing financial
 disputes with Trevino. Also on that day, Trevino filed an
 affidavit stating that he had never been informed of Judge Hara's
 relationship with Nakano prior to January 10, 2012 by either
 Judge Hara or his then-counsel, Ando and Bickerton.
 
On May 14, 2012, Judge Strance held a hearing on
 
Trevino's Motion for Reconsideration. LaGuire stated that on
 February 8, 2012, when Nakano was waiting to be called to the
 stand, Judge Hara informed the parties' attorneys that he planned
 to limit Nakano's testimony and prohibited LaGuire from asking
 Nakano who his lawyer was or what was discussed.
 
On August 2, 2012, the circuit court filed its Order
 
Denying Reconsideration basing it on the following facts and
 conclusions: 
(1) [Trevino] has not satisfied his burden to present
new facts that would warrant reconsideration of the
 
[circuit] court's prior order.
 
6
    On November 8, 2012, Trevino filed his notice of appeal
from the circuit court's October 9, 2012 Final Judgment, and
 
August 2, 2012 Order Denying Reconsideration.
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 b. Judge Hara's rulings are more properly
decisions that can be appealed to a higher court, and this
[circuit] court is without sufficient information to enable
it to decide if Judge Hara's findings were proper under
applicable law.
 
(2) [Trevino] has not satisfied his burden of
establishing that his alleged newly discovered facts were
relevant to a disputed material fact or issue in the trial
presided over by Judge Hara.
 

 
II. DISCUSSION
 
"Decisions on recusal or disqualification present 
perhaps the ultimate test of judicial discretion and should thus 
lie undisturbed absent a showing of abuse of that discretion." TSA Int'l Ltd. v. Shimizu Corp., 92 Hawai
'i 243, 252, 990 P.2d 
713, 722 (1999) (quoting State v. Ross, 89 Hawai 'i 371, 375, 974 
P.2d 11, 15 (1998)). "[T]he proper test for disqualification is an objective one as to what a reasonable outsider would believe, not what the judge subjectively believes." Yorita v. Okumoto, 3 
Haw. App. 148, 153, 643 P.2d 820, 825 (1982). 
Trevino cited Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 601-7(b)
 
(1993 and Supp. 2012) and HCJC Rule 2.11(a)(1) as authorities for
 his Motion for Recusal. HRS § 601-7(b) concerns situations in
 which a party "files an affidavit that the judge before whom the
 action or proceeding is to be tried or heard has personal bias or
 prejudice either against the party or in favor of any opposite
 party to the suit[.]"
4 Trevino's affidavit, attached to his
 
4 The full-text of HRS § 601-7 (1993 and Supp. 2012) is as follows:
 
§607-7 Disqualification of judge; relationship, pecuniary
interest, previous judgment, bias or prejudice. (a) No person
shall sit as a judge in any case in which:
 
(1) The judge's relative by affinity or consanguinity within
the third degree is counsel, or interested either as a
plaintiff or defendant, or in the issue of which the
judge has, either directly or through such relative, a
more than de minimis pecuniary interest; or
 
(2) The judge has been of counsel or on an appeal from any
decision or judgment rendered by the judge;
 
provided that no interests held by mutual or common funds, the
investment or divestment of which are not subject to the
(continued...)
 
7
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Motion for Recusal, alleged that Judge Hara had "personal
 
knowledge of facts in dispute in this trial" and did not
 specifically allege that Judge Hara had a personal bias for or
 against either party as required under HRS § 601-7(b). Nor did
 Trevino's memorandum in support of his Motion for Recusal affirm
 facts showing Judge Hara had a personal bias for or against
 either party. Instead, Trevino summarily states, "[i]t is only
 reasonable to suspect Judge Hara's partiality toward Trevino;
 human nature would expect Judge Hara to harbor a partial view of
 Trevino given the nature of his consultation with Ivan Nakano[.]" 
In his opening brief, Trevino offers a similarly unsupported
 observation that Judge Hara's relationship to Nakano, "does raise
 the spector [sic] of personal knowledge of material facts in
 dispute, bias, or prejudice." We conclude that such insinuations
 of personal bias do not trigger recusal under HRS § 601-7(b), but
 are more properly considered to raise questions about whether
 Judge Hara's role in the proceedings created an appearance of
 impropriety.
 
HCJC Rule 2.11(a) requires judges to disqualify
 
themselves in a relatively broader range of circumstances than
 under HRS § 601-7(b):
 
Rule 2.11. DISQUALIFICATION OR RECUSAL
 (a) Subject to the rule of necessity, a judge shall
 
4(...continued)
direction of the judge, shall be considered pecuniary
interests for purposes of this section; and after full
disclosure on the record, parties may waive disqualification
due to any pecuniary interest.
 
(b) Whenever a party to any suit, action, or proceeding,
civil or criminal, makes and files an affidavit that the judge
before whom the action or proceeding is to be tried or heard has a
personal bias or prejudice either against the party or in favor of
any opposite party to the suit, the judge shall be disqualified
from proceeding therein. Every such affidavit shall state the
facts and the reasons for the belief that bias or prejudice exists
and shall be filed before the trial or hearing of the action or
proceeding, or good cause shall be shown for the failure to file
it within such time. No party shall be entitled in any case to
file more than one affidavit; and no affidavit shall be filed
unless accompanied by a certificate of counsel of record that the
affidavit is made in good faith. Any judge may disqualify oneself
by filing with the clerk of the court of which the judge is a
judge a certificate that the judge deems oneself unable for any
reason to preside with absolute impartiality in the pending suit
or action.
 
8
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
disqualify or recuse himself or herself in any
 
proceeding in which the judge's impartiality might
reasonably be questioned, including but not limited
to the following circumstances:
 (1) The judge has a personal bias or prejudice
for or against a party or a party's lawyer, or personal
knowledge of facts that are in dispute in the
proceeding.
 
. . . .
 COMMENT
 
[1] Under this Rule, a judge is disqualified or recused
 
whenever the judge's impartiality might reasonably be
 
questioned, regardless of whether any of the specific
 provisions of Rules 2.11(a)(1) through (6) apply. 
HCJC Rule 2.11(a) and Rule 2.11 cmt. 1 (asterisks omitted).
 
"The test for appearance of impropriety is whether the 
conduct would create in reasonable minds a perception that the 
judge's ability to carry out judicial responsibilities with integrity, impartiality and competence is impaired." Office of 
Disciplinary Counsel v. Au, 107 Hawai
'i 327, 338, 113 P.3d 203, 
214 (2005) (citation, internal quotation marks and brackets omitted). Rule 2.11(a)(1) of the HCJC contains the same language as 28 U.S.C. § 455(b)(1), providing that a judge shall disqualify himself "[w]here he has a personal bias or prejudice concerning a party, or personal knowledge of disputed evidentiary facts concerning the proceeding[.]" 28 U.S.C. § 455(b)(1) (current through P.L. 113-47). Further, "[a] judge's obligation to disqualify or recuse himself or herself under these Rules applies regardless of whether a motion to disqualify or recuse is filed." HCJC Rule 2.11 cmt. 2. 
The following circumstances lead us to conclude that
 
Judge Hara should have recused himself pursuant to Rule 2.11(a).
 Judge Hara had an attorney-client relationship with Nakano in
 2003. That relationship concerned a severance agreement with Big
 Island Toyota, the circumstances surrounding which are material
 to facts in dispute in the instant case. Judge Hara limited the
 scope of Nakano's trial testimony to avoid reference to his
 attorney-client relationship with Judge Hara.
 
Judge Hara determined that limiting the scope of the
 
examination of Nakano to exclude matters he discussed in his 2003
 
9
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
consultation with Judge Hara and "who he consulted" was warranted
 
in a balance between "[Trevino's] rights to go ahead and examine
 [Nakano] based on the other testimony of the witnesses . . . and
 the necessity of the [circuit c]ourt . . . to proceed with this
 trial[.]"
 Judge Hara stated that he disclosed his relationship
 
with Nakano to the parties' counselors Saito, Ando, and Bickerton
 during early stages of the litigation. According to Judge Hara,
 "this was fairly early on and there was in my recollection no
 indication by any of the parties that they felt that relationship
 was going to interfere with this [circuit c]ourt's ability to
 proceed as trial judge in this case."
 
Even if Trevino's oral motion for disqualification
 
could be considered untimely, "[a] judge's obligation to
 disqualify or recuse himself or herself under these Rules applies
 regardless of whether a motion to disqualify or recuse is filed." 
HCJC Rule 2.11 cmt. 2. Judge Hara's relationship to Nakano and
 knowledge of matters concerning Nakano's employment with Big
 Island Toyota made Judge Hara's participation in the case appear
 improper, thus triggering his obligation to recuse or disqualify
 himself from presiding over the case.
 
Judge Hara presided over a case where he had "personal
 
knowledge of facts that [were] in dispute in the proceeding." 
HCJC Rule 2.11(a)(1). "Knowledge" as defined in HCJC "mean[s]
 actual knowledge of the fact in question" and "a person's
 knowledge may be inferred from circumstances." HCJC,
 Terminology. The record contains evidence of circumstances from
 which Judge Hara's personal knowledge of disputed facts are
 logically inferred. On January 10, 2012, in opening statements
 at trial, Toyota Plaintiffs' attorney argued that Trevino had
 told De Luz that Nakano, "the most trusted 30-year employee ever,
 was stealing from him [De Luz]" and that Trevino had fired Nakano
 for that. Nakano was Trevino's predecessor at Big Island Toyota
 and Trevino negotiated Nakano's "contentious" termination
 package. Nakano's subsequent consultation with Judge Hara as a
 private practice attorney on his severance package, and under the
 definition of "knowledge" provided by the HCJC, we conclude that
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Judge Hara had personal knowledge of contentious circumstances
 
surrounding Nakano's termination from Big Island Toyota and that
 those circumstances include facts that are material to the
 present dispute over Trevino's employment with the same employer.
 
This case is distinguishable from State v. Ross, 89 
Hawai
'i 371, 974 P.2d 11 (1998). Ross, involved criminal charges 
against a defendant alleged to have harassed a store clerk. The Hawai
'i Supreme Court concluded that a judge's intermittent arm's 
length sales of fish to the store and acquaintance with the store's president did not establish grounds for vacating the judge's adverse rulings on the basis of an appearance of impropriety. The holding in Ross pivoted on the reasonableness of questions posed to the judge's impartiality, whereas the instant case concerns HCJC provisions mandating Judge Hara's recusal or disqualification based on inferences of his personal knowledge of disputed facts from the circumstances. See HCJC 
Rule 2.11(a)(1) and see Ross, 89 Hawai
'i at 380, 974 P.2d at 20. 
The Ross judge's casual vendor relationship and acquaintance with the store owner had no relation to the controversy over which he presided (i.e., the defendant's trial for criminal harassment of the store's clerk) and the store was not itself a party to the proceeding. Ross, 89 Hawai
'i at 380, 974 P.2d at 20. By 
contrast, Judge Hara's knowledge of Toyota Plaintiffs' "contentious" termination of Nakano directly implicates Trevino's role in negotiating with Nakano over his termination and Big Island Toyota is itself a party to the present case. These distinguishing circumstances further lead us to the conclusion that Judge Hara's actions rise to the level of an abuse of discretion warranting our adverse review. 
We conclude that Judge Hara abused his discretion by 
failing to recuse himself despite his personal knowledge of facts in dispute in the proceeding. See HCJC Rule 2.11(a) (providing 
that a judge's obligation to disqualify or recuse himself is subject to the rule of necessity); HCJC Rule 2.11(a)(1) (requiring a judge to recuse herself or himself if she or he has personal knowledge of facts in dispute in the subject proceeding); and TSA Int'l Ltd., 92 Hawai
'i at 252, 990 P.2d at 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
722.
 
III. CONCLUSION
 
Therefore, we vacate the Circuit Court of the Third
 
Circuit's (1) October 9, 2012 Final Judgment; and (2) August 2,
 
2012 "Order Denying Defendant Victor D. Trevino, Jr.'s Motion For
 Reconsideration Of Order Denying Defendant Victor D. Trevino's
 Motion For Recusal And/Or Disqualification Of Judge Glenn S. Hara
 Filed Under Seal On January 17, 2012, Filed March 22, 2012, Filed
 April 2, 2012" and remand this case for proceedings consistent
 with this opinion. Trevino's other points on appeal are now
 moot.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, January 29, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Victor D. Trevino, Jr.
Defendant/Counterclaim-
Plaintiff/Third-PartyPlaintiff/Appellant pro se.
 
Presiding Judge
Paul M. Saito
 Andrew L. Salenger
Trisha L. Nishimoto (Cades Schutte)
for Plaintiffs/Counterclaim­Defendants/Appellees. 
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
 
12
 