NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000458
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
ISSAC H. PASCUA, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 13-1-1499)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Issac H. Pascua (Pascua) appeals
from the May 13, 2015, Judgment of Conviction and Sentence
entered in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit (Circuit
Court).1  Pascua was convicted of Kidnapping in violation of
Hawai#i Revised Statutes (HRS) §§ 707-720(1)(d) and/or (1)(e)
(2014); Assault in the Second Degree in violation of HRS §§ 707-
711(1)(a) and/or (1)(b) (2014); Abuse of Family or Household
Members in violation of HRS §§ 709-906(1), (5) and (8) (2014);
and Terroristic Threatening in the Second Degree, in violation of
HRS § 707-717 (2014).
Pascua raises three points of error on appeal: 
(1) "The lower court's instruction on Kidnapping was erroneous
because it failed to establish that [Pascua's] conduct must have
been an uninterrupted continuous course of conduct in order for
the jury to find guilt beyond a reasonable doubt[;]" (2) "The
record lacks substantial evidence to support [Pascua's]
conviction for Kidnapping[;]" and (3) "The record lacks
1The Honorable Glenn J. Kim presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
substantial evidence to support [Pascua's] conviction for Assault
in the Second Degree."
After a careful review of the points raised, the
arguments presented by the parties, the record, and the relevant
authority, we resolve Pascua's points on appeal as follows and
affirm.
1. Pascua argues that the kidnapping instruction was
prejudicially erroneous, because it was inconsistent with the
other offense instructions, misleading, and insufficient to show
the jury that the restraint must be continuous and uninterrupted. 
Pascua points out that the charged period in the instructions for
each of the offenses was identical2 but only meant continuous and
uninterrupted conduct in the kidnapping instruction.  Thus, he
argues, the identical plain language in the instructions for each
offense could not mean one thing--continuous and uninterrupted
conduct--as to one offense, but something else for the other
charges.  Pascua asked that the instruction read, "From the 9th
day of August, 2013, through and including the 15th day of
August, 2013, in the City and County of Honolulu, State of
Hawaii, the Defendant continuously  restrained [Complaining
Witness (CW)]" (emphasis added).
"When jury instructions or the omission thereof are at
issue on appeal, the standard of review is whether, when read and
considered as a whole, the instructions given are prejudicially
insufficient, erroneous, inconsistent, or misleading."  State v.
Mark, 123 Hawai #i 205, 219, 231 P.3d 478, 492 (2010) (citation,
quotation marks, and brackets omitted).  Jury instructions "must
be examined in the light of the entire proceedings and given the
effect which the whole record shows [them] to be entitled." 
State v. Nichols , 111 Hawai #i 327, 334, 141 P.3d 974, 981 (2006).
The challenged instruction as given here was a correct
statement of the law.  See , Hawai#i Criminal Jury Instructions
9.34 and 9.35 (2005) http://www.courts.state.hi.us/legal_
references/circuit_court_standard_jury_instructions (last viewed
2Each charge and respective jury instruction alleged conduct that
occurred "on or about the 9th day of August, 2013, to and including the 15th
day of August, 2013."
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Feb. 8, 2018).  That the offense was charged as a continuing
course during the charged period does not alter this conclusion,
when the entire sentence is read.  The jury was instructed to
decide whether, during the specified period, Pascua restrained
the CW.  There is nothing in this language that provides that a
finding of restraint for a part or parts of that period would
suffice.
Moreover, the parties consistently communicated that
the issue to be decided, with regard to the Kidnapping count, was
whether the restraint by Pascua was continuous or interrupted. 
The State argued in its opening statement, "the State is going to
ask you to hold the Defendant accountable and find him guilty of
Kidnapping for holding her against her will, making it impossible
for her to escape, from August 9th until August 15th of 2013."  
In its opening statement, the defense pointed out intervals
during the charged period when the CW was left alone and not
physically controlled by Pascua.  Similarly, in its closing
argument, the State maintained, "He reinforced that constant
cloud of fear, that constant threat that remained with her from
the car incident on August 9, 2013, throughout until she fled on
August 15th, and he did this multiple times[.]"  Consistent with
its opening statement, the defense argued in closing, 
that restraint, as [the State] already told you, needs to be
from Friday, August 9, 2013, through and including Thursday,
August 15, 2013.  It must be continuous.  It must be
uninterrupted.  [The State] is not going to disagree with
that.  You're not going to be told otherwise by the Court. 
That is what you need to find.  You would need to find
continuous, uninterrupted restraint from Friday, August 9th,
to Thursday, August 15th, and you don't have that.
. . . .
. . . [R]emember, it has to be continuous and
uninterrupted for seven days, okay.  That's how they charged
it, and that's what they have to prove.  It has to be from
Friday, August 9th, through and including Thursday, August
15th, okay.
The Circuit Court did not err by refusing Pascua's
requested amendment to the kidnapping instruction.
2. Pascua argues that there was no substantial
evidence as to the material element that he restrained CW
continuously and uninterruptedly from Friday, August 9, 2013, to
and including Thursday, August 15, 2013.  Under HRS § 707-
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
720(1)(d) or (1)(e), a person commits the offense of kidnapping
if the person intentionally or knowingly restrains another person
with intent to inflict bodily injury upon that person or
terrorize that person respectively.  Restraint means to restrict
a person's movement in such a manner as to interfere
substantially with the person's liberty by means of force,
threat, or deception.  HRS § 707-700 (2014).  
Pascua was charged with Kidnapping that occurred on or
about August 9, 2013, to and including August 15, 2013.  The
State adduced substantial evidence, through the testimony of the
CW that Pascua repeatedly struck, choked, and threatened her with
death, beginning on August 9, 2013 when Pascua repeatedly struck
her while she was driving on the freeway until August 15, 2013,
when Pascua struck her and threatened her with a knife in hand,
with death by shooting her.  She testified to repeated instances
of force being used and threatened against her during this time
and that Pascua's mood swings were unpredictable, leading her to
fear for her safety and that of her son, whom Pascua knew how to
contact, and preventing her from leaving or seeking help during
this period.  The State also presented the testimony of the
emergency room physician who confirmed CW was bruised on various
places on her body, and suffered a serious concussion. 
Photographs of CW's injuries were also presented to the jury.  
Our review of the evidence leads to the conclusion that
substantial evidence was presented that showed Pascua used
physical force and threats of injury to prevent CW's movement
during the entire charged period.
3. Pascua argues that there was insufficient evidence
as to the material element of substantial bodily injury,
specifically a serious concussion, for his Assault in the Second
Degree conviction.  Pascua argues that CW had no visible injuries
to the back of her head and that the treating physician testified
that the symptoms which led him to diagnose a concussion could
also be explained by the strangulation she suffered.
The offense of Assault in the Second Degree requires
proof that the actor intentionally or knowingly caused
substantial bodily injury to another and/or recklessly caused
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
serious or substantial bodily injury to another.  HRS §§ 707-
711(1)(a) and/or (1)(b).  Substantial bodily injury is defined as
bodily injury which causes, among other things, a serious
concussion.  HRS § 707-700 (2014).
The evidence in this case was sufficient to support a
finding that Pascua caused CW to suffer a serious concussion.  CW
testified that Pascua grabbed her head by the hair and banged her
head into a brick wall in the bedroom on three separate days,
which caused her to feel dizzy and disoriented.  The treating
emergency room physician testified that CW had a closed head
injury with subconjunctival hemorrhage, or blood in the eyes, and
bruising around her eyes or a black eye.  He diagnosed this
injury as a serious concussion.  Although the doctor testified
that some of CW's symptoms were consistent with strangulation, he
also testified that although "there are no definitive tests to
diagnose whether or not a person suffered from a serious
concussion . . . [i]t is a clinical diagnosis."  He could
"definitively" make the clinical diagnosis of concussion.  Thus,
taking the evidence in the light most favorable to the
prosecution, State v. Batson, 73 Haw. 236, 248-49, 831 P.2d 924,
931 (1992), the State adduced substantial evidence from which a
jury could conclude Pascua committed Assault in the Second
Degree.
Based on the foregoing, the May 13, 2015, Judgment of
Conviction and Sentence entered in the Circuit Court of the First
Circuit is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 23, 2018.
On the briefs:
Randall K. Hironaka,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Stephen K. Tsushima,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
5