NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0003085 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
KURT BOSSHARD, Trustee of the unrecorded
Kurt Bosshard Trust, dated 9/9/99,
Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellant,
v.
 
THE THREE STOOGES, LLC. a Hawai 'i Limited Liability Co.;
GREG L. ALLEN, SR., individually;
GREG L. ALLEN, JR., individually,
Defendants/Counterclaim-Plaintiffs/Appellees,
and
 
ALLEN FAMILY, LLC, an Arizona Limited Liability Co.,
Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/Cross-Claim Plaintiff/Appellee,
and
 
MOLOA'A BAY VENTURES, LLC., a Hawai 'i Limited Liability Co.,
Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/Cross-Claim Defendant/Appellee,
and
 
WALLACE G. REZENTES, JR., in his official capacity as
Director of Finance; COUNTY OF KAUAI,
Defendants/Appellees
and
 
JOHN DOES 1-25, Defendants
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0234)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding J., Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellant Kurt
 
Bosshard (Bosshard), Trustee of the unrecorded Kurt Bosshard
 
Trust dated September 9, 1999, appeals from the Circuit Court of
 
the Fifth Circuit's1
 (circuit court): 
1
 The Honorable Kathleen N.A. Watanabe presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(1) August 1, 2013 "Order Approving Report of
 
Commissioner, Granting Defendants The Three Stooges, LLC, Allen
 
Family, LLC, Greg L. Allen, Sr., and Greg L. Allen, Jr.'s Motion
for Confirmation of Sale, and Directing Distribution of
 Proceeds," (Order Confirming Sale);
  
(2) August 1, 2013 "Judgment" on the Order Confirming
 
Sale (Judgment); and
 
(3) August 1, 2013 "Order Denying Plaintiff's Motion
 
for Declaratory Relief as to Counts I and II and Motion for
 Summary Judgment as to Count II of the Complaint for Foreclosure
 Filed July 2, 2012," (Order Denying Motions for Declaratory
Relief and Summary Judgment).
 
Bosshard contends the circuit court erred by:
 
(1) entering the Order Confirming Sale because (i) the
 
circuit "court failed to take into account Bosshard's contractual
 right to receive Lots 4 and 5 pursuant to the Promissory Note and
 First Mortgage" and (ii) the expungement of Bosshard's "Notice of
 Pendency of Action, filed July 2, 2012, and recorded July 6,
 2012" was unwarranted; 
(2) entering its Order Denying Motions for Declaratory
 
Relief and Summary Judgment; and
 
(3) entering its January 23, 2013 "Order Re: Motion to
 
Allow Credit Bidding by Second Mortgagee" because it "failed to
 take into account Bosshard's contractual right to receive Lots 4
 and 5 pursuant to a Promissory Note and First Mortgage[.]"
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
 well as the relevant statutory and case law, we conclude that
 Bosshard's appeal is without merit.
I.	 This court lacks jurisdiction over the Order Denying Motions
for Declaratory Relief and Summary Judgment.
 
Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/Cross-Claim
 
Plaintiff/Appellee Allen Family, LLC (Allen Family); and
 
Defendants/Counterclaim-Plaintiffs/Appellees Three Stooges, LLC
 
(Three Stooges), Greg L. Allen, Sr., and Greg L. Allen, Jr.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(collectively the Allen Entities) contend that this court lacks
 
jurisdiction over the Order Confirming Sale and the Order Denying
 
Motions for Declaratory Relief and Summary Judgment.
 
"The general rule is that a judgment is final for the 
purpose of appeal if it is final not only as to all claims but also as to all parties." Chang v. City and Cnty. of Honolulu, 51 
Haw. 137, 139, 453 P.2d 753, 754 (1969). In addition, appeals of "final judgments, orders, or decrees" in civil matters are authorized only when "taken in the manner and within the time provided by the rules of court." Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 641-1(a)&(c) (1993). Under Hawai
'i Rules of Civil 
Procedure (HRCP) Rule 58, which provides that "[e]very judgment 
shall be set forth on a separate document[,]" appeals may be 
taken from circuit court orders in civil cases "only after the orders have been reduced to a judgment and the judgment has been entered in favor of and against the appropriate parties . . . ." Jenkins v. Cades Schutte Fleming & Wright, 76 Hawai
'i 115, 119, 
869 P.2d 1334, 1338 (1994). 
HRCP Rule 54(b) "provides an exception to the general
 
rule with reference to any judgment on one or more but less than
 all of the claims in a multiple-claim action, entered pursuant to
 express determination that there is no just reason for delay and
 express direction for entry." Chang, 51 Haw. at 139, 453 P.2d at
 
754. Therefore, a "judgment entered on an order confirming the 
sale of the foreclosed property, [shall be final and appealable] if the circuit court expressly finds that no just reason for delay exists, and certifies the judgment as final pursuant to [HRCP R]ule 54(b) . . . ." HRS § 667-51(a)(2) (Supp. 2014). Moreover, where parties appeal from an order certified pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b), "this court will only consider other orders which were preliminary rulings upon which the subject [HRCP Rule 54(b) certified] Order was predicated or were part of the series of orders which collectively led to that Order." Cook v. Sur. 
Life Ins., Co., 79 Hawai
'i 403, 409, 903 P.2d 708, 714 (App. 
1995). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In the instant case, neither the circuit court's Order 
Confirming Sale nor its Order Denying Motions for Declaratory 
Relief and Summary Judgment disposed of all claims as to all parties. The circuit court's Judgment on the Order Confirming Sale and corresponding judgment are final and appealable, however, because the circuit court certified the Judgment under HRCP Rule 54(b). See HRS § 667-51(a)(2). The circuit court's 
Order Denying Motions for Declaratory Relief and Summary Judgment is not final and appealable because it was not certified pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b), and is not a preliminary ruling upon which the Judgment on the Order Confirming Sale was predicated or part of the series of orders that collectively led to the Judgment on the Order Confirming Sale. Cook, 79 Hawai
'i at 409, 903 P.2d at 
714. In other words, this court lacks appellate jurisdiction
 
over the circuit court's Order Denying Motions for Declaratory
 Relief and Summary Judgment because the circuit court neither
 reduced the order to a separate judgment pursuant to HRCP Rule 58
 nor certified the Judgment pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b).
II.	 By failing to appeal the Judgment on the Foreclosure Decree,
Bosshard forfeited his rights to challenge the circuit
court's (1) decision not to award him the hypothetical value
of Lots 4 and 5 under the foreclosure claim in Count I and
 (2) expungement of the lis pendens.
 
A.	 Lots 4 and 5
 
Bosshard contends the circuit court abused its
 
discretion in entering the Order Confirming Sale because it
 
failed to include the value of Lots 4 and 5 in the amount owed to
 Bosshard for his foreclosure claim pursuant to the Promissory
 Note (Note) and First Mortgage.
2
 Bosshard argues that
 
"[p]ursuant to the loan documents, as modified, Bosshard was
 entitled to receive both Lots 4 and 5 and the principal and
 
2
 The Note was executed on April 18, 2001 in consideration of
Bosshard's loan of $1,600,000 to Kapaa 160, LLC (Kapaa 160). Also on April
18, 2001, and in order to secure the payment of the Note, Kapaa 160,Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/Cross-Claim Defendant/Appellee Moloa' a Bay
Ventures, LLC (Moloa' a Bay), and the Allen Family, as Mortgagors, executed and
delivered to Bosshard, as Mortgagee, the First Mortgage on the real property(the Property) that is the subject of this case. 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
interest due him pursuant to the Promissory Note and Mortgage."
 
Bosshard points to the First and Second Loan Modifications and a
 Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) as evidence of his right to Lots 4
 
and 5.
3 Bosshard further argues that "[Appellee HG Kaua 'i Joint 
Venture, LLC] shall take the foreclosed property subject to the
 
Lis Pendens filed by" Bosshard because the Allen Family is a
 junior lien holder and therefore Bosshard's claims "have clear
 priority" over the Allen Family's claims "or any purchaser
 claiming by or through Allen Family[.]"
 
The Allen Entities argue that Bosshard consented to the
 
terms of the Second Mortgage when he signed Exhibit B,
4
 and that
pursuant to terms of the Second Mortgage, Bosshard forfeited his
 option to acquire Lots 4 and 5 by instituting foreclosure under
 the First Mortgage. The Allen Entities also argue that the
 "circuit court's refusal to add the hypothetical value of Lots 4
 and 5 to the secured debt was simply not error" because
 
even if Bosshard retained an option after he filed the
foreclosure action, the failure to subdivide and convey Lots
4 and 5 was a nonmonetary default that, pursuant to the
terms of the Note and First Mortgage, entitled him only to
accelerate the debt and foreclose. Nowhere in the Note,
First Mortgage, or any of the agreements modifying the Note
did the parties ever agree that the failure to subdivide and
 
3
 The First Loan Modification was executed on May 17, 2002 by
Bosshard, Kapaa 160, Moloa' a Bay, and the Allen Family. The First Loan 
Modification recited that the Mortgagors were in the process of developing theProperty into the "Kulana Kai Subdivision." Under the First Loan Modification, Bosshard was given the option to receive Lot 4 (containingapproximately 7.2 acres) and Lot 5 (containing approximately 16 acres) of theKulana Kai Subdivision in lieu of certain interest and loan originations feesdue Bosshard under the Note and First Mortgage. 
The Second Loan Modification was executed on July 7, 2003 and set
forth applicable interest rates in the scenario that Bosshard took advantage
of his option to receive Lots 4 and 5.
 
The MOA was executed on September 28, 2009 by Bosshard, Kapaa 160,
the Allen Family, Moloa' a Bay, Greg L. Allen, Sr., Greg L. Allen, Jr., and the
Three Stooges. The MOA reiterated Bosshard's right to receive Lots 4 and 5,as set forth in the First and Second Loan Modifications. 
4
 On May 22, 2002, Bosshard signed "Exhibit B" to the Second
Mortgage, which provides that Bosshard consented "to placement of Second
Mortgage lien on the property described in Exhibit A attached hereto in
accordance with the terms contained therein." Exhibit A described the
 Property and provided that it was conveyed subject to, inter alia, the "[f]ree
flowage of a stream," a dirt road, several easements for utilities, a setback
"for future road widening purposes," and the First Mortgage.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
convey Lots 4 and 5 would increase the amount of
indebtedness secured by the Property. 
The Allen Entities further contend that Bosshard's
 
failure to appeal from the circuit court's November 26, 2012
 
"Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order Granting
 Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment and Decree of Foreclosure
 as to Count I of the Complaint for Foreclosure, filed July 2,
 2012" (Foreclosure Decree) precludes his appeal of the Order
 
Confirming Sale. The Allen Entities argue that if Bosshard
 
believed that the circuit court erred "by failing to increase the
 debt [owed to Bosshard] by the hypothetical value of Lots 4 and
 5, . . . he was required to appeal from the Foreclosure Decree,
 which finally determined that amount, and not from the subsequent
 orders confirming sale or denying him summary judgment." 
Appeals may be taken from post-foreclosure decree
 
orders, but "appellate jurisdiction is limited to the 'errors
 unique to' these orders." Independence Mortg. Trust v. Dolphin,
 
Inc., 57 Haw. 554, 556, 560 P.2d 488, 490 (1977) (quoting Powers
 v. Ellis, 55 Haw. 414, 417, 520 P.2d 431, 433 (1974)). 
This court does not have jurisdiction over Bosshard's 
appeal with regard to his contentions of error relative to Lots 4 and 5 because the alleged error is not unique to the Order Confirming Sale. The Foreclosure Decree and the Order Confirming Sale used the same calculation to determine the amount owed to Bosshard under the Note and First Mortgage, and the Foreclosure Decree was a final appealable judgment pursuant to HRCP Rule 54(b) that the parties had thirty days to appeal under Hawai
'i 
Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 4(a)(1). 
The Foreclosure Decree found that as of August 19,
 
2012, the Allen Entities owed Bosshard $3,488,193.73, which
 included "advances of $89,426.25 and accrued interest on the
 advances in the amount of $29,236.21." The Foreclosure Decree
 concluded that interest would continue to accrue on the "Note at
 the rate of 12% per annum . . . together with costs of
 litigation, attorney's fees, and all other costs or expenses." 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
The Order Confirming Sale ordered that as of June 19, 2013, the
 
Allen Entities owed Bosshard $3,779,663.31 for principal and
 interest under the Note and First Mortgage, plus advances of
 $1,408.50, and that interest would continue to accrue on the Note
 until closing. The Order Confirming Sale merely confirmed the
 Foreclosure Decree's findings with regard to the amount owed to
 Bosshard and thus Bosshard forfeited his right to challenge the
 circuit court's decision not to award him the value of Lots 4 and
 5 under the foreclosure claim in Count I when he failed to appeal
 the Judgment on the Foreclosure Decree.
B. Lis pendens
 
The Order Confirming Sale ordered Bosshard's Notice of
 
Pendency of Action, also known as a "lis pendens," to be
 "released or expunged" upon the closing of the foreclosure sale
 of the real property that is the subject of this case. 
Bosshard's contention that the circuit court abused its
 discretion in expunging the lis pendens is without merit because
 the Foreclosure Decree effectively expunged the lis pendens
5
 and
therefore Bosshard forfeited his right to challenge the
 expungement when he failed to appeal the Foreclosure Decree. See
 
Independence Mortg. Trust, 57 Haw. at 556, 560 P.2d at 490. 
Therefore,
 IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Circuit Court of the
 
Fifth Circuit's August 1, 2013 "Order Approving Report of
 Commissioner, Granting Defendants The Three Stooges, LLC, Allen
 Family, LLC, Greg L. Allen, Sr., and Greg L. Allen, Jr.'s Motion
 for Confirmation of Sale, and Directing Distribution of Proceeds"
 and August 1, 2013 "Judgment" are affirmed. This court has no
 jurisdiction as to the Circuit Court of the Fifth Circuit's
 August 1, 2013 "Order Denying Plaintiff's Motion for Declaratory
 
5
 The Foreclosure Decree found that Bosshard was entitled to have
 
the Property sold "free and clear of the claims of the Defendants and all
other parties herein[.]" After a notice of pendency of action is recorded
with the Bureau of Conveyances pursuant to HRS § 634-51 (Supp. 2014), "a
person who becomes a purchaser or encumbrancer of the property affected shall
be deemed to have constructive notice of the pendency of the action and be
bound by any judgment entered therein if the person claims through a party to
the action[.]"
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Relief as to Counts I and II and Motion for Summary Judgment as
 
to Count II of the Complaint for Foreclosure, filed July 2,
 2012."
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, March 27, 2015. 
On the briefs:
 
Harold Bronstein
 
for Plaintiff/Counterclaim-Defendant/Appellant Kurt
Bosshard, Trustee of the
unrecorded Kurt Bosshard Trust
 dated 9/9/99.
 Presiding Judge
Associate JudgeAssociate JudgeDeborah K. Wright
Keith D. Kirschbraun Douglas R. Wright(Wright & Kirschbraun)for Defendant/Counterclaim-Plaintiff/Cross-ClaimDefendant/Appellee Moloa
'a Bay
Ventures, LLC. 
Patrick J. Childs
 
and
 Corey Y.S. Park
for Defendant/Counterclaim­Plaintiff/Cross-Claim
Plaintiff/Appellee Allen
Family, LLC, and
Defendants/Counterclaim­Plaintiffs/Appellees
Three Stooges, LLC; Greg L.
Allen, Sr., individually;
Greg L. Allen, Jr.,
individually.
 
Jade Lynne Ching
Pamela W. Bunn
 (Alston Hunt Floyd & Ing)
for Third-Party
Purchaser/Appellee HG Kauai
Joint Venture, LLC.
 
8
 