NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-15-0000367
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I
 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
DOUGLAS MANAGO, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CRIMINAL NO. 13-1-0320)

 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Douglas Manago (Manago) appeals
 
from the Judgment of Conviction and Sentence (Judgment) filed on
 
March 25, 2015, in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit
 
1
(Circuit Court).  Following a jury trial, Manago was found
 
guilty of Burglary in the First Degree, Hawaii Revised Statutes
 
(HRS) § 708-810(1)(c) (2014). Manago was sentenced to a ten year
 
term of imprisonment with a mandatory minimum of six years and
 
eight months as a repeat offender. 
Manago raises three points of error on appeal,

 
contending that: (1) the Circuit Court erred when it failed to
 include the complete statutory definition of the term "building"
 
1
 The Honorable Dexter D. Del Rosario presided. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
in its jury instructions; (2) the Deputy Prosecuting Attorney's
 
(DPA's) comments during closing argument constituted
 
prosecutorial misconduct; and (3) the Circuit Court erred when it
 
neglected to rule on a defense counsel objection. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to
 the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Manago's points of error as follows:
 
(1) HRS § 708-810(1)(c) states, in relevant part: 
(1) A person commits the offense of burglary in the
first degree if the person intentionally enters or remains
unlawfully in a building, with intent to commit therein a
crime against a person or against property rights, and:
 
. . . .
 
(c) The person recklessly disregards a risk that the
building is the dwelling of another, and the building
is such a dwelling.
 
HRS § 708-800 (2014) defines building as "any
 
structure, and the term also includes any vehicle, railway car,
 
aircraft, or watercraft used for lodging of persons therein; each
 unit of a building consisting of two or more units separately
 secured or occupied is a separate building." 
Consistent with these statutes, the Circuit Court
 
instructed the jury as follows: 
A person commits the offense of Burglary in the First
Degree if he intentionally enters a building unlawfully,
with intent to commit therein a crime against a person or
against property rights, and he recklessly disregards a risk
that the building is the dwelling of another, and the
building is such a dwelling. 
There are four material elements of the offense of

 
Burglary in the First Degree, each of which the prosecution
must prove beyond a reasonable doubt. 
These four elements are: 
1. That on or about April 10, 2012, on the island of
Oahu, the defendant intentionally entered a building
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
unlawfully, to wit, the residence of Eduardo Viramontes,
and/or Teodoro Dominguez-Delgado, situated at 94-289 Leonui
Street, apartment 91; and 
2. That the defendant had the intent to commit therein
 
a crime against a person or against property rights; and 
3. That the defendant recklessly disregarded the risk
that the building was the dwelling of another; and 
4. That the building was the dwelling of another.
 
. . . . 
Building includes any structure.
 Dwelling means a building which is used or usually
used by a person for lodging. 
Manago argues that the Circuit Court plainly erred when
 
it failed to include the complete statutory definition of the
 
term "building" in its jury instructions. Specifically, Manago
 argues that the instruction was erroneous because it did not
 include the language of HRS § 708-800, that "each unit of a
 building consisting of two or more units separately secured or
 occupied is a separate building." 
The Hawai
'i Supreme Court has recognized that the 
"trial court is not required to instruct the jury in the exact words of the applicable statute but to present the jury with an understandable instruction that aids the jury in applying that law to the facts of the case." State v. Metcalfe, 129 Hawai
'i 
206, 230, 297 P.3d 1062, 1086 (2013) (citation omitted). Moreover, "jury instructions 'should not merely parrot the language of the statute,' but should also adequately apprise the jury, in easily understandable language, the law to be applied in its deliberation." State v. Kaiama, 81 Hawai
'i 15, 27, 911 P.2d 
735, 747 (1996). 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
We conclude that the Circuit Court did not err in
 
giving the above instruction. The Circuit Court's instruction
 
communicated the four material elements of Burglary in the First
 Degree, that: (1) Manago intentionally entered a building i.e.,
 94-289 Leonui Street, apartment 91, unlawfully; (2) Manago had
 the intent to commit therein a crime against a person or property
 rights; (3) Manago recklessly disregarded the risk that the
 building was the dwelling of another; and (4) that the building
 was the dwelling of another.  The Circuit Court's instruction
 
also aided the jury in applying the law to the evidence presented
 
at trial. Eduardo Viramontes (Viramontes) and Teodoro Dominguez-
Delgado (Delgado) testified that they lived at 94-289 Leonui
 Street, apartment 91 on April 10, 2012. Viramontes testified
 
that a male, later identified as Manago, entered his apartment on
 April 10, 2012. Viramontes and Delgado testified that they did
 not give Manago permission to enter their residence. Delgado
 testified that $400.00 was missing from his bedroom. As part of
 his investigation, Honolulu Police Department Officer Roberto
 Cadiz (Officer Cadiz) determined that the "suspect had cut the
 
screen and then reached inside. Reached inside and unlocked the
 
door from there." A stipulation provided that Manago's DNA
 profile matched the DNA recovered from a watch found inside
 apartment 91. Manago's DNA profile also matched the DNA
 recovered from the glass jalousie louver of apartment 91. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the Circuit Court provided the jury
 "with an understandable instruction that aid[ed] the jury in
 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
applying [the] law to the facts of the case." Metcalfe, 129 
Hawai'i at 230, 297 P.3d at 1086 (citation omitted). 
Manago argues that "the fact that the defense was based
 
on the admission that Mr. Manago was on the premises but did not
 
enter the unit, an idea consistently advanced to the jury, makes
 
the omission of the full definition of 'building' clearly
 
prejudicial to Mr. Manago." The Circuit Court instructed the
 jury that the State must prove all four elements of Burglary in
 the First Degree beyond a reasonable doubt. In reaching its
 guilty verdict, the jury determined that the State proved all
 four elements of Burglary in the First Degree beyond a reasonable
 doubt. The jury determined that Manago entered apartment 91, and
 that apartment 91 was Viramontes and Delgado's dwelling. The
 Circuit Court defined dwelling as a "building which is used or
 usually used by a person for lodging." Despite Manago's
 arguments to the contrary, the jury could not have found Manago
 guilty of Burglary in the First Degree based on his admission
 that he was on the premises, but did not enter apartment 91. 
Therefore, we are not persuaded by Manago's argument. 
In sum, the Circuit Court's definition of "building" 
was not erroneous. The Circuit Court's definition of the term and its Burglary in the First Degree instruction "adequately and understandably apprised the jury of the law to be applied in its deliberation[.]" State v. Lagat, 97 Hawai
'i 492, 500, 40 P.3d 
894, 902 (2002). 
(2) Manago argues that the DPA committed prosecutorial
 
misconduct by: (1) "introducing a speculative and prejudicial
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
theory of the case for the first time during closing argument
 
that was not based on facts in evidence"; and (2) misstating the
 definition of "building." 
"In order to determine whether the alleged
 
prosecutorial misconduct reached the level of reversible error,
 [appellate courts] consider the nature of the alleged misconduct,
 the promptness or lack of a curative instruction, and the
 strength or weakness of the evidence against defendant." State
 
v. Agrabante, 73 Haw. 179, 198, 830 P.2d 492, 502 (1992)
 (citation omitted). "Allegations of prosecutorial misconduct are
 reviewed under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard,
 which requires an examination of the record and a determination
 of 'whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error
 complained of might have contributed to the conviction.'" State
 
v. Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i 405, 412, 984 P.2d 1231, 1238 (1999) 
(citations omitted). 
During the State's closing argument, the following
 
exchange took place: 
[DPA]: Now, we have two different stories. The State
 
will submit to you our theory of the case. In this trial, in

this case, we have three key players. We have defendant,
Douglas Manago. We have Natalie Woods. And we have
[Viramontes].
 
Now, defendant and Natalie Woods, they had known each

other for a long time. They were dating. Obviously they care
for each other. [Viramontes] and Natalie, they knew each
other too. They were friends. Obviously [Viramontes] likes
[Woods]. But [Woods] was using him for money. She kept
borrowing money from him. But maybe he wanted more. He
wanted sexual favors, or a relationship. But she didn't want
it. She was upset. 
So what did she do? She asked [Manago], who didn't
know [Viramontes], to go inside to his place, to burglarize
his place, to take money. 
[Defense counsel]: 
Objection. Facts not in evidence. 

6

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
[DPA]: It's argument. 
Why? Because he knew [Viramontes] had a job. He knew

where he lived. And he knew he had money, because she had
been borrowing money from him. Now, if you take that theory,
apply the facts and the physical evidence in this case, you
will find that it fits perfectly. 
Manago argues that "the idea that Natalie Woods had put
 
Mr. Manago up to burglarizing the unit was never introduced in
 
testimony or exhibits. As such the defense had no opportunity to
 adduce evidence or testimony to rebut the same." In response,
 the State contends that "the evidence revealed that the [DPA's]
 remarks were legitimate comments based upon the evidence and the
 reasonable inference that could be drawn therefrom."
 
Closing argument is an opportunity for both parties to 
"persuade the jury that its theory of the case is valid, based upon the evidence adduced and all reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom." Rogan, 91 Hawai
'i at 413, 984 P.2d at 1239 
(citing State v. Quitog, 85 Hawai 'i 128, 145, 938 P.2d 559, 576 
(1997)). During closing argument, it is "within the bounds of legitimate argument for prosecutors to state, discuss, and comment on the evidence as well as to draw all reasonable inferences from the evidence." State v. Clark, 83 Hawai
'i 289, 
304, 926 P.2d 194, 209 (1996). The supreme court has recognized that: 
"Although a prosecutor has wide latitude in commenting on
the evidence during closing argument, it is not enough that... his comments are based on testimony 'in evidence'; hiscomments must also be 'legitimate.'" "A prosecutor'scomments are legitimate when they draw 'reasonable'inferences from the evidence." Finally, it is "generallyrecognized under Hawai' i case law that prosecutors are bound
to refrain from expressing their personal views as to a 
defendant's guilt or the credibility of witnesses."
 
 
7

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
State v. Tuua, 125 Hawai 'i 10, 14, 250 P.3d 273, 277 (2011) 
(citations omitted). 
In determining whether an inference is reasonable, the 
"most obvious consideration" is "[w]hether the evidence bears a 
logical and proximate connection to the point the prosecutor wishes to prove[.]" State v. Basham, 132 Hawai
'i 97, 112, 319 
P.3d 1105, 1120 (2014) (citation omitted). The pivotal issue at trial was whether Manago entered 94-289 Leonui Street, apartment 91. Viramontes testified that a male, later identified as
 
Manago, entered his apartment on April 10, 2012. Viramontes
 testified that Woods was not at his apartment on April 10, 2012. 
Woods testified that she was at the apartment and Manago did not
 enter apartment 91. Manago also testified that he did not enter
 apartment 91. 
Based on Woods's testimony, the DPA could properly 
infer that Woods was upset because Viramontes did not agree to loan her money. Woods testified that she yelled at Viramontes because he wanted sexual favors. The DPA's comment that Woods asked Manago to "burglarize [Viramontes's] place, to take money[,]" appears to be a reasonable inference as to how the events unfolded, based on Woods's testimony that Viramontes refused to loan her money, as well as the other evidence presented at trial. The DPA's comments were within the bounds of legitimate argument, and "constituted permissible commentary on the evidence." State v. Hauge, 103 Hawai
'i 38, 54, 79 P.3d 131, 
147 (2003). 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
As to the second Agrabante factor, the Circuit Court
 
did not provide a curative instruction despite Defense's
 
objection. 
The third Agrabante factor requires consideration of
 
the weight of the evidence against Manago. As noted above,
 Viramontes testified that a male entered his apartment on April
 10, 2012. Viramontes testified that the long-sleeve t-shirt
 covering the male's face became loose in the hallway. Viramontes
 was able to see the male's face, but did not recognize him at
 that time. At trial, Viramontes identified Manago as the male
 who entered his apartment on April 10, 2012. On the morning of
 April 10, 2012, Harold Viernes (Viernes), who lived on Leonui
 
Street and was responsible for building maintenance, observed a
 
male, later identified as Manago, "looking up and down, like
 casing the place." In the afternoon, Viernes heard the tenant in
 apartment 91 yell, "What are you doing here? Get the f--- out." 
Viernes testified that the male told him "Oh, that's just my
 braddah. He just mad." Viernes noticed a long-sleeve t-shirt in
 the male's hand. After the male left, Viernes testified that the
 tenant in apartment 91 came onto his balcony, and yelled "that f­--er just ripped me off. Break into my house." At trial,
 Viernes identified Manago as the male he observed on April 10,
 2012. Viramontes and Delgado testified that they did not give
 Manago permission to enter their apartment. A stipulation
 provided that Manago's DNA profile matched the DNA recovered from
 the watch found inside apartment 91 and the DNA recovered from
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the glass jalousie louver of apartment 91. The weight of the
 
evidence against Manago is strong. 
Manago argues that a second instance of prosecutorial
 
misconduct occurred when the DPA defined 'building' in his
 closing argument. The DPA stated:
 
Now, as you know, we're here for Burglary in the First
Degree against defendant, Douglas Manago. Judge told you
there are four elements in this charge. 
The first one being on or about April 10, 2012, on the
island of Oahu, the defendant intentionally entered a
building unlawfully. 
April 10, 2012, and on the island of Oahu. You have
heard that throughout the trial. It's not disputed. We all
know that that's true. So what are we really looking at?
Whether or not the defendant intentionally entered the
building. 
The State submits to you the State has proven beyond a
reasonable doubt that it was intentional. Because, as you
saw, that the screen was cut. It wasn't anyone stumble into
the apartment. Someone went inside with a purpose. It was
intentional. And that the fingerprint was found. 
Second, it was a building. Well, using your common

sense you know that this was a building indeed.
 
And third, whether it was unlawful. [Delgado] and
[Viramontes] told you that they didn't know [Manago]. And no
permission ever was given for him to go inside. So it was
uninvited. It was unlawful. 
The DPA's comment, when viewed in context, encouraged
 
the jurors to use their common sense in evaluating the evidence. 
See, e.g., State v. Sawyer , 88 Hawai 'i 325, 329 n.6, 966 P.2d 
637, 641 n.6 (1998); see State v. Nakoa, 72 Haw. 360, 371, 817
 
P.2d 1060, 1066 (1991). Despite Manago's arguments to the
 contrary, the DPA's comment did not "compound[] the ambiguity in
 the Court's insufficient Jury Instructions with regard to the
 definition of 'building[.]'"  As discussed above, the Circuit
 
Court properly instructed the jury that it must determine whether
 the State proved beyond a reasonable doubt that: (1) Manago
 
10
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
intentionally entered a building i.e., 94-289 Leonui Street,
 
apartment 91, unlawfully; (2) he had the intent to commit therein
 a crime against a person or property rights; (3) he recklessly
 disregarded the risk that the building was the dwelling of
 another; and (4) that the building was the dwelling of another. 
The jury could not find Manago guilty of Burglary in the First
 Degree simply based on his admission that he was on the premises,
 but did not enter apartment 91. Therefore, we conclude the DPA's
 comment was not improper. 
There was no objection to the DPA's remark and, thus,
 
there was no curative instruction. As noted above, the evidence
 against Manago was strong.
 
We conclude that there was no prosecutorial misconduct
 
in this case.
 
(3) Manago argues that the Circuit Court erred when it
 
neglected to rule on the Defense's objection during the exchange,
 quoted above, concerning the State's theory of the case, i.e.,
 that Woods asked Manago to burglarize Viramontes's apartment.
 
Manago argues that the "dismissive stance by the Court
 
in response to a legitimate objection substantially prejudiced
 Mr. Manago by first lending credence to the prosecutions [sic]
 improper statement and then denigrating the defense while
 elevating the prosecution." Although it is somewhat unclear, we
 construe this to be an argument that the Circuit Court
 disregarded its duty to "maintain the attitude and appearance of
 impartiality." State v. Pokini, 55 Haw. 640, 645, 526 P.2d 94,
 
101 (1974). We conclude that Manago reads too much into a silent
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
record and, upon review of the record of the Circuit Court's
 
conduct of the trial in this case, that this argument is wholly
 without merit. 
For these reasons, the Circuit Court's March 25, 2015
 
Judgment is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, May 18, 2016. 
On the briefs: 
David A. Fanelli,
for Defendant-Appellant. Presiding Judge 
Donn Fudo,Deputy Prosecuting Attorney,City and County of Honolulu,for Plaintiff-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
12
 