NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-14-0001274
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
LISA M. VOLQUARDSEN, ESQ., LLLC,
a Hawaii Domestic Limited Liability Law Corporation,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
CHARLES H. MURATA, Defendant-Appellant,
and
JOHN DOES 1-10; JANE DOES 1-10; DOE CORPORATIONS,
PARTNERSHIPS, GOVERNMENTAL UNITS or OTHER ENTITIES 1-20,
Defendants
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CIVIL NO. 13-1-182K)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Ginoza and Chan, JJ.)
Defendant–Appellant Charles H. Murata (Murata), pro se,
appeals from an order entered by the Circuit Court of the Third
Circuit (circuit court)1 denying Murata's motion to dismiss the
complaint filed by Plaintiff-Appellee Lisa M. Volquardsen, Esq.,
LLLC (Volquardsen) (Motion to Dismiss).  Volquardsen's complaint
seeks a temporary and permanent injunction, declaratory relief,
and damages based upon the allegations that Murata, a former
employee of Volquardsen's, among other things, has continued to,
without authorization, possess and disseminate confidential
client information and communications.  Murata's Motion to
1The Honorable Ronald Ibarra presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Dismiss is based upon the allegation that Volquardsen's complaint
constitutes a strategic lawsuit against public participation
(SLAPP) under Chapter 634F of the Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS),
Hawai#i's anti-SLAPP statute.
On appeal, Murata appears to contend that:
(1) the circuit court erred in denying his Motion to
Dismiss because Volquardsen had failed to respond to the Motion
to Dismiss in the manner required by HRS § 634F-2;
(2) the circuit court committed plain error in denying
the Motion to Dismiss because doing so violated Murata's "right
to participate in . . . government" which he exercised by
reporting the "possible commission of a federal crime";
(3) the "testimony submitted into the government
proceedings" related to the employment disputes between Murata
and Volquardsen is "protected" and "confidential";
(4) he had ineffective assistance of counsel.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, as
well as the relevant statutory and case law, we resolve Murata's
points of error as follows, and affirm.
(1) In his first point of error, Murata contends that
the circuit court erred in denying his Motion to Dismiss because
Volquardsen had failed to respond to the Motion to Dismiss in the
manner required by HRS § 634F-2.
HRS § 634F-2 (2016) states in relevant part:
[§634F-2]  Required procedures; motion.
Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, including rules of
court, upon the filing of any motion to dispose of a claim
in a judicial proceeding on the grounds that the claim is
based on, relates to, or involves public participation and
is a SLAPP lawsuit:
. . . .
(4) The responding party shall:
(A) Without leave of court, have seven days to
amend its pleadings to be pled with
specificity, and shall include such
supporting particulars as are peculiarly
within the supporting pleader's knowledge;
and
(B) Have the burden of proof and persuasion on
the motion;
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
(5) The court shall make its determination based
upon the allegations contained in the pleadings;
(6) The court shall grant the motion and dismiss the
judicial claim, unless the responding party has
demonstrated that more likely than not, the
respondent's allegations do not constitute a
SLAPP lawsuit as defined in section 634F-1;
. . . .
Specifically, Murata seems to contend that because his
Motion to Dismiss is based on the allegation that Volquardsen's
original complaint is a SLAPP lawsuit,2 Volquardsen was required
to amend her complaint pursuant to HRS § 634F-2(4)(A), rather
than file an objection to the Motion to Dismiss.  However,
Volquardsen was only required to amend her complaint if the
complaint did not sufficiently demonstrate that more likely than
not, Volquardsen's allegations do not constitute a SLAPP lawsuit.
See HRS § 634F-2(4)(A), (6).
Based upon the allegations contained in Volquardsen's
complaint, and considering that Volquardsen had the burden of
proof and persuasion on the Motion to Dismiss as the responding
party, see HRS § 634F–2(4)(B), we conclude that Volquardsen "has
demonstrated that more likely than not, [Volquardsen's]
allegations do not constitute a SLAPP lawsuit as defined in
section 634F–1[.]"  HRS § 634F-2(6).
Under HRS § 634F–1, in order for a lawsuit to be a
SLAPP, it must (1) lack substantial justification3 or be
interposed for delay or harassment, and (2) be solely based on
the party's public participation before a governmental body4. 
2 HRS § 634F-1 (2016) states in relevant part:
[§634F-1] Definitions.  As used in this chapter,
unless the context otherwise requires:
. . . .
"SLAPP" means a strategic lawsuit against public
participation and refers to a lawsuit that lacks substantial
justification or is interposed for delay or harassment and
that is solely based on the party's public participation
before a governmental body.
3  HRS § 634F-1 defines "[l]acks substantial justification" as
"substantially frivolous, substantially groundless, or substantially
vexatious."
4  Under HRS § 634F-1, a "'[g]overnmental body' includes a branch,
department, agency, instrumentality, official, employee, agent, or other
person acting under color of law of the United States, a state, or subdivision
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Perry v. Perez-Wendt , 129 Hawai #i 95, 100, 294 P.3d 1081, 1086
(App. 2013).  Here, the allegations in the complaint demonstrate
that Volquardsen's lawsuit does not meet either of the elements
required to be a SLAPP.
The complaint alleges the following:  Murata used to
work for Volquardsen, and was not authorized to retain, remove,
keep or disseminate the confidential information from Volquardsen
or her clients.  However, after Murata quit his job with
Volquardsen, he continued to possess and disseminate confidential
client information and communications.  Murata has continued to
engage in unauthorized activities which are detrimental to
Volquardsen's clients and business.  When Volquardsen contacted
the Office of Disciplinary Counsel regarding the issue, she was
advised to file a temporary restraining order and preliminary
injunction in order to protect Volquardsen's confidential client
information.
Based upon these allegations, Volquardsen's claims do
not appear to lack substantial justification or be interposed for
delay or harassment.  We find the allegation that Volquardsen was
advised by a government body to file her lawsuit particularly
noteworthy.  Although Murata alleges in his Motion to Dismiss
that prior to the filing of Volquardsen's complaint, Murata had
submitted "testimony and evidence" to the Department of Labor and
Industrial Relations for "redress of labor grievances" arising
out of his employment with Volquardsen, we conclude that the
allegations in the complaint show that any alleged public
participation before a government body by Murata is not the sole
basis for Volquardsen's complaint.
Murata further argues that the circuit court improperly
considered Volquardsen's objection to the Motion to Dismiss,
because pursuant to HRS § 634F-2(5), the court was required to
consider only the pleadings in rendering its ruling.  HRS Chapter
634F does not preclude a responding party from filing an
objection or an opposition to a motion that seeks to dispose of
an alleged SLAPP claim.  Rather, the responding party has the
of a state or other public authority."
4NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
"burden of proof and persuasion on the motion" and "[t]he court
shall make its determination based upon the allegations contained
in the pleadings."  HRS § 634F-2(4)(B), (5).  Thus, a responding
party is allowed to oppose such a motion, but the court shall not
consider alleged facts or evidence outside of the pleading that
asserts the subject claim.  See Perry 129 Hawai# i at 99, 294 P.3d
at 1085.
Here, we note that there is nothing in the record to
indicate whether or not, in denying the Motion to Dismiss, the
circuit court considered alleged facts or evidence set forth in
Volquardsen's objection that are not alleged in her complaint.
Regardless, given our de novo  review, any consideration of
allegations outside the complaint by the circuit court was
harmless5 since, as explained above, the complaint alone
sufficiently demonstrates that more likely than not,
Volquardsen's allegations do not constitute a SLAPP lawsuit.
(2) Next, Murata appears to contend that the circuit
court committed plain error in denying the Motion to Dismiss
because doing so violated Murata's "right to participate in . . .
government" and was "a miscarriage of justice."
Murata cites to federal case law regarding plain error
review in criminal matters.  However, the instant case is a civil
matter, and we "invoke the plain error doctrine in civil cases
only when justice so requires.  As such, the appellate court's
discretion to address plain error is always to be exercised
sparingly."  Okada Trucking Co. v. Bd. of Water Supply , 97
Hawai#i 450, 458, 40 P.3d 73, 81 (2002) (internal quotation
marks, citations, and ellipsis in original omitted).
5  Rule 61 of the Hawai #i Rules of Civil Procedure provides:
Rule 61.  HARMLESS ERROR.
No error in either the admission or the exclusion of
evidence and no error or defect in any ruling or order or in
anything done or omitted by the court or by any of the
parties is ground for granting a new trial or for setting
aside a verdict or for vacating, modifying, or otherwise
disturbing a judgment or order, unless refusal to take such
action appears to the court inconsistent with substantial
justice.  The court at every stage of the proceeding must
disregard any error or defect in the proceeding which does
not affect the substantial rights of the parties.
5NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Murata contends that the circuit court plainly erred in
denying the Motion to Dismiss, based upon the legislative intent
of HRS §§ 634F-1 to -4, which he argues is to "[p]rotect and
encourage citizen participation in government to the maximum
extent permitted by law" and "provide a protection for natural
persons who are citizens of the State of Hawaii and/or the United
States of America against SLAPPs which are substantially
vexatious, groundless, frivolous and lacking substantial
justification."  However, Hawai #i appellate courts "derive[]
legislative intent primarily from the language of [the] statute
and follow[] the general rule that in the absence of clear
legislative intent to the contrary, the plain meaning of the
statute will be given effect."  State v. Akina , 73 Haw. 75, 78,
828 P.2d 269, 271 (1992).
Here, the legislative intent of HRS §§ 634F-1 to -4 is
clear from the statutory language.  Therefore, the plain meanings
of the statutory provisions are given effect.  As explained
above, the circuit court did not err in denying Murata's Motion
to Dismiss because Volquardsen's lawsuit is not a SLAPP under HRS
§§ 634F-1 and -2.  Therefore, we decline to notice plain error in
this case.
(3) Murata further seems to contend that the "testimony
submitted into the government proceedings" related to the
employment disputes between Murata and Volquardsen is "protected"
and "immunity and confidentiality of the government proceeding
was mandated."  However, this contention is not supported by any
discernible argument and fails to state any alleged error
committed by the circuit court.  Even if any such error were
properly alleged on appeal, Murata also fails to cite to where in
the record any error might have occurred.  Therefore, this
contention is deemed waived and will not be addressed further.
See Kakinami v. Kakinami , 127 Hawai #i 126, 144 n.16, 276 P.3d
695, 713 n.16 (2012) (citing In re Guardianship of Carlsmith , 113
Hawai#i 236, 246, 151 P.3d 717, 727 (2007) (noting that this
court may "disregard a particular contention if the appellant
makes no discernible argument in support of that position")
(internal quotation marks and brackets omitted)); Asato v.
6NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
Procurement Policy Bd., 132 Hawai# i 333, 354 n.22, 322 P.3d 228,
249 n.22 (2014) ("However, these are not truly 'points of error'
inasmuch as they do not state an 'alleged error committed by the
court[.]'  Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule
28(b)(4)(i)."); Kamaka v. Goodsill Anderson Quinn & Stifel, 117
Hawai#i 92, 114 n.23, 176 P.3d 91, 113 n.23 (2008) ("This court
is not obligated to sift through the voluminous record to verify
an appellant's inadequately documented contentions." (citation
omitted)).
(4) Lastly, Murata contends that he had
"[i]neffectiveness of [c]ounsel" because "Murata's former counsel
is the sole reason the submission of the Order Granting the
Preliminary Injunction was not challenged to be denied or
modified."  Again, this contention fails to state any alleged
error committed by the circuit court and will therefore not be
addressed here.  See Asato , 132 Hawai# i at 354 n.22, 322 P.3d at
249 n.22 ("However, these are not truly 'points of error'
inasmuch as they do not state an 'alleged error committed by the
court[.]' Hawai #i Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule
28(b)(4)(i).").
Based on the foregoing, the "Order Denying Defendant's
Motion to Dismiss: Pursuant to Hawaii Revised Statutes 634F 1-4:
Hawaii Citizen Participation in Government Anti-SLAPP Motion and
Request for Damages, Punitive and Actual, Attorney's Fees and
Costs, Filed Herein on June 26, 2014," entered by the circuit
court on October 6, 2014, is affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, November 24, 2017.
On the briefs:
Charles H. Murata,
Defendant-Appellant.
Lisa M. Volquardsen,
Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge
7