NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-10-0000190
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
LEONARD J. PEREIRA Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
WAHIAWA DIVISION
 
(CASE NO. 1DTC-09-027518)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Leonard J. Pereira (Pereira)
 
appeals the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
 
Plea/Judgment filed on November 4, 2010 in the District Court of
 
1
the First Circuit, Wahiawa Division (District Court).
Pereira was convicted of Excessive Speeding, in
 
violation of HRS § 291C-105(a) & (c) (2007 & Supp. 2009), arising
 
from a citation issued by Officer Susan Klimek (Officer Klimek)
 
to Pereira on April 22, 2009, for driving 81 miles per hour in a
 
45-mile-per-hour zone.
 
On appeal, Pereira contends that the District Court: 
(1) erred in determining that proper foundation had been laid
 
with respect to Officer Klimek's testimony that, based on her
 
training and experience, the subject LTI 2020 laser gun was
 
operating properly; (2) erred in denying Pereira's motion for
 
1
 The Honorable Christopher P. McKenzie presided.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
judgment of acquittal based on a lack of foundation for admission
 
of the laser gun reading; (3) erred in denying Pereira's renewed
 
motion for judgment of acquittal after it concluded that the
 
officer's testimony was sufficient to lay foundation for
 
admission of the laser gun reading; (4) abused its discretion
 
when it concluded that the laser gun tests were conducted in
 
accordance with the manufacturer's manual; and (5) erred when it
 
allowed the State to rely on foundational testimony that referred
 
to April 22, 2009 (the date of the offense), rather than
 
April 20, 2009, which was the date erroneously referred to by the
 
court.2
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Pereira’s points of error as follows:
 
Sufficient foundation for admission of the laser gun 
reading requires evidence that the laser gun was tested in 
accordance with the manufacturer's recommended procedure, and 
that "the nature and extent of an officer's training in the 
operation of a laser gun meets the requirements indicated by the 
manufacturer." State v. Assaye, 121 Hawai' i 204, 210, 215, 216 
P.3d 1227, 1233, 1238 (2009). The person proffering such foundational testimony should have personal knowledge of the 
manufacturer's recommendations for testing of the laser gun and 
of the laser gun testing according to said recommendations to 
overcome hearsay concerns. Id. at 213, 216 P.3d at 1236 
(analyzing the police officer's testimony consistent with expert testimony in State v. Manewa, 115 Hawai' i 343, 354, 167 P.3d 336, 
2
 These contentions were raised in Pereira's First Amended Opening
Brief after Pereira's Opening Brief was stricken for failing to comply with
Hawai'i Rules of Appellate Procedure (HRAP) Rule 28(b). We note that the 
First Amended Opening Brief, although an improvement from the Opening Brief,
still fails to comply with HRAP Rule 28(b)(3), which requires, inter alia,
appropriate record references. Counsel is cautioned that failure to complywith HRAP may lead to sanctions. 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
347 (2007)). Additionally, the Assaye court, in its analysis of 
sufficient foundation for the laser gun reading, did not espouse 
any difference in testimony by the "expert" chemist in Manewa as 
opposed to testimony by the police officer in Assaye. Assaye, 
121 Hawai' i at 210-14, 216 P.3d at 1233-37. Thus, status as an 
expert does not appear to be crucial to the analysis. 
Furthermore, In re Admissibility of Motor Vehicle Speed Readings 
Produced by the LTI Marksman 20–20 Laser Speed Detection System, 
714 A.2d 381 (NJ Super. 1998) (In re Admissibility) (which was 
cited with approval in Assaye, 121 Hawai' i at 213-14, 216 P.3d at 
1236-37, in support of the premise that accepted procedures 
recommended by the manufacturer should be provided), additionally 
concluded: "speed readings produced by the laser speed detector 
should be received as evidence of the speed of motor vehicles 
without the need for expert testimony in individual prosecutions 
arising under the motor vehicle laws." In re Admissibility, 714 
A.2d at 391 (emphasis added). 
With the foregoing principles in mind, evidence in the
 
instant case reflected the following. As to training on the
 laser gun and personal knowledge of the manufacturer's
 
recommended procedures in that regard, Officer Klimek, a police
 
officer for fourteen years with Honolulu Police Department (HPD),
 
testified that she had been "already trained on the -- the 2020",
 
in a course which was "four hours", and was subsequently trained
 
on the UltraLyte in either 2008 or the fall of 2007, in a
 
training session of "about a hour and a half total" that included
 
"measur[ing] out the points and . . . how to operate the gun and
 
check the batteries and details for the laser 2020." As part of
 
the course of instruction, Officer Klimek received a copy of the
 
manual from Laser Technology, Inc. Officer Klimek "went through
 
[the manual] as [the instructor] instructed the class" and
 
confirmed that the instruction she received matched the
 
information she read in the manual. Officer Klimek confirmed
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that she received instruction on the care and testing of the
 
laser as contained in the manual. 
Evidence from Officer Klimek's testimony described four
 
tests for the laser gun--the self test, display test, scope
 
alignment test, and the delta distance test and confirmed that
 
she performed these four tests on the laser gun on April 22,
 
2009, and that the results of the tests indicated that the laser
 
was operating correctly. Officer Klimek stated that if the test
 
results were different, she "wouldn't have utilized that gun and
 
signed out another one."
 
The evidence received through Officer Klimek's lay 
testimony was sufficient to establish that "the nature and extent 
of [Officer Klimek's] training in the operation of a laser gun 
meets the requirements indicated by the manufacturer." Assaye, 
121 Hawai' i 204, 215, 216 P.3d 1227, 1238. Officer Klimek's 
testimony is consistent with the personal knowledge of the Manewa 
chemist who testified that he tested the device and determined 
that "the parameters are within manufacturer's specifications[,]" 
and that "[he] would not have used any of the instruments if they 
were not in proper working condition in that particular days," 
Manewa, 115 Hawai' i at 354, 167 P.3d at 347, upon which the 
Assaye court relied in stating that the "expert's 'personal knowledge' that was adduced through his testimony at trial was 
sufficient 'to establish that the GCMSs were in proper working 
condition.'" 121 Hawai' i at 213, 216 P.3d at 1236 (quoting 
Manewa, 115 Hawai' i at 354, 167 P.3d at 347). 
Consequently, Pereira's first point that the District
 
Court erred in determining proper foundation for accuracy of the
 laser device by utilizing lay testimony rather than expert
 
testimony, second point that the District Court erred in denying
 
Pereira's motion for judgment of acquittal because hearsay
 
resulted in a lack of foundation for admission of the laser gun
 
reading, and third point that the District Court erred in denying
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Pereira's renewed motion for judgment of acquittal where it
 
concluded as a matter of law that the officer's testimony was
 
sufficient to lay foundation for admission of the laser gun
 
reading cannot be sustained.
 
Pereira's fourth point of error contends that the
 
District Court abused its discretion by concluding, in denying
 
the renewed motion for judgment of acquittal, that the laser gun
 
tests were conducted in accordance with the manufacturer's
 
recommendations because the officer was unsure about those
 
recommendations regarding delta distance. Pereira additionally
 
argues that Officer Klimek's reliance on delta distance
 
measurements measured by the traffic section of HPD reflects that
 
she had no firsthand knowledge of the distances.
 
Officer Klimek explained the procedure that she and
 
other officers use with regard to the delta distance test. She
 
testified that there are two premeasured points located in the
 
HPD parking lot in Wahiawa, and when the test mode button is
 
activated and says "D1," she shoots at a blue diamond on the far
 
wall, which is the farthest distance, and get a distance reading,
 
and then she shoots at a pole that has a sign that says 'Our area
 
is being monitored by camera', and get a distance reading, then
 
push the test mode button again and "you get the reading between
 
those two points, and you divide that by 2, and if you're plus or
 
minus 1 foot based on the numbers, then everything's operating
 
correctly." Officer Klimek acknowledged that "plus or minus 1
 
foot" is "the measured distance between the blue diamond and the
 
pole with the sign" from the point where she was standing.3 On
 
cross-examination, Officer Klimek explained that delta distance
 points were D1, a "blue triangle," which was 112 feet, and D2,
 
3
 Although this testimony was not the height of clarity as to the
precise reading reflected on the laser gun or the specific numbers to which
the product of "dividing by 2" would be compared, Officer Klimek confirmed
that when she performed the test on April 22, 2009, the results indicated that
the instrument was "operating correctly" and were consistent with the
description in the manual and the instruction that she had received.
 
5
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the light pole, which was 64 feet from where she was standing,
 
which was "at the captain's stall." Officer Klimek also read
 
aloud from a document described as page 48 from the LTI 2020
 
Ultralyte manual:
 
A. The tester must establish permanent known
distances between a target and a shooting mark, fixed
distance test, or between two targets and a shooting mark,
delta distance test. The target and the shooting mark must
form a straight line. Keep in mind that the minimum
measurement is -- for this test is 50 feet.
4
 
As to the requirements of the manual that the minimum
 
measurement is 50 feet, the "measurement" to which the minimum of
 
50 feet appears to be the "permanent known distances" (1) between
 
the referenced target and the shooting mark in a fixed distance
 
test or (2) between two targets and a shooting mark in the delta
 
distance test. Hence, the relevant measurement is from a target
 
to the shooting mark, which measurement must be a minimum of 50
 
feet. According to Officer Klimek's testimony, the delta
 
distance test was utilized and not the fixed distance test. The
 
measurement between the target of the blue diamond/triangle on
 
the wall and the shooting mark at the captain's stall of 112 feet
 
exceeded the minimum of 50 feet, and the distance between the
 
target of the light pole and the shooting mark at the captain's
 
stall of 64 feet likewise exceeded the minimum of 50 feet. From
 
the foregoing, the District Court, in viewing the testimony in
 
the light most favorable to the prosecution in a motion for
 
judgment of acquittal, did not abuse its discretion in denying
 
the motion and concluding that the laser gun tests were conducted
 
in accordance with the manufacturer's manual where the officer's
 
testimony as to the manufacturer's recommendations regarding
 
4
 Although at trial the State's objection to questioning regarding
the document was ultimately sustained, as Pereira argues, the testimony was
not stricken, and, moreover, the State attaches to its brief and requests
judicial notice of a portion of the manual that apparently includes virtually
the same passage.
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
delta distance was consistent with the measurements in the delta
 
distance test that she conducted. 
With regard to measuring of the delta distance points,
 
Officer Klimek explained that, as to the distances in that area
 
where she tested, "[w]e actually measured it with a metal -­
metal tape measure", further confirming on cross-examination that
 
she measured out the delta distances with a tape measure which is
 
"a metal tape measure that traffic said we had to use" that is
 
"in the arsenal" and "belongs to the department," but she could
 
not confirm that the tape measure was certified or that it was
 
correct. Although Officer Klimek subsequently was asked "do you
 
dispute 50 feet is -- is -- is a recommended distance, she
 
responded, "I can only say that I know that traffic measured it
 
out and we were told that the points that we use are good," this
 
response by Officer Klimek in the context of the latter question
 
does not necessarily contradict her earlier testimony that she
 
personally measured the distances. Accordingly, Pereira's fourth
 
point of error is unavailing.
 
Finally, in his fifth point of error, Pereira asserts
 
that the District Court erred and abused its discretion in
 
permitting foundation for an April 20, 2009 testing of the laser
 
gun for an April 22, 2009 offense. As conceded by Pereira,
 
"[t]he State laid foundation for Officer Klimek's LTI 2020 on the
 
night of April 22, 2009." Pereira contends, however, that the
 
District Court "found that the LTI 2020 used by Officer Klimek on
 
April 20, 2009 was tested and working properly and that Officer
 
Klimek properly used the LTI 2020 on April 20, 2009." The
 
evidence reflects that the date of the incident was April 22,
 
2009. Although the District Court in its ruling recited the date
 
of the incident as April 20, 2009, rather than the date reflected
 
in testimony of April 22, 2009, such misstatement was harmless
 
error where it did not affect "a substantial right" of Pereira in
 
light of "the entire proceedings," and there was no "reasonable
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
8possibility that the error contributed to the conviction."
Hawai#i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 52(a); State v. Sprattling,
99 Hawai# i 312, 320, 55 P.3d 276, 284 (2002); State v. Pauline,
100 Hawai #i 356, 378, 60 P.3d 306, 328 (2002);  see State v.
Adams, 697 P.2d 1229, 1231-32 (Idaho  App. 1985) (magistrate's
misspeaking of the offense that was grounds for probation
revocation did not create reversible error where record
demonstrated that the erroneous offense was not before the court
and in consideration of the written order reflecting the correct
offense).  
For these reasons, we affirm the District Court's
November 4, 2010 Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and
Plea/Judgment.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, February 29, 2012.
On the briefs:
Anthony Fujii
for Defendant-AppellantPresiding Judge
Anne K. Clarkin
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu
for Plaintiff-AppelleeAssociate Judge
Associate Judge