 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-12-0000681
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
STATE OF HAWAI 'I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
KEOHOKUI ARNOLD KAUIHANA, Defendant-Appellant
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 05DTC-11-001470)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: 
Foley, Presiding Judge, Fujise and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Keohokui Arnold Kauihana (Kauihana)
 
appeals from the July 5, 2012 Judgment and Notice filed in the
 
District Court of the Fifth Circuit, Lihue Division ( District 
 
Court),1
 convicting him of Driving Without a License (DWOL), in
 
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) § 286-102 (2007).2
 
On appeal, Kauihana contends that the District Court
 
erred in convicting him with insufficient evidence of the element
 that he was not first appropriately examined and duly licensed
 and that, even if he failed to properly raise the issue before
 the trial court, this court should notice plain error.
 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
1
 The Honorable Joe P. Moss presided.
 
2
 No copy of the judgment appealed was attached to the opening
brief, as required by Rule 28(b)(3) of the Hawai' i Rules of Appellate
Procedure. Counsel for Kauihana is cautioned that future failure to comply
with the rules may result in sanctions.   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
resolve Kauihana's points of error as follows:
 
Kauihana concedes that the State proved that he was
 
driving with an expired license, but argues that insufficient
 evidence existed of the DWOL element that Kauihana was not first
 "appropriately examined and duly licensed as a qualified driver
 of that category of motor vehicles"
3
 because the evidence
established that he had at one point prior been appropriately
 examined and duly licensed, and because his license was not
 invalidated by having been expired for more than a year, as
 indicated by HRS § 286-107.5 (2007), which provides in part that
 "[a]ny driver's license not reactivated . . . within one year of
 the indicated date of expiration shall be invalid." Kauihana
 misunderstands the applicable statutory requirements.
 
HRS § 286-102(a) requires that a driver be "first
 
appropriately examined" and also be "duly licensed" at the time
 he was driving. To interpret the element as Kauihana desires-­simply that he was, at some time in the past appropriately
 examined and duly licensed and need not have been duly licensed
 at the time he was cited for DWOL--is an unreasonable
 interpretation of the statute. 
HRS § 286-107.5 (2007), entitled "Reactivation of
 
expired license; fees; road test waived," states:
 
(a) Unless revoked or suspended, and except as
provided in subsection (b), all drivers' licenses expired
under section 286-106 may be reactivated by the licensee in
accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth
for the renewal of licenses under section 286-107(b). No
person seeking reactivation of an expired license under this
subsection shall be required to undergo reexamination of the
person's driving skills under section 286-108. The examiner
of drivers shall require the holder of an expired license to
pay a reactivation fee of $5 for each thirty-day period, or
fraction thereof, that has elapsed after the ninety-day
grace period.
 
(b) Any driver's license not reactivated under
subsection (a) within one year of the indicated date
of expiration shall be invalid. The examiner of
drivers shall examine all applicants whose licenses
have been declared invalid under this subsection in
 
3
 See State v. Matautia, 81 Hawai' i 76, 83, 912 P.2d 573, 580 (App.
1996).
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
accordance with the licensing procedures established
under sections 286-108 and 286-110.
 
Kauihana's license was "expired" and, under HRS
 
§ 286-107.5, could have been "reactivated" within one year
 
without a road test. At the time of the citation, Kauihana's
 expired license was "not invalid" for reactivation under
 HRS 286-107.5, but would have become "invalid" for reactivation
 and for waiver of a road test after the one-year period has
 passed; however, Kauihana was not "duly licensed" because his
 license was expired. We conclude that sufficient evidence
 existed that Kauihana was not "duly licensed" at the time he was
 cited.
 
Therefore, the District Court's July 5, 2012 Judgment 
and Notice is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai 'i, February 20, 2014. 
On the briefs: 
Daniel Hempey
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Associate Judge Associate Judge Tracy Murakami
Deputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Kauaifor Plaintiff-Appellee 
3
 