NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-13-0000028
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI 'I 
LEIGH K. MATSUYOSHI and L.K. MATSUYOSHI, INC.,
Respondents-Appellants-Appellants,
v.
 
BUSINESS REGISTRATION DIVISION, SECURITIES
ENFORCEMENT BRANCH, OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE
HEARINGS, DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND CONSUMER
AFFAIRS, STATE OF HAWAI 'I,
Petitioner-Appellee-Appellee
 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(CIVIL NO. 12-1-0604)
 
MEMORANDUM OPINION
 
(By: 
Nakamura, C.J., Foley and Leonard, JJ.)
 
Respondents-Appellants-Appellants Leigh K. Matsuyoshi
 
(Matsuyoshi) and L.K. Matsuyoshi, Inc. (LKM Inc.) (together,
Appellants) were found to have violated several provisions of the
 
Uniform Securities Act, Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) Chapter 485
 
(Securities Act), in an action brought by Petitioner-Appellee-
Appellee Business Registration Division, Securities Enforcement
 
Branch, Office of Administrative Hearings, Department of Commerce
 
1
and Consumer Affairs, State of Hawai 'i (Appellee). 
Appellants appeal from: 
(1) the "Order Affirming Commissioner's Final Order"
 
and the "Final Judgment," (together, Circuit Court Order) both
 
1
 At the time relevant to this case, the Uniform Securities Act
(Modified) was codified as HRS Chapter 485. Effective July 1, 2008, HRS
Chapter 485 was repealed and replaced with a new Uniform Securities Act
codified as HRS Chapter 485A. 2006 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 229, §§ 17, 20 at 996.
We cite to HRS Chapter 485, which contains the provisions relevant to this
case.
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
entered December 18, 2012 in the Circuit Court of the First
 
2
Circuit  (Circuit Court);
 
(2)
 the "Commissioner's Final Order as to Respondents
 
[Matsuyoshi] and [LKM Inc.]" (Final Order) entered February 3,
 
2012 in the Department of Commerce and Consumer Affairs, Hearings
 
3
Office  (DCCA); and
 
(3)
 the "Hearings Officer's Findings of Fact,
 
Conclusions of Law and "Recommended Order" (Recommended Order)
 entered October 20, 2010 in the DCCA.
4
 
On appeal, Appellants contend the Circuit Court Order
 
was wrong because:
 
(1) the Commissioner clearly erred by misapplying the
 
doctrine of Piercing the Corporate Veil against Appellants to
 
conclude the subject transactions were not exempted from the
 securities' registration requirement of HRS § 485-8 (Supp. 2000);
 
(2) the Commissioner clearly erred by misapplying the
 
doctrine of Piercing the Corporate Veil against Appellants to
 conclude Matsuyoshi violated the registration regulations for
 investment advisors and salespersons under HRS § 485-14 (Supp.
 2000);
 
(3) the Commissioner clearly erred by concluding
 
Appellants violated 485-25(a)(1), (2), and (3) (Supp. 2007)
 because the record lacked sufficient evidence to find either
 Matsyoshi or LKM Inc. committed fraud, and the conclusion was
 based on the erroneous finding that Appellants were not exempted
 from the registration regulations under the Securities Act; and
 
(4) the Commissioner violated Appellants' Fourteenth
 
Amendment due process rights by "sua sponte" misapplying "a major
 doctrine of law in the Final Order without allowing Appellants a
 meaningful opportunity to respond."
I. BACKGROUND
 
Matsuyoshi was a registered representative of Paulson
 
2
 The Honorable Rhonda A. Nishimura presided.
 
3
 Tung Chan, Commissioner of Securities (the Commissioner) presided.
 
4
 Craig H. Uyehara, Administrative Hearings Officer (Hearings
Officer Uyehara) presided.
 
2
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Investment Company (Paulson) from May 1992 to June 19, 2000. Ray
 
Ishihara (Ishihara), Shizue Takaki (Takaki), and Miyuki Hirashima
(Hirashima), former clients of Matsuyoshi while she was at
 
Paulson (collectively, Investors), invested in LKM Inc. 
Matsuyoshi incorporated LKM Inc. on June 7, 2000, to invest in
 
stocks. Matsuyoshi was the sole director, president,
 vice-president, treasurer, registered agent, manager and only
 employee of LKM Inc. and had full control of the company from
 2000 through 2004.
 
LKM Inc. issued "Stock Purchase Agreements" (SP
 
Agreements) to each of the Investors. The SP Agreements
 
purported to sell Class A Common Stock in LKM Inc. to the
 
Investors in exchange for a collective capital contribution of
 almost one million dollars. Matsuyoshi testified LKM Inc. never
 issued stock certificates. The SP Agreements provided that
 Matsuyoshi was entitled to a salary of 7% of LKM Inc.'s total
 equity per month. This salary would equal 84% of LKM Inc.'s
 assets at the beginning of the year, if the asset level had
 remained constant. Matsuyoshi deposited the Investors' total
 contribution into LKM Inc.'s business brokerage account held at
 Charles Schwab (Schwab Account). Matsuyoshi testified that the
 
total value of the Schwab Account was equal to the total equity
 
of LKM Inc. From June 2000 to November 2004, Matsuyoshi issued
 around $486,000 to herself and her creditors directly from LKM
 Inc.'s Schwab Account.
 
Matsuyoshi testified she alone made the investment
 
decisions concerning LKM Inc.'s Schwab Account. LKM Inc.'s
 Schwab Account decreased in value as early as October of 2000. 
Around that time, Matsuyoshi returned Takaki's money following
 Takaki's repeated requests. Takaki received about $15,000 less
 than she initially invested. In 2002, Matsuyoshi returned
 Ishihara's money at his request. Ishihara received about
 $320,000 less than he originally invested. By 2004, Matsuyoshi
 returned Hirashima's investment, which was about $287,000 less
 than Hirashima originally invested.
 
On August 14, 2009, the Commissioner issued a
 
"Preliminary Order to Cease and Desist" against Appellants
 
3
  
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
alleging Appellants engaged in unregistered and fraudulent
 
securities sales and solicitations through the offer and sale of
 the SP Agreements. The DCCA heard the matter on October 22, 2009
 and March 16, 2010, and Hearings Officer Uyehara issued the
 Recommended Order on October 20, 2010. The Recommended Order
 recommended the Commissioner "conclude that the preponderance of
 the evidence established that [Appellants] violated HRS §§ 485-8,
 485-14, 485-25(a)(l), (2), and (3)[.]"
 
On February 3, 2012, the Commissioner issued the Final
 
Order. The Final Order affirmed the part of the Recommended
 Order that found a preponderance of evidence established: (i)
 Appellants violated § 485-8 by not registering the securities
 
involved in the SP Agreement; (ii) Matsuyoshi violated § 485-14
 
by acting as an unregistered salesperson and investment advisor;
 and (iii) Appellants violated § 485-25(a)(l), (2), and (3), by
 
engaging in fraudulent and other prohibited activities. The
 
Final Order reversed the part of the Recommended Order that found
 LKM Inc. violated § 485-14 and affirmed the recommended $500,000
 penalty. On December 18, 2012, the Circuit Court affirmed the
 Final Order.
 
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
"Review of a decision made by the circuit court upon 
its review of an agency's decision is a secondary appeal." Paul's Electrical Service, Inc. v. Befitel, 104 Hawai
'i 412, 416, 
91 P.3d 494, 498 (2004). We review such a decision to determine whether the circuit court was right or wrong in its decision, applying the standards set forth in HRS § 91-14(g) to the agency's decision. See id. HRS § 91-14(g) (2012 Repl.) 
provides: 
Upon review of the record the court may affirm the decision
of the agency or remand the case with instructions for
further proceedings; or it may reverse or modify the
decision and order if the substantial rights of the
petitioners may have been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, conclusions, decisions, or orders
are: 
(1) In violation of constitutional or statutory
provisions; or 
(2) In excess of the statutory authority or
jurisdiction of the agency; or 
(3) Made upon unlawful procedure; or 
4
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
(4)	 Affected by other error of law; or
 
(5)	 Clearly erroneous in view of the reliable,
probative, and substantial evidence on the whole
record; or 
(6)	 Arbitrary, or capricious, or characterized
by abuse of discretion or clearly
unwarranted exercise of discretion.
 
Findings of fact are reviewed under § 91-14(g)(5). See
 
id. 	Conclusions of law are reviewed under §§ 91-14(g)(1), (2),
 
and (4). See id. An agency's exercise of discretion is reviewed
 
under § 91-14(g)(6). See id. 
III. DISCUSSION
 
A. 	Appellants' violated HRS § 485-8.
 
The finding that the SP Agreements constitute
 
securities under the Securities Act is undisputed on appeal. 
Under HRS § 485-8, securities are required to be registered with
 the office of the commissioner unless an exception applies. 
Appellants contend the subject transactions were exempted under
 
5
HRS § 485-6(9) (Supp. 2001) (limited offering exemption ) , which
provides:
 
§ 485-6(9) Exempt Transactions. The following
transactions shall be exempt from sections 485-4.5, 485-8,
and 485-25(a)(7):
 
. . . .
 
(9) 	Any transaction pursuant to an offer to sell
securities of an issuer, if the transaction is
part of an issue which:
 (A) There are no more than twenty-five offerees,
wherever located (other than those designated
in paragraph (8)) during any twelve consecutive
months;
 (B) The issuer reasonably believes that all
purchasers, wherever located, (other than
those designated in paragraph (8)), are
purchasing for investment;
 (C) 
No commission, discount, or other
remuneration is paid or given, directly or
indirectly, to a person, other than a dealer or
agent registered under this chapter, for
soliciting a prospective purchaser in this State;
 
5
 The fundamental objective of the limited offering exemption, HRS
§ 485-6(9), is "to provide a relatively simple and economical procedure forsmall businesses to raise venture capital, either in the organizational state,or as a means of raising additional capital from a small number of investors."David F.E. Banks, Hawaii's Response to Regulation D, Hawai' i Bar Journal,
1991, at 1, 17, n. 133. 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
and
 (D) The securities of the issuer are not offered
 or sold by general solicitation or any general
advertisement or other advertising medium[. ]
 
(Emphasis added.)6 The question before the Commissioner was
 
whether the 7% "salary" Matsuyoshi was to receive under the SP
 
Agreements constituted remuneration for soliciting the sale of
 corporate stock to the three Investors. The Commissioner
 concluded:
 
In the case before us, the undisputed facts are that
[Matsuyoshi's] compensation was directly keyed to the
Investors' investments. The "salary" was stated as a
percentage of the corporate equity and [Matsuyoshi]
testified that the corporate equity was the same thing as
the Investors investments. So for all intents and purposes,
her "salary" was a percentage of investments she solicited
and brought to the company, making the salary at least
indirect, if not direct, renumeration [sic] for her efforts
in successfully soliciting the Investors. 
The question then is, can [Matsuyoshi], the
salesperson, disclaim the compensation as belonging to
[Matsuyoshi], the manager of investments, protected under
the veil of the corporate structure?
 
It is well-established in Hawaii jurisprudence that
where an individual acts in every role of a corporation, she
is the alter ego of the corporation and the fiction of
recognizing the corporation as a distinct entity may be
disregarded to prevent injustice and inequity. Kalihi, Inc.
v.
 Yamamoto, 54 Haw. 267, 271-2, 506 P.2d 9, 12 (1973).
Essentially, such a corporation should be disregarded for
the purpose of stopping the individual from circumventing
the laws of justice.
 
In the case before us, there could not be a thinner
corporate veil to pierce. The facts are undisputed that
[Matsuyoshi] held every role in the corporation, from
incorporator, to agent, to president, vice-president,
secretary, treasurer, sole director, manager, sole employee.
 
6
 The text of § 485-6 in effect in 2000 provided: 
(9) Any transaction pursuant to an offer directed by the
offerer to not more than twenty-five persons (other than
those designated in paragraph (8)) in the State during any
period of twelve consecutive months, whether or not the
offerer or any of the offerees is then present in the State,
if all buyers represent that they are purchasing for
investment (rather than with a present view to resale) and
the seller reasonably accepts their representations as true,
and no commission or other remuneration is paid or given
directly or indirectly for soliciting any prospective
buyer[.]
 
HRS § 485-6 (1993) (emphasis added). The relevant portion of the exemption is
effectively the same as the 2001 version. The 2001 version has been used
 throughout the proceedings below and we reference this version in the interest
of continuity. 
6
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
She was responsible for the sales and solicitation of the
shares of the company to the Investors and she controlled
the investment of all the funds that came in from those same
 investors. The corporate veil was so thin that Respondent
Matsuyoshi herself testified the Investors' funds were
identical to the "corporate equity." In this case, to allow
[Appellants] to use their corporate veil to protect
themselves from the consequences of their own schemes would
bring about injustice and inequity. 
Moreover, the "salary" for management of investments
of 7% of assets under management per month would amount to
84% per year, a compensation so high and out of norm, that
it is more than likely by the preponderance of the evidence
that the compensation conflated salesperson and investment
adviser and/or investment adviser representative
renumeration [sic] into one. The fact that Respondent
Matsuyoshi structured the entire enterprise around herself
in every role supports that conclusion as well. 
Piercing through the corporate veil, the Commissioner
concludes Respondent Matsuyoshi's "salary" was keyed off of
the 7% of the amount of investments she solicited on behalf
 of the company and constitutes in part renumeration [sic]
for solicitation of the securities. Accordingly,
[Appellants] have failed to prove they have met element (C)
and the securities do not qualify for the exemption under
HRS § 485-6(9).
 
The burden of establishing an exemption is on the
 
person claiming the benefit of the exemption and it "shall not be
 
necessary to negate any of the exemptions in this chapter
 provided in any complaint, information, indictment, or any other
 writ or proceedings laid or brought under [the Securities Act]."
 HRS § 485-17 (1993). Appellants contend the remuneration
 contemplated by the limited offering exception is limited to
 value directly received in exchange for the solicitation
 activities: "Did [Matsuyoshi] receive remuneration in exchange
 for soliciting the [SP Agreements]? No, she did not." This
 contention contravenes the plain language of HRS § 485-9(c) that
 remuneration may be direct or indirect. See
 HRS § 485-9(c). 
Matsuyoshi was required, and failed, to prove she did not receive
 direct or indirect remuneration for soliciting the sale of
 securities.
7
 
7
 While the remuneration limitation of § 485-9(c) is not designed to
prevent salaried employees or officers of the issuer from soliciting
securities, the solicitation must be an incidental function of their regular
duties and the employee or officer must receive no additional compensation.
See Banks, supra, at 23 (citing Uniform Securities Act 1956 § 402 cmt.
(1958)). As discussed below, Matsuyoshi's solicitation of securities was not
incidental to her regular duties as an officer of LKM Inc., but in fact, her
compensation was directly correlated to her solicitation of securities.
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
Appellants contended before the circuit court that
 
Matsuyoshi's salary was a "fixed salary, bargained for by
 
Appellants and the [Investors] in [the SP Agreements], which in
 no way fluctuated with gains, losses, solicitation, advice,
 market conditions, etc." This contention is without a factual
 basis. Matsuyoshi's 7% monthly salary was not fixed, rather, it
 was dependant on Matsuyoshi's solicitation of securities: the
 more shares of LKM Inc. Matsuyoshi purportedly sold through the
 SP agreements, the higher her monthly salary. Since all of LKM
 Inc.'s assets came from Matsuyoshi's sale of corporate stock
 through the SP Agreements, her salary was directly correlated to
 her soliciting securities.
 
Consequently, because at least part of Matsuyoshi's
 
salary constituted remuneration for the solicitation of
 securities, Appellants were not exempt from the registration
 requirements of HRS § 485-8. See generally Schultz v.
 
Rector-Phillips-Morse, Inc., 552 S.W.2d 4, 12 (1977) (consulting
 fees taken from the proceeds of securities sales constituted
 direct and indirect remuneration, rendering an exemption from
 securities registration inapplicable). And since Appellants
 failed to meet their burden, our decision does not reach
 Appellants' contention that the Commissioner misapplied the
 doctrine of piercing the corporate veil.
B. Matsuyoshi violated HRS § 485-14.
 
HRS § 485-14(a)(a) provides, in relevant part: "It is
 
unlawful for any person to transact business in this State as a
 dealer, investment advisor, salesperson, or investment advisor
 representative unless registered under this chapter." The Final
 Order concluded Matsuyoshi acted as a salesperson within the
 meaning of HRS § 485-1(2) (1993).
 
A salesperson is "any individual other than a dealer
 
who represents a dealer or issuer in effecting or attempting to
 effect purchases or sales of securities." HRS § 485-1(2). An
 issuer is "any person who issues or proposes to issue any
 security", or the person "performing the acts and assuming the
 duties of depositor or manager pursuant to the provisions of the
 trust or other agreement or instrument under which the security
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
is issued[.]" HRS § 485-1(8). Appellants' only contention on
 
appeal appears to be that the definition of salesperson is
 limited to individuals who represent dealers. This contention is
 contrary to the plain language of § 485-1 and is without merit. 
LKM Inc. sold securities--corporate stock--through the SP
 Agreements in a transaction that did not constitute a limited
 offering. Matsuyoshi signed the SP Agreements on behalf of LKM
 Inc., the issuer. The Final Order thus correctly concluded:
 
Matsuyoshi's active involvement in the sale of the [SP
Agreements] through her solicitation and sale constitute the
transaction of business involving securities in Hawaii.
[Matsuyoshi] acted as a securities salesperson within the
meaning of HRS § 485-1(2). [Matsuyoshi] was not a duly
registered securities salesperson and was not exempt from
registration in violation of HRS § 485-14. 
 
An investment advisor is "any person who, for
 
compensation, engages in the business of advising others, either
 
directly or through publications or writings, as to the value of
 securities or as to the advisability of investing in, purchasing,
 or selling securities, or who, for compensation and as a part of
 a regular business, issues or promulgates analyses or reports
 concerning securities." HRS § 485-1(6). Matsuyoshi contends the
 Commissioner clearly erred by concluding Matsuyoshi acted as an
 investment advisor because "[LKM Inc.] relied on investment
 advisors in making decisions when trading stock." This
 contention is without merit because Matsuyoshi acted as an
 investment advisor to LKM Inc. and the Commissioner's finding was
 therefore correct.
 
Matsuyoshi testified the Investors "came onboard
 
because they knew that I was good at picking stocks. I didn't
 sell them, personally, stocks. I was not a broker. I just
 bought stocks for the company." Matsuyoshi's testimony continued
 to confirm her role as a compensated investment advisor to LKM
 Inc.:
 
[Appellee's Counsel:] What is the difference, then,
between [LKM, Inc.] and Paulson?
 
. . . .
 
[Matsuyoshi:] The way the [LKM Inc.] has [sic] been
created was not a broker-dealer. I was never a
 
broker-dealer. I was never an investment adviser. I never
 advised clients or -- I never advised them on, and I never
sold them or bought or sold stocks for them. I bought it
 
9
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
for the company.
 
. . . . 
[Appellee's Counsel:] And you're making investment
decisions from that one account from [LKM Inc.'s Schwab
Account]; correct?
 
[Matsuyoshi:] Correct.
 
[Appellee's Counsel:] And then you're placing these
[Investors'] monies who that's all that's in there; correct?
 
[Matsuyoshi:] Correct. 
. . . .
 [Appellee's Counsel:] the [Schwab Account], 100
percent investors' monies in that account; correct?
 
[Matsuyoshi:] They're not investors. They're
shareholder, so –
 
[Appellee's Counsel:] They gave you money for
investment purposes. You have to agree to that?
 
[Matsuyoshi:] Yes.
 [Appellee's Counsel:] These [Investors] put all their
money to you. You put it in the [Schwab Account]. 100
 
percent of that account is [Investors'] money. You agree
with that?
 
[Matsuyoshi:] I agree.
 
[Appellee's Counsel:] No other money was in -- your
money wasn't in there; correct?
 
[Matsuyoshi:] No.
 . . . .
 [Appellee's Counsel:] These [Investors'] monies were
in there, and that's all that was in there to start?
 
[Matsuyoshi:] Yes.
 [Appellee's Counsel:] And you used that money and you
invested with that money into all these high technology or
quality technology stocks that tanked. Fair statement?
 
[Matsuyoshi:] Fair.
 
. . . .
 [Appellee's Counsel:] I am asking you if you told
Charles Schwab how or how much to put in what stock for LKM
Matsuyoshi, Inc. –- I'm sorry, [LKM, Inc.]
 
[Matsuyoshi:] I'm not quite sure if I fully
understand that, but I'll try and answer that.
 
[Appellee's Counsel:] If you don't understand it, let
me ask you a different question.
 
[Matsuyoshi:] okay.
 
10
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Appellee's Counsel:] Who told Charles Schwab to buy
Apple shares from [LKM, Inc.'s Schwab Account]?
 
[Matsuyoshi:] I did.
 
[Appellee's Counsel:] And you received compensation
from your [Investors] for making those decisions on their
behalf; correct?
 
. . . .
 
[Matsuyoshi:] No, I did not.
 
[Appellee's Counsel:] . . . Your compensation, it
says, is a salary and shall be paid regardless of the
management's performance; that this salary is 7 percent of
[LKM Inc.'s] total equity per month.
 
[Matsuyoshi:] Correct.
 
[Appellee's Counsel:] And you would agree that the
value of [LKM Inc.] is directly tied to the [Schwab Account]
dollar for dollar; correct?
 
[Matsuyoshi:] It's at Charles Schwab, correct.
 
[Appellee's Counsel:] No, I asked you if the [LKM,
Inc.] value of the corporation and its equity is tied dollar
for dollar to that [Schwab Account].
 
[Matsuyoshi:] Yes.
 
. . . .
 [Appellee's Counsel:] If a million dollars is in
 
[LKM, Inc.] and a million dollars goes to [Schwab Account],
the value of [LKM Inc.] is a million dollars; correct?
 
[Matsuyoshi:] Yes, correct.
 
. . . . 
[Appellee's Counsel:] So every decision you made in
the [Schwab Account] directly affected the equity in [LKM
Inc.]?
 
[Matsuyoshi:] Yes.
 
[Appellee's Counsel:] Every decision that you made to
leave stock in there directly affected your shareholders, as
you'd like to call them, their equity; correct?
 
[Matsuyoshi:] Yes.
 
. . . .
 
[Appellee's Counsel:] And the only person making
those decisions were you?
 
[Matsuyoshi:] Yes.
 
[Appellee's Counsel:] Not Charles Schwab?
 [Matsuyoshi:] No.
 . . . .
 
11
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
[Appellee's Counsel:] And only you received money for
making those decisions?
 
[Matsuyoshi:] Right.
 
We conclude from Matsuyoshi's testimony that she
 
provided advice to LKM Inc. on the advisability of purchasing and
 
selling securities, for compensation, through her discretionary
 management over the Schwab Account. We also conclude
 Matsuyoshi's discretionary management over the Schwab Account
 constituted advice to the three Investors because she advised the
 Investors in her former capacity at Paulson, LKM Inc.'s sole
 purpose was to trade stock, and Matsuyoshi had sole management
 discretion over the Schwab Account.
8 The Commissioner's finding
 
that Matsuyoshi acted as an investment advisor was proper.
C. Appellants violated HRS § 485-25(a)(1).
 
HRS § 485-25(a)(1) makes it unlawful, either directly 
or indirectly, to "employ any device, scheme, or artifice to defraud" in connection with the offer, sale or purchase of a security. In a "civil enforcement action brought by an agency, a state of mind of at least recklessness must be established to prove a violation of HRS § 485-25(a)(1)[.]" Trivectra v. 
Ushijima, 112 Hawai
'i 90, 104, 144 P.3d 1, 15 (2006). 
Circumstantial evidence is sufficient to establish the requisite state of mind. See id., 112 Hawai
'i at 105, 144 P.3d at 16. 
Here, the violation of HRS § 485-25(a)(1) arises from
 
the SP Agreement and its purported sale of corporate stock. The
 Commissioner found Appellants made misrepresentations in reckless
 disregard of the truth by: (1) leading the Investors to believe
 
8
 Under the present circumstances, we do not recognize advice to the
Corporation as distinct from advice to the individual Investors. See 
generally Robert's Hawaii School Bus, Inc. v. Laupahoehoe Transp. Co., 91
Hawai'i 224, 240-41, 982 P.2d 853, 869-70 (1999) ("The common purpose of
statutes providing limited shareholder liability is to offer a valuableincentive to business investment. Although the greatest judicial deferencenormally is accorded to the separate corporate entity, this entity is still afiction. Thus, when particular circumstances merit--e.g., when the incentivevalue of limited liability is outweighed by the competing value of basicfairness to parties dealing with the corporation--courts may look past acorporation's formal existence to hold shareholders or other controllingindividuals liable for "corporate" obligations. When a corporation is themere instrumentality or business conduit of another corporation or person, thecorporate form may be disregarded.") (citations omitted). 
12
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that their investments would be handled in the same manner as
 
when they had been Matsuyoshi's clients at Paulson and failing to
 clarify the differences in laymen terms; (2) improperly
 leveraging the trust from Matsuyoshi's long-term professional
 relationship with the Investors to deceive them as to the risks
 of the new enterprises and lead the Investors "to believe that
 [Matsuyoshi's] past performances would indicate future
 performances[;]" and (3) failing to disclose the "extreme
 variation of the compensation schedule from industry
 norms . . . ." The Commissioner concluded these
 misrepresentations were made with the requisite intent and
 induced the Investors to purchase shares in LKM Inc., and thus
 violated HRS § 485-25(a)(1). Viewing the Commissioner's findings
 and the entire record in light of Trivectra, we conclude the
 circuit court correctly affirmed the Final Order. 
In Trivectra, the commissioner concluded the respondent 
made a representation to an investor that was, at a minimum, recklessly made in disregard of the truth. See id., 112 Hawai
'i 
at 105, 144 P.3d at 16. The Hawai 'i Supreme Court held "in 
deference to the trier of fact, we cannot say that it was error for the circuit court to affirm the commissioner's conclusion that [the respondent] acted recklessly with respect to the truth of his representation to [the investor.]" Id. The supreme court 
concluded "inasmuch as a security was involved in this transaction and the commissioner concluded that a misrepresentation was recklessly made in connection with its sale, the circuit court was correct in affirming the commissioner's conclusion that the Appellants had violated HRS § 485–25(a)(1)." Id. 
In the instant case, Appellants provide no ground for
 
this court to assign error to the Commissioner's conclusion. 
Appellants contend merely that the SP Agreements clearly
 articulated LKM Inc.'s "legitimate purpose." This appears to
 reference the purpose listed in LKM Inc.'s Articles of
 Incorporation: "To engage in the active investment/trading of
 this organization's resources in various equity investment
 vehicles such as common stocks, preferred stocks, shares of
 
13
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
partnerships, and other instruments without limitations. This
 
purpose, however, is part of the very misrepresentation the
 Commissioner found, namely, that Matsuyoshi's transactions with
 the Investors' money would be the same as it had been at Paulson. 
As such, the Commissioner did not err by finding Appellants
 violated HRS § 485-25(a)(1).
D. Appellants violated HRS § 485-25(a)(2) and (3).
 
HRS § 485-25(a)(2) makes it unlawful for any person, in 
connection with the offer, sale or purchase of a security in Hawai
'i, either directly or indirectly, to "make any untrue 
statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements made, in the light of the circumstances under which they are made, not misleading[.]" HRS § 485-25(a)(3) makes it unlawful for any person, in connection with the offer, sale or purchase of a security in Hawai
'i, either directly or indirectly, to "engage in any act, 
practice, or course of business which operates or would operate as a fraud or deceit upon any person[.]" A state of mind need not be pled or proven in order to establish a violation of HRS § 485-25(a)(2) or (a)(3). See Trivectra, 112 Hawai
'i at 104, 144 
P.3d at 15. 
In Trivectra, the commissioner concluded the 
respondents violated both § 485-25(a)(2) and (3) by omitting the same set of material facts. See Trivectra, 112 Hawai
'i at 
106-07, 144 P.3d at 17-18. There, the respondents marketed a security subject to the Securities Act and failed to inform investors that (1) the software purchased as part of the sale of securities could be obtained by the investors for free and (2) the respondents' use of the software violated an agreement between the respondents and the software company. Id. The 
commissioner concluded these facts were material because there was "a substantial likelihood that its disclosure would have been considered significant by a reasonable investor." Id. (quoting 
Basic v. Levinson, 485 U.S. 224, 231 (1988) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted)). The Hawai
'iSupreme Court of Hawai 'i 
affirmed this finding. See Trivectra, 112 Hawai 'i at 106-07, 144 
P.3d at 17-18. 
14
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
In the instant case, Appellants contend the
 
Commissioner erred because he failed to make a finding that
 
Appellants made an "untrue statement of material fact or a
 misleading statement containing a material omission as required
 under HRS § 485-25(a)(2)." This contention is without legal or
 factual basis. The Commissioner found Appellants, as in
 Trivectra
, omitted material facts that would be of interest to a
 
reasonable investor:
 
65.	 The [Appellants] made untrue statements of material
fact or omitted to state a material fact necessary in
order to make the statements made, in light of
circumstances under which they were made, not
misleading in connection with the offer, sale or
purchase of the stock purchase agreements:
 
a. 	 [Matsuyoshi] acted in a manner that conveyed
that she would manage investments for the
Investors through the company, [LKM Inc.]; and
that she would be getting renumeration [sic]
based on the performance of her management of
investments held by the company. Although she
put herself out in this manner, at no point did
she register with the Office of the
Commissioner;
 
b.	 [Appellants] omitted to clearly explain to the
Investors the change in investment
relationships. [Matsuyoshi] knew that at least
two of the Investors were in their 70's and all
 of them were lay people who had relied on
[Matsuyoshi] as their broker-dealer salesperson
for years. When she induced them to leave
Paulson and become investors in [LKM, Inc.],
[Appellants] omitted to explain to them that
they would not have the same care and service
they had at Paulson and did not explain the
risks involved;
 
c.	 [Appellants] omitted to tell the Investors that
they should not rely on [Matsuyoshi's] past
performance as indicative of future performance;
 
d.	 [Appellants] told the Investors that their
investment monies would purchase Class A Common
Stock of [LKM, Inc.] and that they would be
issued over one million shares, but no
certificates were issued. [Appellants] failed
to tell Investors that [LKM, Inc.'s] own
corporate business registration filings from
2000 to 2004 indicated no shares of Class A
 Common Stock were issued;
 
e.	 [Appellants] set forth the redemption process in
the [SP] Agreement as redeemable on demand
within the next business day, but the record
shows that Investors' requests for redemption
were delayed or denied;
 
f.	 [Appellants] omitted to explain how the
redemption process worked. Since the records
 
15
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
show that [Matsuyoshi] could not understand the
calculations herself, it would be impossible forher to have accurately explained it to theInvestors; 
g. [Appellants] omitted to explain in detail the
justification for the 84% per annum compensationand omitted alerting purchasers that thecompensation was markedly higher than standardcustomary compensation that usually does notexceed 3% per annum. Even if the Investorschecked it out themselves with a CPA, thefailure to disclose the context of compensationthat exceeds the norm to such a marked degreewould have had a material effect on the misleading nature of the "salary[;]" 
h. [Appellants] failed to disclose that the stock
purchase agreements were "securities" that wererequired to be registered with the Office of theCommissioner and were not registered or exempt; 
i. [Appellants] failed to disclose that
[Matsuyoshi], as the one who made decisions oninvestments and whose salary was keyed to themanagement of the assets under management, actedas an investment adviser and/or investmentadviser representative to the company; wasrequired to be registered with the Office of theCommissioner; was not registered and was notexempt from registration; 
j. [Appellants] failed to disclose that
[Matsuyoshi] in her solicitation of, and sale ofshares of the company to, the Investors was[sic] required to be registered with the Officeof the Commissioner to transact securities, wasnot registered as a securities salesperson andwas not exempt from registration; 
k. [Appellants] failed to disclose information to
the Investors as to where, in what or how theirmoney would actually be invested; 
l. [Appellants] failed to disclose to the Investors
that [Matsuyoshi] would treat the [Investors']funds as a personal account. [Appellants]failed to disclose that approximately$486,000.00 of [Investor] monies would be usedto pay [Matsuyoshi's] personal expenses, not assalary checks written to [Matsuyoshi], butrather as a direct account from which [Matsuyoshi] would write checks out to creditcards and other creditors. 
The circuit court thus correctly affirmed the Final Order.
 
E. 	The Commissioner did not violate Appellants'
Fourteenth Amendment due process rights.
 
Appellants contend their "right to Due Process of Law
 
under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution"
 
was violated when the Commissioner allegedly misapplied the
 
16
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
doctrine of Piercing the Corporate Veil "without allowing
 
Appellants notice and a meaningful opportunity to respond, and
 because said misapplication determined the entire outcome of this
 case." This contention is without merit. The Commissioner's
 application of the doctrine was not a determinative factor in
 Appellants' failure to meet their burden of establishing the
 limited offering exemption. Regardless of whether the doctrine
 is applied, Appellants failed to prove that Matsuyoshi did not
 receive direct or indirect remuneration for soliciting the sale
 of securities. In any event, Appellees did raise the issue of
 piercing the corporate veil before the Commissioner by arguing
 that Appellants never observed corporate formalities and that LKM
 Inc. was merely a facade. Appellants also had the opportunity to
 challenge the Commissioner's application of the doctrine in their
 appeal to the circuit court. As such, this point of error lacks
 both factual and legal bases.
IV. CONCLUSION
 
Accordingly, the "Order Affirming Commissioner's Final
 
Order" and the "Final Judgment," both entered December 18, 2012
 in the Circuit Court of the First Circuit are affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai
'i, February 25, 2014. 
On the briefs:
 
Gary Victor Dubin
Frederick J. Arensmeyer
Richard T. Forrester for Respondents-Appellants-
Appellants.
 Chief Judge
Ian Robertson
 for Petitioner-Appellee-
Appellee. 
Associate Judge
 
Associate Judge
 
17
 