 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
NO. CAAP-16-0000046 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I 
STATE OF HAWAI# I, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v. 
JOSHUA RESUN, Defendant-Appellee 
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE THIRD CIRCUIT
(CR. NO. 15-1-0268K)  
MEMORANDUM OPINION 
(By:  Ginoza, Chief Judge, Leonard and Hiraoka, JJ.) 
Plaintiff-Appellant State of Hawai# i (the State) 
appeals from an "Order Dismissing Case Without Prejudice" 
(Dismissal Order  ), filed on January 22, 2016 in the Circuit Court 
of the Third Circuit (
Circuit Court) in favor of Defendant-
Appellee Joshua Resun (Resun).  1 
Resun was indicted for Felony Abuse of Family or 
Household Member, in violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) 
§ 7 09-906(1) and (9) (2014 and Supp. 2015),  with the State 2
1  The Honorable Melvin H. Fujino presided. 
2  At the time of the alleged offense in 2015, HRS § 709-906 provided,
in relevant part: 
§709-906  Abuse of family or household members; 
penalty.  (1) It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or
in concert, to physically abuse a family or household
member . . . . 
For the purposes of this section: 
(continued...)  
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
alleging that on September 6, 2015, Resun abused the complaining 
witness (CW) in the presence of a family or household member 
under fourteen years of age.  In the course of Resun entering a 
no-contest plea, the Circuit Court questioned the application of HRS § 709-906(9) because the abuse occurred in the presence of 
Resun and the CW's child who was two-months old at the time of 
the incident.  The Circuit Court ultimately determined that Resun could not be prosecuted under HRS § 709-906(9) because a two-
month old child does not have the ability to perceive the abuse. 
On appeal, the State contends the Circuit Court: (1) 
erred in dismissing the charge and/or no contest plea for lack of 
probable cause; and (2) abused its inherent powers and authority by improperly taking judicial notice of facts and demonstrating an appearance of bias in raising and sustaining its own constitutional challenge. 
For the reasons discussed below, we vacate and remand. 
I. Background 
On September 23, 2015, Resun was indicted for Felony 
Abuse of Family or Household Member. 
On December 2, 2015, the Circuit Court held a hearing 
for change of plea and sentencing.  Resun entered a no contest plea, pursuant to a plea agreement he had reached with the State, reserving only his right to appeal the Circuit Court's prior ruling regarding its jurisdiction.  After the Circuit Court found that Resun entered his no contest plea knowingly, voluntarily, 
(...continued)
. . . . 
"Family or household member" means spouses or
reciprocal beneficiaries, former spouses or reciprocal
beneficiaries, persons in a dating relationship as definedunder section 586-1, persons who have a child in common,parents, children, persons related by consanguinity, andpersons jointly residing or formerly residing in the samedwelling unit. 
. . . . 
(9) Where physical abuse occurs in the presence of any
family or household member who is less than fourteen years
of age, abuse of a family or household member is a class Cfelony. 
(Emphasis added).  As discussed, infra , subsection (9) has since been amended. 
2   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
and intelligently, the deputy prosecutor recited the facts 
underlying the charge, including that the two-month-old child of Resun and the CW was present during the incident. 
The Circuit Court asked, "Two-month or two-year-old?" 
The deputy prosecutor reiterated, "Two-month.  The relationship [of Resun and the CW] was two years.  The [child] was two months." 
The Circuit Court then asked, "How would that be the 
intent of the statute regarding presence?"  In response, the deputy prosecutor explained that because the child was "less than fourteen years old," in the "immediate circumstance of the violent act[,]" and "right next to mom when the incident happened[,]" the abuse occurred in the infant's presence pursuant to HRS § 709-906(9).  The Circuit Court asked, "So are you saying 
if the infant is two days old, has no idea what's going on, and the parents or household members –- one physically abuses the other, that this felony statute would apply?"  The deputy prosecutor asserted that the statute would, indeed, apply in such a situation.  
The Circuit Court declined to proceed with sentencing 
and requested memoranda on HRS § 709-906(9) to "address what is 
meant by 'occurs in the presence of any family or household 
member.'"  The Circuit Court stated: 
THE COURT: There has to be some type of observation 
or perception.  Observation –- not necessarily did they see
it, but they can also be in the next room and they can hearit.  But they have to be of an age where they canunderstand, for "in the presence of" to be relevant. 
Following the December 2, 2015 hearing, the parties 
filed memoranda pursuant to the Circuit Court's instructions.  
On December 29, 2015, the Circuit Court held another 
hearing.  The parties argued their positions regarding the 
legislative history of the statute and its applicability to Resun's charge. 
Upon hearing the parties' arguments, the Circuit Court 
issued its oral findings and conclusions: 
THE COURT:  Okay.
In the, uh, Court has reviewed the files and records
in this case, heard the arguments of counsel.  The Court would find that section 7-0, um, section 709-906 subsections 
3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
(1) and (9) of the Hawaii Revised Statutes, which requires
that for a felony abuse that the defendant mustintentionally, knowingly or recklessly physically abuse afamily or household member and the physical abuse occurredin the presence of any family or household member who isless than fourteen years of age, thereby committing theoffense of felony abuse of fam –- family or householdmember, the Court would find that the term "in the presenceof" is ambiguous.
And therefore, looking at the legislative history,
which requires that the "presence" means, uh, that the –-looking at the legislative history would be –- and it seemedto indicate the legislative intent was that the child wouldhave to have witnessed the domestic violence.  So accordingly, the Court would find that two month old in thiscase could not be the intent of the statute. 
So I guess it's, right now, although he's pled to a
felony abuse, I don't know if the defense would now move towithdraw and see if the, uh, State and defense can work outan agreement regarding a regular felony –- a regular abuseand then still reserve their right to appeal. 
The Circuit Court added, "I think based on the Court's 
ruling the defense has to move to withdraw his plea."  Resun then 
moved to withdraw his plea, which the Circuit Court granted.  The Circuit Court reasoned: 
THE COURT:  But the Court having made its ruling the
State cannot proceed with the felony abuse anyway.  So it 
would –- I would think that the –- if the defense was willing to just plead to a regular abuse, or if not, I'mjust gonna dismiss it without if that's what the defense isasking 'cause they cannot proceed on the felony.  You can't proceed on the felony now. 
Accordingly, defense counsel requested a dismissal. 
The State asked the Circuit Court for clarification: "'[C]ause 
you're basically saying that the statute was ambiguous and therefore the State didn't have evidence for the charge.  Right?" The Circuit Court replied, "Yes."  After further discussions, Resun moved to dismiss the felony charge for lack of probable cause.  The Circuit Court granted the motion, noting that the dismissal was without prejudice. 
On January 22, 2016, the Circuit Court issued its 
written Dismissal Order, which states in relevant part: 
1. The allegations in this case are that Defendant
committed Felony Abuse of Family or Household Membersin the presence of a minor family or household memberin violation of HRS § 709-906(9); 
2. The factual basis for the allegation as presented bythe State is as follows: Defendant and complainingwitness are household or family members by virtue oftheir relationship and child in common; Defendantrecklessly, knowingly, or intentionally physical[ly]abused complaining witness.  Defendant and complaining 
4 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
witness had, at that time, a 2 month old child in
common who was in the vicinity of the physical abuseat the time it occurred; 
3. This Court finds that the word "presence" as used inHRS §709-906(9) is ambiguous; 
4. As the word "presence" is ambiguous, this Court looksto extrinsic aids, specifically the legislativehistory, as an interpretive tool to determine themeaning of the word "presence"; 
5. In addition, the rule of lenity requires thatambiguities be decided in favor of a Defendant in acriminal action[;] 
6. In viewing the legislative history of HRS §709-906(9)amendment involving presence of a minor household orfamily member, this Court finds that the legislaturecontemplated the effects from a child witnessingdomestic abuse; 
7. To witness an act requires an ability to perceive suchact, and a 2 month old does not possess such abilityof perception[.] 
It is so ordered that this case is dismissed without prejudice for lack of probable cause as the felony count ofAbuse of Family or Household Members in the Presence of aMinor HRS 709-906(9) lacks the essential element of "in thepresence of a minor." 
(Emphasis added). 
On January 26, 2016, the State timely appealed. 
II. Standards of Review 
A. Refusal of No Contest Plea 
The trial court is vested with wide discretion to accept orrefuse a nolo contendere plea, and the acceptance or refusalof a no contest plea is therefore reviewed for abuse of thatdiscretion. . . .  An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court has clearly exceeded the bounds of reason or hasdisregarded rules or principles of law or practice to thesubstantial detriment of a party litigant. 
State v. Merino, 81 Hawai# i 198, 211, 915 P.2d 672, 685 (1996) 
(internal quotation marks, citations, brackets, and footnote 
omitted).
B. Statutory Construction 
"The interpretation of a statute is a question of law
reviewable de novo ."  Capua v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 117  Hawai #i 
439, 44[4], 184 P.3d 191, 196 (2008) (citing Flor v.
Holguin, 94 Hawai #i 70, 76, 9 P.3d 382, 388 (2000))
(brackets, citations, and ellipses omitted).  Statutoryconstruction is guided by the following rules: 
First, the fundamental starting point for statutoryinterpretation is the language of the statute itself.Second, where the statutory language is plain andunambiguous, our sole duty is to give effect to itsplain and obvious meaning.  Third, implicit in thetask of statutory construction is our foremostobligation to ascertain and give effect to theintention of the legislature, which is to be obtainedprimarily from the language contained in the statute 
5   
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
itself.  Fourth, when there is doubt, doubleness of
meaning, or indistinctiveness or uncertainty of anexpression used in a statute, an ambiguity exists. And fifth, in construing an ambiguous statute, themeaning of the ambiguous words may be sought byexamining the context, with which the ambiguous words,phrases, and sentences may be compared, in order toascertain their true meaning. 
Carlisle v. One (1) Boat, 119 Hawai #i 245, 256, 195 P.3d
1177, 1188 (2008) (quoting In re Contested Case Hearing onWater Use Permit Application, 116 Hawai #i 481, 489-90, 174
P.3d 320, 328-29 (2007)) (block quotation format altered). 
State v. Woodfall, 120 Hawai# i 387, 391, 206 P.3d 841, 845 
(2009).
III. Discussion 
A. The Case Should Not Have Been Dismissed and There Were 
Sufficient Facts for the No Contest Plea 
The State first contends that the Circuit Court erred 
in dismissing the charge and/or no contest plea for lack of 
probable cause
. Specifically, the State argues that the Circuit 
Court erred: (a) in ruling that the statute was unconstitutionally vague and impliedly overbroad in its definition of "presence"; and (b) in its statutory interpretation. 
Contrary to the State's contention, the Circuit Court 
made no ruling regarding the constitutionality or vagueness of HRS § 709-906(9) and thus we do not address those issues.  We 
instead review the Circuit Court's statutory interpretation. 
In the Dismissal Order, the Circuit Court concluded in 
relevant part that, based on the legislative history of HRS 
§ 7 09-906(9), the legislature was concerned with the effects from 
a child "witnessing" domestic abuse, and that "[t]o witness an act requires the ability to perceive such act, and a 2 month old does not possess such ability of perception[.]" (Emphasis added).
3 
3  Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary defines "perceive" as: "1 a  : 
to attain awareness or understanding of  b : to regard as being such 
<perceived  threats> <was perceived  as a loser>  2 : to become aware of through 
the senses; esp : SEE, OBSERVE[.]"  Perceive , Merriam-Webster's Collegiate 
Dictionary 918 (11th ed. 2003). 
Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary defines "perception" as:
(continued...) 
6  
 see NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
In our view, the Circuit Court's construction of the 
statute does not sufficiently take into account the express 
language adopted by the Legislature, which in relevant part simply states: "Where physical abuse occurs in the presence of any family or household member who is less than fourteen years of age, abuse of a family or household member is a class C felony." HRS § 709-906(9).  The plain language of HRS § 709-906(9) applies  
in this case. 
It is well-settled that "the fundamental starting point 
for statutory interpretation is the language of the statute itself."  Woodfall, 120 
Hawai# i at 391, 206 P.3d at 845 (quoting 
Carlisle, 119 Hawai# i at 256, 195 P.3d at 1188) (emphasis added). 
The language of HRS § 709-906(9) applicable to the alleged  
offense in this case, which occurred in 2015, does not contain any reference to the ability of the family or household member in whose presence the abuse occurred to "perceive" the abuse. Rather, the applicable language requires the physical abuse to occur "in the presence" of a family or household member "less than fourteen years of age[.]"  The phrase "less than fourteen years of age" includes those that may be only two months old, as in this case.  Moreover, as to the words "in the presence," Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary defines "presence," in relevant part, as "the fact or condition of being present" or "the part of space within one's immediate vicinity," and "present" is defined, in relevant part, as "being in view or at hand[.]"  Presence, Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary at 982; Present, id. Under these common definitions, "presence" does 
3(...continued)
1 a :  a result of perceiving : OBSERVATION  b : a mental 
image : CONCEPT  2 obs : CONSCIOUSNESS  3 a : awareness of 
the elements of environment through physical sensation
<color ~>  b : physical sensation interpreted in the light 
of experience  4 a : quick, acute, and intuitive cognition : 
APPRECIATION  b : a capacity for comprehension  syn 
DISCERNMENT[.]  
Perception , id.  Further, Black's Law Dictionary defines "perception," in
relevant part, as: "An observation, awareness, or realization, usu. based onphysical sensation or experience; appreciation or cognition.  The term includes both the actor's knowledge of the actual circumstances and theactor's erroneous but reasonable belief in the existence of nonexistent 
circumstances."  Perception,  Black's Law Dictionary 1317 (10th ed. 2014). 
7  NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
not require an ability to "perceive," and the plain language of 
HRS § 709-906(9) appears to apply in this case. 
We note, however, that the definition of "presence" in 
Black's Law Dictionary is more nuanced, and provides: "Close physical proximity coupled with awareness[.]"  Presence, Black's Law Dictionary 1374 (10th ed. 2014)(emphasis added).  Thus, we recognize that the words "in the presence" as used in HRS § 709  -
906(9) could potentially be construed as ambiguous, as was determined by the Circuit Court. 
To confirm that our interpretation of the plain 
language of the statute is consistent with the legislative intent, we look to the legislative history of HRS § 709-906(9). Steigman v. Outrigger Enters., Inc., 126 Hawai# i 133, 148-49, 267 
P.3d 1238, 1253-54 (2011) (noting that although statutory language was plain and unambiguous, the court could resort to legislative history to confirm its interpretation); Priceline.com v. Dir. of Taxation, 144 Hawai
#i 72, 88-89, 436 P.3d 1155, 1171-
72 (2019) ("Even when the meaning of a law is apparent on its face, legislative history may be used to confirm the court's interpretation of a statute's plain language.") (quoting E & J Lounge Operating Co. v. Liquor Comm'n of City & Cty. of Honolulu, 118 Hawai# i 320, 335, 189 P.3d 432, 447 (2008) (internal brackets 
and quotation marks omitted)). 
The abuse in this case allegedly occurred on 
September 6, 2015.  The applicable version of HRS § 709-906(9) was adopted in 2014, effective June 20, 2014.  2014 Haw. Sess. Laws Act 117, § 1 at 329.  The Senate Judiciary and Labor Committee Report on House Bill 1993, which would become Act 117 and adopt HRS § 709-906(9), states: 
The purpose and intent of this measure is to
amend section 709-906, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to
establish that the offense of abuse of a family orhousehold member is a class C felony when the physicalabuse occurs in the presence of any family orhousehold member who is less than fourteen years ofage. 
. . . . 
Your Committee finds that research has shown that 
children who witness domestic violence can suffer severe 
emotional and developmental difficulties that are similar to 
8 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
those of children who are victims of direct physical and
mental abuse.  According to the Office of the ProsecutingAttorney of the County of Kauai, approximately twenty-threestates and Puerto Rico have statutes that address the issue of children who witness domestic violence in the home, andapproximately eighteen of those states have statutes thatimpose additional penalties on offenders who commit domesticabuse in the presence of a child. 
Your Committee further finds that existing law allows
the sentencing judge to consider as an aggravating factorthat the offense of abuse of a family or household memberwas committed in the presence of a child, but this factordoes not impact the penalty imposed for the commission ofthe offense.  This measure establishes that the offense of abuse of a family or household member is a class C felonywhen the physical abuse occurs in the presence of a childunder fourteen years of age to deter these types of domesticabuse cases. 
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 3071, in the 2014 Senate Journal, at 
1259 (emphasis added). 
The Senate Ways and Means Committee Report on House 
Bill 1993 provides, in relevant part: 
The purpose and intent of this measure is to reduce
domestic violence and to protect minors and other household
members from abuse. 
Specifically, the measure: 
. . . . (3) Makes the commission of an act of physical abuse
in the presence of a family or household memberwho is less than fourteen years of age a class Cfelony. 
. . . . 
Your Committee finds that domestic violence occurs at 
an alarming rate across the nation.  The resulting physicaland emotional trauma resulting from domestic violence notonly affects the victims of domestic violence but alsochildren who witness the domestic violence.  Research has consistently shown that children who witness domesticviolence have an increased rate of emotional, cognitive, anddevelopmental difficulties.  Your Committee believes that this measure will help deter future acts of domesticviolence by family or household members and prevent theunnecessary trauma that children experience from witnessingacts of domestic violence. 
S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 3294, in the 2014 Senate Journal, at 
1371-72 (emphasis added). 
Application of the statute to this case is consistent 
with the stated legislative intent to protect children under fourteen years of age in whose presence physical abuse occurs. For a child to "witness" abuse does not in turn mean an ability 
9 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
to "perceive" the abuse, especially to the extent that the 
Circuit Court's use of the word "perceive" was meant to convey an ability of the child to understand or comprehend the events. 
We further note the reference in the Senate Judiciary 
and Labor Committee report that "existing law allows the sentencing judge to consider as an aggravating factor that the offense of abuse of a family or household member was committed in the presence of a child[.]"  S. Stand. Comm. Rep. No. 3071, in the 2014 Senate Journal, at 1259.  Although not explicitly cited, this report appears to refer to HRS § 706-606.4 (2014), titled "Sentencing in offenses involving abuse of a family or household member committed in the presence of a minor" which, in 2014 and currently, provides that: 
"In the presence of a minor" means in the actual physical
presence of a child or knowing that a child is present and
may hear or see the offense. 
(Emphasis added).  The 2014 legislative history thus supports our 
view that when HRS § 709-906(9) was first adopted, the Legislature intended that the statute should apply in a case such as this, where abuse occurs in the actual physical presence of a child, even though the child is only two months old.
4 
We thus conclude that the Circuit Court erred in its 
statutory interpretation of HRS § 709-906(9), because the statute is applicable to the circumstances identified in this case.  It is undisputed that Resun's infant child was in the "immediate circumstance of the violent act" and "right next to [the CW] when the incident happened."  As required under HRS § 709-906(9), the record establishes the physical abuse occurred "in the presence" of Resun's infant child and that the child was two-months of age at the time of the incident, which is "less than fourteen years of age."  Therefore, the Circuit Court abused its discretion in 
4 In 2016, HRS § 709-906(9) was amended to explicitly adopt the
definition of "in the presence of a minor" set out in HRS § 706-606.4.  2016 
Haw Sess. Laws Act 231, § 44 at 760.  That is, HRS § 709-906(9) (Supp. 2016)was amended as follows: "Where physical abuse occurs in the presence of [any]a minor, as defined in section 706-606.4, and the minor is a family orhousehold member [who is] less than fourteen years of age, abuse of a familyor household member is a class C felony."  Id. (bracketed language omitted, underlined language added). 
10   NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
refusing Resun's no-contest plea and dismissing the case against 
Resun. 
B. The Circuit Court Had Discretion to Consider the 
Factual Basis for the Charge, but Erroneously
Interpreted the Statute 
In its second point of error, the State contends that 
the Circuit Court abused its inherent powers and authority by 
improperly taking judicial notice of facts and demonstrating an appearance of bias in raising and sustaining its own constitutional challenge to the charged statute.  Specifically, the State argues that the Circuit Court abused its discretion when it (A) took judicial notice of the fact that "a 2 month old does not possess such ability of perception"; and (B) raised constitutional challenges to the statute sua sponte. 
First, the Circuit Court did not raise constitutional 
challenges to HRS § 709-906(9).  Thus, we do not address the State's argument in this regard. 
Second, we conclude the Circuit Court's rulings were 
based, as a threshold matter, on its interpretation of HRS § 709-906(9), which then resulted in the Circuit Court making factual assumptions about the ability of the two-month old child to perceive abuse.  With regard to a no contest plea, the Hawai# i 
Supreme Court has recognized that: 
HRPP 11(b) accords the trial court the discretion, "after
due consideration of the views of the parties," to refuse ano contest plea that it deems not to be in "the interest ofthe public in the effective administration of justice."Accordingly, we further hold that HRPP 11(b) likewiseaccords trial courts . . . the discretion to insist upon a"factual basis" (or, more accurately, an offer of proof) asa part of their deliberations regarding whether to accept ano contest plea.  We emphasize, however, that the trialcourt's discretion in this regard derives from HRPP 11(b)and not HRPP 11(f). 
Merino, 81 Hawai# i at 219, 915 P.2d at 693. 
In this case, the Circuit Court thus had the discretion 
to consider the factual basis for the Felony Abuse of Family or 
Household Member charge under HRS § 709-906(9) in considering whether to accept Resun's no contest plea.  However, as discussed above, the Circuit Court erred in its interpretation of the requirements under HRS § 709-906(9).  Given these circumstances, 
11 NOT FOR PUBLICATION  IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
we need not reach the issue of whether the Circuit Court 
improperly took judicial notice of the two month old child's ability to perceive abuse because resolving that issue is not necessary to our decision.
IV. Conclusion 
Based on the foregoing, we vacate the "Order Dismissing 
Case Without Prejudice" entered on January 22, 2016, by the 
Circuit Court of the Third Circuit.  This case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this Memorandum Opinion. 
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, May 24, 2019. 
On the briefs: 
Dale Yamada Ross,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, for Plaintiff-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Phyllis J. Hironaka, Deputy Public Defender, for Defendant-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
12 