 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER
 
NO. CAAP-17-0000003
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
IN THE INTEREST OF EG
 
APPEAL FROM THE FAMILY COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
 
(FC-S NO. 14-00002)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Ginoza, C.J., and Leonard and Reifurth, JJ.)
 
Appellant Father appeals from the Order Terminating
 
Parental Rights, filed on December 23, 2016 in the Family Court
 
of the First Circuit ("Family Court"),1 which terminated Father's
 
parental rights to his child, EG, who was born in 2013.2
 
On appeal, Father challenges the Family Court's
 
Findings of Fact ("FOF") 101, 105, 106, 107, 112, 117, 118, 119,
 131, 132, 134, 135, 136, 138, 141, 146, and 149 and Conclusions
 of Law ("COL") 6, 9, 10, and 13. Specifically, Father argues
 
1
 The Honorable Jennifer L. Ching presided.
 
2
 Father's wife, EG's mother ("Mother"), stipulated to termination
of her parental rights as to EG during the trial on Petitioner-Appellee State
of Hawai 'i, Department of Human Services' motion to terminate parental rights.
Mother does not appeal from the order. Father and Mother are collectivelyreferred to as "Parents" herein.  
 
 
 
 
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
that FOFs 1013, 1384, and 1495 are erroneous because (i) there was
 
no testimony by a mental health expert that Father lacked insight
 
into his mental health problems, (ii) the Family Court improperly
 sustained an objection when a social worker was asked which
 competing mental health diagnoses for Father it believed
 justified the Motion to Terminate Parental Rights, and (iii)
 there was no witness to challenge the credible testimony of
 Father's expert witness, Dr. Winter Hamada, regarding Father's
 psychological evaluation, projected clinical discharge of six
 months, and opinion that Father's mental health status did not
 warrant concern about his parenting ability of a child. 
Father also appears to argue that FOFs 105
6, 1067, 1078,
 
3 FOF 101 states that "Father lacks insight into his mental health
problems which negatively impacts upon his ability to provide a safe family
home for the Child."
 
4 FOF 138 states:
 
Ms. Tsutsui testified, and the Court finds, that Father
lacks insight into his mental health problems[.] Father never
acknowledged any problem and was not open to engaging in any
mental health services until after the Motion to TPR was
 filed, Father was very focused on getting his schizophrenia
diagnosis removed, and even at the time of her testimony,
Father was denying any mental health problems. This was of
 concern to Ms. Tsutsui because if Father does not have insight
into his mental health needs and the importance of engaging
with a therapist, then he cannot care for himself, he cannot
care for the Child, he lacks insight into the Child's needs,
and cannot safely care for the Child.
 
5 FOF 149 states that "Dr. Winter Hamada was qualified as an expert
witness, as a clinical psychologist. She was called as a witness by Father.
Dr. Hamada testified that her diagnosis of Father is Adjustment
Disorder. . . . The Court did not find Dr. Hamada's testimony to be reliable
or trustworthy."
 
6 FOF 105 states that "Father was afforded adequate opportunity for
reasonable visitation with the Child by DHS."
 
7
 FOF 106 states as follows:
 
Father has not demonstrated adequate parenting skills
during visits with the Child to warrant having unsupervised
visits with the Child. Father has a difficult time setting
boundaries for the Child. Father continued to need assistance
 from the visit supervisor in order to keep the Child safe
during visits: 
a. On one occasion, at a visit at a mall, the Child ran
out of parents' sight, and the visit supervisor had to inform
parents that the Child had run away. 
(continued...)
 
2
  NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
1179, 13110, 13211, 13412, 13513, 13614, and 14615 are erroneous
 
because (i) Petitioner-Appellee State of Hawaii, Department of
 
Human Services ("DHS"), did not make reasonable efforts to
 
7(...continued)
b. During another visit, Father was with the Child, who
was in a stroller; he stopped in the middle of the street, in
the crosswalk, for an extended period of time. The visit
supervisor informed Father that this was not safe, and the
visit supervisor asked Father to move out of the street.
 
c. On another occasion, while putting the Child into a
vehicle, Father asked the visit supervisor it if was okay to
leave the Child in the front seat with no car seat (there was
a car seat in the back seat of the car).
 
8 FOF 107 states that "Parents have inadequately supervised the
Child during visits, putting the Child in potentially harmful and dangerous
situations that required intervention by the visitation supervisor."
 
9 FOF 117 states, "Similarly, under the circumstances presented in
this case, the Court specifically finds that Father was given every reasonable
opportunity to effect positive changes to provide a safe family home and to
reunify with the Child."
 
10 FOF 131 states:
 
Under the circumstances present in this case, the
Court finds, by clear and convincing evidence, the DHS has
exerted reasonable and active efforts to reunify the Child
with Father by identifying necessary, appropriate, and
reasonable services to address the identified safety issues,
and by making appropriate and timely referrals for these
services.
 
11 FOF 132 states that "[u]nder the circumstances present in this
case, the Court finds, by clear and convincing evidence, that the DHS gave
Father every reasonable opportunity to succeed in remedying the problems which
put the Child at substantial risk of being harmed in the family home and to
reunify with the Child."
 
12 FOF 134 states that "[a]ll of the service plans in this case that
were offered by DHS, and ordered by the Court, were fair, appropriate, and
comprehensive."
 
13 FOF 135 states that "[n]one of the underlying facts and data upon
which DHS based its opinion, assessments, and recommendations was shown to be
untrustworthy. DHS' investigation and continuing assessment in this case was
conducted in an appropriate manner."
 
14
 FOF 136 states that "DHS social worker Julie Tsutsui, testifying
on behalf of DHS, was a credible witness."
 
15
 FOF 146 states: 
Brianna Yeomans is a Catholic Charities outreach
 
worker who supervised visits between parents and the Child,
[and] provided transportation[] and outreach to the parents.
Ms. Yeomans supervised 21 visits. She stated that neither
Mother nor Father had met, or made significant progress in
attaining, the parenting goals set by Catholic Charities. 
3
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
reunify Father and EG; (ii) DHS witnesses were not credible; and
 
(iii) Catholic Charities outreach worker Brianna Yeomans had not
 been "instructed" that Father's unsupervised visits with EG were
 inappropriate.
16
 
Finally, Father challenges FOFs 11217 and 14118 related
 
to Father's housing situation by claiming that there was not
 clear and convincing evidence that (i) housing was an ongoing
 issue, (ii) Father was not presently willing and able to provide
 a safe family home for EG, and (iii) it was not reasonably
 foreseeable that he would be willing and able to provide a safe
 family home for EG within a reasonable period of time, even with
 the assistance of a service plan as provided in FOFs 118 and
 119.
19
 
16 It is unclear what point Father attempts to make with his
reference to that portion of the transcript noting that Yeomans had not been
instructed that Father's visits were inappropriate because he makes no
argument addressing that testimony. Therefore, we deem the point waived.
Haw. R. App. P. 28(b)(7) ("Points not argued may be deemed waived.").
 
17 FOF 112 states:
 
Father and Mother moved residences at last [sic] seven
(7) times since the Child was born. Parents, at times, lived
on farms and in tents with no running water or plumbing. All
of the residences since the birth of the Child were deemed
 to be unsafe for the Child by DHS. Their current apartment
floods often and has a low ceiling which requires Mother to
bend down, causing her neck pain. The service plans ordered
by the Court include that Father obtain and maintain safe
and appropriate housing, which Father has not done
throughout this case.
 
18 FOF 141 states:
 
Ms. Tsutsui testified, and the Court finds, that
parents are not able to provide a safe family home for the
Child because they have shown a pattern of not being able to
sustain stability in areas including mental health,
parenting, marital relationship, and housing. These areas
 of instability would create trauma for the Child, for
example, a psychotic episode, constantly moving residences,
or seeing the dynamic of parents' interaction with each
other. Through the Child's life, the parents have chosen to
live in residences not conducive to raising a child, and the
history of the case is that Mother and Father have not put
the Child's needs first.
 
19
 FOFs 118 and 119 state as follows:
 
118. The Court finds, by abundantly clear and convincing
evidence, that DHS had demonstrated that Father is not
 presently willing and able to provide the Child with a safe
family home, even with the assistance of a service plan.
(continued...)
 
4
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 resolve Father's points of error as follows, and affirm the
 Family Court's order.
 
In a proceeding to terminate parental rights under the
 
Chile Protective Act, the family court must determine by clear
 and convincing evidence that: (1) a parent is not presently
 willing and able to provide a safe family home, even with the
 assistance of a service plan; (2) it is not reasonably
 foreseeable that the parent will become willing and able to
 provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service
 plan, within a reasonable period of time, which shall not exceed
 two years from the child's date of entry into foster care; and
 (3) the proposed permanent plan is in the best interests of the
 child. Haw. Rev. Stat. ยง 587A-33(a).
 
"Generally, the family court possesses wide discretion 
in making its decisions and those decision[s] will not be set aside unless there is a manifest abuse of discretion." Fisher v. 
Fisher, 111 Hawai' i 41, 46, 137 P.3d 355, 360 (2006) (quoting In 
re Doe, 95 Hawai' i 183, 189, 20 P.3d 616, 622 (2001)). The 
family court's FOFs are reviewed on appeal under the "clearly erroneous" standard, while COL's are reviewd de novo, under the "right/wrong" standard. Id. (quoting Doe, 95 Hawai'  at 1i89, 20 
P.3d at 622). It is not the province of the appellate courts to assess the credibility of the witnesses or the weight of the evidence. Id. 
FOFs 101, 138, and 149 are not clearly erroneous. 
Father contends that FOFs 101 and 138 could not properly be based
 upon the testimony of Julie Tsutsui, a DHS social worker, because
 Tsutsui was not qualified to testify as an expert in mental
 
19(...continued)
 
119. Moreover, the abundantly clear and convincing
evidence shows that it is not reasonably forseeable that
Father will become willing and able to provide the Child with
a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service
plan, within a reasonable period of time not to exceed two
years from the Child's date of entry into foster care.
 
5
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
health. Although the court referenced Tsutsui's testimony in
 
support of FOF 138, it did not claim to base its finding
 regarding Father's lack of insight on Tsutsui's testimony alone. 
Rather, FOF 97(l), which is unchallenged by Father, notes that
 the April 2016 Kapiolani Child Protection Center evaluation
 concludes that, due to his lack of insight, Father was
 susceptible to destabilization and his psychosis could re-emerge
 if he were to experience a high level of stress or relapse. 
In addition, no medical or psychological opinion was
 
necessary because Tsutsui's opinion regarding insight does not
 involve a medical or psychological diagnosis. Essentially,
 Tsutsui's opinion was that, regardless of Father's mental health
 diagnosis, it was Father's belief that he had no mental health
 issues that posed a problem. Thus, Tsutsui's testimony, in
 conjunction with the various medical evidence presented
 concerning Father's mental health condition, justified the Family
 Court sustaining an objection as to which competing mental health
 diagnoses DHS relied upon to support termination of Father's
 parental rights because Father did not believe either one of the
 competing mental health diagnoses. 
Father's reliance upon Dr. Hamada's expected clinical 
discharge in six months is misplaced. In March 2016, Dr. Hamada testified that she expected to clinically discharge Father within six months. However, in December 2016 when Father testified, he stated that he continued to see Dr. Hamada once a week, nearly nine months after Dr. Hamada stated that Father would be clinically discharged within six months. Thus, the Family Court's finding that Dr. Hamada's testimony was not credible was not clearly erroneous. See Fisher, 111 Hawai' i at 46, 137 P.3d 
at 360 (it is not the province of the appellate courts to assess the credibility of the witnesses). 
FOFs 105, 106, 107, 117, 131, 132, 134, 135, 136, and
 
146 are not clearly erroneous. Father contends that DHS failed
 to make reasonable efforts to reunify Father with EG. In support
 of his claim, Father points to the lack of correspondence by DHS
 to Dr. Hamada inquiring about Father's progress. Dr. Hamada is a
 licensed clinical psychologist who was engaged by Father for
 
6
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
individual psychotherapy. Dr. Hamada admitted that she had not
 
seen Father with EG. Dr. Hamada was not engaged to assist Father
 with reunification beyond providing individual therapy, which she
 did beginning in September 2015. In addition, Dr. Hamada sent
 two letters to Tsutui, dated May 2, 2016 and June 30, 2016 that
 provided a report on Father's treatment. 
Father also points to Tsutsui's failure to contact
 
Father's current couples counselor, testimony that unsupervised
 visits were not inappropriate, and testimony that Father made
 significant progress in parenting class to support his claim that
 Father's parenting skills were not inadequate, he had adequate
 supervised visits with EG, and that Tsutsui was not a credible
 witness.
 
In July 2016, Tsutsui testified that she was not able
 
to contact Father's current couples counselor. However, Tsutsui
 explained that Father was previously terminated from couples
 counseling in November 2014 for inconsistent attendance and
 denying that there were any problems, and because it was his
 third counselor since the beginning of the case. Tsutsui
 believed that Father started couples counseling sometime in
 March, he did not attend counseling in June 2016, and their
 current counselor was on an extended vacation in July 2016; thus,
 she was not able to contact him. 
None of the challenged findings of fact specifically
 
determined that Father's conduct during unsupervised visits was
 inappropriate. It appears that Father takes issue with the
 finding that "Father has not demonstrated adequate parenting
 skills during [supervised] visits with the Child to warrant
 having unsupervised visits with the Child," and that "Parents
 have inadequately supervised the Child during [supervised]
 visits, putting the Child in potentially harmful and dangerous
 situations that required intervention by the visitation
 supervisor" contained in FOFs 106 and 107. 
In October 2015, Father and Mother had some
 
unsupervised visits with EG to see how they would do, but the
 unsupervised visits were discontinued due to regressive behavior
 by EG after the visits. Tsutsui testified that the same
 
7
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
parenting class for Father had been previously discontinued in 
December 2015 after Father was absent five times. Thus, at the time, Father did not demonstrate adequate parenting skills because he had not completed parenting class. A review report dated July 13, 2016 from Comprehensive Counseling and Support Services rated Father as having made significant progress in parenting classes during the reporting period from March to May 2016. An ' Ohana Time (OT) Observation Form dated June 29, 2016 
noted during a visit, while crossing the street to take EG to the bathroom, Father stopped in the middle of the crosswalk to tend to a child in the stroller that he was pushing and had to be warned by the outreach worker that they should cross the street as quickly as possible to minimize the chance of an accident. During that same visit, after placing EG in the front passenger seat of a vehicle and asking the outreach worker, "is she good?", Father had to be told that EG needed to be in a car seat. Thus, Tsutsui testified that she was still concerned about Father's parenting ability due to those incidents during supervised visits. Thus, the Family Court did not err in concluding that Father placed EG in a potentially harmful and dangerous situation during a supervised visit and failed to demonstrate adequate parenting skills even after he was deemed to have made significant progress in parenting class, and that Father did not demonstrate adequate parenting skills during supervised visits to warrant further unsupervised visits. 
The Family Court was not clearly erroneous in finding 
that Tsutsui's testimony was credible. Credibility of witnesses is the province of the trier of fact. Fisher, 111 Hawai' i at 46, 
137 P.3d at 360. Nothing that Father points to warrants reversal of a finding by the Family Court that Tsutsui's testimony was credible. 
Finally, FOFs 112 and 141 are not clearly erroneous. 
Contrary to Father's claim, there was clear and convincing
 evidence that there was a pattern of Father not being able to
 maintain stable housing. When DHS initially filed a Petition for
 Foster Custody of EG on January 6, 2014, DHS contended that
 Father was in the process of being evicted and refused to leave
 
8
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
the premises for fear that the landlord would lock him out. More
 
than a year later, in a Short Report to Court dated January 29,
 2015, DHS reported that Parents did not have housing that could
 accommodate EG. Parents had moved from Kailua to a farm in
 Waianae, then to a farm in Kahaluu. In a Safe Family Home Report
 dated April 13, 2015, DHS reported that Parents had relocated to
 Kahaluu and resided in a tent on the premises which was very
 muddy and had mosquitos. Father wanted to work on an organic
 farm but it did not have housing that could accommodate children.
 Thus, DHS did not consider the premises suitable for children. 
Tsutsui testified that Parents moved repeatedly because of issues
 with landlords or household members, eventually ending up with
 housing with the assistance of Catholic Charities. Tsutsui
 stated that Parents would have to remain in the same housing for
 at least a year for DHS to consider it stable. Tsutsui testified
 that Parents had only been in the same housing for five months
 since May 2016. 
It was not clearly erroneous for the Family Court to
 
find that Father was not willing and able to provide a safe
 family home, even with the assistance of a service plan; neither
 was it clearly erroneous for the court to find that it was not
 reasonably foreseeable that Father would be willing and able to
 provide a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service
 plan, within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed two years
 from the date EG entered foster custody. As discussed above,
 Father lacked insight into his mental health issues and
 demonstrated a pattern of not being able to maintain stable
 housing that was suitable for EG since January 2014 when DHS
 filed the Petition for Foster Custody. Tsutsui testified that
 Father was not participating or not consistently participating in
 services throughout the entire case. Father discontinued couples
 counseling in November 2014 and denied that there were any
 problems. Father also discontinued parenting classes in December
 2015 after missing five classes. Father was referred for a
 psychological evaluation five times because of four no-shows.
 Tsutsui did not believe Father could provide a safe family home
 because throughout the case Father barely engaged in services,
 
9
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAII REPORTS OR THE PACIFIC REPORTER 
denied having any mental health problems, lacked insight into his
 
mental health needs, and had a pattern of housing instability.
 The record is consistent with this testimony. 
A key criteria is whether "[i]t is not reasonably
 
foreseeable that the child's parent whose rights are subject to
 termination will become willing and able to provide the child
 with a safe family home, even with the assistance of a service
 plan, within a reasonable period of time, which shall not exceed
 two years from the child's date of entry into foster care[.]"
 Haw. Rev. Stat. ยง 587A-33(a)(2). EG's date of entry into foster
 care is February 20, 2014. Nearly three years later, Father had
 not addressed his mental health issues and demonstrated a lack of
 ability to maintain stable housing that was appropriate for EG
 when the Family Court terminated Father's parental rights on
 December 23, 2016. 
In addition to challenging the various findings of
 
fact, Father challenges COL 6, 9, 10, and 13. To the extent that
 those conclusions relate to propositions of law, Father has
 established no error. Rather, Father appears to challenge the
 underlying FOFs applied in those conclusions. We have already
 determined, however, that those FOFs, largely replicating those
 found in FOF 118 and 119, are not clearly erroneous. Therefore,
 COL 6, 9, 10, and 13 are not wrong.
 
Therefore, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Order
 
Terminating Parental Rights, filed on December 23, 2016 in the
 Family Court of the First Circuit is affirmed. 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, September 4, 2018. 
On the briefs: 
Tae Chin Kim 
for Father-Appellant. Chief Judge 
Julio Hererra and Lianne L. Onishi,Deputy Attorneys General,for Petitioner-Appellee. Associate Judge 
Associate Judge 
10
 