NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
NO. CAAP-15-0000169
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
OZZIE J. CLARKE, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE SECOND CIRCUIT
(CASE NO. 2DCW-13-0002383)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By: Nakamura, Chief Judge, and Reifurth and Chan, JJ.)
The State of Hawai# i (State) charged Defendant-
Appellant Ozzie Jack Clarke (Clarke) with operating a vehicle
under the influence of an intoxicant (OVUII) (Count 1); refusal
to submit to breath, blood, or urine test (Refusal to Submit to
Testing) (Count 2); and promoting a detrimental drug in the third
degree for possessing marijuana (Count 3).  After a bench trial,
the District Court of the Second Circuit (District Court)1 found
Clarke guilty as charged on all counts.  
1The Honorable Douglas J. Sameshima presided.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
Clarke appeals from the District Court's Judgment
entered on February 20, 2015.  On appeal, Clarke contends that:
(1) there was insufficient evidence to support his OVUII
conviction; (2) the District Court erred in convicting him of
Refusal to Submit to Testing; (3) there was insufficient evidence
to support his conviction for promoting a detrimental drug in the
third degree; and (4) his trial counsel failed to provide
effective assistance.  As explained below, we reverse Clarke's 
conviction for Refusal to Submit to Testing, and we affirm his
remaining convictions.
I.
We resolve Clarke's arguments on appeal as follows.
A.
The District Court found Clarke guilty of OVUII, in
violation of Hawaii Revised Statutes (HRS) ยง 291E-61(a)(1)
(2007).2  Clarke contends that there was insufficient evidence to
show that he was under the influence of alcohol in an amount
sufficient to impair his driving.  We disagree.
When viewed in the light most favorable to the State,
see State v. Richie , 88 Hawai #i 19, 33, 960 P.2d 1227, 1241
(1988), the evidence showed, among other things, that: Clarke was
stopped for speeding; Clarke's eyes were red and watery and there
was an odor of liquor on his breath; he admitted that he had
drunk "three . . . beers"; on the walk-and-turn test, he started
too soon, missed heel to toe, stepped off the line, raised his
arms, took too many steps in one direction, and turned
2HRS ยง 291E-61(a)(1) provides:
(a) A person commits the offense of operating a
vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant if the
person operates or assumes actual physical control of a
vehicle:
(1) While under the influence of alcohol in an
amount sufficient to impair the person's
normal mental faculties or ability to care
for the person and guard against casualty[.]
2NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
improperly; and on the one-leg stand test, he did not perform the
test as instructed and swayed.  We conclude that there was
sufficient evidence to support Clarke's OVUII conviction.
B.
Clarke contends that the District Court erred in
convicting him of Refusal to Submit to Testing.  The State
concedes error on this point based on State v. Won , 137 Hawai #i
330, 372 P.3d 1065 (2015).  We agree with this concession of
error, and we reverse Clarke's conviction for Refusal to Submit
to Testing.  State v. Wilson, No. CAAP-15-0000682, 2018 WL
564771, at *1-8 (Hawai #i App. Jan. 26, 2018).
C.
Clarke challenges his conviction for promoting a
detrimental drug in the third degree on the ground that there was
insufficient evidence to show that he knowingly possessed the
marijuana found in the car he was driving.  Clarke was the only
person in the car when it was stopped; Clarke admitted that he
knew there was marijuana in the car; and the stopping officer,
who was a certified drug recognition expert, testified that
Clarke exhibited characteristics that were indicative of possible
marijuana use.  We conclude that there was sufficient evidence to
show that Clarke knowingly possessed the marijuana found in the
car.
D.
Clarke contends that his trial counsel provided
ineffective assistance for failing (1) to introduce the video of
his field sobriety tests that were recorded through the patrol
car's dash camera and (2) to seek a continuance so that the video
could be introduced.  Clarke has the burden of establishing
ineffective assistance of counsel and must show: "1) that there
were specific errors or omissions reflecting counsel's lack of
skill, judgment, or diligence; and 2) that such errors or
omissions resulted in either the withdrawal or substantial
impairment of a potentially meritorious defense."  Richie, 88
Hawai#i at 39, 960 P.2d at 1247.  Because the video recording is
3NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
not part of the record on appeal, we cannot evaluate Clarke's
claim that his counsel provided ineffective assistance in failing
to introduce the video, and Clarke has not met his burden of
establishing ineffective assistance on this ground.3
Clarke also claims that his counsel provided
ineffective assistance in failing to move to suppress the
marijuana found in the car.  However, the record is not
sufficiently developed to determine whether the failure to make
such a motion constitutes ineffective assistance.  
Accordingly, we reject Clarke's claims of ineffective
assistance without prejudice to his raising these claims in a
petition pursuant to Hawai #i Rules of Penal Procedure Rule 40.
II.
Based on foregoing, we reverse the District Court's
Judgment with respect to Count 2.  We affirm the District Court's
Judgment with respect to Counts 1 and 3.
DATED: Honolulu, Hawaii, January 31, 2018. #
On the briefs:
Michael J. Collins
(Cain & Herren, ALC)
for Defendant-Appellant Chief Judge
Richard K. Minatoya
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
County of Maui
for Plaintiff-Appellee  Associate Judge
Associate Judge
3Clarke's suggestion that counsel was ineffective for
failing to raise a relevancy objection to the officer's testimony
about observing indicia of Clarke' marijuana use is without
merit.  The indicia of Clarke's marijuana use was relevant to
whether Clarke knowingly possessed the marijuana found in the
car.
4