NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
1The Honorable Linda K.C. Luke presided. 
2Tachibana v. State, 79 Hawai# i 226, 900 P.2d 1293 (1995).NO. CAAP-16-0000590
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI# I
STATE OF HAWAI #I, Plaintiff-Appellee, v.
RYAN K. STONE, Defendant-Appellant
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT
HONOLULU DIVISION
(CASE NO. 1DTA-15-04984)
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
(By:  Fujise, Presiding Judge, Reifurth and Ginoza, JJ.)
Defendant-Appellant Ryan K. Stone (Stone) appeals from
the Notice of Entry of Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment,
entered on July 22, 2016 in the District Court of the First
Circuit, Honolulu Division (District Court).1
Stone was convicted of Operating a Vehicle Under the
Influence of an Intoxicant (OVUII), in violation of Hawaii
Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291E-61(a)(1) (Supp. 2016).
On appeal, Stone contends (1) the District Court erred
by denying his Motion to Set Aside Finding of Guilt and for Entry
of Dismissal of Case for violation of Rule 48 of the Hawai# i
Rules of Penal Procedure (HRPP), (2) the District Court failed to
conduct an adequate prior-to-trial advisement and ultimate
Tachibana2 colloquy, (3) the District Court improperly commented
on the evidence when making a pre-trial evidentiary ruling,
(4) Stone was seized without probable cause when Officer Sung YiNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
2(Officer Yi) held Stone's driver's license, and (5) the District
Court erred by admitting Officer Robert Weeks's (Officer Weeks)
testimony without first evaluating whether it was more probative
than prejudicial.
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
resolve Stone's points of error as follows:
(1) The District Court did not err by denying Stone's
Motion to Set Aside Finding of Guilt and for Entry of Dismissal
of Case for violation of HRPP Rule 48.  Stone argues that there
was insufficient evidence to support exclusion of time due to the
unavailability of a State's witness and that the District Court
failed to make adequate findings of fact when denying his motion. 
A defendant may waive his Rule 48 speedy trial rights.  See State
v. Diaz, 100 Hawai# i 210, 223-24, 58 P.3d 1257, 1270-71 (2002)
(counsel's consent to continuance sufficient for waiver of
Rule 48 rights).  HRPP Rule 48(b) requires a motion filed by the
defendant.  This motion may be filed at any time before the trial
commences.   State v. Hutch , 75 Haw. 307, 330, 861 P.2d 11, 23
(1993).  Stone moved to dismiss the charge for violation of HRPP
Rule 48 on May 17, 2016, after trial concluded and he had been
found guilty of OVUII on May 4, 2016.  Therefore, he waived the
alleged violation of HRPP Rule 48 as untimely.  Consequently, the
District Court was not required to issue any findings of fact to
determine the includable or excludable time.
(2) Stone contends both the prior-to-trial advisement
and Tachibana  colloquy were inadequate.  Stone contends that the
District Court's advisements failed to adequately alert Stone of
his right not to testify as required State v. Monteil, 134
Hawai#i 361, 341 P.3d 567 (2014) and, citing  State v. Pomroy , 132
Hawai#i 85, 319 P.3d 1093 (2014), that the error was not
harmless.
In Monteil , the Hawaii Supreme Court expanded upon the
advisement to inform a defendant of the right not to testify by
requiring that a defendant be made aware of "relevant
circumstances and likely consequences of such a decision[.]" NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
3Monteil, 134 Hawai# i at 371, 341 P.3d at 577 (citation and
internal quotation marks omitted).  The Monteil court noted that
the trial court failed to advise the defendant of a very
significant "relevant circumstance" of his right to testify –
"i.e., that no inference of guilt may be drawn for exercising
this right."  Id.
Stone takes issue with the District Court's statements
that "If you choose not to testify, the judge cannot assume
you're guilty simply because you've exercised your constitutional
right to remain silent," in the prior-to-trial advisement and "If
you choose not to testify, the court cannot assume you're guilty
simply because you're exercising your constitutional right to
remain silent," in the Tachibana colloquy.  The District Court's
statements satisfied Monteil and Tachibana by adequately advising
Stone that if he chose not to testify, that no inference of guilt
could be used against him for exercising that right for his non-
jury trial.  Therefore, Stone's claim that the prior-to-trial
advisement and Tachibana colloquy were inadequate are without
merit.
(3) Contrary to Stone's claim, the District Court did
not improperly comment on evidence when making a pre-trial
evidentiary ruling regarding the foundation required for
admission of testimony relating to Stone's performance on the
standardized field sobriety tests.  The District Court ruled that
it would be utilizing the non-pass/fail approach for evidence
related to the standardized field sobriety tests, that evidence
in the form of observations from any witness may be admitted, and
that evidence regarding the horizontal gaze nystaugmus test would
be excluded without an expert witness but observations made as a
lay witness during the test were admissible.  After Stone's
counsel stated that he did not understand the ruling, the
District Court clarified that the State was still obligated to
provide proper foundation regarding the field sobriety tests such
as qualification of the witness as to training in the area but
the court did not expect testimony on pass or fail on the test.  
Stone's counsel then stated that he understood.NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
4Stone did not object to the District Court's pre-trial
evidentiary ruling on the ground that it was an improper comment
on the evidence.  Regardless, the District Court's evidentiary
ruling was not a comment on the evidence.  The District Court
accurately stated the law, that without proper foundation, i.e.
qualification as an expert witness, a witness may not state that
a defendant passed or failed a standardized field sobriety test. 
State v. Ferrer , 95 Hawai #i 409, 429-30, 23 P.3d 744, 764-65
(App. 2001).  Further, any lay witness, including a police
officer, may testify about their observations and based on those
observations provide a lay opinion that a defendant was
intoxicated.  Id. at 429, 23 P.3d at 764 (citing State v.
Toyomura, 80 Hawai# i 8, 26-27, 904 P.2d 893, 911-12 (1995)). 
Thus, the District Court did not "invite[] the State to ignore
the technical context of [State v.] Ito [, 90 Hawai #i 225, 978
P.2d 191 (App. 1999)] and Ferrer and to have a field day
regarding the SFST such that it was virtually impossible to gauge
and weigh the significance of Officer Landon Miyamura's
testimony."
(4) Stone contends that he was implicitly seized
without probable cause when Officer Yi held his driver's license
based on Officer Yi's later testimony that Officer Yi intended to
keep it.  Stone takes Officer Yi's testimony out of context and
makes an argument that is unsupported by the record.  Stone did
not move to suppress evidence from his traffic stop, issuance of
citations, and/or arrest for OVUII based on lack of probable
cause.  Instead, after all evidence was received, Stone argued in
his closing argument that Officer Yi predetermined that Stone
would be arrested for OVUII by holding his driver's license. 
Therefore, Stone waived objection to the admission of evidence
stemming from his stop, issuance of citations, and arrest for
OVUII.
In any case, Officer Yi had probable cause to hold
Stone's driver's license for a reasonable amount of time to issue
traffic citations to Stone.  Officer Yi initially stopped Stone
after observing him allegedly speeding, crossing a solid white
line into a shoulder area, and crossing a broken white line intoNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
5a center lane and straddling both lanes for a few seconds.  
After Officer Yi initiated a traffic stop, Stone stopped his car
in the middle of an intersection.  Upon initially making contact
with Stone, Officer Yi asked for Stone's driver's license, which
Stone produced, then Officer Yi asked Stone to move his vehicle
out of the intersection, which Stone did.  During that time,
Officer Yi held Stone's driver's license and later testified that
he intended to keep it so that if Stone drove off he would at
least have Stone's identification.
A traffic stop for speeding and other traffic law
violations is permissible when based on specific articulable
facts and that "a man of reasonable caution would be warranted in
believing that criminal activity was afoot."  State v.
Estabillio, 121 Hawai #i 261, 270, 218 P.3d 749, 758 (2009)
(citation omitted).  Officer Yi articulated facts that warranted
stopping Stone for violation of traffic laws.  Therefore,
Officer Yi was authorized to detain Stone for a short time to
issue him traffic citations.
After Stone moved his vehicle, Officer Yi approached
Stone again, asked Stone for vehicle documentation and noticed
Stone had watery and glassy eyes, a strong odor of alcohol on
Stone's breath, and that Stone slurred his speech.  Officer Yi
returned to his own vehicle to finish issuing citations to Stone
while other officers arrived to investigate whether Stone was
driving while intoxicated.  Stone was subsequently arrested for
OVUII based upon another officer's observations.  Officer Yi did
not investigate whether Stone was driving while under the
influence of an intoxicant and was not the officer that arrested
Stone for OVUII.  Thus, Stone's detention and subsequent arrest
for OVUII was not based on Officer Yi's observations or actions. 
Therefore, probable cause, or lack thereof, relating to the OVUII
charge is not related to Officer Yi temporarily holding Stone's
driver's license.
(5)  The District Court did not err by admitting
Officer Weeks's testimony.  Stone objected to the testimony on
relevance grounds based on the claim that Officer Weeks was only
involved with Stone's implied consent form which was not atNOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI #I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
6issue.  The State proffered Officer Weeks's testimony to
establish additional statements Stone made that another officer
did not note in his report.
"All relevant evidence is admissible, except as
otherwise provided by the Constitutions of the United States and
the State of Hawaii, by statute, by these rules, or by other
rules adopted by the supreme court.  Evidence which is not
relevant is not admissible."  Rule 402 of the Hawaii Rules of
Evidence (HRE).
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative
value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury,
or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or
needless presentation of cumulative evidence.
HRE Rule 403.  
Stone objected to Officer Weeks's testimony as
irrelevant under HRE Rule 402.  At no time prior to or during
Officer Weeks's testimony did Stone object based on HRE Rule 403. 
Therefore, the point of error is waived.  Moreover, Stone makes
no argument on appeal as to why Officer Weeks's testimony was
unfairly prejudicial.  Therefore, the point of error is without
merit.
Therefore,
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Notice of Entry of
Judgment and/or Order and Plea/Judgment, entered on July 22, 2016
in the District Court of the First Circuit, Honolulu Division is
affirmed.
DATED:  Honolulu, Hawai# i, August 30, 2017.
On the briefs:
Christopher R. Evans,
for Defendant-Appellant.
Loren J. Thomas,
Deputy Prosecuting Attorney
City and County of Honolulu,
for Plaintiff-Appellee.Presiding Judge
Associate Judge
Associate Judge