   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
CAAP-10-0000016
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAI' I 
STATE OF HAWAI' I, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
 
MARTY MARTINS, Defendant-Appellant.
 
APPEAL FROM THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
 
(CR. NO. 5P110-00650)
 
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER
 
(By: Fujise, Presiding Judge, Leonard and Ginoza, JJ.)
 
Defendant-Appellant Marty J. Martins (Martins) appeals
 
from the September 9, 2010 judgment of conviction of the District
 
Court of the Fifth Circuit, Lihue Division (District Court),1
 
convicting him of Harassment, in violation of HRS § 711­1106(1)(a) (Supp. 2010).
 
On appeal, Martins raises one point of error, asserting
 
that the Complaint is insufficient and cannot within reason be
 construed to charge a crime because it charges conduct in the
 disjunctive.
 
Appellee State of Hawai' i (State) argues that, because 
Martins is raising the sufficiency of the charge for the first time on appeal, the liberal construction standard applies under State v. Motta, 66 Haw. 89, 657 P.2d 1019 (1983) and the Harassment charge set forth in the Complaint was sufficient. 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs
 
submitted by the parties and having given due consideration to
 
The Honorable Laurel Loo presiding.
 1   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
the arguments advanced and the issues raised by the parties, we
 
affirm.
 
STANDARD OF REVIEW
 
"Whether a charge sets forth all the essential elements 
of a charged offense is a question of law, which we review under the de novo, or right/wrong, standard." State v. Wheeler, 121 
Hawai'i 383, 390, 219 P.3d 1170, 1177 (2009) (quoting State v. 
Wells, 78 Hawai' i 373, 379, 894 P.2d 70, 76 (1995) (brackets, 
ellipsis and internal quotation marks omitted). 
BACKGROUND
 
On May 4, 2010, the State charged Martins by complaint
 
as follows.
 
COUNT I: On or about the 9th day of April, 2010, in the
County of Kauai, State of Hawaii, MARTY J. MARTINS, with intent to
harass, annoy, or alarm another person, to wit: Kenneth McCoy, did
strike, shove, kick, or otherwise touch Kenneth McCoy in an
offensive manner or subject Kenneth McCoy to offensive physical
contact, thereby committing the offense of Harassment in violation
of Section 711-1106(1)(a) of the Hawaii Revised Statutes.
 
COUNT II
: On or about the 9th day of April, 2010, in the
County of Kauai, State of Hawaii, MARTY J. MARTINS did obtain or
exert unauthorized control over the property or services of
Kenneth McCoy, to wit: a cane the value of which is not in excess
of $100.00, with the intent to deprive the owner, of the property
or services, thereby committing the offense of Theft in the Fourth
Degree in violation of Section 708-833(1) of the Hawaii Revised
Statutes.
 
Trial proceeded on September 9, 2010. At trial,2
 
complaining witness Kenneth McCoy (McCoy) testified that he uses
 
his cane to walk because his "knee joint is gone" and "it's also
 aggravated by arthritis". According to McCoy, he was familiar
 with Martins, and on the afternoon of April 9, 2010, McCoy was
 walking in the exit lane of Walmart when Martins drove his
 scooter "on the sidewalk side of two cars, went over, and turned
 around and [came] back towards [McCoy]". Martins then "pulled in
 front of [McCoy,]" about 20 feet from McCoy, then got off his
 moped and "stood there and waited for [McCoy]". McCoy testified
 
Although the trial transcript was requested, it was not part of the
record on appeal at the time briefs were filed. Both the State and Martins 
cited in their briefs to a transcript that was not of record. Counsel are reminded that they should ensure that the transcript is part of the record onappeal prior to citing thereto, consistent with Rule 28 of the Hawai' i Rules 
of Appellate Procedure. 
2
 2 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
that Martins stopped directly in the direction that McCoy was
 
walking. McCoy stated that Martins "got in my face" and
 "confronted me" and that Martins's demeanor "was threatening." 
According to McCoy, they "were arguing" and McCoy "went to change
 legs" when "Martins reached down and grabbed my cane and threw it
 over in the weeds along an irrigation canal" which was
 approximately "12 to 16 feet" away. McCoy later clarified that
 he had lifted the cane up off the ground as he "was just changing
 legs[,]" "readjusting". McCoy testified that he was holding the
 cane in his hand and that "[Martins] just snatched it out of my
 hand." McCoy stated he was unaware of doing anything to provoke
 Martins prior to the taking of his cane. McCoy "got on the phone
 to call the police," and Martins left.
 
The defense moved for a judgment of acquittal on both
 
charges. Regarding the theft charge, the defense asserted there
 was no showing that Martins intended to deprive McCoy of his
 property, the cane. Regarding the Harassment charge, the defense
 argued that: "[T]here's not a showing of an intent to harass,
 annoy and alarm. It sounds like mutual confrontation there." 
The District Court denied the motion for judgment of
 
acquittal.
 
Martins testified that he was riding his moped "through
 
the Walmart parking area, or down the access road along the front
 of Walmart, going to the apartments behind Wilcox Hospital." He
 was stopped behind a car and decided to go around the vehicle, at
 which point McCoy "started mouthing off." Martins testified he
 was wearing ear plugs and could not understand all of what McCoy
 said, but heard McCoy yelling: "Asshole . . . [t]his isn't
 Daytona" or "'this isn't' something". By that time, Martins had
 passed McCoy and then decided to turn around to confront McCoy. 
Martins testified that he parked and "stood there and waited for
 [McCoy] to come along." Martins testified that he told McCoy, "I
 can't have you cussing me every time I ride my moped" and McCoy
 responded by swearing at Martins and that McCoy raised his cane
 and stated "I'll knock you silly." Martins testified "[s]o I
 took the cane and threw it behind me about eight feet." Martins
 
3
 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
stated that he left and that McCoy "wasn't calling the cops when
 
I left."
 
In closing argument, the State and the defense focused
 
only on Martins's action in taking McCoy's cane as the relevant
 conduct for the Harassment charge. The State argued that McCoy
 had the cane in his hand when it was ripped out, such that it was
 an offensive touching meant to harass, annoy or alarm McCoy. The
 defense argued that "the State hasn't shown that [Martins]
 intended to harass, annoy and alarm by taking the cane." Rather,
 the defense asserted, there was a mutual confrontation, McCoy was
 waving his cane, and Martins took the cane and threw it in an
 attempt at self-protection.
 
The District Court convicted Martins of Harassment, but
 
acquitted him of Theft. The District Court stayed the sentence
 pending appeal. This appeal followed.
 
DISCUSSION
 
Martins acknowledges he did not object before the 
District Court to the sufficiency of the charge. He further acknowledges the applicability of Motta and the liberal construction standard where there is a post-conviction challenge to a charge. Under Motta, a "flexible rule of liberal construction" applies wherein "we must liberally construe the [charge] in favor of validity and uphold it, unless there is some showing of substantial prejudice . . . such as that the [charge] is so obviously defective that by no reasonable construction can it be said to charge the offense[.]" Motta, 66 Haw. at 93-94, 
657 P.2d at 1021-22 (citation, internal quotation marks, and some ellipsis points omitted; brackets and some ellipsis points added); see also Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i at 399-400, 219 P.3d at 
1186-87 (noting that when a charge is challenged for the first time on appeal, "this court will not reverse a conviction based upon a defective indictment [or complaint] unless the defendant can show prejudice or that the indictment [or complaint] cannot within reason be construed to charge a crime.") (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). 
4
   NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
In this case, Martins does not suggest at all that he
 
was prejudiced by the wording of the Complaint. Rather, he rests
 
his appeal on the contention that the Complaint "cannot within
 reason be construed to charge a crime." We do not agree.
 
Martins primarily relies on State v. Jendrusch, 58 Haw.
 
279, 567 P.2d 1242 (1977). Applying the liberal construction
 standard, however, Jendrusch is distinguishable. In Jendrusch,
 the defendant was charged in one count with different types of
 conduct that were proscribed under different sections of the
 disorderly conduct statute. In that circumstance, charging the
 defendant in the disjunctive rather than in the conjunctive "left
 the defendant uncertain as to which of the acts charged was being
 relied upon as the basis for the accusation against him." 58
 Haw. at 283 n.4, 567 P.2d at 1245 n.4. Unlike in Jendrusch, we
 consider the entire record below and it is clear in this case
 that the only conduct in question for the Harassment charge was
 Martins's conduct in taking away McCoy's cane.
3
 
"[I]n determining whether a defendant has been 
adequately informed of the charges against him, the appellate court can consider other information in addition to the charge that may have been provided to the defendant during the course of the case up until the time defendant objected to the sufficiency of the charges against him." Wheeler, 121 Hawai' i at 396, 219 
P.3d at 1183. When the sufficiency of the charge is raised for the first time on appeal, we may consider the entire record below, including the testimony and counsel's closing argument. Id.; State v. Sprattling, 99 Hawai' i 312, 320-21, 55 P.3d 276, 
284-85 (2002). Here, similar to Sprattling, Martins admitted to conduct supporting the Harassment charge (i.e., that he took McCoy's cane and threw it), McCoy testified that Martins "snatched" the cane out of his hands, and in closing arguments it was clear the defense understood that the only conduct pertaining 
Although State v. Pesentheiner, 95 Hawai' i 290, 294-95, 22 P.3d 86, 90-91
(App. 2001) recognized that different types of conduct could violate HRS §
711-1106(1)(a) (i.e., actual bodily contact, as opposed to "offensive physicalcontact" involving "contact with an item physically appurtenant to the body"),the conduct in question in the instant case was clear. 
5
 3 NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAI 'I REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER
 
to the Harassment charge was the taking of McCoy's cane. Even in
 
his reply brief before this court, Martins states that he "was
 charged with harassment for grabbing Kenneth McCoy's cane and
 tossing it aside."
 
Under the circumstances of this case, the Complaint can
 
be reasonably construed to charge the crime of Harassment and
 Martins was adequately informed of the charge against him.
 
Based on the foregoing, the judgment filed on
 
September 9, 2010 is affirmed.
 
DATED: Honolulu, Hawai' i, June 22, 2011. 
On the briefs: 
Charles A. Foster 
for Defendant-Appellant Presiding Judge 
Tracy MurakamiDeputy Prosecuting AttorneyCounty of Kauai 
Associate Judge 
Associate Judge
 
6
 