NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
NO. CAAP-23-0000620 
 
 
IN THE INTERMEDIATE COURT OF APPEALS 
 
OF THE STATE OF HAWAIʻ I 
  
HEIDI LEWIS, Respondent-Appellant-Appellant, 
v. 
HAWAIIAN HOMES COMMISSION, Agency-Appellee-Appellee; 
DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN HOMELANDS, Petitioner-Appellee-Appellee; 
and CAPRICE AYAU, Respondent-Appellee-Appellee. 
  
APPEAL FROM THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE FIRST CIRCUIT 
(CIVIL NO. 1CCV-23-0000002) 
  
SUMMARY DISPOSITION ORDER 
(By:  Nakasone, Chief Judge, Hiraoka and McCullen, JJ.) 
 
Self-represented Respondent-Appellant-Appellant Heidi 
Lewis (Lewis) appeals from the Circuit Court of the First 
Circuit's1 September 27, 2023 order affirming Agency-Appellee-
Appellee the Hawaiian Homes Commission's (Commission) termination of her interest in a homestead lease and denial of 
her motion for reconsideration. 
On appeal, Lewis argues the circuit court erred 
(1) "in its application of legal standards to the facts of the 
 
1  The Honorable James H. Ashford presided. Electronically Filed
Intermediate Court of Appeals
CAAP-23-0000620
15-DEC-2025
08:29 AM
Dkt. 86 SO
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
2 
 case, particularly in interpreting the lease agreement and the 
alleged violations thereof"; and (2) "by relying heavily on 
highly redacted evidence presented by" Petitioner-Appellee-
Appellee the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands (Department or 
DHHL) "without adequately scrutinizing its credibility and 
relevance."2 
Upon careful review of the record and the briefs 
submitted by the parties, and having given due consideration to 
 
2  Lewis actually raises eight points of err or (POE) on appeal:  
 
(1) "Denial of Due Process" by upholding the Commission's 
decision;  
(2) "Failure to Provide an Impartial Tribunal"; 
(3) "Misapplication of Legal Standards to the Facts"; 
(4) "Overdependence on Questionable Evidence" by relying 
on heavily redacted evidence;  
(5) "Erroneous Conclusion of Law Regarding Lease 
Cancellation"; 
(6) "Failure to Consider Mitigating Circumstances or 
Alternative Remedies"; 
(7) "Inadequate Notice of Lease Violations and Opportunity to Cure"; and  
(8) "Commissioners['] failure to recuse after verbally 
stating [their] intention to do so compromised 
[their] ability to provide a fair trial . . . [and] 
violated [the] 5th and 14th [ amendments] ."   
However, POE 1, 2, 6, 7, and 8 are waived, as Lewis did not raise them before 
the circuit court.  See Mauna Kea Power Co. v. Bd. of Land & Nat. Res., 76 
Hawai‘i 259, 262 n.2, 874 P.2d 1084, 1087 n.2 (1994) (waiving issue presented 
during secondary appeal that was not argued before administrative agency or 
on appeal to circuit court).  We address POE 3 and 5 together, as they are 
related, and POE 4. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
3 
 the issues raised and the arguments advanced, we resolve this 
appeal as discussed below and affirm. 
Lewis and her sister, Respondent-Appellee-Appellee 
Caprice Ayau (Caprice), assumed as tenants-in-common Hawaiian 
Homes Commission Residence Lot Lease No. 3093 (Lease) located at 
89-435 Keaulana Avenue, Wai‘ anae, Hawai‘ i 96792 (Homestead) on 
March 23, 2005, effective June 24, 2004.  Lewis has resided on 
the Homestead since July 2004, but Caprice has resided in 
Minnesota for over forty years and did not occupy the Homestead 
at any time relevant to this case. 
In March 2020, the Department received complaints that 
Lewis was operating an illegal game room on the Homestead. 
In June 2020, Honolulu Police Department (HPD) 
officers apprehended a suspect in an attempted robbery case at the Homestead.  The incident report for the attempted robbery, 
HPD Incident Report No. 20-225933 (Attempted Robbery Incident 
Report), included a sketch identifying the Homestead as a 
"GAMEROOM" and photographs of several gaming machines inside the 
house on the Homestead. 
In August 2020, the Department sent Lewis a letter 
(Violation Notice) notifying her that (1) it "received indications" she was "using the [Homestead] as an illegal 
gambling establishment," among other illegal activities; 
(2) such activities violated "Paragraph No. 4 under the terms, NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
4 
 covenants and conditions of [her] lease agreement,"3 which 
required her to "observe, perform and comply with all laws, 
ordinances, rules and regulations of the health or other 
governmental authorities" (emphasis omitted); and (3) the 
violations constituted cause for the Department to pursue action 
against her, potentially resulting in the Lease's cancellation.  
The Violation Notice then instructed Lewis to "immediately cease 
all illegal activity on [her] homestead lot." 
In July 2021, the Commission held a public meeting 
during which a Keaulana Avenue resident addressed the Commission regarding "all the illegal activities that have been happening 
on Keaulana Ave.," including at Lewis's Homestead.  The deputy attorney general present at the meeting stated that "specific 
matters relating to these leases may come before the Commission 
in the form of contested case." 
In January 2022, the Department asked the Commission 
to schedule a contested case hearing on whether to cancel 
 
3  Paragraph 4 of the Lease provides in pertinent part: 
 
The Homesteader will . . . observe, perform and comply with 
all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the health 
or other governmental authorities, including the rules and 
regulations of the Commission, applicable to the use and 
occupation of said demised premises as may from time to 
time be issued, enacted or promulgated; and will allow the 
Commission and its agents at all reasonable times free access to the demised premises for the purpose of examining 
the same and determining whether the covenants herein and 
elsewhere in this lease contained are being fully observed 
and performed. 
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
5 
 Lewis's Lease; the Commission granted the request the following 
day.4 
In June 2022, the Commission conducted the contested 
case hearing.  It accepted into evidence, among other things, 
various HPD incident reports, including the Attempted Robbery 
Incident Report, as well as Lewis's testimony. 
Importantly, Lewis testified that she maintained 
control over access to her Homestead and permitted gaming 
operations, for which she was supposed to receive some 
compensation, to occur on the Homestead. 
  
 
4  Under section 210 of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act (HHCA), the 
Department may, after due notice and an opportunity for a hearing, cancel a 
lessee's lease upon finding the lessee "has violated any condition in respect to the leasing of such tract."  Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, § 210, 
42 Stat. 108.  
 
HHCA § 210 provides in full as follows:  
 
§ 210.  Cancellation of leases.  Whenever the 
department has reason to believe that any condition 
enumerated in section 208, or any provision of section 209, 
of this title has been violated, the department shall give 
due notice and afford opportunity for a hearing to the lessee of the tract in respect to which the alleged 
violation relates or to the successor of the lessee's 
interest therein, as the case demands.  If upon such 
hearing the department finds that the lessee or the lessee's successor has violated any condition in respect to the leasing of such tract, the department may declare the 
lessee's interest in the tract and all improvements thereon 
to be forfeited and the lease in respect thereto canceled, and shall thereupon order the tract to be vacated within a 
reasonable time.  The right to the use and occupancy of the 
Hawaiian home lands contained in such tract shall thereupon 
revest in the department and the department may take 
possession of the tract and the improvements thereon. 
 
(Some formatting altered.) 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
6 
 Q.  Do you have control over access to your 
[Homestead]?  
 
A.  Yes, I do.  
 
. . . .  
 
Q.  Were there gaming operations at your [Homestead]?  
Yes or no?  
  
A.  Yes. 
 
. . . .  
 Q.  So when -- when the game rooms were there, were 
you getting rent for that? 
 A.  No.  They did not pay me like they said they were 
going to pay me.  But they never did pay me.
 
 
Lewis further testified she shut down the game room on 
August 28, 2020, after receiving the Violation Notice. 
A.  You know, once I got the [Violation Notice] from 
-- from DHHL to call them and they were aware of this -- 
what was going on, that was like my light of this dark 
tunnel that I -- I didn't know who else to turn to.  So 
when I did get that [Violation Notice], that was my saying that, you guys gotta go. . . . 
 
On December 2, 2022, the Commission issued its 
Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Decision and Order 
(Commission's Order).  As relevant to the instant appeal, the 
Commission found the Department proved by a preponderance of the 
evidence that Lewis violated a state law prohibiting the 
promotion of gambling and, in turn, the Lease's terms and 
conditions.  It further found that Caprice had not violated the NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
7 
 Lease;5 as a result, the Commission preserved Caprice's interest 
in the Lease but canceled Lewis's, effective immediately.6 
Lewis moved for reconsideration, and the Commission 
denied her motion in January 2023. 
Lewis then appealed to the circuit court.  The circuit 
court affirmed "[a]ll findings of fact and conclusions of law" 
in the Commission's Order, and this secondary appeal followed. 
(1) Lewis first contends the circuit court "erred in 
its application of legal standards to the facts of the case," 
specifically with regard to "interpreting contractual obligations and determining violations thereof" and the "legal 
basis for lease cancellation."  We construe this argument as 
challenging the Commission's application — and the circuit 
court's affirmation — of the "preponderance standard of proof" 
during the contested case hearing "instead of the heightened 
'clear and convincing' standard applicable in civil proceedings involving quasi criminal allegations." 
 
5  During the contested case hearing, Caprice indicated she was "willing 
to make or undertake the appropriate steps to occupy" the Homestead; this 
would enable Caprice to maintain her interest in the Lease, as it requires 
the homesteader to "occupy and commence to use the demised premises as [the 
homesteader's] home within one year of the date of this lease, and [to] 
thereafter continue to occupy and use said lands on [the homesteader's] own behalf[.]" 
 
6  The parties stipulated to the Department staying enforcement of the 
Commission's Order pending Lewis's appeal.  
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
8 
 Under Hawai‘ i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 91-10(5) (2012), 
the party initiating the contested case hearing (here, the 
Department) must carry the burdens of production and persuasion 
by a preponderance of the evidence.7 
"A party proves something under the preponderance of 
evidence standard when the existence of the contested fact is more probable than its nonexistence."  Borrson v. Weeks, 155 
Hawai‘i 490, 496, 567 P.3d 195, 201 (2025) (citation modified). 
Here, to cancel Lewis's Lease pursuant to section 210 
of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act (HHCA), the Department needed to demonstrate it was more likely than not that Lewis 
violated the Lease term requiring her to comply with all laws.  
See Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, § 210, 42 Stat. 108. 
(authorizing DHHL to cancel a lessee's interest in a lease if, after conducting a contested case hearing, it finds the lessee 
violated any lease condition); HRS § 91-10(5).  Specifically, it needed to show it was more likely than not that Lewis knowingly 
 
7  HRS § 91-10 provides in relevant part: 
 
§ 91-10  Rules of evidence; official notice.  In 
contested cases: 
 
. . . . 
 
(5)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the party 
initiating the proceeding shall have the burden of proof, 
including the burden of producing evidence as well as the burden of persuasion.  The degree or quantum of proof shall 
be a preponderance of the evidence.  
 
(Some formatting altered.) 
 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
9 
 advanced or profited from gambling activity, in violation of HRS 
§ 712-1222 (2014).8 
"A person advances gambling activity if, having 
substantial proprietary control or other authoritative control 
over premises being used with [the person's] knowledge for 
purposes of gambling activity, [the person] permits that 
activity to occur or continue."  HRS § 712-1220 (2014). 
During the contested case hearing, Lewis testified she 
(1) had "control over access to [her Homestead]"; (2) knew 
gaming operations, for which she was supposed to receive some 
compensation, were occurring on her Homestead; and (3) permitted 
the gaming operations to continue until she received the 
Department's Violation Notice.  Lewis's own statements 
demonstrate it was more likely than not that she violated HRS § 712-1222, and as a result, the Commission was entitled to 
cancel her interest in the Lease pursuant to HHCA § 210.   
 
8  HRS § 712-1222 provides in full:  
 
§ 712-1222  Promoting gambling in the second degree.  
(1)  A person commits the offense of promoting gambling in 
the second degree if the person knowingly advances or 
profits from gambling activity. 
 
(2)  Promoting gambling in the second degree is a 
misdemeanor. 
 
(Some formatting altered.) 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
10 
 Thus, the circuit court did not err in affirming the 
Commission's application of the preponderance of the evidence 
standard and its cancellation of Lewis's interest in the Lease 
for violating the Lease terms. 
(2) Lewis next contends the circuit court "erred by 
relying heavily on highly redacted evidence presented by DHHL 
without adequately scrutinizing its credibility and relevance."9  
Lewis does not specify the "highly redacted evidence" she challenges, but we presume she is referring to the HPD incident 
reports. 
Under HRS § 91-14(f) (Supp. 2019), judicial review of 
an agency appeal is typically "confined to the administrative 
record."
10  DW Aina Le‘ a Dev., LLC v. Bridge Aina Le‘ a, LLC., 134 
Hawai‘i 187, 216, 339 P.3d 685, 714 (2014).  The circuit court 
 
9  Lewis does not cite to any authority in support of this argument, and 
it is not this court's duty to "develop [ the parties'] arguments for [them],  
find the legal authority to support those arguments, or guess at what part of 
the record may be relevant."  See In re Morris sey, 349 F.3d 1187, 1189 (9th 
Cir. 2003) (citation modified); Hussey v. Say, 139 Hawai‘ i 181, 191, 384 P.3d 
1282, 1292 (2016) ("This court is not obliged to address matters for which 
the appellants have failed to present discernible arguments." (citation 
modified)).  Nonetheless, we address Lewis's argument to facilitate access to justice. 
 
10  HRS § 91-14(f) provides:  
 
(f)  The review shall be conducted by the appropriate 
court without a jury and shall be confined to the record, 
except that in the cases where a trial de novo, including 
trial by jury, is provided by law and also in cases of alleged irregularities in procedure before the agency not 
shown in the record, testimony thereon may be taken in 
court.  The court, upon request by any party, shall receive 
written briefs and, at the court's discretion, may hear 
oral arguments. 
NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
11 
 was therefore limited to considering the evidence before the 
Commission and was required to determine whether the 
Commission's findings based on the evidence were clearly 
erroneous.  See HRS § 91-14(g)(5) (Supp. 2019). 
Here, the Commission's finding that "Lewis engaged in 
conduct that materially aided the gambling activity on the 
[Homestead]" was based, in part, on partially redacted HPD 
incident reports it accepted into evidence.  Most of the reports 
redacted the names and addresses of the parties involved, but 
the Attempted Robbery Incident Report contained unredacted information identifying "89-435 Keaulana" as a "GAMEROOM" and 
depicting gaming machines on the Homestead. 
Although Lewis objected to the Attempted Robbery 
Incident Report being received into evidence, she did not 
explain why.  And nothing in the record suggests the report was 
irrelevant or unreliable. 
Moreover, the Commission did not solely consider 
partially redacted HPD incident reports in determining Lewis violated her Lease.  It also considered Lewis's testimony.  And, 
as determined above, Lewis's testimony supported a finding that 
she more likely than not knowingly advanced illegal gambling 
activity. NOT FOR PUBLICATION IN WEST'S HAWAIʻI REPORTS AND PACIFIC REPORTER 
 
 
12 
 Thus, neither the circuit court nor the Commission 
clearly erred in considering the partially redacted HPD incident 
reports.     
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the circuit court's 
(1) September 27, 2023 order affirming the Commission's Order 
and denial of Lewis's motion for reconsideration and 
(2) September 27, 2023 Final Judgment. 
  DATED:  Honolulu, Hawaiʻ i, December 15, 2025. 
 
On the briefs: 
 Heidi Lewis, Self-represented 
Respondent-Appellant-
Appellant.  
Craig Y. Iha, 
Jordan A.K. Ching, Deputy Attorneys General 
for Agency-Appellee-Appellee 
and Petitioner-Appellee-
Appellee. /s/ Karen T. Nakasone Chief Judge  /s/ Keith K. Hiraoka 
Associate Judge 
 /s/ Sonja M.P. McCullen 
Associate Judge 